Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  Increasing Use on Mass Production Lines </H5>
  Uses for YAG (yttrium-aluminum-garnet) laser industrial 
equipment are expanding. They have a wide range of uses from the 
precision welding of small parts, such as those found in 
electronics, to welding and opening holes in large parts such as 
those found in aircraft and automobile bodies. Recently, YAG 
lasers have been used to weld aluminum alloys, which had been 
considered nearly impossible to weld, and they are now beginning 
to appear on mass production lines. Moreover, there are now 
instances in which YAG lasers have been put to practical use not 
only to weld and drill holes, but also to modify the surfaces of 
materials. 
  The sales of YAG laser manufacturing equipment grew steadily 
from about 1200 units in 1989 to about 1450 units in 
1990.[.sup]1[/] In 1991, however, investments in equipment 
began to drop, and sales leveled off. Then in 1992, sales 
decreased to about 1300 units. 
  Although unit sales have fallen off, we can say that uses 
for 
YAG laser industrial equipment are expanding because that is the 
general feeling among manufacturers and users of YAG laser 
processing equipment. When we look at a rough breakdown of YAG 
laser equipment sold, welders and markers comprise about 
30% 
each, and the remaining 40% is made up of trimmers, cutoff 
machines, and hole drilling machines. The uses of YAG laser 
equipment are expanding in the fields of welding and drilling. 
<H3>  Auto, Electric Industries Look to YAG for More Precise, More 
Compact Products </H3>
  There is currently a strong move in the auto industry toward 
lightweight bodies. One effective means for making autos lighter 
is to use aluminum. However, aluminum has a high reflectance 
ratio and high heat conductance, so it has been considered 
unsuitable for laser processing. However, because the average 
output and functions of YAG lasers have improved, YAG lasers can 
now be used to weld aluminum alloys, and they have started to 
appear on mass production lines. 
  In the electric/electronics manufacturing and precision 
instrument fields, where compactness and light weight have 
already made great advances, YAG lasers are often used to make 
precision spot welds. The demand is growing stronger for high 
precision processing as the number of small parts increases. 
Noboru Taguchi (Chief of Engineering, Laser Equipment 
Operations, NEC) says, ``As parts become smaller and more 
precise, the value of using YAG lasers will become even 
greater.'' 
  The users of YAG lasers share the same view. Figure 1 shows 
a 
printer head spot welded with a YAG laser at Tosei Electrobeam 
(main office: Mizuho-cho, Tokyo), a major job shop that does the 
processing for the manufacturer. Mamoru Ueno (President, Tosei 
Electrobeam) says, ``YAG lasers, with the short wavelengths they 
emit, are best suited for this kind of microprocessing.'' Tosei 
Electrobeam currently has four YAG laser units in full operation. 



  Recently YAG lasers have found new applications in the 
modification of material surfaces. In the future they will 
surely be noted as a method for adding new functions to material 
surfaces. 
  Thus, the use of YAG laser processing has expanded into many 
areas. That is because there is growing recognition of the 
special features and excellence of YAG lasers for processing 
parts and products that require high precision, compactness, 
etc., (see boxed material, p 16). YAG laser processing is 
expanding its range in welding and hole drilling, and at the 
same time opening new territory in the field of surface 
modification. 
<H5>  Welding </H5>
  Aluminum is a difficult material to weld because of its high 
reflectance ratio. Moreover, it has 4-5 times the heat 
conductance of iron, so any absorbed heat immediately 
dissipates, making localized heating very difficult. Laser beams 
with very high output are effective in overcoming these 
problems. Therefore, when we consider the welding of aluminum 
from the standpoint of output, there is a good argument at this 
point for using CO[.sup]2[/] lasers, which can generate even 
higher output than YAG lasers. However, the YAG laser is a tool 
that is hard to give up on.[.sup]2[/] 
  First of all, there is a general trend for reflectance 
ratios 
in metals to decrease as the wavelength of the light grows 
shorter. Therefore, YAG lasers, which emit light at a wavelength 
of 1.06 m, have an advantage over CO[.sup]2[/] lasers with 
longer their wavelength of 10.6 m. In the case of aluminum, 
the reflectance ratio for a CO[.sup]2[/] laser is a high 
96%, but is 80% for a YAG laser. Or looking at 
this in terms 
of the rate of absorption, only 4% of CO[.sup]2[/] laser 
light is absorbed compared with 20% of YAG laser light. 
  Moreover, the output waveform emitted by YAG lasers can be 
varied, and this can be used to control the amount of heat gain 
to the material. By using this feature, it is possible to 
improve the welding of metal surfaces with high reflectance 
ratios such as aluminum alloys and copper, and mirror-like 
materials with smooth surfaces. 
  Although the continuous emission output of CO[.sup]2[/] 
lasers is greater than that of YAG lasers, YAG lasers are 
superior to CO[.sup]2[/] lasers because they can generate a 
peak output of several tens of kilowatts instantaneously by 
pulsed emission. 
  For these reasons, research both by manufacturers and users 
on aluminum alloy welding by YAG laser has advanced along with 
the development of high output YAG lasers (see boxed material, p 
18). 
<H3>  First Application of Aluminum Alloy Welding--Auto Hood 
Production Line </H3>
  As all this research on aluminum alloy welding proceeded, 
the 
Mazda Motor Corporation jumped ahead of the competition and 
became the first company to make a practical application of YAG 
lasers for aluminum alloy welding. Mazda installed YAG lasers on 
its aluminum hood production line, and they began operation in 
May 1992. The aluminum hoods welded by laser are used on the 
Efini RX-7, Efini MS-9 and Sentia models, and a monthly 
production amounts to 4000-5000 units each (Fig. 2 [not 
reproduced]). 
  The auto industry is striving to use more aluminum parts to 
increase fuel efficiency. The present condition, however, is 
that the high reflectance and heat conductance ratios of 
aluminum have hindered progress so much that adopting aluminum 
parts has been reduced mostly to lip service. 
  Mazda, however, moved aggressively to use aluminum for body 
parts, such as choosing to use an aluminum hood on its RX-7 for 
export to the U.S. in 1985. As far as the weight of the body is 
concerned, the hood is particularly important. Therefore, Mazda 
chose the hood as one of its targets for reducing the weight of 
the body and managed to cut the weight of the hood to 10 kg, 
roughly half the weight of previous steel hoods, by switching to 
aluminum in its Efini RX-7 that went on sale domestically in 
December 1991, for example. 
  Before Mazda introduced YAG lasers in May 1992, it assembled 
aluminum hoods with MIG welding. However, because the MIG 
welding was performed by hand, there was a small amount of 
variation depending on which employee did the welding, and there 
was a tendency for unevenness to appear in places where the 
surface of the hood was welded. Moreover, even when the same 
employee did the welding, it was difficult to maintain 
consistency in all the weld locations. 
  Therefore, to improve the appearance it was necessary to 
introduce a polishing step after the welding to smooth down the 
surface of the hood several micrometers. The polishing operation 
generated dust, which degraded the work environment and created 
another problem. 
  To overcome these problems, Mazda introduced YAG lasers by 
combining optical fiber and robotics technology to automate the 
welding process and eliminate the dust. 
<H3>  YAG Lasers To Be Used in Future To Reduce Weld Defects by 
Control of Output Waveform </H3>
  The maximum average output of these YAG lasers is 800 W, but 
the maximum peak output is 10 kW. The laser is combined with one 
robot and 10 meters of optical fiber (Fig. 3). Welding uses a 
pulsed laser beam. The time required to weld one hood, including 
the time to transport the part and the time used for the 
movement of the robot arm, is about 1 minute 50 seconds. 



  The hood consists of two sheets of 1 mm thick 5000-series 
(Al-Mg series) aluminum alloy welded together (Fig. 4). The 
perimeter of the outer metal sheet is folded over so that it 
encloses the inner sheet. If we look at a cross section of the 
edge of the hood, it appear to be constructed from three sheets 
of metal. 



  What is welded by YAG laser is the perimeter consisting of 
three sheets folded over each other: 15 locations on the RX-7 
and 18 on the Sentia. The depth of penetration at each weld is 
about 1.3-1.4 mm, and the length of each weld is about 20 mm. 
  During trials weld defects such as cracks and pinholes 
occurred in the aluminum alloy because of rapid cooling after 
exposure to the laser beam. However, Chinobu Iwashita (Manager, 
2nd Body Engineering Group, Mazda Engineering Division) 
explained, ``We reduced the number of weld defects by accurate 
control of the waveform generated by the laser.'' One strength 
of YAG lasers is the fact that heat gain can be controlled by 
controlling the output waveform. 
  Mr. Iwashita continued, ``We want to aggressively employ YAG 
lasers with the goal of using aluminum alloys for parts other 
than the hood such as the trunk and doors.'' Mazda also plans to 
study using YAG lasers to weld metals other than aluminum alloys 
such as iron and zinc galvanized steel sheet. 
<H3>  New Type of Motorcycle Exhaust Chamber Requiring Lighter 
Weight and Greater Precision </H3>
  The Yamaha Motor Company, with the cooperation of Sakura 
Industries (main office: Hamamatsu City, Shizuoka Prefecture), 
introduced YAG lasers for the assembly of the collecting portion 
(exhaust chamber) of the exhaust pipe, which is part of their 
motorcycle mufflers.[.sup]3[/] The exhaust chamber Yamaha is 
assembling with YAG lasers has a brand new construction, and it 
is mounted on the sports models FZR400 and FZR250 (Fig. 5 [not 
reproduced]). 
  With high rpm engines, some parts of engine performance fall 
off as the engine's speed increases. This phenomenon occurs 
because there is a long period of overlap in which both intake 
and exhaust valves are open. 
  When the overlap period is long, it is hard for the fuel 
mixture to enter the cylinder if the exhaust valve is open 
because the exhaust is under positive pressure as the fuel 
mixture tries to enter the cylinder. This is because the exhaust 
is reflected by the chamber and silencer, and the pressure wave 
rebounding into the cylinder interferes with the fuel mixture's 
entering the cylinder. As a result, combustion falters and 
engine performance drops. 
  Therefore, Yamaha developed a new type of exhaust chamber 
that can control the exhaust gas pressure. A tapered rotating 
valve opens and shuts, and this design controls the pressure of 
the exhaust gas from idle through high speed (Fig. 6). 



  Because the chamber is the area where the exhaust gas 
converges, it gets very hot and vibrates severely, so it must 
have great strength. It must also be very precise. This is 
especially important for the tapered part of the chamber where 
the valve slides. If the radial precision is poor in this area, 
there is a chance that the valve will stick and fail to function 
properly. 
  During initial development Yamaha used a cast stainless 
steel 
chamber that had been machine processed. However, Naohisa 
Takahashi (Materials Research Manager, 2nd Research Department, 
Yamaha Engineering Headquarters) said, ``We found it difficult 
to process the tapered area with good precision and maintain 
thin walls for light weight.'' There were also problems because 
the casting and processing costs were high. 
<H3>  Welding 4 Pipes into Single Unit: Alternately Using 2 
Optical Fibers </H3>
  Therefore, Yamaha adopted a manufacturing method in which 
they stamp a 1.2mm thick stainless steel sheet into a body and 
four pipes, and then weld these together to form the chamber. 
The YAG laser is used to weld these four independent pipes into 
a single unit (Fig. 7). Yamaha chose a YAG laser because it was 
easy to add to the production line, and its welds have few 
distortions. 



  The YAG laser used by Yamaha is in the 400 W output class, 
and it uses two optical fibers 2 meters long. One optical fiber 
is used for welding the top and bottom of the chamber, and the 
other is used for welding the tapered area. The laser beam is 
switched between the two, and the two optical fibers are used 
one after the other. 
  The welding sequence is as follows: first the tapered areas 
of the four pipes are aligned and set in a jig. Then the top is 
welded in three locations by a pulsed laser beam from the 
optical fiber for welding the top and bottom faces (Fig. 8). The 
pulsed laser beam overlaps the beads to complete the welding. 
Next the workpiece is turned over and the bottom face is welded 
in three locations in the same manner. Finally, the laser beam 
is switched over to the optical fiber for welding the tapered 
area, and it welds the tapered area. 



  During this process, if the welding speed is too fast, the 
beads fail to overlap, and gaps form between them. If a chamber 
is mounted on a bike in this condition, air will leak into the 
tapered area through these gaps while the bike is running, 
causing afterburning. This produces loud noise, and in severe 
cases breaks the muffler. Therefore, it is dangerous to perform 
the welding too quickly. On the other hand, when it is 
impossible to install a lot of laser equipment from the cost 
standpoint, it is necessary to speed up the weld time as much as 
possible to increase production capacity. Taking these factors 
into consideration, Yamaha chose a weld speed of 3-5 mm/sec. 
  By installing the YAG lasers Yamaha was able to make the 
chamber 40% lighter than the original cast chamber and to 
cut 
processing costs by 30% as well. Yamaha is planning to 
use YAG 
lasers for welding other parts in the future. 
<H3>  YAG Lasers Used To Make Heat Sensor by Welding Thin 
Stainless Steel Sheet to Iron </H3>
  There are more and more cases where YAG lasers are used in 
the manufacture of electronic instrument parts. Matsushita 
Electric Works is making active use of YAG lasers in its 
manufacturing processes in a number of ways. One of these is a 
heat detector that is used to detect fires, etc. 
  The heat sensor consists of a stainless steel diaphragm 20 
m thick and a heat-sensing iron plate 200 m thick (Fig. 
9). The YAG laser is used to weld the diaphragm to the 
heat-sensing plate, and the welded area extends around the 
perimeter of the diaphragm. 



  Diaphragms on previous heat sensors were made of 
copper-based 
materials and were attached to the heat-sensing plate by solder. 
However, copper-based materials corrode easily, and there were 
questions about reliability. To overcome this problem, 
Matsushita chose to use stainless steel as a diaphragm material. 
  Stainless steel, however, cannot be soldered. Moreover, 
because the stainless steel sheet used as a diaphragm is very 
thin, according to Yoshimitsu Nakamura (Chief Engineer, 
Matsushita Electric Works Production Engineering Research 
Institute), ``It will become uncontrollably distorted,'' if a 
large amount of heat is conveyed to the surrounding area when it 
is attached to the heat-sensing plate. Therefore, Matsushita 
installed a pulse excitation YAG laser that enables localized 
heating to weld the stainless steel sheet. The time required to 
weld one diaphragm is about 5 seconds. 
  There is another area where Matsushita uses the YAG laser in 
addition to this welding. The detector must operate faithfully 
in case of fire, but it must not be activated by the gradually 
rising temperatures of midsummer. Therefore, a small hole is 
opened in the flange so that the flange expands only when the 
temperature rises rapidly. 
  When the temperature rises slowly, air escapes from the hole 
and the flange does not expand. On the other hand, the air 
inside the detector expands all at once in a fire, so even if 
some air escapes through the hole, the flange will expand and 
the detector will work. This is an extremely small hole with a 
diameter of 22 m, which is barely visible to the naked eye. 
Matsushita uses the YAG laser to drill this hole. 
<H5>  YAG Laser Built into Press To Weld Thin Laminated Sheets </H5>
  The magnetic head core used in audio equipment is a part 
consisting of several thin layered sheets. The thinner the 
sheets, the better the frequency properties, etc., so steps are 
being taken to make these sheets thinner. 
  Kuroda Precision Industries developed the Laser FASTEC 
System, which stamps out thin sheets about 0.1 mm thick, forms 
them into layers, and welds the layers together with a YAG laser 
to make the single unit. Kuroda began to use this system in the 
mass production of magnetic head cores in 1992 (Fig. 
10).[.sup]4[/] 



  The company originally had a die system called the FASTEC 
System. This system performed the functions of stamping out the 
thin sheets on a press and arranging them into layers. The 
method of joining the layered sheets on this system was to 
emboss the sheets and caulk them. 
  However, the sheets became so thin that it was no longer 
possible to add embossments on the press. To form embossments on 
a thin sheet, the press must be controlled to micrometer 
precision. According to Nobuaki Iguchi (Head of Development, 
Kuroda Precision Industries), ``Either you get no dimple or the 
press punches through the sheet and opens a hole,'' if this 
precision control is not possible. Moreover, the number of small 
parts that cannot accommodate embossments has increased. 
  Therefore, Kuroda build a YAG laser into the FASTEC system, 
and developed the Laser FASTEC System that welds the sheets 
together instead of caulking them. 
  The thin sheets cut by the press are stacked one after the 
other, and as each thin sheet is added, it is welded in place by 
the laser built into the die. The laser beam is conveyed into 
the die by a maximum of 8 optical fibers, and it can weld 8 
spots at the same time. The generation of the laser beam is 
synchronized with the movement of the die so that it fires when 
the moving platen of the die is raised. 
  The optical fibers used in this system are 5 meters long. 
There is a lot of vibration around the system because of the 
stamping operation, but because the laser generator is located a 
short distance away, it is not affected much by the vibration. 
Further, dies require routine maintenance such as removing dust, 
and the dies are often changed. These operations become 
difficult if the structure of the line is complex. However, a 
spokesman for Kuroda Precision Industries emphasizes the 
additional merits of the YAG laser system by saying, ``Because 
this system uses optical fiber, the line is not complex and 
these operations are not difficult to perform.'' 
<H5>  Drilling Holes </H5>
  In addition to welding, YAG lasers are used extensively to 
drill holes. This covers a wide range of products such as 
automobiles, aircraft, home appliances, etc., and the holes vary 
widely both in size and shape. 
<H3>  Lasers Used To Drill Variety of Holes in Auto Bodies: 
Reduces Number of Dies and Amount of Inventory </H3>
  There are cases in which the change from past processing 
methods to YAG laser processing has resulted in great 
advantages. One example comes from the Toyota Motor Corporation. 
  Toyota installed a YAG laser system to drill holes in 
exterior body panels, and it began operation in June 1990 (Fig. 
11 [not reproduced]). In the past Toyota stamped out the holes 
on presses, but switched to using YAG lasers to reduce the 
number of dies and the amount of inventory. 
  Toyota uses a YAG laser with a maximum average output of 200 
W, but the holes are drilled with a pulsed laser beam. The body 
panels are zinc galvanized steel 0.8-1.0 mm thick. The holes 
drilled by laser are for attaching the license plates, 
installing antennas, etc., and they include a variety of shapes 
such as round, square, and oblong and a size range of 4-20 mm in 
diameter. About 15 holes per vehicle are drilled by laser on ten 
models such as the Vista, Corolla, and Hi-Lux. 
  YAG lasers are installed on all six production lines in four 
plants such as those at Takaoka and Tsutsumi. The models they 
manufacture have various specifications. One example is the 
steering column specifications. Depending on whether the car is 
a right-hand or left-hand drive, the hole for the steering 
column must be opened on either the right or left side of the 
dashboard panel. To respond to these various specifications, it 
is necessary to install the YAG lasers on both sides of the 
line. Therefore, three of the six lines have only one YAG laser 
unit and the other three lines have two. There is one robot for 
each laser generator. 
  The hole drilling at Toyota is not merely a matter of 
opening 
a small hole by melting and evaporating the material. Some holes 
are cut out by moving the laser beam. This generates scrap as a 
result. Masao Kawase (Engineering Control Department, 2nd 
Production Engineering Division, Toyota Motor Corporation) said, 
``Getting rid of this scrap material presented a problem.'' 
  To keep the scrap from falling, a magnet was attached to the 
tip of the robot arm. The magnet directly picks up the scrap 
generated after the hole is opened and removes it from the line. 
The robot throws away a piece of scrap material each time a hole 
is opened. During this process, sensors located outside the line 
check each time to make sure that the robot has actually removed 
the piece of scrap. 
  In the past, body panel holes were opened by stamping, but 
there were two problems. One was that a different die was needed 
for each model and its specifications. As a result, it was 
necessary to build a lot more dies to correspond to the increase 
in model numbers. 
  Another problem was inventory. Among production processes, 
opening holes is a relatively fast operation. Once the holes 
have been made, the specifications for that body panel are set. 
Therefore, it was necessary to keep a large inventory for each 
different specification. To cut down on inventory, it was 
necessary to shift the hole opening process, which sets the 
specifications, as far down the production line as possible. 
  With YAG laser processing no dies are needed. Moreover, it 
is 
possible to place the hole opening process near the end of the 
production line, which provides processing flexibility since the 
holes can be drilled in response to the specifications needed at 
that time. Toyota plans to try YAG lasers in the processing of 
aluminum alloy material in the future. 
<H5>  YAG Laser Drills 630 Cooling Holes in Gas Turbine Blade </H5>
  YAG lasers were installed at the Takasago Plant of 
Mitsubishi 
Heavy Industries, which manufactures industrial gas turbines, in 
February 1991 to drill cooling holes in turbine blades, and they 
went on line in April 1991.[.sup]5[/] The material used in 
the turbine blades is a heat-resistant cobalt-based alloy. The 
YAG lasers have an maximum average output of 230-240 W, and a 
maximum peak output of 20 kW. 
  Users desire high gas temperatures at the turbine inlet in 
order to increase turbine efficiency, and in the case of high 
efficiency turbines the temperature may reach a maximum of 
1350C. Naturally, the harshest conditions fall on the first 
level of stationary blades located closest to the hot inlet 
gases. 
  Therefore, Mitsubishi is drilling a large number of holes in 
the stationary blades to keep the temperatures at their surface 
cooler (Fig. 12 [not reproduced]). Compressed air flows through 
the inside of blades and erupts through the holes to cover its 
surface and form a kind of protective barrier. This air cooling 
not only lowers the surface temperature of the stationary blades 
to 750-800C, but also extends blade life. 
  The number of holes the YAG laser drills in the stationary 
blades depends on the type of gas turbine. In types where the 
inlet temperature reaches 1250C, about 150 holes are 
needed, and in types where the temperature reaches 1350C, 
about 630 holes are needed. In the case of the 1350C type, 
the laser drills about 200 cooling holes in the stationary 
blades for the second row as well. 
  The hole diameters range from about 1.0-2.5 mm, and the 
parts 
of the blade where the holes are drilled range from 3-7 mm 
thick. These holes are not always perpendicular to the surface 
and sometimes fall at about 30-45 angles. Holes drilled at 
these angles are sometimes more than 10 mm long. 
  The spot of the laser beam is only about 0.5 mm in diameter, 
much smaller than the holes. Therefore, first the laser beam 
drills straight through, and then is moved in a circular motion 
to widen the hole by melting and evaporating the workpiece 
material. A protective plate is inserted into the blade to 
protect areas outside the processing site from laser beam damage. 
  In the past, these cooling holes were drilled by electric 
discharge processing equipment at the Takasago Plant. This 
method was not efficient, however, because it required changing 
jigs and electrodes to accommodate holes of different angles and 
locations. Early in 1991 there was an upsurge in turbine orders, 
and Mitsubishi had to find a more efficient way to produce them. 
They chose to install YAG lasers because of their high 
processing capability. 
  Hiroyuki Fukunishi (Blade Section Manager, Takasago Plant 
Manufacturing Department, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries) says, 
``We increased our processing efficiency from 4 to 10 times,'' 
by installing YAG lasers while maintaining precision equal to 
that of electric discharge processing. Moreover, YAG lasers can 
be used on ceramic-coated stationary blades, which cannot be 
processed by electric discharge because of conductivity problems. 
  The Takasago Plant plans to install another YAG laser unit 
this summer, and will try to use YAG lasers for moving blades as 
well in the future. 
<H5>  YAG Lasers Also Used for High-Precision Aircraft Turbines </H5>
  For exactly the same reasons, cooling holes are drilled in 
the turbine blades of jet engines for aircraft. 
  Japan Turbine Technology (main office: Daiei Town, Chiba 
Prefecture) began using YAG lasers in 1991 for the repair and 
processing of cooling holes in turbine stationary blades for jet 
engines.[.sup]6[/] This company was established in 1988 as a 
joint venture between Japan Air Lines and Nippon Steel, mainly 
for the purpose of repairing jet engine turbines of large 
commercial aircraft. 
  The high pressure turbines in large jet engines operate in 
combustion gases at temperatures exceeding 1300C and 
pressures exceeding 2.5 MPa (25 atmospheres), and at the high 
speed of about 9000 rpm. Because the turbine blades are 
operating under such harsh conditions, they are repaired after 
every 10,000 hours of flying time. 
  Repair is performed on each blade after it is removed from 
the engine (Fig. 13 [not reproduced]). During repairs the 
cooling holes get plugged because of retouching performed on the 
whole surface of the blade such as brazing over areas where 
cracks have formed. The company uses YAG lasers to reopen the 
plugged holes. The YAG laser used by Japan Turbine Technology 
has a maximum average output of 400 W and a maximum peak output 
of 20 kW. 
  The thickness at the areas where the holes are opened in the 
stationary blade is about 2 mm, but just as in the case of the 
gas turbines, many holes lie at an angle to the surface, and 
some lie at an angle of only 6 with respect to the surface. 
The hole diameters are about 0.5-0.6 mm, and number 550-560 on 
each blade. The number of cooling holes is greater for engines 
of higher output. Just like Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Japan 
Turbine Technology uses a method so that the laser beam will not 
damage other parts of the blade when it opens the holes. 
  High precision is required to control the flow volume of 
cooling air in jet engine turbine blades. Even a small error 
will badly affect efficiency and lead to blade damage. 
Therefore, the hole shape and surface smoothness must be 
controlled with high precision processing. Yoshimichi Moroi 
(Engineering Section Manager, Engineering Department, Japan 
Turbine Technology) says, ``The most important factor is to find 
optimal conditions that hold the heating effects to a minimum 
during processing.'' 
<H5>  Trimming Rotor Surfaces on Motors To Achieve Dynamic Balance </H5>
  All the hole processing we have discussed thus far has 
involved opening holes all the way through material. However, 
there is also processing that involves trimming away small areas 
and making indentations. 
  Hair dryers have a compact motor that revolves at a high 
speed of 10,000-20,000 rpm. Therefore, it is necessary to 
achieve dynamic balance in the rotors just as the tires on an 
auto need to be balanced. Poor dynamic balance results in 
vibration, noise and shortened lifetime. 
  In the past a drill was used to trim places that disrupted 
the balance. However, that method was not efficient because each 
time the rotor was trimmed, it had to be checked to see whether 
it was in balance or not. Therefore, Matsushita Electric Works 
installed a YAG laser to improve production efficiency. 
  Figure 14 shows the production line where dynamic balance is 
achieved with the YAG laser. The rotors that arrive are first 
mounted on a measuring device called a balancer and spun at 1500 
rpm. During this process the balancer base will begin to vibrate 
if the rotor is out of balance. Sensors mounted on the balancer 
detect the locations and amounts of imbalance. 



  After the amounts of imbalance and their locations are 
specifically determined, the rotor is moved directly below the 
laser while it is still spinning, and the laser beam fires as 
each location comes into alignment. The laser beam gradually 
trims away the imbalanced areas to correct the balance (Fig. 15 
[not reproduced]). 
  This corrective operation is performed on two separate 
stages 
on a single generator. While measurements are being taken on one 
stage, the laser beam is trimming the surface on the other 
stage. This is accomplished by changing the path of the laser 
beam by moving a prism inside the generator and alternately 
sending the beam to the two stages. 
  Norio Yoshida (Senior Engineer, High Energy Processing 
Development Lab, Production Engineering Research laboratory, 
Matsushita Electric Works) says, ``From measurement to 
correction, the time required to balance each rotor is only 
about 5 seconds,'' so the introduction of the YAG laser has 
increased operating efficiency. As many as 300,000 rotors a 
month are processed by this method. 
<H5>  Surface Modification </H5>
  YAG lasers are not only used for welding and opening holes. 
Recently the move to use YAG lasers as a means for modifying 
surfaces has attracted attention. 
  Surface modification is a method of providing the surface of 
a material with new functions by building up another substance 
on top of it (cladding). One example is adding metal powder to 
the surface of a material that must be corrosion and wear 
resistant, and then exposing that area to a YAG laser beam to 
melt the metal (Fig. 16). 



<H3>  Surface Modification of Inside Wall of Easily Corroded Thin 
Tube with 100 Meter Long Optical Fiber </H3>
  The Engineering Laboratory of Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy 
Industries Company is one place using YAG lasers for surface 
modification. This lab has combined a YAG laser and a 100 meter 
long optical fiber to perform surface modifications on 
structural material requiring corrosion 
resistance.[.sup]7,8[/] 
  This technique is being used on the inside walls of 
stainless 
steel pipes in existing nuclear power plants. Stainless steel 
pipes suffer a localized loss of corrosion resistance when 
exposed to a large amount of heat such as welding. Moreover, the 
narrowest of these pipes has an inside diameter of only 40 mm. 
  Therefore, this is a preventive maintenance technique 
developed by Ishikawajima-Harima to fight corrosion in which an 
optical fiber is passed through the pipe and a YAG laser beam is 
used to form a cladding layer on areas with reduced corrosion 
resistance. For example, surface modification is possible on a 
site 10 cm wide at the tip of a pipe 5 meters long. 
  Welding is a method generally used in surface modification. 
Welding forms a protective layer by pounding the metal powder 
into the substrate. However, because the coating is not 
chemically bonded to the substrate, it has relatively poor 
adherence and easily becomes porous. Therefore welding is not 
suited for surface modification of structural material when the 
purpose is to increase corrosion resistance. 
  On the other hand, when a laser beam is used for surface 
modification the metal coating and the substrate are bonded 
metallurgically, so there is good adherence and the atoms in the 
structure are tightly packed. Moreover, the heating effects on 
the substrate are minimized since a small area can be 
selectively fused. 
  Currently high-output CO[.sup]2[/] lasers are often used 
for laser beam surface modification. However, because the 
equipment is large and optical fiber cannot be used, 
CO[.sup]2[/] lasers cannot be used in on-site operations 
where surface modifications must be performed inside existing 
plants. 
  Therefore, Ishikawajima-Harima researchers thought that if a 
YAG laser and optical fiber could be used, it would be possible 
to expose narrow spaces and the insides of pipes in existing 
facilities easily with a laser. Until now, there has been no 
method for forming a dense, highly adherent coating in narrow 
spaces such as the insides of pipes. 
<H3>  Expectations Grow for Low Output Laser Beam as Surface 
Modification Tool </H3>
  The actual procedure for surface modification is as follows: 
first the metal powder is mixed with an organic solvent binder 
to form a paste. In the case of the insides of stainless steel 
pipes it is effective to form a cladding layer with a high 
chrome-high nickel-molybdenum series metal for corrosion 
resistance, so the powder consists of a mixture of these metals. 
  Next a special device is used to form a uniform coating of 
this metal powder paste in the pipe. The thickness of the 
coating is roughly 0.2-1.0 mm. After coating is completed, a YAG 
laser beam is passed through the pipe via an optical fiber, and 
the metal powder coating is exposed. The direction of the beam 
is altered by a reflective mirror. The reflective mirror is 
rotated as the laser beam torch is withdrawn, and this creates a 
continuous bead [like a pipe thread] that forms the cladding 
layer. 
  The laser used in this process is a continuous wave type 
with 
an output of about 400 W and an exposure rate of about 0.2 
meters/minute. Norio Morishige (Specialist Manager, Bonding 
Research Department, Ishikawajima-Harima Engineering Research 
Lab) says, ``For example, a YAG laser with about 500 W of output 
can perform surface modifications comparable to a 
CO[.sup]2[/] laser with a 2 kW output.'' The reason 
low-output YAG lasers can be used for surface modifications is 
because the YAG laser wavelength is shorter than the 
CO[.sup]2[/] laser wavelength, and it is absorbed more by the 
exposed material. 
  Researchers at Ishikawajima-Harima want to apply this YAG 
laser surface modification technique to exterior surfaces of 
structural materials requiring high temperature and wear 
resistance, and they are involved in developing a practical 
device. Mr. Morishige continues, ``The YAG laser is fully 
suitable for surface modification. We want to find uses for it 
in many places.'' 
<H5>  Conclusion </H5>
  The uses of YAG lasers have steadily grown. However, Mr. 
Nakamura from Matsushita Electric Works says, ``It will be a 
shame if we do not find new uses for YAG lasers. Not only 
production engineers, but also product designers and developers 
need to realize the advantages of YAG lasers and consider the 
uses of YAG lasers as tools during the design stages'' in order 
to expand the uses of YAG lasers even more. Using YAG lasers 
will contribute to the development of products with higher added 
value. 
  However, problems still remain for manufacturers and users 
of 
YAG lasers to solve if they are to find wider applications. For 
example, the biggest obstacle to the purchase of the processing 
equipment is high cost. Although costs have come down over the 
past two or three years, users still have a strong feeling that 
YAG lasers are expensive. They still seem expensive compared to 
the CO[.sup]2[/] lasers that cost &yen;10 million per 
kilowatt. 
  As Yoshio Kohara (Operations Manager, Laser Operations 
Center, Sumitomo Heavy Industries) says, ``The cost is 
approaching that of CO[.sup]2[/] lasers'' because advances in 
technology have made construction of the power source, etc., 
less expensive. Some users have said that if the cost comes down 
they will purchase more YAG lasers, so we can expect 
manufacturers to make attempts to lower the cost in the future. 
  Furthermore, in terms of the hardware, although it is now 
possible to control the output waveform with timing, it is not 
possible to control the laser beam intensity distribution 
electrically. There is an optimal intensity distribution for 
processing each type of material. Some users are requesting 
capability to freely change the distribution of the beam 
intensity such as an intensity with a Gaussian distribution or 
an intensity that shows a different distribution. 
  There are also problems with users. Developing products with 
high added value by using laser processing falls under the realm 
of industrial secrets, and there is a tendency for companies to 
hide the fact that they are using lasers. This also slows the 
spread of YAG lasers. 
References 
  1. Yano Economic Research Institute; YAG Reza Kakoki Ichiba 
[YAG Laser Processing Equipment Market], MAKETTO SHEA MANSURI 
[MARKET SHARE MONTHLY], No. 40 pp 71-76, Feb. 1993. 
  2. Noboru Taguchi; Aruminiumu Gokin No Reza Yosetsu [Laser 
Welding of Aluminum Alloys], DAI 16 KAI REZA KYOKAI UINTA SEMINA 
[16th WINTER SEMINAR OF LASER SOCIETY] pp g1-g14, 1993. 
  3. Naohisa Takahashi, et al.; Parusu YAG Reza Ni Yoru 
Keiryoka Haiki Chamba No Teiwai Yosetsu Kumitate [Low-Distortion 
Welding in Assembly of Lightweight Exhaust Chamber by Pulsed YAG 
Laser], DAI 25 KAI REZA NETSUKAKO KENKYUKAI ROMBUNSHU [PAPERS OF 
25th LASER THERMAL PROCESSING SOCIETY], pp 33-40, 1991. 
  4. Tsuruhara; Kanagatanai De Buhin No kumitate Ya Atokako, 
Kino No Fukugo De Seisansei Kojo [Part Assembly and Post 
Processing Within the Die, Increased Productivity by Combined 
Functions], NIKKEI MECHANICAL, pp 34-44, 7 Sep 1992, Features. 
  5. Naoki Mitsuyoshi, et al.; YAG Reza Ni Yoru Sangyo Gasu 
Tabin Buredo No Anaake Kako [Opening Holes in Industrial Gas 
Turbine Blades with YAG Lasers], DAI 29 KAI REZA NETSUKAKO 
KENKYUKAI ROMBUNSHU [PAPERS OF 29TH LASER THERMAL PROCESSING 
SOCIETY], pp 85-89, 1993. 
  6. Anon.; YAG Reza Kakoki No Riyo Hirogaru [Uses of YAG 
Laser 
Processors Expand], NIKKEI MECHANICAL, p 73, 4 Feb 1991, Trends. 
  7. Norio Morishige; Reza Bimu Wo Riyoshita Kozo Zairyo No 
Kotingu [Coating Structural Materials Using Laser Beams], NIHON 
ZOSENGAKUKAI SHI [JAPAN SHIPBUILDERS SOCIETY JOURNAL] No. 741, 
pp 10-16, 1991. 
  8. Kenji Hirano, et al.; Ko Faiba Denso Ni Yoru Reza 
Kuraddingu Gijutsu No Kaihatsu [Development of Cladding 
Technique Using Laser Transmitted by Optical Fiber], 
ISHIKAWAJIMA HARIMA GIHO [ISHIKAWAJIMA-HARIMA TECHNICAL REPORT], 
Vol. 30, No. 4 pp 234-240, 1990. 
  [Box, p 16] 
<H3>  Three-Dimensional Processing by Sending Laser Beam Through 
Optical Fiber and Combining with Robot </H3>
  YAG lasers have many different features, and the most 
appealing one is that the laser beam can be conveyed flexibly 
from the generator to the processing site via an optical fiber 
made of SiO[.sup]2[/] (quartz). 
  At the Takasago Laboratory of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, 
for example, researchers an send a laser beam about 225 meters 
through an optical fiber. They have developed and applied a 
method for making welding repairs of damaged areas in steam 
generator heat conducting tubes in nuclear power 
plants.[.sup]a[/] The wavelength from a YAG laser is a short 
1.06 m, which is almost entirely reflected by the 
SiO[.sup]2[/], so it can be sent through an optical fiber. 
  One advantage of using optical fiber is that 
three-dimensional processing can easily be performed when it is 
combined with a robot. If the laser beam emitted from a single 
generator is split among several optical fibers, it can be used 
in multiple lines (Fig. A) It is also possible to perform 
processing on the same workpiece at several locations at the 
same time. 



  On the other hand, the laser beam from a CO[.sup]2[/] 
laser with a wavelength of 10.6 m is absorbed by the 
SiO[.sup]2[/], so it cannot be passed through optical fiber. 
Therefore, the laser beam must be sent from the generator to the 
processing site by multiple mirrors, so the system tends to get 
rather complex. 
  Furthermore, most CO[.sup]2[/] laser processing devices 
are large structures that straddle the production line and are 
called gate-type devices. Therefore, if the production line 
needs to be changed around, it is a major task to move this huge 
piece of equipment. However, with YAG lasers there is no need to 
move the whole unit, but merely reroute the path of the optical 
fibers.[.sup]b[/] 
References [box] 
  a. Takashi Ishide; Ko Faiba Denso Ni Yoru Sokannai 
Koshutsuryoku YAG Reza Yosetsu [Welding in Thin Tubes by YAG 
Laser Conveyed by Optical Fiber], DAI 15 KAI REZA KYOKAI UINTA 
SEMINA [15th LASER SOCIETY WINTER SEMINAR], Laser Society pp 
e1-e14, 1992. 
  b. Kikuchi; Ko Faiba Riyo No Koshutsuryoku YAG Reza, 
Tashushoryo Seisan Rain E No Donyu Hajimaru [Installation of 
High Output YAG Lasers Using Optical Fiber to Multiple Model 
Small Volume Production Lines Begins], NIKKEI MECHANICAL, 13 May 
1991, pp 32-40, Features. 
  [End box, p 16] 
  [Box, p 18] 
<H3>  YAG Lasers Achieve High Output and New Makers Appear One 
After Another </H3>
  YAG lasers are achieving high levels of output. In the past, 
almost all YAG lasers had an average output of less than 1 kW, 
but beginning in 1989, YAG lasers with more than 1 kW of output 
began to appear. At present, the most powerful ones available 
commercially have reached 2.4 kW and are sold by Toshiba, etc. 
Moreover, various manufacturers are heavily involved in R&amp;D 
right now with the goal of achieving even higher output. 
  For example, Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries developed 
a 
YAG laser with a maximum output of 3 kW in November 1992, and it 
is currently at the testing stage on its way to 
commercialization. In September 1992 Sumitomo Heavy Industries 
announced that it would sell a 2 kW YAG laser and is already 
receiving inquiries about it. Moreover, a 2.4 kW YAG laser 
developed by the Hobart Corporation in the U.S. went on sale in 
March in Japan from Indeko [phonetic] (main office: Tokyo). 
  The high output YAG lasers these companies are shooting for 
will be used for trimming and welding large parts. As the output 
increases, processing speed also increases. For example, they 
can be used for trimming and welding zinc galvanized steel 
sheets with large surface areas like those used in automobiles. 
Another target for these high output YAG lasers is trimming and 
welding aluminum alloys. 
  What has become conspicuous over the past few years as YAG 
lasers have achieved higher output is the increase in the number 
of Japanese companies forming affiliations with foreign laser 
equipment makers and those entering the YAG laser field anew. 
For example, in 1989 Sumitomo Heavy Industries purchased the 
Canadian company Lumonics, and entered the YAG laser field. 
  In 1991 Fanuc, Ltd. purchased a partial technical license 
from General Electric. Also in 1991 Hoya purchased the U.S. 
company Continuum Electrooptics and also invested capital in the 
German company MLS (Munich Laser Systems). These new arrivals 
have already put commercial products on the market. We can 
expect the competition in development and sales of YAG lasers to 
become even more intense in the future. 
  [End box, p 18] 

