Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Summary" of the government's "National Plan for Drug </F>
Prevention and Control," which was drafted by a team of experts 
presided over by Air Force General Arnaldo Velarde Ramirez] 
  [Text] Part 1: Problem Diagnosis 
  1. General Context 
  1.1 General Considerations 
  Over the past two decades the problem of drugs in Peru has 
increased and become very complex. There is general consensus 
that: 
  a. the very large production of coca for illegal purposes 
is--in most cases--encouraged by foreign interests; 
  b. the number of users of legal and illegal drugs such as 
tobacco, alcohol, cocaine paste, inhaled toxic materials, 
marijuana, etc., has increased significantly; 
  c. the traffic and illegal trading of legal and illegal 
drugs, the criminal activities provoked by this activity, and 
the grave consequences of drug addiction have increased; 
  d. criminal activities, which have overwhelmed the capacity 
of legislators, have evolved very fast; 
  e. there is a need for coordinated action by the involved 
nations against the international character of this illegal 
trade. 
  1.2 Historic and Cultural Context 
  From time immemorial, coca cultivation has been part of the 
tradition and custom of the Andean peasant. Coca is used for 
chewing, for trade, medicinally, and in social and religious 
ceremonies. It has a sacred meaning for the people. 
  1.3 Geographical Context 
  The Peruvian territory--which lies in the west-central part 
of the South American continent--comprises three macroeconomic 
regions: The coastal region, which represents 10 percent of the 
territory; the ranges, which represents 31 percent; and the 
Andean Amazon jungle which represents 59 percent. The 
high-elevation jungle ecosystems of this region, with steep 
hills and high humidity between 600 and 2,000 meters above sea 
level, are right for coca cultivation. 
  1.4 Economic, Political, and Social Context 
  Peru has a population of 22 million people. Social and 
economic indicators have dropped over the past 30 years and are 
today among the lowest in Latin America. This economic 
depression has impoverished the Andean region, forcing its 
inhabitants to migrate to coastal and higher jungle zones where 
foreign pressures provoked a staggering increase in the coca 
plantations. In 1990 the government launched an economic 
stabilization program seeking to reinsert the country into the 
international economic community. The program obtained 
important results in the control of inflation and the 
reorganization of the productive apparatus. 
  International drug traffickers have made large profits by 
purchasing cheap coca from Peruvian peasants and selling it back 
transformed into cocaine. To protect their interests, drug 
traffickers then decided to become associated with terrorists. 
Over the past seven years this alliance has tied up a 
considerable proportion of human and material resources which 
could have been used to fight trafficking. The successful 
campaign to pacify the country that began in 1992, and the 
government's political willingness to fight the scourge, have 
created new hopes for a successful future campaign against drugs 
in the country. 
  2. Production 
  2.1 Coca Leaf Production 
  The cultivation of coca for legal purposes, which is being 
implemented particularly in traditional Andean areas (Cuzco, 
Huanuco, Puno, Cajamarca, Ancash, Junin, and Huancavelica, among 
others) currently involves around 20,000 hectares and some 
27,000 peasant families. The "National Coca Enterprise," which 
by law has the monopoly on the marketing of coca, presently 
controls less than half the cultivated area and the coca 
produced for legal purposes. 
  The lack of trustworthy and current data on coca cultivation 
in Peru is a serious obstacle in properly understanding the 
situation and in proposing alternative solutions to the problem 
it represents. 
  From the estimated 129,000 hectares of plantations for 
non-traditional purposes, some 223,900 tonnes should be 
harvested annually. This activity occupies at least 200,000 
peasant families and produces an estimated annual revenue of 
$300 million. 
  2.2 Production of Cocaine Base and Cocaine Hydrochloride 
  Exportable cocaine base in Peru allegedly totals 900 tonnes 
(worth approximately $600 million per year). This can be used 
to produce approximately 700 tonnes of cocaine per year. Some 
90 percent of the cocaine base is bought by Colombian interests, 
for processing later. 
  2.3 Production of Other Crops 
  There is worrying evidence of poppy cultivation in several 
places in Peru, backed by foreign interests linked to a heroine 
connection. 
  2.4 Impact of Illegal Crops on the Environment 
  Coca cultivation and the illegal use of its byproducts cause 
very serious damage to the jungle ecosystem, like: 
  -- the deforestation of higher jungle areas not fit for 
agriculture, consequently provoking hydro-biological changes and 
harming biodiversity; 
  -- the direct erosion of soil by effect of coca cultivation; 
  -- the contamination of soil and rivers, as well as of the 
flora and fauna as a consequence of the indiscriminate use of 
biocidal fertilizers and chemical components used to transform 
coca into PBC (cocaine base) and PBL (washed coca paste). 
  2.5 The Use of Coca in Traditional Medicine 
  The therapeutic and nutritional properties of coca are 
currently under study by the Traditional Medicine Institute of 
the Health Ministry. Promising results have been obtained so 
far. Its conclusions will serve as the basis for future actions 
by the government, seeking to solve the controversy over the 
classification of coca. 
  2.6 Peruvian Experience in Alternative Development 
  In terms of strategy, the Peruvian Government gives the 
highest priority to Alternative Development for which it seeks 
the help of the social groups involved in this activity. 
  Alternative Development programs have experienced financial 
difficulties. The search for new mechanisms to raise funds for 
these programs will be subject of concrete actions in the future. 
  3. The Illegal Trafficking of Drugs 
  3.1 The Illegal Trafficking of Drugs 
  The Repression of illegal trafficking is of major importance 
at a national and international level. 
  Peru has approved extensive regulations, in keeping with 
international treaties, to classify and punish all types of 
illegal trafficking. 
  Along with the emphasis on repressive measures, norms have 
also been approved to legalize the cultivation of coca in the 
country, while specific cases of addiction and possession for 
personal use have also been legalized. 
  The current plan considers tightening control on criminal 
actions through a systemic approach, when the illegal 
trafficking of drugs can be described as "organized crime." 
  3.2 Situation in Peru 
  The illegal trafficking of drugs (TID) began as a criminal 
activity in Peru in around 1960. It gradually became a threat 
to political, economic, and social stability--because of its 
nature and because of its tie up with terrorist criminals who 
seek to obtain mutual benefits. 
  The subdividing of international TID has created a situation 
where Peruvian trafficking groups or "firms"--like the one 
headed by Demetrio Limonier-Chavez Penaherrera, aka 
"Vaticano"--can control the production, sale, and storage of PBC 
and PBL prior to its transportation by Colombian cartels for 
refining and later introduction into consumer markets, taking 
advantage of its leading role in the trafficking structure. 
  3.3 Organization and Dynamics of the Illegal Trafficking of 
Drugs 
  By nature, the illegal trafficking of drugs is performed by 
gangs organized at a national and international level, which 
control the production, sale, transportation, and storage and/or 
transfer of funds through "money laundering," using--throughout 
the process--methods and technology to minimize risks. 
  Through their economic capacity, they exercise diverse 
influence on society, creating corruption mechanisms, violating 
internal laws, winning the goodwill of people through 
superficially benevolent development activities, and through 
protection rackets. 
  4. The Improper Use of Drugs 
  Legal and/or socially accepted substances like tobacco and 
alcohol head the list of most-consumed psycho-active substances 
in Peru. They involve the highest risk because their use 
initiates the habit among minors and leads to the consumption of 
illegal drugs. 
  The illegal use of drugs is the responsibility of all social 
groups. The problem presents itself in different ways, and in 
that sense, is a problem that concerns not only minors, the 
poor, or unaffected individuals: It affects all social and 
economic groups. 
  Outright prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation policies 
have not obtained the expected results because they fail to 
attack all aspects of the problem. It is necessary to implement 
overall policies that give priority to the participation of the 
population from their grassroots organizations. 
  5. The Institutional Framework 
  The official way to deal with drugs in Peru has been 
basically through criminal prosecution. 
  The appearance of new aspects of the problem during the 
1980's contributed to change the official perception of the 
issue and prompted the government to try new answers. 
  The economic and social aspects became the main causes of 
the 
problem's present magnitude. Terrorism and its alliance with 
the illegal trade became one of the greatest threats to social 
peace and public order. 
  The greatest problem affecting the institutional answer to 
the problem is the lack of an integrated system for a more 
rational use of the equipment and resources dedicated to fight 
the scourge. The absence of a valid policy representative 
(planner, coordinator, and policies' implementation officer) has 
reduced the effect of state actions. 
  6. International Arena 
  Peru has participated in the world crusade against this 
scourge since 1912. It has signed international instruments 
drawn up by the community of nations. 
  Our actions have involved the bilateral, multilateral, and 
regional arenas. In the past few years the Peruvian state has 
sought the recognition of the principle of "shared 
responsibility" and "integral response" in the handling of the 
problem, which has traditionally been faced from a juridical and 
repressive viewpoint. 
  It is worth noting that the Peruvian proposal seeks the 
international community's understanding of the meaning of this 
struggle in our country and the important contribution we are 
making to the global effort to solve the problem. 
  Part 2: National Plan for Drug Prevention and Control 
  1. Objective 
  1.1 The conceptual framework 
  The conceptual framework is defined by a methodical 
interpretation of the Peruvian people's attitude, which is 
expressed through daily and multiple demonstrations (debates, 
seminars, experts' meetings, etc.). This attitude projects a 
defined image of the people's desire to achieve the general 
objective. 
  1.2 General Objective 
  A gradual reduction of coca cultivated for nontraditional 
use 
through alternative development and environmental protection 
programs; a reduction of the improper use of drugs and the 
consequences of addiction through integral prevention and 
appropriate treatment programs; the repression of illegal 
production and trade within a framework of respect for the law 
and human rights in order to protect the well-being and dignity 
of individuals, and a contribution with the international 
struggle against the problem. 
  2. Politics 
  The government reiterates its political willingness to fight 
this scourge, with due respect for all international agreements, 
and calls on all national groups to fight against the illegal 
trade based on five guiding principles: 
  a. the right of peasants to a free, viable, and dignified 
alternative; 
  b. the unity of all Peruvians in the face of this world 
scourge; 
  c. the national desire to confront this phenomenon; 
  d. a shared responsibility, which strengthens international 
understanding and cooperation; 
  e. the Peruvian Government's political decision to fight 
with 
all its energy and ability, legally and with respect for human 
rights. 
  3. Strategy 
  3.1 Concept 
  The strategy adopted by the Peruvian Government is all 
encompassing and provides for strategic lines of action. Its 
implementation calls for the participation of all national 
sectors. 
  3.2 General Strategy 
  Herewith the basic elements of the strategic lines of 
action: 
  a. to establish, in 1994, the necessary juridical and 
institutional framework for the area of drugs; 
  b. to attach, during the 1994-2000 period, the highest 
priority to the implementation of the Alternative Development 
plan for reducing illegal coca plantations; 
  c. to continue the fight against narcotics and drug-related 
crimes, with the cooperation of the Armed Forces; 
  d. to call on the people to participate in an 
all-encompassing preventive action, in treating and 
rehabilitating addicts, and in reducing the social consequences 
of addiction; 
  e. to grant particular attention to international actions 
and 
to joint, cooperative work, based on the principle of shared 
responsibility. 
  4. Specific Objectives 
  a. The National Plan for Drug Prevention and Control 
reflects 
the main factors of the diagnosis made in Part 1 of this 
document, identifying 21 specific objectives: 
  1) Alternative Development: To implement a set of actions 
aimed at gradually replacing the coca economy, for which the 
state will strengthen the structural reform in order to create 
the conditions favorable for developing a competitive economy; 
  2) Participation of the Private Sector: In the 
implementation 
of the Alternative Development programs, the state will create 
the basic necessary conditions and will give real guarantees to 
national and foreign entrepreneurs who wish to invest in areas 
where coca is being produced; 
  3) Investigation for the Advantageous Use of Coca: A 
national 
commission will be created to investigate the therapeutical, 
nutritive, and industrial properties of coca; 
  4) Production for Traditional and Industrial Use: The demand 
for coca for traditional consumption and for legal use will be 
covered by assigning appropriate reserve zones, preferably in 
the areas in which coca has been traditionally produced; 
  5) Environment Preservation: The environmental deterioration 
process, caused by expanded coca farming, will be controlled by 
promoting the recovery and preservation of biological diversity 
of the affected ecosystems and of those that are being 
jeopardized, through adoption of environmental balance measures; 
  6) Monitoring of Land Dedicated to Production of Coca and 
Other Drug-Producing Plants: The state will have permanent, 
updated information of the land dedicated to the production of 
plants from which narcotics are obtained, through remote 
sensoring methods, photogrammetry, and surveying work; 
  7) Development of the Higher Andean Regions Abandoned by the 
Population: These areas will be developed in order to prevent 
the migration of their inhabitants to coca producing areas; 
  8) The National System for Control and Repression of the 
Production and Illegal Trafficking of Drugs, and of Related 
Crimes: National efforts will be strengthened and coordinated 
with a view to controlling and repressing the production and 
illegal trafficking of drugs, the improper use of precursors and 
specific chemicals, the laundering of money and transferring of 
funds, and the smuggling of arms, explosives and related 
activities, in order to facilitate the timely enforcement of the 
law. To this end, the National Control and Repression System 
and Subsystems will be created; 
  9) Control of Production and Illegal Drug Trafficking: 
  A subsystem will be created to coordinate national efforts 
in the control of the production and illegal trafficking of 
drugs; 
  10) Control Over Improper Uses of Precursors and Specific 
Chemicals: Efforts by the national institutions that control 
precursors and specific chemicals will be coordinated; 
  11) Laundering Money and Transferring Funds: National 
efforts 
to control the laundering of money and the transfer of funds 
will be coordinated; 
  12) Smuggling of Arms and Explosives: National efforts to 
control the smuggling of arms and explosives will be coordinated; 
  13) Action against Corruption: Corruption will be controlled 
in the work of the agents in charge of supervision and who use 
their influential position in the structure of the state and in 
financial institutions to favor the illegal trafficking of drugs; 
  14) Comprehensive Prevention: A Comprehensive Prevention 
Program will be developed, based on complete epidemiologic 
studies, to meet school curricular requirements but--with 
creative versatility--and to encourage people to adopt 
prevention as a permanent attitude against drugs; 
  15) Treatment and Rehabilitation: A national treatment 
program will be developed based on the real needs of the 
affected population using classical and alternative methods; 
  16) The Consequences of Acquiescence: A reduction will be 
sought in the social consequences of drug abuse--including 
accidents, the committing of crimes, labor losses, family 
disintegration, and public health associated with the use of 
drugs; 
  17) Information Pertaining To Use: Timely information, 
collected by the state, will be available on levels of the 
excessive use of drugs in the country; 
  18) The Role of the Media: The media will participate in the 
national effort to reduce the supply and demand, and in the 
repression of the illegal traffic of drugs and connected crimes; 
  19) The Institutional Framework: A national system will be 
implemented to handle the drug problem, to plan, coordinate, and 
execute the government's antidrug policy. The National System 
for the Prevention and Control of Drugs will be created to 
direct the resources in the fight against the various aspects of 
this matter; 
  20) Juridical Development: National legislation will be 
harmonized, seeking to standardize state policies on the various 
aspects of the phenomena with the directives and guidelines 
contained in the approved national plan and with agreements and 
declarations signed by Peru; 
  21) International Action: Contributions will be made to the 
international community effort toward the appropriate handling 
of the drug issue--a universal problem as acknowledged in 
international instruments signed by Peru. This will be achieved 
by paying special attention to the way the phenomena is 
characterized in our country, and by improving and implementing 
agreements and mechanisms with other nations and with 
specialized international organizations under the general 
principles of shared responsibility and comprehensive action, 
yet respecting the norms of international law and the principles 
that support it; 
  b. The methodical development of specific objectives will be 
complemented with appropriate policies and strategies, including 
the necessary directives for planning and programming. It will 
also permit the clear defining of the institutions that will 
participate in the process. 
  5. Interconnected Plans and Programs 
  a. The National Plan for the Prevention and Control of Drugs 
will begin a process of planning and programing through the 
following documents: 
  1) The National Program for Alternative Development; 
  2) The National Program for the Participation of the 
National 
Business Sector; 
  3) The National Program for Investigating the Beneficial 
Uses 
of Coca; 
  4) The National Program for Allocating Areas for the Legal 
Production of Coca; 
  5) The National Program for Obtaining Land Ownership 
Information and Monitoring Cultivation; 
  6) The National Program for the Development of the Higher 
Andean Region; 
  7) The National Program for the Repression of Drug 
Trafficking and Related Crimes; 
  8) The National Program for Integral Prevention of Drug 
Abuse, and Treatment and Rehabilitation of Drug Addicts; 
  9) The National Program for the Reduction of Social 
Consequences Resulting from Drug Addiction. 
  6. Program Goals 
  The goals of the program are tentative and should be 
redefined at the beginning of the second phase of the planning 
process. 
  a. 1994: 
  -- The publication of the National Plan for Drugs Prevention 
and Control; 
  -- The publication of the law creating the National Drugs 
Control System; 
  -- The establishment of the National Drugs Control System; 
  -- The implementation of the planning and programming 
process 
provided for in the National Plan for Drugs Prevention and 
Control. 
  b. 1995: 
  -- The conclusion of the Initial Planning and Programming 
Process provided for in the National Plan for Drugs Prevention 
and Control; 
  -- The implementation of the Alternative Development 
National 
Plan for the gradual reduction of illegal coca plantations; 
  -- The setting up and implementation of the National System 
for the Control and Repression of Production and Illegal Drug 
Trafficking and Related Crimes at a National Level; 
  -- The institutional participation of the representatives of 
the private sector in the National Drugs Control System; 
  -- The drafting of the National Drugs Law; 
  -- The identification of priority areas for conservation, 
according to the environment law; 
  -- The assessment of the national public and private 
sector's 
capability to treat and rehabilitate drug addicts. 
  c. 1996: 
  -- The assessment of the fulfillment of the National 
Alternative Development Program, implemented in 1995; 
  -- The definition of areas earmarked for legal coca 
production; 
  -- The conclusion of the Coca Leaf Studies and Investigation 
Program; 
  -- The culmination of the registration of plantations; 
  -- The beginning of a nationwide campaign to reduce 
unnecessary consumption of legal drugs (alcohol, tobacco, 
medicines); 
  -- The culmination of the studies for a comprehensive law. 
  d. 1997: 
  -- The assessment of feedback on the National Alternative 
Development Program; 
  -- The assessment of feedback on the National System for the 
Control and Repression of Illegal Drugs Production and 
Trafficking. 
  e. 1998: 
  -- The assessment of feedback on the National Alternative 
Development Program; 
  -- The assessment of feedback on the National System for the 
Control and Repression of Illegal Drugs Production and 
Trafficking. 
  f. 1999: 
  -- The Assessment of feedback on the National Alternative 
Development Program; 
  -- The assessment of feedback on the National System for the 
Control and Repression of Illegal Drugs Production and 
Trafficking. 
  g. 2000: 
  -- The involvement of at least 50 percent of the peasants 
engaged in the production of coca for non-traditional purposes 
in legal activities under the Alternative Development programs; 
  -- The reduction of community dependency where 50 percent of 
the population's income is generated from drug consumption. 

