BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 5 (XINHUA) -- The renewal of 
most-favored-nation (MFN) status for China by the United States 
Government is beneficial to the growth of business of U.S. 
trans-national companies in China. 
  The remarks were made recently by some Beijing-based 
representatives and managers from U.S. companies, who also said 
that the rapid pace of the Chinese economy also provides U.S. 
enterprises favorable opportunities, which they should take to 
expand their presence here. 
  The companies, including General Motors (GM), Apple 
Computers, Caltex Oil, Ford, McDonnell Douglas (MDC), Motorola, 
United Technology (UTC), Du Pont and AT&amp;T, all have success 
stories in China. 
  GM, ranked first on FORTUNE magazine's top 500 corporations 
for the last two years in a row, has established two joint 
ventures in China to produce trucks and advanced electronic fuel 
injection systems respectively. And the auto giant has also 
secured six licenses to manufacture other auto components. 
  "GM will be committed to the Chinese automotive market," 
said 
Richard Donnelly, vice-president of GM and group executive for 
the GM powertrain group. "We want to support local 
manufacturing and technological growth." 
  Donnelly made his China tour recently to donate engine 
transmissions to China's Ministry of Machinery Industry, Qinghua 
University and the Beijing Institute of Technology. 
  He said that GM's business focus in China would be 
components 
manufacturing in support of the industrial policy and plan made 
by the Chinese Government. 
  The corporation has made an overall investment plan in 
China, 
he said, adding that 20 to 25 cooperative projects were under 
discussion between GM and China and agreements on several of 
them would be reached within the year. 
  Donnelly was convinced that GM would continue its success in 
China, just as it had done in other countries. 
  The Apple Computer Company, the largest vendor of personal 
computers in the U.S. last year, occupied only less than five 
percent of China's PC market. However, Robin Abrams, 
vice-president of Apple Pacific, indicated that Apple would take 
20 percent of the China market within two or three years. 
  David Tang, marketing director of Apple China/Hong Kong, 
predicted that China would become one of the largest PC markets 
before 1997 with annual sales of one million sets. 
  In order to occupy the market, Apple would introduce to 
China 
its newly-developed Power Macintosh computers, which debuted at 
the Apple Computer Technology Forum held in Beijing June 1-3. 
  Tang said that Apple planned to sell 20 thousand Macintosh 
computers including thousands of power Macintoshes. 
  It was the best opportunity to enter into the China market 
since China was still using lots of DOS systems rather than 
advanced Windows systems due to lack of Chinese software, Tang 
said. 
  Apple was looking for Chinese partners to co-develop Chinese 
software, Tang said, adding that there were 20 Macintosh 
software programs applicable in China now. 
  He also disclosed that the company had established a 
joint-venture in Shandong Province to develop software and had 
65 distributors across the country. 
  Caltex Oil Company, which entered China at the beginning of 
the century, resumed its China business in the late 1970s. Till 
now, the company has established extensive business contacts 
with its Chinese partners and set up several joint ventures. 
  In 1980, Caltex began to export crude oil for China's Daqing 
Oil Field, becoming the first foreign oil company of this kind. 
  After that, Caltex started to build filling stations in 
Shenzhen, and the business of a Caltex-Shanghai joint venture is 
the mixture and sale of lubrication oil. Two oil depots and an 
asphalt depot were built by the company in south China's Zhuhai 
and Shenzhen cities and Shandong Province. According to a 
senior Caltex official, the company's commitment to the Chinese 
market would increase to meet China's rising need for energy. 

