Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nusrat Mirza: "Agreement on Siachen Will Be </F>
Against National Interest"] 
  [Text] According to a news report referring to a U.S. 
official, a decision has been made to keep Siachen a nonmilitary 
zone, and this agreement is being fine-tuned. I believe that any 
agreement with India over Siachen is detrimental to Pakistan. 
This will lead to our acceptance of India's supremacy, and will 
create reasons for decreasing our armed forces. Our government 
and the military would be shooting themselves in the foot if 
they did so. 
  The highest region in the world, Siachen, is also known as 
the roof of the world. It is the place where 20,000 Indian and 
Pakistani soldiers are fighting one another. It is being 
considered for an agreement, according to informal talks by 
American officials with senior journalists. We believe that such 
an agreement is not in Pakistan's interests, because battles and 
skirmishes are not fought just for winning or losing. There are 
many purposes. One purpose is military or economic. Other 
purpose is to maintain self-respect or for one's supremacy. A 
war fought for military and economic reasons, or to hurt the 
enemy's economic and military power, is fought to see how much 
harm is done to the enemy. In the present situation, this war, 
which was started by India, is proving to be very harmful to it. 
This is also showing India's weaknesses, because India is under 
great economic pressure because of this war. Some already knew 
it, and it is often being heard now that even grass does not 
grow in Siachen. If this is true, then why did India start this 
campaign? When it was planning to take over Siachen, then 
Pakistan knew that India was moving toward Siachen. Thus, 
Pakistan also started its preparations, and Pakistani and Indian 
deputations met face to face in some European countries. Both 
countries were looking to purchase special equipment to start a 
war in this cold region, where the temperature is 40 degrees 
below zero. One reason for this campaign could be that India 
wanted to surprise Pakistan and establish its supremacy over it, 
to demonstrate that it can attack Pakistan from a region which 
is extremely inaccessible. Perhaps there was a price for this 
campaign, and it has exceeded all the budgets that have been set 
for it. Therefore, for the past several years, India has shown 
interest in an agreement over Siachen. That is why the American 
officials are saying that it is easy to have an agreement on 
this issue, and that Pakistan should not give any opinion. At 
present, it seems that Pakistan is apparently willing to follow 
the policy of obeying U. S. orders. 
  India's Losses in Siachen -- From the information we have 
received from our national and international media, it appears 
that India has suffered losses ten times greater than has 
Pakistan. In other words, if ten Indians are killed, only one 
Pakistani is martyred. Economically, India's losses are many 
times greater. The prestigious magazine INDIA TODAY wrote in 
1990 about Siachen, "India's weaknesses are evident in economic 
and military movement in Siachen, because the Cheetah helicopter 
is overhauled in France, and not in India." The purpose for 
which the Cheetah is used indicates that India is not meeting 
all its military needs. Then, the number of Indian troops there 
is much greater than the number of our troops, according to 
military sources. Thus, India must be spending much more money 
there. It is also worried because of this. It is possible that 
we, too, are worried. However, it is a good strategy to keep the 
enemy occupied in such a way that it spends its energy and 
remains under economic pressure. Now, if there is an agreement 
over Siachen, it would mean that we cannot afford the expenses, 
even though they are much greater than what India is spending. 
This also means that we are in no position to protect our 
independence, because the enemy will later pressure us in other 
areas. It will also make sure that it benefits on the Kashmir 
issue, and will send these people to Kashmir. The troops that 
have been removed from the Chinese border after the agreement 
have also been sent to Kashmir. This could also mean that all 
the economic spending figures in Siachen were totally wrong, or 
that our leadership, which is "an ever-changing leadership," is 
tired. It sits down whenever it sees a shadow by a wall. Instead 
of aggravating Indian weakness, we are providing it a chance to 
breathe easy if we have an agreement over Siachen. 
  Challenge to India's Supremacy -- By opposing India in 
Siachen, Pakistan has negated the picture of India's supremacy, 
and has challenged it. That is why its supremacy was not 
accepted. Had we accepted it, we would not have been able to 
keep it occupied in Siachen. If we agree to an agreement, it 
will mean that we have accepted India's supremacy. Even if it is 
not inferred now, sooner or later, we will have to accept 
India's supremacy. 
  The fact is that challenging India in Siachen is equivalent 
to checking India's supremacy. I recognize that peace is very 
important; a peace agreement that causes additional problems is 
not a good strategy. A cease-fire that results in a greater war 
later is not appropriate. Only the tired people or those who 
refuse to learn from political and military events of the past 
do such things. The people should never give them any support. 
There is a lot of unrest in Pakistan at present, and the current 
military leadership's ability and competence are being 
questioned. 
  Reductions in the Military -- Our involvement in Siachen and 
the Kashmir issue are the major reasons for Pakistan's large 
army. If these problems are solved through American efforts, 
then Pakistan will have any reason to have a large army. This 
means that we do not ever want to resolve the problem. This is 
not true. We do want to resolve this issue, but without any 
restrictions. We cannot accept the condition of reducing our 
armed forces or rolling back our nuclear capabilities. In 
addition, we also want this issue to be resolved under a 
"package deal." It is India's need to get out of the Siachen 
problem. We will leave it there only if it agrees to resolve the 
Kashmir problem according to the UN resolutions. If we agree 
over Siachen, then India will fully benefit, and we will lose. 
It is possible that India gives the impression of giving 
something to Pakistan over Siachen. It will then take even more 
back over the Kashmir negotiations. India will benefit greatly 
by stopping military campaigns in Siachen. At the same time, it 
will heap loses for us when we discuss the Kashmir issue. If we 
have an agreement over Siachen, then we should insist on having 
a package deal without giving up our stand on reduction in the 
army or rolling back our nuclear program. The issue of reducing 
our army is being discussed by our intellectuals, politicians, 
and the people. They are talking about reducing our armed forces 
because the self-serving role of military generals in the past 
had resulted in increased interference in political affairs. 
Many efforts were made in the past to reduce our army; 
however, the people did not support these efforts, because they 
know the importance of the military for historic and 
psychological reasons. One reason is that the Hindus have not 
sincerely accepted Pakistan as a country of Muslims. They want 
to avenge the rule of Muslims over them for thousands of years 
by ruling the Muslims now. Therefore, the Hindus, through India, 
want to control Pakistan, the country of Muslims. 
  If the present military leadership, which is very 
knowledgeable about our country's affairs, makes a losing deal 
over Siachen, and shoots itself in the foot, then the people 
will have no reason to accept the additional economic pressure 
of maintaining a large army. They will sadly accept reductions 
in our armed forces. It is true that the United States is 
pressuring Pakistan to end its disagreement with India, and to 
roll back its nuclear technology. We have to remove this 
pressure by using some strategy. 
  Training of Pakistani Soldiers -- The training that our 
military troops and officers have received to fight in cold 
regions while remaining in Siachen will be of great benefit to 
us in the future. At a time when Pakistan, instead of looking 
for help inside, looks toward others, it will see many different 
kinds of scenarios that can interest it. The present era is not 
one of military campaigns; however, if there is a military 
campaign, we must be in a position to play our role actively. 
The money that is being spent for such training will prove to be 
a good investment in the future. For it, it is important that we 
keep our eye on the sky. The sky is the better place to fight 
than on land or on roofs. We can learn new things through new 
experiments. While I was living in Shangri-La Sakrud, I met a 
young military officer on 27 June 1987. He had returned from 
Siachen and was full of zeal. He explained to me an incident 
when they were all in a camp and saw a circle of light traveling 
from one site to another. They fired at it, but it was not 
affected. Slowly, the circle came close to their place of 
operation, and then disappeared. He thought there were some 
ghosts there. However, I said that someone was using a satellite 
for spying. Their experience in the Siachen war will be 
beneficial to us in the long run. If nothing else, our army can 
be part of a peacekeeping force in a cold region. 
  After presenting these arguments, I am stating again that 
any 
agreement with India over Siachen will not be in Pakistan's 
interests. This would lead to our acceptance of India's 
supremacy. India will create another opportunity to confront us, 
and it will also make India economically stronger. Also, it will 
be a cause for reducing Pakistan's military force in the future. 
India's economic weakness will be increased if it is involved in 
the Siachen war, and its dream of supremacy will remain a dream. 
The Pakistani military will gain more experience and training. 
There will be more problems for India, and it will remain 
economically backward. 

