Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Using new technologies, including the multi-layer 
film coating technology and the ``X-coating'' technology for 
removing residual tensile stresses that generate cracks in the 
film, Toshiba Tungaloy Co., Ltd. (Toshiba Tungaloy), has 
developed the most advanced material coating technology to 
dramatically improve the wear and defect resistance of cutting 
tool edges by forming a functionally gradient structure. 
  Toshiba Tungaloy used the new technology for commercial 
production of the ``X''-series coated cutting tools for steel 
machining, and the products were received well by users. 
  Thus, Toshiba Tungaloy plans to place more emphasis on 
marketing new products made by the new technology, while 
expanding the range of products for which the new technology can 
be applied. The new technology is a combination of three 
material technologies: the formation of 12 layers of dense 
coating film, the formation of a balanced matrix, and the 
``X-coating'' technology. By using the new combination 
technology, Toshiba Tungaloy was able to improve the defect 
resistance 2- to 10-fold and the wear resistance 1.5- to 2-fold 
over those of existing high-toughness coating materials. 
Heretofore, Toshiba Tungaloy has commercialized and placed in 
the market sturdy and durable ``T700X Series'' coating materials 
-- T715X and T725X -- one after the other. Due to the extremely 
favorable responses by users, Toshiba Tungaloy is trying to 
expedite the expansion of sales of these two products, while 
developing new applications of the technology to other product 
series. 
  The twelve layers formed by the film coating technology 
consist of 10 chemical-vapor-deposition layers based on titanium 
carbide (TiC), titanium nitride (TiN) and titanium carbo-nitride 
(TiCN), and an alumina-based (Al[.sup]2[/]O[.sub]3[/]) 
layer and a titanium nitride-based layer on top of the 10 CVD 
layers. The total thickness of the coating layer is 10 to 12 
. Through the formation of multi-layers, a dense, functional 
gradient structure with fine crystalline grains is constructed 
for the purpose of improving the layer's wear resistance. 
  The X-coating technology is used to greatly improve the 
defect resistance of this coating layer. Because the coating 
layer's thermal expansion coefficient is larger than that of the 
matrix, a tensile residual stress will be generated in the 
coating layer upon cooling. The stress tends to promote the 
propagation of cracks when loads are applied in intermittent 
cutting. The X-coating technology can solve this problem. When 
the X-coating technology is used, microfine cracks are 
intentionally created in the coating layer by a special method, 
so that the tensile residual stress will be reduced. At the same 
time, the special method increases a compression residual stress 
at the surface of the matrix, so crack propagation will be 
suppressed and the defect resistance will be dramatically 
improved. 
  This technology was commercialized by Toshiba Tungaloy after 
it acquired the license for the technology, which had been 
developed jointly with Nippon Steel Corp., Nittetsu Choko Co., 
Ltd., and Toho Kinzoku Co., Ltd. and for which a patent 
application had been filed jointly. Toshiba Tungaloy combined 
the licensed technology with its technology developed in-house. 
  The third component of the new technology involves the 
adoption of a method for controlling the propagation of cracks 
toward the inside of the matrix by creating a layer for removing 
the _b_ phase on the matrix's surface and the use of a 
super-hard matrix material with well-balanced defect and wear 
resistance. 
  Toshiba Tungaloy was successful in combining the above three 
technologies to create the functional gradient mechanism in the 
entire cutting edge, and is now capable of supplying the 
products that can guarantee longer life and more reliability for 
cutting tools that users have needed most in their effort to 
reduce the labor for the metal cutting process or to automate 
that process. 

