BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhu Yuli: "China's Aviation Industry Spreads Its </F>
Wings"] 
  [Text] Prior to the 1980s, China's aviation industry 
mainly engaged in manufacturing military equipment. However, 
last year, civilian products accounted for more than 70 percent 
of total industrial output value. Beginning in 1994, Aviation 
Industries of China (AVIC) will implement a Flying Program over 
the next 10-15 years which calls for the industry to transform 
itself into a mammoth industrial group by the year 2000 with 
annual sales volume expected to reach 60 billion yuan, 
quadrupling the 1993 figure. 
  China's aviation industry witnessed sustained and rapid 
growth in 1993. In accordance with the State Council's general 
plan for structural reform, AVIC has successfully completed its 
organizational transformation, adjusted itself to the demands of 
the socialist market economy and is now operating under the new 
system. 
  Last year, its total industrial output value reached 14.96 
billion yuan, a 35.7 percent increase over the previous year, 
while the sales income hit 15.3 billion yuan, up 32 percent. It 
also earned profits of 540 million yuan, and paid taxes of 490 
million yuan, 17 percent and 25 percent respective increases 
over the previous year. 
  In terms of new aircraft research and development during 
1993, two new models successfully completed test flights and the 
design for a new type aircraft was finalized. Designs of the 
Y7H-500 passenger aircraft and the Y8 carrier aircraft have 
basically been finalized and feasibility studies have been 
completed. Last year, the corporation won 14 national invention 
awards, 13 state awards for scientific and technological 
progress. The corporation also won 307 ministry-level 
scientific and technological achievement awards. In addition, it 
scored breakthroughs in a number of key scientific and 
technological projects. 
  Total output value and sales of civilian products rose to 11 
billion yuan and 11.2 billion yuan, representing 35 percent and 
43 percent respective increases over the previous year. 
  In 1993, the industry's exports jumped to US$870 million, 
with exports of mechanical and electronic products, including 
civilian aircraft, standing at US$550 million. The growth rates 
surpassed the average national level. 
<H5>  Production of Civilian Products </H5>
  AVIC, which was established in June 1993, was based on the 
former Ministry of Aero-Industries which in 1988 joined with the 
former Ministry of Aerospace Industry to form the Ministry of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics Industry. 
  AVIC, a mammoth industrial corporation directly under the 
State Council, is a state-owned enterprise engaged in scientific 
research, production and business operations. It consists of 
more than 200 enterprises and work units, with a total work 
force of over 560,000. 
  The major responsibilities of the corporation include: 
formulating business strategies and development schemes for 
China's aviation industry; governing and supervising the 
operation, management and use of state-owned property belonging 
to the aviation industry; contracting with the state for key 
aviation products and new models, and systematically managing 
projects; constantly supplying new technology and equipment for 
military and civil aviation; designing technological standards 
for the aviation industry and managing and supervising product 
quality; being responsible for state-level test flights for new 
airplane models; and administering foreign affairs for the 
aviation industry in accordance with the rights granted by the 
State Council. 
  Following a sustained 40-year effort, China's aviation 
industry has developed into a solid overall force and now has a 
foundation for developing high and new technology. In early 
1982, Deng Xiaoping, then chairman of the Central Military 
Commission of Central Committee of Communist Party of China, 
pointed out that all departments in the defense industrial 
sector, apart from fulfilling the requirements of research and 
production of arms and military equipment, should spare no 
efforts to research, develop and produce civilian products. 
Under the guidance of the strategy, China's aviation industry 
began to gradually switch to the production of civilian products 
and market operations. After a diligent 10-year effort, the 
output of civilian products rose to occupy 70 percent of the 
total industrial output and a number of competitive products now 
enjoy a brisk market. Tertiary industry also recorded rapid 
progress in recent years. The 1993 total output value for 
tertiary industry hit 1.83 billion yuan, with profits of 150 
million yuan. 
  The newly founded AVIC will adopt even more flexible 
business 
mechanisms, and will extend great effort to develop civilian 
products, establish multifaceted business operations and 
increase the volume of imports and exports. As part of the 
effort to further deepen reform and expand opening, the 
corporation will accelerate the transformation of business 
mechanisms, adjustment to the international market and develop 
aviation science and technology to provide high-quality aviation 
equipment and other products for military and civilian use, 
while at the same time, go all out to expand exports. 
  The Flying Program 
  In consideration of the economic base and technological 
force 
of China's aviation industry, and the demands of the national 
defense, domestic and foreign markets, AVIC has established its 
Flying Program to be carried out over the next 10-15 years. The 
main principle of the program is to place greater emphasis on 
its main function of producing aviation products, strengthening 
the so-called two wings-nonaviation production and tertiary 
industry, and developing AVIC into a super-large industrial 
group corporation. It plans to reach ever higher plateaus in 
terms of the technological level of its aviation products, the 
production scale of non-aviation products and exports, and 
economic efficiency. 
  The detailed goals of the program include: increasing total 
industrial output value by 25 percent annually during the last 
two years of the Eighth Five-Year Plan (1991-95), hitting 22 
billion yuan in 1995; further increasing the figure by 18 
percent annually during the Ninth Five-Year Plan (1,996-2000), 
achieving 50 billion yuan in output by the year 2000; and 
increasing the business volume of tertiary industry by an 
average annual rate of 25 percent, with sales income rising to 
25 billion yuan by 1995 and further to 60 billion yuan by the 
year 2000. 
  This strategic program includes specific developmental goals 
for the following 10 areas: 
  Military Aircraft. By the year 2000, the 
corporation will have the capacity to carry out research on and 
production of advanced fighters, thereby narrowing the overall 
gap between domestic and advanced world levels, and striving to 
equal or surpass advanced world levels. 
  Civilian Aircraft. By way of international 
cooperation, AVIC will substantially raise design, experimental 
and manufacturing capabilities. Based on international joint 
production, the corporation will strive to reach its target of 
researching, developing and manufacturing primary aircraft, and 
continue to improve and perfect the Y7, Y8 and Y12 series which 
already have attained a good reputation in both domestic and 
world markets. It will also further expand contracted 
production of spare parts for foreign customers. 
  Helicopters. Production will develop on the basis 
of expanded tonnage and size. By the year 2000, a manufacturing 
system will be gradually formed to research and produce 
helicopters. 
  Gas Combustion Engines. By the end of this 
century, the corporation will have the capability to research 
and produce military-use turbine engines. In terms of civilian 
aviation engines, AVIC will accelerate the pace of technology 
accumulation, and will upgrade its technical level through 
cooperative production. 
  Airborne Equipment. The corporation will actively 
import advanced technology. Emphasis will be placed on the 
importation of aviation electronics systems and the coordinated 
development of mechanical and electronic parts, as well as the 
overall upgrading of industrial technology. 
  Experiments and Test Flights. AVIC will ensure 
the successful completion of experiments and test flights 
involving key projects and will accelerate the development of 
related technology. 
  Long-Term Research. Between now and the year 
2000, the corporation will actively develop programs, carry out 
long-term research and enhance technology to produce new types 
of military aircraft and large-scale civilian aircraft. 
  Non-Aviation Products. The corporation will 
greatly expand both the domestic and foreign markets and attract 
increased domestic and foreign capital. It will also attach 
great importance to economic efficiency, and use its 
technological advantages to develop a score of national 
high-quality products, including mini-buses, medium-sized and 
luxury buses, motorcycles, air conditioners, air conditioner 
compressors, compressors for refrigerators, time pieces, liquid 
crystal displays, and computer-controlled equipment. The 
corporation will also actively participate in the development 
and construction of the Shanghai Pudong New Area. By the year 
2000, Pudong will become one of the major export processing 
industrial bases for China's aviation industry. 
  Tertiary Industry. A strategy of all-around 
business will be adopted which will be based on the main goal of 
good economic returns. A comprehensive development plan will be 
drafted and will be implemented one step at a time. Management 
will be liberalized. 
  Imports and Exports. By the year 2000, the 
corporation's annual import and export volume will rise to US$3 
billion. 
  Since China implemented the reform and opening policies in 
1979, and especially since it decided to establish a socialist 
market economy, China's aviation industry has met unprecedented 
development opportunities. Although China's civil aviation 
sector continues to grow at an annual rate of over 30 percent, 
it still fails to meet the demands of economic development and 
international and domestic tourism. With the sharp increase in 
the number of airports and international and domestic air routes 
in the foreseeable future, China's civil aviation sector will 
continue to develop at a rapid rate and will need to purchase a 
large number of trunk and branch line aircraft. 
  At present, many countries have gained an awareness of the 
vast market potential of China's aviation industry, and a number 
of world-famous companies have come to China seeking business 
cooperation. Based on the principle of equality and mutual 
benefit and a sincere desire for cooperation, AVIC hopes to have 
various forms of governmental or non-governmental cooperative 
ventures with counterparts in other countries and regions. On 
the basis of international cooperation and their own efforts, 
China's aviation industry will continue to fly high with wings 
spread wide. 

