Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Wilma N. Yamzon] </F>
  [Text] The Philippine Navy said yesterday it will deploy 
more boats in the country's major fishing grounds to deter 
poaching, piracy, and illegal fishing. 
  Vice Adm. Virgilio Q. Marcelo, Navy chief, revealed his 
plans 
to intensify the campaign to stop the unauthorized exploitation 
of the country's waters to discourage foreign fishing boats from 
poaching and crack down on dynamite and cyanide fishing. 
  He added that the Navy started installing cameras and 
satellite-based positioning equipment on naval planes. 
  The Navy chief said this will resolve complaints on the lack 
of documented evidence against poachers and illegal fishermen to 
push their prosecution in court. He said that while the Navy 
gets many reports on intrusions, the government cannot press its 
case against violators without strong evidence. 
  The Navy chief outlined his other goals, including the 
acquisition of a second U.S. built logistic support vessel 
(LSV), the construction of a third 140-foot "Aguinaldo Class" 
patrol boat, the strengthening of search-and-rescue (SAR) 
capabilities, and the increase in the "steaming time" of Navy 
patrol boats and "flying time" of naval patrol planes. 
  Marcelo said the Navy will sustain its programs to produce a 
"lean and compact, efficient and cost-effective organization," 
including boosting the reservist program. 
  Meanwhile, in his 1993 accomplishment report, Marcelo said 
the Navy conducted 2,171 patrols and 205 sealift missions, 
including its transport services to Batanes where there is no 
commercial shipping traffic. 
  Navy ships have been transporting food, medicine, and other 
basic commodities, and construction materials used for 
government projects in Batanes. 
  In counter-insurgency operations, Navy and Marine soldiers 
killed 27 rebels, captured 212 others, and recovered 47 
firearms, mostly from secessionist "Lost Command" groups in 
Mindanao. 
  Marcelo said the Navy seized over P275 million [Philippine 
pesos] worth of smuggled goods, including the interception of 
P150 million worth of "shabu [methaphethamine hydrochloride]," 
its biggest single haul this year. 
  The Navy also seized 108 vessels for illegal fishing and 
another 60 vessels for transporting illegally cut logs. 

