BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Ai Dacheng, deputy director of the </F>
Gold Bureau of the Ministry of Metallurgical Industry, by Wu 
Chen (2477 1057); place and date not given: "Mainland Gold 
Industry Moving Gradually Toward the Market"] 
  [Text] As the mainland moves toward the market economy, 
signs of relaxation of the decades-old monopoly on the gold 
industry have emerged. During a special interview with this 
reporter a few days ago, Ai Dacheng, deputy director of the Gold 
Bureau of the Ministry of Metallurgical Industry on the 
mainland, expressed: The move to readjust gold prices on the 
mainland in September 1993 can be regarded as the beginning of 
the turn to the market economy for the gold industry and the 
establishment of a gold exchange market, for which preparation 
work is in full swing, will mark a crucial step toward the 
market. Although the state-monopolized gold purchase and 
management system will be maintained for some time to come, and 
the chaos in the gold industry since last year has been dealt 
with, the direction of the development of the gold industry will 
eventually be opening wider and moving toward the market. 
<H5>  Making the First Step in the Transition to the Market Economy </H5>
  Ai Dacheng pointed out: At present, no fundamental change 
has taken place in the gold management system instituted on the 
mainland. This is expressed in the fact that the gold industry 
is still being operated along the orbit of the planned economy, 
gold enterprises are carrying out production in accordance with 
mandatory plans, and the purchase, allocation, and marketing of 
gold products are monopolized by the People's Bank of China. 
Gold in the form of mineral products (including gold ingots, 
gold nuggets, and gold bullion) are still mainly used for state 
reserves, and have not really entered the market as commodities. 
No standard gold exchange market has yet been set up in China, 
and gold still cannot be traded freely. Because of this, Ai 
Dacheng said: Since the direction of developing the socialist 
market economy was fixed at the 14th CPC National Congress, 
fundamental changes have taken place in the macroeconomic 
environment on the mainland. If the gold industry continues to 
stick to the tradition of the planned economy, it will have 
difficulty in its development. Therefore, the only way out for 
the gold industry, and even the gold trade, is to carry out 
reform to bring about a transition to the market economy. 
  Ai Dacheng held that the move to put gold prices in order 
and 
to readjust the price mechanism this year is a reform carried 
out with great effort by the gold trade in recent years. It is 
totally different from remedial methods used in the old system 
in the past and is the first step taken in the transition to the 
market economy. 
  The mainland has all along pursued the policy of letting the 
People's Bank of China, together with other departments, fix 
gold prices on behalf of the state. The gold prices had been 
distorted over a long period, and when gold prices were at their 
lowest, the domestic purchase price of gold was less than half 
of the international prices, but the prices of gold ornaments 
were higher than international gold prices. Since the reform 
began on 1 September 1993, the purchase prices of gold have 
become floating prices determined by the international market 
instead of fixed prices determined by the state. The purchase 
price of gold is fixed at a level 10 percent less than that on 
the international market, and the prices for allocating and 
marketing are maintained at the same level as those of the 
international market. At the same time, existing subsidies 
related to policies, low-interest loans, and preferential 
policies of tax exemption have been abolished. 
<H5>  Focus of Reform of the Gold Trade This Year </H5>
  According to Ai Dacheng's personal view, the focus of reform 
of the gold trade on the mainland this year is to speed up the 
establishment of a domestic gold exchange market. The state's 
approval of letting gold in the form of mineral products enter 
the market for business as commodities will mean a fundamental 
change in the gold management structure. At present, the State 
Council has instructed the State Economic and Trade Commission 
to give macro guidance, the People's Bank of China to take the 
lead, and the State Administration of Gold Control and other 
departments concerned to assist in the work of investigation, 
studies, the design of plans, and the formulation of plans in 
the establishment of the gold exchange market. 
  It is held that, because of limitations in the management 
level and the means of regulation and control on the mainland at 
present and the reality of imbalance in the purchase and 
marketing of gold, if restrictions on the gold market are 
completely removed, the price of gold may rise as a result of 
supply falling short of demand. Therefore, even if a primary 
gold exchange market is established on the mainland in the near 
future, it will still be put under control as in other 
developing countries. At present, there are three kinds of 
situations in open gold markets in the world: One is free 
buying and selling of gold without any restriction; another is 
free buying, selling, import, and export of gold by legal 
persons, but not by private individuals; the third is free 
buying and selling of gold inside the country, but the import 
and export of gold are restricted. This last form will most 
likely be adopted for the gold market on the mainland in the 
future. 
  Ai Dacheng held that in the early stage of the establishment 
of the gold exchange market on the mainland, the state possibly 
will follow the mode of foreign exchange management, set up a 
standard market in Beijing or in a big city along the coast, and 
carry out unified management. Gold business will have to be 
carried out within the market. Details on the scope of 
management and whether or not individuals are allowed to do 
business in the market remain to be studied. Ai Dacheng also 
said: At present, the demand for setting up a gold exchange 
market of various localities is very strong, and more than 10 
provinces and municipalities have already submitted their 
investigation and study reports asking to be selected as the 
venue for a gold exchange market at the national level or as the 
first provincial gold exchange market. However, the attitude of 
the State Council is to let the state make overall arrangements 
for the establishment of a gold market, and it does not approve 
of carrying out experiments at selected points in various 
provinces for the time being. 
<H5>  Speeding Up the Process of the Establishment of the Gold </H5>
Exchange Market 
  Ai Dacheng stressed: The establishment of the gold exchange 
market is a matter of complicated systems engineering, and a 
great deal of work remains to be done, such as, passage of 
relevant laws, regulations, and rules; training of specialized 
personnel; acquisition of necessary hardware facilities, and so 
on. Therefore, it is very difficult to work out a timetable, 
and it is not yet clear whether or not such a market can be 
established in 1994. The only thing definite is that work in 
this respect will certainly be accelerated in 1994. 
  Ai Dacheng said that the gold trading policy on the mainland 
at the present stage is, on the one hand, to energetically open 
wider to the outside world, and, on the other hand, to 
strengthen management and establish a good environment and order 
for development. 
  It is learned that over a long period, an enormous 
underground invisible gold exchange market has been formed on 
the mainland. In the second half of 1993, because the economic 
order on the mainland was out of control in some way, a few 
localities spontaneously began to establish their own local gold 
markets which were run by the people. To a great extent, 
underground exchanges became half-open exchanges. More 
localities were making preparation for setting up gold markets. 
This resulted in the running away from management of the gold 
market by the authorities and the reduction in the procurement 
of gold. Therefore, Ai Dacheng said that departments concerned 
stressed again a few says ago that the state-monopolized gold 
purchase and management system will continue to be upheld, and 
they have decided to carry out an overall check-up of the 
existing local gold exchange markets; to ban gold exchange 
markets spontaneously set up, including gold markets which are 
being built; to prohibit gold processing enterprises from 
directly purchasing gold from gold mines; and to make it a rule 
that all gold in the form of mineral products should be sold to 
the People's Bank of China. At present, the governments of all 
provinces, municipalities, and autonomous regions, together with 
departments concerned, are taking joint actions to change as 
quickly as possible the present chaotic situation in management 
of gold products. 
  Besides, the State Council reaffirmed not long ago 
regulations on forbidding private gold mining. According to 
what Ai Dacheng said, before the price readjustment in 
September, local illegal gold exchange markets set up 
spontaneously purchased gold at prices much higher than those 
fixed by the state. Stimulated by high profits, gold mining by 
individuals revived. In remote mountain and border areas of 
Henan, Shaanxi, Xinjiang, Gansu, Qinghai, and other provinces 
and regions, gold mining by individuals is especially rampant. 
At the high tide, the number of individual gold miners reached 
as many as 300,000. 
  Ai Dacheng pointed out that individual mining does various 
kinds of serious harm: First is damage to resources. Gold is a 
valuable resource which is nonrenewable. Individual gold miners 
violate scientific laws and sequence in mining. They operate 
gold mines in a plundering manner, working at mines with rich 
ore and abandoning those with poor ore. As a result, it is 
difficult to recover and utilize mines, causing great waste of 
resources. Second is pollution of the environment. Individual 
gold miners lack funds and equipment. Extremely toxic chemicals 
such as cyanide and mercury are used in ore dressing and 
smelting, and inappropriate handling often causes serious 
pollution. Third is the emergence of hidden dangers in 
production. Many individual gold miners illegally carry out 
mining in places close to state-owned gold mines and damage the 
geological structure. This gives rise to accidents in 
production. Fourth is numerous public security problems caused 
by individual mining. Large numbers of individual miners gather 
in border and remote areas where management is relatively weak. 
They often fight with weapons in contending for claims. A few 
lawless miners even kill others to seize their gold. They give 
rise to many social problems. Fifth is that gold mined by 
individuals is usually not sold to the state. It is stored up 
by individuals or turned into ornaments. Much of the gold is 
traded on the black market or even smuggled abroad. This causes 
great loss of state resources and hard currency. 
<H5>  Methods for the Management of Mining Gold in Cooperation </H5>
With Foreign Countries 
  While strengthening the management of the gold trade on the 
mainland, attempts to open the trade to the outside world has 
started. Ai Dacheng said: The mainland will cooperate with 
foreign businessmen in exploiting gold resources within a 
limited scope. At present, foreign businessmen who intend to 
cooperate with the mainland are provided with data concerning 
gold resources in Lannigou of Guizhou, Jinya of Guangxi, and 
Donggualin of Yunnan. Many foreign businessmen have carried out 
on-the-spot studies and negotiations for cooperation. 
  Ai Dacheng disclosed: The State Administration of Gold 
Control drafted procedures for the management of mining gold in 
cooperation with foreign countries a few days ago, and the 
procedures have been sent to departments concerned to solicit 
their views. These procedures are expected to be published in 
the first quarter of 1994. He also talked about several general 
principles included in the "management procedures," which are 
being discussed: 
  First is determining the scope of cooperation and 
development. Gold mines which have been preliminarily considered 
to be of low grade, to contain arsenic, carbon, and other 
materials, or to have difficulties in ore-dressing and smelting, 
and those which are considered to have difficulties in mining, 
ore-dressing, and smelting given the existing technology of the 
mainland, but which have good prospects for exploitation can be 
approved for carrying out experiments on mining in cooperation 
with foreign businessmen. 
  Second is determining requirements for selecting points for 
experiments and procedures for approving development projects. 
General speaking, mines with sufficient domestic prospecting 
data and relatively favorable external construction conditions 
can be selected for experiments in cooperation with foreign 
countries in mining gold. The procedures for approving 
cooperative projects should be like this: Gold management 
departments of various provinces should first put forward a 
report of intent on a cooperative project. After this report is 
examined by the Ministry of Metallurgical Industry, it is to be 
submitted to the State Planning Commission and the State 
Economic and Trade Commission for examination and approval 
before negotiations are held. 
  Third is determining the principles for carrying out 
experiments on cooperation in gold mining at selected points and 
ways of introducing foreign capital. A preliminary view under 
consideration is that the Chinese side may use as capital for 
cooperation mineral resources, land, water and electricity 
supply facilities, mining equipment, and so on, and the foreign 
side may use funds, technology, and equipment as their shares of 
investment. Specific percentage can be fixed through 
negotiations between the two sides. However, profits in the form 
of foreign exchange should be shared between the two sides, gold 
products should still be sold to the People's Bank of China, and 
foreign businessmen participating in mining gold should not be 
allowed to take the gold abroad. The duration of cooperation 
shall be determined by the characteristics and years of service 
of the mines. When the period of cooperation expires, all the 
assets of the mine should go to the Chinese side. 
  Ai Dacheng stated that the above principles are only a 
preliminary framework of ways to manage gold mining and of 
opening up gold mines to the outside world. Revision by 
departments concerned and approval by the State Council are 
needed before final regulations can be promulgated. 

