Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Riitta-Eliisa Laine: "Minor Impact From EEA </F>
Agreement on Social Welfare"] 
  [Text] Many must learn to fill out EEA [European Economic 
Area] forms. 
  The Finns, who have become accustomed to the benefits of the 
welfare state, need not fear the dawn of the EEA era, as the EEA 
agreement will only have a minor effect on Finnish social 
benefits. However, many Finns must learn to fill out the EEA 
forms. 
  From a practical standpoint, the agreement affects mainly 
those who travel abroad to find employment or who come to 
Finland from abroad to work. While traveling in another EEA 
country, a Finnish tourist may utilize the agreement, for 
instance, if he becomes ill, as long as the person can present 
the necessary documents. A retiree will always receive medical 
care according to the laws of his country, no matter in which 
EEA country he resides. 
  If a person resides and works only in Finland, the social 
benefits will remain the same as before the effective date of 
the EEA agreement. 
  One of the most important cornerstones of the EEA agreement 
is the concept of equal treatment of all EEA citizens. While 
residing in an EEA country, a citizen of another member nation 
may enjoy the same social benefits as the citizens of the host 
nation. Refugees and stateless people who reside in EEA 
countries are also entitled to the same social benefits as the 
citizens of the countries in question. 
<H5>  Pensions Based on Residency </H5>
  Pension benefits, however, are determined based on the laws 
of each country, as well as the terms governing such pension 
benefits. In other words, the agreement does not make the 
pension benefits uniform in the various EEA countries. On the 
other hand, it becomes easier to secure pension rights in 
another country in such a way that missing years can be 
supplemented by years worked in another country. When an EEA 
worker retires in Finland, the worker is entitled to collect 
pensions from all EEA countries where he has resided or worked. 
  Each country also defines, based on its own regulations, 
when 
a person is classified as disabled. 
  Simultaneously with the EEA agreement, changes in the 
National Basic Pension Act and the National Survivor's Pension 
Act came into effect in Finland. According to the new 
legislation, the amount of basic pension and survivor's pension 
received depends on the time a person has resided in Finland. 
<H5>  EEA Norms for Medical Professions </H5>
  In the field of health care, the EEA agreement requires that 
the regulations pertaining to the practices of physicians and 
dentists be adapted to the regulations of the EEA. The same 
applies to the professions of head pharmacist, pharmacist, 
optician, dental technician, registered nurse, and midwife. 
  Based on an application, the National Board of Medicolegal 
Affairs may grant a citizen of another EEA nation the right to 
practice these professions. 
  The EEA also affects the National Health Insurance Act. The 
goal is to supervise reimbursement of prescription drugs and to 
increase competition in the medical drug markets. The 
regulations regarding products classified as medical drugs are 
changing. All products, the purpose of which is to cure, 
palliate, or prevent illness, are considered medical drugs and 
are subject to the applicable rules and regulations. No longer 
is it permissible to ascribe medical use to products that 
cannot, as such, be considered medical drugs. 
<H5>  General Information Pamphlet </H5>
  The Ministry of Health and Social Affairs, the National 
Pension Institute, and the Central Pension Security Institute 
have jointly prepared a pamphlet "A Brief Guide to EEA and 
Finnish Social Benefits," which provides general information 
about the new system. The free pamphlet is available from local 
offices of the National Pension Institute, from the Central 
Pension Security Institute's mail order department, telephone 
90-1511, and from the National Pension Institute's mailing 
office, telephone 90-434 11. At a later date, the pamphlet will 
also become available in Swedish and English. 

