Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Afghan President Offers Conditional </F>
Cease-fire"] 
  [Text] Kabul, London, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT -- Afghan interim 
President Borhanoddin Rabbani yesterday confirmed that he is 
willing to negotiate a cease-fire with his main adversary 
Golboddin Hekmatyar provided the latter breaks off his alliance 
with Uzbek militia leader 'Abdol Rashid Dostam. Rabbani has 
also offered to resign as leader of Jami'at-e Eslami [Islamic 
Society of Afghanistan] in favor of former Defense Minister 
Ahmad Shah Mas'ud. 
  According to unconfirmed reports, Rabbani had in the 
beginning wanted to resign from his official post and also leave 
the country but Mas'ud prevented him from doing so and the 
interim president is now under Mas'ud's protection in one of the 
latter's strongholds in the capital. A spokesman for Rabbani, 
however, has denied that he wanted to flee or that he is now 
Mas'ud's prisoner. Rabbani yesterday appeared briefly outside 
Kabul to receive Iranian President Hashemi-Rafsanjani's envoy. 
  Rabbani's cease-fire offer was made through a Pakistani 
mediator who later met with Hekmatyar at his headquarters some 
30 km from Kabul, but Hekmatyar, who is interim prime minister 
until 21 March, rejected Rabbani's offer and swore to continue 
the fighting "until the downfall of those who seized power 
illegally." The two sides yesterday threw everything they had 
into the battle for Kabul, targeting hospitals, schools, 
mosques, and market places as part of a strategy to terrorize 
the population. 
  Five of Kabul's 11 districts are under the control of the 
pro-Rabbani forces, three under the control of the Shiites who 
are allied with Iran, and only one under the control of the 
Uzbeks. Control of the remaining two districts south and east of 
the capital changed hands several times in the current battles. 
Sources close to Mas'ud say that he is confident that he can 
drive the Uzbeks out of their Bala Hesar stronghold. 
  A spokesman for Dostam, however, said yesterday that the 
Uzbeks in that area had enough arms and ammunition to "wipe out 
half of Kabul" before surrendering. 
  He added that "Mas'ud has seen nothing yet. We can blow him 
up along with everything he controls in the capital." The two 
camps launched air attacks particularly on civilian targets in 
the capital and surrounding areas. Elsewhere in the country the 
situation was relatively calm with the exception of some 
sporadic fire in Mazar-e Sharif, the country's second largest 
city. 
  The forces dispatched by Mas'ud and his ally Isma'il Khan, 
governor of Herat, to attack the Uzbeks in the north have made 
major advances without any significant resistance. That may be 
because Dostam does not have enough forces to fight on three 
fronts or it may be that he wants to lure the forces of Mas'ud 
and his ally into his own territory before attacking them. 

