Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Pan Hongxin (3382 4767 2502), Central People's </F>
Radio Network reporter, and XINHUA reporter Luo Yuwen (5012 3768 
2429)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 5 Feb (XINHUA) -- Jiang Zemin, general 
secretary of the CPC Central Committee, Chinese president and 
chairman of the CPC Central Military Committee, recently met 20 
model citizens from across the country who have staunchly 
supported the tradition of the Army cherishing the people and 
the people supporting the Army. The 20 included Xu Honggang, a 
heroic fighter who gallantly rose to defend a just cause. Jiang 
Zemin said: We must carry forward the fine traditions of our 
party and our armed forces, as well as the traditional virtues 
of the Chinese nation, and make efforts to create a good mood in 
society and promote socialist spiritual civilization. 
  Jiang Zemin, Li Ruihuan, Liu Huaqing, Hu Jintao and other 
leading comrades met Xu Honggang and other advanced 
representatives before attending a jointly sponsored army-people 
party celebrating the Spring Festival. Zhang Zhen, Chi Haotian, 
Zhang Wannian, Yu Yongbo and Fu Quanyou were also present. 
  Jiang Zemin praised highly the heroic deeds of Xu Honggang, 
who defied brute force and took up the cudgels on behalf of a 
just cause, as well as the noble conduct of people such as Zhan 
Benfang, who helped rescue and protect soldiers. He said: The 
deeds of Xu Honggang and Zhan Benfang embody the tradition of 
the communist party, of the veteran Red Army, as well as the 
fine tradition of the Army cherishing the people and the people 
supporting the Army, and the traditional virtues of the Chinese 
nation. We must properly publicize the deeds of people like Xu 
Honggang in order to encourage good conduct, maintain social 
unity and stability, and create a favorable social environment 
for reform, opening up, and economic construction. 
  Xu Honggang is the squad leader of a communications company 
under the Jinan Military Region. He was seriously injured after 
bravely struggling with gangsters on a bus on 17 August. He was 
rescued by Zhan Benfang, deputy director of a tax department in 
Sichuan's Yulian County. The deeds of Xu Honggang and Zhan 
Benfang and other heroes have been admiringly talked about among 
the people. Xu Honggang and other `double support' models who 
met the leaders said they would bear in mind the exhortations of 
the leaders of the CPC Central Committee in order to do an even 
better job of supporting the Army and giving preferential 
treatment to the families of soldiers and martyrs, and in 
supporting the government and cherishing the people. 

