BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Rangoon Burma Television Network in 
Burmese at 1300 GMT on 29 March carries a 50-minute report on 
the 29 March plenary session of the National Convention to draw 
up the basic principles for drafting the new state constitution 
held in the Central Meeting Hall of the President's Residence 
compound on Ahlone Road, Rangoon. The report includes recorded 
extracts of the proposal papers read by eight delegates from the 
political parties. 
  First, U Kyar Har Shei of the Lahu National Development 
Party 
presents his party's report. He proposes that statehood be 
granted to national races other than those who have already 
obtained the status of region and state; or the status of 
special division could be granted if a national race is not yet 
qualified to obtain the statehood. He also calls for direct 
access to the central government. He also proposes that 
self-administered regions and self-administered states be given 
the right of "self-administration and self-determination" in 
order for them to carry out the necessary legislative and 
administrative work. 
  He says Lahu nationals are spread out throughout the Shan 
State, especially in areas east of Salween River, and live 
together with Shan, Akhar, and Wa. He proposes that "Mong Ping, 
Mong Hsat, Mong Ton Towns be merged and formed into the Lahu 
National Self-Autonomous Zone" which will remain under the Wa 
State or Wa Special Division. 
  Continuing, he proposes that Yangon [Rangoon], as the 
capital 
city of the nation, be placed under the administration of the 
region concerned and not under the direct administration of the 
president, as proposed by some delegates. 
  Addressing the chapter on head of state, he proposes that 
the 
president be assisted by a vice president. 
  Next, U Saw Than Aung, deputy chairman of the Karen National 
League presents his party's proposal paper. He first presents 
an important issue affecting the Karen nationals -- "fifth 
principle on the state structure, which says national races 
other than those who have already achieved the status of region 
or state" shall be entitled to a self-administered division or 
self-administered zone. Citing the distribution of Karen in the 
country, he asks the convention that the Karen State be made an 
exception to that principle. He says "the population of Karen 
in the Karen State constitutes only one fifth of the total 
population of Karen living throughout the country and that four 
fifths of Karen population live in other regions and states." 
He asks that the self-administered areas for national races 
with a population of between 100,000 and 500,000 be determined 
by the delegates during the duration of the convention. 
  He suggests that Pa-o, Palaung, Danu, Lahu, Akhar, Wa, 
Kokang, Mro or Khami, Naga, Lisu and others be granted 
self-administered area status if they so desire. 
  He says if the population of the Karen State is 1 million, 
there are 7 million estimated to be living outside the Karen 
State. With a view to solving the Karen national issue during 
the current period, he suggests that the ministry of national 
races affairs be set up in the central government to attend to 
the needs of Karen and other nationals. He also suggests that 
the constitution include a provision for the formation of the 
Karen Affairs Council with Karen members of Parliament from the 
Karen State and from other regions and states in order to solve 
the Karen problem. He also proposes that a Directorate of Karen 
Affairs be formed under the council. 
  Addressing the chapter on head of state, he proposes that 
the 
electoral college be formed with three groups of members from 
the two chambers of Parliament. 
  The meeting goes into recess at 1100 and resumes at 1200. U 
Phu Kwe Si of Kokang Democracy and Unity Party presents his 
party's report. He suggests that "in recognition of the 
historical, geographical, and cultural background of Kokang 
nationals, it is proposed that the social, economic, and 
administrative affairs of Kokang be managed by the Kokang, who 
are familiar with own customs and traditions." Addressing the 
issue of state structure, he proposes that that "the Northern 
Shan State Special Region-1 be granted the status of 
self-administered division or self-administered zone." 
  Addressing the issue of head of state, he suggests that the 
electoral college be formed with three groups of members of the 
two chambers of Parliament to elect the president and two vice 
presidents. 
  Next, U Marcos alias U Sai Lon of the Wa National 
Development 
Party reads his party's report to the plenary session. He says 
he again presents the proposal to prescribe the Wa State for Wa 
and other related races -- (Em), Palaung, (Shan Tau), (Ainkyin), 
Duwai, Lawa -- living in Tangyan, Mong Hsu, and an area between 
south of Nam Ting Creek and areas on eastern bank of the Salween 
River, including Mong Ton and Mong Hsat. He also suggests that 
new states, self-administered divisions, and self-administered 
zones of the Union be given the rights of self-administration 
and self-determination. 
  He also suggests that legislative, judicial, and 
administrative powers be enjoyed by legislatures of the regions 
and that states be also granted self-administered divisions. He 
proposes that the government form commissions composed of 
experts and leaders of national races concerned in order to 
determine the self-administered divisions and self-administered 
zones. 
  Continuing, U Marcos says the Wa want direct access to the 
central government, rather than through parliament of a region 
or state, in attending to local political, economic, social, 
administrative, and development matters. 
  He also suggests that special union territories under the 
direct administration of the president shall not be formed 
unnecessarily. Regarding the issue of head of state, he suggests 
that the president and vice president be elected by the Union 
Parliament. He concludes his party's report by asking for the 
delegates' pardon if the report contains any mistake or offends 
any person or organization. 
  Next, U Khin Maung, Panglong, of the National League for 
Democracy [NLD] presents his party's report. He notes the 
present time is the period for all national races to consult 
patiently among themselves as in a family, without any mutual 
suspicion. He says "It is very important for all to work in 
unity in order to raise high the banner of national 
reconciliation and march toward the emergence of a new 
democratic state." He says he agrees with the four principles 
on the state as explained by the chairman of the National 
Convention Convening Work Committee [NCCWC], but he would like 
to add the following provision: "Myanmar [Burma] is a 
motherland, where all indigenous national races reside" and that 
"this land is the motherland and country of all indigenous 
national races." He says "the perpetuation of the Myanmar 
Motherland depends on national unity. In recognition of this 
fact, the aforementioned provision should be included in the 
state constitution to further strengthen national unity. He 
adds: "As Myanmar is a motherland which jointly belongs to all 
indigenous national races, there is no reason for national races 
to be divided and to secede." 
  Next, U Nyunt Wai, elected representative from Pegu 
Division's Toungoo constituency-2, continues to read the NLD 
report. Addressing the issue of state structure, U Nyunt Wai 
says: "Extra care should be given in prescribing 
self-administrative zones in order to prevent the 
Yugoslavia-like scenario in the country." He expresses the hope 
that national races will work together. He suggests that the 
issue of granting self-administered status be determined by a 
government-appointed commission composed of national leaders as 
well as local leaders. 
  Regarding the status of the state capital, U Nyunt Wai 
suggests that Rangoon should retain its present status. He 
suggests that strategic places, such as the Coco Islands, be 
placed under the direct administration of the central government. 
  Next, U Lwin, secretary of the NLD, continues reading the 
NLD 
report when the session resumes at 1440 after a recess. U Lwin 
says: "It is the NLD policy to practise the federal system [two 
preceding words given in English] and to share and distribute 
the three sovereign powers with organs of power at different 
levels." He reiterates "the NLD policy that the system of 
administration of the state shall be based on democracy." 
  Addressing the issue of self-administered divisions and 
self-administered zones, he suggests that the legislative bodies 
of the self-administered divisions and zones should be 
democratic and should be formed with members who have the 
mandate of the voters in their respective constituencies. He 
expresses his concern that "if this is not practised, genuine 
democracy cannot be achieved and will amount to a 
self-infringement of the objective for a multiparty democratic 
system." Quoting political scientists, Jacobson and Lippmann, 
he says "the wishes of the voters constitute political sovereign 
power. Therefore, the legislatures concerned should only be 
formed with representatives elected by the people themselves." 
  Next, U Aung Shwe, NLD chairman, continues reading the NLD 
report. He says the NLD accepts the provision as explained by 
the chairman of the NCCWC that the president shall be a person 
capable of preventing disintegration of the Union and national 
unity and contributing to the perpetuation of national 
sovereignty and the progress and prosperity of the nation. He 
notes the NCCWC chairman also stipulates "the person to be 
president must be well versed in the political, administrative, 
economic, and military affairs of the state." I Aung Shwe says 
that although he agrees with the provision for loyalty toward 
the nation and its citizens, he asks "whether it is practical to 
prescribe the aforementioned qualifications." He says such 
qualifications can create problems for those standing for 
elections. Moreover, he says "the qualification to be well 
versed in military affairs would further limit the candidates as 
the majority of women who have won equal rights as men and 
worked side by side with them through various eras will not be 
able to stand for elections." He says: "All males and females 
who meet the citizenship requirements should be able to stand 
for elections." 
t] Continuing, U Aung Shwe refers to the national convention 
convening work committee chairman's proposed basic principle of 
electing a president by three parliamentary groups. He notes 
that the union parliament has been entrusted with the mandate 
[preceding word rendered in English] of the people. He says 
there is a need to have the participation of all the national 
races nationwide and to be within the framework of democracy in 
electing a president who will have the mandate of the entire 
populace. He proposes that "The first group be composed of 
members of the chamber of parliament who are elected based on an 
equal representation from regions and states; the second group 
be composed of members of the chamber of parliament who are 
elected based on population; the third group be composed of 
members of the two chambers of parliament elected by the people 
from the states, divisions, and self-administered zones." He 
suggests that there should be only one chamber in the state and 
division parliaments and reiterates that the National League for 
Democracy is fully aware of the six national convention 
objectives. 
  He then proposes that "the groups should each select a 
presidential candidate either from among the parliamentarians or 
from outside. A presidential candidate select committee 
composed of senior members of the union parliament should 
scrutinize the qualifications of the candidate. If the 
candidate is found to be ineligible the candidacy should become 
invalid and a new candidate must be selected. After approving 
the presidential candidates, the union parliament should elect 
one of the candidates as president by sacred ballot. The 
candidate who received the second highest number of votes would 
become the vice president." 

