Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with David Kyd, information director of </F>
the International Atomic Energy Agency, by Hans-Joachim Wiese; 
Kyd in Vienna -- live] 
  [Text] [Wiese] Mr. Kyd, the IAEA [International Atomic 
Energy Agency] is responsible for the inspection of the nuclear 
facilities in the DPRK -- actually not only in the DPRK but all 
over the world -- but it is massively prevented from doing its 
duty by Pyongyang. Therefore, the day before yesterday the IAEA 
Governors Council decided to refer the issue to the UN Security 
Council. What does your Agency expect from that? 
  [Kyd] We are indeed the inspection agency, but, of course, 
we cannot force the DPRK to open the facilities in the DPRK for 
our inspections if the DPRK has problems with that. And this is 
the case. Our director general will go to New York today. 
There will be a UN Security Council meeting, and I could 
imagine that the Security Council will adopt a resolution next 
week. We hope that the DPRK will realize that the matter has to 
be clarified and that this will increase security not only in 
Asia but also in the DPRK itself. 
  [Wiese] Inspectors of your organization have already gone to 
the DPRK, and they have been able to visit a few nuclear 
facilities. The problem probably is just one very specific 
facility. Mr. Kyd, what are the specific findings of the IAEA 
regarding the question of whether or not the DPRK has the 
nuclear bomb? 
  [Kyd] For a nuclear weapon you need three things: First, a 
carrier system; second, an ignition mechanism -- one must be 
able to master that; and third, fissionable material, which is 
plutonium. It is our job to find out how much plutonium the DPRK 
actually has. The DPRK claims it has produced just a few grams. 
However, we suspect there is more than that. We do not know 
yet how much, and we were prevented from finding out because 
over the past two weeks, as you have already mentioned, we have 
not been permitted to take samples in one facility, in one 
laboratory, where plutonium has been produced in the past, to 
find out what the level of radioactivity is like in this 
facility. This means we do not know whether this facility is 
utilized fully or whether, as the North Koreans claim, nothing 
has been produced there recently. 
  [Wiese] The IAEA resolution, which I mentioned at the 
beginning, threatens more far-reaching measures, if the DPRK 
continues to be unwilling to cooperate. What is one to 
understand by that? 
  [Kyd] We ourselves can take only limited measures because 
the IAEA is actually responsible only for inspections. However, 
in the UN Security Council it is clear that both a warning and 
economic sanctions are conceivable if all members of the UN 
Security Council, including China, agree to them. 
  [Wiese] The DPRK, however, is threatening to leave the 
Nonproliferation Treaty if international pressure continues. 
What would such a step mean? 
  [Kyd] Of course, it would be very bad, because 161 countries 
are participating in this treaty, and it would be the first time 
in 25 years that a country leaves the treaty. It would create a 
precedent and would not to be welcomed. On the other hand, the 
international community also has to consider whether, after one 
year, there is any sense in negotiating with a country that is 
obviously unwilling to fulfill its obligations. This is not a 
good example for other countries in the future. One could 
expect another country to try to get concessions by saying: I 
am neither in the treaty nor outside. What do you offer me? 
  We want to prevent that, too. 
  [Wiese] Mr. Kyd, next year an international conference must 
decide whether or not the Nonproliferation Treaty, which was 
concluded 25 years ago, as you said, is to be extended. The day 
before yesterday, the following countries did not join the vote 
of the Board of Governors -- either by abstaining or by voting 
against: Libya, Brazil, India, and Indonesia. China abstained. 
All these are potential nuclear powers. This is not a good 
sign for the future of the Nonproliferation Treaty. 
  [Kyd] I believe one cannot draw such a conclusion from that. 
It was rather a disagreement about whether or not pressure of 
this kind by the UN Security Council is appropriate, whether or 
not it will be effective. I certainly believe that the 
Nonproliferation Treaty will be extended next spring, that is, 
in one year. Whether for another 10 years or for another 25 
years is not yet clear. However, it is a treaty that has been in 
effect for 25 years already. There are only five nuclear powers 
all over the world and three so-called threshold countries -- 
Israel, Pakistan, and India -- which have perhaps already 
mastered this technology. This is a good result. Now we have 
South Africa in this treaty, and soon Brazil and Argentina will 
join and the republics of the former Soviet Union. I think this 
is certainly positive. 
  Of course, now there is an acute case -- namely the DPRK. On 
the other hand, however, 160 countries have joined the treaty, 
and we believe the current case should not be interpreted too 
dramatically. Of course, for northeast Asia, however, it would 
be a serious case indeed if the DPRK were to leave the treaty. 
Then the situation will become very sensitive there, not only 
for South Korea but also for Japan, and even for China. 
  [Wiese] Thank you very much. This was David Kyd, 
information director of the IAEA in Vienna. Good bye, Mr. Kyd. 

