BFN 

  [Text] Trencianske Teplice, West Slovakia, May 13 (CTK) -- 
Slovak Interior Minister Ladislav Pittner and his Czech 
counterpart Jan Ruml today agreed on a common Czech-Slovak 
border administration, the conclusions of the joint border 
commission, and on the delimitation of personal files of former 
StB (secret police) members. 
  Ruml told journalists after the meeting that the two 
countries' governments would confirm the conclusions of the 
border commission which agreed on an exchange of the villages of 
U Sabotu and Sidonie and on the compensation for territorial 
losses due to the regulation of the course of the Morava River. 
The controversial Czech cottage owners' colony of Kasarna will 
be discussed by the Czech and Slovak premiers, Vaclav Klaus and 
Jozef Moravcik. Ruml praised Slovakia's willingness to speed up 
customs clearance at road and railway border crossings. 
  Pittner informed his colleague of the Slovak cabinet's 
intention to "gradually introduce a standard regime on the 
common border." Both ministers also agreed on the joint use of 
the personal files of former StB members until their 
transportation to Slovakia. 
  After the meeting with Czech Interior Minister Jan Ruml, his 
Slovak counterpart Ladislav Pittner told journalists that as of 
May 18 measures aimed at speeding up customs clearance would be 
introduced at one road border crossing, and gradually they would 
be used at all road and railway checkpoints on the common 
Czech-Slovak border. 
  Pittner said that the introduction of a standard regime on 
the common border would not concern the two countries' citizens. 
"In this way the protection of both states against immigrants 
from third countries will be guaranteed," he said, and added 
that Slovakia decided to take this step after it found out that 
the signing of a Hungarian-Slovak readmission agreement was in 
sight. 
  "Slovakia is also interested in the guarding of the open 
countryside border, but our financial means are limited," 
Pittner said. He said he agreed with Ruml that the Czech 
Ministries of the Interior and Defense would help Slovakia in 
the search for people who were forcibly taken by the former 
Soviet secret police KGB to the Soviet Union after the Second 
World War. 

