Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Guatemala City, 11 Mar (ACAN-EFE) -- Today, the 
Guatemalan Foreign Ministry asserted in a letter to UN Secretary 
General Butrus Butrus-Ghali that the country has signed no 
agreement establishing borders with Belize, and it adds that 
Guatemala maintains a territorial claim on the former British 
colony. 
  Foreign Minister Marithza Ruiz de Vielman asked the United 
Nations to inform its member states about the Guatemalan 
Government's territorial claim, which includes an area of land 
in Belizean territory and maritime areas on the Caribbean Ocean. 
Ruiz de Vielman said the joint declaration signed by the two 
states on 31 July 1992 does not recognize the definition of 
their territorial and maritime limits. She recalled that 
Guatemala recognized Belize as an independent state in September 
1992 without relinquishing its claim, which dates back 150 years. 
  The diplomat's letter to Ghali emphasized that the 
government 
respects the free determination of nations and believes the 
settlement of controversies between states should be reached 
through peaceful means. She added that the Guatemalan Government 
is prepared to continue direct discussions with the former 
British colony to reach a definite solution to the dispute. 
  "Guatemala formally rejects anything which violates its 
sovereignty, continental shelf, control of its territorial seas, 
or exclusive economic zone, both those defined in the past and 
those which may result when the dispute is settled," the text 
added. The document said Guatemala's territorial sea is 12 
maritime miles (more than 18 km) wide. 
  "Until the dispute is settled, Guatemala cannot accept nor 
does it accept boundaries that are equidistant to states, 
adjacent coasts, or coasts that face each other if they 
negatively affect its sovereign right to 12 maritime miles," she 
emphasized. Ruiz said the government is willing to adopt control 
measures to prevent the violation of its laws and its customs, 
immigration, and health regulations. 
  She confirmed that the country's economic zone comprises an 
area beyond its territorial sea and adjacent zones, which extend 
200 maritime miles beyond the boundaries used to measure the 
width of its territorial sea. Also, the continental shelf 
extends 200 miles with exclusive sovereignty rights to exploit 
its natural resources, she said. 
  She emphasized that Guatemala will not recognize the 
charters 
or lists of geographic coordinates prepared by Belize until they 
reach a definite agreement that is satisfactory to the two 
parties. The foreign minister asked the United Nations to inform 
its member states about Guatemala's position on Belize. 

