Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Letter to ARGUMENTY I FAKTY: "Soft Landing, Mr. President!" </F>
This letter is in response to an article by Aleksandr Sargin 
under the rubric "Scandal": "A Soft Landing to You, Mr. 
President!" which was translated and published under the 
headline: "Problems in Presidential Flight Team Noted" in 
FBIS-USR-94-008, 2 February 1994, pp 2-3] 
  [Text] We are amazed and upset by your article "Soft 
Landing, Mr. President!" since the majority of us like your 
newspaper and value the objectivity, diversity, and topicality 
of the material, the boldness of its opinions, and the high 
professionalism of its presentation. This article, however, was 
in sharp contrast to all that we have read hitherto. 
  Who gave the author (who is known to none of the members of 
the outfit and who, naturally, cannot know its assignments and 
endeavors) the right to judge our company, its activity, and its 
leader--a professional pilot of the highest class, with 
"God-given talent," as the people say. Can there be any 
justification for such improper behavior (aimed, in our view, at 
causing a sensation, most likely, some department functionary 
clinging to a wholly needless chair which is slipping away), 
traumatizing the outfit and taking up its time, which is so much 
needed in the business of renewal. 
  We do not intend to justify ourselves on the substance of 
this malevolence, and the article as a whole could not be called 
anything else! We demand a meeting with the author. Nor would it 
have done the newspaper any harm, before publication of this 
article, to meet with specialists of the company, with the 
leadership, and with the public. Nor is it too late even now! We 
maintain that the material set forth in the article is pure 
invention. Truly, some of the events did occur, but everything 
here has, as they say, been "stood on its head!" The characters, 
the dates, the place, and the time of the events and so forth 
were changed. Serious allegations were leveled at the company on 
the basis of absolutely incompetent arguments. The information 
adduced on the landing of the Il-62 in a "Vnukovo field" evokes 
mirth, and not only in the professional. There was not even the 
remotest approximation of anything of the kind, what is more. 
This was manifest slander of the company and management! Why 
also in your article is there such a lack of respect for the 
president? For a state organization and the state as a whole? 
The trashy material and cynicism, which are atypical of your 
publication, are jarring! 
  Whence this fury leveled at, it is our firm belief, a useful 
undertaking? We assure you that the entire work of the Rossiya 
State Transport Company is built on an understanding of the 
country's present economic condition and is geared to the 
speediest complete renunciation of state budget appropriations. 
  When, though, permit us to ask, has an outfit been blamed 
for 
the assimilation of new equipment? Is this not geared to the 
development of state potential as a whole and a growth of 
well-being, skills, and image of the outfit? 
  Of course, our outfit, like any other, is not insured 
against 
mistakes, but you cannot destroy an idea without an 
understanding of its essence. 
  Can we all be considered absolute bunglers rejecting Air 
Transport Department control and safety documentation and also 
ICAO [International Civil Aviation Organization] documents 
written in the blood of all air catastrophes? Who rejected 
professional cooperation with the department? A. Larin? Someone 
else from the company? Absurd! It was he, after all, who created 
the department! Where's the logic? 
  We are for professional contact, but without bureaucratic 
red 
tape! 
  We request and demand an immediate investigation in point of 
substance, a retraction in the paper, restitution to the company 
for moral damage, and our protection henceforward from such 
nonsense! 
  [Signed] Staff of the Rossiya State Transport Company 
  FROM THE EDITORS: A series of air 
catastrophes has as of late cost the lives of hundreds of 
people. This is, probably, one of the most dreadful ways to die. 
Shots of pieces of charred human flesh amid the piles of 
wreckage of an aircraft are horrifying. "Filled" daily almost 
with such information, could we have remained silent, having 
received alarming warnings about the president's flights? 
  Of course, cold calculation suggests that all documents 
should be collected as a preliminary. But experience tells us 
that this is practically impossible--for very many reasons. 
Following, therefore, a taped conversation with four deputy 
leaders of the aviation detachment (three no longer work there), 
we decided to publish the material. They all subsequently failed 
to show the editors the necessary documents, it is true. 
  It would now seem perfectly probable that the ARGUMENTY 
I FAKTY correspondent was an unwitting instrument of internal 
intrigues in the aviation detachment--attempts were being made 
to settle scores through him. But even if this version is 
correct, it is only partially so. Following the publication, 
certain aviation specialists met with the author of the article 
and provided additional information, as they say. But the 
problem is that they also were unwilling to make documents 
available or at least put their name to what they had to say. 
  It remains for us to confess that the paper was in a 
rush to publish the article, which cast aspersions on the outfit 
of the aviation detachment. We apologize to it and very much 
hope that we will not in the near future find ourselves proved 
right, for all that, albeit at a very high price. 

