BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following review of the 29 March 
issue of Cairo 'AQIDATI summarizes articles that are Islamic in 
nature. 
<H5>  CONTENTS: </H5>
  1. Cairo Mosque To Turn Into Islamic Center 
  2. Editorial on Terrorist `Deceptions' 
  3. Seminar Urges Students To Avoid Extremist Ideas 
  4. Weakness of Islam Analyzed 
  5. Former Soviet Union Muslims Study in al-Azhar 
  6. Columnist on Terrorism and Image of Islam 
<H5>  CAIRO MOSQUE TO TURN INTO ISLAMIC CENTER </H5>
  A 70-word report by Muhammad al-Abnudi on page 1 says that 
Awqaf Minister Dr. Muhammad 'Ali Mahjub has announced that the 
'Amr-Bin- al-'As Mosque in Cairo will be turned into an 
integrated Islamic complex and that his ministry has prepared an 
open budget for this project and for repairing the mosque, which 
serves more than a million people. The minister's remarks came 
during a visit to the mosque to inspect the damage caused by the 
collapse of part of the wall surrounding it. 
<H5>  EDITORIAL ON TERRORIST `DECEPTIONS' </H5>
  A signed 250-word editorial by Samir Rajab on page 1 
comments 
on the televised confessions of ex-terrorist 'Adil 'Abd-al-Baqi. 
He says that these confessions show that the deceived groups 
killed, stole, and sowed corruption for years, all the while 
realizing that they were committing crimes against their 
homeland and compatriots. The writer then goes on to say: "The 
problem is, how have they succeeded in brainwashing thousands of 
young people? This is the question. Do not say it is a 
question of unemployment or a housing crisis. There are many 
examples of pious and good people who refuse to commit sins 
despite all the enticements." He voices his view that what 
these groups are doing is a struggle for an illusionary 
authority by individuals who have set themselves up as amirs and 
found people to listen to them, thus degrading religion. He 
adds: "There are also those manipulating them from abroad who 
claim to be the protectors of Islam. Won't they come to their 
senses and know that the day of judgement will be difficult?" In 
conclusion, the writer says that a day will come when these 
guilty persons will regret their sins and that Egypt will always 
remain above all, "vanquishing with its true religion the lies, 
deceptions, and deviations." 
<H5>  SEMINAR URGES STUDENTS TO AVOID EXTREMIST IDEAS </H5>
  A 1,500-word report on page 4 details a seminar held at the 
al-Haram Model Secondary Boys School during one of 'AQIDATI's 
convoys of Muslim scholars. The students were addressed by 
Islamic preacher Dr. Sabri 'Abd-al-Ra'uf, teacher of 
jurisprudence and head of the Islamic and Arab Studies Center at 
the Medical College for Men at al-Azhar University, and Dr. 
Mahmud Khiami, teacher of jurisprudence at the same college. 
After explaining the role of youth and students, which he 
describes as "important and serious, with big responsiblies," 
Dr. 'Abd-al-Ra'uf lists the instructions and guidance mentioned 
in the Koran about the duty of parents and guardians toward 
their children and their education and the young's duties to 
obey their elders and abide by religious teachings. He then 
urges the students "to prepare yourselves starting now to 
shoulder responsibility in the future. This requires you to 
rise to the level of responsibility, to be an example for Muslim 
youth, and to work together to protect the homeland from any 
harm. Prior to all this, you have to work to protect your 
minds. Do not listen to all that is being said to you." He 
then urges them not to ignore the role of the family and school 
and to help their homeland achieve progress and prosperity. In 
response to questions from various students, Dr. Khiami and Dr. 
'Abd-al-Ra'uf speak at length on how Muslims should behave and 
act toward others, on the proper way to pray, on refraining from 
using bad words especially in public. 
  Then answering a question on the young people's duty to 
propagate Islam, Dr. 'Abd-al-Ra'uf says: "Your duty now, O 
sons, is to complete your studies. You are not required to be 
preachers now because preaching is a heavy responsibility and is 
not as easy as some people believe. Not everyone who has 
learned some of the Prophet's sayings or Koranic verses can make 
himeself a preacher. You, O noble son, should not sit with these 
extremists but learn from the qualified scholars." 
  In reply to the next question, Dr. Sabri 'Abd-al-Ra'uf 
says: "Regarding terrorism first, Islam does not know or 
condone terrorist actions. The terrorist is not a Muslim and is 
beyond Islam and its teachings. The prophet, God's peace and 
blessing be upon him, says that `the Muslim is the one who does 
not harm Muslims by word or deed.' A Muslim cannot do such 
things. We do not see any terrorist voicing his belief in God 
and his prophet with his heart and tongue while he is on a spree 
of destruction, killing, and sabotage." On Bosnia, he says 
that what is happening in Bosnia and Palestine indicates that 
Muslims are still ignorant of their religion and that they 
should become aware of their present and work for their future. 
After urging unity of Muslims, he adds that "victory cannot be 
achieved because of the Islamic nation's state of divisions and 
fragmentation" and we should be united and obey God's book if we 
want to protect the honor of Muslim women in Bosnia, Palestine, 
Kashmir, Burma, India, and the Philippines. The two college 
teachers then answer various questions on the proper behavior of 
Muslims and the rights and duties of parents and children. 
<H5>  WEAKNESS OF MUSLIMS ANALYZED </H5>
  A 1,200 word report on page 10 details a seminar on the 
current cultural crisis and the lesson of Andalusia [Spain under 
Arab rule], in which the speakers analyze the reasons for the 
weakness of the Muslim nation and unanimously agree that the 
main reason for this is the loss of direct contact with the 
Koran and that the remedy lies in going back to the true 
religion and its tenets. Senior preacher Shaykh Muhammad 
al-Ghazali began the seminar by saying that the Muslim nation 
might become sick but will never die. After warning that Muslims 
have become ignorant of Islam and that trivial issues have taken 
priority over fundamental questions, al-Ghazali says that if the 
nation's minds and hearts get together and are inspired by the 
Koran, then the Muslim nation can be qualified to become strong 
on the ground and sovereign -- otherwise it will remain weak and 
humiliated. He adds: "Our present links with Islam are weak 
and if we rule the world now we will corrupt it because we will 
not be presenting the true religion or a sound relationship with 
God. The belief defined by the prophet must be embedded in our 
ethics, societies, and conditions." 
  Dr. 'Abd-al-Halim 'Uways, teacher of history and Islamic 
culture, makes the same point about loss of links with the Koran 
and warns that "we are facing in our Arab and Islamic world 
another surge of cheap and parasitic ideas: secular, 
materialistic, or theological. We are confronting failed schools 
of thought that are deeply immersed in the quagmire of sedition 
and are traitors to the nation's civilization and principles. 
These schools of thought do not see any good in this nation's 
present and future except by melting in the western pot even 
though western and pan-Arab experiences have proved to be a 
failure." 
<H5>  FORMER SOVIET UNION MUSLIMS STUDY IN AL-AZHAR </H5>
  A 1,400 words report on page 20 views the scholarships 
granted by the al-Azhar University for Muslim students from the 
former Soviet republics and interviews some of the students 
about their backgrounds, hopes, and ambitions. 
<H5>  COLUMNIST ON TERRORISM AND IMAGE OF ISLAM </H5>
  A 250 comment by 'Adil Dayf on the same page argues that the 
source of terrorism is Israel as evidenced by the Hebron 
massacre. He says that there is terrorism in various countries, 
including Ireland, France, and the United States, but only Islam 
is the target of accusations. He adds that "it is the Muslims 
themselves who are regrettably distorting the image of Islam 
when they commit inhuman crimes." He then calls on every Muslim 
to apply true Islam and not distort it with acts that violate 
every law "because all forms of terrorism are rejected by Muslim 
and non-Muslim countries and we should wash our hands of 
terrorism and let the whole world hear that we condemn all forms 
of terrorism and crimes in the world." He adds that the first 
and strongest condemnation should be addressed to all inhuman 
crimes, whether perpetrated by a Muslim or a non-Muslim, and 
also to Jews who use violence to expel the Arabs. 

