BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Dododzhoni Atovullo: "Two Wars at the Same Time; </F>
Reportage from Tajik Refugee Camp in Afghanistan"] 
  [Excerpts] Peshawar-Kondoz-Moscow -- From Peshawar it is 
four hours by jeep to the Afghan border and then two days to 
Kabul, from Kabul it takes four days' journey north by donkey 
and horse across the mountain passes to reach Kondoz. It is 
here, in Afghanistan's Northern province, that the largest 
settlements of Tajiks or, as they also called, refugee camps, 
are situated. 
  Over the past two years out of 5 million Tajiks over 300,000 
have died or gone missing and about 1 million have fled and are 
now living in Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Turkmenia, Kirghizia, 
Pakistan, and Afghanistan. Over 70,000 former Tajikistan 
citizens are living in four camps around Kondoz. [passage 
omitted] 
  Not only everywhere in the refugee camps -- in the dug-outs, 
tents, and simply on the trees -- but also in almost all the 
stores of Kondoz and Tolikon [name as transliterated] you can 
find posters of Said Abdullokha Nuri. This is the only 
opposition leader to have been with the refugees constantly and 
from the first day. 
  He gives interviews to virtually no one but I managed to 
talk 
with him specially for IZVESTIYA: 
  "We thought our stay in exile would be temporary and very 
brief. But it has all turned out differently. The government's 
calls for national conciliation, the general amnesty, and 
statements about building a democracy state in Tajikistan have 
proved to be nothing but cover for the self-seeking designs and 
political ambitions of those leaders whose intransigence is 
hostile and harmful to the interests of the overwhelming 
majority of the Republic's population." 
  "But what do you hope for?" 
  "For talks. Of course this is a long and complex path, but 
it is the only one that save a people who are tormented, 
tormented, and mortally tired of war." 
  "What will your actions be if the talks nonetheless fail to 
produce results?" 
  "War. Protracted civil war. We know that means new 
sufferings and broken destinies and that it is an impasse, but 
we cannot repeat the mistakes of our predecessors who have twice 
in one century been exiled from their own land. We must return 
to our homeland honorably and with dignity. The key to the 
Tajik conflict is in Moscow. If Moscow wants all knots can be 
untangled. I have frequently said and I repeat once more: We 
are in favor of always having close ties with Russia, we 
recognize its geopolitical interests, and we are in favor of 
Russian troops guarding the border but we want one thing -- 
Russia must not interfere in the internal Tajik conflict by 
supporting one side." [passage omitted] 

