Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 14 (XINHUA) -- Xiamen City in Fujian 
Province has made thorough preparations for local legislation 
since the province's deputies to the National People's Congress 
(NPC) put forward a proposal in this regard in 1989. 
  Zhang Binsheng, vice-chairman of the provincial people's 
congress standing committee, made the remark in an interview 
with XINHUA today. 
  The current session of NPC will examine a decision on 
empowering the Xiaman Municipal People's Congress and its 
standing committee and Xiamen Municipal Government with the 
power to enact laws and regulations for enforcement in the 
Xiamen Special Economic Zone, which was established in 1980. 
  The Shenzhen Special Economic Zone bordering on Hong Kong 
was 
given the power to enact local laws in 1992. 
  Zhang said that in 1989 and 1993, respectively, 30 NPC 
deputies from Fujian Province raised a proposal to NPC on 
granting Xiamen local legislative power, which was put on the 
agenda of the NPC Standing Committee. 
  Some special economic policies are being implemented in 
special economic zones, but if no corresponding laws and 
regulations are formulated to confirm them, their authority and 
credibility will be in doubt, Zhang said. 
  Though the provincial people's congress standing committee 
has enacted a raft of economic laws and regulations for the 
start-off of the Xiamen Special Economic Zone since 1981, red 
tape and other problems have dragged legislative progress far 
behind the development of the zone. 
  As its preparations for having legislative powers, Zhang 
said, Xiamen has been formulating long-term and yearly plans for 
local legislation and conducted a great number of social surveys. 
  Xiamen has drafted eight regulations, which have been 
enacted 
by the provincial people's congress standing committee. 
  Legislative power is important to Xiamen also because it can 
serve as a pilot area for formulating laws and regulations 
governing economic, civil and legal affairs between the mainland 
and Taiwan, according to Zhang. 
  Xiamen, facing Taiwan across the Taiwan Strait, is one of 
the 
areas with the largest concentration of Taiwan investment and 
with the largest number of Taiwan visitors. As a result, 
disputes concerning economy, investment, marriage and property 
inheritance, and sea and air piracy have cropped up in recent 
years. This situation calls for urgent legislation of relevant 
laws and regulations, he said. 

