CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Renato Garcia] </F>
  [Excerpts] According to information obtained by the Federal 
Police [PF] Maritime, Air, and Border Police Department [DPMAF], 
Livio Cecchini Bruni Junior, who in 1984 had attempted to ship 
cocaine to the United States in sardine cans, returned to Rio de 
Janeiro early last year. The trafficker is still at large, 
somewhere in the state, despite the incessant pursuit conducted 
by federal agents. During December, the Rio Civil Police sought 
fame, attempting to achieve it by capturing Chico Mendes's 
killers, the rancher Darli Alves da Silva and his son, Darci 
Alves Pereira, who were hiding at a site on the outskirts of 
Nova Iguacu. However, the information was "leaked," and the pair 
escaped. 
  For over 10 years, the American trafficker, William Reed 
Elswick, aka "Captain America," has been living with impunity in 
Brazil (despite the consecutive requests from the U.S. 
Government for his extradition), thanks to a fortune estimated 
at $20 million. 
  "Livinho" or "Dom Xereta," Darli, Darci, and "Captain 
America" are the main characters in the stories that the 
Federal, Civil, and Military Police prefer not to tell. They are 
serial accounts of the secret operations conducted by them that 
have not attained the desired success. Lack of good fortune or 
resources, "leaks" of information, incompetence, the Brazilian 
legislation itself, the slowness of the justice system, or 
police corruption explain the failures of those searches. In the 
Polinter-Rio [Rio Interstate Police] agency alone, there are 
over 300,000 arrest warrants against criminals in the state or 
in other units of the Federation that the police have failed to 
implement. 
  Currently, in Rio de Janeiro, the three forces' major 
concern 
is to abort the embryonic drug cartel organized by the Red 
Command [CV] traffickers, Orlando da Conceicao, aka "Orlando 
Jogador," and Ernaldo Pinto Medeiros, aka "Garoto." According to 
the Civil Police top echelon, the concept of the most dangerous 
outlaws in the state changed after the charges made by X-9 (a 
pimp), Ivan Custodio de Lima, the principal witness of the 
Vigario Geral massacre. The publicity concerning police 
extortion also has been cited as a prime factor in the failures 
of operations planned for capturing dangerous outlaws. 
  Among the three forces' rank and file, however, the view is 
that the limits imposed by the Brizola government on the police 
are making the criminals' lives easy. 
  The Federal Police superintendent in Rio, officer Edson 
Antonio de Oliveira, now claims that the weakness in the 
Brazilian legislation and the lack of an international agreement 
that would hasten the issuance of arrest warrants are 
obstructing police action. Interpol maintains that the Mafia has 
a base of operations in South America, with ramifications in 
Brazil, notably in Rio. However, to capture a "Mafioso," the PF 
must wait for an arrest warrant from an Italian judge. The 
warrant takes up to a year to arrive. 
<H5>  `Captain America' Still At Large </H5>
  Capturing William Reed Elswick, "Captain America," became 
such a great obsession for the PF superintendent in Rio, Edson 
Antonio de Oliveira, that it caused him to confuse the 
"mega-trafficker" with his accomplice, the American businessman 
Donald Anthony Kohel. In April of last year, Kohel was arrested 
in Sao Conrado with marijuana, weapons, and photos of nude minor 
girls. The federal agents rejoiced, thinking that they had 
actually captured Elswick. The confusion was dispelled when the 
PF received "Captain America's" fingerprints from the FBI. 
  It was a disappointment for Edson Antonio de Oliveira, who 
had managed to capture Elswick in Rio during January 1985. The 
American trafficker was released 11 days later by virtue of a 
habeas corpus signed by the then president of the Federal 
Supreme Court [STF], Joao Batista Cordeiro Guerra, now deceased. 
Ten days after Elswick's release, the STF unanimously revoked 
Cordeiro Guerra's decision. It was too late: "Captain America" 
had already escaped. To Oliveiro's even greater disappointment, 
the trafficker's double and accomplice, Donald Kohel, also 
obtained a habeas corpus, was released two days after his 
arrest, and fled. The Federal Police were left with the 
consolation of having arrested another accomplice of "Captain 
America," the trafficker Terry Mike Lee, aged 40. [passage 
omitted] 
<H5>  `Orlando Jogador' Has Special Protection </H5>
  If the police have, for six months, been unable to find the 
one in charge of the embryonic Rio drug cartel, trafficker 
Orlando da Conceicao, aka "Orlando Jogador," it is because there 
are policemen implicated with the outlaw. The suspicion on the 
part of the new Civil Police secretary, Jorge Mario Gomes, was 
confirmed by the arrest of detective Cesar Pereira da Silva in 
December. Identified as "Orlando Jogador's" security chief, the 
policeman was arrested with the trafficker Miguel Silveira de 
Miranda and two women in an apartment on Jose Bonifacio Street 
in Meier. 
  The Civil Police Narcotics Repression Division [DRE] has had 
the same difficulty in arresting Ernaldo Pinto Medeiros, known 
as "Ue" or "Garoto," who supplies cocaine to "Orlando Jogador" 
and other Rio traffickers. According to the DRE detectives, 
"Ue's" security force consists of Civil and Military Police 
members as well as prison agents. The two outlaws have always 
been informed of the operations mounted to capture them long 
before they were due to be carried out. The police action 
against them is doomed to failure. Like "Ue" and "Jogador," 
nearly 300,000 outlaws sought by the Brazilian justice system 
are living peacefully in Rio de Janeiro. 
<H5>  Trafficker Livio Bruni Had Plastic Surgery, Returned to Rio </H5>
  The target of various Federal Police operations during the 
past 12 months, the trafficker Livio Cecchini Bruni Junior, 
called "Livinho," and also known as "Dom Xereta," "Padrinho," or 
"Snake," is, like the rancher, Darli Alves dos Santos and his 
son, Darci, also located in Rio de Janeiro. Even Civil Police 
members were involved in the search for Livio Bruni Junior, but 
they have been unsuccessful thus far. The agents are hampered by 
the lack of a recent photo of the Brazilian "Mafioso." According 
to the agents, Bruni Junior altered his appearance completely by 
undergoing minor plastic surgery on his face. 
  "Livinho" arrived in Rio with three other Italian 
traffickers 
linked to the Sicilian Mafia, whose identities the Federal 
Police prefer to keep secret. It was not until after the four 
fugitives from Italian justice (Bruni Junio is a fugitive from 
Brazilian justice as well) had entered Brazil and changed their 
identities that the Federal Police traced their entry into the 
country through Rio International Airport. According to the 
police, "Dom Xereta" returned to resume an old plan: that of 
being the "Mafia's man" in Brazil. The PF have already tracked 
"Livinho's" passage through Buzios and Angra dos Reis, where 
they attempted to corner him. Livio Bruni Junior has been 
charged in Rio, Niteroi, and Teresopolis with drug trafficking, 
murders, and kidnappings. 

