BFN 

  [Text] In his speech given to the second enlarged plenary 
session of the provincial discipline inspection commission on 
the morning of 29 March, Jiang Chunyun, secretary of the 
provincial party committee, pointed out: Party and government 
leading cadres at all levels should be aware of hardships, 
approach the problem of corruption from the perspective of the 
rise and fall and life and death of the major socialist causes, 
enhance the sense of responsibility and urgency toward the 
endeavor to oppose corruption and advocate honesty, truly regard 
the anticorruption struggle as a long-term task and carry it out 
persistently. 
  After fully affirming Shandong's achievements in the 
anticorruption struggle carried out previously, Jiang Chunyun 
said: This year is a very important year for restructuring the 
economy, in which the following new characteristics will emerge 
in the anticorruption struggle. First, extended reform will set 
new and still higher demands on the anticorruption struggle. 
Second, the tasks of the anticorruption struggle will become 
heavier. Third, people will have higher requirements and 
expectations. Leading cadres at all levels should clearly 
understand these new conditions and new characteristics. They 
must note that both the tasks of the current reform and 
development and the tasks of the endeavor to oppose corruption 
and advocate honesty are heavy and arduous. They must pay close 
attention to and achieve success in these two fields of tasks 
and never slacken efforts. They should let the anticorruption 
struggle be manifest in the entire process of reform, opening 
up, and the socialist modernization drive. 
  Jiang Chunyun pointed out: We should have a good command of 
the guiding thoughts, oppose corruption to meet the overall 
interests of the work of the entire party and entire country, 
and combine the endeavor to oppose corruption with the endeavors 
to deepen reform, open wider to the outside world, promote 
development, and maintain stability. We should emphasize the 
following points. We should include the anticorruption work in 
the overall situation, merge it into economic construction, 
reform, and opening up as a whole, take them into consideration, 
and make all-around arrangements for them. In coordination with 
the execution of major policy decisions on reform and opening 
up, we should study and draw up supporting measures to counter 
the problems that might arise in the efforts to improve party 
style and administrative honesty. We should regard the negative 
and corrupt phenomena that affect reform, development, and 
stability as conspicuous problems and make efforts to address 
them. In particular, we should strictly deal with the abuse of 
power for selfish gains and the trade between money and power, 
which are done under the banner of developing the market 
economy, reform, and opening up, and the law and discipline 
breaches characterized by refusals to implement orders and 
prohibitions in defiance of the overall situation and 
instructions for the purpose of protecting the interests of a 
locality or a department. Through reform, we should solve 
step-by-step the deep-seated problems that lead to corruption 
and, instead of waiting for and relying on help, take the 
initiative in exploration and effectively check the emergence 
and spreading of negative and corrupt phenomena by improving and 
strengthening laws, regulations, and systems. 
  Jiang Chunyun emphasized: We should give prominence to 
priorities of work and accomplish all the anticorruption tasks. 
According to the arrangements of the central authorities, the 
focuses of this year's anticorruption work are on leading 
cadres' honesty and self-discipline, the investigation and 
handling of law and discipline breaches, and the correction of 
the unhealthy trends in some trades. These three aspects of 
work constitute a whole, which are related to and promote each 
other, and we should carry them out in an all-around manner. To 
whether we can resolutely punish corrupt elements, effectively 
eliminate the numerous negative and corrupt phenomena, and 
correct the unhealthy trends in some trades, the key lies in 
party and government leading cadres' effort to take the lead in 
maintaining honesty and self-discipline. In opposing corruption 
and advocating honesty, party organizations at all levels should 
make the best use of both positive and negative examples to 
educate leading cadres on the outlook on life, outlook on the 
world, and the party's purpose. All leading cadres should 
exercise strict self-discipline, often examine and remold 
themselves; take the initiative in resisting the erosion of 
various corrupt ideas; stand the tests of money, sex, and power; 
and always subject themselves to the supervision of the party 
and the masses. 
  Jiang Chunyun urged: To make this year's anticorruption work 
successful, we should strengthen leadership and have realistic 
and feasible guaranteeing measures. We should pay particular 
attention to the following work. First, principal leading 
cadres of party and government organs should hold the overall 
responsibility and attend to the work personally. Second, 
central principles and policies on the anticorruption struggle 
should be conscientiously implemented, and the work focus should 
be placed on party and government leading organs, judicial 
departments, law-enforcing administrative departments, economic 
management departments, and, in particular, leading cadres at 
and above the county or section level. Third, supervision and 
examination should be a success. Fourth, we should step up 
efforts to establish policies, laws, regulations, and systems. 
Fifth, we should make conscientious efforts to handle cases 
well. Sixth, we should attach importance to propaganda by the 
media. We should publicize some selected typical cases to 
educate cadres and masses and to form a necessary deterrent 
force. We should also attach importance to publicizing positive 
examples and the party's fine traditions and work styles to 
establish in and outside the party the positive and healthy 
practice of feeling honored to be honest and ashamed to be 
corrupt and going all out to make progress so that we can 
provide a good media environment for the anticorruption work. 
  Tan Fude, standing committee member of the provincial party 
committee and secretary of the provincial discipline inspection 
commission, chaired the session. Attending were Zhao Zhihao, 
deputy secretary of the provincial party committee and governor 
of the province; Lu Maozeng, chairman of the provincial 
committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference; Ma Zhongcai, vice chairman of the provincial 
people's congress standing committee; and Zhang Ruifeng, vice 
governor. 

