Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Geneva, Jan 17 (AFP) -- The Organisation of the 
Islamic Conference (OIC) called Monday [17 January] for UN 
Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali to authorise air strikes 
"without delay" against Bosnian Serb forces. 
  Foreign ministers from leading nations of the OIC met here 
with Butrus-Ghali to urge the UN to follow through on a pledge 
at the NATO summit to use air strikes if necessary to ensure the 
passage of aid and the safety of UN troops. 
  "We hope that this NATO declaration will not be construed as 
an empty threat and that it will not be the subject of 
procedural wrangling," said OIC Secretary General Hamid Algabid. 
  "We request that the UN secretary general authorise such 
strikes without delay," Algabid said after a meeting with the 
Bosnian Prime Minister Haris Silajdzic. 
  Butrus-Ghali said through a spokeswoman that his meeting 
with 
the foreign ministers was "very positive" and that the ministers 
had "expressed their profound concern about the human tragedy" 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Algabid also urged the lifting of the arms embargo on the 
Moslem side to allow them a greater chance to defend themselves 
agains the better-armed Serbs and Croats. 
  The meeting of the OIC Bosnia group -- the foreign ministers 
of Pakistan, Egypt, Iran, Malaysia, Senegal, Tunisia, Turkey and 
the deputy minister from Saudi Arabia -- comes a day before 
peace talks are due to resume here between the three sides 
involved in the Bosnia conflict. 
  But Algabid expressed the OIC's dismay about a plan on the 
table to divide Bosnia into three mini-states ruled by Serbs, 
Croats and Muslims. 
  "It is unacceptable to accommodate the expansionist 
territorial ambitions of Serb nationalism," he said. "The 
present approach in the negotiations would in fact amount to the 
virtual partitioning of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina." 
  The OIC was also to meet with EC and UN negotiators Lord 
Owen 
and Thorvald Stoltenberg to urge them to reconsider plans for a 
gradual lifting of sanctions against the rump-Yugoslavia. 
  Algabid also called on the UN to accept offers from the OIC 
to send troops to serve in the UN Protection Force (UNPROFOR). 

