Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Ndjamena, March 7 (AFP)--Negotiations on a 
withdrawal of Libyan troops from the disputed Aouzou Strip in 
northern Chad have broken down, Chadian Interior Minister 
Abderamane Izzo said Monday [7 March]. 
  Last week Libyan leader Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi said the 
dispute between Tripoli and Ndjamena over the territory "was 
definitively over" following a decision on February 3 by the 
International Court of Justice in The Hague which recognised 
Chadian sovereignty over the strip. 
  Libyan troops have occupied the virtually empty territory 
for 
more than 20 years. 
  The two countries have often clashed militarily over the 
land, a remote strip of 114,000 square kilometres (45,600 square 
miles) reputed to contain substantial deposits of uranium and 
manganese. 
  Izzo accused the Libyan delegation here of evading the issue 
of a troop withdrawal by "drowning this crucial question in a 
mass of diffuse problems." 
  He told a press conference that he was doubtful the talks 
which began Friday would resume. The negotiations had failed to 
achieve their purpose, he said. 
  "We will not beat about the bush any more over the legal 
means for recovering our land," Izzo said, hinting that Ndjamena 
could appeal to the UN Security Council to force Libya to 
evacuate the territory. 
  A government statement earlier said the talks had broken 
down 
over a demand by Libya that a previous accord, signed in Algiers 
in 1989 and calling for the release of prisoners of war, be 
implemented. 
  "Given that the Algiers accord has been totally overtaken by 
events, Chad rejected this proposal which constituted an 
unacceptable prior condition," Izzo said. 
  The Libyan delegation was also demanding the signing of a 
friendship and cooperation treaty prior to the execution of the 
World Court's decision, along with the release of Libyan war 
prisoners. 
  The delegates said they had no authority to decide on the 
principle of a withdrawal or on the dates, these being "up to 
technicians to decide," Izzo added, describing the Libyan 
demands as "diversions." 
  The Libyan delegation held talks with Chad President Idriss 
Deby, but the content of the talks was not revealed. 

