CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by M. Kudryavtseva, `Come to Us for Cure'] </F>
  [Text] Only few could come to the elite clinic at the Third 
Chief Directorate of the Russian Federation Ministry of Public 
Health until recently, while today, it opens its doors to all. 
  There are 58 physicians and 120 medical workers, many of 
whom 
are experts with scientific degrees of the highest and first 
skill categories who are ready to provide almost any type of 
medical assistance. Patients are seen daily by 25 specialists, 
while the clinic has a total of 10 departments and services. 
  This includes surgery, ophthalmology, ear, nose, and throat 
diseases, and dermatology and STD departments. Here, one cannot 
only have a tooth treated but also solve the problems of 
dentures. Psychotherapists, neuropathologists, and immunology, 
urology, and OB-GYN experts also work there. The clinic can also 
treat allergies and infectious diseases. Yet the most important 
in the clinic are the therapists. 
  The clinic is providing medical services to more than 60 
industrial enterprises in the city. Skilled experts thoroughly 
examine the production and health status conditions of the 
workers from the enterprises and provide authoritative 
recommendations. And if, e.g., it is contraindicated to John Doe 
to work next to a vibration machine, the doctor would recommend 
that he be transferred to another department. The ten-year 
experience of such cooperation yielded its results. Statistics 
show that the total morbidity at these enterprises declined by 
30%. No one knows how much money has been saved, but most 
importantly, the health of the people which, everyone knows, 
cannot be measured by money, has been preserved! 
  The wise students of Hippocrates used to say: ``bene 
diagnostus, bene curatio'' which means--he who diagnoses 
well, cures well. In today's setting, one can say that without 
modern equipment, accurate diagnostics are impossible, and 
consequently, one should not expect correct treatment. In the 
words of the chief physician, Candidate of Medical Sciences Oleg 
Kuzovlev, the clinic has accumulated the best equipment which, 
in addition, is annually updated. Here, one can find medical 
devices manufactured in Japan, FRG, Sweden, and the United 
States. And all of these are unique in their own right. For 
example, the Japanese ultrasonic devices made by the Aloka 
Company make it possible to detect cancer, a cyst, tumor, or 
heart disease with 100% certainty. Using the Japanese 
Olympus 
gastroscopes, one can treat stomach and intestinal polyps and 
ulcers, while the bronchoscopes made by the same company cure 
chronic bronchitis and pneumonia. 
  If you have a problem with your eyesight, you have a fundus 
camera at your disposal which can detect the earliest symptoms 
of the retina disease. A laser scalpel is also used in the 
clinic. 
  It turns out that one cannot only study the vital activity 
of 
the organs, but also to peek inside the human and microbe cells. 
Instruments for this purpose exist in the biochemistry lab. 
Biochemical and other analyzers provide 100% confidence of 
research outcome. For example, the vital activity of tissues and 
cells is determined by more than 80 different indicators. 
  The anatomy and physiology of the brain have become 
completely accessible for research due to the 16-channel 
electroencephalograph. One can also determine the blood flow 
rate in the brain vessels. The intercranial Doppler instruments 
make it possible to do so with high accuracy. 
  Much attention is given at the clinic to diagnostics. Here, 
functional, computer, and endoscopic diagnostics facilities are 
at work and, of course, traditional X-ray machines. Studies are 
underway at the biochemistry, bacteriological, virology, 
immunology, and even serology laboratories. 
  There are 24 biologically active spots on the human body 
which, in a way, represent all internal organs on the skin 
surface. Literally within minutes, a computer monitoring these 
spots can determine which organs function properly and which are 
strained, and thus observe the functional status of the organism. 
  In the clinic, the patient passes through a ``conveyor'' of 
medical experts who determine the accurate diagnosis. Here, they 
will not only find out what hurts and will prescribe treatment 
but will definitely cure. 
  Do you remember a nursery rhyme ``first grade--to 
immunization, didn't you hear, isn't it us''? It turns out, each 
person has his own individual set of necessary immunizations. 
The clinic examines the presence of protective antibodies to 
many diseases in the blood (tetanus and diphtheria). Provided 
that their amount is sufficient, one can rule out the additional 
unnecessary immunization for each specific person. Here, the 
etiological agent sensitivity to antibiotics is also determined. 
  The most pleasant part is that one does not have to be 
hospitalized. Many of the methods used, as a rule, in hospitals 
are employed here on the outpatient basis. Yet when necessary, 
there is a possibility of hospitalizing the patient in the best 
clinics in Moscow. 
  In the words of the chief physician Oleg Kuzovlev, the 
clinic 
was among the first in the city to receive a license for medical 
insurance and is capable of providing paid medical services to 
both enterprises and private individuals. Clinical treatment 
without stomatological services costs US$200 a year, while 
services with stomatological assistance--US$250 a year, while 
service involving a house call by a dentist costs US$350 a year. 
  Naturally, the payments are made in a ruble equivalent. 
  In the words of the clinic's chief physician, this is not 
expensive when compared to similar services at the treatment 
facilities of the former Fourth Chief Directorate of the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Public Health. 
  One should add that the clinic is located not far from the 
Kolomenskaya subway station at 19 Vysokaya Street, Block 2. 
Telephones for contact are 112-50-60 and 112-02-81. 
  Photography [not reproduced] by A. Volodin. 


