Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Yeung in Beijing] </F>
  [Text] Guangdong province, the most prosperous region in 
China, has thrown its weight behind politically sensitive tax 
reforms aimed at boosting central government coffers. 
  Speaking to more than 300 reporters in Beijing last night, 
provincial Governor Zhu Senlin dismissed suggestions the tax 
changes were a move to "re-centralise" financial power delegated 
to the regions. Instead, he said the taxsharing reforms would 
lay down the rules so "everybody knows what can be done." "It 
will spell out clearly the interest of the central government 
and the regions through the setting up of a system," he said. 
  Mr. Zhu's defence of the reforms comes at a time when 
Guangdong is experiencing a dramatic surge in tax revenue. The 
reforms were introduced on January 1. Mr. Zhu revealed that in 
the first two months of this year, tax returns swelled to 4.15 
billion yuan (HK$3.7 billion) -- up nearly 60 per cent on the 
same period last year. 
  Industry and commerce tax takings have reached 3.4 billion 
yuan, representing a 59.2 per cent increase over the 
corresponding period last year. Total industrial output has 
grown by 19.8 per cent to 5.48 billion yuan. 
  "Fears that the new tax measures will dampen the enthusiasm 
of all sectors are totally unnecessary. Guangdong fully 
supports the tax-sharing system," Mr. Zhu said. Echoing Beijing 
policy, the Guangdong chief said the reforms would give central 
authorities greater "macrocontrol" over the economy, enabling 
them to make adjustments on a national scale when necessary. 
  Mr. Zhu said the central treasury's share of the total 
national revenue was "relatively low". "Regions should make 
contributions to guarantee the expenditure and the normal 
operation of the central government," he said. 
  The governor dismissed suggestions the surge in tax revenue 
for the January/February period reflected moves by the province 
to increase taxation. He attributed the increase to more 
stringent efforts to collect tax, adding that lax collection 
techniques in the past had led to many loopholes and much tax 
avoidance. 
  "We will levy tax in strict accordance with the 
law....Generally speaking, the new tax levy will not increase 
the burden on enterprises." 
  While drawing a rosy picture of the development of 
Guangdong, 
Mr. Zhu indicated a spate of long-term problems needed to be 
solved. These included the differences in economic growth 
between regions, the backwardness of infrastructure, development 
of spiritual civilisation, and efforts to crack down on crimes 
and social evils. 
  "We should also pay great attention to agriculture, 
particularly the supply of grain, price surges and law and 
order," he said. 
  On patriarch Deng Xiaoping's demand that China create 
several 
more Hong Kongs on the mainland, Mr. Zhu said a worker 
conference on the development of Special Economic Zones (SEZs) 
held recently in Zuhai had further discussed the idea. 
"Mainland provinces have expressed a lot of interest in 
building a Hong Kong in their own regions but no decision has 
been taken by the central government. 
  "We do believe the most qualified ones will be the existing 
SEZs. They have already adopted some international practices and 
can easily be integrated with other parts of the world." 
  Shenzhen Mayor Li You-wei said the zone would speed up its 
development in the next decade to help bridge the gap in 
development between the border cities and Hong Kong. 
  This was especially important in the lead up to the 1997 
transfer, he said. 

