BFN 

  [Text] Zakho -- It is being reported that the Turkish 
Army's operation into South Kurdistan [Iraq], which began 16 
days ago, has failed and one of the units involved in the 
operation has been withdrawn. However, the air-supported 
operation, in which village guards and special teams have also 
taken part alongside tens of thousands of troops, is continuing 
in some places. It is being indicated that the military 
officials, who told the press that they will stay on 
particularly in Mezi and Shive districts of Haftanin region 
until autumn, are only satisfied with the performance of some 
mobile units in the region but that even these units are unable 
to hold their ground. 
  Newspapers published in South Kurdistan report that unlike 
last year's cross-border operation, which at the time was 
described as "the Southern War," none of the peshmerga forces 
have joined the operation launched by the Turkish Army on 12 
April with the aim of creating a "buffer zone." 
  We heard that during the operation--which was given wide 
coverage by the Turkish press, who call it the "Spring 
Operation"--the units were frequently ambushed by the 
guerrillas. There are reports that ARGK [People's Liberation 
Army of Kurdistan] guerrillas have downed a warplane and a 
helicopter in the last 15 days. 
  Intensive clashes took place during the first days of the 
operation in areas of Zap region close to Hakkari's Cukurca 
district. One guerrilla was killed and two other were injured 
during clashes here. The guerrilla sources said that the state 
[Turkish] forces lost many men here and that the guerrillas 
downed a helicopter while it was landing troops. 
  On the same day, eight warplanes raided South Kurdistan's 
Haftanin, Ava Guze, Kela Spi, and Bizenin regions. The 
guerrilla sources reported that they suffered no losses and in 
return downed one of the planes. In its 25 April issue TERCUMAN 
reported the downing of the plane thus: "During the 
cross-border operation one of our F-104 planes hit Gabar 
Mountain and crashed after having blown up a PKK [Workers Party 
of Kurdistan] ammunitions dump." 
<H5>  Clash With the DPK [Democratic Party of Kurdistan] </H5>
  The state forces that established themselves in Berwari 
region on 17 April wanted to infiltrate Mesina Mountain where 
ARGK guerrillas are active, but peshmerga forces prevented them 
from doing so. A clash ensued between the peshmrerga and state 
forces the next day. It is reported that some 20 peshmerga died 
in the clash, and that a 40,000-strong Turkish force moved into 
Zakho's Berwari district and into the rural areas around the 
villages of Shile, Zergal, Kanimasi. When this happened, DPK 
Politburo member Nechirvan Barzani went to Zakho's Amadiye 
district on 20 April. 
  Kanimasi town in Berwari district was bombed by warplanes on 
17 April. Two people, one 65 and the other 9, were injured in 
the raid and taken to Azadi hospital in Zakho. Sinet region was 
also bombed the same day. Welat Sen, 4, was injured and Nahile 
Sen, 15, was killed during the raid. They had moved to south 
Kurdistan after being forced out of Siris village in Sirnak's 
Uludere district. Qesrok Plain and its caves, where 150 families 
from the north [Turkey] had taken shelter, were bombed 
especially severely. Many civilians were injured. 
  Local sources in Cukurca indicated that on the eighth day of 
the operation, ambulances, military vehicles, and helicopters 
started ferrying injured soldiers to Hakkari twice or three 
times a day. The 200-bed military hospital in Hakkari was soon 
full. 
<H5>  Withdrawal </H5>
  Relying on guerrilla sources, KURD-A reports that the 
guerrillas organized five separate attacks on the Turkish Army 
units that were withdrawing from South Kurdistan's Miroz, 
Avashin, and Birchela regions, which are close to Cukurca 
district. It reported that ten soldiers were killed and one 
guerrilla was injured. The state forces who failed to hold on 
to the village of Mavresh withdrew leaving behind its hardware. 
  The valley between Avashin and Herki was bombed for two 
hours 
by the Turkish planes. Troops also landed there. Indicating 
that the landing of troops there creates the possibility that 
the state forces might move eastward, the ARGK press bureau 
said: "Unable to hold their position in a given region, the 
Turkish forces are trying to break through our defenses in some 
other regions. They are suffering losses with each attack and 
are withdrawing. The guerrillas are on alert. The Turkish Army 
has bogged down in south Kurdistan." 
  It is being reported that the regions where the army units 
are withdrawing, specially Avashin and Miroz, are being bombed. 
  In the meantime, it is reported that additional troops are 
being moved from Tatvan to Hakkari. 
<H5>  Clash Between DPK-PUK </H5>
  Another clash has taken place between the DPK and the PUK 
[Patriotic Union of Kurdistan] in South Kurdistan, which is at 
the center of world attention due to the latest operation. An 
hour-long hand-to-hand battle took place in Khelilkan, 
al-Sulaymaniyah at around 1400 on 24 April. Three DPK 
peshmergas died during the clash, which began for unknown 
reasons. It is being reported that there is considerable 
tension between the two organizations. 

