BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Enrique Etchevarren in Europe] </F>
  [Text] Rome -- "Within 48 hours I will have had the 
opportunity of meeting the two most famous Poles, you and the 
pope." This was said by Uruguayan President Luis Alberto Lacalle 
when he met Polish President Lech Walesa. 
  During the morning of his last day in Warsaw and a few hours 
before departing for Rome, Lacalle met Walesa in Belvedere 
Palace, seat of the Polish Government, and told Walesa that 
Uruguay is the gateway to the potentially rich Common Market of 
the South (Mercosur). 
  The meeting between the two chiefs of state included such 
topics as the current European equilibrium and the possible 
development of events in the former Soviet Union's republics and 
the EC, in which Poland wishes to become a member. 
  Lacalle told the media after the meeting that he had had the 
opportunity to exchange ideas with Walesa, whom he termed "a 
fighter against communism who to a large measure allowed the 
political, social, and economic opening of East Europe." 
  Lacalle told Walesa that Uruguay is the natural gateway for 
entering Mercosur, and he added that although the bloc will 
compete in attracting capital, he was very impressed with the 
position of the Polish president, who considers Latin America to 
be the continent of the future. 
  The Uruguayan president invited Walesa to visit our country 
during the course of a scheduled Latin American trip, which 
still does not have a fixed date. 
  Asked by the media accompanying him about Poland's internal 
situation, Lacalle said: "It is very difficult to change a 
country in one day after 50 years of communism and socialism, 
which are the type of regimes that can do less for the happiness 
of the people, the promotion of investment, and the distribution 
of wealth." 
  He added that Walesa and his advisers told him that they 
have 
started to form a new class of business leaders who can make the 
country competitive. 
  Diplomatic sources told EL PAIS that even within the midst 
of 
a difficult political crisis, Poland has been pointed out as the 
country that has had the best recovery in East Europe. 
  With an economic growth of 4 percent in 1993 and an internal 
market of 40 million people, the Poles are receiving heavy 
investment from basically West European enterprises. 
  Moreover, the economic reform's slowness has led to an 
unstable political situation in which Walesa has lost his 
majority in Parliament and has to live with a cabinet dominated 
by post-communists. 
  The electoral support of Marx's inheritors is interpreted by 
Warsaw as a natural reaction by the middle class Pole in the 
face of the new conditions of an open economy. Basically, 
unemployment, which is now at 15 percent and was unknown in a 
planned economy, has hit the Poles hard. Moreover, no one doubts 
that returning to the past is impossible and that the freedom 
reconquered after 50 years of dependence on the former USSR is 
not in danger. 
  Anyway, the confrontation between Walesa and the 
post-communist government, which found an ally in the Peasants 
Party that has always traditionally favored Marxism, has had its 
first effect: to stop the rapid process of privatizations. 

