BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest ROMPRES, 13/4/1994 -- The prime minister 
of the Netherlands, Ruud Lubbers, accompanied by the Dutch 
minister of foreign affairs, Peter Kooijmans, will make an 
official visit in Romania over April 19-20, at the invitation of 
the Romanian prime minister Nicolae Vacaroiu and of the Romanian 
Government, said the Romanian Foreign Ministry spokesperson 
Mircea Geoana at a press conference on Wednesday, April 13. The 
visit is going to be the first one after 1989 to be made in 
Romania by the Dutch premier and by the Dutch foreign minister. 
  The recent election of Daniel Tarschys as secretary-general 
of the Council of Europe was saluted by the Romanian Foreign 
Ministry which expressed through its spokesperson the confidence 
that "during his, Mr. Daniel Tarschys, tenure, the European body 
will further on the way of integrating the states of Central and 
Eastern Europe, of institutional consolidation, and of 
affirmation of its specific role. On the occasion of the 
election of Mr. Daniel Tarschys, the Romanian minister of 
foreign affairs Teodor Melescanu addressed him a congratulatory 
message. 
  The spokesman for the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
Mircea Geoana, confirmed at the today's press conference that 
the ministry received the application for an entry visa to 
Romania of the former sovereign of this country, Mihai I, and 
said the visa was forwarded to the government. 
  Relative to the visit to Romania of Bosnian President Alija 
Izetbegovic, the spokesman informed the press that it was agreed 
with the Romanian side, in principle, to have it scheduled for 
the immediately following period. 
  In connection with the Crans-Montana Forum due in Bucharest 
from 21 to 24 April, confirmations have been received from 137 
political personalities and 232 businessmen. Of the latter 152 
come from Romania. Also, 7 heads of state, 10 premiers and 
deputy prime ministers, six speakers or deputy speakers of 
Parliament, 12 foreign ministers and deputy foreign ministers, 
20 ministers in charge of various other domains, 9 
secretaries-general and deputy secretaries- general of European 
international organizations have so far confirmed their 
participation. 
  At the Wednesday, 13 April news conference of the Ministry 
of 
Foreign Affairs, spokesman Mircea Geoana said that when the 
period for the negotiation of the relevant documents is 
completed, the visit to Romania of the president of the F.R. of 
Yugoslavia Zoran Lilic will be expected for the signing of the 
treaty. 
  Asked to refer to the decision of the Russian Federation, in 
which the latter expressed its "interest and wish" to convert 
into military bases the Russian troops formerly deployed in the 
territories of ex-Soviet states, spokesman Geoana said: "I think 
that the international reference documents as well as those 
recently adopted by the CSCE, which spell it out clearly that 
the foreign troops in these states are to be completely and 
unconditionally retreated, are the international foundation of 
any initiative." The ministry official also said the matter 
required that those directly concerned and involved made their 
positions known. 
  Spokesman for the Romanian Foreign Ministry Mircea Geoana 
also read out at this press conference, the point of view of 
that institution on the decision of the Republic of Moldova to 
join the Commonwealth of Independent States. Geoana mentioned 
among other things that "owing to its geographic position, 
culture, history and traditions, the natural place of the 
Republic of Moldova as an independent and sovereign state, is in 
the big family of the European nations, an by no means in 
Euro-Asian structures. The foreign policy acts recently adopted 
by the Parliament of the Republic of Moldova seem to show a 
tendency towards the latter. 
  Such a global approach, a pan-European one in particular, 
offers access to the opportunities that have already been 
offered to the young independent states and lowers the risks of 
perpetuating dependency on a certain area, full membership to 
organisations getting shaped at present. 
  We are of the opinion that the strategic objective jointly 
established by Romania and the Republic of Moldova concerning 
their economic integration and the consolidation of their common 
cultural and spiritual space is still in sight. It is a concept 
corresponding, in this phase, to the normal yearnings of the two 
Romanian states to get closer to each other, with the economic 
integration being viewed in the context of the integration of 
Romania and the Republic of Moldova within Euro-Atlantic 
structures. At the same time that concept does not hamper 
relations with other states of the world, on the contrary, it 
supposes and promotes such links. This reality is going to grow 
stronger in proportion to the economic revigoration of the two 
independent Romanian states, function of the pace of their 
integration with these structures. 
  The special relations between Romania and the Republic of 
Moldova, based on kinship, national language, culture and 
history continues and will continue to represent one of the main 
priorities of Romania's foreign policy. 
  Devoted to the spirit and contents of the declaration by 
which it recognized the Republic of Moldova as an independent 
Romanian state, Romania, irrespective of the situation specific 
to a moment or another, will always remain close to its brethren 
in the Republic of Moldova, in order to back them on a 
political, diplomatic, material and spiritual plane, for them to 
overcome the difficult problems the citizens of the republic on 
the left bank of the Prut have to face." 

