BFN 

<F P=106> [By David Chazan] </F>
  [Text] Nairobi, April 21 (AFP) -- Proposed peace talks in 
Tanzania this weekend between Rwandan rebels and their foes in 
the interim government seemed unlikely to stem ethnic 
bloodletting, diplomats and analysts said Thursday [21 April]. 
  The rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front [RPF] told AFP that its 
delegates would go to the northern Tanzanian town of Arusha to 
meet army representatives, but would refuse to talk to members 
of the interim government which they do not recognise. 
  "Our delegation will be essentially military and it will be 
talking to military men, not to the government, which is 
illegitimate," rebel spokesman James Rwego said by telephone 
from Brussels. 
  But Rwanda's ambassador to Kenya said the rebels would have 
to negotiate with the government, formed after the death of 
President Juvenal Habyarimana in a mysterious April 6 plane 
crash plunged the tiny central African nation into tribal 
carnage that has cost tens of thousands of lives. 
  "Our delegation will be a government delegation, not a 
military one," ambassador Cyprien Habimana said. 
  "We have an interim government, and the army is under the 
orders of the government. We are not a military dictatorship," 
Habimana said. 
  African diplomats familiar with the centuries-old tribal 
feud 
between the majority Hutus, who dominate the army, and the 
minority Tutsis who form the backbone of the rebel movement, 
expressed scepticism about the outcome of the Tanzanian-mediated 
talks. 
  "There's too much bitterness after all the bloodshed, and 
neither side is willing to accept the other's conditions," said 
a senior envoy in Nairobi. 
  "If the rebels are saying that they will only talk to the 
military, that could simply mean that they aren't ready to talk 
at all," the diplomat said. 
  Tanzania brokered peace accords signed in August between the 
two sides which were hailed as a breakthrough in efforts to end 
the three-year civil war that erupted when the rebels invaded 
from neighbouring Uganda in October 1990. 
  But the death of Habyarimana, a Hutu, and the army's claim 
that his plane was shot down rekindled the war. 
  The Presidential Guard spearheaded massacres of Tutsis in 
the 
capital Kigali, still littered with bodies more two weeks after 
the killings began. 
  Death squads are still hacking and clubbing to death people 
suspected of being Tutsis or rebel sympathisers. 
  United Nations' efforts to broker a ceasefire have so far 
failed. 
  The government is believed to be unwilling to accept a rebel 
demand for the interim administration to be disbanded. 
  "How can they negotiate anything if one side doesn't even 
recognise the other?" the diplomat said. 
  Tanzanian President Ali Hassan Mwinyi, who convened the 
talks, has met separately with the rebel front's vice-chairman 
Patrick Mazimhaka and the home affairs minister in the interim 
government, Faustin Munyazesa. 
  The UN spokesman in Kigali, Moctar Gueye, welcomed the 
Tanzanian initiative and expressed the hope that Rwanda's 
neighbours, worried that the bloodshed could spill over into 
their countries, could find ways of putting pressure on both 
sides to lay down their arms. 
  The slaughter in Rwanda has sparked a regional refugee 
crisis. At least 50,000 Rwandans have streamed into neighbouring 
countries. 
  The UN meanwhile confirmed that rebels had captured the 
northern town of Byumba this week. 
  The rebels have also claimed to have gained ground against 
government forces in Kigali, in the northeastern Mutura region 
and in the Buganza area to the east. 
  They also said they had surrounded Habyarimana's hometown, 
the northern Hutu stronghold of Ruhengeri. 
  UN officials were unable to confirm the claims as the 
fighting on several fronts has made travel impossible in Rwanda, 
a patchwork of rebel-and government-held pockets. 

