BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jose Maria Brunet: "Government Will Stand By Its </F>
Policy and Not Withdraw Labor Reform"] 
  [Text] Madrid -- The government takes the 12 June 
[European and Andalusian] election defeat as a "serious 
warning," and will try to regain lost ground by throwing itself 
into administration and without changing its policy -- 
particularly in the economic sphere -- asserting that the labor 
reform will not be withdrawn. Thus it believes that stability is 
guaranteed, especially after CiU [Convergence and Union] leader 
Jordi Pujol has reiterated his support for continuing the 
legislative term on the basis of cooperation with the government. 
  These, in essence, are the conclusions that the cabinet 
reached yesterday after discussing the political situation 
caused by the electoral setback of the PSOE [Spanish Socialist 
Workers Party] in the European and Andalusian elections. 
<H5>  Firm Stability </H5>
  Minister of the Presidency Alfredo Perez Rubalcaba 
emphasized 
as the foremost element of the government's analysis that there 
is a situation of political stability. "What the events of the 
past few days show," he said, "is that the government's 
stability is firm and that it has been reaffirmed by the meeting 
which the Generalitat [Catalan autonomous government] premier 
held with the prime minister Thursday [16 June]." Therefore, 
this is a government "that has the ability to conduct its 
political activity with the necessary parliamentary stability." 
  Perez Rubalcaba stated that the government members must "put 
their backs into it" -- that is, pick up the thread of the 
administration begun after the legislative elections of a year 
ago, and succeed in making society see that there is a 
determined political will to surmount the crisis and clean up 
public life. The third main aspect of the the government's 
activity is the implementation of autonomy, a matter on which it 
wishes to continue to work for the implementation of the various 
autonomy statutes. 
  The government believes that, in the first place, the 
measures concerning the labor reform that have been approved are 
producing good results. Hence, the government has no intention 
of altering this initiative, as United Left and the trade unions 
have demanded. 
  With respect to the voices in the PSOE calling for a 
leftward 
shift with more marked Socialist features, Perez Rubalcaba 
stated that "party members are free, and say what they please," 
although "there are bodies that must finally decide what is to 
be done." Next Monday, he pointed out, there is a meeting of the 
Executive Committee from which "the party's stance on the 
elections and the future will emerge. All we party members must 
abide by that stance, because the Executive Committee is elected 
in order to exercise political leadership." 
  In any event, Perez Rubalcaba emphasized that, in the 
government's opinion, the labor reform "is a good law," that was 
drafted for one purpose -- to create jobs. "In that," he 
stated, "it is a law that represents progress. We are already 
seeing its results, which will be greater over the next few 
months. The reform is producing excellent results as far as new 
contracts are concerned." 
  According to Rubalcaba, nobody in the government has 
suggested the advisability of changing the policy of alliances 
that the PSOE is maintaining in this legislative term. He 
remarked in this connection that, following the legislative 
elections, the government sought agreements on the basis of 
compatibility of programs, and this resulted in the cooperation 
with CiU and the Basque Nationalist Party. The survival of the 
agreement of programs was made clear this week at the meeting 
between Gonzalez and Pujol, and so there is no reason to change 
the policy of alliances. 
  With respect to the causes of the electoral setback, there 
are, in Rubalcaba's opinion, "obvious" causes; the corruption 
cases -- "which could have estranged some citizens from the 
PSOE" -- and the economic crisis, because although there is a 
recovery, "there are many people who still do not perceive it." 
Rubalcaba intensified the self-critical tone in saying that the 
government's basic policies should not be reformulated, but in 
the knowledge that "citizens have become estranged from the 
government" for the aforementioned reasons. 
  "What the government should do," he continued, "is set under 
way the necessary means to combat the economic crisis, create 
jobs, and pursue corruption. That is what we are doing, but 
probably not to a sufficient extent. So the government has 
concluded that it is necessary to work harder and more 
thoroughly, and explain our policies better." 
  In short, it is the government's conviction that "we have 
accomplished things, but have probably been unable to explain 
this, and it is reasonable that we concern ourselves with this 
and therefore combine our administration work -- each of us in 
our ministerial areas -- with greater explanation to the public, 
greater closeness with respect to the various sectors, and 
greater dialogue, which has developed, but perhaps has not 
crystallized sufficiently." 

