BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 9 KYODO -- Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata 
and South Korean President Kim Yong-sam agreed Thursday [9 Jun] 
to keep in close contact on the problem of North Korea's 
suspected development of nuclear weapons, Foreign Ministry 
officials said. 
  Hata and Kim reaffirmed the need for close consultations on 
the nuclear issue in a 25-minute telephone conversation, the 
officials said. 
  Kim, who has just returned from a weeklong visit to Russia 
and Uzbekistan, called Hata to brief him about the trip. 
  Saying he had agreed with Russian President Boris Yeltsin to 
keep in close contact on the North Korean nuclear problem, Kim 
stressed the important of cooperation among Japan, South Korea 
and the United States as well as with Russia and China on the 
problem, according to the officials. 
  Kim told Hata that U.S. President Bill Clinton also phoned 
Kim while he was in Moscow, they said. 
  Hata told Kim he hopes Foreign Minister Koji Kakizawa and 
South Korean Foreign Minister Han Sung-chu will be able to 
discuss the matter when Kakizawa visits Seoul on Saturday, the 
officials said. 
  The premier said it is important that Pyongyang cooperate 
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as soon as 
possible and sweep away international concern that it is 
developing nuclear weapons. 
  Later in the day, Kakizawa and South Korean Ambassador to 
Japan Kong No-myong agreed in a meeting that Japan, South Korea 
and the U.S. acknowledge that China's role is important in 
solving the problem, the officials said. 
  Kakizawa said he wants to discuss the nuclear issue with Han 
based on the results of last weekend's consultations among 
Japan, South Korea and the U.S. in Washington. 
  He also said he wants to discuss bilateral and international 
affairs when they meet in Seoul. 
  Kong told Kakizawa that the South Korean Government has not 
changed its stance on the problem but has recently begun to 
express its position more clearly than before. 
  He was quoted as saying Seoul decided to do so because of 
criticism that its stance on the nuclear issue was one of 
appeasing North Korea. 

