Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] France favors the reinforcement of international 
sanctions to reestablish a democratic regime in Haiti. This 
statement was made on 28 February by French Foreign Affairs 
Minister Alain Juppe after an interview in Paris with President 
Jean-Bertrand Aristide. In the Security Council we are defending 
a draft resolution reinforcing the sanctions against those who 
do not respect the Governors Island accord, signed in July but 
not respected by the military regime, Juppe said. According to 
Juppe, France intends to support the return of democracy in 
Haiti and the return of the legitimately elected president, 
political dialogue, and the reconciliation of all Haitians. 
  For his part, President Aristide considered that his meeting 
with the head of French diplomacy had been fruitful. A 
resolution reinforcing the sanctions on the military would be in 
conformity with the July agreement, the president pointed out: 
  [Begin Aristide recording, in Creole] In fact, today [28 
February] I met with France's minister of foreign affairs. I was 
very pleased to meet him. We discussed three points and agreed 
on all three. 
  The first point is the matter of the crisis, i.e., whether 
France has changed or has maintained its position in support of 
ours. The foreign affairs minister asserted that the position 
remains the same: They support our position. 
  A draft resolution is to be presented to the Security 
Council, which is upside down, upside down [repeats himself]. We 
talked about it and he said that his position, the position of 
France, was the same as that of the constitutional government 
which respects the Governors Island accord, which demands that 
the military resign, in conformity with the agreement; then we 
will proceed to the formation of a government which must issue 
from dialogue, as we usually do, in order to achieve 
reconciliation and justice for all. Thus, in this sense, I 
believe that it is a first point on which the French Government 
and we, the Haitian Government, agree. 
  The second point regards the police. We agree that the 
police 
should not be a force for repression of the people of the 
nation. There is a proposal, provided for in our Constitution 
and in the Governors Island accord, that invites Haitians living 
in the country to join us and Haitians abroad to receive 
training, just as we have done with about 60 who have already 
been trained in the United States. Others will be trained in 
Canada. France is considering doing the same. Thus, we agree to 
study such a project with France. 
  The third point is our refugees. [end recording] 
  It should be noted that France is in the group of countries 
called Friends of Haiti, which includes the United States, 
Canada, and Venezuela. The question of reinforcing the sanctions 
against Haiti was recently a point of divergence, with Canada in 
favor and Washington reluctant. 
  President Aristide has been in Paris since 26 February on a 
four-day private visit. He was scheduled to meet President 
Francois Mitterrand on 1 March. 

