BFN 

  [Text] CAIRO, May 11 (AFP)--Egyptian authorities are 
holding between 20,000 and 30,000 political prisoners, most of 
them Moslem fundamentalists, the Egyptian Human Rights 
Organisation said Wednesday. 
  Mahmud Qandil, a member of the organisation's board, said it 
was difficult to have a precise figure because "every day many 
detainees are arrested or released." The Interior Ministry 
could not give an exact number, he said, but added that 
"according to various estimates, the number of political 
prisoners was between 20,000 and 30,000." 
  Qandil was presenting a report by a team from the 
organisation which visited Asyut, the southern region which has 
seen the worst violence between fundamentalists and the security 
forces. According to the report nearly two-thirds of the 114 
people killed in the violence in the first four months of this 
year died in Asyut province. It blamed the outlawed al-Jama'ah 
al-Islamiyah (Islamic Group) for the murder of a German woman 
tourist and 29 policemen in the region this year and also said 
the al-Jama'ah was suspected of killing eight Coptic Christians, 
including five gunned down in a monastery in March. 
  However, the organisation also accused the security forces 
of 
rounding up daily at least 250 people "indiscriminately" on 
suspicion of belonging to the al-Jama'ah. 
  Witnesses quoted in the report said the "excessive or 
accidental" use of firearms by the police had led to the deaths 
of innocent people, such as the killing of four people on March 
27 who had no connections with the outlawed fundamentalists. 
The government has launched frequent raids on hideouts used by 
the Islamic militants, whose two-year violent campaign has badly 
hit the tourist industry and cost almost 400 lives. 
  The human rights organisation said the situation was likely 
to "explode" in the Suhaj and al-Minyah provinces to the north 
and south of Asyut. It urged the authorities to set up an 
independent legal commission to investigate killings by the 
security forces in their battle against the militants. 
  The report said the violence would only stop when the 
government respected the law, ensured freedom of speech, changed 
the education system and stopped certain broadcasts likely to 
incite sectarian violence. 
  On Tuesday a senior Egyptian opposition MP, Kamil Khalid, 
accused unnamed government officials of ordering the killing of 
a lawyer closely associated with the militants. Khalid said 
'Abd-al-Harith Madani died after having tried to give him 
proposals for ending the conflict between the militants and the 
security forces. 
  The Egyptian Bar Association earlier accused the security 
forces of torturing Madani to death in custody. 

