Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "We Are Proud of the Early Call for Peace"] </F>
  [Text] At the invitation of the U.S. Council on Foreign 
Relations, and before prominent personalities interested in 
international affairs, His Majesty King Husayn has expressed 
pride in having had the privilege to preach peace in the Middle 
East, a region that has been a beacon, and that has contributed 
much to the progress of mankind throughout its history on many 
levels. 
  Jordan, since 1967, has been trying by all means to achieve 
progress toward a peace that will satisfy future generations. 
This has been going on since the issuance of UN Security 
Council Resolution 242, passing through all the international 
initiatives that followed and ending with the Madrid conference 
from which the current peace process emanated. In this state of 
mind, we viewed the historic handshake and reconciliation which 
took place on 13 September 1993 as an act of great wisdom and 
great courage on both sides. In the same state of mind, Jordan 
has supported the progress that was made on the 
Palestinian-Israeli track, and ratified the agenda with Israel 
the next day [14 September]. 
  Today, as at any time in the past, Jordan believes in the 
need to achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle 
East, and hopes for similar progress on all the other 
Arab-Israeli tracks in order to achieve the ultimate goal; 
namely, the signing of a peace treaty with Israel, which should 
reflect on the lives of people on both sides. Before signing 
such a treaty, Jordanian territory must first return to 
Jordanian sovereignty, Jordan must restore its share of water, 
and great attention must be given to the people in the occupied 
territories in a way that will enable them to see an immediate 
change in the quality of their lives. Above all, a solution 
must be found to the refugee problem, which has affected Jordan 
more than any other neighboring Arab state. 
  While reviewing Jordan's position on various regional and 
international issues, King Husayn expressed great pride in his 
one family, and in democracy and all that it has entrenched in 
terms of freedom, power-sharing, pluralism, and respect for 
human rights. His majesty also expressed great optimism over the 
future of this region which is still heading toward a new Middle 
East abounding with peace prospects, development, prosperity, 
and hopes of harmony, cooperation, openness, and mutual respect 
among the followers of the three monotheistic religions. 

