CSO 

<F P=106> ["Government Work Report Delivered by Governor Chen </F>
Shineng (7115 1102 5174) at Second Session of Eighth Guizhou 
Provincial People's Congress on 21 January 1994"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] Nineteen Ninety Four is the 
first year of the current provincial government. Under the 
leadership of the Guizhou Provincial CPC Committee, we have 
persistently followed the basic line consisting of "one focus 
and two basis points," further implemented the guideline laid 
down by Comrade Deng Xiaoping's important talks which he gave in 
his South China inspection tour, earnestly carried out the major 
policy decision made by the central authorities in strengthening 
the macro-economic control, and energetically fulfilled the 
various tasks assigned us by the First Session of the Eighth 
Provincial People's Congress. We have overcome difficulties, 
thanks to the strenuous efforts made by all the people in the 
province. The whole province of Guizhou has witnessed a fine 
tendency of rapid economic growth. It is expected that Guizhou's 
GNP will increase by 9 percent, the output value of the primary 
industry 4 percent, that of secondary industry by 10.6 percent 
and that of the tertiary industry by 15 percent as compared with 
the previous year. All social undertakings have made new 
progress. 
  -- Rural Economy Continues To Develop. 
  Guizhou has successfully fulfilled its plans for the 
increase of the total output value in agriculture, that of 
peasants' income and that of the major farm products. The total 
output value in agriculture reached 18.48 billion yuan, up 4.1 
percent; the per capita net peasants' income 579 yuan, an 
increase of 73 yuan; total grain output 8.695 million tons, an 
increase of 10.2 percent; the total output of cured tobacco 
508,000 tons, up 13 percent; and the area planted with trees 
4.75 million mu, up 18 percent as compared with 1992. Township 
enterprises energetically promoted the shareholding and 
cooperative system, and established more than 100 small 
industrial districts with their total output value expected to 
reach 11.6 billion yuan, which represented an increase of 32.3 
percent. Funds totaling 280 million yuan were invested in 1993 
for the development of water conservancy projects. Over 580,000 
mu of sloping fields were converted to terraced fields and 
500,000 mu of farmland were planted with greenery. Peasants in 
the province added, improved and restored irrigation on 915,000 
mu of land. The development of bare land had started. The plan 
for the first-stage comprehensive agricultural development was 
over-fulfilled, and all the results were checked and accepted by 
the state. The use of science and technology to revitalize 
agriculture was continuously expanded. Major grain crops of fine 
strain were grown in more than 90 percent of the farmland in the 
province. Strenuous efforts were exerted to raise funds for 
purchasing farm and sideline products. Such funds were basically 
available. The policy to reduce peasants' burdens was earnestly 
implemented, and the irrational fees and charges which the 
central authorities had specifically abolished and those 
collected by the province were screened and sorted out, and good 
results were obtained in helping people eliminate poverty. A 
total of 610,000 mu of farmland were set aside for the 
development of the "feeding and clothing project." In addition, 
there were another 700,000 poor people whose per capita net 
income had exceeded 300 yuan. 
  --Steady Growth in Industry and Transportation. 
  The total industrial output value in 1993 is expected to 
reach 38 billion yuan, up 13 percent over 1992. The ratio of 
production and marketing was 93.3 percent. The large- and 
medium-sized state-owned enterprises played their role well as a 
mainstay, and turned out industrial products totaling 21.9 
billion yuan, which made up 58 percent of the total industrial 
output value in the province. Heavy industry witnessed a rapid 
growth. The output of major heavy industrial products such as 
iron and steel, aluminum ingot, raw coal and ferroalloy had 
increased on a fairly large scale. The annual power generation 
output reached 14.2 billion Kwh, an increase of 10.75 percent, 
of which the annual power generation output within the electric 
network totaled 12 billion Kwh, and the province sold 11 billion 
Kwh of electric power, up 10 percent in each instance. The 
province also sold electric power of 240 million Kwh to other 
provinces. The railways in the province handled freight totaling 
21.5 million tons, an increase of 700,000 tons over 1992. 
Structural readjustment was made in support of the transport of 
important materials. 
  --Realm of Circulation Continues To Expand. 
  The total volume of retail sales in the province in 1993 
is expected to reach 13.12 billion yuan, an increase of 12.7 
percent, of which the volume of retail sales of consumer goods 
rose 15.2 percent. Funds earmarked for the development of 
various markets reached 130 million yuan in 1993. There were 
2,633 markets of all kinds with their volume of business 
reaching 6.2 billion yuan, which indicated a growth of 14 
percent over 1992. There were 71 markets for producer goods with 
their volume of business totaling 2.42 billion yuan. The amount 
of inter-banks loans continued to increase. Securities 
registration companies were newly set up. Trading markets for 
real estate, technology and human resources were also 
established. 
  --Development of Nonstate Economy Accelerated. 
  The number of individual industrial and commercial 
establishments increased from 286,700 to 317,400, and their 
capital totaled 1.134 billion yuan. The number of private 
enterprises reached 3,733 with their registered capital totaling 
1.134 billion yuan. There were 740 Sino-foreign joint ventures 
and cooperative and foreign-funded enterprises with their 
registered capital totaling US$1.25 billion and total 
investments reaching US$1.563 billion. The rates of growth of 
collectively run and township-run and other types of industries 
rose by 23.7 percent, 43.9 percent and 26.7 percent 
respectively. The share of nonstate economic sector accounted 
for 28.3 percent of the total industrial output value, their 
market share in sales 48.3 percent and their investment share 
23.4 percent. 
  -- New Progress in Major Construction Projects. 
  Investments on fixed assets totaled 9.5 billion yuan, an 
increase of 34 percent, and that on local technical innovations 
totaled 1.22 billion yuan, up 13 percent. Progress was made in 
17 on-going major construction projects, and two of the projects 
were already completed. The Dana Highway was already completed 
and open to traffic. The Guizhou-Zunyi Highway for Motor 
Vehicle, the Guiyang East Exit Highway and the first stage of 
the Panbei Highway had already started. The Guizhou Section of 
the Nanning-Kunming Railway and the Longdongbao Airport were 
under construction. The telephone exchange capacity in the 
province was expanded by 65,000, and the three optical cables -- 
the Guizhou Section of the Nanning-Kunming cable, the Guizhou 
Section of the Fuzhou-Chengdu cable and the Guizhou-Xingyi cable 
had officially started. Nearly 1.3 billion yuan were invested 
for power generation. The first power generator set of the 
Panxian Power Station had gone into operation, the construction 
of the Dongfeng Power Station was accelerated. The Guiyang Power 
Station successfully developed technical innovations, and 
expanded its power generation capacity by 248,000 Kw. The 
national electric power grid had supplied electricity to 60 
counties in the province. Initial results were attained in 
renovating major cities such as Guiyang and others. The 
Huaguoshu Overpass in Guiyang was completed and open to traffic. 
The construction of public facilities in various townships was 
accelerated. Remarkable results were attained in geological 
prospecting. Excellent progress was made in prospecting for 
alumyte in northern part and diamond drilling in southeastern 
part of the province. 
  -- Remarkable achievements made in financial circles. 
  Although the province was faced with difficulties when 
revenues dropped at one time, the financial targets were 
nevertheless over-fulfilled, thanks to the joint efforts made by 
the party committees, governments and relevant departments at 
all levels. The revenues reached 5.62 billion yuan in 1993, up 
18.87 percent. The expenditures totaled 6.81 billion yuan, an 
increase of 12.33 percent. The national bank had a total deposit 
of 25.08 billion yuan in the province at the end of 1993, an 
increase of 4.48 billion yuan. The total balance of its loans 
reached 32.41 billion yuan, up 5.85 billion yuan. The banks and 
the financial departments had actively readjusted the structure 
in the supply of funds, vigorously supported the key 
construction projects, and had enough funds to pay for major 
expenditures. 
  -- Township Reform Further Deepened. 
  With the improvement of the responsibility system, the main 
form of which is the household contract that links remuneration 
to output, and the system of unified management combined with 
independent management, the network of collectivized services 
for agriculture was set up. The system of stockpiling and 
regulating grain reserves and that of venture capital were also 
set up. Progress was made in changing the way the enterprises 
operate, allowing them to have more power in production and 
management. The reform of the shareholding system was carried 
out quite well. The stocks of the two companies authorized to 
issue securities were already on the market. Twenty companies 
with limited liabilities were authorized to raise funds 
publicly, and more than 160 companies with limited liabilities 
were established. The department in charge of the reform of the 
circulation system continued to promote the "four opening-ups." 
Some state-owned and cooperative enterprises specialized in 
commodity circulation joined their efforts to "let the civilian 
sector run state-owned enterprises" on an experimental basis, to 
reform the shareholding system, to decontrol the prices for the 
purchase of grain and edible oil, and to allow more stores to 
sell and buy grain and cooking oil. The prices of nearly 95 
percent of consumer goods and 85 percent of producer goods are 
market regulated. New developments were made in reforming 
housing and the social security system. The reform of the system 
for the use of land had started in rural and urban areas. 
Twenty-two county (prefectural) level and three provincial-level 
units had carried out structural reform and tried to implement 
the civil service system. 
  -- Open Wider to the Outside World. 
  A total of 674 contracts were signed in state-run and 
provincial-run development zones with joint investments totaling 
2.29 billion yuan. Some of the funds had already arrived. Both 
hard environment and soft environment for investment were 
gradually improved. Investments were made in the Beihai Guizhou 
Economic Development Zone. Water, electric power and roads were 
connected, and ground was leveled for all construction sites. 
Remarkable results were attained in attracting foreign 
investments. Funds totaling 270 million yuan were attracted into 
the province. Foreign capital totaling US$49.2 million were 
actually in use in Guizhou, an increase of 37.7 percent over 
1992. Six prefectures and cities and 11 enterprises were newly 
added to the list of those which were authorized to handle 
import and export business. Their total volume of imports and 
exports reached US$351 million of which US$240 million came from 
exports, marking increases of 4.8 percent and 7.2 percent 
respectively. The province received 100,000 tourists from 
abroad, earning more than US$10 million of foreign exchange. The 
province also received 10 million domestic tourists, and 
recovered 400 million yuan from circulation. 
  -- New Strides Made in Vitalizing Guizhou by Relying 
on Science and Technology 
  The tempo in reforming the system of science and technology 
had quickened. A number of scientific research institutions had 
gradually become business-oriented. Nongovernmental scientific 
research institutions and organizations totalled 340 in number. 
New scientific and technological achievements including seven 
awards were made in 1993. Excellent results were attained in the 
development of the "Spark Program" and "Torch Program." Guizhou 
had selected and dispatched deputy county magistrates (city 
mayors) in charge of science and technology to 81 counties and 
cities. The CPPCC chapters, various democratic parties and the 
Federation of Industry and Commerce had done a great deal of 
work to support the border region and poor people and to 
revitalize Guizhou with science and technology. Basic education 
was strengthened, and 93.6 percent of school-age children 
attended schools. The share of students who received vocational 
education accounted for 47 percent of all the senior middle 
school students. Institutions of higher learning were readjusted 
and reinforced. Ordinary colleges added more than 40 special 
fields of study which meet the requirements for social and 
economic development. Remarkable achievements were made in 
promoting the "hope project." Eight Hope primary schools were 
built, helping 22,000 children deprived of education to go back 
to school. The problem of middle and primary schools teachers 
not getting paid on time was basically solved. 
  -- All Social Undertakings Continue to Develop. 
  The program for family planning was well implemented. The 
natural population growth rate was maintained at 14.7 per 
thousand, which was below the state target. Investments on 
environment protection were increased, and achievements made in 
attaining environmental and ecological balance. Public health 
undertakings strengthened the public health network at the 
county, township and village levels. Sports departments scored 
magnificent achievements at the Seventh National Sports Meet. 
Progress was registered in the press and publishing, radio and 
television, books and reference materials and archives. The 
supervisory, auditing, public security, judicial, industry and 
commerce, land control, statistics, civil affairs, 
nationalities, foreign affairs, religious, overseas and Taiwan 
Affairs departments had done a great deal of work for economic 
construction and for the reform and opening-up program. 
  -- Spiritual Civilization and Democratic Legal System 
Further Strengthened. 
  Various activities to learn from Lei Feng were launched 
throughout the province. Emphasis was placed on the development 
of professional ethics. All kinds of mass activities to promote 
spiritual civilization were developed. A total of 63 rural 
community centers to develop spiritual civilization, more than 
400 radio and television relay stations and 295 FM radio 
stations were built. Socialist democracy was further promoted 
and the legal system strengthened. Guizhou had formulated 25 
local administrative regulations, and submitted three laws of a 
regional nature to the provincial people's congress for approval 
in 1993. Positive results were attained in strengthening public 
security, and new achievements registered in protecting 
railways. Struggles of all forms were firmly waged against 
criminals, and measures taken to eliminate the factors of 
instability in the society and unflinchingly maintain political 
and social stability. Achievements were registered in combating 
corruption and maintaining a clean government. Breakthroughs 
were made in investigating and cracking down major criminal 
cases. The supervisory organs had accepted and put 1,273 cases 
on file for investigation; winded up 1,204 cases; and taken 
disciplinary actions against 972 persons. 
  Fellow deputies: 
  During the past year, Guizhou was faced with more problems 
in 
economic development. Funds were in shortage at all times, and 
revenues were once dropping. The "bottleneck effect" in 
hampering economic growth was particularly prominent. In 
addition, there were some new changes in the economic 
environment. Our economic work was carried out under 
considerably difficult conditions. We had concentrated our 
efforts in solving the outstanding problems in economic 
development and grasped the key link of fund shortage. While 
earnestly rectifying the financial order, strictly enforcing 
financial and economic discipline and strengthening 
macro-economic control and by winning the support of the state, 
vigorously attracting deposits, developing normal inter-bank 
financing and attracting more business investments, we had 
increased the total amount of funds, energetically purchased 
farm and sideline products, and supported key enterprises in 
production and key construction projects. In light of the grim 
situation of declining revenues, the provincial government 
timely organized a leading group to strengthen tax collection 
and financial work and established a multi-level tax collection 
management system whereas the province paid attention to the 40 
key tax-paying enterprises, while the prefectures and cities 
directed their attention to the major taxpayers. We had also 
solved the outstanding problem of the declining sales of 
cigarettes, timely readjusted the tax collection plans in 
various localities and ensured the tax payments from key 
enterprises. The cadres at all levels went to various localities 
to understand the situation, and various relevant departments 
made use of all available funds, electric power and 
transportation facilities and joined their efforts in overcoming 
all difficulties, and overfulfilling the target of balancing the 
budgets. When the term of the governments at all levels expired, 
the succeeding governments had timely stabilized and 
strengthened the government leading groups, maintained the 
continuity in implementing various policies, whipped up the 
enthusiasm of the cadres and the broad masses, and done a good 
job in fulfilling the plan for economic and social development 
in the province. Here, on behalf of the provincial people's 
government, I wish to pay my highest respect and express sincere 
appreciation to the broad masses of workers, peasants, cadres, 
intellectuals, PLA and armed police commanders and fighters 
stationed in Guizhou, public security police and bailiffs, 
militiamen and military reserve officers and men; to various 
democratic parties, the Federation of Industry and Commerce, 
mass organizations, patriotic personage without party 
affiliation, and to those compatriots from Hong Kong, Macao and 
Taiwan, overseas Chinese and foreign friends who had supported 
the construction projects in Guizhou! 
  While we reaffirm our achievements, we must also soberly 
realize the existing problems. The main problems are as follows: 
  1. The comparative advantage in agriculture is low. So is 
the 
rate of growth of peasants' actual income. Some of the 
preferential policies in support of agriculture were not well 
implemented. The contingent of agro-technicians at the basic 
level is not stable enough, and the development of the network 
of collectivized agricultural services was not fast enough. 
  2. The way the state-owned enterprises operate is not 
flexible. Some enterprises have experienced difficulties in 
operation, while others were running with low efficiency. The 
number of enterprises which suspended or slashed production was 
on the increase. Safety precautions were not well taken in the 
field of industry and transportation. 
  3. Funds are still in shortage. Money is extremely tight in 
some projects. Some counties are faced with financial 
difficulties. 
  4. Commodity prices have increased on a large scale. The 
general retail price rose by 15 percent in 1993, adversely 
affecting the living standard of some of the people. 
  5. Not enough efforts are made in carrying out reform in 
some 
fields and in opening up to the outside world. The state policy 
is not promptly implemented. 
  6. Some government organizations have not worked with high 
efficiency. A small number of government employees even abuse 
their authorities to carry out unhealthy practice, and some 
individual cadres are corrupt. In doing our work, we have not 
worked hard to investigate and study the new situation and new 
problems which have cropped up when the new system was replacing 
the old. We have miscalculated some of the problems which have 
emerged in the course of developing the economy. Nor have we 
timely and resolutely adopt measures to solve such problems. In 
this connection, we must earnestly sum up our experience, 
energetically improve ourselves and work hard to carry out our 
work well. 
  The year 1994 is a crucial year to continuously develop our 
economy in a fairly rapid pace and establish the socialist 
market economy. The main tasks of the government work in Guizhou 
this year are as follows: 
  -- We must energetically implement the guidelines laid down 
by the 14th National CPC Congress and the Third Plenary Session 
of the said congress; fulfill the tasks set by the Seventh 
Guizhou Provincial CPC Congress; quicken our pace in 
establishing the socialist market economic system; and 
concentrate our efforts in deepening reform, opening wider to 
the outside world. We must readjust our structure; strengthen 
our management; raise our efficiency; and achieve the three 
goals in ensuring that government functionaries are honest and 
hardworking. We must ensure that the growth rate of our GNP is 8 
percent, 9 percent if possible; that of the primary industry 2.2 
percent, 3.2 percent if possible; that of the secondary industry 
9.5 percent, 10.8 percent if possible (that of total industrial 
output value 12.5 percent, 13.5 percent if possible); that of 
the tertiary industry 14 percent, 15 percent if possible; and 
that of local revenues 9 percent, 10 percent if possible. In 
addition, we must develop all kinds of social undertakings in an 
all-round manner. 
  We have many favorable conditions to fulfill all the 
aforementioned targets, but we too are faced with many 
difficulties, particularly in reforming the system whereby tax 
revenues are shared by central and local authorities. Within a 
short period of time, this system will have a greater impact on 
the increase of the local revenues. Due to the implementation of 
the unified income tax system, enterprises will meet more 
challenges in market competition. It will be harder to check the 
price increases, solve the contradictions in the supply of funds 
and transportation, and fulfill the task of making structural 
readjustment. How to take the initiative in keeping pace with 
the new economic operational environment will be a severe test 
to all the sectors concerned. All departments must emancipate 
their thought, seek truth from facts, deepen the reform, open 
wider to the outside world, enhance revolutionary vigor, carry 
out their work in a down-to-earth manner, promote economic 
development, and maintain political and social stability while 
working hard to solve contradictions. In carrying out our work 
in 1994, we must pay attention to the following tasks: 
  (1) We must persistently regard the "three conducives" as 
the basic criterion in determining all policies and measures and 
in checking the merits and demerits of our work. In the field of 
ideology, we must guard against the rightist tendency. What is 
more important is to guard against the "leftist" tendency at the 
same time. We must dare to break with convention and carry out 
our work creatively. We must implement fully the policies 
clearly defined by the central and provincial authorities; and 
dare to explore and carry out on an experimental basis these 
policies which have not been clearly defined but are conducive 
to the development of the productive forces. We must also boldly 
use the experience of the coastal areas in developing market 
economy. 
  (2) We must persistently uphold the theory that "only 
development is a valid reason." While subordinating ourselves to 
the macro-economic control exercised by the central authorities, 
we must try our best to invigorate the local economy; face up to 
the imbalance of the economic developments in different regions; 
and encourage those areas where economic development is fast to 
develop even faster. We must strive to maintain a fairly high 
speed in developing the national economy, and increase local 
revenues while taking the situation as a whole into 
consideration. Efforts must be made to readjust our economic 
structure and raise our economic efficiency; try to find some 
realistic new ways to develop our economy, expand our existing 
financial resources and open up and cultivate new financial 
resources. 
  (3) On the basis of the principle that we should carry out 
our reform safely and reliably, we must exert even greater 
efforts in developing the reform program in all fields. 
Particular efforts must be made to make breakthroughs in 
developing the local economy. We must work out a policy to 
coordinate with the major reform programs which the state wishes 
to develop with a faster speed. We should pay attention to the 
way the new structure replaces the old; and take the interests 
of all parties into consideration when the major reform program 
affects some parties with vested interests. 
  (4) We must handle well the relations among reform, 
development and stability; use the results of economic 
developments to judge the effects of the reform program; and 
list the task of maintaining stability as an important item in 
the government work. We should strive to create a good 
environment to carry out reform, and persistently "grasp two 
links at the same time and attach equal importance to both." We 
must make arrangements to do our government work well and in an 
overall manner; work for material progress and at the same time 
ethical progress and for economic progress and at the same time 
social progress. In the course of marching forward, we must 
timely discover and solve new problems, particularly those of a 
tendentious nature; guide and give full play to the enthusiasm 
of the broad masses of cadres and people. [passage omitted] 

