Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ahmad Kamal Hamdi: "Djibouti Opposition Leader </F>
Tells AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT: Government Refusing To Conduct Peaceful 
Dialogue, Insisting on One-Party System] 
  [Text] Bonn--Ahmed Dini Ahmed, former Djibouti prime 
minister and leader of the the opposition "Union and Democracy 
Front" in Djibouti, is on a visit to Germany. During his visit 
he met with a number of German Foreign Ministry officials in 
Bonn. He also visited a number of Arab and Islamic embassies 
and diplomatic missions there to explain political, 
constitutional, economic, and social conditions in Djibouti as 
well as the present situation in the Horn of Africa, especially 
after the international forces' withdrawal from Somalia, and the 
future of east African states. 
  In a statement to AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT, Ahmed Dini spoke about 
the ongoing civil war between the government and the opposition 
in Djibouti, pointing out that the opposition in his country 
started out peaceful, constitutional, and away from any aspects 
of violence. But it was forced to resort to the use of arms 
because it is impossible to reach an understanding with the 
government, which insists on establishing a one-party system, 
violating human rights, and implementing illegal random death 
sentences. 
  He added: 227 civilians have been executed in Djibouti so 
far. 
  Ahmed Dini Ahmed added: The opposition in Djibouti tried to 
open a dialogue with the government of President Hassan Gouled 
through the mediation of some Arab and other states, but the 
government rejected any peaceful dialogue and escalated military 
repressive measures. As a result, the opposition was forced to 
resort to fighting. Nevertheless, it is still looking for 
reasonable means to reopen a dialogue and initiate negotiation. 
  The Djibouti opposition leader, who headed the first 
independent government after independence in 1977, said that the 
opposition's aims are to establish a pluralistic, democratic 
system, to hold free and honest elections, to guarantee 
constitutional freedoms, to establish freedom of expression and 
the press, and to respect human rights. 
  Ahmed Dini Ahmed told AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT that he sensed from 
his contacts with officials in Bonn that Germany does not 
support the present regime in Djibouti because of its human 
right violations. And that the Federal Government has suspended 
its development aid to Djibouti since 1992, namely after the 
implication of the authorities and security men in the murder of 
54 oppositionists. 
  He said that Germany once offered the Djibouti Government a 
ferry for civilian use in Djibouti Port. But the government 
turned it into a military ship equipped with weapons and machine 
guns. When Djibouti refused to remove these weapons, Bonn 
announced the suspension of its financial, material, and 
security aid, keeping some development aid, especially in the 
area of water prospecting and irrigation and some agricultural 
development projects. 

