CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rachid Drif: "The Morals of the GIA"] </F>
  [Text] The files of the security services are overflowing 
with photographs that would have seemed surrealistic in other 
times. Dozens and dozens of photographs from investigations that 
will certainly never be made public. Pictures that no newspaper 
will ever publish. Men by the dozen decapitated, their throats 
slit like animals, covered with knife wounds, and with 
terrifying looks on their faces. Soldiers, police officers, 
government employees, foreigners, and citizens with their 
throats slit or their heads cut off to glorify religion and be 
absolved of past sins. It is "jihad": holy war seen by the amirs 
of the GIA [Armed Islamic Group] as a way of saving the Algerian 
people from worse calamities--a way of remaining faithful to the 
principles of the leaders of the Islamic Front and obeying the 
new scholars of religion who issue fatwas without ever dirtying 
their own hands. 
  It is those anonymous dead, whose names are being added 
every 
day to quickly forgotten lists, whom many Algerians--passive 
accomplices--know nothing about. 
<H5>  Islamists and the "Junta" </H5>
  Cherrati Yekhlef, the imam of El Harrach and founding member 
of the FIS [Islamic Salvation Front] who is now in prison, is 
still awaiting trial. He was one of the few influential members 
of Abassi's party to have issued communiques calling for calm 
during the confrontations in June 1991. 
  After the second round of balloting in the legislative 
elections was suspended early in 1992, he circulated, through 
the party's channels, one of the first fatwas authorizing a holy 
war using every means, including murder. Members of the FIS took 
the imam's "opinion" to be a party directive, and crime was 
therefore legalized by religion: by Islam. 
  Later, gang leaders such as Allal and Layada surrounded 
themselves with young muftis trained in Algerian schools. Those 
muftis authorized robbery, the murder of relatives and 
Islamists, and then a special rite: the slitting of throats. 
  Religion therefore justified organized crime without 
interference. No known Islamist and no imam, whether a member of 
the FIS or an accredited TV preacher, would denounce the murder 
of innocents and terrorism openly, the exceptions being Shaykh 
Zebda, who was threatened by the armed groups, and then Nahnah 
following the murder of Shaykh Bouslimani. 
<H5>  New Amir </H5>
  Sayeh Attia became the GIA's new leader following the death 
of Si Ahmed Murad, better known as Djaafar El Afghani. Attia was 
born in Ouled Hellal in Medea, his stronghold, in 1956. He is 
one of the 100 or so Islamist activists whose names appear on a 
list included by the National Gendarmerie in a rather unusual 
report. While cross checking general intelligence, the 
investigators--analysts from Darak--noticed something 
distinctive about many former FIS elected officials, leaders of 
armed groups, and virulent Islamists often living outside their 
native regions. They were the sons of harkis [Algerians who 
fought for France prior to Algeria's independence], and a list 
of them has been published in the newspaper EL WATAN. 
  Attia, alias "El Khan," alias "Younes," conducted his first 
big "operation" in March 1993. It was an attack on the Boughzoul 
barracks, and 18 soldiers were killed. Some of them had their 
throats slit. In Tamezguida, 12 Croats were murdered the same 
way, while the Muslims in the group were spared. 
  In Theniet El Had, the governor of Tissemsilt was murdered 
and part of his escort massacred. Attia was wounded during the 
shoot-out by police and gendarmes at the rear of the procession 
who had time to respond to the attack. He was later reported 
dead. To carry out the attack, he had requested assistance from 
two amirs in the GIA, Boukabous in Kedaria near Bouira and 
Kouider Benyahia, son of the "bachagha" of Abadia. The two amirs 
showed up with their respective groups. 
  Attia asserted his leadership and was in contact with 
Djaafar 
El Afghani, who covered the Algiers region while he stayed 
active in his native Medea. He married a 14-year-old girl whose 
father was sheltering the group from Tamezguida. The father was 
later arrested. After Djaafar's death, he became the national 
amir and took over the GIA. According to reliable sources, he 
recently sent emissaries to the leaders of the armed movement 
asking them to swear allegiance to him--the "baiaa" due the amir 
according to religious tradition. Three Islamists were 
contacted: Said Mekhloufi, former editor in chief of the FIS 
bimonthly EL MOUNQUID and head of Chebouti's former MIA [Armed 
Islamic Movement]; Redjam, boss of the front's emergency unit 
that was established in June 1991; and Moussa Kraouche, the 
Algerian Brotherhood's spokesman in France and a close associate 
of Rabah Kebir. They were the "heavyweight" groups in the 
underground FIS, fundamentalism, and the "djazzara". "General" 
Chebouti was not on the list, and his name no longer appears at 
all. 
  There are two opposing theories about him. A few months ago, 
a terrorist was arrested who said that the former follower of 
Bouyali had been seriously wounded, had died from his injuries, 
and had been buried by his next of kin. His grave cannot be 
found. But the security services are not ruling out the 
possibility that he is lying low for awhile and that he has left 
Algeria like Hattab, the man behind Merbah's murder. 
<H5>  From Jijel to Lambese </H5>
  The principal organizer of the escape from Batna Prison, a 
man named Messaoudi, was recently killed. The former head of the 
FIS Executive Bureau and amir of Zana El Beida (between Batna 
and Setif), he and his group had apparently organized the 
operation to free known activists and above all to rescue 
another, extremely dangerous amir. And in fact, the 65 prisoners 
on death row and the numerous prisoners serving life sentences 
did include members of the group headed by Hocine Abderrahim, 
who had made preparations for the attack on the airport; members 
of the group headed by Meliani and Lahrani, who both led the 
attack on "L'Amiraute"; and men convicted in connection with the 
Ksar El Hirane incident, in which five gendarmes had had their 
throats slit. 
  The amir whom the group was intent on freeing was Saoudi 
Mabrouk, who had been active in Kadiria near Bouira. Saoudi had 
lost his legs during an armed encounter, and the nurse who was 
taking care of him at Lambese was taken away by the armed group. 
Condemned to death three times, Saoudi had belonged to one of 
the most dangerous terrorist groups and was responsible for the 
murder of a Gendarmerie squad leader and of police officers in 
Lakhdaria during the events of June 1991 and for the theft of 
several hundred kilograms of explosives in Jijel in 1990. 
  The group responsible for the job in Jijel was one of the 
first MIA groups to be set up following the Mustapha Bouyali 
era. Its members have all made the headlines: Hattab, who has 
been a fugitive for four years; Allam, alias "Amir Nouh," who 
was condemned to death and executed; Bouabdellah, who escaped 
while being transferred from Serkadji to Lambese; Seddiki, a 
serial killer who escaped from the Blida Prison and was then 
killed; and Assameur, head of Tekfir Oua El-Hidjra. 
  Escapees from Lambese Prison were killed in Boumerdes and 
the 
Algiers region. As for the prisoners under a death sentence, 
they seem to have been taken in by Messaoudi's group before he 
was killed. They belong to various varieties and generations of 
Islamist terrorism and are a big danger because they can provide 
a link between tiny groups that have not been in contact with 
each other and have been operating independently. 

