BFN 

<F P=106> ["Standpoint" column: "Al Sa'ud Treason and Insolence!"] </F>
  [Text] Frankly, we were not surprised by the vindictiveness 
of the Saudi regime's foreign minister at the opening of the 
Gulf Cooperation Council [GCC] foreign ministers meeting when he 
referred to Iraqi attempts to split the council. We were also 
not astonished by his insolence when he called on the council to 
bar these Iraqi attempts, which only exist in his sick mind! 
  Indeed, we were not surprised or astonished by this clear 
persistence in pursuing the course of treason and subservience 
to the foreigner, or by this rabid desire to harm the Iraqi 
people and maintain the unjust blockade on them. How could we be 
surprised or astonished when we know more than anyone else the 
immensity of the crimes and treasons the Al Sa'ud regime has 
committed against Iraq and the entire Arab nation, and when we 
know how anxious and frightened this regime is about the future. 
It fears the return of a powerful, unified Iraq to resume its 
responsible pan-Arab role in the Gulf area and the entire Arab 
arena. 
  It seems the Saudi regime, which has been exposed on the 
political, economic, financial, local, Arab, and international 
levels and whose non-patriotic and anti-Arab practices have 
become known, is not ashamed to persuade other Gulf states to 
follow its example by pursuing the same policies and stands, 
that is, to disavow all values and principles of common cause 
and destiny and to oppose the good efforts and endeavors to lift 
the blockade on Iraq! 
  This little Qaynuqa'i [reference to early Arabian Jewish 
tribe of Qaynuqa'], this grandson of Mordechai, forgets that if 
not for Iraq and the Iraqi people's brave stand on the eastern 
flank of the Arab homeland for eight continuous years to stem 
the yellow Khomeynite wind, and if not for their generous 
sacrifices, there would not be a Saudi regime today, nor the 
GCC, palaces, flags, or rulers. But what can one say to those 
who have lost every characteristic of manhood, honor, and 
loyalty? 
  Once again, we say we were not surprised or astonished 
because we know that a small agent and a servile slave can only 
be his master's voice, repeating the words of his overlords in 
Washington and Tel Aviv, expressing their wishes and interests 
first and foremost. 
  Besides, an agent cannot be the master of others. He cannot 
impose his wish and trusteeship on others. The Saudi regime is a 
servile follower of the United States and the West, so how can 
he impose its authority and hegemony on other Gulf states? How 
can it ask them to obey its orders when they do not trust it and 
feel uneasy about its acts and behavior? Has the Saudi regime 
forgotten that it has occupied the Qatari al-Khufus border post, 
and that it is still threatening the security and stability of 
some of the Gulf states? 
  If the Saudi regime has the right to establish all types of 
relations with the Zionist entity, receive the representatives 
of Jewish councils in the United States and elsewhere, and 
violate the laws of the Arab boycott of Israel, why shouldn't 
the Gulf states have the right to establish relations with Arab 
Iraq and lift the blockade on it, when they know Iraq and its 
honorable pan-Arab stands in defense of the security, dignity, 
and stability of the Arab Gulf states. 
  Indeed, we were not, and will not be, surprised by the 
behavior of the Saudi regime and the statements of its 
officials, who have burned their Arab bridges and persisted in 
humiliation and disgrace. They can only breath the air of 
treason and servile subservience. True, the lowly are easy to 
humiliate; in fact, they enjoy being humiliated! 

