Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "According to Labor: Privatization Plans Are </F>
Delaying Regional Development Projects"] 
  [Text] Railway and construction labor leaders fear that 
plans to privatize the state-owned ENFE [National Railway 
Enterprise] and ENDE [National Electricity Enterprise] companies 
will in effect nullify the two major projects on which the 
citizens of Cochabamba are counting, leaving the region 
frustrated and mired in a postponement of indefinite duration. 
  Alarm was voiced this weekend when construction labor 
leaders 
sought explanations for the government's repeated failures to 
advance and fund the Misicuni multiple project, which has been 
brought to a virtual halt, because the government considers the 
approximately $280 million cost of the investment impossible to 
finance through international institutions. 
  Construction labor leaders, who look to this project to 
provide jobs for their members, have begun to fear that the 
government's excuses for avoiding implementation of the Misicuni 
project are related to the government's plan to privatize ENDE. 
  "The government does not want the state-owned enterprises to 
incur bigger debts with the international institutions, because 
this could impede the auctioning or the public tender process 
with respect to the enterprises it is administering, such as 
ENDE," said COD [Departmental Workers Federation] leader Pedro 
Espinosa. 
  The Misicuni multiple project repeatedly has been declared a 
priority by different administrations, but none of them has 
succeeded in funding its implementation. 
  The first objective of the Misicuni project is to supply 
potable water to the population of Cochabamba, and to enable, as 
concomitant projects, the installation of a hydroelectric plant 
and the piping of the remainder of the Misicuni's waters to farm 
irrigation projects. 
  According to railway labor leaders, the government will take 
no action to obtain financing not only of the Misicuni project 
but of other projects as well, such as the Aiquile Santa Cruz 
railway interconnection project. 
  The ENFE is also part of the government's privatization 
plans, and the government therefore has very little interest in 
seeking financing for the railway project. 
  According to studies made by Sondotecnica of Brazil as 
consultants, the railway interconnection project would cost 
approximately $1 billion, although last year, a preliminary 
study by a Japanese mission in connection with a possible 
variant in the original design reduced the estimated cost to 
around $500 million. 
  "The government is gradually losing interest in pushing 
regional development projects, because it has other plans in 
mind, such as the privatization of state-owned enterprises; and 
seeking financing at this point in time would be prejudicial to 
its plans," said railway labor leader Erwin Carvallo. 
  Both officials indicated that other projects of regional 
interest are also in limbo, with little probability of 
implementation during the term of this administration. 
  "Its privatization policy is for the moment impeding any 
thought of financing the regional development projects," they 
said. 

