Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Zagreb, Feb 22 (AFP) -- Relief convoys to Bosnia 
resumed on Tuesday after a break of two-and-a-half days, a 
spokesman for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Ron 
Redmond (eds: correct) said. 
  Several convoys left Metkovic in southern Croatia for 
central 
Bosnia on Tuesday morning and several more were scheduled to 
leave on Wednesday, he said. 
  The UNHCR's air lifts to Sajarevo also resumed on Tuesday, 
with a total of 27 humanitarian flights scheduled for the day, 
he added. 
  The UNHCR suspended relief to Bosnia on Saturday afternoon 
because of NATO threats to bomb Serb positions unless heavy 
artillery was withdrawn before the expiry of an ultimatum set 
for 0000 GMT Monday. 
  Redmond added that UNHCR staff who left Bosnia for safety 
reasons after the ultimatum had started going back, with some 
already back in Sarajevo after flying in early on Tuesday. 
  At UNHCR headquarters in Geneva, spokeswoman Christiane 
Berthiaume said the convoys from Metkovic included eight heading 
for Zenica, with the others travelling to Jablanica, Tuzla, and 
the Croatian and Moslem sectors of Mostar. Two further convoys 
were leaving Belgrade for Gorazde and Srebrenica. 
  Asked about the opening of Tuzla airport, which the Bosnian 
Serbs have been opposing, Berthiaume said it would be a major 
step, given the large number of displaced persons in that 
Moslem-majority part of Bosnia. The head of UN peacekeeping 
operations Kofi Annan has set March 7 as the date for opening 
the airport, closed since May l992. 
  The spokeswoman noted that last month the UNHCR could 
deliver 
only 1,800 tonnes of relief to Tuzla by road, whereas needs were 
estimated at 7,400 tonnes. 
  In Sarajevo, UN Protection Force (UNPROFOR) military 
spokesman Bill Aikman of Canada said 10 Danish Leopard tanks had 
reached the British Army base at Vitez in central Bosnia 
overnight and were continuing on to Tuzla to rejoin the rest of 
their battalion, which is to supervise the airport opening. 
  The tanks are the first heavy armour deployed in Bosnia by 
UNPROFOR. They were stuck in a Belgrade suburb for four months 
because of Serb objections, then did a roundabout rail journey 
through Hungary, Austria and Italy, to be shipped from Trieste 
to the Croatian port of Split, from where they set out on Monday. 

