BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on drug seizures and arrests related to drug trafficking 
monitored through 19 May. 
<H5>  Argentina </H5>
  On 12 May police personnel arrested two men carrying 6,000 
doses of LSD during a control operation at Ezeiza international 
airport. The drugs were hidden in 11 tablets distributed in 
small bags. This is the largest LSD seizure ever in Argentina. 
(Buenos Aires PAGINA/12 in Spanish 14 May 94 p 15) 
<H5>  Bolivia </H5>
  Lieutenant Colonel Ramiro Ortega Sequeiros, Mobil Rural 
Patrol Unit, Umopar, commander in Beni Department, reported on 4 
May that four people, including two alleged drug traffickers who 
are sought by the antidrug police, died on 29 April in the crash 
of a small plane. The accident occurred at the Loma Alta cattle 
ranch, northeast of San Joaquin in Mamore Province. The crew 
members were identified as pilot Erwin Revollo; Sergio Garcia, 
aka Pedro Combo; German Arias Rodriguez, aka Tres Patas; and his 
wife Rosa Antelo Suarez. (La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 7 May 94 
Section 2 p 3) 
  The Umopar commander in Beni, Ramiro Ortega, reported that 
an 
operation conducted in the township of La Orquilla, Itenez 
Province, Beni Department, showed that petty drug traffickers 
are gradually replacing the small light planes that carried the 
drugs from the Chapare region to the drug gathering centers in 
Beni and Pando Departments. They travel through forests and 
rivers that are not under rigorous control to the drug gathering 
centers, where they contact the buyers. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in 
Spanish 9 May 94 National Section p 1) 
  During an operation carried out last weekend in Oruro by 
members of the Special Antinarcotics Force, a total of 42 kg of 
cocaine paste were confiscated when a group of drug traffickers 
riding in a truck were intercepted on the Oruro-Pisagas highway 
on the Chilean border. As a result six drug traffickers were 
arrested. (La Paz Television Nacional in Spanish 0100 GMT 18 
May 94) 
<H5>  Brazil </H5>
  The largest opium byproduct seizure ever made in Brazil has 
allowed the federal police to discover a new international drug 
trafficking route. U.S. citizen Lisa Ruth Bell was arrested at 
Rio de Janeiro international airport carrying 12 kg of opium 
byproducts valued at $12 million. The drugs were hidden under 
the false bottom in her handbag and in bags tied to her body. 
The police have discovered that traffickers are using direct 
Bangkok-Rio de Janeiro flights to bring in the drugs, which are 
then shipped to the United States. Federal police specialists 
are analyzing the seizure to ascertain whether it involves 
heroin or morphine. (Rio de Janeiro Rede Globo Television in 
Portuguese 1600 GMT 17 May 94) 
<H5>  Paraguay </H5>
  National Narcotics Directorate personnel arrested two 
Brazilian citizens and seized more than 2 kg of very pure 
cocaine during a raid of an inn in the township of San Lorenzo. 
The detainees are Enrique Cespedes Leiges, 34, and Edson 
Pereira da Silva, 39. (Asuncion ABC COLOR in Spanish 13 May 94 p 
101) 
<H5>  Peru </H5>
  National Police personnel intercepted a motorboat carrying 
150 kg of cocaine paste during an operation on the Pozuzo River, 
in Izcozacin District, Oxapampa Province. The forces also 
arrested Manfredo Randolf Heindinger, 28; Santiago Ramos 
Naranjo, 28; Silvio Pelayo Cordero Alvarez, 21; Eulogio Guardia 
Robles, 22; Oligario Gomez Leandro, 47; Henry Blas Cierto, 20; 
Jucep Cespedes Justo, 36; Gumercinco Acosta Casimiro, 27; and 
Walter Raul Rojas Rodriguez, 30. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 11 
May 94 p A11) 
<H5>  Uruguay </H5>
  Dr. Augusto Duran Martinez, president of the National 
Antidrug Board, has reported that drug consumption has quickly 
spread in Uruguay, to the point that 10 percent of youths 
consume cocaine and 20 percent marijuana. (Montevideo LA MANANA 
in Spanish 10 May 94 p 3) 

