Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "In Their Words" column by "high-ranking" Thai </F>
Foreign Ministry official Darum Sukontasap: "Asean Security 
Talks Are a Tool for Prosperity"] 
  [Text] Next week, the Thai Foreign Ministry will host a 
Special Meeting of Asean Senior Officials (Special SOM). The 
significance of this meeting is that it will be the second time 
in almost two years that senior officials from Asean's foreign 
policy, military and intelligence establishments sit together, 
with a full agenda, to discuss ways and means through which 
Asean countries could enhance their security cooperation. The 
first Special SOM, which was held in Manila in June 1992, fell 
short of its intended goals and, this time, the Asean countries 
are hoping that the upcoming meeting will yield more concrete 
results. 
  Asean had from the late 1970s up to the early 1990s played a 
leading role in bringing the Cambodia conflict to the attention 
of the world community. The regional organization was also 
instrumental in the search for a durable solution to the 13 
year-old problem. Therefore, political cooperation was nothing 
new to the six-member grouping. In fact, critics often pointed 
out that Asean's strength had always been in political rather 
than economic cooperation, although the latter was the raison 
d'etre of the regional grouping when it was established in 1967. 
  However, in spite of Asean members' close cooperation in the 
political field, it was not until recently that Asean felt the 
need for a formal and exclusive framework for intra-Asean 
security consultation. The routine Asean Senior Officials 
Meetings (SOM), or the meetings of Permanent Secretaries for 
Foreign Affairs of Asean countries, which take place three or 
four times a year, discuss a wide variety of political-related 
subjects, ranging from regional political situation to economic 
relationship between Asean and third countries. Security 
issues, per se, are singled out for attention only when dictated 
by circumstances. 
  Therefore, the upcoming Special SOM in Bangkok represents 
Asean's new thinking. It signifies a clear departure from 
Asean's earlier insistence that, as a group, Asean will not 
venture into the military realm of regional cooperation. With 
the advent of the Special SOM, Asean military cooperation is no 
longer unimaginable. The question is: Does this mean that Asean 
may be in the process of transforming into a military bloc? To 
answer this question, we must first ask ourselves whether, in 
the prevailing regional atmosphere there is any need for a 
military bloc. The answer would most probably be in the 
negative. It would be anachronistic of Asean to even think 
about forming a military alliance of any sort. Asean security 
cooperation is necessary today not as an end in itself but as a 
tool for ensuring economic prosperity for the region. In order 
to secure a sustainable economic growth, countries of the region 
need trust, understanding, a predictable pattern of political 
and security relationships, as well as effective mechanisms 
through which regional disputes could be resolved quickly and 
peacefully. 
  Picking up where the first Special SOM left off, the Bangkok 
meeting will attempt to institutionalize the habit of security 
cooperation and dialogue among Asean countries. If successful, 
at the very least, more Special SOMs will follow on a more 
regular basis. 
  Influenced by the changing global security environment, the 
agenda of the second Special SOM would most likely evolve around 
two main questions: (a) How (and how far) can intra-Asean 
security cooperation be strengthened and (b) how should Asean 
deal with the metamorphosis of the current security 
configuration within the Asia-Pacific region? The answers for 
these questions would also help Asean countries prepare 
themselves for the grand event -- the Asean Regional Forum 
(ARF), which will be held in Bangkok in July of this year, 
following a meeting among the senior officials of ASEAN and 
other members of the ARF in Bangkok in May. 
  Both the Special SOM and the Asean Regional Forum are two 
important and complementing fora which could meaningfully 
contribute to Asean's effort in intensifying its internal and 
external dialogues on political and security issues. With the 
support of everyone concerned, they could serve to strengthen 
and promote political and security cooperation in the Southeast 
Asian region as well as help develop a more predictable and 
constructive pattern of political and security relationship for 
the Asia-Pacific region as a whole. 

