Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Philippe Massonnet] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, March 18 (AFP)--Japanese Prime Minister 
Morihiro Hosokawa will hike pressure on China this weekend, 
calling on North Korea's last remaining ally to exert every 
influence on Pyongyang to defuse the Korean nuclear crisis, 
sources said Friday. 
  Hosokawa -- who will be dangling a fat line of credit for 
the 
Chinese economy -- will be making the pitch at a critical stage 
in the unfolding crisis, coinciding with possible moves to press 
for UN sanctions against North Korea. 
  "I don't think that Hosokawa will go so far as to lobby the 
Chinese openly, but he is still likely to call on them to take 
concrete steps to make North Korea give in," an Asian diplomat 
in Beijing said. 
  A foreign ministry official in Tokyo confirmed Friday that 
Hosokawa would ask China to "do its best to persuade" Pyongyang 
to give up its suspected drive to build a nuclear bomb. 
  The expected moves come amid a new surge of tension in the 
Korean peninsula, after the International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA) revealed that its inspectors had again been barred from 
probing a suspect North Korean nuclear facility. 
  Pyongyang's refusal once more placed it at loggerheads with 
Washington, after a three-week lull that raised hopes for a 
negotiated solution to the year-old crisis. 
  The United States now says there is "no basis" for talks it 
had scheduled with North Korea on Monday that were part of the 
package deal. Analysts say the next steps could lead to U.S. 
lobbying for UN sanctions against Pyongyang for snubbing the 
world's nuclear watchdog. 
  Diplomats said Japan, like China a supporter of a 
non-confrontational approach on the crisis, would naturally turn 
towards Beijing for help, as China is the last big country with 
any friendly ties with Stalinist North Korea. 
  But China, they noted, is also loath to back sanctions as a 
UN Security Council member and said clearly on Wednesday it had 
no wish to be a "mediator" in the showdown with the North. 
  A key aim of the Hosokawa visit will be to sketch out the 
next phase in economic cooperation, including the renewal of a 
massive line of credit on which China has been drawing for its 
economic development. 
  Sources in Tokyo said China is likely to ask for credit of 
1.5 trillion yen (14.28 billion dollars) for the 1996-2000 
period, nearly twice the amount under the existing arrangement, 
which expires next year. 
  "Japan is reluctant to insist on progress on human rights, 
as 
the United States does, but will probably raise the issue when 
it comes to the loan renewal, and also insist on military 
transparency," an expert on East Asian affairs said. 
  An aide to Japanese Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata said here 
in January that Japan may cut the credit line if it considers 
China's military spending to be too great. 
  China's drive to modernise its armed forces, and 
declarations 
of sovereignty of small islands in the South China Sea, has 
alarmed several of its neighbours. 
  Last week, it announced that military spending would rise 
from 4.94 billion dollars in 1993 to 5.97 billion this year. 
  But Foreign Minister Qian Qichen on Wednesday insisted that 
China had no expansionist aims, had only hiked the military 
budget in line with inflation and in any case found it at a 
"derisory" level compared with that of Japan or the United 
States. 
  Other big economic topics are possible investments in China 
by Japanese firms and a scheme to build a high-speed train link 
between Beijing and Shanghai, a project that will no doubt draw 
huge competition from French and German firms. 
  Hosokawa, who will be making his first visit to China since 
taking office last August, will hold talks with Premier Li Peng, 
President and Communist Party General Secretary Jiang Zemin and 
Vice Premier Zhu Rongji, who is in charge of the economy. 

