BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 10 KYODO -- The Japanese Government 
Friday submitted to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) a 
statement calling the use of nuclear arms "contrary to the 
spirit of humanity." 
  But the statement of the government's view on the legality 
of 
using nuclear weapons in armed conflict was stripped of a phrase 
included in an earlier draft which had denied such use 
constitutes a violation of international law. 
  The ICJ or so-called World Court had called on U.N. members 
to submit "advisory opinions" on the legality of using nuclear 
weapons after the World Health Organization (WHO) in May 1993 
requested the court to decide whether or not nuclear warfare 
violates international law. 
  The government received a request from the ICJ last 
September 
to submit its written statement by Friday. 
  "The government believes that because of the immense power 
to 
cause destruction, death and injury to human beings, the use of 
nuclear weapons is clearly contrary to the spirit of humanity 
that gives international law its philosophical foundation," the 
Japanese statement said. 
  "Japan, the only nation that has suffered nuclear attack, 
considers that nuclear weapons must never be used," the 
statement said, according to Foreign Ministry officials. 
  It further noted that the government "firmly maintains" the 
country's three nonnuclear principles -- not possessing, not 
producing and not introducing nuclear weapons into Japanese 
territory. 
  Japan, it said, "will always strive to promote nuclear 
disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation with a view to 
achieving the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons." 
  The government had intended to submit a paper which said the 
use of nuclear arms technically does not violate international 
law but decided to delete the phrase after strong criticism from 
opposition parties and from victims of the atomic bombings of 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 
  Foreign Minister Koji Kakizawa was quoted as telling the 
mayors of the two cities in a meeting Thursday that "It is 
difficult to affirm (the use of nuclear arms is) a complete 
violation when thinking about the reality of international 
politics." 
  The dispute was further aggravated by timing as the standoff 
over North Korea's alleged development of nuclear weapons is at 
a highly sensitive stage with the possibility of U.N. sanctions 
looming. 

