Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] KURD-A/Botan -- Noting that this year Nevruz's 
active resistance will be mostly executed by the guerrillas, the 
PKK [Kurdish Workers Party] called on the people not to go into 
the streets, refrain from going to work, and celebrate Nevruz in 
their homes. The PKK indicated that mass and radical activities 
could also be held where conditions permit, but such activities 
must only be held with the support of ERNK [National Liberation 
Front of Kurdistan] and ARGK [People's Liberation Army of 
Kurdistan]. 
  A statement signed by the PKK Central Committee and 
distributed in Kurdistan noted that Nevruz, which has centuries 
of tradition in uprisings, is now being celebrated by the 
Kurdish people under new conditions. The statement noted that 
Nevruz played a historic role in protecting the national 
existence in Kurdistan and, particularly in recent years, it has 
become a means of resurgence of the national liberation struggle 
under the guidance of PKK. 
  Noting that "1994 Nevruz is being welcomed by endeavors to 
freely reconstitute our country" and that the present stage is 
one of securing a political and military balance between the 
state and the PKK, the PKK statement says: "In some parts of 
our country this balance has been achieved and many areas are 
under the control of our armed forces. The Turkish Republic's 
political authority was considerably eroded with the recent 
decision to boycott the elections. As a result of heavy 
losses, particularly in 1993 and the winter months, the Turkish 
Army has gradually retreated into the cities. The PKK has 
started to create free areas and administrations in places 
cleared of Turkey's fascist Army. Parallel with efforts to 
develop active warfare against the enemy, work is going ahead on 
setting up a National Assembly and provincial assemblies, 
electing leaders, and forming a war economy as a foundation for 
a people's regime." [passage omitted] 
  Pointing out that the 1994 Nevruz is being marked under very 
different circumstances, the statement says: "Nevruz, which is 
historically the source of our freedom and strength and which 
fulfilled its appropriate role every year with the blood of 
hundreds of martyrs, will also play its deserving role this 
year, on which we have pinned great hopes, and will glorify the 
resurgence in 1994. Nevruz will again be celebrated with all the 
splendor. This year Nevruz's independence and freedom fire will 
enlighten our cities and mountains. Our people will welcome 
Nevruz with the excitement and joy of the gradual establishment 
of the people's rule in Kurdistan. But Nevruz will be celebrated 
differently this year. This year's Nevruz celebrations will be 
in the form of a Kurdistan-wide mass protest of the massacres, 
violence, village torchings, and antidemocratic actions 
committed by the Turkish Republic through special warfare and 
stealthy methods. The fascist colonialism -- which is torching 
our country without restraint, refuses to recognize any of our 
national-democratic rights, and prefers to resort to bloodshed 
-- will be countered by a wide-scale protest action. 
  "In accordance with our party's decision, on Nevruz everyone 
should dress in national customs and mark our historic holiday 
in their homes, not go into the streets, and not open shops. As 
in every other year, the freedom fires should be lighted on 
Nevruz night; with the sunrise no one should appear in the 
streets but instead celebrate Nevruz at home. The 1994 Nevruz 
celebrations should, in general, be in this form of mass 
protest, but where conditions allow it could be celebrated in 
the form of radical mass actions. However, such celebrations 
should be held under ERNK guidance and with the knowledge of the 
guerrilla force. On the war front, the guerrillas with the 
greater potential will launch even more comprehensive attacks 
against the enemy forces during this Nevruz and will not allow 
the treacherous circles to soil our sacred Nevruz. It will be 
the guerrilla force that will primarily execute the active 
resistance this Nevruz; the Nevruz resistance will resurge all 
over Kurdistan with guerrilla activities that will be further 
developed and expanded during the week of heroism to follow the 
Nevruz holiday. The 1994 Nevruz will be marked in such an 
appropriate manner on both fronts [civilian and military] and it 
will be made to play its historical role in harmony with the 
stage attained by our national liberation struggle." 

