Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dr 'Ali-Reza Nuri-Zadeh: "Rafsanjani's Latest </F>
Battle With Khomeyni's Heirs"] 
  [Text] About four months ago, the well-known hardline 
newspaper SALAM published a front-page article under the 
headline "The Huge Financial Scandal in Italy is Spreading 
Beyond Its Borders." The article contained an explanation of the 
secret commercial deals between Italian companies well-known for 
their connections to the Mafia and foreign countries, among them 
Iran, and the volume of commissions paid to some of the 
officials of the countries doing business with those companies. 
SALAM indicated that a prominent official of the Iranian 
National Oil Company in the Shah's day served as a middleman 
between an Italian company and the Ministry of Petroleum to 
build the new Bandar 'Abbas refinery in return for several 
million dollars. After the publication of the SALAM report this 
past 12 May, President Hashemi-Rafsanjani ordered one of his 
advisers to conduct an investigation into what the newspaper had 
published, and asked the Minister of Islamic Guidance Dr. 'Ali 
Larijani to issue a press directive to the editors in chief of 
all publications for them not to print any news or report 
containing any reference to the subject of the commissions. 
About two months later, the president's adviser submitted a 
comprehensive report on the press report and the parties that 
had been behind its publication. 
  According to a source close to the presidency, the report of 
President Rafsanjani's adviser was extremely provocative. It 
made it clear that there were some hardliners with highly placed 
positions in the ruling structure, particularly in the economic 
and financial institutions, who with the help of agents and 
middlemen, had been able to amass great wealth by making 
commercial deals with large European and American companies, and 
obtaining huge commissions. The report revealed the involvement 
of a former employee of the Islamic Consultative Council and 
former adviser to the Minister of Post, Telegraph &amp; 
Telephone, 
and an Italian national who had been a doorman at the Italian 
Embassy in Tehran, in a massive scam. It also indicated that 
they had set up a corporation in Europe to fund newspapers and 
publications opposed to the policies of the government in Iran. 
The report did not rule out that SALAM was one of the papers 
enjoying the financial and political support of that corporation. 
<H5>  The Newspaper Funding Corporation </H5>
  While the news of the arrest of SALAM's editor in chief, 
Engineer 'Abbas 'Abdi, on August 26, was a surprise for most 
Iranians, those close to the presidency took the news with 
complete calm. 'Abdi's name had come up several times before his 
arrest, in the meetings held at the presidency to discuss the 
activity and moves of the students following the line of the 
imam group, and those calling themselves hardliners, and the 
scope of their involvement in financial and administrative 
corruption, and the misuse of positions to acquire wealth. In 
fact, the investigations of President Rafsanjani's adviser 
entrusted with looking into the SALAM article on financial 
scandals, confirmed that Engineer 'Abbas 'Abdi had connections 
with a person known as H.B., now detained by Iran's security 
authorities. He was one of the participants in the corporation 
for funding newspapers opposed to the government. The imprisoned 
person, who had been a translator for the Ministry of Petroleum 
and the Iranian Majles, confessed that his partners were using 
the money that they had obtained through commercial deals with 
foreign companies in the field of stirring up public opinion 
against Rafsanjani's government, and spreading despair and 
misery among the people. The revolutionary public prosecutor has 
not yet disclosed, however, whether or not Engineer 'Abdi will 
be tried for violating the publishing and press code or for 
having defamed the president and ministers, or whether he will 
face charges unrelated to his mission. However, Mohammad 
Musavi-Kho'iniha, the director of SALAM, and spiritual leader of 
the students following the line of the imam, who held the 
American democrats hostage in Iran in 1979, believes that the 
arrest of 'Abdi occurred after SALAM began to defend the values 
and sacrosanct principles of the revolution, and refused to 
bargain over what 'Abdi and his colleagues considered to be the 
unchangeable principles of the revolution. 
  In an interview with SALAM, the paper's director, Kho'iniha, 
said that the arrest of its editor in chief was an illegitimate 
act and represented a clear violation of the publications law. 
He added that he was himself responsible for what SALAM had 
published recently about Ayatollah Montazeri, and comments about 
him, and THAT the criticisms of President Rafsanjani's economic 
programs, and his recent Friday prayer sermon, were the reason 
for Abdi's arrest. 
  SALAM published, in its August 30 issue, an article about 
the 
way Engineer 'Abdi was arrested, saying that security men broke 
into his house, and threatened his wife, saying that she must be 
silent and not interfere with the process of enforcing the law, 
then bound 'Abdi's hands and took him to an unknown place. It is 
notable that 'Abdi's arrest coincided with the arrest of Mehdi 
Nasiri, the editor in chief of the mass-circulation KEYHAN, on 
the charge of defaming the top judicial authority, Ayatollah 
Mohammad Yazdi, although judicial authorities freed him after 
just one day in return for a financial guarantee, while 'Abdi's 
detention by the central security agency has continued without 
any announcement of the reasons for his arrest. 
<H5>  The Postponed Struggle </H5>
  The question now in Iranian politics is: is Rafsanjani 
actually determined to end the role of the extremists by 
arresting two of their senior figures? And has the struggle 
begun, which was expected to break out after Khomeyni's death, 
between those who want to turn the revolution into an actual 
form of government, and those who believe in the continuity of 
the revolution, and the ongoing revolution. 
  In order to answer this question, we must first get to know 
the parties to the struggle in Iran and sketch a clear picture 
of the governing structure today and the system Rafsanjani 
wants, and who would implement it with him. 
  Since the death of Khomeyni, there has been mounting talk in 
the Western press about the wings competing for power in Iran. 
These newspapers generally point out that there is a wing led by 
Rafsanjani--the pragmatists--that seeks reconciliation with the 
West, the rebuilding of the Iranian economy, and the restoration 
of Iran's rightful place in the region and the world. This 
faction is in constant conflict with the hardline wing led by 
former Interior Minister 'Ali Akbar Mohtashemi, who formed an 
alliance with former speaker of the Majles Mehdi Karrubi, former 
public prosecutor Mohammad Musavi-Kho'iniha, director of the 
Strategic Studies Center, and director of SALAM. The Western 
press considers Ahmad Khomeini to be the major supporter of this 
movement, while the position of the leader of the revolution 
'Ali Khamene'i is still unclear. Sometimes he supports 
Rafsanjani and at others announces his support for the 
hardliners. 
  This asessment of what is occurring in the corridors of 
power 
in Iran since the death of Khomeyni is oversimplified, lacking 
sufficient evidence, first of all, for the true reasons for the 
conflict, and secondly, the truth behind the loyalties of those 
considered to be pragmatists, and those known as hardliners. 
<H5>  The Moderate and the Hardliner </H5>
  Khomeyni himself was a hardliner and a moderate at the same 
time. He was hardline with his enemies, and those who dared to 
criticize his actions (Shari'atmadari, Qotbzadeh, Bani-Sadr); 
but Khomeyni did not believe in the economic solutions the 
hardliners are now proposing (the system of allotment and the 
whole socialist path). In his writings, Khomeyni constantly 
affirmed the need to safeguard Muslims' wealth, oppose land 
reform and the nationalization of the private sector, despite 
the fact that the revolutionary authorities confiscated the 
money and property of more than 2 million Iranians after the 
revolution. 
  The Assembly of Experts granted Khomeyni's powers, after his 
death, to his successor 'Ali Khamene'i, at the same time raising 
the latter's religious standing to ayatollah, although Khamene'i 
was young (compared to most senior ayatollahs in Iran, whose 
ages range from 80 to 100). The fact that there were dozens of 
clergymen who were more knowledgeable and qualified than he in 
the Majles and heading up government institutions, caused the 
Islamic leader of the revolution to have a lack of weight and 
importance versus the mounting strength of the power centers 
that Khomeyni had been able to destroy with a mere gesture of 
his hand. Khamene'i was forced to include them in his decision 
making in order to hold onto his position. This is how the 
leader of the revolution has, since Khomeyni's death, moved to 
the left in the morning and to the right at night, trying to 
please everyone. This was at a time when Rafsanjani needed 
legitimate cover for carrying out his reform projects. Given the 
two-track position of the leader of the revolution, Rafsanjani's 
opponents were able to form powerful blocs in Majles, the 
mosques, and universities, and in some of the revolution's 
institutions, such as the Revolution Guards and the Basij 
(volunteers). While Rafsanjani succeeded in the Majles elections 
held last year, in keeping some of the figures of the powers 
opposed to him out of the Majles, but the hardline forces have 
kept their other power bases. 
  A glance at the position and possibilities of some of the 
pillars of the anti-Rafsanjani movement reveals the reasons for 
the Iranian president's failure to achieve his ambition to 
transform the revolution into a state and implement his reform 
programs. 
  1. Hojjat ol-Eslam Ahmad Khomeyni, Khomeyni's son, is a 
member of the National Security Council, representing the leader 
of the revolution. He is also a member of the committee for 
identifying the interests responsible for solving disputes 
between the executive authority (the government) and Majles. He 
manages a financial empire from Jamaran, in northern Tehran, and 
directs his father's complex, which has become a major economic, 
religious, touristic, and cultural complex, bringing Ahmad 
Khomeini profits estimated at millions of dollars annually. 
  2. Ayatollah Mehdi Karrubi, former speaker of the Majles and 
the Shahid Institute, who has great influence in broad sectors 
of the Guard, and the wounded and handicapped from the war. His 
wife still heads up the health department of his famous 
institute. 
  3. Former Interior Minister Hojjat ol-Eslam 'Ali Akbar 
Mohtashemi, and director of the magazine BAYAN. Although he is 
banned from travel, his contacts with revolutionary forces 
outside Iran are ongoing. Last month, and during a visit of 
Hezbollah leaders to Iran, security authorities revealed that 
senior Hezbollah leaders visited Mohtashemi and spoke to him for 
several hours. 
  4. Hojjat ol-Eslam Mohammad Musavi-Kho'iniha, public 
prosecutor and leader of the last pilgrimage [to Mecca], 
director of the Strategic Studies Center, adviser to the leader 
of the revolution, and spiritual guide to the students following 
the line of the imam. Bear in mind that 30 of the students that 
took part in the captivity of the American diplomats now hold 
high-level positions in the Iranian diplomatic service, among 
them Assistant Foreign Minister Hosein Sheikholislam. 
  5. Ayatollah 'Ali Meshkini, leader of the Assembly of 
Experts 
that is responsible for choosing the commander and Islamic 
leader, or removing him; he also has the power to amend the 
constitution. 
  6. Former Minister of Intelligence Hojjat ol-Eslam Mohammad 
Mohammadi Reyshahri, Meshkini's son-in-law, leader of the 
Iranian pilgrimage mission, and Khamene'i's representative. 
These people have dozens of followers in the Majles, the Guard, 
government departments, and Iranian embassies abroad. 
  It is said that one of Rafsanjani's advisers on national 
security and Majles deputy Dr. Mohammad Javad Larijani, every 
time he approaches Rafsanjani on settling a problem, whether 
dealing with the opposition, or with Western countries, or the 
economic ills, we see secret forces move quickly to foil them. 
So far, these forces have been able to prevent the attainment of 
any positive change in the method of governing. 
  Has Rafsanjani actually begun his final war against these 
centers of power? AL-MAJALLAH's sources in the Iranian capital 
indicate that the summoning of Musavi-Kho'iniha by the public 
prosecutor's office to give evidence before judges, with the aim 
of hearing the complaints against him, represents a turning 
point in Rafsanjani's method of dealing with his foes. The 
outcome of Kho'iniha's trial, of Engineer 'Abdi and of the 
hardline KEYHAN's editor in chief Mehdi Nasiri, will make clear 
whether the Iranian president is determined to expel Khomeyni's 
heirs from power for good, or whether secret forces will again 
move to save Kho'iniha and his partners, to show that the 
revolution goes on--and that it is Rafsanjani who must back his 
bags and get off the revolutionary train. 


