CSO 

<F P=106> [Text of decree of the presidium of the Republic of </F>
Tatarstan Supreme Soviet "On the Practice of Applying the 
Republic of Tatarstan Laws on Administrative Responsibility"] 
  [Text] After hearing and discussing the report of the 
minister of internal affairs of the Republic of Tatarstan, I. G. 
Galimov, and the information presented by the procurator of the 
Republic of Tatarstan, S. Kh. Nafiyev, and the chairman of the 
Republic of Tatarstan Supreme Soviet Commission on Legality, Law 
and Order, and Human Rights and Privileges, R. G. Vagizov, on 
the practice of applying the Republic of Tatarstan laws on 
administrative responsibility; the presidium of the Republic of 
Tatarstan Supreme Soviet notes that the Republic of Tatarstan 
laws "On Administrative Responsibility for Violating Public 
Order and Administrative Order," "On Administrative 
Responsibility for Violating the Rules of Traffic, Operation and 
Storage of Transport, and Maintenance of the Road and Street 
System and Technical Means for Organizing Traffic," "On 
Administrative Responsibility for Legal Offenses in the Sphere 
of the Preservation of Property, Monetary Capital, and 
Securities Which Are State or Municipally Owned," and "On 
Administrative Responsibility for Violating the Rules for 
Acquiring, Storing, and Using Firearms and Gas Weapons, 
Ammunition, and Aerosol Packaging" adopted in May 1993 to 
fulfill the State Comprehensive Program To Fight Against Crime 
in the Republic of Tatarstan in 1993-1995, despite the overall 
short effective period, have helped prevent crimes and other 
legal offenses and strengthen legality and law and order. 
  The application of Article 1 of the Republic of Tatarstan 
Law 
"On Administrative Responsibility for Violating Public Order and 
Administrative Order," which establishes administrative 
responsibility for failure, within a month's time, to execute an 
administrative penalty in the form of a fine and its 
substitution with administrative arrest, which helped realize 
the principle of inevitability of punishment and increase 
citizens' responsibility, yielded definite results. 
  When the Republic of Tatarstan Law "On Administrative 
Responsibility for Violating the Rules of Traffic, Operation and 
Storage of Transport, and Maintenance of the Road and Street 
System and Technical Means for Organizing Traffic" went into 
effect on the republic's territory, transport discipline rose 
substantially, the number of road and transport accidents with 
serious consequences stopped rising, and the number of accidents 
due to drivers who were not sober declined. 
  In connection with the adoption of the Republic of Tatarstan 
Law "On Administrative Responsibility for Legal Offenses in the 
Sphere of the Preservation of Property, Monetary Capital, and 
Securities Which Are State or Municipally Owned," the internal 
affairs organs of the Republic of Tatarstan inspected 9,927 
installations for technical reinforcement, alarm systems, and 
preservation of physical assets. 
  The adoption and application of this Law was positively 
reflected in the preservation of physical assets and the 
increased responsibility of managers of enterprises, 
organizations, and institutions. For the first time in the last 
several years, the number of thefts of state property declined 
by 11.2 percent. 
  But the following shortcomings were identified during the 
realization of the Republic of Tatarstan laws: 

  -  the proper application of all these laws and monitoring of 
their performance have not been organized in all cities and 
regions of the republic. Thus, for example, Article 1 of the Law 
"On Administrative Responsibility for Violating Public Order and 
Administrative Order" was poorly utilized in the cities of 
Naberezhnyye Chelny, Zainsk, Leninogorsk, Menzelinsk, and Agryz 
and in Alkeyevskiy, Atninskiy, and Kaybitskiy rayons; 
  -  the impossibility of bringing people to account for failure, 
within a month's time, to fulfill an administrative penalty in 
the form of a fine and its substitution with administrative 
arrest based on other laws, with the exception of the Republic 
of Tatarstan Law "On Administrative Responsibility for Violating 
Public Order"; 
  -  the absence of the possibility of applying less of a 
punishment 
than the lowest level set, which removes the possibility of a 
differentiated approach to administrative offenses and 
accordingly reduces the preventive effect of their use. 


    The Republic of Tatarstan Supreme Soviet presidium 
decrees the following: 
  1. Take under consideration the report of the Republic of 
Tatarstan minister of internal affairs, I. G. Galimov, and the 
information presented by the procurator of the Republic of 
Tatarstan, S. Kh. Nafiyev, and the chairman of the Republic of 
Tatarstan Supreme Soviet Standing Commission on Legality, Law 
and Order, and Human Rights and Privileges, R. G. Vagizov. 
  2. The Republic of Tatarstan Supreme Soviet Commission on 
Legality, Law and Order, and Human Rights and Privileges must do 
the following: 

  -  continue work on summarizing the practice of applying the 
Republic of Tatarstan laws on administrative responsibility, and 
report on the results of that work based on 1994 outcomes at a 
meeting of the Republic of Tatarstan Supreme Soviet presidium; 
  -  submit a draft of the Republic of Tatarstan Code "On 
Administrative Offenses" for the Republic of Tatarstan Supreme 
Soviet presidium to study in the third quarter of 1994, taking 
into account the practice of the application of current 
administrative legislation and the proposals made. 


    3. Make a recommendation to the republic mass information 
media to conduct explanatory work on the laws adopted and on 
coverage of the practice of their application. 
  4. The deputy chairman of the Republic of Tatarstan Supreme 
Soviet, A. P. Lozovyy, is charged with monitoring the 
fulfillment of this Decree. 
  Chairman of the Republic of Tatarstan Supreme Soviet, F. 
Mukhametshin. 
  City of Kazan 5 May 1994 

