BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Let Us Act Now as Committed Protagonists of the </F>
Accorded Policy"] 
  [Text] The accord reached at the recent special session of 
our National Assembly contains the fitting policy which we have 
chosen to mend the domestic finances and eliminate currency 
excesses, which today, as we all know, is the obstacle we have 
to overcome to reorganize and foster our economic development. 
  This policy, which ought to help to put behind us the 
current 
crisis and move ahead, took shape mainly thanks to the debates 
of the Parliaments in the Workplace. 
  Therefore, Cuban workers have been the main protagonists of 
this accord. The accord contains the essence of the main 
proposals, concerns, and points of view expressed in those broad 
and democratic debates. The ultimate goal of this policy is to 
defend the interests of the workers and the workers' 
revolutionary government and their accomplishments in every 
field. 
  This is why it is the duty of the Cuban workers, 
particularly 
our working class, now to play an unparalleled leading role in 
implementing this policy. 
  This is the beginning, as Comrade Fidel pointed out so well, 
of the most difficult part of this effort. It will require the 
understanding and support of all the people, timely information, 
and much discipline and determination. It will also require 
rigorous order in implementing the measures and the necessary 
time so that the government and the entities of the state 
involved can make decisions and organize its implementation. 
This is not a one-day thing but a long process linked to other 
economic, organizational, labor, and salary steps. It relies on 
every workplace's resolute commitment to work harder and more 
efficiently. 
  The significant step that has been taken encourages all of 
us. It is important, however, not to harbor false hopes. While 
consistent implementation of the accorded policy will help 
reactivate the economy in the medium and long term, it does not 
mean that the country will have more resources, food, medicine, 
raw materials, fuel, electricity, or transportation available in 
the short term. 
  We must keep in mind that we are beginning a program to mend 
domestic finances, the results of which, as has been said, will 
not be felt in the short term nor right away. 
  It is important to note that we will be implementing this as 
the U.S. Government continues to impose its cruel and ironclad 
blockade on us. The blockade has already cost over $41 billion. 
Figures indicate that the blockade, last year alone, deprived 
us of 40 percent of the hard currency we could have accrued with 
the existing level of production and exports. 
  We will implement this policy and the unavoidable groundwork 
to attain our remaining goals in the midst of the harsh 
conditions which our country faces following the abrupt loss of 
the market and favorable prices secured from the former USSR and 
the countries of the European socialist bloc for Cuban sugar, 
nickel, citrus crops, and other products. It is a known fact 
that that brutal blow diminished our import capacity from $8.2 
billion in 1989 to less than $2 billion in 1993. 
  In other words, we must solve the excess currency problems 
within Cuba's current conditions with barely 23 percent of the 
resources that were available four years ago, without foreign 
credits for development, and upholding the principles of human 
solidarity and justice which have guided our steps at this 
difficult junction of the special period. None of these 
realities will be immediately changed by the steps we are taking 
and will take. 
  Of course, by revaluing salaries and gradually recovering 
the 
Cuban peso's purchasing power, the current policy will serve to 
encourage work, labor discipline, and productive efficiency. Its 
most immediate effect, however, will be on the currency in 
circulation and not production. This will not result in 
resources being more available in the short term. 
  We must also be aware that we will be heading toward a 
period in which this policy will cause more sacrifices in the 
family's economy, meaning more expenses and cash payments, 
without the simultaneous possibility of restoring the levels of 
material consumption, electricity, and transportation needed. 
  Once again, the virtue of implementing this accord does not 
lie in freeing us of those inevitable sacrifices but in laying 
the groundwork to make the sacrifices more effective and to 
yield what we want. 
  Take the case of energy: The country needs to spend at least 
$800 million a year to provide the nearly 6 million tons of fuel 
that we use today, less than half of what we had available four 
years ago. This means that we invest nearly half of all the 
hard currency in energy reources. If we consider the fact that 
the country needs to allocate at least another $500 million to 
import food and considerable -- though insufficient -- amounts 
for medicine, raw materials, materials, and key equipment, like 
spare parts and components to maintain the thermoelectric plants 
and the distribution network, we can clearly see that it is 
impossible to think of having more electricity or more 
transportation services today. 
  Our sugar fields would need at least $54 million in 
fertilizer this year to be able to increase the yield and to 
accelerate the sugar industry's recovery. Yet, the country will 
only be able to allocate 24 percent of the resources to this 
end, which will be allocated following a very strict criteria of 
efficiency. Producing vegetables, tubers, and cattle requires a 
minimum of $136 million in fertilizer, pesticides, seeds, and 
other basic products. These are only a few basic examples. 
Similar difficulties and shortages of resources prevail in all 
other economic sectors. 
  It is essential for the workers to be well informed and 
aware 
of the nature of the problems we face so that they can avoid 
false expectations and can firmly support the idea that only 
with more work and efficiency -- with an increase in tireless 
efforts to realize the production potential in every factory, 
workshop, or farm -- can we ease the harsh consequences of the 
special period. 
  The assemblies for efficiency that we have started as a 
means 
to give continuity to the spirit and method of the workers' 
parliament need to be an efficient tool to keep progressing in 
that direction. 
  The goal is to fully utilize a new method that will 
strengthen the unity of the workers, the administration, and 
union and political leaders in the search for the most adequate 
ways to: reduce subsidies and costs; employ the labor force 
rationally; guarantee strict control of material and financial 
resources; take care of the food and service needs of the 
workplace; increase discipline; and demand efficiency in all 
productive, teaching, scientific, and service endeavors. 
  These assemblies are committed to offering substantial 
economic contributions in a systematic and stable way, thus 
contributing decisively to revaluing the salary and our national 
currency. 
  The fact that our National Assembly has pointed to the 
importance of those assemblies in its historic accord and has 
advised the representatives, provincial and municipal delegates, 
and the popular councils to get closely involved with them is 
more than an acknowledgement. It is a reason for commitment 
that should motivate us to ensure that these assemblies are 
conducted with the highest quality. 
  In the same sense, we could say something similar of the 
guidelines issued by the government's leadership to the 
ministers and leaders of the organizations of the state central 
administration and to the presidents of the provincial 
administrative councils. 
  Our government, on behalf of all the people, now has the 
complex and sensitive mission of steering and executing the 
program of measures that it deems appropriate. With the 
intelligence, perseverance, serenity, and courage that 
characterizes our political and administrative leadership, 
everything necessary will be done to solve the problems without 
falling short and to guarantee the Revolution's strategic course. 
  This does not mean in any way that the role of the workers 
and their unions will diminish. On the contrary, the 
mobilization, support, creative initiative, and political 
strength of the working class and the people will be more 
important and decisive than ever. 
  This is the Revolution of the workers, as Fidel has 
reiterated, and we have gathered here to adopt those measures 
that will help save the Revolution of the workers. 
  Let us work so that these assemblies prove to be useful 
opportunities to evaluate how our daily efforts toward 
efficiency are progressing, to discuss new proposals that we can 
put into practice, to clear misunderstandings and doubts among 
the workers, and to exercise, after all, our indeclinable 
prerogatives as the owners of the means of production. 
  Let us turn this first assembly for efficiency into a forum 
where we clearly express the workers' and the Cuban union 
movement's support for the policies that, in an exemplary, 
democratic, and participative way, we just drafted and, in a 
very special way, for the measures issued by our Council of 
State toward expropriating the ill-gotten goods hoarded by the 
speculators and thieves who in a despicable way work to build 
fortunes from the shortages and sufferings of the people. 
  All the patriotism, all the capacity for struggle, all the 
spirit of combat of the workers: To support as a single man our 
government, the Revolution, and Fidel in the heroic effort to 
overcome the present difficulties and move ahead with the 
honorable flags of the free, nonrelinquishable, just, and 
socialist fatherland. 
  [The following notice accompanies this editorial: "The text 
of this editorial will be read at the beginning of the 
Assemblies for Economic Efficiency, which will be held in every 
workplace nationwide beginning 16 May."] 

