BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Russian Federation Defense Minister Army </F>
General Pavel Grachev by military observer Viktor Badurkin; date 
and place not given: "The Army: Duty and Debts"] 
  [Text] [Badurkin] Pavel Sergeyevich, the events of recent 
weeks -- the Black Sea conflict, the "games" with NATO, the 
spring draft, and the parliamentary hearings -- have intensified 
readers' interest in the Russian Army, its problems and 
concerns. Let us talk about how they are to be resolved, and 
what awaits our Army in the future. 
  [Grachev] Your fellow journalists often reproach me with the 
fact that military reforms are proceeding slowly and that very 
little is changing in the Army. Leaving aside their blatant 
malevolence, I agree with many serious and well-supported 
criticisms. I also want the painful process of shaping and 
reforming the Russian Armed Forces to be over and done with as 
quickly as possible. But wishes are one thing, and real 
possibilities are quite another. After all, we have to change 
the Armed Forces' structure and recruitment system, make 
reductions, withdraw our troops from abroad, rehouse them in the 
Motherland, constantly maintain combat effectiveness at the 
proper level, and resolve a host of legislative and social 
questions -- all at the same time. And all this with funding 
that it is more than modest. So that we have plenty of headaches. 
  Just look at the effort involved in the reduction alone -- 
by 
almost one-third. We have "pulled" back to Russia from abroad 
around 140 units and combined formations numbering 280,000 men. 
These are not just figures -- they represent human destinies, 
homelessness, lack of facilities, grievances, and 
disappointments.... 
  [Badurkin] And, as a consequence, a fall in the prestige of 
military service even in the officer corps.... 
  [Grachev] Naturally. Those who remain in the Army today are 
people who are are serving the Fatherland not for money but, so 
to speak, for the idea, in response to a spiritual urge. The 
monetary pay and allowances even of a senior officer who has 
spent 10 years in the garrisons is half that of a Moscow 
trolleybus driver. A fighter pilot earns a sixth of what a 
civil aviation pilot earns. And this despite the fact that in 
recent years both legislators and the government have been 
trying to meet the Army's needs halfway. The material situation 
of our officers, NOC's and enlisted men is in no way comparable 
with the income of servicemen in other countries -- including 
countries which are significantly behind Russia on the economic 
level. Though in Russia, if you recall history, the level of 
material support of "state people" has in all times been high 
enough. 
  The same applies to apartments. Last year we failed to meet 
the quota for commissioning apartment blocks owing to 
underfunding, and I am not confident that the situation will 
improve seriously this year. 
  [Badurkin] But, despite all the difficulties, the Army must 
remain the Army, Russia's defender.... 
  [Grachev] The main thing that we have achieved in the 
two-and-a-half years of the Russian Armed Forces' existence is 
to have created a combat-effective and controllable Army. The 
priority undoubtedly belongs to the strategic nuclear forces as 
the real guarantor of the country's security. Right now we are 
carrying out the provisions of the doctrine with regard to the 
general-purpose force groupings, and we have begun to set up a 
new operational-strategic formation -- the mobile forces. 
  In the transitional period -- through 2000 -- the Armed 
forces will retain their five-branch structure, although each 
branch will undergo significant transformations and reductions. 
The Air Force, for example, has already been reduced by 20 
percent; of the 15 air formations, nine remain. In the reform 
of the Air Defense Forces special attention is being paid to the 
creation of aerospace defense and a system for monitoring the 
airspace. In the Navy submarines, surface ships, and combatant 
crafts that are obsolete and have lost their utility are being 
actively decommissioned. The Navy's entire basing and support 
system is being brought in line with the new conditions. The 
most alarming problem in the Navy is the problem of salvage, 
since a significant number of ships -- almost two-thirds of the 
total complement -- are in the concluding phase of their service 
life. 
  We have managed to somewhat improve the traditional system 
of 
operations training, to make significant modifications to the 
organization of mobilization training, and to reduce the amount 
of manpower and resources diverted to exercises and training. 
Unfortunately, in combat training we have had to stop holding 
divisional and regimental exercises in the interests of economy. 
  Incidentally, the results of inspections show that the 
majority of regiments and ships, despite shortages of manpower 
and a host of other problems, are coping with their tasks. 
Thanks are due to the officers who are fulfilling not only 
their own duties but also soldiers' duties as well. Thanks to 
their self-sacrificing labor we are keeping "afloat." 
  [Badurkin] Nowadays everyone knows about the "joys" of 
military service and the officer's life. Many hoped that, with 
the adoption of the Law "On the Status of Servicemen," the dire 
situation of Russian officers would change. But yet again they 
were disappointed in their expectations. 
  [Grachev] Yes, implementation of the Law "On the Status of 
Servicemen" is proceeding with difficulty; only one-half of it 
is currently operating. The main reason is the absence of 
appropriations. However, in several cases the situation around 
this law is being aggravated artificially. We understand 
clearly that, at the present time, when the crisis in the 
economy and the financial and credit system has not yet been 
overcome, it is difficult for the state to ensure the immediate 
implementation of all the law's articles. Servicemen are 
prepared to wait. But I absolutely cannot agree with those who 
claim that servicemen have too many privileges. Many categories 
of citizens have advantages and privileges; this is aimed at 
attracting intellectual forces and specialists to one sphere of 
human activity or another, or to compensate for the special 
features of the professional activity. In view of the country's 
difficult economic situation we would not object to the 
suspension of certain "expensive" articles of the law, but we 
want this question to be resolved entirely openly, with the 
participation of our competent structures, and not to lead to a 
severe reduction in the already poor material living standards 
of Army and Navy personnel. 
  [Badurkin] Pavel Sergeyevich, throughout our conversation we 
have been touching willy-nilly on a very important problem -- 
money, or more accurately the lack of money to carry out the 
tasks facing the Armed Forces. How are you to succeed in making 
ends meet? 
  [Grachev] As is well known, the reduction of military 
expenditure has been going on since 1969. Our budget has been 
"trimmed" by 100 percent in comparable prices in the intervening 
years. In 1993 only 65-70 percent of the Army's minimum 
requirements were met. The Ministry of Defense has become a 
huge debtor. As of the beginning of the year the debt for 
supplies and services was over 2.2 trillion rubles [R]; today it 
has already grown to R6 trillion. But you cannot put a figure 
on the hidden debt which arises from combat and operations 
training events not been carried out, from exercises, marches, 
and flights postponed to a later date or canceled altogether, 
from the unresolved tasks in the improvement of military camps, 
the preparation of communal facilities for winter, and the 
transportation of basic necessities to the Far North regions and 
the Arctic. Poor funding inflicts irreparable damage on the 
Armed Forces. 
  The sum of R37.1 trillion, calculated by the Ministry of 
Defense as the level of the share of military expenditure in GDP 
last year (5.03 percent) and included without any analysis or 
appraisal in the draft federal budget under the article 
"National Defense," is significantly less than the sum that the 
Army now needs. In view of the fact that we have been on 
"starvation rations" for two years already, the R53 trillion 
approved by the president in the form of an amendment to the Law 
"On the Federal Budget for 1994" and supported by a number of 
State Duma Committees is still insufficient. However, this sum 
will still enable the tasks facing the Armed Forces to be 
performed at the minimum level and prevent the defense complex 
from being destroyed once and for all. 
  [Badurkin] Military expenditure is a difficult burden for 
any state, especially for Russia today. Perhaps the Ministry of 
Defense should devote more attention to saving, and not to 
"extorting" funds? 
  [Grachev] We understand perfectly that the reduction of 
military expenditure is a measure which is essential for our 
country. And we are ourselves looking for reserves. On my 
instructions everyone is tackling these questions: deputy 
ministers, commanders in chief, and directorate chiefs. All the 
plans and individual measures in the organizational development 
and training of the Armed Forces are subjected to economic 
expertise. Anything superfluous, irrational, or nonpriority is 
immediately discarded. In the interests of economy, tours of 
inspection among the troops by generals and officers of the 
central apparatus have been sharply restricted in the last year, 
and the number of assemblies has been reduced. We are taking 
stern measures against officials who allow mismanagement and 
waste. We are not leaving any incident of abuse unanswered. 
The sale of military property is being carried out 
energetically. We are gradually getting used to the market 
economy, and it is forcing us to seek unorthodox ways of 
obtaining the funds that are vital for the performance of urgent 
tasks. However, it should not be forgotten that the Army is not 
a commercial structure but a budget-funded organization, and our 
possibilities are extremely limited. 
  [Badurkin] A last question, Pavel Sergeyevich. You often 
meet your Western colleagues. How do they feel about Russia and 
our Army? 
  [Grachev] I will not speak about politicians; the tone of 
their statements depends on many factors. Military men, 
however, think in real categories and understand that Russia has 
not ceased to be a great nuclear power and must be treated 
seriously. I have formed good relations with the majority of 
Western defense ministers and the NATO command. They agree with 
us that firm security and stability in various regions can be 
ensured only on the basis of equality and by taking into account 
the interests of every state, including Russia. 

