BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Deputy Foreign Minister Fernando Petrella by </F>
Mauricio Carvallo in Buenos Aires -- date not given] 
  [Excerpts] [Carvallo] Would you say that the [Falklands] 
islands will belong to Argentine again before the year 2000? 
  [Petrella] I believe that during the past few years, we have 
witnessed more dramatic changes in the world than actual 
possibilities that Great Britain will transfer the Malvinas 
Islands' sovereignty to Argentina. We have the examples of 
South Africa, the Middle East, the changes taking place in 
Russia, in the former Yugoslavia. The changes the world is 
experiencing are so unpredictable and fast that something like 
that could happen. 
  Argentina does not want to rush things, however. Since 1983 
and 1990, when relations with Great Britain were restored and, 
especially, with President Carlos Menem's administration and the 
implementation of Domingo Cavallo and Guido Di Tella's foreign 
policy, what has changed is our concern over the islanders' 
interests. In the past, this aspect was not taken into account 
as much as it is now. 
  [Carvallo] In what sense? 
  [Petrella] Democratic Argentina realizes that the islanders 
have their own identity, that the islands' society is no longer 
the pastoral nor isolated society it was before 1982. To a 
certain degree, the war, with all its terrible aspects, brought 
an economic well-being the islanders did not enjoy before. 
These facts must be taken into account in a negotiation. In 
fact, during all our meetings with the British and the 
islanders, we have fully respected their interests. We believe 
the islands will gradually grow closer to us through dialogue 
and the fact that Argentina continues to grow and is predictable 
from the political viewpoint. In addition, the Southern Cone 
offers a climate of harmony, cooperation, friendship, and 
firmness regarding our claim. 
  [Carvallo] But are the islanders aware of that? 
  [Petrella] There are concrete signs that lead us to believe 
that our policy has prompted a debate on the islands. If you 
read the PENGUIN NEWS (local daily) as carefully as we do, you 
will notice that the islanders discuss a relationship with 
Argentina. Naturally, it is not always fully positive. They 
argue and say rude things about us, but at least we are again a 
subject of their discussions on the future of the islands, in 
which Argentina is always mentioned. [passage omitted] 
  [Carvallo] Can you assure that Argentine will never again 
resort to the use of force? 
  [Petrella] Definitely. First, because it is not ethical; 
Second, because it does not generate solutions; and third, 
because we appreciate and need our relationship with Great 
Britain and Europe, which is almost the same thing. These are 
three very pragmatic and clear reasons that are by no means 
idealistic. When we talk about ethics we are not talking about 
idealism. We are talking about something very sound and very 
special: force does not yield solutions. It is a `boomerang' 
because in the long run it would affect our relationship with 
Great Britain and Europe. Only recently, Argentina overcame the 
U.S. and European embargo that followed the war. This problem 
has still not been solved with Great Britain who still refuses 
to sell us spare parts and military equipment. This is very 
complicated because most of Argentina's military equipment, 
traditionally was British. [passage omitted] 
  [Carvallo] It has been said that the islands have about 50 
percent more oil than what Great Britain can extract from the 
North Sea... 
  [Petrella] The two companies that have prospected for oil, 
with the purpose of finding someone interested in buying their 
study, might say that. No one has bought that study although 
the British say a phantom Argentine enterprise did but I do not 
know for sure. 
  Argentina does not want to hasten a debate that not only has 
an ecological aspect but also a very important personal aspect. 
Everyone knows that it takes a lot of people to exploit a single 
oil well and this will definitely change the islanders way of 
life which we consider sacred and something that must be 
preserved. [passage omitted] 
  [Carvallo] It is quite surprising that Argentina, through 
you, should say that it is not particularly interested in any 
oil there might be on the islands... 
  [Petrella] I am not making an official statement. It is a 
comment to a journalist who works for EL MERCURIO, from Chile, a 
friendly country... I am telling a friend that Argentina could 
not care less about the oil on the Malvinas because it has 
plenty of its own and because the oil price is not going to 
increase. When Russia floods the world with its oil, a very 
strict cartel will have to be created to prevent prices from 
dropping. 
  [Carvallo] Some believed oil could cause new tensions in the 
South Atlantic. 
  [Petrella] Between 1971 and 1982 we gave oil to the islands. 
Therefore, oil is not the problem, the problem has to do with 
the jurisdictional and legal aspects of the UK's unilateral 
exploration and exploitation in the Malvinas. This territory is 
in dispute and we cannot remain indifferent to unilateral 
actions. This is why we are seeking cooperation. 
  [Carvallo] To define sovereignty? 
  [Petrella] That is the question. We must generate a common 
space. We have already made a clear proposal regarding the oil 
to a high-ranking official. We proposed creating a joint 
authority to assign exploitation areas according to a practical 
criteria. All this must be done under the sovereignty 
"umbrella" that was created to enable these moves without either 
of the two parties acquiring better accumulated rights. 
  [Carvallo] In the meantime, Argentina is telling oil 
companies that it will oppose oil exploitation without its 
approval. 
  [Petrella] Of course. We have told them that any investment 
will encounter legal problems..., but I cannot say what we are 
going to do. We are warning the companies that this territory 
is in dispute, when there are so many other places in the 
world... We cannot or should not approve the exploration and 
exploitation of resources in these areas until that dispute has 
been settled or until the involved parties have agreed to 
tolerate each other. [passage omitted] 
  [Carvallo] Islands Governor David Tatham said to me: Why so 
much interest in a joint oil exploitation with Argentina when 
there is also Chile, Uruguay, and Brazil. What would your 
ministry say about this? 
  [Petrella] The dispute is with Argentina. Brazil, Chile, and 
Uruguay, as well as the rest of the countries of the hemisphere, 
have recognized our rights. The UK could, obviously, contact 
whichever country it wished if a dispute, recognized by the 
United Nations, did not exist. 
  [Carvallo] What do you expect from Chile then? 
  [Petrella] Solidarity. That contact with the islands be made 
considering Argentine interests in any negotiation. That Chile 
maintain the magnificent commitment undertaken by President 
Patricio Aylwin to back our rights. We regard this as one of 
Chile's greatest acts of friendship throughout our common 
history. 
  One of the main objectives of President Menem's foreign 
policy, implemented by Foreign Minister Di Tella, has been to 
maintain the best and most cordial relationship with Chile. And 
this not only because of cultural reasons but for economic and 
strategic reasons. 
  [Carvallo] Chile, however, is in the uncomfortable position 
that whatever it does may affect its optimum relationship with 
the two countries in dispute. 
  [Petrella] Argentina's stance on the UK has been to say that 
it must play a constructive role in the Southern Cone. In other 
words, it can no longer speculate on differences between 
Argentina and Chile, as in the past when some were more obvious 
than others, because there was usually mutual distrust. This 
must no longer exist. Argentine-Chilean integration must 
progress. 
  This is why any British Government gesture that may affect 
the Argentine-Chilean relationship is considered discouraging in 
Argentina. We have told the British this many times and we are 
certain we have the support of the Chilean Government. 
  [Carvallo] What has Great Britain done lately regarding 
Chile 
that may discourage Argentina? 
  [Petrella] There were three episodes. One was the British 
Government invitation to Chilean legislators to visit the 
Malvinas. This, in itself is not especially sensitive but the 
second episode -- proposing that they set up a Chilean consulate 
on the islands -- is. That would really be complicated. The 
third -- the donation of an aircraft -- is obviously a symbol of 
the conflict. Since Argentina overcame the conflict, it caused 
no more problems but many believe the British should have known 
the effect this could have caused. Anyway, the 
Argentine-Chilean friendship is very strong now. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Carvallo] Argentina and Chile also have their own 
territorial conflicts. What outcome due you expect from the 
controversy over Laguna del Desierto? 
  [Petrella] We hope our representatives will be able to 
convince the arbitrators of our rights. I believe, with all due 
respect for Chile and the arbitrators, that our attorneys have 
good grounds and are eloquent enough to explain them. 
  [Carvallo] Chile has grounds, probably even better ones. 
Therefore, how sure can Chileans be that Argentina will not 
declare any ruling on Laguna del Desierto not in its favor null? 
  [Petrella] Today's Argentina is not the Argentina of the 
past. Nor is the current relationship between Chile and 
Argentina the same as in the past. I think this answers your 
question. 

