CSO 

<F P=106> ["Paraphrased" report on speech by Prime Minister of the </F>
Republic of Tatarstan M.G. Sabirov at 19th Session of the 
Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Tatarstan on 19 April 1994: 
"Reform the Economy in the Interests of Society"] 
  [Text] Respected People's Deputies! That criticism heard 
during the session with respect to the government is quite 
understandable. It is associated most of all with the difficult 
situation that has developed in our republic's economy. The 
purpose of my speech is not to give an explanation for all the 
critical statements--I consider it my duty to report to you, 
deputies, about the economic condition of the republic, and to 
inform you of the government's near-term measures concerning a 
reduction in the rate of the production slump and our 
capabilities for its stabilization, in order, in the final 
analysis, not to permit a reduction in the standard of living of 
the citizens of Tatarstan. 
  Today, an interstate treaty has already been signed that was 
long-awaited by a majority of the population, and within its 
framework 12 intergovernmental agreements, and our opponents 
from various sides are criticizing both the documents themselves 
and the persons who participated in their preparation and 
signing. But at the same time, should they not think about 
Tatarstan's political situation and economic prospects if there 
were no treaty? How would many of our residents feel, continuing 
to experience a condition of vagueness in their position with 
respect to other citizens of the Russian Federation, with their 
next-door neighbors, with their fellow-workers? [line missing] 
this psychological burden of a majority of our people, which, 
naturally, will serve to further strengthen interethnic harmony 
in Tatarstan. I think that everyone understands the high value 
of this harmony and this friendship of the peoples of the 
republic. 
  What do the treaty and agreements offer on an economic 
plane? 
I will say frankly: Clarity has emerged among the government and 
economic managers and workers of financial-economic services in 
mutual relations not only with structures of the Russian 
Federation but also with state organs, firms, and enterprises of 
the near and far abroad. In this difficult period of entering 
the market, this already gives our commodity producers, bankers, 
and average and small entrepreneurs freedom of action to arrange 
and reinforce relations with their colleagues in a unified 
economic space. Now the efforts of our entrepreneurs and 
managers--no matter what kind of property they own and 
manage--should be directed at maximizing the effectiveness of 
using new capabilities for their practical activity. Thus, this 
is essentially a new program establishing new tasks, on whose 
implementation the government and all entrepreneurs will have to 
work energetically. 
  The government, on its part, prepared a program of action 
for 
implementation of the treaty and the agreements. All collectives 
should obviously have such programs, so that after organizing 
their activity thoughtfully and with initiative, they will get 
the maximum possible use and benefit from them. Such purposeful 
work should be calculated for at least five years. Incidentally, 
such periods are specified in the treaty and the agreements. 
  Afterwards, the prime minister said: The government 
conducted 
all its work on the basis of the Concept of the Transition to 
the Market, which was adopted by the Supreme Soviet of the 
Republic of Tatarstan in 1991, and which is being adjusted 
annually. Besides implementing a number of other programs 
adopted by the Supreme Soviet, the government worked on 
implementing the constitution, laws of the Republic of 
Tatarstan, edicts of the president, and also its own resolutions 
and decrees. 
  In March 1994 work was completed on a draft of the Main 
Directions of the Economic and Social Development of the 
Republic in Consonance with the Constitution of Tatarstan. The 
draft [line missing] a number of comments were made. In the near 
future we propose to distribute a corrected text of the draft to 
all deputies, in order to consider and adopt this important 
document at the next session. 
  Considering that the information and concluding speeches of 
Deputy Prime Minister F.G. Khamidullin and Minister of Finance 
D.N. Nagumanov presented an analysis of the work for 1993 and 
forecasts of the development of the economy for 1994, and a 
report and analysis of the budget, I will dwell briefly only on 
certain features. 
  The individual, the resident of our republic, with all his 
concerns and affairs is always at the government's center of 
attention. "Not allowing a drop in the standard of living of the 
population" is the main principle by which we are guided in our 
daily work. 
  The facts say that the standard of living that determines 
the 
ratio of the average per capita income to the subsistence 
minimum had in the course of 1993 a clearly expressed growth 
tendency--from 2.2 in January to 2.9 in December (in Russia this 
indicator fluctuates from 1.45 to two, respectively). It was 
possible to achieve this most of all with a balanced price 
policy, repeated raises in the minimum scale of payments for 
work, increases in allowances and compensation payments, and the 
development and introduction of specially directed social 
protection. We were able to maintain prices for minimum 
commodity subsistence at a lower level than in neighboring 
regions and in the Russian Federation as a whole. Two very 
important laws were adopted in the republic in 1993: "On the 
Subsistence Minimum" and "On the Minimum Wage Scale." In 
accordance with them, the minimum wage scale cannot be less than 
the value of the figure for the subsistence minimum. I will note 
that the subsistence minimum is a low limit, a limiter, and we 
should in no case permit a drop in the level of incomes below 
this figure. If something like this happens, the mechanism of 
specifically directed social protection is immediately turned 
on. Analysis shows that of the standard collection of 19 food 
product designations adopted in the Russian Federation, 
quantitatively more can be bought in Ulyanovsk, next in Kazan, 
and then Samara. 
  It should be said that starting in 1994 we have already 
begun 
to orient ourselves to a higher indicator--a minimum consumer 
budget. While today the subsistence minimum is equal to 40,500 
rubles [R], the minimum consumer budget is R131,000. 
  The actual cost of food, commodities, and services that are 
part of the subsistence minimum amounts to R40,500 plus R31,500 
for April 1994; that is, R72,000. (The subsidy allocated to each 
individual of the republic is contemplated at a level of R31,500 
for April.) Analysis of the standard of living for the first 
quarter of 1994 shows that a fall in it is occurring 
nevertheless. In November 1993 it amounted to 2.65, in February 
1994--2.22, in March--2.41, and 2.44 is expected in April; i.e., 
lower than in 1993. The reason is that it is possible to 
restrain prices only to a certain limit, after which the ruin of 
the consumer market could begin. But with an increase in prices, 
the cost of the subsistence minimum also increases. In order to 
maintain their required ratio it is necessary to ensure a faster 
growth of the incomes of our citizens. 
  As you know, wages are the main source of income of the 
working population. However, the Law of the Republic of 
Tatarstan of 8 February 1994 "On the Minimum Wage Scale" has not 
been put into effect at all enterprises and 
organizations--according to it, starting 1 February 1994 a 
minimum wage scale of R3,000 is established on the entire 
territory of the republic. According to 32 enterprises and 
educational institutions that have just been checked, where the 
established minimum has not been introduced, this minimum is not 
received by more than 4,000 persons. I repeat: only where 
verified! These are mainly educational institutions that are 
financed from the budget of the Russian Federation, medical 
apparatus and compressor plants, KOMZ, the joint-stock company 
Kvart, the computer system PO [production association], 
individual NII's [scientific research institutes) and KB's 
[design bureaus], and everyday services enterprises. In 
addition, as a rule, unskilled workers--office cleaners, guards, 
and cloakroom attendants. But, after all, it is for this 
category that the minimum was introduced! 
  A very low wage is paid by the Kazan electromechanical 
plant--R23,427, the Tochmash plant--R46,357, Promstroy 
Progress--R45,506, Leninogorsk sewing factory--R38,085, and 
others. 
  At the same time, the level of wages is excessively high at 
Tatenergo--R479,061, the Kazan liquor-vodka plant--R362,775, the 
Kazan leased tobacco factory Aromat--R294,526, the Menzelinsk 
liquor-vodka plant--R314,444, the Urussu ZhBI [reinforced 
concrete articles]--R303,595. Moreover, a majority of them are 
permanent clients in begging for favorable credits and other 
types of subsidies. Under these conditions the State Labor 
Committee, jointly with the ministries, departments, and heads 
of administration, should immediately conduct a check on the 
"minimum" for all organizations and enterprises located on the 
territory of the republic, no matter what property category they 
come under. Workers of the Goskomimushchestvo [State Committee 
for the Management of State Property] of the republic should 
also participate. It is necessary to take quick and effective 
measures in each specific case. Where it is possible, to assist, 
and where the situation is hopeless, to proceed in the end to 
activate the bankruptcy system. 
  It is necessary to regulate the "spread" in the level of 
average wages through taxation. A work rating figure that is not 
taxable should be closely tied to the results of the work of an 
enterprise. Given a very high wage, if it is not connected with 
increased volumes of production and the ability of the produced 
product to compete, it is necessary to introduce a mechanism for 
progressive taxation on resources being directed at wages. 
  Afterwards, M.G. Sabirov began to set forth the 1994 program 
for further reformation of the economy. Its main point is the 
conduct of radical changes in tax, budget, credit, and price 
policy. The government established a working group headed by 
F.G. Khamidullin that in the near future is supposed to submit 
proposals for reforming tax policy. It is proposed to reduce the 
amount of taxes, to eliminate some of the taxes introduced in 
the localities that were not approved at all, and to bring order 
to tax benefits. Benefits should be given only to those 
enterprises and organizations that, after submitting justified 
calculations, can sharply increase the volume of production of 
competitive products, and not only to fill in deficiencies owing 
to the benefits taken, but that will also give additional 
revenues to the budget. 
  It is necessary to perfect the methodology for calculating 
budgets submitted by the local soviets, with a gradual increase 
in the importance of the local budgets. It is advisable in the 
republic consolidated budget to retain only that part that is 
used to cover general republic expenditures and the 
implementation of republic and federal programs. 
  Resolution of the price problem is seen in the adoption of a 
normative document in the form of an edict of the president of 
the Republic of Tatarstan concerning freedom of economic 
activity in which it is advisable to envision a further 
liberalization of prices in all spheres of activity. 
  The issue of payments, or more properly nonpayments, has 
become the most important one for everyone today. Managers of 
all ranks, including the president and Cabinet of Ministers 
workers, are losing a lot of time searching for resources to 
support production and the life support of the population. 
  The upper house of the Federal Assembly of the Russian 
Federation passed a decree "On the Solvency Crisis in the 
Economy of the Russian Federation." We see the resolution of 
this question in the immediate introduction of securities in the 
republic, first and foremost, the bill of exchange system within 
whose framework settlements should be conducted for the debts of 
enterprises in all types of economic management. A package of 
necessary documents has been developed and is going through the 
endorsement stage. The task of the government is to launch them 
starting 1 May 1994. The next measure--it is necessary 
immediately to develop a mechanism for and conduct a quarterly 
offset of mutual indebtedness at least in the economic space of 
our republic. Possibly the Russian Federation will also 
introduce this system later. It is also necessary to activate 
work to attract foreign financing for the purpose of financing 
the improvement and reorganization of enterprises, and to use 
the barter mutual relations of commodity producers, importing 
into the republic for "debts" first of all the needed group of 
food commodities, medicines, equipment, and materials. 
  In 1994 it is necessary for us to accelerate, intensify, and 
expand privatization. It is also necessary to include new 
facilities in privatization, to complete small privatization 
this year, and to increase the privatization share in state 
property. All this will make it possible to increase the rate of 
costs of enterprises being privatized and to accelerate 
structural restructuring. 
  Small and average enterprises are the most flexible form of 
commodity producers that react instantly to market demands. A 
system of measures should be worked out in a short time, 
including adoption of the necessary laws of the Republic of 
Tatarstan, edicts of the president, and decrees of the 
government. Then the growth of small entrepreneurship in number 
and quality will not only cover many spheres of the market with 
commodities of their production, will not only make it possible 
to increase the number of jobs, but will also provide 
significant revenue for the budget, mainly for local budgets. 
This is where it is necessary to have a system of tax benefits 
first and foremost. 
  We should further reorganize agricultural production, which 
was discussed in detail at two group conferences of agrarians. A 
special place is given in the draft on the main directions of 
this branch. A program on the agricultural industry is now under 
development. 
  At the present time there is active interest on the part of 
deputies in reforming the executive organs of authority. This is 
understandable. The concept of reforming the Cabinet of 
Ministers was worked out at the end of 1993 by a group of 
specialists and researchers. The structure of the higher 
executive organs of about 40 states were studied. On the basis 
of this analysis and taking our peculiarities into account, in 
the first quarter of this year I proposed a new so-called mixed 
economic structure of the Cabinet of Ministers oriented on the 
market, including its staff, and the ministries and departments. 
We can also distribute this material to the deputies together 
with the draft Main Directions of Socioeconomic Development of 
the Republic of Tatarstan in Accordance with the New 
Constitution. 
  In concluding his speech, M.G. Sabirov emphasized that the 
president, the government, and a majority of the deputy corps 
are working as an integrated team. Herein lies our strength. As 
for the arguments and debates on urgent problems in the 
development of the republic, they can be explained by a desire 
to find a way to more optimal solutions. The government is ready 
to receive and examine all proposals of people's deputies and 
positive criticism, no matter where it originates, in the most 
careful way, and to draw practical conclusions. 

