Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [New Year address by Czech President Vaclav Havel; place and </F>
date not given -- live or recorded] 
  [Excerpts] Dear follow citizens: The coming into being of 
the independent Czech Republic a year ago was for most of us 
more of a reason for reflection than for celebration. We asked 
ourselves what the division of what until then had been a common 
home would mean for all us, both the Czechs and Slovaks; what 
would this mean for Central Europe? Were we to understand this 
as a success of national aspirations or as a defeat in the 
struggle for a common state? 
  I believe the first year of the existence of our new state 
has dispersed a larger part of last year's concerns. Our 
republics did not collapse and Central Europe was not shaken by 
our split. Czech society accepted this change with 
understanding as a fact of life. It did not succumb to a feeling 
of despondency or defeatism. It did not come to hate Slovaks, 
and without much hesitation it set about creating new relations 
within the area of the Czech state. 
  We soon began to understand that the wound caused to many of 
us by the division of Czechoslovakia was a kind of tax we are 
having to pay for our post-November freedom. What this division 
will really mean historically, and what will it bring, depends 
again above all on ourselves. 
  The aim of European unification is to create a new type of 
coexistence and cooperation of all its independent parts. We 
therefore ought to accept the fact that we are taking part in 
such unification as two sovereign states bounded together by the 
richness of Czech-Slovak mutual relations simply as a newly and 
differently based challenge to fulfill this European goal. If 
we succeed in this endeavor, it will mean that we have 
successfully passed this historic test. 
  We have prerequisites for this. The most important of them 
is the fact that immediately after its establishment the Czech 
Republic succeeded in following up on all that was good in both 
the older and fresh Czechoslovak legacy. We have clearly 
subscribed to the humanistic and democratic tradition of our 
modern history, and this we have expressed symbolically by 
adopting the Czechoslovak national holiday and by continuing 
without interruption the great work of transformation that began 
after November 1989. 
  Thanks to all this, our parliament succeeded in adopting in 
good time the new democratic Constitution and a large number of 
other laws, and thus continued the fundamental rebuilding of the 
whole of our legal system. We began to establish and put into 
practice the new constitutional system. The president was 
elected and the constitutional court established. This year 
this process will be further promoted by holding elections to 
the Senate. 
  Our government enjoys the lasting support of parliament and 
the majority of our citizens. Thanks also to the orderly manner 
in which Czechoslovakia was divided, the Czech Republic was in a 
short time fully recognized by the international community. In 
its foreign policy it soon was able to stand on its own feet 
and, in a manner appropriate to the new situation, it followed 
up in a creative way on the active foreign policy of 
post-November Czechoslovakia. 
  The most visible success of the Czech Republic is 
undoubtedly 
its success in maintaining the pace of economic transformation 
and its refusal to deviate from its plan. It thereby 
demonstrated that the course taken after the first discussions 
was the correct one. [passage omitted] 
  One can say overall that most of the basic changes carried 
out in our economic system have been carried out and therefore 
we can today regard its transformation as irreversible. 
  Esteemed friends, I am well aware of all the difficulties -- 
and frequently the pain -- which the great changes now taking 
place in all areas of our life are causing in your ordinary 
life. I am well aware of your fear of growing criminality. I 
am aware of problems many of you, especially older people, are 
having with the restructuring of social and health care. I am 
aware of the risks connected with your business activities. 
  It is precisely because I am aware of all this that I 
appreciate the fact that most of you understand the good sense 
of these changes and the patience with which you are coping with 
all the burdensome phenomena accompanying them. Again and 
again, I admire the courage with which so many of you are 
engaging in the creative work of building new relations. This 
is why I regard the speed and all the existing good results of 
our social transformation as being due to you, citizens of the 
Czech Republic, rather than to the government and the 
parliament. [passage omitted] 
  I believe the common denominator of several important tasks 
we ought to concern ourselves with now is the creation of a 
genuine -- that is a truly open -- and many-layered civic 
society. The large-scale privatization taking place in our 
society must in my view quickly find its counterpart in civic 
and public life. We ought to broaden really purposefully and 
with much greater courage than hitherto the trust in the 
individual as real creator of economic prosperity. We must also 
show greater trust in the individual as a citizen capable of 
assuming his share of joint responsibility for the affairs of 
the whole community. 
  Of course, there are tasks which only the state can and must 
discharge if it is to have any purpose at all. Perhaps there 
are more of these tasks than our government admits at present. 
At the same time, however, there are many other tasks which 
citizens themselves could and indeed should discharge to a far 
greater extent and which they could discharge better than the 
state. [passage omitted] 
  Democracy is a system based on trust in human 
responsibility, and this is something it should awaken and 
cultivate. Democracy and civic society are therefore only two 
sides of the same coin. In any case, at a time when the 
civilization of our planet is threatened by human 
irresponsibility, I do not see at the present time any other way 
of saving it than by a general awakening and the cultivation of 
man's responsibility for the affairs of this world. 
  Above all, the development of a civic society depends, of 
course, on citizens themselves, but not only on them. What can 
the state do in this respect? Out of many possible examples I 
will cite at least two which seem to me at this moment 
especially topical. 
  There has been a great deal of talk about the reform of 
public administration. I believe our state is facing here a 
typical challenge of the present time, a challenge which has a 
deeper purpose that might appear at the first sight. If the 
state has the courage to decentralize itself in a good time and 
if that decentralization is based on the good idea of bringing 
various types of decision-making to the lowest possible level 
and of giving greater scope to self-administration, both at a 
higher and at a community level, then it can make a significant 
contribution to the creation of a real civic society. 
  After all, a large number of matters now being tackled at 
individual ministries could be tackled by people far more 
flexibly and with a better knowledge of all specific 
circumstances at the level of regions and natural areas. Many 
matters now being dealt with at district level could be dealt 
with faster and more effectively by local communities. And an 
even more daring decentralization in redistribution could merely 
help ensure that such a redistribution reacts truly sensitively 
to the multifaceted requirements of life which can be hardly 
foreseen at the center. [passage omitted] 
  Another area in which civic participation in the public life 
should be significantly strengthened is that extensive area 
which is not mostly a private matter but which at the same time 
should not be confined only to the state, an area which is not 
aimed at profit making but which at the same time is extremely 
important to society. I am talking about the large area of 
nonprofit or public organizations. [passage omitted] 
  The state should not be founded on the notion that it alone 
knows best what society needs and that it alone should finance 
this area from centrally collected taxes. Central financing 
leads inevitably to central control. Here, too, we must trust 
citizens more and enable them to assume greater responsibility. 
The issue then is thoughtfully delegating to other subjects 
some of the redistributing functions currently vested with the 
state. [passage omitted] 
  Moreover, by expanding the opportunities I have been talking 
about we will help our society deepen civic solidarity, enhance 
interest in public affairs and experience in participating in 
them, and raise people's sense of responsibility for the whole 
community. We will thereby indirectly nurture a attitude to 
one's country. 
  Esteemed friends, I believe you understand what this is all 
about. After all, this is not a complicated matter. To put it 
simply, unless courageous economic reforms are accompanied by 
long-term, purposeful, and continuous care for the good 
development of all levels of civic society, our life will soon 
become one-dimensional. It will become desolate. It will 
restrict itself to a mere pursuit of profit accompanied by an 
apathetic attitude to public affairs and once again reliance on 
the state as someone who on our behalf will take care of 
everything. 
  A modern democratic state cannot be composed, to put it 
simply, of merely the state administration, political parties, 
and private enterprises. It must open to citizens a varied 
scale of opportunities to enable them to become involved not 
only privately but also publicly; to enable them to develop 
various types of civic coexistence, solidarity, and 
participation. [passage omitted] 
  Moreover, a genuine civic society is the greatest insurance 
against various kinds of social tension or political and social 
shocks. It makes it possible to tackle various problems 
immediately where they begin and ensure that they do not fester 
somewhere under society's skin and finally grow to such an 
extent that they pose a threat to the life of the society as a 
whole. 
  We hear frequently the word standard. We are building a 
standard market economy, a standard political system, and 
standard political parties. We pass standard laws, norms, and 
principles and look at standard advertisements. One has nothing 
against it if standard means that something is well tested and 
good. We must take care, however, not to profess standards as 
such, to adopt standard attitudes about oneself in order not to 
succumb subsequently to the mistake of seeing everything that is 
standard as being customarily also good. There are things which 
cannot be standard because of their very nature, and which if 
they were standardized would mean simply that they had become 
simplified and inexcusably the same. [passage omitted] 
  A talk about civic society is of course a talk about the 
character of the state. I believe the Czech nation, like other 
advanced European nations, has already grown out of the diapers 
of its modern national awakening and is now mature enough to 
know that their Czech nationality cannot be the sole or main 
purpose of its existence. It must be something different and 
somewhat more than a mere culmination of the nation's existence. 
  We cherish our nation's history, its traditions, culture, 
and good customs. We love our language, country, and the towns 
in which we live, our country's spiritual climate. We equally 
cherish other levels of our belonging -- to one's family, 
church, community, profession, or company, society, political 
party -- a community of those with whom we share a common view 
of the world. I believe most of us already understand that none 
of these groups to which we profess our belonging -- however 
well disposed toward others we might be -- cannot be elevated 
above them and changed into some kind of a determining purpose 
of the existence of the state. 
  During World War II, Europe learned how far the idea of an 
ethnically pure state can lead and it is now watching this 
happen, in a different form, with impotent horror in the former 
Yugoslavia. We learned sufficiently how far the idea of a state 
based on class ideology led during the era of communism. We see 
in the manifestations of fundamentalism which is trying hard to 
take power in some Islamic countries just where the idea of a 
strictly religious state can lead. An ideology which 
establishes a state only, and only on considerations of how some 
people differ from others and thereby on what divides them, 
always leads to a use of force. 
  The only alternative to a strictly national state as created 
in various forms in Europe over the past centuries is today a 
state founded on a civic principle, a principle which unites 
rather than divides people without suppressing any of its 
specific features. [passage omitted] 
  To build a state on a civic principle cannot of course be 
done except by building a genuine civic society. I believe this 
is the path the Czech Republic should take. It is not a path 
that will lead to any loss of national or any other identity; on 
the contrary, it will lead to its peaceful development. [passage 
omitted] 
  Europe is now endeavoring to give itself a historically new 
type of order which is called unification. It is not a matter 
of making all nations, ethnic groups, cultures, and regions 
dissolve into some kind of an amorphous pan-European sea; nor is 
it a question of creating some kind of a monstrous super-state. 
It is a question of making it possible to create a space for a 
close, equal cooperation among various individual parts of 
Europe. It is a question, therefore, of building a Europe in 
which a powerful nation can no longer oppress a less powerful 
one and in which disputes are no longer resolved by force. 
  It is a complicated process and it will undoubtedly be 
accompanied by many mistakes. It is, however, something worth 
trying. The basic principle which makes such an integration at 
all possible is once again a civic principle as a guarantee that 
national hatred will never again prevail over normal civic 
cooperation. Many different civic communities of European 
democratic states are jointly creating a great civic European 
society. I do not see for us any other or better possibility 
than to accept this spirit of a civic Europe. It is the only 
way we have of ridding us forever of a fear of others. 
  In a democracy, relations between citizens and politicians 
are always a two-way process. Politics mirrors the will and 
moods of citizens; at the same time, the conduct of politicians 
influences the conduct of citizens. The task of political 
power, which is concerned about civic society, is therefore not 
only to issue relevant laws but also to care about what is 
understood as political culture. 
  To be more specific, if politicians want to awaken in 
citizens their best talents and powers, their resolve to serve 
the whole community, and their responsibility for it, then they 
should think more about public affairs and less about how much 
to foster their own career and how to successfully put something 
over some other politician. A good political climate is one of 
the important conditions of a good social climate. After all 
the tremors caused by the shock of our newly acquired freedom, 
the spirit of good will, tolerance, decency, interest in others, 
belief in good human features, respect for life, natural 
responsibility, modesty, and kindness should return to our 
social climate. The better we succeed in achieving this, the 
better life will be for all of us. 
  Esteemed fellow citizens, on this day four years ago I said 
that our country was not flourishing. What can I say today? I 
would not dare to say that it is already flourishing, but I am 
not afraid to say that green shoots have already begun to appear 
in many places. One can see the shoots of something new, of 
something promising and hopeful. [passage omitted] 

