Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] An editorial published in today's TRABAJADORES 
newspaper states that control of prices and inventories, as well 
as the discipline of collection and payments are the weapons 
against corruption. The text comments on the black market as a 
subject of the workers assemblies that are being held throughout 
the country. In these assemblies, the collective analyzes the 
economic effectiveness of each work center and the financial 
state of the country. 
  The black market economy is taking most of the workers' 
income because of high prices, a reflection of an inflationary 
phenomenon barely seen in the policy of state prices. The 
editorial comments that the high prices of black-market products 
invite crime since many people who operate with state resources 
not only purchase on that market, but also become salespeople 
when they exploit the lack of administrative control and 
responsiveness to the so-called deficits [faltantes]. 
  This black market, efficient organizer and duplicator of 
crime and corruption, involves more and more citizens who 
normally would not commit criminal acts, but whose scruples, 
under the current situation, are weakened, and who try to 
justify the mentality of "save yourself if you can," which is 
contrary to their normal way of being and thinking. 
  The editorial goes on to state that in the workers 
parliaments, there has been a consensus to take radical steps 
against those who have accumulated large amounts of money and 
property through shady or fraudulent means. There cannot be a 
respectable administration or a work collective with patriotic 
spirit that does not fight in favor of control, not just because 
of its effect on the economy, but to protect the morale, 
prestige, and dignity of the workers. 
  The editorial states that every labor union movement should 
take the matter in hand and demand that the administrations 
adopt measures to cut connections between the state economy and 
the black market. If every work center hoists the flag of 
honesty above any justifiable trend, then we are creating 
conditions for the success of future financial measures and 
subsequent restructuring of the management system. 
  TRABAJADORES acknowledges the importance of preparing 
ourselves to attack the problems at their roots. The editorial 
adds that we need to organize and protect morale so our ranks 
are not weakened, and so Marti's thought is strengthened: 
Poverty may pass; what does not pass are the dishonorable acts 
men commit, using poverty as an excuse. 

