BFN 

  [Text] Hangzhou, May 9 (XINHUA) -- The 32 victims including 
24 Taiwanese tourists who died in a boat fire in east China's 
Zhejiang Province in late March died from smoke inhalation and 
burns, legal experts say. 
  Invited by the Association for Relations Across the Taiwan 
Strait (ARATS), the experts who investigated the boat fire that 
took place on March 31 on Qiandao Lake announced the conclusions 
to officials of the Taiwan-based Straits Exchanges Foundation 
(SEF) and some relatives of the Taiwan victims today. 
  They ruled out other possible causes of death. No bullet 
holes were found on the outer side of the boat or bullet wounds 
on the bodies of victims. 
  The bullet mark found on the steel sheet near the hatchway 
to 
the lower cabin was identified as caused by the lead bullet of a 
hunting rifle, they say. 
  As no one survived the fire on the "Hairui" boat, and the 
scene of the crime was seriously damaged by fire and 
fire-extinguishing, more than 30 experts from the fire, legal 
medical, forensics, analysis and ship examination departments 
were summoned to the spot for comprehensive investigations. 
  Investigations and tests were conducted continuously for 
several days and nights. Three other teams of experts from the 
Ministries of Public Security and Transportation also arrived on 
the scene to conduct further analysis. 
  Experts who have conducted the investigations said that all 
the victims were found dead in the lower cabin of the boat. 
Some of the victims had hid their watches, gold ornaments and 
money under their shoes, bras and panties. 
  Partial autopsies proved that they died of smoke inhalation 
and burns. 
  The experts say that after the victims had been induced to 
enter the lower cabin, the culprits threw explosives into the 
cabin and fired into the cabin with hunting rifles. 
  Near the cabin was a large drum of diesel oil which caused 
the fire after the explosion. Later the culprits poured 
gasoline they carried with them into the cabin and set the whole 
boat ablaze. 
  Investigations and tests of the remains of the cabin 
revealed 
particular matter left over from explosives and residue from 
gasoline, they say. 
  Meanwhile, experts from the Ministry of Public Security said 
that investigations have proved that the three suspects 
arrested, Wu Lihong, Yu Aijun and Hu Zhihan, had committed the 
crime. 
  He Ting, an expert from the Criminal Investigation 
Department under the Ministry of Public Security said that no 
army man or people other than the three suspects were found to 
have participated in the criminal activities. 
  However, he said that Wu Liming, elder brother of Wu Lihong 
and an armed policeman serving in Hangzhou, capital of Zhejiang 
Province, has been arrested because he had helped his brother 
hide some of the snatched goods. 
  He said that investigations revealed that the three culprits 
had made premeditated plans before committing the crime. 
  Wu Lihong confessed that he borrowed 10,000 yuan from one of 
his friends in early March last year, and later borrowed 50,000 
yuan in loans from local banks and bought a motor boat last 
December. The loans were due to be repaid this coming June and 
he was under pressure to raise money to pay the loans. 
  Yu Aijun said he felt jealous toward his many neighbors who 
were buying or building houses. Hu Zhihan confessed that he had 
left his factory in Hangzhou because he felt the pay was too low. 
  The three culprits had close relations. Wu Lihong came up 
with the idea of robbing a pleasure boat last September and 
disclosed his plan to the other two, who agreed to cooperate 
with him. Later, the three made detailed plans and preparations 
for the robbery. 
  They bought three daggers, two pairs of nylon stockings to 
cover their heads with and had a blacksmith make a large axe. 
They also bought dynamite and detonators under the pretense of 
using it to get stones for house construction. They also 
borrowed two hunting rifles. 
  At about four o'clock in the afternoon on March 31, Wu and 
Yu 
carried their tools for the crime and set out on the motorboat. 
They picked up Hu along the way. 
  When the "Hairui" passed by, it was raining and they 
followed 
the boat a while until they saw there was no other boat around. 
Two of the culprits covered their heads with the stockings and 
boarded the "Hairui". Later the third one also came on board. 
  According to police, the perpetrators first took control of 
the cockpit and then rushed into the middle cabin where most of 
the passengers were staying. Brandishing the hunting rifles and 
the axe, they forced the passengers to enter the lower cabin. 
The culprits said that if the passengers obeyed, only their 
money would be taken and their lives would be spared. 
  The culprits confessed that they took the boat to 
Huangniling, a backwater area where they had planned to go, and 
threw the only iron ladder on which one could climb out of the 
lower cabin into the lake. They closed the hatchway to the 
lower cabin and secured it with iron wires, and one culprit kept 
guard over it. 
  They confessed that they first wanted to sink the boat, but 
were unsuccessful. 

