Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report on interview with Estonian President </F>
Meri: "Estonia's Path of Renewal"] 
  [Text] Estonia's President Lennart Meri, who visited the 
Basel trade fair, is optimistic about domestic development in 
his country. He said that the small republic is successfully 
pursuing the path of renewal in spite of numerous problems. 
Meri's assessment of the relationship with Russia, whose 
current circumstance the West does not understand very well, is 
more pessimistic. 
  In President Lennart Meri's view, Estonia has overcome the 
worst. This not only means decades of Soviet rule but also the 
first two years after regaining independence in 1991. Estonia 
was completely dependent on the Soviet Union with regard to fuel 
supplies and to market its products, and it was subject to the 
division of labor ordered by Moscow. "This went so far as bolts 
being produced in our country, but not the nuts to go with 
them." Liberating themselves from this embrace was difficult 
for Estonians until they introduced their own currency. As long 
as it was still part of the ruble zone, Estonia was affected by 
the adverse situation in the collapsed empire. "In late 1991 
and early 1992, there were queues in front of our shops the 
likes of which we had not seen in the worst Soviet times." 
<H5>  Optimism, Courage, Public Spirit </H5>
  Yet, the president says that Estonian voices grieving for 
the 
Soviet Republic of Estonia have never existed. Such feelings 
may have existed among the Russians in Estonia; this part of the 
population felt as if it had been expelled from paradise. 
Meanwhile, however, even the Russians in Estonia discovered the 
advantages of the market economy; they appreciate that good work 
is remunerated with proper pay, that one can do one's shopping 
in Tallinn, or Helsinki, or Basel. Of course, this is a 
question of money, and of course, the people of Estonia are 
still poor. "I, as the head of state, have a salary that 
amounts to less than your minimum wage here in Switzerland." 
According to Meri, the Estonian economy went through its lowest 
point in 1993. Exports to the former Soviet area (which used to 
be 95 percent) are under 20 percent now. 
  What creates more problems than the modernization of 
industry 
is agriculture. First, because of the slow pace of 
reprivatization, "which we want to conduct as justly as 
possible," and because of the greater need for subsidies of 
agricultural enterprises in the northern climate. 
  Meri says that the most precious capital the country has is 
the courage and idealism of its people. The people know what is 
important and they are prepared to overcome the difficult 
transition period. Estonia is shown solidarity, including 
efficient help, mainly from neighboring Finland, with which it 
also shares a similar language. The Estonian government has 
concluded a number of free trade agreements, including one with 
Switzerland, and there are 5,000 joint ventures in existence in 
the country. The president regrets that the share of Swiss 
companies in these joint ventures is a very small one. He added 
that his country is trying to speed up Baltic cooperation; the 
free trade zone of the three republics will come into effect at 
the beginning of April, and a common economic area will also be 
of greater interest to foreign investors. The states in the 
Baltic area will have to stand together in economic and security 
questions. "We will not repeat the mistake of 1939/40 when each 
of us faced the Soviet threat alone." 
<H5>  The Shadow of Big Brother </H5>
  In the midst of the new awakening, which also caused culture 
to flourish, the Russian neighbors were almost completely 
forgotten for a while, said Meri. Only during the last few 
months has the public come to realize that developments in 
Russia continue to be of importance for the Baltic States. At 
the beginning of the year, President Yeltsin assured Meri that 
Russia would keep its promise to withdraw its troops by 31 
August 1994. Then there was a hardening in negotiations, and a 
"high-ranking figure" at the Moscow Foreign Ministry publicly 
says that the Baltic States joined the Soviet Union of their own 
free will in 1940. Why now, and what is the purpose, Meri asks 
-- and leaves the answer open. Does he see enough Western 
support for the Balts? The reply is evasive, but clearly 
skeptical: The small Baltic States are hardly taken account of 
-- in the majority of the world press -- politicians think of 
the next elections, historic perspectives are unknown to them. 
<H5>  Everything Open in Russia </H5>
  Meri considers the situation in Russia unstable, but he 
thinks that everything is still open; the journey might lead to 
democracy or back to the old conditions. The West does not 
really understand this. Does the Estonian president see any 
possibility of making concessions in the treatment of Russian 
minorities in his country, which might improve relations with 
Moscow? Meri denies this. He thinks that Russia uses the 
minority question as an excuse and a lever and that the relevant 
Estonian laws are generous. "If this is not the case, we will 
gladly step up the protection of minorities -- provided that the 
great Western democracies set a good example." 

