Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, 4 Jan -- The participation of the delegation 
of Ukraine in the work of the 48th session of the UN General 
Assembly was one of the main issues covered at a regular 
briefing in the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry. Viktor Batyuk, 
Ukraine's permanent representative to the United Nations, 
informed those present that Ukrainian representatives have 
explained Ukraine's stance on nuclear disarmament issues, 
economic reforms, and accession to the nuclear non-proliferation 
treaty. Work on drawing up an international convention on the 
status and safety of UN personnel, which was started at 
Ukraine's initiative, has contributed to Ukraine's growing 
prestige at the United Nations. One of the major results of the 
delegation's work was that a decision was taken by the session 
to revise in 1994 the system of payments made by Ukraine in 
respect of peacekeeping operations, with the repayment of its 
debts being postponed, and to make changes in the methodology of 
the construction of the scale of contributions to the UN regular 
budget. Changing the methodology may result in considerably 
reducing the size of Ukraine's contribution in the years 1995-97. 
  Nina Kovalska, a department chief, spoke about the course of 
the discussion at the 48th UN session on issues of the 
protection of human rights, social development, and humanitarian 
cooperation, held within the framework of the Vienna declaration 
and the action program adopted at the second world conference on 
human rights in June 1993. Following lengthy talks, in 
particular, the resolution on helping refugees and displaced 
persons in Azerbaijan was adopted. Ukraine was a co-sponsor of 
the resolution. The Ukrainian delegation spoke in favor of the 
Security Council expanding and of adapting its structure and 
activity to the requirements of modern international life. The 
discussion resulted in adopting a resolution on forming a 
special working group which would aim to process proposals from 
every interested state. 

