BFN 

  [Text] In a major breakthrough, the Delhi police has 
arrested a Hizbul Mujahideen militant and two of his associates 
who were in the process of establishing a country-wide terrorist 
network. 
  They were trying to carry out their mission with the help of 
fundamentalist organisations in various towns and cities, 
including Delhi. 
  Their objective was to target prominent Kashmiri political 
leaders and spread terror among the general population. 
  Police picked up Mushtaq Ahmed, 28 and his associate 
Khaliq-u-Zaman, 30 on Sunday from near a Mazhar in Adarsh Nagar 
in North West Delhi where the two had rendezvoused. 
  A Chinese pistol with 8 rounds and 4 stick grenades were 
recovered fIom their possession. Another associate, Shahid Anis 
Azmi, 18 was earlier arrested by a team of Delhi Police in 
Bombay from where he was operating for the past few months. 
  Their interrogation revealed that they were on a specific 
mission to establish a terrorist network in metropolitan towns 
by recruiting local Muslim youth who were later trained in arms 
and explosives in Kashmir. 
  An organisation called the Minorities United Front (MUF) had 
been floated by the Hizbul Mujahideen for this purpose in 
December 1992 in the aftermath of the demolition of the disputed 
structure at Ayodhya. 
  Additional police commissioner (CID) R S Gupta said on 
Monday 
that Mushtaq Ahmed, a resident of Anantnag, acting on orders of 
Hizbul Chief Salauddin, was coordinating the search for 
potential Muslim recruits. 
  The entire operation brought into open the hand of 
Pakistan's 
ISI, he added. 
  After having enrolled himself in the Unani Medical College 
in 
Gaya in mid-1993, Ahmed had been visiting various hotbeds of 
fundamentalism in Bihar and UP for identifying Muslim youth. 
  Ahmed contacted various madrasas in Etawah, Muzaffamagar, 
Gaya, Calcutta and Bombay. Cells were set up in these places and 
many youth were taken to Kashmir for training in arms and 
explosives. 
  The objective was to create a team of dedicated youth owing 
allegiance to Hizbul Mujahideen and willing to undertake various 
terrorist activities including the assassination of top 
political leaders connected with Kashmir. 
  According to Gupta, most of the recruits belonged to Muslim 
fundamentalist bodies such as the Students Islamic Movement of 
India (SIMI), Students Islamic Organisation (SIO) and Aljehad, 
organisation active in Western UP. 
  Both Khaliq-u-Zaman and Shahid Anis Azmi were active workers 
of SIMI. Khaliq-u-Zaman, who belongs to Hamirpur in UP, worked 
in the Delhi office of SIMI and joined the MUF around six months 
back. 
  After receiving arms training in Anantnag, he helped recruit 
two boys from Etawah who were also later sent to Kashmir for 
training. Shahid Anis Azmi, who originally hails from Azamgarh 
in UP, was associated with the SIMI office in Bombay and joined 
the MUF in 1993. He had since been helping Ahmed recruit Muslim 
youth. 
  A fourth associate, Assadullah, who is presently in the 
custody of the Calcutta police, also figures as a prominent 
member of the network. 
  Assadullah, who is to be brought to the Capital shortly by 
the Delhi Police, was working for the SIO and had been making 
frequent forays into Bangladesh to create hide-outs there for 
the terrorists to escape after carrying out their mission in the 
country. 
  Ahmed has revealed that at least eight youth had been 
recruited so far from various towns and cities to function as 
agents of the Hizbul Mujahideen. 
  Police officials, however, said the figure could be higher. 
Efforts were on to get more information of the activities of 
Ahmed and his associates from some key documents seized from him. 
  Telephone numbers from an electronic wrist watch which Ahmed 
was wearing at the time of his arrest are also being 
investigated. 
  Ahmed has also revealed that a weapons consignment in two 
trucks had been dispatched from Kashmir to various areas in the 
country. Police were making efforts to locate the destination of 
the consignment. 
  Police officials said that although the group had not 
carried 
out any strike, plans were at an advanced stage for terrorist 
strikes in Delhi and Calcutta and funds in this regard had 
already been distributed. 
  The arrested persons were booked under the Arms Act, 
Explosives Act and TADA and remanded to police custody on 
Monday. Further investigations are on. 

