BFN 

<F P=106> [From NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 09 June 94 Morning Edition] </F>
  [Text] The Russians in the "Fourth Siberian Forestry 
Resources Development (KS) Project, a large-scale venture 
involving Japanese and Russian private companies, have proposed 
expanding the scale of the venture. 
  The venture's goal was originally to promote the forestry 
industry of the Russian Far East. However, the Russian proposal 
would add cooperation in the region's defense conversion and in 
the upgrading of its infrastructure. At the same time it would 
increase by 70 percent the supply of wood to Japan. The 
Japanese side is showing opposition to the proposal, citing such 
reasons as the venture's launch two years behind schedule. If 
there is no agreement by the end of July, the two sides will 
break off negotiations. 
  The possibility has thus arisen that the KS Project, 
anticipated as representing Japan-Russian economic exchange, 
will be put on hold. 
  The KS Project's initial framework entailed: (1) the 
Japanese side guaranteeing to purchase wood and processed 
products; and (2) the Russian side procuring with the foreign 
exchange thus earned capital goods for timber cutting, 
transporting, and processing. The project, begun in January 
1992, was expected to generate a total of 1.4 billion dollars 
over five years. There have been 17 main participants on the 
Japanese side, including companies like Marubeni, Nissho Iwai, 
and Mitsubishi Corporation. The Russian side comprises 
forestry-related companies. Both the Japanese and Russian 
Governments have lent their support to the project. 
  Due to economic disorder in Russia, however, such details as 
economic conditions and preferential tax measures were not 
resolved, thereby delaying the start of the venture. 
  The Russian side's present proposal is considered to go 
beyond the framework of the original idea of boosting the 
forestry industry and is now seen as a plan to promote the 
entire economy of the Russian Far East. 
  The Japanese side is reluctant to change the venture's 
framework. The concern is that increasing the supply of wood to 
Japan will tend to exacerbate market conditions. 

