Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Paid advertisement by presidential candidate Andres </F>
Pastrana: "Colombia's Time Has Come"] 
  [Text] Here are the seven key points that Andres Pastrana 
pledges to implement during his administration. 
<H5>  1. Economy </H5>
  We are going to consolidate an economic, expeditious, 
and sustainable economic development model. The time for social 
equality and productive efficiency has come. 
  We are going to consolidate the bases for achieving growth 
rates above 8 percent, which requires the broadening of economic 
opportunities and an increase in the productivity of our workers 
at large and small companies. Development will be sustainable. 
Its objective is to benefit the people, chiefly the weak, 
within a policy of conserving the environment. 
  I pledge to expand and consolidate economic openness, 
guarantee macroeconomic stability, strengthen the productive 
capacity of the private sector, and make our government honest, 
humane, and efficient. 
  To conquer foreign markets and make exports one of the 
pillars of our economic growth, we are going to diminish our 
disadvantages in the labor force, technology, and infrastructure. 
  We are going to eliminate the barriers to our 
competitiveness 
first by continuing the reorganization of our customs service. 
  My government will not favor any particular sector or group, 
nor will it make the interests of a segment of society the 
engine of economic growth. 
<H5>  2. Education </H5>
  We are going to make education the foundation of the 
new Colombian man. The time has come to guarantee equality of 
opportunity and to raise the quality of life for Colombians. 
  Millions of children are unable to enroll in school. We are 
going to ensure that at the end of the decade not a single 
Colombian between the ages of 5 and 15 will be without basic 
education. 
  We are going to improve the quality of our education, 
thinking of our development needs, training teachers, offering 
children and young people school supplies, and adjusting higher 
and technological education to the demands of our economy. 
  We are going to raise public spending on science and 
technology from the current .4 percent to 1.5 percent of gross 
domestic product. To handle modernization needs, we will train 
the current labor force and provide advice to our businessmen. 
  Education is more than desks and blackboards. Schools will 
be the heart of our family and community development policy. 
  We will eliminate the double shifts so students spend less 
time on the streets. We are going to stimulate the healthy use 
of free time in our children and young people. 
<H5>  3. Water and Environment </H5>
  We are going to guarantee the preservation of our 
environment. The time has come to make adequate use of our 
natural resources, in particular, our water and forests. 
  At the conclusion of the four-year period, 90 percent of the 
people will have drinking water and at least 80 percent will 
have excellent sewage service. We are going to stimulate the 
use of unconventional technologies in treating sewage to 
preserve our natural resources. 
  We are going to curb the deterioration of hydric resources 
due to improper use. 
  To preserve our soils, we are going to promote irrigation 
and 
drainage policies that will also incorporate 520,00 new hectares 
into agriculture. 
  We are going to implement a plan to preserve our forestry 
resources and conserve hydrographic basins and minibasins. It 
will become necessary to involve the business sector in a 
program of reforestation and adequate development of 
silviculture and timber industry. 
  We will support scientific research and conduct an inventory 
of our natural resources. 
  We are going to promote environmental education, recreation, 
and tourism so all Colombians will be the defenders of our most 
precious natural resources. 
<H5>  4. Agriculture and Industry </H5>
  We are going to impose an active policy of support for 
agriculture. The time has come for the structural adjustment of 
the livestock sector and agroindustry. 
  Openness has exposed the weaknesses of our agricultural and 
livestock sectors. Farmers are not solely responsible for this 
crisis. It is now up to the government to remove the obstacles 
to raising our productive efficiency and being more competitive 
on the international market. 
  Our goal is to increase exports and improve their quality, 
not to lock ourselves into the domestic market. 
  We are going to reinforce technological development in rural 
areas and build an irrigation infrastructure in places where it 
is most needed. 
  We are going to improve our marketing mechanisms. 
  We are going to develop information and administration 
systems to expedite decisions so farmers can be safe from 
unnecessary risks. 
  It will become indispensable to stress planning and 
orientation so farmers know what, when, and how to plant. We 
are going to turn our peasants into rural businessmen. 
<H5>  5. Infrastructure </H5>
  We are going to modernize and overcome deficiencies in 
the physical infrastructure. The time has come for 
international competitiveness and Colombia's true regional 
integration. 
  Deficiencies in communications, roads, and energy raise the 
cost of production for businessmen and society and make us less 
competitive. It is time modernize our infrastructure. 
  We are going to build the first 750 km of high specification 
freeways, improve 9,000 km of the ones that already exist, and 
provide adequate maintenance to 70,000 km of roads. 
  We are going to repair 1,600 km of railroad. 
  Through a policy of reliability and efficiency, the 
country's 
energy consumption will be balanced. Colombia remains 
vulnerable in electric energy and fuels. 
  We are going to modernize our communications technology. 
  We are going to invest all necessary resources in the 
Atlantic Coast to turn it into the most attractive destination 
of the Caribbean. 
<H5>  6. Security and Justice </H5>
  We are going to restore the rule of law to make our 
country more just. The time has come to guarantee citizens a 
more secure existence. 
  We will be inflexible in crushing and punishing all forms of 
crime. We are going to be ruthless with those who insist on 
destroying the country. We are going to strengthen the Armed 
Forces and the Police and emphasize intelligence mechanisms. 
  We do not endorse the decriminalization of the production, 
trafficking, or consumption of drugs. We are going to support 
programs to substitute crops, control the marketing of chemical 
precursors, and crush drug trafficking without hesitation. 
  We are going to decisively combat kidnapping and guarantee 
that the perpetrators of this horrendous crime are severely 
punished. 
  We are going to stimulate the support of citizens to combat 
this crime. Cynicism, complacency, individualism 
[individualismo], and negligence are Colombia's chief enemies. 
  We are going to defend the human rights of all Colombians. 
  We are going expedite Colombians' access to justice and 
establish mechanisms to reconcile and solve conflicts among 
those involved without the need to appeal to the courts. 
<H5>  7. Modernization of the State </H5>
  We are going to take a step forward in modernizing our 
institutions and government-private sector relations. The time 
has come for a humane, honest, and efficient state. 
  To have a more prosperous country, it is fundamental to have 
a state that is more efficient, modern, and responsible in its 
obligations. We are going to combat without hesitation any 
form of corruption in either the government or private sector by 
strengthening the Attorney General's Office and advancing all 
legal and administrative measures to attain that goal. 
  We are going to further administrative and fiscal 
decentralization so territorial entities can have true autonomy 
and there can be an efficient allocation of jurisdiction and 
resources. We are going to orient public spending toward a 
search for greater efficiency and equality in public 
administration. 
  We are going to introduce in the public sector modern 
methods 
of organization and management to provide better service. 
  We are going to give dignity to public functions to 
extricate 
them from political interests so they can be at the service of 
all. 

