BFN 

  [Text] The failure of a Solidarity-like workers' movement 
earlier this month has dampened speculation that growing worker 
discontent alone might threaten China's political stability in 
the near future. Political dissident Liu Nianchun's elaborately 
designed League for the Protection of the Rights of the Working 
People fell apart amid internal bickering almost as soon as it 
was announced on March 9. According to sources in the dissident 
community, few of the 120 activists who signed the original 
petition to protect worker rights knew Liu planned to set up a 
full-blown organisation. 
  Nevertheless, Chinese officials appear concerned that worker 
unrest may still threaten what has been the fundamental 
achievement of Deng Xiaoping's China: sustained rapid economic 
growth. The urgency with which Beijing is dealing with labour 
issues suggests it believes it is in a race against time to 
improve working conditions before strikes, sabotage and a 
breakdown in discipline ruin the economic miracle based on 
foreign investment that has brought considerable wealth to some 
parts of the country. 
  There is evidence from some regions that labour unrest is 
accelerating: Fujian province was hit by 47 work stoppages or 
strikes in 1993, three times more than the previous year. More 
than 40 per cent of these incidents occurred in Taiwan-funded 
enterprises. The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences warned of 
"more unemployed workers, strikes and violence against plant 
officials" in a recent report on China's social and economic 
outlook for 1994. 
  New laws being rushed into place include a new national 
labour law which Beijing had been agonising over for more than 
10 years. They are aimed at establishing a legal basis for 
stricter inspections of factory conditions by local labour 
officials. Beijing has also passed laws ostensibly aimed at 
foreign funded factories which rely on cheap labour, covering 
minimum wages and the establishment of official trade unions. 
But whether these measures will stem the rise of worker 
discontent remains to be seen. 
  "There may be a lot of talk at the national level, but it's 
very different on the shop floor," said Wang Wei-ling, a 
research with the Hong Kong-based labour rights group Asian 
Monitor. "Many managers -- especially in foreign-funded 
enterprises -- think that the new regulations do not apply to 
them." 
  The rapid expansion of foreign-funded enterprises, which now 
employ more than 6 million, and the gradual cutting of 17 
million jobs from state enterprises, have given rise to growing 
labour tensions in both sectors. In the foreign-funded sector, 
lax supervision of worker conditions by local officials eager to 
attract foreign investment has left scope for abuse. Poor 
safety conditions and military-style management have caused 
relations with foreign bosses to deteriorate to the point where 
"revenge strikes" are becoming a regular occurrence. 
  Routine reports of factory fires, beatings and abuse of 
workers -- many of whom are girls from the countryside -- as 
well as delays in payment of wages and many other basic problems 
have given foreign funded enterprises a Dickensian reputation. 
  Walk-outs hit two South Korean shoe factories in Tianjin 
last 
year after inefficient workers were forced to kneel in front of 
their South Korean managers, the Beijing Youth News reported. 
An official survey of 11,679 in-patients at medical clinics in 
Shenzhen's Baoan district last year found that 9 percent were 
workers injured in industrial accidents at foreign funded 
enterprises. 
  In the state sector, worker problems revolve around the 
threat of lay-offs as well as the steady withdrawal of fringe 
benefits at the same time as salaries are frozen. Beijing has 
launched ambitious plans to help the long term jobless, but 
admits it will be able to find jobs for only 7 million of the 17 
million expected to be laid off from state firms in the next few 
years. 
  Internal reforms introduced in state enterprises have also 
caused problems, Wang Weiling said. "Because of the emphasis on 
restructuring into private or collective ownership, workers in 
state enterprises are losing the democratic rights they once 
enjoyed," she said. "In addition to the threat of unemployment 
and a lack of social security, the workers' role in 
decision-making has been reduced." 
  Strikes are technically illegal and were once unheard of. 
But now, strikes are often mooted when workers are 
discontented, even over what would once have been considered 
trifling matters. The Taiwan-funded Zhongxing Department Store 
in Shanghai lost an estimated 100,000 renminbi [Rmb] (HK$88,800) 
following a one-day strike by its 100 employees in January. 
Their grievance was that the work code had been amended to make 
anyone late for work liable to losing their Rmb50 monthly bonus. 
  But most workers remain afraid of strikes, which not only 
could cost them their jobs but could even put them in jail. 
"Workers we interviewed in Shenzhen told us the local trade 
unions visited and said: `You came to the free trade zone to 
earn money, not to cause trouble'," Wang Wei-ling said. "They 
were told they could be sent back to the countryside if they 
continued with their strikes and slowdowns," she said. 
  A phone-in show on management-worker relations on Guangdong 
provincial radio last month was abruptly ended after the seventh 
caller said he was puzzled at the lack of impulse among workers 
to stage a strike. "The presenter cut off the caller and 
announced that this was the end of the discussion," according to 
a BBC transcript of the show. 
  It was apparently against this backdrop of silenced worker 
discontent that Liu Nianchun and about 120 other dissident 
intellectuals launched their plan for an autonomous workers' 
league. "Only the corrupt officials and those unscrupulous 
merchants who collude with them to grab super-profits are not 
working people," the league's founding charter said. 
  Although the league soon faltered, the Guangdong Federation 
of Trade Unions (GFIU) was sufficiently scared by the threat of 
an independent, nationwide workers' league to carry out a survey 
in mid-March on the sentiments of workers in the province, 
source at the trade federation said. 
  "We concluded that such a movement would not gain much 
support because it would be viewed as illegal," a GFTU official 
said, making a veiled reference to those who were arrested in 
1989 for joining similar movements. "Our task this year is to 
educate the workers to consider the big picture," he said. 
"They must be taught that the protection of their rights is 
best carried out according to legal mechanisms rather than by a 
person or a group claiming to represent them." 
  But opinions remain divided within the labour movement 
inside 
and outside China over how to improve the situation. Most 
contentious is whether China's official trade union, whose 
constitution says its role is to "advocate the party line and 
help economic growth" can be of real help. 
  The All-China Federation of Trade Unions has vowed to 
organise workers in more than half the country's foreign funded 
enterprises this year after studies found that only a tenth of 
such firms have union representatives. "Many of us feel that 
working through the official unions is the only realistic way," 
a Beijing dissident said. 
  The theory behind this emerging consensus between labour 
officials and labour activists is that demands will only be 
tolerated and effective if they are raised through official 
channels. According to this view, any non-official trade union 
is unlikely to achieve anything tangible for workers: Those set 
up by workers would be quickly shut down, while those set up by 
managers would be mainly interested in boosting efficiency. 
  An official with the Shanghai Federation of Trade Unions 
(SFTU) said the idea of forming autonomous trade unions was "not 
correct". "A lot of these ideas are just plans by foreign bosses 
to split the trade union federation," he said. According to the 
union official, Shanghai labour department officials this year 
cracked down on three worker organisations that were set up with 
management backing in foreign-funded enterprises. 
  The unofficial groups went under different names: A welfare 
society in a Taiwan enterprise, a recreation club in an American 
enterprise and a workers' committee in a European enterprise, 
but the SFTU viewed all of them as attempts to replace its role. 
"We will not allow any of these `yellow trade unions' to grow 
up in China," the official said. Only 1,300 of Shanghai's 3,400 
operating foreign-funded enterprises had set up official trade 
unions by December last year, the official said. 
  Another element in the emerging consensus concerns the use 
of 
labour contracts, which would give the necessary legal basis to 
employees seeking arbitration settlements as well as inspectors 
seeking to impose fines on enterprises. More than 
three-quarters of all foreign-funded enterprises in the Xiamen, 
Zhuhai and Shantou special economic zones still have not signed 
employment contracts with their workers, the Beijing backed 
OUTLOOK WEEKLY [LIAOWANG] reported in January. But in the end, 
labour activists say everything will depend on whether China's 
Ministry of Labour as well as provincial and local labour 
inspection departments can carry out their supervisory roles. 
  One-off "mass inspection campaigns", such as the one carried 
out in Guangdong after 84 workers were killed in a Shenzhen 
factory fire in November, are in no way considered to be 
adequate replacement for a strict inspection system immune to 
corruption. 

