Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> ["List of Deputies of the State Duma of the Russian </F>
Federation Federal Assembly Elected in the Federation-Wide 
Electoral District," preceded by Decree No. 155 of the Central 
Electoral Commission of the Russian Federation "On Establishing 
the Overall Results of the Election of Deputies of the State 
Duma of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly." For Part II 
listing of deputies of the State Duma elected by single-seat 
electoral districts, please see pages 8-21 of the 5 January 1994 
FBIS Report: Central Eurasia, FBIS-USR-94-001.] 
  [Text] 
<H6>  Decree of the Central Electoral Commission of the Russian 
Federation "On Establishing the Overall Results of the Election 
of Deputies of the State Duma of the Russian Federation Federal 
Assembly" </H6>
  An election of deputies of the State Duma of the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly was held on 12 December. 
  Based on a protocol of the Central Electoral Commission of 
the Russian Federation on the results of the election in the 
federation-wide electoral district, dated 25 December 1993, 
protocols of district electoral commissions for elections to the 
State Duma of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly, and in 
keeping with Article 40 of the Statute on Elections of State 
Duma Deputies in 1993, the Central Electoral Commission has 
established that, as a result of voting, 444 deputies of the 
State Duma of the Russian Federation have been elected, of whom: 
225 were elected in the federation-wide electoral district and 
219 were elected in single-seat electoral districts. 
  Elections were null and void in the territory of the 
Republic 
of Tatarstan in five electoral districts: Almetyevskiy No. 23, 
Moskovskiy No. 24, Nizhnekamskiy No. 26, and Privolzhskiy No. 
27. In each of the districts, the total number of valid ballots 
came to less than 25 percent of the total number of registered 
voters. In Naberezhnochelninskiy Electoral District No. 25, an 
election of the deputy was not held in view of the fact that one 
candidate had been registered. 
  Elections were not held in Electoral District No. 32 (the 
Chechen Republic). 
  The Central Electoral Commission RESOLVES: 
  1. To recognize the election of deputies of the State Duma 
of 
the Russian Federation Federal Assembly as valid in the 
federation-wide electoral district and 219 single-seat electoral 
districts. 
  2. To publish in the press a report of the Central Electoral 
Commission of the Russian Federation on the overall results of 
the election of deputies of the State Duma of the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly and a list of deputies of the State 
Duma. 
  [Signed] Chairman of the Central Electoral Commission of the 
Russian Federation N.T. Ryabov 
  [Signed] Secretary of the Central Electoral Commission of 
the 
Russian Federation V.A. Zagulyayev 
  Moscow, 25 December 1993 
  No. 155 
<H6>  List of Deputies of the State Duma of the Russian Federation 
Federal Assembly Elected in the Federation-Wide Electoral 
District </H6>
<H6>  The Agrarian Party of Russia </H6>
  Mikhail Ivanovich Lapshin, born in 1934, Russian, 
higher education, chairman of the Agrarian Party of Russia, 
president of the Lenin's Commandments joint-stock company, 
village of Dubnevo, Moscow Oblast. 
  Aleksandr Semenovich Davydov, born in 1932, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of 
Russia, chairman of the Central Committee of the Trade Union of 
Employees of the Agro-Industrial Complex of Russia, city of 
Moscow. 
  Aleksandr Kharlampiyevich Zaveryukha, born in 
1940, Ukrainian, higher education, no party affiliation, deputy 
chairman of the Russian Federation Government, city of Moscow. 
  Aleksandr Grigoryevich Nazarchuk, born in 1939, 
Ukrainian, higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of 
Russia, chairman of the Agro-Industrial Union, city of Barnaul. 
  Magomedtagir Medzhidovich Abdulbasirov, born in 
1935, Avar, higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of 
Russia, chairman of the Russian Federation Committee for the 
Food and Processing Industry, city of Moscow. 
  Igor Yevgenyevich Klochkov, born in 1939, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, chairman of the board of 
the Solidarity Russian Bank, city of Moscow. 
  Ivan Petrovich Rybkin, born in 1946, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of Russia, deputy 
chief of the Main Directorate of Water Management of the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Agriculture, city of Moscow. 
  Gennadiy Timofeyevich Dyudyayev, born in 1947, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of 
Russia, chairman of the Kemerovo Oblast Agrarian Union, city of 
Leninsk-Kuznetskiy. 
  Sergey Nikolayevich Bystrov, born in 1937, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of 
Russia, chief of the of the economics department of the 
Stavropolye scientific-production association, village of 
Shpakovskoye, Stavropol Kray. 
  Nikolay Savelyevich Kotov, born in 1936, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of Russia, 
general director of the Kuban joint-stock company, village of 
Berezanskaya, Krasnodar Kray. 
  Vladimir Borisovich Isakov, born in 1950, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, professor of the Urals 
State Legal Academy, city of Yekaterinburg. 
  Gennadiy Aleksandrovich Medentsov, born in 1936, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of 
Russia, chairman of the oblast committee of the Trade Union of 
Employees of the Agro-Industrial Complex, city of Volgograd. 
  Aleksandr Dmitriyevich Mikhaylov, born in 1929, 
Russian, higher education, deputy chairman of the Agrarian Party 
of Russia, chief of the Main Administration for Kolkhoz Affairs 
of the Russian Federation Ministry of Agriculture, city of 
Moscow. 
  Andrey Anatolyevich Popov, born in 1963, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, engineer-economist at 
the Kompozit small enterprise, city of Volgograd. 
  Gennadiy Vasilyevich Kulik, born in 1935, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of Russia, 
consultant to the Ineks-Intereksport company, city of Moscow. 
  Nikolay Vasilyevich Ivanov, born in 1952, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of Russia, chief 
of the Dubrovskiy Rayon Agricultural Administration, settlement 
of Dubrovka, Bryansk Oblast. 
  Vasiliy Fedorovich Vershinin, born in 1940, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, member of the 
peasant-owner farm Dieko-3, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Ivanovich Naumov, born in 1929, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of Russia, chief 
of the Main Territorial Administration of the Russian Federation 
Ministry of Agriculture, city of Moscow. 
  Vitaliy Vladimirovich Gukov, born in 1948, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of 
Russia, chairman of the Kursk Agro-Industrial Union, city of 
Kursk. 
  Nikolay Avksentyevich Sukhoy, born in 1941, 
Ukrainian, higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of 
Russia, vice president of the Rosselkhozvodstroy republic 
corporation, city of Moscow. 
  Petr Vasilyevich Ivantayev, born in 1942, Chuvash, 
higher education, member of the Agrarian Party of Russia, 
chairman of the Chuvash Republic Committee of the Trade Union of 
Employees of the Agro-Industrial Complex, city of Cheboksary. 
<H6>  The Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin Bloc </H6>
  Grigoriy Alekseyevich Yavlinskiy, born in 1952, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, chairman of the 
board of the Center for Economic and Political Research 
(EPIcenter), city of Moscow. 
  Aleksey Yuryevich Mikhaylov, born in 1963, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, leading 
research associate of EPIcenter, city of Moscow. 
  Mikhail Mikhaylovich Zadornov, born in 1963, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, leading 
research associate of EPIcenter, city of Moscow. 
  Sergey Viktorovich Ivanenko, born in 1959, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, leading 
research associate of EPIcenter, city of Moscow. 
  Aleksey Yuryevich Melnikov, born in 1964, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, senior research 
associate of EPIcenter, city of Moscow. 
  Tatyana Vladimirovna Yarygina, born in 1953, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, leading 
research associate of EPIcenter, city of Moscow. 
  Viktor Leonidovich Sheynis, born in 1931, Jewish, 
higher education, no party affiliation, deputy chairman of the 
Committee for Legislative Proposals of the Russian Federation 
President, city of Moscow. 
  Nikolay Yakovlevich Petrakov, born in 1937, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, director of the 
Institute of Market Problems of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 
city of Moscow. 
  Vyacheslav Vladimirovich Igrunov, born in 1948, 
Russian, incomplete higher education, no party affiliation, 
director of the Institute of Humanities and Political Research, 
city of Moscow. 
  Anatoliy Leonidovich Adamishin, born in 1934, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, first deputy 
minister of foreign affairs of the Russian Federation, city of 
Moscow. 
  Igor Aleksandrovich Yakovenko, born in 1951, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Republican Party of the 
Russian Federation, director of the Monitoring Russian 
Sociological Service, city of Moscow. 
  Anatoliy Grigoryevich Golov, born in 1946, 
Russian, higher education, chairman of the Social-Democratic 
Party of the Russian Federation, city of St. Petersburg. 
  Valeriy Vasilyevich Borshchev, born in 1943, 
Russian, higher education, member of the party Russian 
Christian-Democratic Union--New Democracy, city of Moscow. 
  Petr Borisovich Shelishch, born in 1945, Jewish, 
higher education, no party affiliation, chief of the chair of 
social work at the Northwestern Cadre Center, city of St. 
Petersburg. 
  Vladimir Petrovich Averchev, born in 1946, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, counselor of 
the Russian Federation Embassy in the United States of America. 
  Ivan Dmitriyevich Grachev, born in 1952, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, department chief at the 
Kazan Tekhfotoproekt scientific research institute, city of 
Kazan. 
  Oksana Genrikhovna Dmitriyeva, born in 1958, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, chief of the 
regional diagnostics laboratory of the St. Petersburg Economics 
and Finance University, city of St. Petersburg. 
  Vyacheslav Nikolayevich Shostakovskiy, born in 
1937, Ukrainian, higher education, chairman of the Political 
Council of the Russian Federation Republican Party, director of 
the Center for Social Knowledge of the International Foundation 
for Socioeconomic and Political Research, city of Moscow. 
  Yevgeniy Arshakovich Ambartsumov, born in 1929, 
Armenian, higher education, no party affiliation, member of the 
Commission for Legislative Proposals of the Russian Federation 
President, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Nikolayevich Lysenko, born in 1956, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Republican Party of the 
Russian Federation, member of the Commission for Legislative 
Proposals of the Russian Federation President, city of Moscow. 
<H6>  Russia's Choice </H6>
  Yegor Timurovich Gaydar, born in 1956, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Russia's Choice electoral 
association, first deputy chairman of the Russian Federation 
Government, city of Moscow. 
  Anatoliy Borisovich Chubays, born in 1955, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, deputy chairman of the Russian Federation 
Government, city of Moscow. 
  Dmitriy Antonovich Volkogonov, born in 1928, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, adviser to the president of the Russian 
Federation for defense and security issues, city of Moscow. 
  Sergey Aleksandrovich Filatov, born in 1936, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, chief of the 
Administration of the Russian Federation President, city of 
Moscow. 
  Aleksey Mikhaylovich Yemelyanov, born in 1935, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, chief of the chair of agrarian economics 
at the imeni M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, city of 
Moscow. 
  Mikhail Nikiforovich Poltoranin, born in 1939, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, chief of the Federal Information Center 
of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Pavel Grigoryevich Bunich, born in 1925, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Democratic Initiative Party, 
first prorector of the Academy of the National Economy, city of 
Moscow. 
  Gennadiy Eduardovich Burbulis, born in 1945, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, chairman of the Strategy Center, city of 
Moscow. 
  Boris Andreyevich Zolotukhin, born in 1930, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, deputy chairman of the Commission for 
Legislative Proposals of the Russian Federation President, city 
of Moscow. 
  Petr Olegovich Aven, born in 1955, Russian, higher 
education, member of the Russia's Choice electoral association, 
general director of the FinPA [expansion not identified], city 
of Moscow. 
  Aleksey Leonardovich Golovkov, born in 1956, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, executive director of the All-Russian 
Association of Privatized and Private Enterprises, city of 
Moscow. 
  Yuliy Solomonovich Gusman, born in 1943, Jewish, 
higher education, member of the Russia's Choice electoral 
association, director of the Central House of Cinematographers, 
city of Moscow. 
  Arkadiy Nikolayevich Murashev, born in 1957, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, chairman of the Center for 
Liberal-Conservative Policy, city of Moscow. 
  Sergey Nikolayevich Yushenkov, born in 1950, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, first deputy chief of the Federal 
Information Center of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Gleb Pavlovich Yakunin, born in 1934, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Democratic Russia movement, 
member of the Commission for Legislative Proposals of the 
Russian Federation President, city of Moscow. 
  Vasiliy Illarionovich Selyunin, born in 1927, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Democratic Russia 
movement, retired, city of Moscow. 
  Nikolay Nikolayevich Vorontsov, born in 1934, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Democratic Russia 
movement, chief research associate of the imeni Koltsov 
Institute of Developmental Biology of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences, city of Moscow. 
  Andrey Aleksandrovich Nuykin, born in 1931, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, deputy director for science of the 
Scientific-Research Institute of Cinema Art, city of Moscow. 
  Mikhail Mikhaylovich Molostvov, born in 1934, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, temporarily not working. 
  Aleksandr Petrovich Aulov, born in 1952, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Russia's Choice electoral 
association, laboratory chief at the Urals Cadre Center, city of 
Yekaterinburg. 
  Ilya Iosifovich Zaslavskiy, born in 1960, Jewish, 
higher education, member of the Democratic Russia movement, 
adviser to the minister of the economy of the Russian 
Federation, city of Moscow. 
  Valentin Ivanovich Tatarchuk, born in 1937, 
Ukrainian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, vice president of the Russian Timber 
Merchants joint-stock company-corporation, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Vasilyevich Gritsan, born in 1937, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, chief of the legal center of the AKKOR 
[Association of Peasant Farms and Agricultural Cooperatives of 
Russia] Kuban Chapter, city of Krasnodar. 
  Anatoliy Yefimovich Shabad, born in 1939, 
Armenian, higher education, member of the Democratic Russia 
movement, leading research associate of the Physics Institute of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences, city of Moscow. 
  Boris Mikhaylovich Titenko, born in 1954, 
Ukrainian, higher education, member of the Republican Party of 
the Russian Federation, chairman of the Rostov regional 
organization of the Republican Party of the Russian Federation, 
city of Rostov-na-Donu. 
  Kirill Borisovich Ignatyev, born in 1966, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, first deputy chairman of 
the company--chief of the administration of the RGTRK [Russian 
State Television and Radio Broadcasting Company] Ostankino, city 
of Moscow. 
  Anton Yuryevich Fedorov, born in 1961, Russian, 
incomplete higher education, no party affiliation, deputy chief 
of the Administration of the Russian Federation President, 
settlement of Usovo, Moscow Oblast. 
  Viktor Ivanovich Danilov-Danilyan, born in 1938, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, minister of environmental protection and 
natural resources of the Russian Federation, city of Moscow. 
  Grigoriy Alekseyevich Tomchin, born in 1947, 
Jewish, higher education, member of the Democratic Russia 
movement, director of the department of privatization--deputy 
chairman of the Committee for the Management of St. Petersburg 
Property. 
  Vladimir Vladimirovich Tetelmin, born in 1944, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Republican Party of the 
Russian Federation, professor at the Krasnoyarsk Institute of 
Civil Engineering. 
  Bela Anatolyevna Denisenko, born in 1941, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Democratic Russia movement, 
laboratory chief at the Institute for the Economy of the Period 
of Transition, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Nikolayevich Yuzhakov, born in 1951, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Democratic Russia 
movement, rector of the Volga Area Cadre Center, city of Saratov. 
  Gennadiy Alekseyevich Alekseyev, born in 1945, 
Russian, secondary technical education, member of the Russia's 
Choice electoral association, specialist-expert of the 
Administration of the Russian Federation President, city of 
Irkutsk. 
  Olga Kirillovna Zastrozhnaya, born in 1944, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, deputy chairman of the Voronezh City 
Soviet of People's Deputies, city of Voronezh. 
  Andrey Ivanovich Generalov, born in 1964, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, president of the Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry of the city of Tutayev, Yaroslavl 
Oblast. 
  Yevgeniy Stepanovich Kuznetsov, born in 1944, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, representative 
of the Russian Federation president in Volgograd Oblast, city of 
Volgograd. 
  Yevgeniy Yuryevich Sidorov, born in 1938, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, minister of culture of 
the Russian Federation, city of Moscow. 
  Mikhail Aleksandrovich Danilov, born in 1937, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Democratic Russia 
movement, chief of the analysis division of the Office of the 
Russian Federation President's Representation in Arkhangelsk 
Oblast, city of Arkhangelsk. 
  Boris Georgiyevich Saltykov, born in 1940, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, minister of science and technical policy 
of the Russian Federation, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Aleksandrovich Ryzhkov, born in 1966, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Russia's Choice 
electoral association, secretary of the head of the Altay Kray 
Administration, city of Barnaul. 
<H6>  The Democratic Party of Russia </H6>
  Nikolay Ilyich Travkin, born in 1946, Russian, 
higher education, leader of the Democratic Party of Russia, head 
of the Shakhovskoy Rayon Administration, Moscow Oblast. 
  Stanislav Sergeyevich Govorukhin, born in 1936, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, filmmaker, city 
of Moscow. 
  Oleg Timofeyevich Bogomolov, born in 1927, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, director of the 
Institute of the World Economy, city of Moscow. 
  Nikolay Vasilyevich Fedorov, born in 1958, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, attorney, city 
of Moscow. 
  Sergey Yuryevich Glazyev, born in 1961, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, laboratory chief at the 
Central Institute of Mathematical Economics, city of Moscow. 
  Sergey Vasilyevich Zapolskiy, born in 1947, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, chief of a 
legal services office, city of Moscow. 
  Valentin Alekseyevich Kotlyar, born in 1951, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Democratic Party of 
Russia, deputy head of the Voronezh Oblast Administration, city 
of Voronezh. 
  Nikolay Maksimovich Tropin, born in 1947, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Democratic Party of Russia, 
temporarily not working. 
  Irina Borisovna Zubkevich, born in 1944, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Democratic Party of Russia, 
chairman of the Nizhniy Novgorod Oblast organization of the 
Democratic Party of Russia, city of Nizhniy Novgorod. 
  Viktor Lvovich Talanov, born in 1951, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Democratic Party of Russia, 
temporarily not working. 
  Aleksey Ivanovich Revushkin, born in 1967, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Democratic Party of 
Russia, chairman of the Samara Oblast chapter of the Democratic 
Party of Russia, city of Samara. 
  German Yuryevich Karelin, born in 1956, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Democratic Party of Russia, 
chairman of the Sverdlovsk Oblast organization of the Democratic 
Party of Russia, city of Yekaterinburg. 
  Yuriy Nikolayevich Yakovlev, born in 1950, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Democratic Party of 
Russia, chairman of the Maritime Kray organization of the 
Democratic Party of Russia, Maritime Kray. 
  Feliks Semenovich Pashennykh, born in 1952, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Democratic Party of 
Russia, director of the fund of the Krasnoyarsk Kray 
organization of the Democratic Party of Russia, city of 
Krasnoyarsk. 
<H6>  The Communist Party of Russia </H6>
  Gennadiy Andreyevich Zyuganov, born in 1944, 
Russian, higher education, chairman of the Central Executive 
Committee of the Communist Party of the Russian Federation, city 
of Moscow. 
  Vitaliy Ivanovich Sevastyanov, born in 1935, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, instructor-cosmonaut-test pilot, deputy 
department chief at the Energiya scientific production 
association, city of Moscow. 
  Valentin Vasilyevich Chikin, born in 1932, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, editor in chief of the newspaper SOVETSKAYA 
ROSSIYA, city of Moscow. 
  Valentin Semenovich Martemyanov, born in 1932, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, department chairman at the State Legal 
Academy of Moscow, city of Moscow. 
  Anatoliy Vasilyevich Ionov, born in 1946, Russian, 
secondary education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, heat treater at the Ryazan instrument-making 
plant, city of Ryazan. 
  Gennadiy Nikolayevich Seleznev, born in 1947, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, vice president of the PRAVDA international 
joint-stock company, member of the editorial board of the 
newspaper PRAVDA, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Vladimirovich Semago, born in 1947, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, general director of a joint venture, city of 
Moscow. 
  Kazbek Aslanbekovich Tsiku, born in 1935, Adyg, 
higher education, member of the Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation, chairman of the economic theory department at the 
Adyg State University, city of Maykop. 
  Yuriy Konstantinovich Sevenard, born in 1935, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, general director of the 
Lengidroenergospetsstroy production, construction, and 
installation association, city of St. Petersburg. 
  Viktor Ilyich Zorkaltsev, born in 1936, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation, temporarily not working. 
  Valentin Alekseyevich Kovalev, born in 1944, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, professor of 
the Law Institute of the Russian Federation Ministry of Internal 
Affairs, city of Moscow. 
  Oleg Orestovich Mironov, born in 1939, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation, professor at the department of constitutional law at 
the Saratov Law Institute, city of Saratov. 
  Yevgeniy Sergeyevich Krasnitskiy, born in 1951, 
Russian, secondary education, member of the Communist Party of 
the Russian Federation, secretary of the standing commission for 
communications and information science of the St. Petersburg 
Soviet of People's Deputies. 
  Aleksandr Nikolayevich Zaytsev, born in 1953, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, serviceman, 
city of Moscow. 
  Yuriy Pavlovich Ivanov, born in 1944, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation, attorney, member of the Moscow Oblast bar, city of 
Moscow. 
  Ruslan Georgiyevich Gostev, born in 1945, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation, professor at the Voronezh Pedagogical Institute, 
city of Voronezh. 
  Vladimir Anatolyevich Bokov, born in 1927, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, temporarily not working. 
  Valentin Ivanovich Nikitin, born in 1948, 
Ukrainian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of 
the Russian Federation, chief of the State Inspectorate of 
Quality of Services and Consumer Services to the Population of 
the Republic of Bashkortostan, city of Ufa. 
  Yevgeniy Alekseyevich Kosterin, born in 1949, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, section chief of the Supreme Soviet of the 
Republic of Mordvinia, city of Saransk. 
  Viktor Stepanovich Shevelukha, born in 1929, 
Ukrainian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of 
the Russian Federation, academician-secretary of the division of 
plant cultivation and selection of the Russian Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, city of Moscow. 
  Vadim Donatovich Filimonov, born in 1931, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation, chairman of the criminal law department of the Tomsk 
State University, city of Tomsk. 
  Sergey Nikolayevich Reshulskiy, born in 1951, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, temporarily not working. 
  Nikolay Gavrilovich Bindyukov, born in 1945, 
Belarusian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of 
the Russian Federation, director of the Institute of Pedagogical 
Education of the Novgorod State University, city of Novgorod. 
  Yuriy Yuryevich Leonov, born in 1963, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation, chairman of the executive committee of the Zashchita 
republic trade union association, city of Moscow. 
  Leonid Nikolayevich Petrovskiy, born in 1948, 
Belarusian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of 
the Russian Federation, chairman of the Gorki collective 
enterprise, Smolensk Oblast. 
  Aleksandr Konstantinovich Frolov, born in 1949, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, political commentator of the newspaper 
SOVETSKAYA ROSSIYA, city of Moscow. 
  Nikolay Mitrofanovich Pyatchits, born in 1947, 
Russian, secondary education, member of the Communist Party of 
the Russian Federation, engine test operator of the ZIL [imeni 
Likhachev Plant] joint-stock machine-building association, city 
of Moscow. 
  Lyubov Vasilyevna Oleynik, born in 1949, 
Ukrainian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of 
the Russian Federation, temporarily not working. 
  Omar Omarovich Begov, born in 1937, Avar, higher 
education, member of the Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation, general director of the association of railway 
restaurants of the Makhachkala Division of the North Caucasus 
Railroad, city of Makhachkala. 
  Viktor Grigoryevich Kosenko, born in 1945, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, chief physician of the Krasnodar Kray 
clinical psychiatric hospital, city of Krasnodar. 
  Tatyana Semenovna Teletkova, born in 1949, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, teacher of mathematics at the Bolshaya 
Sosnovka Secondary School, village of Bolshaya Sosnovka, Perm 
Oblast. 
  Alevtina Viktorovna Aparina, born in 1941, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, first secretary of the Volgograd Oblast 
Committee of the Communist Party of the Russian Federation, city 
of Volgograd. 
<H6>  The Liberal-Democratic Party </H6>
  Viktor Vasilyevich Kobelev, born in 1943, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic Party of 
Russia, chief of staff of the Central Committee of the 
Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Vyacheslav Antonovich Marychev, born in 1939, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, director of the club of a steel-rolling plant, 
city of St. Petersburg. 
  Vladimir Pavlovich Ivanov, born in 1946, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic Party of 
Russia, head of the Krasnoyarsk regional organization of the 
Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of Krasnoyarsk. 
  Aleksey Valentinovich Mitrofanov, born in 1962, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, minister of foreign affairs in the shadow 
cabinet of the Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of 
Moscow. 
  Stanislav Mikhaylovich Zhebrovskiy, born in 1942, 
Russian, higher education, deputy chairman of the 
Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Zakharovich Gvozdarev, born in 1951, 
Ukrainian, higher education, deputy chairman of the 
Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Aleksandr Dmitriyevich Vengerovskiy, born in 1953, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, deputy director of the All-Russian 
Intersectoral Study and Science Center for Computer Technology 
and Information Science, city of Moscow. 
  Sergey Nikolayevich Abeltsev, born in 1961, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, deputy director of the imeni Lenin Kolkhoz, 
Moscow Oblast. 
  Anatoliy Mikhaylovich Kashpirovskiy, born in 1939, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, president of 
the Foundation for Researching the A.M. Kashpirovskiy 
Phenomenon, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Kuzmich Gusev, born in 1932, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, vice president of the 
Industrialist scientific-production corporation, city of Moscow. 
  Yuriy Yevgenyevich Buzov, born in 1955, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic Party of 
Russia, regional director of the Neva-Chup-Chups joint-stock 
company, city of Moscow. 
  Anatoliy Stepanovich Sidorov, born in 1933, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, general 
director of the Institute of Entrepreneurship Economics and 
Organization of the Russian Academy of Sciences, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Aleksandrovich Lisichkin, born in 1941, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, president of 
the Futurum concern, city of Moscow. 
  Mikhail Yakovlevich Lemeshev, born in 1927, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, consultant to 
the Russian Academy of Sciences, city of Moscow. 
  Oleg Aleksandrovich Finko, born in 1941, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic Party of 
Russia, editor in chief of YURIDICHESKAYA GAZETA, city of Moscow. 
  Aleksandr Ivanovich Kozyrev, born in 1949, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, chief learned 
secretary of the AENPD [expansion not identified] of Russia, 
vice president of the International Association of Economic 
Historians, city of Moscow. 
  Yuriy Pavlovich Kuznetsov, born in 1947, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic Party of 
Russia, psychoanalyst with the International Institute for the 
Reserve Potential of Man, city of St. Petersburg. 
  Vitaliy Yevgenyevich Zhuravlev, born in 1964, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Social Justice Party, 
chairman of the Humanism and Democracy humanitarian foundation, 
city of Moscow. 
  Sergey Vyacheslavovich Kalashnikov, born in 1951, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, president of the Neftekhim Trading House 
joint-stock company, city of Krasnogorsk, Moscow Oblast. 
  Mikhail Nikolayevich Sidorov, born in 1947, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, deputy director 
for scientific work of the Economic Scientific-Research 
Institute of the Russian Federation Ministry of the Economy, 
city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Viktorovich Pchelkin, born in 1967, 
Russian, special secondary education, member of the 
Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, chief of the youth 
department of the Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of 
Moscow. 
  Vladimir Mikhaylovich Borzyuk, born in 1952, 
Russian, secondary education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, head of the regional organization of the 
Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia in Orel Oblast, city of Orel. 
  Sergey Aleksandrovich Korobov, born in 1958, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, coordinator of the Penza Oblast organization of 
the Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of Penza. 
  Viktor Ulyanovich Korniyenko, born in 1937, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, department chief of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Yevgeniy Yuryevich Loginov, born in 1965, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, serviceman, cadet of the 
Humanitarian Academy of the Russian Federation Armed Forces, 
city of Moscow. 
  Sergey Aleksandrovich Churkin, born in 1956, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, coordinator of the Vologda Oblast organization 
of the Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of Vologda. 
  Sergey Vladimirovich Sychev, born in 1962, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, student of the Diplomatic Academy of the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Foreign Affairs, city of Moscow. 
  Mikhail Nikolayevich Snezhkov, born in 1945, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, chairman of the Colleague student, creative, 
cooperative scientific-technical society, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Ilyich Novikov, born in 1960, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, director of the Lakur 
limited-liability company, city of Glazov, the Udmurt Republic. 
  Tatyana Ivanovna Bulgakova, born in 1945, Russian, 
special secondary education, no party affiliation, director of 
the Meteor club for children and teenagers, city of Moscow. 
  Eleonora Valentinovna Mitrofanova, born in 1953, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, chief of the 
EKOLEKS law firm, city of Moscow. 
  Viktor Grigoryevich Vishnyakov, born in 1931, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation, leading research associate of the Institute 
of Legislation and Comparative Law Studies, city of Moscow. 
  Nikolay Pavlovich Astafyev, born in 1940, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, department chief in the 
Moscow Oblast Procuracy, city of Lyubertsy, Moscow Oblast. 
  Yevgeniy Petrovich Ishchenko, born in 1946, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, chairman of the 
department of criminal law of the Urals State Legal Academy, 
city of Yekaterinburg. 
  Viktor Petrovich Ivanov, born in 1938, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, deputy editor in chief 
of the newspaper VSEROSSIYSKIYE NOVOSTI, city of Moscow. 
  Yevgeniy Vyacheslavovich Tuinov, born in 1954, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, chief of the 
department of information of YURIDICHESKAYA GAZETA, writer, 
journalist, city of St. Petersburg. 
  Boris Vasilyevich Moiseyev, born in 1935, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, deputy editor in chief 
of the YURINFORM agency, city of Moscow. 
  Vyacheslav Viktorovich Kiselev, born in 1948, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, chief of the 
Shchelkovo legal services office of the Moscow Oblast bar, city 
of Shchelkovo, Moscow Oblast. 
  Yevgeniy Aleksandrovich Bolshakov, born in 1949, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, general director of the AV and AS joint-stock 
company, city of Vladivostok. 
  Aleksandr Vladimirovich Pronin, born in 1955, 
Russian, secondary technical education, member of the 
Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, deputy chief of staff of the 
Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Mikhaylovich Kostyutkin, born in 1948, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, aide to the chairman of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Yuriy Mikhaylovich Ruda, born in 1958, Ukrainian, 
secondary technical education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, foreman of the rayon consumer services 
administration, settlement of Gorshechnoye, Kursk Oblast. 
  Georgiy Grigoryevich Lukava, born in 1925, 
Georgian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, department chairman at the Moscow State 
Technical University of Civil Aviation, city of Moscow. 
  Viktor Ivanovich Ustinov, born in 1937, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic Party of 
Russia, adviser to the chairman of the Liberal-Democratic Party 
of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Konstantin Nikolayevich Panferov, born in 1932, 
Russian, higher education, adviser to the chairman of the 
Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, professor of the Moscow 
State Technical University of Civil Aviation, city of Moscow. 
  Stanislav Konstantinovich Zarichanskiy, born in 
1962, Ukrainian, higher education, member of the 
Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, employee of the 
organizational department of the Central Committee of the 
Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Aleksandr Valentinovich Filatov, born in 1967, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, administrator of affairs of the shadow cabinet 
of the Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Larisa Sergeyevna Maksakova, born in 1946, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, deputy coordinator of the Moscow regional 
organization of the Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of 
Moscow. 
  Luiza Dmitriyevna Gagut, born in 1949, Greek, 
higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic Party of 
Russia, senior research associate of the Institute of Economics 
of Ferrous Metallurgy, city of Moscow. 
  Edvard Georgiyevich Zhuk, born in 1960, 
Belarusian, higher education, no party affiliation, deputy 
manager of the Aura-Bank, city of Moscow. 
  Dmitriy Aleksandrovich Skum, born in 1961, 
Ukrainian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, aide to the deputy chairman of the 
Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Aleksey Alekseyevich Zvyagin, born in 1936, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic 
Party of Russia, professor at the Commercial University of 
Moscow, city of Moscow. 
  Aleksey Alekseyevich Zuyev, born in 1970, Russian, 
secondary technical education, no party affiliation, adviser to 
the president of the GMM company, city of Moscow. 
  Vadim Ivanovich Bolshakov, born in 1930, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, consultant of the 
sociological group of the Liberal-Democratic Party of Russia, 
city of Moscow. 
  Nina Viktorovna Krivelskaya, born in 1948, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, senior research 
associate of the Instructional and Scientific Complex of 
Psychology and Work With Personnel, city of Moscow. 
  Anatoliy Vladimirovich Kapustin, born in 1939, 
Belarusian, higher education, no party affiliation, chairman of 
the board of the Fund for Protection Against Unemployment, city 
of Moscow. 
  Mikhail Petrovich Burlakov, born in 1952, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Liberal-Democratic Party of 
Russia, department chairman on the Tolyatti Campus of the Samara 
Pedagogical Institute, city of Tolyatti, Samara Oblast. 
  Anatoliy Semenovich Moiseyev, born in 1947, 
Russian, special secondary education, no party affiliation, 
administrator of the Berezka musical group, settlement of 
Zapovednoye, Kaliningrad Oblast. 
  Aleksey Viktorovich Vasilishin, born in 1945, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, consultant for 
the operation of engines of the Omega company, city of Tobolsk. 
<H6>  The Party of Russian Unity and Accord </H6>
  Sergey Mikhaylovich Shakhray, born in 1956, 
Russian, higher education, leader of the electoral association 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord, deputy chairman of the 
Russian Federation Government, city of Moscow. 
  Aleksandr Nikolayevich Shokhin, born in 1951, 
Russian, higher education, member of the electoral association 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord, deputy chairman of the 
Russian Federation Government, city of Moscow. 
  Konstantin Fedorovich Zatulin, born in 1956, 
Russian, higher education, chairman of the coordination council 
of the association Entrepreneurs for a New Russia, city of 
Moscow. 
  Yuriy Khamzatovich Kalmykov, born in 1934, 
Circassian, higher education, member of the electoral 
association Party of Russian Unity and Accord, Russian 
Federation minister of justice, city of Moscow. 
  Valeriy Aleksandrovich Kirpichnikov, born in 1946, 
Russian, higher education, member of the electoral association 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord, president of the Union of 
Russian Cities, city of Sosnovyy Bor, Leningrad Oblast. 
  Gennadiy Georgiyevich Melikyan, born in 1947, 
Armenian, higher education, member of the electoral association 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord, Russian Federation minister 
of labor, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Aleksandrovich Tumanov, born in 1940, 
Russian, higher education, member of the electoral association 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord, professor of the Institute of 
State and Law of the Russian Academy of Sciences, city of Moscow. 
  Anatoliy Yakovlevich Sliva, born in 1940, 
Belarusian, higher education, member of the electoral 
association Party of Russian Unity and Accord, deputy chief of 
the State-Law Administration of the Russian Federation 
President, city of Moscow. 
  Vyacheslav Alekseyevich Nikonov, born in 1956, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, adviser to the 
Reform international fund, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Nikolayevich Kozhemyakin, born in 1956, 
Russian, higher education, member of the electoral association 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord, deputy chief of the 
Secretariat of the Deputy Chairman of the Russian Federation 
Government, city of Moscow. 
  Vladimir Anatolyevich Lepekhin, born in 1959, 
Russian, higher education, supporter of the electoral 
association Party of Russian Unity and Accord, instructor at the 
imeni M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, city of Moscow. 
  Aleksandr Vladimirovich Turbanov, born in 1950, 
Russian, higher education, supporter of the electoral 
association Party of Russian Unity and Accord, chief of the 
legal administration of the Inkombank joint-stock bank, city of 
Moscow. 
  Igor Aleksandrovich Shichanin, born in 1955, 
Russian, higher education, member of the electoral association 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord, chief of the department of 
international cooperation and CIS affairs of the staff of the 
Russian Federation Government, city of Moscow. 
  Konstantin Eduardovich Zuyev, born in 1961, 
Russian, higher education, supporter of the electoral 
association Party of Russian Unity and Accord, chairman of the 
board of directors of the Technology joint-stock company, city 
of Moscow. 
  Murad Magomedovich Kazhlayev, born in 1931, Lak, 
higher education, no party affiliation, chief conductor and 
artistic manager of the Academic Grand Orchestra of the 
Ostankino State Television and Radio Broadcasting Company, city 
of Moscow. 
  Sergey Borisovich Stankevich, born in 1954, 
Russian, higher education, member of the electoral association 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord, temporarily not working, city 
of Moscow. 
  Sergey Aleksandrovich Shapovalov, born in 1951, 
Russian, higher education, member of the electoral association 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord, deputy head of the Rostov 
Oblast Administration, city of Novocherkassk. 
  Irek Sharipovich Muksinov, born in 1932, Bashkir, 
higher education, member of the movement Joint Creativity of 
Nations in the Name of Life (The Senezh Forum), research 
associate at the Institute of State and Law of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences, city of Moscow. 
<H6>  The Women of Russia Political Movement </H6>
  Alevtina Vasilyevna Fedulova, born in 1940, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Council of 
Representatives of the Women of Russia Political Movement, 
chairman of the Union of Women of Russia, city of Moscow. 
  Yekaterina FilippovnaLakhova, born in 1948, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, adviser to the 
president of the Russian Federation for the affairs of women, 
families, and children, city of Moscow. 
  Natalya Georgiyevna Gundareva, born in 1948, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, actress of the 
imeni Mayakovskogo Moscow Academic Theater, city of Moscow. 
  Natalya Dmitriyevna Malakhatkina, born in 1949, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Women of Russia 
Political Movement, chairman of the D.O.M. (Childhood, Society, 
Charity) Center, city of Moscow. 
  Lyudmila Nikolayevna Zavadskaya, born in 1949, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Women of Russia 
Political Movement, acting chief of the section of theory and 
sociology of law at the Institute of State and Law of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, city of Moscow. 
  Marina Karamanovna Dobrovolskaya, born in 1960, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Council of 
Representatives of the Women of Russia Political Movement, 
chairman of the Union of Women of the Navy, city of Moscow. 
  Galina Ivanovna Klimantova, born in 1944, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Women of Russia Political 
Movement, chief of the department for family affairs of the 
Council of Ministers of the Udmurt Republic, city of Izhevsk. 
  Fanuza Sharafiyevna Arslanova, born in 1951, 
Tatar, higher education, no party affiliation, chief of the 
legal department of the Urengoygazprom joint-stock company, city 
of Novyy Urengoy, the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug. 
  Antonina Aleksandrovna Zhilina, born in 1949, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, president of 
the commercial and industrial joint-stock company Tsaritsyn 
Dvor, city of Volgograd. 
  Irina Yevgenyevna Vybornova, born in 1951, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, vice president 
of the Free Economic Society of Russia, city of Kaliningrad, 
Moscow Oblast. 
  Yelena Yevgenyevna Chepurnykh, born in 1955, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, chairman of the 
International Federation of Children's Organizations, city of 
Moscow. 
  Raisa Ivanovna Skripitsyna, born in 1942, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Women of Russia Political 
Movement, vice mayor of the city of Obninsk, Kaluga Oblast. 
  Valentina Grigoryevna Martynova, born in 1942, 
Russian, higher education, no party affiliation, deputy general 
director of the Farmimeks state enterprise, city of Moscow. 
  Yekaterina Mikhaylovna Popova, born in 1941, Komi, 
higher education, no party affiliation, chief physician of the 
Komi Republic Hospital, city of Syktyvkar. 
  Svetlana Yuryevna Orlova, born in 1954, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Women of Russia Political 
Movement, general director of the Anna Women's Commercial 
Charitable Organization, city of Vladivostok. 
  Valentina Vasilyevna Kozhukhova, born in 1950, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Women of Russia 
Political Movement, chairman of the board of the Stavropol Kray 
Fund for Compulsory Health Insurance, city of Stavropol. 
  Galina Petrovna Chubkova, born in 1945, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, chairman of the 
department of sociology and psychology at the Astrakhan 
Technical Institute of the Fishing Industry, city of Astrakhan. 
  Larisa Vladimirovna Babukh, born in 1949, Russian, 
higher education, no party affiliation, general director of the 
Larina-Servis joint-stock company, city of Moscow. 
  Zhanna Mikhaylovna Lozinskaya, born in 1944, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Women of Russia 
Political Movement, senior research associate of the State 
Technical University of Tula, city of Tula. 
  Irina Yefimovna Novitskaya, born in 1951, Russian, 
higher education, member of the Women of Russia Political 
Movement, ward chief at the city emergency service hospital for 
children, city of Vladimir. 
  Lyudmila Nikolayevna Markina, born in 1940, 
Russian, higher education, member of the Women of Russia 
Political Movement, director of the Milling Combine No. 3 leased 
enterprise, city of Moscow. 

