Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Observer Aleksandr Golts report on interview with Colonel </F>
General Mikhail Kolesnikov, chief of the Armed Forces General 
Staff; place and date of interview not given: "`General Staff 
Secret Report' in Fact Blatant Forgery. Chief of Russian 
Federation Armed Forces General Staff Refutes Articles in 
Japanese Weekly and IZVESTIYA"] 
  [Text] The popular Japanese weekly SHUKAN BUNSHUN has 
published material which, if it were true, would cause an 
international sensation; the respected Russian newspaper 
IZVESTIYA has given a detailed account of this material. Citing 
a secret document from the Russian General Staff and an 
interview with an anonymous staffer from this organization, it 
is reported that Russia is allegedly assisting the 
implementation of North Korea's nuclear missile plans. Also, 
that our nuclear and rocket scientists have helped to develop 
the nuclear weapons [boyepripasy] which, it seems, the DPRK 
already possesses as well as the means to deliver these weapons. 
Moreover, it is claimed that, in the Russian military's 
assessment, the situation is so grave that the issue of 
establishing a joint system of ABM defense for Russia, Japan, 
and the United States needs to be addressed. 
  But it is probably no accident that neither the actual 
magazine nor IZVESTIYA has attempted to ascertain whether this 
document is genuine by making inquiries at its alleged source. 
  In reply to my question as to whether such a document really 
exists, Colonel General Mikhail Kolesnikov, chief of the Armed 
Forces General Staff, answered: "The articles in the Japanese 
magazine and IZVESTIYA are based on a gross and obvious forgery. 
It is only to be regretted that such a respected newspaper has 
fallen victim to forgers by publishing this material from its 
Japan correspondent Sergey Agafonov without any preliminary 
verification." 
  Indeed, it can only be conjectured why the photograph of the 
first page of the "document" was thought sufficient to remove 
all doubts as to the authenticity of the report. After all, it 
is unlikely that IZVESTIYA employs people specializing in the 
clerical work of the Ministry of Defense who would be able to 
distinguish a genuine document from a forgery. People who deal 
with office paperwork, however, are adamant that the Ministry of 
Defense never uses the kind of document serial numbers indicated 
in the article. But if this is the case, the ironic questions in 
the article addressed to the ministry and the General Staff are 
still left hanging in the air. After all, if no leaks took 
place, any hint that there is a little key which "opens General 
Staff safes for Japanese guests" is simply an insult. 
  However, other questions are now being raised. In 
particular, what was the point of publishing these unverified 
reports. Col. Gen. Mikhail Kolesnikov believes that "we are 
talking about a clear provocation with the aim of casting 
aspersions on the Ministry of Defense and the General Staff." 
Can it be that someone actually wants to rekindle the antiarmy 
campaign of the past few years? 
  At the same time the chief of General Staff is not ruling 
out 
the possibility that this episode has played into the hands of 
those who want to complicate relations between Russia and North 
Korea. 
  Yes, the nuclear problems of the Korean peninsula are 
currently very acute. Russia is not hiding its alarm at the 
fact that the DPRK has suspended its participation in the Treaty 
on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons. At the same time, a 
ranking Russian diplomat stated recently, we believe that 
sanctions against the DPRK -- on which some countries are 
insisting -- should be used only as a last resort, but there are 
those who would prefer to replace the complex process of 
negotiations with open pressure on Pyongyang. And is it not 
currently in their interests to make it seem as if Russia is to 
blame for the fact that the DPRK has allegedly acquired nuclear 
weapons? 

