BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Christina Lopes, Henrik Qvortrup, and Bent </F>
Winther: "SF Steps Up Its Opposition to NATO"] 
  [Text] With adoption at its national conference of an 
aggressive election program the Socialist People's Party [SF] 
has further distanced itself from the Social Democratic Party 
and the Radical Liberals. 
  The SF's national conference yesterday hardened the party's 
attitude to NATO, when the conference in Kolding recommended 
that the military organization be disbanded. 
  The adoption of this new position on NATO was a defeat for 
the party's Folketing caucus and for party chairman Holger K. 
Nielsen. But it is also an indication that the SF has moved 
further away from the Social Democratic Party. 
  As a result further obstacles seem to have been thrown in 
the 
path of the negotiations between the Social Democratic Party, 
the Radical Liberals, and the SF which could result from of the 
upcoming election. 
  Immediately after the national conference Holger K. Nielsen 
tried to play down the importance of the NATO decision which he 
himself had advised the delegates against. 
  "There is no suggestion of a major defeat. The NATO decision 
will not be a nonnegotiable demand as far as we are concerned," 
the SF chairman said. 
  Social Democratic spokesman Frank Jensen is not enthusiastic 
about the SF decision and the prospects it holds out for future 
cooperation. 
  "With its new decision the SF has taken a regrettable step 
away from the centrist line the party had otherwise adopted. It 
is an unwise decision," Frank Jensen told BERLINGSKE TIDENDE. 
  The NATO decision was reached after a long and at times 
bitter showdown between former SF chairman Gert Petersen (who 
recommended a "no") and the SF's member of the Defense 
Committee, Jens Thoft. 
  The national conference also gave the Folketing caucus its 
backing on a number of the forceful demands the SF leadership 
has been making: a 30-hour workweek, a tunnel to Sweden, higher 
gasoline and carbon dioxide taxes, and much more money for local 
authorities. A large number of these demands are unacceptable 
especially to the Radical Liberals whose leader, Marianne 
Jelved, has already urged moderation in BERLINGSKE TIDENDE. 
  However, leading SF members are unwilling to allow 
themselves 
to be frightened off in advance by the negative reactions from 
the other parties. 
  Holger K. Nielsen thinks it important that the three parties 
should be able to appear together as a bloc which could work as 
a counterweight to the Liberal-Conservative-Progress Party bloc. 

