BFN 

<F P=106> [Press release issued by the UK Department of Trade and </F>
Industry: "Terms of Reference for Nuclear Review Announced"] 
  [Text] The terms of reference, timing and format of the 
nuclear review were announced today by Tim Eggar, minister for 
Energy. 
  The review will focus on the future prospects for nuclear 
power including, without commitment, its privatisation. It will 
also examine the economic and commercial viability of new 
nuclear power stations in the UK. 
  In a written answer to a parliamentary question from Mr. Tim 
Yeo MP (South Suffolk) Mr. Eggar said: 
  "I am now in a position to announce the terms of reference, 
timing and format of the nuclear review. This answer has been 
agreed with my Rt Hon [Right Honorable] friend the secretary of 
state for Scotland, who has responsibility for the nuclear power 
generating industry in Scotland. 
  "The government believes that the future role of nuclear 
power in the UK's electricity supply will depend on it proving 
itself competitive while maintaining rigorous standards of 
safety and environmental protection. 
  "The Coal Review established that there is a sound economic 
basis for continuing to operate existing nuclear stations. The 
nuclear review will not consider whether Sizewell B should be 
brought on stream. Sizewell B is on course to start operating 
this year, subject to the receipt by Nuclear Electric of such 
consents as are required by law. 
  "Decisions on these consents are matters for the appropriate 
ministers and authorities and are not matters for the review. 
The review will, however, take into account the decisions made 
on Sizewell B, whether the consents are granted or refused. 
  "The nuclear review will focus on the future prospects for 
nuclear power. It will examine the economic and commercial 
viability of new nuclear stations in the UK, against the 
background of the government's energy policy as set out in the 
White Paper "The Prospects of Coal" (Cm 2235). 
  "The government has asked the nuclear generating industry to 
make the commercial case for new nuclear generating capacity and 
to make that case publicly available. Whether any new nuclear 
station could be built with private sector finance will be a key 
test of that case. The government would welcome comments on the 
industry's case, which will be published shortly. 
  "The government also invites submissions from interested 
parties on whether new nuclear power stations offer particular 
diversity, security of supply and environmental benefits or 
disadvantages. 
  "The review will examine possible options for introducing 
private sector finance into the nuclear industry. As part of 
this, the government is prepared to consider without commitment 
representations on whether privatisation would in principle be 
feasible, and what a practical timescale might be. The review 
will address the question of how best to manage the substantial 
nuclear waste and decommissioning liabilities which are 
currently the responsibility of the public sector, so as to 
secure value for money for the taxpayer while ensuring necessary 
safety and environmental standards are met. 
  "The review will also assess the existing arrangements to 
enable the full costs of nuclear power in the UK to be met, 
taking account of the Trade and Industry Committee's 
recommendations on the fossil fuel levy in their report "British 
Energy Policy and the Market for Coal" (HC236). 
  "Submissions on these issues should be made in writing both 
to my Department and the Scottish Office, to be received by 30 
September. All substantive submissions received by the 
government will be made publicly available. Copies will be 
placed in the libraries of this House and of the House of Lords. 
Commercially confidential information in submissions received 
by the government, internal papers and advice and reports 
internal to government, and advice from external advisers, will 
not be made publicly available in this way. 
  "The review will be undertaken by the Department of Trade 
and 
Industry and the Scottish Office Industry Department, in 
consultation with other government departments as appropriate. 
The government may appoint consultants to advise it on matters 
relevant to the review as the need arises. 
  "My Rt Hon Friend the secretary of state for the environment 
is announcing today a separate review of radioactive waste 
management policy, to be conducted in parallel with the nuclear 
review." 
<H5>  Notes for Editors </H5>
  Press Enquiries: 071 215 6424/5964 (Out of Hours: 071 215 
4657/8); Public Enquiries: 071 215 5000 

