BFN 

<F P=106> [Mikhail Lantsman report in the "Financial" column: "CIS </F>
Bankers Want To Build a New Payment Union. European Colleagues 
Think This Is Hardly Feasible"] 
  [Text] On 23 and 24 April in the Bor hotel in the Moscow 
region an international banking conference was held which 
discussed problems of Russia's financial settlements with 
neighboring states. The aim of the conference was, based on the 
commercial banks' practical experience, to elaborate a new 
settlements system on the post-Soviet subcontinent. The 
conference was held on the initiative of the Russian Banks 
Association, the Council on Foreign and Defense Policy, the New 
Policy Center for Humanitarian Relations and Business 
Cooperation, and Mezhekonomsberbank. 
  By the admission of Vyacheslav Solovov, Russian Federation 
Central Bank deputy chairman, the actual disintegration of the 
ruble zone occurred on 1 July 1992 when Russia announced that 
all of its ruble accounts beyond its borders would not be 
recognized. This meant that Russia effectively introduced its 
own currency in non- cash circulation. The process was 
completed exactly a year later when Russia finally privatized 
the "Soviet" currency and stopped providing technical credits to 
the republics to finance commodity exchanges. Experiencing an 
acute ruble shortage, those republics that were unprepared for 
that had to launch their national currencies. Yet it would be 
unfair to blame Russia for the disintegration. The preservation 
of the old regime, with the administration test site 
[administrativnyy polygon] turning into a semblance of 
international economic space, would have made Russia a 
gratuitous donor. 
  After the bulk of interstate settlements moved from national 
to commercial banks, new settlement systems emerged 
spontaneously, adapted to the mixed post-Soviet economy. From 
primitive communal barter to attempts to create a foreign 
exchange market. According to the Russian Federation Central 
Bank, in 1993 the volume of financial settlements processed by 
Russia's commercial banks was triple those that went via the 
Central Bank. Commercial banks, operating with the CIS 
countries' "ersatz currencies," quote them at their own risk. 
There are practically no official quotations. The exchange 
rates of "ersatz currencies" published by the Central Bank are 
not recommended to commercial banks for conducting settlement 
operations. 
  According to Russian Banks Association President Sergey 
Yegorov, the new payment system should be built on the 
experience acquired by commercial banks. All scenarios proposed 
by the forum participants in essence boiled down to two 
variants: creating a Eurasian currency system, using the 
experience of Western Europe; or creating a new-type ruble zone, 
whose prototype could be the integration of the monetary systems 
of Russia and Belorussia [Belarus]. Both options were presented 
in a concept elaborated by Mezhekonomsberbank's expert council. 
The first variant envisions a lengthy preparatory period and a 
high extent of coordination at intergovernment level, which 
makes its execution rather problematic. The second presupposes a 
single emission center -- the Russian Central Bank, which will 
hardly be acceptable to the majority of CIS republics. 
  Meanwhile, according to expert appraisals by the Center for 
European Political Studies, the former USSR is not threatened 
either with the repetition of the West European experience or 
the creation of a new-type ruble zone. According to Western 
analysts, the CIS countries do not constitute an "optimal 
currency space." First of all, the former USSR republics lack 
two substantial elements: compatibility of economic structure 
and consensus on the need for a common economic policy. The 
greater part of trade links created in the past, analysts 
believe, will not hold for more than five years. Currently 
Russia's trade with its immediate neighbors constitutes 
one-third of its trade with the rest of the world. 

