BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by unofficial Senate Office President Bernard </F>
Sansaricq at the ceremony installing Emile Jonassaint as 
"president" at the Legislative Palace in Port-au-Prince on 11 
May -- live] 
  [Text] Mr. President of the Republic; honorable members of 
the legislature; commander in chief of the Haitian Armed Forces 
and members of the General Staff; representatives of the major 
organizations of the state and churches; men and women of Haiti; 
dear guests; ladies and gentlemen: I have the honor of speaking 
this morning in this august chamber, at the feet of Haiti's 
Declaration of Independence, to give substance to a wish -- 
widely expressed by various sectors -- to see the presidential 
void filled and an end to the governmental fuzziness being 
experienced by the country for several months now. 
  In keeping with our traditions and in compliance with the 
provisions of Article 149 of our Constitution, it is Judge Emile 
Jonassaint, president of the Court of Cassation of the Republic, 
who is vested with the provisional presidency, with the 
corresponding legal consequences. 
  Attorney Jonassaint has courageously and patriotically 
agreed 
to carry out this historic mission -- one of salvation -- for 
the Haitian nation, whose very foundations are threatened. The 
parliament -- in recovered dignity and with the sought-after 
unity -- will accompany him along the path to democracy for the 
salvation of the Haitian people. 
  Today, we are appointing to the State's highest office a 
distinguished figure who represents a number of symbolic values: 
the wisdom of the jurist, the noble fervour of the courageous, 
the calm of the strong, the serenity of the righteous, and a 
nationalism that is total. [applause] 
  Fellow citizens inside and outside Haiti; men, women, 
youths, 
the elderly, and children of Haiti; free peoples throughout the 
world, Never in the tumultuous history of our country have 
Haitians been subjected to ravages as destructive as this weapon 
of war that the economic embargo constitutes. 
  After he was driven out of the sacred temple of 
representative democracy -- where he sought to replace the altar 
of freedoms and constitutional rights with an obscure and 
infamous force devoted to the devil of necklacing and populist 
dictatorship [applause] -- the apostle of hatred and division 
among Haitians, to put the finishing touches on his work of 
destroying the Haitian family and the Haitian nation, addressed 
foreign gods. Today, thanks to the stateless cooperation of 
unnatural sons of our generous nation, international 
infiltration has turned our society into a post-Cold War 
fratricidal battleground, without the slightest consideration of 
the essential needs of our population and in disregard of the 
universal rights of men and of nations. 
  The new international political sphere of influence 
resulting 
from the Cold War -- one of lukewarm peace -- anguishes us 
Haitians, because today, Haiti finds itself imprisoned and 
enslaved in the incredible, indecent U.S. gulag of a 
pseudodemocracy in which the murderous sounds of necklacing and 
machetes mercilessly suppressed the voice of the elected 
representatives of the people, to destroy the nascent Haitian 
democracy's fragile institutions. 
  May God spare all of America this violent and murderous 
pseudodemocracy, one perhaps flourishing in the slum 
neighborhoods of black Americans in the United States and which 
the President of the United States would like to pass on to us 
via a Black Caucus whose noble African memory seems to be 
forever lost. [applause] 
  The international community having voted everything against 
it except for purely and simply removing it from the face of the 
earth, Haiti's very existence as a free and sovereign nation is 
today threatened. They are threatening to use against us 
incendiary bombs, resembling an ocean of flames, to destroy this 
nation whose scrawny body consists of only a few living corpses 
as citizens, in a colonial economy [economie de comptoir] that 
has already given up the ghost. On the thermometer of the 
embargo, one can read -- eloquently -- the high, impoverishing, 
fever that is [word indistinct] our country. 
  What comfort and what glory does the U.S. President intend 
to 
obtain by launching a military attack against this country, 
whose entire resources remain greatly inferior to the 
destructive power of a single Patriot missile? Is not it 
reasonable to believe that the pilots in charge of creating this 
new Hiroshima would have to report to the head of the extremely 
powerful United States that their mission of extermination is 
impossible because they have been preceded by an economic 
embargo that has left Haiti a horrible desert where dead bodies, 
debris, and flies intermingle? [applause]. 
  If such a great American political party is using Haiti in 
order to pay its electoral debt to its supporters, I dare say to 
the world that the trading and bargaining in democracy will not 
be done at the expense of freedom and rights of Haitians to 
self-determination because such a cross would be too heavy; such 
a Calvary too long for our people, who are still thirsting for 
real democracy and economic prosperity. [applause]. 
  I therefore call on the head of Vatican, Holy Father John 
Paul II himself, to work to close this insane chapter in our 
national history by putting back onto the track of morality and 
decency the train of those leaders, traffickers in democracy, to 
whom we entrusted the respect of our sovereignty. 
  We ask the Holy Father himself to exorcize those devils of 
pseudodemocracy issued from the entrails of the venerable 
Catholic Church itself. [applause] We ask the Holy Father 
himself to exorcize those devils of pseudodemocracy issued from 
the entrails of the venerable Catholic Church itself, who would 
like to once more destroy human dignity under the overwhelming 
dictatorship of outdated ideologies. 
  Black people of the entire world, African brothers, see in 
the Haitians' current experience the fate awaiting you tomorrow, 
when the weapons of economic blockade, systematic slander, and 
organized disinformation would be honed in order to serve 
neo-colonialism throughout the world; wake up and say no to the 
current genocide in Haiti. 
  People of Haiti, France has once again led us to the summits 
of the Jura Mountains; Canada sees us only as sardines packed in 
cans; Venezuela has suffered amnesia; and the most powerful 
country on earth, the United States of America, authorizes our 
destruction through the napalm of the embargo, even though the 
entire mythology of American democracy is based -- to quote 
Francois (Manasta) -- on refusing extremes and seeking 
compromise, and on the triumph of good sense. [applause] 
  Glory and honor to former President George Bush, the late 
President Richard Nixon, the honorable Senator Bob Dole, former 
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, the late... [pauses] the 
honorable Sen. (Presler), and all those lovers of freedom, 
democracy, and reason who still believe that in a crisis America 
must place itself behind its friends, not in front of them. 
[applause] 
  In this connection, I call on my country's Army to remain in 
the barracks, respecting the unity of command and the actions of 
the Army hierarchy and ever ready to guarantee public order and 
security. A new page of history more heroic than ever is opening 
up to us, and we are going to write it as much within respect 
for Haitian values as for the values in our Constitution. 
  I urge all citizens to unite, in discipline and 
selflessness, 
to defend the collective interest. Our country is in a weakened 
condition. The time for surrealistic and (?extravagant) 
demagoguery, without cohabitation and power-sharing, is past. 
Let us remain citizens of a free and sovereign nation, around a 
chief, so as together, as Haitians, determine our country's 
democratic future to the benefit of our people, the poorest in 
our hemisphere. [applause] 
  As long as there exists a Haiti, there will be genuine 
Haitians, and as long as there are true Haitians, there will be 
a democratic, prosperous, free, fair, and sovereign Haiti. May 
God protect and help us. Let Haiti be Haiti. [preceding sentence 
in English] As General De Gaulle advise --, wonderfully -- in 
1963: Stop pestering them! [applause] Thank you. [applause] 

