Language: <F P=105> Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by ulo Kulm: "Economists Projected the </F>
Future"] 
  [Text] 
  The Association of Economists met in Tallinn on 
Thursday. The current state of the economy was discussed and 
projections made for the future. 
  A longer presentation dealing with the current state of 
Estonia's economy and its future was made by Teet Rajasalu, 
science director of the Economic Institute. In his opinion our 
economy has reached a balance and become more demand-oriented. 
Exports should increase by the end of the year: They could go up 
to 14-15 billion kroons or, combined with the export of 
services, up to 20 billion kroons. 
  Improvement will derive mostly from choices now available to 
people between buying domestic or imported products. Income 
should also be going up for low- and medium-level wage earners, 
which should liven up the economy even further. 
  In his examination of different sectors of the economy, 
Rajasalu projected a continuing decline of agriculture. The 
industry as a whole, however, could exceed last year's levels by 
the end of 1994. Even though hauling volumes tend to shrink, 
transportation by sea, for one, is said to be doing well. The 
export of sea-related services makes a difference in maintaining 
Estonia's balance of payments. It is hoped that the export of 
building services will also increase. 
  T. Rajasalu thinks that the number of unemployed will also 
go 
up this year, but not significantly--roughly by 10,000. 
Inflation is continuing and, because of it, wages should also be 
going up. Average wage should be up to 1,800 kroons a month by 
the end of the year. 
  Alari Purju of the forecasting institute compared what is 
going on in Estonia to reforms carried out in Eastern Europe. 
According to him, reforms have gone off best in the Czech 
Republic, in Poland the instability is greater. The gross 
product has gone down in all of the reforming countries. 
  Also participating in the discussions were economists from 
the economic ministry, Bank of Estonia, the Economic Forecasting 
Institute and the University of Tartu. 

