BFN 

<F P=106> [Station Commentary] </F>
  [Text] Media report that Malaysia is providing arms to 
Bosnia is indeed damaging. The allegation is completely untrue. 
It goes against the very principle of Malaysia's policy of 
neutrality and upholding peace. No doubt Malaysia has been very 
vocal in calling for the arms embargo on Bosnia to be lifted. 
This is only because it will give a chance to the Bosnian 
Muslims to defend themselves against Serbian atrocities. 
  Malaysia is not alone. Even President Clinton recently said 
the United States was all for the lifting of the embargo. But 
never at any time has Malaysia gone against the resolution laid 
down by the United Nations. Against such a backdrop, it is 
indeed puzzling as to the true motive of the report. What is 
more disheartening is that the report was not filed by tabloids 
more interested in sales, but by a well-respected international 
cable network. 
  That is why Prime Minister Datuk Sri Dr. Mahathir Mohamed 
points out Malaysia is not in the gun running business. Perhaps 
the allegation could have come because Malaysia was providing 
arms to its 1,500 soldiers serving in the United Nations 
Protection Force in Bosnia-Herzegovina. If there are others 
providing arms to the Bosnians, it is certainly not Malaysia. 
It is also unbecoming of the network not to publish Dr. 
Mahathir's denial of the alleged provision of arms. 
  As a result, the international community might have the 
wrong 
impression. If any media group wants to have credibility, it 
should always provide a fair and balanced viewpoint. This 
surprisingly is not the case this time as far as the report on 
Malaysia is concerned. There are also doubts as to the 
credibility of the source. So far, there seems to be no 
concrete evidence to the allegation. Also, Malaysian 
peacekeeping force had been told not to engage in any warfare. 
Their job is to keep the peace and preserve the safe havens. 
  The UN has praised Malaysian soldiers for their exemplary 
attitude in discharging their duties. Despite the allegation, 
Malaysia is undaunted in its efforts to see peace come again to 
the former Yugoslavia. Most importantly, it wants the UN to be 
more forthcoming in efforts to help the long suffering Bosnians. 
  Strangely, the world body seems to be dragging its feet in 
this matter. In the meantime, this is giving leeway for the 
Serbs to continue the vicious campaign to eliminate the 
Bosnians. This is not fair and it certainly warrants being 
highlighted by the media. But if certain sections of the Western 
media due to reasons known only to themselves resort to untruth 
and speculation, it is not going to help matters. 
  The international community must know the atrocities the 
Serbs are committing, but if they are misled, measures to 
galvanize efforts to put pressure on the Serbs will be that much 
harder. Media groups have to demonstrate greater responsibility. 
Resorting to sensationalism and false report might jeopardize 
what little exercise [is] being done now to save the helpless 
Bosnians. If that happens, then those media organizations are 
as guilty as the Serbs in the brutal suppression of the unarmed 
Bosnians. 

