BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 27 KYODO -- Japan will hold 
working-level talks with the United States in Washington next 
Thursday to find ways to increase U.S-made auto and auto parts 
exports to this country, a Japanese trade ministry official said 
Friday [27 May]. 
  The meeting is in line with Tuesday's accord between Tokyo 
and Washington to restart the stalled trade "framework" talks, 
said an official at the Ministry of International Trade and 
Industry (MITI) who declined to be named. 
  The official said the planned talks on auto trade, one of 
the 
three priority fields under the framework negotiations, will 
focus on setting "objective criteria" designed to gauge the 
openness of Japan's market. 
  The meeting will then be followed by subcabinet-level 
consultations expected to be held in Tokyo in the week starting 
June 5, the MITI official said. 
  Tokyo will not accept any objective criteria on auto trade 
that are tantamount to "numerical targets," the official said, 
apparently reflecting growing concern in Japan over a possible 
revival of the issue of numerical targets. 
  Under Tuesday's bilateral accord, the U.S. showed its 
explicit commitment not to seek any numerical targets in coming 
sectoral trade talks with Japan. But U.S. Trade Representative 
Mickey Kantor soon said Washington will pursue "result-oriented" 
accords in sectoral talks, generating concern over the question 
of numerical targets among Japanese Government officials, 
including MITI Chief Eijiro Hata. 
  In Tuesday's talks, Tokyo and Washington refrained from 
defining numerical targets in order to get the deadlocked trade 
talks moving forward. 
  The MITI official said what the Japanese side considers 
numerical targets are quantitative pledges by the government 
regarding future trade performance and trade areas beyond 
government control. 
  Talks to establish a new trade framework have been put on 
hold since February's rupture over the definition of objective 
criteria. 
  The MITI official confirmed that Tokyo has accepted the 
latest U.S. request for including five additional trade areas in 
the priority fields of government procurement, insurance and 
trade in auto and auto parts. 
  Talks on the new areas -- financial services, sheet glass, 
forestry products, intellectual property rights and competition 
policy -- may begin next week, the official said. 

