Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Pool" item] </F>
  [Text] Belgrade, March 14 (TANJUG)--Russian president 
special envoy Vitaliy Churkin arrived here Monday morning on a 
very sensitive mission during which he will explain to 
representatives of the Bosnian Serb Republic how Moscow, but 
also Washington, view the position of Bosnian Serbs following 
the agreement between Bosnian Muslims and Croats to form a 
federation, and to obtain a definite response from the Serbian 
side. 
  Before arriving here, Churkin performed intense shuttle 
diplomacy in search of a solution to the Bosnian conflict. 
  In London he met with Charles Redman, special envoy of 
President Clinton, in Zagreb he held talks with Croatian 
President Franjo Tudjman, in Sarajevo with Muslim leader Alija 
Izetbegovic, and in Pale he was received by Momcilo Krajisnik, 
Bosnian Serb Republic speaker. 
  According to Churkin the federation between Bosnian Croats 
and Muslims does not "necessarily run contrary" to the interests 
of Bosnian Serbs and could form part of an overall settlement of 
the Bosnian conflict. 
  In Pale (the seat of the government), Momcilo Krajisnik told 
Churkin that Serbs have no reason to unite with Croats and 
Muslims. 
  In Churkin's opinion, Serbs should be connected with the 
Croat-Muslim federation by a weak link, maybe a union. 
  A definite response, it has been announced in Pale, will be 
given to Churkin in Belgrade on Monday, where he is due to meet 
in the afternoon with Bosnian Serb Republic Vice-President 
Nikola Koljevic, it has been learnt from unofficial sources. 
  It is expected that Churkin will be received by Serbian 
President Slobodan Milosevic on Monday. 
  Bosnian Muslims and Croats have reached an agreement to form 
a Croat-Muslim federation, which would later form a 
confederation with Croatia. This concludes the first phase of 
the latest peace process on Bosnia according to the U.S. 
scenario. 
  The second phase, the Americans assess, will necessarily 
lead 
to the involvement of Bosnian Serbs. Evidently it is Churkin's 
job to see to it that Bosnian Serbs get involved in the second 
phase. 
  Bosnian Serbs have apparently once again come under strong 
diplomatic, but also military, pressure. The goal is to find a 
place for them in the future organization of the former Yugoslav 
Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina. This however means that Bosnian 
Serbs are expected to make the biggest concessions, both 
political and territorial. 
  Washington's concept is, by a maneuver of a dual Muslim 
state, to secure the continuation, albeit partial, of a unitary 
Bosnia, to extend the territory under Muslim control, and to 
secure for them an outlet to the sea and finally to create a 
strong negotiating block (and if possible a military one) 
against Bosnian Serbs in the coming phase. 
  Political analysts consider that by this initiative 
Washington attempts to isolate once again Bosnian Serbs and 
exert pressure on them in order to obtain territorial 
concessions more easily at the negotiating table. 

