BFN 

  [Excerpt] Amman--Students at the University of Jordan 
Wednesday staged a peaceful protest against the continuing 
blockade of al-'Aqabah and demanded that the U.S. apply the same 
standards in implementing U.N. resolutions. 
  The protesters also demanded that Jordan, which has 
suspended 
formal participation in the Arab-Israeli peace process pending a 
solution to the siege of its Red Sea port, withdraw from the 
peace process altogether. 
  Nearly 500 students, about half of them young women, took 
part in the one-hour rally within the campus of the university 
organised by the Students Council. 
  Organisers put the number at more than 1,000 and said all 
shades of political thought among the students were represented 
in the rally. But it was clear that the Islamic bloc, which 
scored an overwhelming victory in student elections last month, 
dominated the event. 
  It was the first rally in the Kingdom after His Majesty King 
Husayn said last month Jordan's return to the 29-month-old 
Arab-Israeli peace talks sponsored by the U.S. and Russia hinged 
on an end to the damaging sea-based inspections of all 
al-'Aqabah-bound vessels by the U.S.-led naval force patrolling 
the Red Sea. 
  The warships are enforcing the international sanctions 
against Iraq following its August 1990 invasion of Kuwait. But 
Jordanian importers and exporters are suffering severely from 
the costly delays caused by diversion of freighters to other 
ports. 
  "No to American double-standards in applying U.N. 
resolutions," "No to American piracy in the Red Sea," "No to 
Rabin's threats against Jordan," and "We will not succumb to 
pressure," were some of the slogans chanted by the students, who 
held aloft portraits of King Husayn and the late King 'Abdullah 
and Jordanian flags. 
  At the head of the rally were leaders of the Students 
Council. Most of the female students wore the veil while many of 
the male protesters held the Holy Koran. 
  The main theme of the protesters was that the U.S. was 
applying double standards in the Middle East. They assailed 
Washington saying that it was very enthusiastic to rigorously 
enforce the U.N.-imposed sanctions against Iraq while dozens of 
Security Council resolutions calling for Israeli compliance 
remained unimplemented. 
  The protesters demanded that it was not enough that Jordan 
had suspended its peace negotiations with Israel but should 
withdraw from the peace process completely. [passage omitted] 
  [Amman AKHBAR AL-USBU' in Arabic of 21 April publishes a 
80-word front-page report on the demonstration staged 
"yesterday" by students of the University of Jordan in which it 
says that "the protesters set fire to U.S. and Israeli flags and 
raised posters supporting His Majesty King Husayn's pan-Arab 
policies and condemning Washington's arrogant policy."] 

