Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chang Mu (1728 3092): "Deng Xiaoping Calls For </F>
Substantial Development in Pudong and Personally Gives Advice To 
Support Zhu Rongji"] 
  [Text]The CPC authorities designated this year as 
China's "Year of Reform and Development" and "Year of Legal 
System Building." An important sign is that from this year to 
the end of this century, efforts will be made to switch from a 
planned economy to a market economy in all dimensions in terms 
of central decisionmaking, state legislation, government 
administration, enterprise operation, and social life, and that 
this important reform that will change China's look will be 
achieved in seven years' time. A high-level CPC leader claimed 
that the reform in the 1980's was primarily aimed at breaking 
the old structure and "dismantling the old house," while the 
next step is primarily aimed at setting up a new structure and 
building a tall building." 
<H5>  Shanghai's Development Benefits the Whole of China </H5>
  In the past few years, Deng Xiaoping always spent the Spring 
Festival season in Shanghai. This year, as he turns 90, is no 
exception. In January Deng showed his face twice in such places 
as the newly completed Yangpu Bridge. Shanghai is not 
only the birthplace of the CPC, but also a city with the 
greatest economic strength and an influential status in China. 
Moreover, it plays a key role in the effort to build a big port 
city and a financial, economic, and trading metropolis and to 
bring the reform and development nationwide to "a new height." 
Shanghai is where Deng Xiaoping placed his highest hopes when 
setting forth the idea of "creating several Hong Kongs in the 
mainland." The way things are going, it is estimated that by 
the year 2010, Shanghai will probably become one of the 
international economic, financial, and trading centers. 
  The crux is: The opening and development of Shanghai and 
Pudong is a thorough change of the conventional mode of 
operation that has been in use in this base of light and heavy 
industries that plays a leading role in China's economy. After 
that, it will serve as an example and catalyze a positive switch 
of the national economy toward the mechanism of market economy, 
thus affording a strong guarantee for staunchly toeing Deng's 
line. Deng Xiaoping put it point-blank: When Shanghai is 
opened and developed, "The state of reform and opening up in the 
Chang Jiang delta, in the entire Chang Jiang Valley, and even in 
the whole country, will be different." 
<H5>  Concentrate Funds To Help Pudong Take Off First </H5>
  At the beginning of 1990, Deng Xiaoping inspected 
Shanghai and showed appreciation for Zhu Rongji's effort to draw 
up a program for developing Pudong. After returning to Beijing, 
Deng said to leaders of the CPC Central Committee Political 
Bureau: Though I have retired, I would like to mention one 
thing, that you should pay more attention to the development of 
Pudong in Shanghai. Li Peng and Yao Yilin, the number one 
and number two men in the State Council at that time, took 
experts to Shanghai for inspection and feasibility studies on 
separate occasions. After the National People's Congress [NPC] 
session in spring, Li Peng officially announced the CPC 
authorities' decision to develop and open up Shanghai's Pudong, 
thus initiating the strategic process of shifting the focus of 
reform and opening up toward the north. 
  Shanghai used to be a financial and trade center and an 
important port on the west coast of the Pacific Ocean. Starting 
in the 1960's, it gradually dropped behind as a result of the 
political movements. Moreover, with the population explosion, 
the old city area west of Huangpu Jiang was cramped and 
dilapidated. Therefore, focusing on developing and opening up 
Pudong was the only way out for a reinvigorated Shanghai. 
Deng Xiaoping demanded that Pudong should "show progress 
every year and big changes in three years," and "Focus 
investment on those projects that can be started early, because 
the earlier they are started, the earlier we can reap profits, 
otherwise we will drag along into the next century." 
  According to the three principles of giving priority to 
financial and trade projects, giving priority to infrastructure 
projects, and giving priority to high- and new-technology 
industries, 38 new domestic and foreign financial enterprises 
have been set up on the bank of Huangpu Jiang over the past 
three years. The head office of China Everbright Trust and 
Investment Corporation was relocated from Beijing to Pudong. 
Now, the volume of bank deposits in Pudong has reached 25 
billion yuan and total credit 24 billion yuan, representing a 
12-fold increase in a space of three years. A total of 15 
billion yuan was invested in 10 major projects of the Pudong New 
Zone. Among them, the Nanpu Bridge, Yangpu Bridge, the Pudong 
section of the inner beltway of Yang-Gao road, Waigaoqiao Port 
District, Pudong Gas Plant, and the Heliu sewage treatment 
project have been completed, and the Waigaoqiao power plant and 
Lingqiao water works will soon be completed. 
  At present, efforts are being stepped up in the planning 
and design for such projects as the Pudong International 
Airport, outer beltway, Pudong underground railway, second 
cross-river tunnel, and key communication projects. The first 
phase of Binjiang Boulevard, the new bund in Pudong, has an 
original design that outshines the old bund west of the river. 
The planning and design of the central part of Lujiazui 
Financial and Trade District, made to the world's top standards, 
has been completed. Over 50 financial, commercial, and trade 
buildings are under construction and preparations are being made 
for the construction of another 50 buildings or so. The number 
of newly established industrial and trade enterprises is over 
25,000. The golden bund district embracing both sides of 
Huangpu Jiang will become China's CBD (Central Business 
District). Three years ago Pudong had only 37 wholly and 
partially foreign-funded enterprises. The number has now risen 
to more than 1,700, with a total investment of over $5 billion, 
of which $3 billion is foreign investment. Over 2,500 
enterprises are recipients of investment, totaling more than 14 
billion yuan, made by various provinces, municipalities, and 
state ministries and commissions. A batch of famous 
multinational companies have transplanted some advanced 
technologies from around the world to Pudong, including the 
sophisticated chemical industry of America's E. I. DuPont 
Company, automatic instruments of Rossmont [luo si meng te 5012 
2448 5536 3676], program-controlled switchboards of Belgium's 
Bell Company, and Japan's JVC electronic products. Besides, 
over 300 scientific and technological groups comprising research 
institutes and institutions of higher learning have made their 
way into Pudong, and 13 high-technology projects are underway in 
the Zhangjiang High-Technology Garden.... 
<H3>  Reform at the Municipality's Own Expense and With Initiative 
in Its Own Hand </H3>
  Wu Bangguo, member of the CPC Central Committee 
Political Bureau and secretary of the Shanghai Municipal CPC 
Committee, said: Under the precondition of ensuring the 
socialist orientation, guaranteeing adequate contribution to the 
treasury, and obeying the center's macroregulation and control, 
Shanghai will seek reform at is own expense and with initiative 
held in its own hands. Zhang Qizheng, vice mayor and chairman 
of the Pudong New Zone, maintained that 1994 is "the year of 
image" for profiling Pudong's development. 
  It is learned that the chief persons in charge of Shanghai 
Municipality have promised Deng Xiaoping to achieve the goal of 
"doubling" the business volume in Pudong within three years. 
Deng Xiaoping emphasized: We can only move ahead, not 
backtrack, in developing Pudong. If we carry on at such a pace, 
Pudong will be very different by 1995 and I will still be around 
to see it. 
  At the moment, Shanghai has more than 50 corporate banks 
(head offices or branches) and financial companies, as well as 
over 80 offices of foreign banks. By the end of this century, 
Shanghai will have over 100 Chinese and foreign financial 
institutions. This, plus the development and improvement of the 
securities market, money market, exchange market, and gold 
market and the expansion of the futures market, port trade, and 
wholesale and retail business, will help Shanghai develop into 
an international financial and trade center at a faster pace. 
The authoritative personality said: Pudong will try 
to raise 200 billion yuan in the coming seven years to put into 
various projects through such varied channels as absorbing 
foreign capital, bringing in domestic capital, bank financing, 
issuing securities, foundation operations, the "BOT" [preceding 
word published in English] procedure, and input by the financial 
authorities. By the end of this century, Pudong's annual GNP 
will exceed 80 billion yuan, which will account for a quarter of 
the GNP of the whole of Shanghai, while its proportion in the 
municipal GNP in 1990 was one fourteenth. There is a big 
chance that Pudong can be built into an Eastern Shanghai that 
has first-rate municipal works, a first-rate business activity 
center, a first-rate comprehensive free trade zone, a first-rate 
export and processing base, first-rate suburban agriculture, and 
first-rate quality of life. 
  Wu Bangguo clearly pointed out that maintaining a good 
social 
atmosphere has always been in the minds of Shanghai's leadership 
groups. This indicates the building of Shanghai's spiritual 
civilization will be strengthened. 
<H5>  Zhu Is Praised by Deng for Managing the Economy </H5>
  Since Deng Xiaoping made his talks in southern China two 
years ago, great changes have taken place in the economic and 
social life on the Chinese mainland. The growth rate of the 
national economy has been at a high level of 13 percent for two 
years running, while the economic growth rate of the seven 
Western powers last year was only 1.3 percent, one tenth of 
China's. The pace of development in China in the 1990's indeed 
attracted worldwide attention. The GNP leaping from 2 trillion 
to 2.4 trillion and then to over 3 trillion yuan has given the 
general public graphic proof of the growing national strength 
and the improvement of their life. As a result, Deng Xiaoping's 
thinking on reform, opening up, and market economy has been more 
extensively accepted by the people. 
  However, there are still many criticisms from abroad 
regarding Chinese Vice Premier Zhu Rongji's rectifying the 
monetary order and strengthening and improving macroregulation 
and control in the second half of last year. In fact, Zhu 
Rongji is not only dubbed by Deng Xiaoping as a cadre who has an 
expert knowledge of economy, but is also considered as someone 
who understands Deng's line the best. Zhu Rongji emphasized the 
need to implement Deng Xiaoping's ideas and theories in an 
active, comprehensive, and correct manner. Whoever fails to 
seize the opportunity will be condemned by history, and so will 
be anyone who does not seek truth from facts, makes rash 
advances blindly, and consequently causes big ups and 
downs. Zhu Rongji maintained that it is necessary to 
constantly study and analyze all the phenomena and problems in 
economic life, so as to obtain a correct understanding of things 
from them and master the law of economic development. Once we 
correctly understand and master the laws governing economic 
development, we will be able to greatly speed up economic 
development. Slow speed is not something we are after, but it 
is hard to describe how fast development should be in absolute 
terms. We want a rational speed and a speed that is in line with 
reality. Fast speeds must also have a limit. If there are big 
ups and downs and inflation, it means development is too fast. 
It is the right speed if this border is not overstepped. The 
speed of economic development should follow the six-character 
requirement, that is, it should be fast [kuai su 1816 6643], 
sustained [chi xu 2170 4958], and healthy [jian kang 0256 1660], 
so that the structure is optimized and the efficiency enhanced. 
Otherwise, if the annual growth rate goes up to 20 percent 
while the revenue collected is inadequate, it will not be a 
healthy development. There is the element of market as well as 
those of planning and macroregulation and control in market 
economy. They are all aspects of the market economy. 
  In the middle of January, at the national financial work 
conference held in Beijing, Zhu Rongji made an important speech 
in the capacities of vice premier and governor of the People's 
Bank of China [PBC]. He once again affirmed the achievements in 
rectifying the monetary order last year and emphasized the need 
to carry on with the task consistently and unremittingly in 
accordance with the existing agreed rules. This indicates that 
the CPC authorities do not intend to relax the tight credit 
without much consideration and allow various negative 
competitions and "overheating" phenomena to rise again. 
What is important is that this measure apparently was 
approved by Deng Xiaoping. Zhu Rongji not only reported his 
work to Deng, but also received a new instruction from him, 
"running the banks truly as banks" instead turning them into 
"money issuing companies" and "coffers," still less unlocked 
"coffers." This is obviously meant to avoid Russia's 
experience of quick devaluation of the ruble that caused high 
inflation. 
<H5>  Deng Re-Emphasized the Need To Seize Opportunities </H5>
  Because reforms of the finance and taxation structure, 
monetary structure, and foreign trade structure are crucial to 
the CPC's effort to achieve major breakthroughs in reform, 
change government functions, and improve and strengthen 
macroregulation and control this year, Zhu Rongji, who is in 
charge of the reforms and consultations in this respect, has 
shown no sign of resigning as PBC governor. In fact, it will 
indeed be quite difficult to find a leading cadre who is at 
least a state councillor to replace Governor Zhu at the Second 
Session of the Eighth NPC to be held in March this year. 
Nevertheless, because Zhu Rongji is really too busy with his 
official duties, there is a possibility that someone may take 
over his governorship at an appropriate time. One may say that 
Zhu Rongji is a key figure who is good at regulating and 
stabilizing the economy at a time when the Chinese Government is 
trying to switch over to the market economic mechanism. He once 
said: If China continues to grow at a rate of 8 to 10 percent 
each year, in 20 years' time the superiorities of the new system 
will be fully manifested. 
  Deng Xiaoping, who has affirmed the accomplishments of 
the third-generation leadership group with Jiang Zemin at the 
core, most ardently wishes that "opportunities must be seized 
and decisionmaking must be timely." The strong momentum of 
China's development has inspired him, whereupon he concluded 
that China will become an economic power before long and now it 
is already a political power. 
<H3>  Stability Is the Key Word in Political Reform; Cadres Should 
Be Renewed </H3>
  Since the 13th National CPC Congress, the proposals and 
appeals for reform of political structure have experienced a few 
ups and downs. Since the 14th party congress, the number one 
and number two men of the CPC top echelon, namely, Jiang Zemin 
and Li Peng, have on many public occasions mentioned the 
necessity of political reform matching economic reform. But the 
focus has been shifted to emphasizing the reforms for 
streamlining the organization and enhancing the efficiency of 
operation. The formulation of "separating the functions of the 
party from those of the government" has been substituted by 
"cross-appointment [jiao cha jian zhi 0074 0643 0369 5120]." 
The plan to let democratic parties participate in one third of 
government and political affairs, formulated toward the end of 
the 1980's, has also been shelved. 
The authoritative CPC personality believes that 
democratic reforms depend on the improvement of the people's 
level of education, otherwise they cannot draw clear 
distinctions concerning cardinal issues of right and wrong. The 
dissatisfaction of the masses toward such problems as unhealthy 
tendencies in society, corrupt phenomena, unfair distribution, 
price increases, and problematic public order can easily be 
taken advantage of by political speculators and even lead to 
social turmoil. This will not only go against the original 
objective of reform, but also sabotage stability and unity and 
even impede economic progress. Therefore, Deng Xiaoping 
pointed out in the 1990's that in terms of political structural 
reform, the biggest objective is to obtain a stable environment. 
The crux of the issue in China is that the communist party 
should have a good political bureau, especially a good standing 
committee of the political bureau. As long as this link does 
not go wrong, China will be as stable as Tai Shan. 
  One can be sure that the composition and division of 
responsibilities in the third-generation leadership group of the 
CPC will not have significant changes for a period of time. 
This is necessary for keeping the overall political situation 
stable. 
<H3>  Promote Only Capable People and Appoint Them to Appropriate 
Positions According to Their Strengths </H3>
  However, the CPC is also fully aware of the urgency of 
choosing successors that carry forward its cause into the next 
century. On the one hand, the current chief leaders are mostly 
quite old and on the other hand, in the course of establishing 
the new system of market economy, China is faced with the 
challenges of new science and technology and professional 
knowledge. With the deepening of the reform, the difficulties 
encountered in various fields will be even greater. 
  In view of this, the CPC's organizational and personnel 
system and its contingent of cadres will show three changes in 
the context of market economy. 
  1. The change from the political mode to the economic mode. 
Cadres are required not only to be able to do political work, 
but also to have capabilities for taking the economy in hand and 
regulating the market. A large number of cadres who have good 
knowledge of economics and the know-how of management will be 
recruited. In the meantime, efforts will be made to strengthen 
the training in economic knowledge and modern scientific 
management, so as to help cadres shift from the political mode 
to the economic mode. 
  2. The change from doing intangible work to doing tangible 
work. Deng Xiaoping pointed out: Shenzhen is a result of 
practical work, not a product of meetings or articles. 
Cadres should have the spirit of not blindly following what is 
in the book or what is said by authorities, but acknowledging 
only what is true. They should be liberated from the mountain 
of documents and the sea of meetings, go into reality, and do 
practical things well. 
  3. The change from the serving type to the trailblazing 
type. 
With the establishment of the market economy, the government 
functions have switched from total monopoly to macroregulation 
and control. All cadres are required to be creative, think 
independently, do things in their own ways, keep abreast of the 
current situation, have a good command of broad and specific 
policies and principles, and carry out pioneering work. 
  The CPC high-level personality suggested that only by 
changing the way we think and breaking the conventional confines 
can we find true leadership talent for the new era. It is 
necessary to change, in earnest, the old mentality of paying 
excessive attention to enthusiasm to the neglect of creativity. 
When assessing and selecting a leading cadre, it is not enough 
to find out whether or not he has enthusiasm and initiative, is 
diligent and conscientious, and willingly bear the burden of 
office. We should also find out if he has creativity, thinks in 
a new dimension, and is good at thinking matters over, offering 
suggestions, and conducting work in a creative way. It is 
necessary to continue the effort to break the mentality of 
demanding perfection and nitpicking and adopt the concept of 
using people according to their strengths. Some people are 
broad-minded and bold in reforms. If they are sent to a region 
or a department, they can quickly reverse the backward situation 
there and accomplish even the most difficult things. But they 
may have many shortcomings and even make mistakes. We should 
analyze such people's strengths and weaknesses, warmheartedly 
help them overcome their shortcomings, and boldly use them. It 
is necessary to thoroughly correct the mentality of considering 
qualifications and arranging ranks according to seniority and 
adopt the concept that "capable people should occupy vital 
positions." We must, without delay, boldly promote excellent 
cadres who are young and promising, show strong potential, and 
are capable of opening up new prospects so that we truly promote 
capable people and appoint them to appropriate positions 
according to their strengths. This is also an important 
guarantee of the country's prosperity. 

