Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Valeriya Novodvorskaya, leader of the </F>
Democratic Union of Russia Party, by ARGUMENTY I FAKTY 
correspondent A. Sargin, under the rubric "Lady in Politics"; 
place and date not given: "V. Novodvorskaya: `I Would Become a 
Nun, but There Are Other Things To Do First'"] 
  [Text] A two-room Khrushchev-era "slum" on the 
outskirts of Maryina Roscha. The entire furnishings consist of a 
bed, a bookcase, and a desk. Portraits on the walls: Christ, 
Yeltsin, Gamsakhurdia. Books everywhere, especially on the desk. 
Also there--a small Colt. This was the setting of a meeting 
between our correspondent and the Democratic Union of Russia 
Party's leader, Valeriya Novodvorskaya. 
  [Sargin] Valeriya Ilyinichna, what is the meaning of this 
Colt in a cozy home environment? 
  [Novodvorskaya] When the KGB used to come time and again to 
arrest me, I would immediately grab this gun. I carried it to 
rallies and I remember how an officer in the militia cordon 
laughed when he checked my purse and found out that this Colt 
was just a plastic toy. 
  [Sargin] Can you tell us a little about your family? 
  [Novodvorskaya] I have lived in this "slum" with my mother 
and grandmother since 1966. My mother is a physician, my 
grandmother--a former medical assistant; all are fiery 
supporters of the president. We also have a cat named Stas. 
Stasik, naturally, does not have any party affiliation, but I 
remember that he used to react very nervously to Khasbulatov 
whenever he was on television. The cat would begin to growl 
unpleasantly (at that moment Stas walked into the room and 
started making mischief. V. Novodvorskaya picked him up and 
said: "Do you not see we are working? Leave us alone; what are 
you, some communist?"--A.S.) 
  [Sargin] Pardon me, do you have a friend or a girlfriend? 
  [Novodvorskaya] My God, are you trying to ask me whether I 
am 
a lesbian? No. I am quite indifferent to both homosexual and 
heterosexual love. 
  I recognize normal human friendship, normal human relations. 
That is, when it comes to chastity, I would probably meet the 
standards of the creators of the young builders of communism 
code of conduct. I can say with certainty that sex does not 
exist. If not for Russia, then at least for me and my immediate 
circle. I am not interested in it. I think under different 
circumstances a person with such Christian principles would 
retire to a monastery, because for me this would be a perfect 
thing. It is just that other things have to be done first. 
  [Sargin] Who are you by education? 
  [Novodvorskaya] A philologist, in Roman-Germanic languages. 
Actually, a "catacomb" historian, because although formally my 
education is in philology, my knowledge of history is of course 
much greater. Therefore at Afanasyev's university, at RGGU 
[expansion unidentified] I teach history and philosophy rather 
than philology. I know Latin, ancient Greek, French; can read 
German, English, and Italian. To learn to speak these languages 
I would need to have spent less time in prison and more time in 
contact with foreigners. 
  [Sargin] Have you been arrested often? 
  [Novodvorskaya] Well, let us start with three rounds under 
Article 70 alone, which was quite a rarity in the Soviet Union. 
After all, I am 43, not 60. Then some small stuff like Article 
190 Point 2--defacing the state flag. This was under Gorbachev. 
Then if you count just arrests for participation in rallies--17 
instances of 15-day detentions over two years, this alone adds 
up to more than eight months. 
  [Sargin] Did they beat you in prison? 
  [Novodvorskaya] They no longer do that in the post-Stalin 
times. In Lefortovo they do not engage in beatings at all--they 
have other ways of talking to you. Those who ended up in special 
prisons such as "Kazan" were simply tortured, but in a much more 
sophisticated way--for instance, the dental drill, oxygen 
injection under the skin, or electroshock. They do not use such 
primitive methods as beating. 
  [Sargin] What is it--a "dental drill"? 
  [Novodvorskaya] This is a classic: They drill healthy teeth 
until the drill bit pierces your jaw. 
  [Sargin] Valeriya Ilyinichna, did your family say to you 
when 
you ended up in prison time after time: "See! Did we not warn 
you: Live quietly!"? 
  [Novodvorskaya] At first they did, then they stopped, 
because 
it was useless. My first arrest was in 1969. And the whole thing 
started in 1968. 
  [Sargin] Your credo is opposition. Now you are loyal to the 
current authority. Why such a dramatic turn? 
  [Novodvorskaya] Our credo is not opposition--it is freedom. 
If freedom and authority diverge, we are in opposition. If 
freedom and opposition diverge, we are with the authority. 
Russia is indeed a unique country. I think this is the first 
time in history that freedom's ways have diverged from those of 
the opposition rather than those of the authorities. Now the 
authority is in opposition, We have to take reality into 
account. If one goes blindly like a bull for the red cloth, for 
the sake of going in the direction of opposition, we may end up 
with red brigades. 
  [Sargin] Will the elections in Russia have an effect on the 
fate of CIS republics? 
  [Novodvorskaya] If the CIS countries have power over their 
own fate, then of course the elections would have an impact. But 
I question very much their ability to control their destiny, 
because in Ukraine those who make the decisions are not Khmara 
or Chornovil--who could indeed make an impact on the destiny of 
their republic--but rather "homo sovietica" from southern and 
eastern Ukraine who voted for Kravchuk. 
  What is the Union of Independent States? On the one hand, a 
democratic Russia; on the other--Ukraine, which is also "more or 
less;" Belarus is a communist preserve but in a presentable 
form; next comes feudal Turkmenistan; and next--routine 
communism in Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. What kind of union is 
this? Georgia, which is in a state of civil war, is being 
dragged into the CIS. What are we going to get from it except 
trouble? Is Karabakh not enough for us? We should not drag 
anybody anywhere. We need to sign mutually profitable agreements. 
  [Sargin] Perhaps for Shevardnadze this was the last chance 
to 
stop war. 
  [Novodvorskaya] Shevardnadze should know his people a little 
better. This is not Azerbaijan, which calmed down under G. 
Aliyev. Last year I visited Georgia, and I now know their 
attitude toward Russians. I conducted rallies and discussions 
there; I had a gorgeous transparency in Georgian: "Shevardnadze 
Is the Butcher of Georgian People" and "Down With Shevardnadze's 
Fascist Junta." 
  [Sargin] Did you end up in prison there as well? 
  [Novodvorskaya] How can you fail to get thrown in prison in 
Georgia? In Georgia you end up either dead or in prison; no 
other options. 
  During my 21-day stay in Georgia I was arrested four times 
and beaten up three times (the last time they kicked me with 
their feet until I lost consciousness). I never had a concussion 
while in Russia. I spent the day of the free elections there, in 
which 30 percent of population participated and which under 
Shevardnadze was held under the sights of submachine guns, in an 
underground prison. 
  [Sargin] Is it true that you were nearly raped there? 
  [Novodvorskaya] No. I do not think that I would satisfy the 
taste of Georgian Mkhedrioni. Thankfully, I am not that young 
and not that good looking, so I do not think there is any such 
danger for me. Sazhi Umalatova is the one who is always afraid 
of being raped because she is beautiful, slim, and blond. 
  [Sargin] What is your reaction to report about Z. 
Gamsakhurdia's death? 
  [Novodvorskaya] Zviad died in battle. I know him: Suicide is 
250 percent impossible. If he did not kill himself in the 
seventies and eighties, why do it now? He has a greater safety 
margin than Solzhenitsyn. Z. Gamsakhurdia's suicide would mean 
destroying with his own hands the cause of his entire life. I 
will never believe that he would throw down the drain such a 
wonderful opportunity as his own death. 
  I think that what is involved here is a design on the part 
of 
the Georgian and what remains of the Russian special services. 
Shevardnadze did not have a guarantee that if necessary Russia 
would not trade him for Zviad. Suicide is an elementary trick of 
special services, although in our country Pugo managed to put 
his gun on a night table after he killed himself, and Akhromeyev 
hung himself with a gun on hand. 
  What happened in Georgia is precisely what our dear friends 
in civilized Western countries advise us to do now. Gamsakhurdia 
followed their advice and... Western advice comes from 
incompetent and weak people. When they give us advice on 
economics, we should listen, because they are knowledgeable in 
this subject. However, with respect to our political affairs, 
the destiny of Russia, they will never understand anything. 
Russia's special road is a very sudden route of building a 
liberal society. 
  Russia was hurt most by the "wedding feast" in the Kremlin 
Palace of Congresses on election night. I cannot think of an 
adequate punishment for the organizers of this stupidity. One 
cannot sit down at the same table as fascists and communists. 
Because those who sit down with them later are sent to gas 
chambers. And in principle for a good reason--for cowardice, 
weakness, spinelessness, and lack of principles. 
  [Sargin] Was this not an attempt on the part of the current 
authority to reconcile with the new opposition? 
  [Novodvorskaya] There cannot be a reconciliation between 
reds 
and whites in Russia during civil war. We must win now and not 
think about the price. We have pulled the genie out of the 
bottle; now we have to learn to control it, because genies do 
not listen to the weak. In Russia they shoot exhausted horses; 
and in Russia people do not resign--they fade into oblivion. 

