CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, April 18 (PTI)--The Prime Minister, Mr 
P.V. Narasimha Rao, today stoutly defended the signing of the 
GATT treaty by India, asserting that on-slaughts against the 
government for taking this step would certainly be warded off. 
  "We are now under attack for doing that. But with the 
cooperation, with the corroboration of scientists and 
economists, we would certainly ward off these attacks," he said 
while apparently referring to opposition criticism to India 
being a signatory to the GATT treaty. 
  Speaking at a function after presenting the G.D. Birla award 
for scientific research for 1993, to Dr R.A. Mashelkar and 
Shankar Puraskar to Prof Raghuvansh, he said integration of 
trade with the world economy had to be total. 
  "If it has to be total, we have to show our talent as being 
second to none. Our people have gone abroad, they are working 
there. For decades and decades, they have brought laurels to the 
countries where they are working. But here in the country, we 
seem to be diffident. This diffidence has to go," he said. 
  The Prime Minister observed that what was needed in the new 
context of integration was "a new morale, a high morale on the 
part of everyone in this country which is transmitted to the 
last person." 
  He said if the people themselves were not given the morale 
that was needed, then neither the scientist could help nor the 
person working behind the scenes or behind the walls of the 
laboratory could help. 
  He said, "what is happening today is just to demoralise the 
last person, the common man in this country, I am sorry to say, 
that is not on." 
  Referring to the scientist's observation that the 
liberalised 
programme and the integration of Indian economy with world 
economy meant nothing if it was not accompanied by a similar 
integration of science and technology here with the science and 
technology that was available anywhere in the world, Mr Rao said 
"I feel very happy that something which we started two and a 
half years ago stands vindicated." 
  The Prime Minister said Indian people have shown their 
talent, their eminence in every field--science, art, philosophy, 
etc. 
  "You have no right to put them under the lid and say you 
shall be backward, you shall remain backward all the time and 
that national planning will be based on the fact that you are 
going to be backward. We are afraid of patents, we are afraid of 
competition, we are afraid of everything. This will not do," he 
observed. 
  Technology has to be fashioned out of science which means 
money, capital and organisation, he said. "These are things that 
are waiting to be done. The original spark is already there and 
it is going to grow." 
  Urging the scientists to speak up, he said the message had 
to 
be effectively conveyed to the common man. "If I speak, they 
will take me as a politician." 
  The Prime Minister congratulated the G.D. Birla Foundation 
for having instituted these awards for those making outstanding 
contributions in various fields. 


