CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aleksandr Tutushkin and Vladislav Dorofeyev: </F>
"Sakhalin Gets Its Own Gasoline for the First Time"] 
  [Text] A festive ceremony is being held today in 
Sakhalin, celebrating the opening of the oil processing plant 
built by the Russian-American joint venture Petrosakh. It will 
operate using oil from the nearby Okruzhnoye oil deposit, which 
is being exploited by this same enterprise. This marks the 
completion of the development practically "from zero" of a 
non-state-owned full-cycle oil complex, complete with the entire 
necessary infrastructure. It will supply no less than one-third 
of the island's demand for oil products, which have never been 
produced here before. 
  The joint venture Petrosakh was registered on 15 July 1991 
with the Ministry of Finance of Russia. Its founders are: the 
Sakhalin firms SAMEKO (1990, Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk) and SAMETO 
(1991, Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk), as well as the Petrosakh USA company 
(1991, Dallas), which was specially created for implementation 
of the Sakhalin project. The joint venture's charter capital 
comprises $46 million, and was contributed in equal portions by 
the Russian and American sides. 
  The Okruzhnoye deposit was surveyed by the 
Sakhalinmorneftegaz association in the 1970's, and then closed 
down due to absence of funds for development. In December 1992 
Sakhalingeolkom [Sakhalin Geological Committee] issued the joint 
venture Petrosakh a license to develop the deposit for a period 
of 20 years. It is curious that two former Soviet oil 
specialists, Georgiy Mirkin and Mikhail Filshtinskiy, were 
appointed to manage the joint venture. They had worked in 
Sakhalin in the 1970's, and then emigrated to the United States. 
It was they who initiated the project for development of the 
deposit, since they knew very well that Okruzhnoye, even though 
it has heavy soil, also contains light high-quality oil, which 
was used to fuel bulldozers during earthwork performed at the 
deposit. The joint venture received the first oil from the 
reactivated well back in August 1991, and by the end of the 
summer 1992 5,000 tonnes had been extracted from two wells. In 
1994 it plans to extract 400,000-500,000 tonnes of oil, half of 
which will be shipped for export. 
  The construction of the oil processing plant began in the 
spring of last year. By that time, construction of a modular 
residential settlement housing 250 people, with offices and a 
full set of consumer services institutions, had been completed 
at the site. Also, satellite communications were established, 
roads were built, a technical service and repair base was 
created, and an airport and seasonal terminal (operating only 
when the sea is free of ice) were built for pumping petroleum 
products from shore storage collectors into tankers. Practically 
95 percent of the equipment, as well as the modular housing, 
were brought from the United States. 
  The first line of the plant, which has already been placed 
into operation, is expected to process 200,000 tonnes of oil per 
year. In the future there are plans to increase the capacity of 
the oil processing plant to 400,000 tonnes and to build a plant 
for rarification of casing-head gas. Moreover, all the oil 
products obtained will be used only for local needs. The entire 
project is anticipated for a period of 20-30 years. The joint 
venture expects to get its first profits in five years after the 
start-up of the plant. For the economy of Sakhalin the emergence 
of the oil processing plant is an unprecedented event. Despite 
the fact that oil and gas have long been extracted on the 
island, oil products have always been brought in from the 
continent. The start-up of the first oil processing plant will 
make it possible to provide one-third of the fuel demands of 
Sakhalin and the Kurils. 
  The president of the joint venture, Donald Joiner, announced 
that Petrosakh in principle is ready to continue making capital 
investments in the Russian economy--to build several more 
plants, to conduct exploration of new deposits, and to actively 
export oil. It is true, Mr. Joiner concluded with regret, that 
the tax system that exists today in the Russian Federation makes 
these plans difficult to realize. 
  [Begin boxed material] 
<H5>  Basic Characteristics of the Oil Industry Complex Created in </H5>
Sakhalin by the Joint Venture Petrosakh 
  The Okruzhnoye deposit is located in remote taiga on the 
eastern shore of the central part of Sakhalin 500 km from 
Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, 160 km from the port of Poronaysk, and 100 km 
from the Pervomayskoye settlement. The oil reserves are 
estimated at 8-10 million tonnes. There are plans to extract up 
to 80 percent of these reserves. By the end of 1995 plans call 
for reaching a level of 1 million tonnes of oil per year. 
  When the first line of the oil processing plant reaches full 
capacity, the joint venture Petrosakh will be able to meet 40 
percent of the needs of Sakhalin Oblast for aviation kerosene, 
30 percent of its needs for gasoline (AI-93 and A-76) and diesel 
fuel, and its total need for fuel oil. 
  [End boxed material] 

