Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Christina Barofke: ``The New German Laender Test </F>
Market: Successful Technology often Comes from the East''] 
  [Text] The new German laender have become the test market 
for environment technology. Two developments have emerged: 
firstly, more and more eastern companies are settling the fight 
for survival by clever marketing, suitable partners for 
production sharing, and innovative environmental know-how. The 
result: Production sites in the new laender have the latest 
environment technology which is also talked about in the west. 
Secondly, more and more companies from the old German laender 
are making use of the advantages the East has to offer. 
<H5>  Modern Paint Shops </H5>
  When, for example, the paint shop of the new Opel Works in 
Eisenach was brought into operation in July 1992, a new age 
began for automobile finishing. For the first time, water-borne 
paints are being used in all the paint sectors in an automobile 
works. The paint shop of the Thuringian works is considered to 
be the most modern of its kind in the world. 
  Another example is the 700 million German mark [DM] paper 
mill belonging to the Haindl group in Schwedt an der Oder. The 
company, whose registered office is in Augsburg, is staking the 
success of its fourth production site wholly on recycled paper. 
Situated right on the Polish border, it is the first paper mill 
in Germany in which newsprint is produced primarily from waste 
paper. Not only the annual capacity of 250,000 tonnes but also 
the environment technology are impressive. The plant uses 
virtually closed water circuits in production, a 
chemical-mechanical and a two-stage biological clarification 
stage, and a modern combined heating and power station for 
recycling residual materials. The amount of residual effluent 
is about ten liters per kilogram of paper produced; Haindl 
claims the energy saving is about 80 percent compared to primary 
fiber production. An annual figure of 300,000 tonnes of waste 
paper from Berlin, Brandenburg, and the other eastern German 
laender are to be treated; even the parent company in Augsburg 
intends to use the process. 
  Foron Household Appliances GmbH in Niederschmiedsberg near 
Chemnitz has also given the competition something to fear in 
terms of environment technology (see commentary). With its 
first CFC- and FC-free refrigerator in the world, it has filled 
a gap in the environment technology market. After the new 
generation of appliances was presented in April, 80,000 
appliances were sold even before production began; the figure 
will be 150,000 by the end of the year. 
  Obviously, it is not only the pioneering spirit that is 
driving the companies in the East towards innovation and 
commitment. Nowhere else are the investment conditions as good 
as they are in the new German laender. The industrial 
investment subsidies from the government, laender, and local 
authorities, and also the financial participation of the 
privatization agency in the start-up losses incurred by company 
purchases and the necessary remedial measures are creating a 
``entrepreneurial'' climate. Rapid approval planning, which 
those in western Germany can only dream about, underscore these 
advantages. 
  The individual regional governments are also endeavoring to 
support environment technologies. The need for in situ remedial 
measures and the future requirements in environment technology 
make this expenditure seem appropriate. The Brandenburg 
Ministry for Economic Affairs under Minister Hirche, for 
example, has so far supported the 150 projects in the 
``Brandenburg Technology Initiative'' with funds totalling more 
than DM35 million. 
<H5>  First Prize for Innovation </H5>
  Saxony's Environment Minister Vaatz has awarded an 
``Innovation prize for exceptional achievement in waste 
avoidance and recycling'' for the first time in 1993. In the 
category of industrial and commercial enterprises, 
Eilenburg-based Electrolysis and Environment Technology GmbH 
received first prize for a process for recycling electronic 
waste. In the future, the peroxodisulphate process will 
guarantee that circuit boards are processed in an economic and 
environmentally acceptable way. For the first time, it is 
possible to collect, sort and subsequently separate out, stage 
by stage, the metals contained in shredded printed circuit board 
material. Closed material circuits mean there are virtually no 
residues to dispose of; in the ideal case, ultra-pure metals 
such as copper, platinum, solder metal, and even gold are 
obtained. The patent for the copper recycling process has 
already been granted. 
  The east Berlin-based company Wemex has developed a complete 
treatment plant for electronic waste. The pilot plant with an 
hourly throughput of 980 kg, which was presented to the public 
in June, is a world first in its complexity. Ninety-eight 
percent of the materials contained in the old electric and 
electronic appliances will be recovered. The use of 
dry-mechanical processes prevents harmful waste gases, vapours 
or slurries. High-performance air filters ensure minimal dust 
emissions. Interested parties from Germany and Europe have 
already been knocking at the company's door. There is also a 
production sharing agreement with a Japanese firm. 
<H5>  Good Prospects of Success </H5>
  A process for cleaning building facades developed by 
Geo-Proft GmbH, Leipzig, is regarded as particularly worth 
promoting. The company has developed a mobile system for 
removing even severe grime, whereby no waste water enters the 
sewer system. The polluted water is collected and recycled. 
According to the company, 3,000 liters of water can clean up to 
5,000 sq.m. of facade, for which about 40,000 liters are 
required with conventional processes. The company sees good 
prospects of success, particularly in view of the immense demand 
for remedial work in the new German laender. 
  Moba Dresden GmbH in Freital offers high-tech for the solid 
waste industry. The company, which stemmed from a research 
department of the state-owned agricultural machinery firm 
Progress, has developed a computer-integrated waste disposal 
system (CAS). ``Mawis'' (Moba Automatic Waste Identification 
System) is an identification and clearing system for waste 
containers. Large-scale use of the system is planned not only 
in several rural districts in Saxony, but also in the Lower 
Saxony rural districts of Wesermarsch and Osterholz- Scharmbeck. 
  HGN, Hydrogeology GmbH in Nordhausen has an important 
contribution to make to special projects concerning the clean-up 
of toxic waste. The newly-developed purification reactor of the 
Thuringia-based engineering company can be used in situ or as a 
mobile unit and is suitable for the biological decontamination 
of small quantities of soil polluted with hydrocarbons. It is 
economically viable even for small soil loads of around 500 
tonnes. 
  Environment technology of a completely different kind is 
offered by IAC, Engineering Association for Applied Computer 
Technology mbH, Leipzig. In October, the software producer 
intends to bring a highly developed geoinformation system onto 
the market which will be used for the identification, processing 
and evaluation of maps, plans of a geographical nature, and 
infrastructure networks. In view of its new technology, the PC 
program Polygis/W will also help specialist authorities, 
planning offices and universities to reduce the costs of 
cartographic work. Looking at the competition from the old 
German laender, IAC manager Tischer mentions other advantages: 
``The program can also be used by a computer novice after a 
short introduction period, and the users do not need to learn a 
special programming language.'' 
  Lausitz-based Brown Coal GmbH regards itself as being in the 
vanguard of plastics recycling. With its help, Dual System 
Germany GmbH, whose credibility has been badly shaken, intends 
to keep at least some of its promises. The gas works of the 
Black Pump energy works in Spremberg in Brandenburg are 
currently being retrofitted by the brown coal and energy company 
and will then be one of the largest waste recycling plants in 
Germany. Synthesis gas will be obtained from plastics, waste 
oil, rubber, and sewage sludge; this gas can in turn be used 
for the chemical industry. 
<H5>  Largest Sorting Plant </H5>
  The East has another highlight to offer: something that 
ought 
long to have been standard from an environmental standpoint is 
at last becoming a reality. Since the summer of this year, the 
site of Eko Steel AG in Eisenhuettenstadt has not only been the 
site of the largest German plastics sorting plant operated by 
Berlin-based Alba GmbH &amp; Co KG. Before long, this site will 
also be producing, for the first time, garbage bins made of 
recycled plastics with the cooperation of the garbage container 
producer Fritz Schaefer GmbH, Neunkirchen. There is no doubt 
that this will be the starting gun for the spread of ``the most 
typical'' of all recycled products throughout Germany. 40,000 
containers have already been ordered for the ``green spot'' in 
Berlin. 
  [Box, p 29] Convincing Proof 
  The fact that ecology and economics can enter into a close 
association for the benefit of a market-conscious company has 
long been proven. Nevertheless, the example of the Saxony-based 
company Foron GmbH, which came away with the German Environment 
Association's coveted Environment prize for 1993 for the first 
completely CFC- and FC-free and hence particularly 
environmentally acceptable refrigerator, deserves special 
attention. 
  It shows that clever management and an industrious 
workforce, 
even in a medium-sized enterprise in eastern Germany, can 
exploit a profitable gap in the market for ecologically 
acceptable consumer goods. It is merely a matter of identifying 
these gaps. The sensational success of the ``Clean Cooler'' by 
no means fell into Foron's lap. Even in the painfully 
privatized company that succeeded the combine dkk [as published] 
Scharfenstein, the new beginning was hard work. However, the 
ambitious ore mountain dwellers did not resort to moaning about 
the lead other companies had over them; they wanted to be in the 
lead themselves. And they come up with a highly successful 
worldwide first. Obviously, not everyone has the luck of the 
hard worker to have two such powerful midwives as the 
environmental protection organization Greenpeace and one of the 
largest German mail order companies to smooth the path to the 
market. But there is more to it than that. Much more important 
is the proof provided by Foron that there are definitely 
opportunities for a medium-sized eastern German company to do 
business in the field of ecotechnology. Though admittedly, 
creativity and know-how need to be accompanied by a little 
optimism. 

