BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Roberto Garduno Espinosa] </F>
  [Text] The Attorney General's Office (PGR) has said the 
arrest of Carlos Resendez Bertolousi in Monterrey is one of the 
most important blows dealt to drug trafficking. Resendez was in 
charge of laundering the money the Tamaulipas 
Cartel made by selling drugs. The PGR added that the 
alleged criminal, who is linked to Juan Garcia Abrego, main 
Tamaulipas Cartel leader who is on the loose, was 
sent to the Topo Chico Social Readaptation Center in Nuevo Leon 
State. 
  A group of judicial policemen, led by Horacio Brunt Acosta, 
received a tip on 19 March and arrested Resendez as Raymundo 
Gumaro Garza Sanchez and Eliseo Hernandez, who had $110,000 in 
their possession. The two men said the money came from the sale 
of 50 kg of cocaine owned by Resendez. 
  The PGR based its investigations on reports by U.S. DEA and 
Federal Judicial Police (PJF). These reports indicate the 
following: "Carlos Resendez is a key and essential figure in the 
operational and financial organization owned by Juan Garcia 
Abrego, currently on the loose and alleged author of many 
crimes, including health crimes, arms warehousing, and fraud 
[usurpacion de funciones]. 
  The relationship between the two capos began in 
1982, when Resendez was a Tamaulipas Judicial Police chief. 
Upon meeting Garcia, he offered him and his relatives 
protection. Years later, as he left the Judicial Police ranks, 
Resendez "suddenly" became a prominent businessman in charge of 
a company called Autolineas Mavi, Inc. 
  Two large economic transactions cast a shadow over Resendez. 
On 19 May 1993, he made deposits of up to 5 million new pesos 
in the Banorte Bank, Account No. 1023597771, under the name of 
Nohema Quintanilla, whom the PGR believes is his mistress. The 
second incident was the confiscation of $432,000 from Cornelio 
Herrera and Adriana Castrocerio, who claimed the money belonged 
to Resendez. 
  These reports indicate that the Tamaulipas Cartel, 
in operation for the last 15 years, is a multinational business 
whose tentacles reach into the United States, Mexico, Guatemala, 
El Salvador, and Colombia. In the United States, the cartel 
operates in Texas, Arizona, New Mexico, California, Ohio, New 
York, and New Jersey. In Mexico, the criminal organization 
operates in 23 states. In addition, six estates, businesses, 
and companies linked to Resendez have been located. They all 
are under different names. 
<H5>  The Steps of Resendez </H5>
  The PGR also detected the purchase of five 1994 vehicles 
from 
the Country Car Company, whose alleged owner is Garcia Abrego. 
Another case involves the hiring of a "large group of exclusive 
artists," who would presumably perform at his daughter Zulema's 
wedding on 15 May. The PJF learned Resendez introduced Ruben 
Ramirez to Juan Garcia Abrego to ensure that "Ramirez would 
become Garcia's legal representative in charge of recovering 
real estate and personal property owned by the Tamaulipas 
Cartel chief. 
  In late 1993, the PGR captured several cartel members and 
Garcia's henchmen, including Luis Medrano Garcia, Jose Medrano 
De la Rosa, and Adolfo De la Garza, whom the federal government 
will prosecute. Medrano De la Rosa is charged with murder and 
criminal association. 
  Our Monterrey correspondent, David Carrizales, reported that 
when Resendez was presented to the media, he admitted to being a 
friend of Garcia Abrego's, but said he is innocent of the drug 
trafficking charges. He added he is the victim of a vendetta by 
Eduardo Valle, private secretary of Attorney General Diego 
Valades Rios. Resendez is in the custody of the 6th Topo Chico 
District Court. Two arrest warrants on two associates of Garcia 
Abrego's are still pending. 

