BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on regional narcotics developments monitored through 3 
April. 
<H5>  Colombia </H5>
  After five years of eluding the police, Cesare Ciulla, an 
Italian national wanted by Italian police and charged with 
trafficking large quantities of cocaine from Bolivia, was 
finally captured in a house in northern Santa Fe de Bogota. 
Ciulla is believed to be a prominent member of the Italian 
mafia's Ciulla family--one of the most important drug 
trafficking families operating in Italy. After three months of 
bilateral intelligence cooperation, Italian and Colombian 
authorities were finally able to establish that Ciulla was 
moving around the city, passing himself off as another member of 
the Italian community living in Santa Fe de Bogota. (Santa Fe 
de Bogota Inravision Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 0000 GMT 30 
Mar 94) 
  Cucuta police arrested two Venezuelan nationals carrying 80 
kg of cocaine paste. The men were arrested while driving along 
the highway leading from Cucuta to Puerto Santander, a border 
community northwest of Cucuta. According to an official police 
report, the drugs were hidden in a secret compartment in the 
vehicle's door. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 29 Mar 
94 p 12A) 
  Alfonso Ernesto Florez Najar, a Mexican architect who took 
part in a recent UNESCO natural disaster conference in Cartagena 
de Indias, was arrested in the city's airport while carrying 3.5 
kg of cocaine. Colombian police report Florez Najar, 42, was 
preparing to board a flight heading to San Jose, Costa Rica, 
when Administrative Department of Security agents discovered the 
cocaine concealed in two false-bottom suitcases. (Madrid EFE in 
Spanish 1657 GMT 28 Mar 94) 
  Agents assigned to the Turbo port authority seized 26 kg of 
cocaine on a Panamanian-registered freighter anchored in the 
Gulf of Uraba. The cocaine was hidden inside three sealed 
fiberglass boxes in the ship's rudder. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL 
TIEMPO in Spanish 24 Mar 94 p 9A) 
<H5>  Costa Rica </H5>
  The rupture of a heroin packet inside the stomach of a drug 
runner has enabled OIJ (Judicial Investigation Agency) agents to 
break up a drug trafficking group operating between Costa Rica 
and the United States. According to the OIJ, the organization 
was made up of American and Colombian nationals who were 
transporting heroin and cocaine inside their stomachs. Costa 
Rican authorities believe that between 1992 and early 1994, the 
group smuggled nearly $530 million colones worth of heroin. 
(San Jose LA NACION in Spanish 23 Mar 94 p 18A) 
<H5>  Guatemala </H5>
  Two marijuana plantations valued at 9 million quetzals were 
discovered and destroyed by Finance Police in the community of 
Melchor de Mencos, Peten Department, along the border with 
Belize. Police report that the first plantation was valued at 2 
million quetzals and growing 6,000 marijuana plants, while the 
other plantation was valued at 7 million quetzals. No arrests 
have been reported in connection with the case. (Guatemala City 
PRENSA LIBRE in Spanish 28 Mar 94 p 4) 
<H5>  Mexico </H5>
  The Mexican Army has destroyed more than 14 marijuana 
plantations and arrested eight suspected drug traffickers in the 
Morelia municipalities of Churumuco and Tiquicheo. Mario Ayon 
Rodriguez, commander of the 21st Military Region, reported that 
no gunfire was exchanged during the two operation and that 
several vehicles and high-caliber weapons were confiscated. The 
military commander also said that two U.S. nationals were also 
arrested as they were preparing to transport the drug to the 
United States. (Monterrey EL NORTE (Foreign Edition) in Spanish 
28 Mar 94 p 9A) 
<H5>  Panama </H5>
  Recent figures disclosed by the General Customs Directorate 
show 300 kg of various drugs valued at $10.5 million were seized 
in the first quarter of the year. According to a report by the 
Customs Directorate, most of the drugs were seized in March, 
with cocaine comprising the largest portion. The report also 
states that in addition to the aforementioned quantity of drugs, 
customs agents also seized 2,425 ml of liquid cocaine and 125 ml 
of ether. (Panama City EL PANAMA AMERICA in Spanish 3 Apr 94 p 
4A) 

