CSO 

  [Text] Recently, North Korea has been stepping up 
broadcasts focused on the negative side of Western countries 
and Russia and other former Eastern bloc countries where the 
socialist system has collapsed. 
  A tally shows that for 4 months from last November through 
the end of this February, North Korea broadcast such reports 
through the Central Broadcasting Station and Radio Pyongyang on 
19 occasions. 
  By month, the number of such broadcasts was: two in 
November, 
five in December, nine in January, and three in February. The 
main theme of such broadcasts is: "Former socialist countries, 
now converted to capitalism, are falling into moribund and 
morbid societies with cases of crime and social vice increasing 
with each passing day; and the workers in East Europe and 
Russia are yearning to return to socialism." 
  In this connection, in an (8 February) program introducing 
the economic condition in Russia, the Central Broadcasting 
Station said that Russia is in such an economic mess that "it 
is on its knees holding out its hands." Earlier, in a (31 
January) interview program Radio Pyongyang played up phenomena 
showing the seamy side of the former Eastern bloc countries 
that have appeared since the fall of the socialist saying, 
"Numerous young women in former socialist countries which are 
now converted to capitalism are falling into prostitution and 
some of them are even being sold to foreign countries." 
  In particular, in a 25 Jan broadcast the Central 
Broadcasting 
Station said, "Each year in Russia 10,000 people contract 
syphilis, 200,000 get gonorrhea, and over 5 million become 
afflicted with various virus diseases." Earlier, a 3 Jan 
broadcast the same station said: "Cases of crime committed by 
Russian minors have sharply increased these several years, 15 
times faster than the increase in the number of adult crimes." 
A 19 January Radio Pyongyang broadcast said: "As of 1993, the 
total number of AIDS cases throughout the world was 851,620. By 
country, the United States led with more than 339,000 cases, 
followed by France with 26,000, Spain with 21,000, and Italy 
with 18,000 in that order. AIDS is rapidly spreading in 
capitalist society." 
  Reportedly, it is in accordance with the "measures to 
improve 
the editing of news broadcasts" adopted by the Party Central 
Committee that North Korea is playing up the negative side of 
former socialist countries in Eastern Europe and Western 
capitalist countries. In the wake of the collapse of the 
socialist system in East Europe and the disintegration of the 
CPSU, North Korea issued a new news broadcasting guideline to 
the Central Broadcasting Committee in order to prevent an 
ideological unrest of its people and tighten up controls by the 
regime. The main purport of the guideline is "to make the 
substance of news broadcasts consistent with the intentions of 
the Party and make them oriented toward mass agitation." 
  The following is the gist of the guideline: 
  --The Central Broadcasting Committee shall closely oversee 
the operations of the broadcasting committees of provinces and 
special municipalities under its jurisdiction. 
  --Successes of the chuche-based economy shall be reported as 
they occur, and the corrupt social and cultural aspects of 
capitalism shall be reported one instance each day as a daily 
responsibility. 
  --Broadcasting stations concerned shall primarily broadcast 
recorded materials, and when choosing a factory or enterprise 
and persons to appear on a particular program, the selection 
shall be made in an organized manner under a plan drawn up in 
advance. 
  --In an interview with local inhabitants, broad dialects and 
extraneous remarks shall be avoided. 
  Under these new guidelines on news broadcasting, North Korea 
is having its overseas missions collect and transmit to the 
home government materials on these subjects: economic poverty 
in Western countries and East European countries formerly under 
socialism; social crimes such as alcoholism and gang violence; 
and natural calamities and the corrupt aspects of capitalism. 
  These materials are delivered to the Central Broadcasting 
Committee through the Foreign Ministry for use in presenting 
"the true picture of capitalism" to the North Korean people. 

