Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The second round of talks between the Palestinian 
and Israeli delegations which was held in Cairo has concluded. 
  While several differences between the two sides continue to 
remain unresolved, the delegations have returned to Tunisia and 
occupied Palestine in order to consult with their leaders. 
  The Zionist regime foreign minister, Shim'on Peres, who 
headed the Israeli delegation at the Cairo talks, says that 
certain proposals regarding three basic differences mainly the 
area of Ariha [Jericho], the issue of controlling the passages, 
and the security issues have been offered to the Palestinian 
delegation and that is now up to the Palestinian leaders to 
accept or to reject them. 
  On the other hand the Palestinian officials say that the 
proposals put forward by the Israeli delegation do not fulfill 
even the minimum of the Palestinians' requirements and that 
Israel is not willing to accept the handing over to Egypt and 
Jordan the control of the passages in the Gaza-Jericho regions 
and the area of Jericho. 
  The presentation of such contradictory viewpoints 
undoubtedly 
speak of the basic differences between the two sides that have 
not yet been removed. This is at a time when the Tel Aviv 
regime and the Egyptian leaders are trying to project the trend 
of the talks as positive and constructive covering the deep 
differences present between the two sides. 
  There are three main issues over which the Israeli and 
Palestinian delegates differ. According to a document presented 
by the Palestinians, Jericho has an area of 342 sq km; that is 
the area of the Jericho region prior to the occupation of the 
West Bank in 1967. The Zionist regime says that the region has 
an area of 25 sq km, and Shim'on Peres' proposal to the 
Palestinians has doubled it to 50 sq km. On the control of the 
border regions too, the only solution which Israel offers is 
that certain border regions should be jointly controlled under 
the supervision of the two sides. But on the security issues 
and the Jewish settlements the Tel Aviv officials say that they 
will give no concessions to the Palestinians. 
  Under the current circumstances it seems that despite the 
fact that main differences between the two sides have remained 
unresolved, the Zionist regime and certain Arab countries such 
as Egypt on the one hand want the talks to continue and on the 
other project the differences and the obstacles created by the 
Zionist regime as minor. This is at a time when the presidents 
of Syria and the United States are expected to have a meeting in 
mid-January. 
  Undoubtedly deadlock in the talks between the Palestinians 
and the Zionist regime will not be to the benefit of the Tel 
Aviv officials who were seeking separate deals with each of the 
other sides. 
  At any rate this time too, despite the optimism being shown 
in connection with the Cairo talks, it is fully clear that 
against any concessions given to the Palestinian delegation by 
Israel, it will try to get a far bigger concession from them and 
world opinion will once again witness the fact that the usurper 
regime of Israel does not implement the agreement that it has 
itself signed. 

