Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In connection with the Japanese-U.S. construction 
talks, the Ministry of Home Affairs is troubled about deciding 
as to what extent it should open the market concerning public 
works projects undertaken by local governments. In view of the 
20 January deadline set by the United States on imposing 
sanctions on Japan, the ministry would have a better chance of 
avoiding the sanctions should it be able to take bold steps 
toward opening the market. What is more important, however, is 
that the decision on opening the U.S. market regarding public 
works projects undertaken by local governments has been withheld 
since the U.S. Government has been unable to obtain the approval 
of state governments concerning the agreement on government 
procurement concluded at GATT's new round of multilateral trade 
talks (Uruguay Round) on 15 December. Therefore, local 
governments in Japan have raised complaints by asking, "Why 
should only Japan have to open its market regarding public works 
projects undertaken by local governments?" 
  To avoid U.S. sanctions, the Japanese Government plans to 
draw up as soon as early January an action program which is to 
include such measures as improvements to the bidding system. 
Among points of primary concern to local governments are: 1) 
the minimum value of construction projects which will be subject 
to a competitive bidding system open to bidders who meet certain 
requirements; and 2) whether the market opening would be 
expanded to include projects undertaken by the governments of 
not only prefectures but also cabinet-order-designated cities. 
  In the recent GATT trade talks, Japan agreed that public 
works projects undertaken by governments of both prefectures and 
cabinet-order-designated cities valued at over 15 million SDR 
(the IMF's special drawing right) units, or about 2.3 billion 
yen at the current exchange rate, would be subject to bidding 
procedures according to the GATT accords. Under MITI's new 
action program, it is possible that the minimum value of such 
public works projects may be further lowered from the current 15 
million SDR units. However, it has become very clear in the 
negotiations on government procurement that "concerning public 
works projects undertaken by local governments, the U.S. market 
is also closed." 
  Consequently, the Home Affairs Ministry apparently feels 
deep 
down that "in terms of the principles of reciprocity, Japan 
cannot make new concessions unless the United States shows its 
market opening plans first." However, the ministry certainly 
cannot take such a hard-line attitude in bilateral trade talks 
considering Japan's huge trade surplus with the United States. 
On the other hand, the ministry would undoubtedly have a hard 
time coordinating matters at home if it were to make concessions 
that would satisfy the United States. Thus, it is racking its 
brain as the deadline approaches for the United States' planning 
to impose sanctions on Japan. 

