Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "The Russian Navy Is Selling Nuclear </F>
Materials to Iran!"] 
  [Text] Iran's secret and open efforts to purchase nuclear 
weapons and obtain nuclear expertise from the nations of the 
former Soviet Union have not ceased. A few days ago Moscow 
witnessed a scandal of significant proportions, which began with 
a radioactive waste crisis between Russia and Japan. This matter 
then developed to the point where it uncovered a huge operation 
involving the smuggling of radioactive waste material to Iran, 
with the participation of the commanders of the Russian navy. 
The initial threads of the scandal led to the uncovering of a 
network of Iranian businessmen who, for some time, had been 
visiting secret nuclear plants, making contacts with scientists, 
and hiring them, and making deals to hasten Iran's nuclear 
program. All of this culminated in Rafsanjani's offering to buy 
all of Kazakhstan's nuclear arsenal, including a testing ground 
which would be reassembled in Iran in order that Iran begin its 
first efforts in nuclear testing. What exactly happened, and 
what are the details of the latest nuclear deal between Russia, 
the former Soviet republics, and Iran? 
  On 17 November 1993, a sea patrol belonging to the 
international environmental protection organization known as 
"Green Peace" spotted a Russian TNT-27 oil tanker, flying the 
flag of the Russian Pacific Fleet, dumping radioactive waste, 
which was said to be non-concentrated, in the ocean in a place 
200 miles off the shore of Japan. Russian military maps call 
this place "Area 9." The thing which attracted the attention of 
the Green Peace people was that the Russian ship stopped dumping 
the radioactive waste as soon as the Green Peace ship approached 
it, although analyses of the water did not indicate that it 
contained a high proportion of nuclear materials. This matter 
caused a crisis between Russia and Japan, and the Russian 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs hastened to apologize to Japan while 
high-ranking government leadership, represented by Prime 
Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, hastened to pacify Tokyo by 
declaring a ban on the disposal by the Pacific Fleet of 
radioactive waste materials in the Sea of Japan. The scandal was 
then considered to be closed and over with, although Admiral 
Igor Kasatonov, the second-highest commander of Russia's naval 
forces, said that such procedures were inevitable because the 
system utilized by the ships require them, and he added that 
these materials do not harm the water as far as the environment 
and human beings are concerned. 
  But AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI has learned that the Russian Ministry 
of Security has been monitoring some feverish activity being 
carried out by a group of persons and establishments which have 
long been interested in the export of concentrated nuclear 
materials and scrap that can be utilized by plants that use 
nuclear materials -- export which takes place without licenses, 
according to Aleksandr Mikhailov, spokesman for the Ministry of 
Security. In other words, there is a lot of talk going on about 
the smuggling of these materials. This is something that is big 
business in present-day Russia, which has adopted the principle 
of earning profits above all else. 
  Colonel Aleksandr Mikhailov made public a report prepared by 
one of the departments in the Russian Foreign Intelligence 
Service [SVRR], which was tasked with monitoring the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The report was submitted 
to the head of the SVRR, Yevgeniy Primakov, on the eve of his 
meeting with the head of the CIA in Washington, D.C., in June of 
1993. The report confirmed that efforts were being made today to 
smuggle non-concentrated nuclear waste materials utilized by 
industrial sectors and scrap that can be utilized by nuclear 
plants, as well as parts of nuclear warheads that are being 
dismantled in accordance with the treaty to decrease nuclear 
weapons -- not the components of nuclear ammunition -- out of 
Russia. Some of these attempts have been spotted by the security 
forces, whereas others have gotten through "safely." They are 
usually carried out by "amateurs" who cannot imagine how 
dangerous this activity is, even for the businessmen. 
Nevertheless, the intelligence agencies have noticed a rapid 
trend toward the establishment of permanent channels for 
smuggling these materials from Russia to nations which aspire to 
possess nuclear weapons. 
  We should mention that Russia is the only nation among the 
nations of the former Soviet Union that has declared that it is 
monitoring the export of nuclear and strategic materials. 
However, this declaration is nothing more than a piece of paper, 
because there has been no announcement of any practical measures 
that would guarantee translating this declaration into reality. 
As a result, there is plenty of opportunity for the smuggling of 
nuclear materials to take place. 
<H5>  From the Far East to Iran </H5>
  AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI has learned that Russian minister of 
Internal Affairs Viktor Yerin, during his visit to the Far East 
in the summer of 1993, gave the green light to the Pacific Fleet 
command to sell "used nuclear materials and nuclear fuel scrap" 
to other countries. These materials used to be buried in western 
and central Siberia. But the expenses of transporting and 
"burying," which the government was no longer able to control 
after the break-up of the USSR, went up so much that the fleet 
could not keep on shouldering them. So it began selling 
radioactive waste to the "Middle East" via two Argentine 
intermediary companies whose ships took the "scrap" in "Area 9" 
in the Sea of Japan. The Pacific Fleet intelligence agencies 
have information to the effect that four of the two companies' 
ships anchored off the shoreline of Iran, and that this was the 
last stop on their voyages back from the Sea of Japan. Another 
ship escaped the eyes of the intelligence services, while a 
Green Peace patrol frustrated the loading operation of a ship 
from southern Europe that had been rented by one of the two 
intermediary companies. Its captain decided not to approach the 
TNT-27 tanker for fear that the Green Peace observers would spot 
what his ship was carrying and then raise a ruckus, upsetting 
the whole world. For this reason, the Korean ship left "Area 9" 
without having loaded the nuclear "scrap." Then the captain of 
the Russian tanker and the Pacific Fleet command launched an 
attack on Green Peace, accusing them of ordinary piracy. One of 
the officers of the tanker's crew said that, if any of the Green 
Peace rabble had tried to come on board his ship, he would have 
ordered them tossed into the ocean. 
  "Actually," said Aleksandr Mikhailov, "the sailors of the 
Pacific Fleet are giving serious consideration to attempts by 
Green Peace to monitor the movements of ships carrying the flag 
of the Russian naval forces, even if they are supporting ships, 
because this injures their feelings as military people who serve 
their flag, and it deprives them of a `source of income,' 
especially since the Russian Government, represented by Minister 
of Internal Affairs Yerin, has given them permission to earn 
part of their living in this manner." 
  But the most important thing about this scandal is that the 
radioactive liquid nuclear waste, more than likely, is nothing 
but a cover for the basic cargo that the rented Korean ship 
decided not to take. When the file was closed on Japan's 
protests via the Russian prime minister's announcement that he 
was banning, from now on, the "disposal of the Pacific Fleet's 
radioactive liquid scrap" in the Sea of Japan, a dispute broke 
out between the prime minister and the Pacific Fleet command, 
and perhaps the Russian naval forces in general. This dispute 
may become even more aggravated if the Pacific Fleet command, 
fairly soon, does not find a new way or cover for delivering 
nuclear waste to its customers abroad in order to maintain this 
fleet's sailors' additional means of "earning their livelihood." 
<H5>  Fruit in Exchange for Nuclear Materials </H5>
  Apparently the worry about the cut-off of the flow of "used 
nuclear materials and nuclear fuel scrap from Russian 
submarines" to foreign companies is preoccupying not only the 
sailors of the Pacific Fleet, but also -- and perhaps even more 
so -- the buyers. On the evening of 20 October, two days after 
Green Peace had announced that it had spotted an attempt to dump 
nuclear materials into the sea, there arrived in Moscow, coming 
from Dusseldorf (Germany), an Iranian citizen by the name of 
Farhat Sayyidi Farsangadari [name as transliterated], chairman 
of the board of the Iranian trade and investment company called 
the "Faris Group," [as transliterated] the owner of a company 
called "FSF," headquartered in the Dusseldorf suburb of Duren, 
which has the job of supplying "fruit" to Germany and exporting 
"industrial technology and other equipment" to Iran. It is said 
that Farsangadari arrived in Moscow in order to review the data 
of the Moscow branch of the Faris Group. The thing that 
attracted the attention of the Russian Ministry of Security 
concerning Farsangadari's visit was that a quantity of nuclear 
materials had been spotted being smuggled from Russia to Estonia 
in the Russian district of Pskov. The final destination of these 
materials was supposed to be the FSF company in the Dusseldorf 
suburb. The thing that caused people to take an even greater 
interest in this company is the fact that it had financed 
recreational trips for several Russian families in Anatolia, 
Instanbul, Malta, and the Canary Islands. The peculiar thing 
about this matter was that the heads of these families were 
specialists working in the Nuclear Research Institute in the 
town of Dubna (the district of Moscow), the synchrotron 
installation in Protvino, and the nuclear installations in the 
town of Arzamas-16, a town which was not shown on any maps 
printed in the Soviet Union because it was a top secret area. 
These experts also had gone to Iran. As for the "recreational 
trips" for their families, which had been organized by Mr. 
Farsangadari, the families ended up joining the heads of their 
families in Iran. 
  Monitoring the activities of the company that Farsangadari 
owned turned up the fact that one of its employees who had close 
ties to the chief, a man by the name of Shariqi, had visited the 
resort of Bad Ems, in the Rhein valley, in the spring of 1993, 
not as a person seeking rest and recreation, but rather as 
correspondent for Iranian newspapers that are published in the 
nation's provinces and as their delegate to a meeting, in this 
German resort town, of high-ranking specialists charged with the 
task of monitoring the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons 
organized by the Moultree [name as transliterated] Institute for 
International Relations (the United States) and the Frankfurt 
Institute for World Issues (Germany). These meetings are held 
twice a year, and those participating in them are 
representatives of the basic nuclear powers and the large 
European nations. This time they were joined by representatives 
from Ukraine and Kazakhstan -- two new nuclear powers. Shariqi, 
who speaks good English and German and also understands Russian, 
did not go out of his way to inform the readers of the 
newspapers that he represented -- and there are not many such 
readers -- concerning the proceedings of the meeting held by 
those tasked to monitor any movement of nuclear materials in 
Russia, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan, where no such monitoring has 
yet been imposed or where it does not fulfill all the 
conditions. Mainly what he did was to occupy himself with making 
contacts with nuclear experts from Russia, Ukraine, and 
Kazakhstan. 
  This is why the Russian security apparatus concentrated its 
attention on Farsangadari's visit to Moscow after the "scandal" 
that originated in the Sea of Japan, particularly since he came 
accompanied by Shariqi. It is difficult to say whether or not 
the chairman of the board of the Faris Group was serious in 
monitoring the data of the Moscow branch whose headquarters 
occupies the third floor of an old municipality building near 
the Embassy of the Armenian Republic in downtown Moscow and 
deals in supplying fruit, alcoholic beverages, vegetables, soap, 
and cosmetics to Russia and importing industrial equipment, 
electrical appliances, dishes, spoons, and aluminum forks. Iran 
does not need kitchen utensils, but it does need aluminum. But 
one thing is for sure, and that is that he spent lots of time 
meeting with Russian citizens who came to Moscow from Izhevsk, 
Arzamas-16, and Krasnoyarsk-26, which are the centers of the 
Russian nuclear weapons and space apparatus industries. It was 
obvious that the Faris Group imported not only dishes and 
aluminum from Russia, but also human expertise, particularly 
people who worked, or still work, in the sectors of military 
production. 
<H5>  Rafsanjani's Deal in Kazakhstan </H5>
  On 23 October Farsangadari and Shariqi left Moscow and flew 
to Alma Ata, arriving there at the same time as Iranian 
President 'Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani who came to hold talks 
with the president of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev. 
Farsangadari's name was not on the list of those accompanying 
the Iranian president. However, he met with him in the Kazakh 
capital and remained in constant contact with a number of the 
president's advisers. It should be mentioned that Farhat Sayyidi 
Farsangadari belongs to an old, established, noble Iranian 
family that was close to the throne and distanced itself from 
the last Iranian shah during the "White Revolution" because of 
violent actions taken against the interests of the family. 
However, the family also remained distant from Khomeyni since it 
considered him to be an extremist. It seems that Iran's present 
government has nothing against this family, otherwise it would 
not be cooperating with it, even though Farsangadari, his wife, 
and his two daughters permanently reside in Germany. After Alma 
Ata, Farsangadari and Shariqi went on a quick trip to 
Semipalatinsk, the location of the underground nuclear testing 
site. Since most of the people working there are in the Russian 
military, it was natural for the Russian Ministry of Security to 
have informers there who told Moscow that the two Iranian guests 
had met with the Kazakh leaders as well as a number of employees 
of mostly Russian and Armenian origin who played a role in 
previous underground nuclear explosions. The participants in 
these meetings kept silent about what happened in them, but 
everyone knew the secret. The discussions dealt with inviting 
specialists to work in Iran, especially since the testing site 
had not been holding any tests or doing any work by means of 
which they could earn their living, and the fact that they had 
no future in either Kazakhstan or Russia. 
  After Farsangadari returned to the Kazakh capital from 
Semipalatinsk, he was received by the Iranian president before 
he had his last meeting with President Nazarbayev. After that 
meeting, some observers revealed the fact that the Iranian 
president had proposed to his Kazakh counterpart that he sell to 
Iran the scrap from the nuclear arsenal that Kazakhstan had 
agreed to destroy in the near future. What was meant by 
"arsenal" in this case was not only the rocket parts and their 
nuclear warheads, but also the testing site equipment in 
Semipalatinsk that was going to be dismantled and which was 
needed by Iran -- a country that is on the verge of testing its 
nuclear bomb and which, they say, has begun to equip a testing 
site in the northeastern part of the country. 
  According to available information, Iraq wants to acquire 
what remains of the Ukrainian nuclear arsenal, and this is why 
Iran has nearly reached agreement with Kazakhstan concerning 
purchasing its nuclear installations as well as the necessary 
equipment and technology to make it possible to conduct 
experiments with nuclear explosions. In any case, there is no 
doubt that the two sides have agreed, in writing, with regard to 
their intent to make deals such as these. Above and beyond that, 
Tehran hopes to get something by means of smuggling materials 
and human expertise. 
  The curious thing is that President Rafsanjani, when passing 
through Baku on his way back from Kazakhstan, issued a verbal 
threat, on behalf of the Muslims of the world, against the 
"Armenian aggressors." But these threats were little more than 
an effort to flatter his Azerbaijani hosts. The large Armenian 
community in Iran occupies an influential position in business 
and trade, in addition to the fact that there are lots of 
Armenian specialists -- most of whom have come to Iran recently, 
especially from Armenia -- who work in Iranian nuclear 
installations. And the scientific research institutes and plants 
that had the job of producing Soviet nuclear weapons, missiles, 
and space equipment were located in all of the Soviet republics, 
including Armenia. Right now Armenian nuclear scientists and 
technicians cannot find any work in the fields that they worked 
in because of the unemployment crisis that has led to a 
paralysis of the entire Armenian industry and because of the 
cut-off of necessary supplies that used to come from plants 
scattered all over the former Soviet Union that they used to 
deal with. For this reason they are looking for work in other 
countries, especially in Iran and Iraq, where they see great 
opportunities to utilize their expertise and knowledge. Thus it 
is doubtful that Tehran would antagonize the Armenian community, 
which supports the Iranian regime economically and financially 
and produces its weapons. This is something that Baku apparently 
also realizes. And Alma Ata feels that the nuclear arsenal it is 
being forced to destroy could bring lots of revenue to 
Kazakhstan if it would do the smart thing with its "rubble." 
Alma Ata could earn an estimated hundreds of millions of dollars 
if it, to some degree, also oversaw this "unlicensed business." 
<H5>  Trip to the Plutonium Burial Sites </H5>
  The activity of the Iranian envoys in Russia indicate that 
Tehran is taking serious practical steps to get what it wants. 
After the talks in Kazakhstan were over, Farsangadari and 
Shariqi returned to Moscow. From there, the former went to 
Dusseldorf, while the latter took a plane to the Russian city of 
Ekaterinburg on 5 November, where he rode by automobile to the 
city of Verkhne Isetsk, a city that was not shown on maps of the 
Soviet Union and to which entry was denied even to Soviet 
citizens, unless they had special permission. It is known now 
that this city is the location of one of the centers of the 
Soviet nuclear industry. Shariqi stayed in this city till 10 
November and met with a number of people from the city as well 
as some guests who came in from Chelyabinsk and Krasnoyarsk. It 
is not difficult to figure out the topic dealt with by the 
Iranian guest at these meetings, especially if we know that, in 
Chelyabinsk-40 and Krasnoyarsk-26 they have buried large 
quantities of used nuclear fuel which came from all of the 
Soviet fleets, Soviet nuclear power plants, and even from 
Finnish nuclear installations. Also, for example, after the 
break-up of the Soviet Union into independent republics, no less 
than three tons of plutonium was sent there from Ukraine. It is 
said that Ukraine apparently wants to regain this plutonium in 
order to sell it, and for this reason refuses to pay the bill 
for burying it. However, the nuclear weapons non-proliferation 
treaty forbids Russia from returning the plutonium to Ukraine 
because it is, officially at least, not a nuclear power. In such 
a case, some of those in charge of burying the nuclear waste 
might embark upon selling these materials without permission, 
the reason being that they would, of course, want to serve both 
the public interest and private interests. 
  Russian circles do not doubt that those working at the 
nuclear test site in Semipalatinsk steered the Iranians toward 
the nuclear scrap burial sites in Chelyabinsk and Krasnoyarsk, 
and that those in charge of these "burial sites" knew in advance 
that a representative from the Iranian military industrial 
complex was coming to verkhne Isetsk, so they went there to meet 
him. Whatever the case might be, the Iranian buyer met the 
Russian sellers in verkhne Isetsk, and then they made a deal. 
Their problem now is to figure out how to ship the materials to 
the Iranian buyer. The route across the Baltic republics is no 
longer a good one because it is now being strictly monitored and 
not even falsified documents will fool them. So the only thing 
left for the suppliers to do is choose between a route through 
the Central Asian republics, which are not separated from Russia 
by border obstacles, and a route through the northern Caucasus 
area and Azerbaijan, bearing in mind that the Caucasus area is 
full of highway bandits led by field commanders who are subject 
to no authority and do not hesitate to steal oil from pipelines 
and "confiscate" trucks loaded with powdered milk and children's 
clothes. But the most important question is: What will the 
Russian security forces do, since they are aware of these 
suspicious deals? 
  The problem is that the security apparatus has to be content 
to merely monitor the buyers and sellers because there are no 
laws that allow them to arrest them. The most that the law 
allows is for them to arrest a moving "convoy," but this is 
something that is hard to do. As for the stealing from the 
"graveyards," that is something which, in practice, cannot be 
proved. A thief can dump a ton of sand into the grave, instead 
of the scrap that contains a high proportion of plutonium, and 
mix the sand with the radioactive materials, and it is 
impossible to tell the difference. As for conducting analytical 
tests of the whole burial site, this is something that is very 
expensive to do and does not serve the purpose. 
  Consequently, if the person who raised all the ruckus 
concerning dumping liquid nuclear waste in the Sea of Japan on 
17 October had the goal of eliminating the supply channels of 
Russian nuclear materials to places abroad via the Pacific 
Fleet, in particular, then most probably he did not get what he 
wanted. As long as there are goods for which there is a demand 
and those who possess the goods wish to sell them, they will 
always find ways to market them illegally. As for the nuclear 
materials and technology, those persons in Russia who possess 
them see no reason not to smuggle them to countries who are 
rushing to grab these commodities, as long as there is no 
obstacle that makes doing business with nuclear materials -- 
either legally or illegally -- something that is not profitable, 
either as far as Russia or the other former Soviet nuclear 
republics are concerned. 

