BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Nadein report: "Commander in Chief Clinton Comes </F>
to Europe To Celebrate All Victories at Once"] 
  [Text] Washington -- U.S. President Bill Clinton has left 
on a nine-day tour of Europe with one main objective -- to lead 
the ceremonies in France. Allied troops landed here on the 
shores of Normandy 50 years ago, 6 June 1944. The colorful and 
costly celebrations for which people in the United States and 
Europe have been preparing for a long time are designed to show 
that it was this event, known here as D-Day, that brought the 
decisive breakthrough in World War II. 
  One cannot help hearing distinctly chauvinistic notes in the 
long, triumphal precelebration campaign. I must warn you right 
away that, if anyone imagines that the mass media are denying 
the role of the Soviet Army or events on the Eastern Front, say, 
or that the Americans are scornful of and deaf to the casualties 
and devastation suffered by the USSR, that impression is 
mistaken. 
  When I talk about chauvinism I mean the strictly U.S. form, 
whereby recognition of the merits of other participants in the 
great war gets lost in a boundless sea of highly varied and 
excellent material in all conceivable genres. You get the 
feeling from this plethora of material of a U.S. triumph -- U.S. 
above all -- over the German military machine, and persistent 
parallels with the victorious battle in the desert against 
Saddam Husayn, not entirely overshadowed by what are in this 
case inappropriate memories of Vietnam, create a general picture 
of the logic and inevitability of the last and only superpower's 
victory in the Cold War as well. 
  By no means everything that is being broadcast at the moment 
will remain in the memory of the pragmatic Americans once the 
celebrations are over. But no means everything will be 
forgotten. The theatrical rerun of the allied landing in 
Normandy (and a precise copy of it on the same day in the United 
States, near Norfolk) will remain in the memory as virtually 
documentary evidence of insuperable U.S. might. 
  President Bill Clinton, who has already gotten weary of 
defending himself against charges of wavering and inconsistency 
in the world arena and reluctance to offer the world U.S. 
leadership, will speak solemnly and at length about the heroic 
deeds of "our fathers and grandfathers." But he will voice 
another conviction (and this may not please some people in 
Europe) -- that the era of U.S. paratroops deployed far from the 
United States is gone forever and that, while the Americans are 
not averse to leading the planet -- with advice, open trade, all 
manner of exchanges -- they no longer have the forces and do not 
expect to have the forces to carry out such landings. 
  The return to power in a number of European countries of 
those whom people in the United States consider neofascists 
(Italy) or Communists (Hungary, Poland, Lithuania) compels the 
President to speak with unprecedented delicacy both on the 
problems arising from the victories 50 years ago and the triumph 
in the Cold War. Another tricky element is that the U.S. 
President, who under to the U.S. Constitution is supreme 
commander in chief, once refused to serve in the Army on 
ideological grounds. 
  What is more, he was an active participant in the pacifist 
movement during his education at Britain's Oxford University. 
That is why Bill Clinton has not included a visit to Oxford in 
his agenda and in the United States chose a slightly older 
audience in order to ensure that the commander in chief's thanks 
for their good service did not elicit undesirable comparisons. 
  During a meeting with World War II veterans on the eve of 
his 
departure for Rome President Bill Clinton said that he had been 
studying specially for several weeks the course of the combat 
operations in Europe. 
  One can say without stretching a point that the U.S. 
President is a fairly rare exception among his people. The 
overwhelming majority of the U.S. population are quite sincerely 
unaware of what kind of war it was, who fought whom during it, 
and, importantly, why. 

