BFN 

  [Excerpt] Bratislava, April 12 (CTK) -- Regarding 
electoral coalitions, the situation in Slovakia is still vague, 
the independent SME says today. 
  Meciar's "national bloc" is facing the most problems because 
the Christian Social Union (KSU) has decided to enter the 
elections independently, the radical Slovak National Party (SNS) 
is not the most suitable partner for the HZDS (Movement for a 
Democratic Slovakia), and the Green Party has definitively 
turned to the left, the daily states. 
  There is, in fact, a social democratic bloc, comprising the 
Democratic Left Party (SDL), the Slovak Social Democratic Party 
(SDSS), and the Farmers' Movement. Contrary to initial 
assumptions, the leftist bloc is missing the Slovak Workers' 
Association (ZRS) which, encouraged by the polls, wants to enter 
the elections separately. However, their loss is compensated 
for by the Greens, the paper reports. 
  Despite the agreement of the ethnic Hungarian Christian 
Democratic Movement (MKDH) and the Hungarian Civic Party (MOS) 
to form a great Hungarian coalition, the Egyutteles is still 
hesitating and thus can prevent a joint list of candidates from 
appearing, the paper notes. 
  The situation in the center is the least clear. A merger of 
the "Knazko-ites" from the Alliance of Slovak Democrats (AD SR) 
with Moravcik's Alternative of Political Realism (APR) into the 
liberal Slovak Democratic Union is anticipated, but the 
rationale of the alleged impossibility of uniting with 
conservative Cernak's National Democratic Party seems to be 
absurd, the paper states. The incompatibility of liberalism 
with conservatism is just an excuse, not a reason for lack of 
unity of the center, it adds. 
  On the right side of the political spectrum, the Christian 
Democratic Movement (KDH) is hesitating to form a coalition as 
well, the paper states. The Democratic Party has given notice 
of the creation of a joint bloc with the Party of Entrepreneurs 
and Tradesmen. In theory, it is still possible either that a 
coalition of the right and center will be formed or that the 
crushing defeat of the right in the last elections, caused by 
its incompetence and unwillingness to cooperate, will repeat 
itself, the paper concludes. 

