CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Irina Lobacheva: ``Far-Sighted Plato and Wise </F>
Keldysh, or How the Academy of Sciences is Trying to Survive 
Under the New Economic Conditions''; the first four paragraphs 
are an introduction] 
  [Text] An enormously long time has passed since the first 
academy made its appearance. Almost four centuries before the 
birth of Christ, about twenty centuries since the year 1 A.D. 
Precisely this time interval, almost inconceivable to the 
reasoning of an ordinary person, excuses anyone who has 
forgotten on what was based the Platonic Union, having as its 
purpose the honoring of the muses. I will therefore refresh your 
memory. 
  First Plato, who decided to gather scientific fellow 
thinkers 
and opponents around him, acquired (on his own resources)the 
gymnasia and the garden in which these academic institutions 
were located. To the point, the name of his academy was given in 
memory of the mythological hero Akademus, whose name was given 
to the garden purchased by Plato. Then students came to the 
gymnasia who spent their time both in philosophical arguments 
and for exercises in mathematics, astronomy, natural science and 
other sciences. Probably in order to think better the academy 
members, that is, the academicists, voluntarily limited their 
sleep, refrained from carnal love and consumption of meat. 
  Our modern world organized its academies without having 
recourse to such self-tortures. And nevertheless the scientific 
associations traditionally bearing the name ``academy'' in most 
well-developed countries are usually striving to perpetuate the 
Platonic tradition. Existing on the resources of their own 
members as some councils of authorities recognized in the 
scientific world, to the extent which they are able they are 
endeavoring to support young scientists, are striving to inform 
mankind of scientific advances, are trying to ward off 
ecological catastrophes and are serving as experts when 
initiating and implementing scientific and technical programs 
capable of changing the life of the planet, etc., etc. Only 
Russia in its time has pursued a different course. 
  It is possible to understand Peter the Great, who himself, 
in 
essence, was the first Russian academician. The state took under 
its wing and gave state support to anyone who could contribute 
to the power of Russia. The scientist was no exception. And so 
it went -- the Russian Academy always was supported from the 
public treasury. Academicians and professors, to be sure, were 
not rewarded with mountains of gold, but in general they lived 
rather comfortably. 
  The Soviet government demanded loyalty from scientists and 
in 
exchange offered the same support to all from the public 
treasury. Those who categorically rejected such conditions were 
banished or killed and those who remained were forced to accept 
the benefaction of the state. 
  Least of all do I want to accuse scientists of conformity. 
Yes, in the history of Soviet science there are very unpretty 
pages, but in the history of our country there are far more. But 
that is not at all what we are discussing here. Existing on the 
money of the Soviet state, Soviet science achieved more than a 
few successes, acknowledged as such by the entire civilized 
world. Under modern conditions, however pitiful it may be, all 
the most appreciable and fundamentally new scientific 
discoveries were made in fields in one way or another associated 
with defense. The military machine was swollen to the limit, 
requiring newer and newer specialists, newer and newer 
equipment. And together with it there also was an excessive 
increase in the number of scientific workers, institutes (for 
the most part closed and highly secret) and laboratories, 
scientific fields, themes, subthemes, minor themes simply being 
of some interest, those requiring the confirmation of ideas... 
And everything was funded virtually without restrictions. 
  As a result, in the prosperous year 1980, within the 
framework of the USSR Academy of Sciences alone, there were more 
than 250 scientific institutions at which about 42,000 
scientific specialists, 269 academicians and 536 corresponding 
members worked. So-called applied science (scientific research 
institutes operating under the departments, ministries, branch 
academies and institutions of higher education) increased these 
figures threefold as a minimum. The selected state form of 
organization of science remained patriarchal and unchangeable. 
It was born from the entire structure of economic control, it 
was centralized to the limit, was militarized, in essence 
ignoring the very concept of efficiency, and was closely linked 
to it. The economy went on the skids, and science went with it. 
This fact, however, exerted almost no influence on the financial 
position of either scientific workers or scientific 
institutions. Academicians received 500 rubles monthly for life 
and corresponding members received 350. An effort was made not 
to admit the unworthy to this steady, ensured life. Doctors and 
candidates of science routinely squabbled with one another, 
wangling funding for one research topic or another. Deathblows 
were inflicted on dozens in striving to live long enough to 
receive the pay of a junior scientific specialist... 
  And suddenly all this remained in the past. Including the 
detested trips to the vegetable commissaries. And a clearly 
designated day for receiving one's wages. And stable funding of 
a research topic over which a laboratory had already sweated for 
some years. And faith in a bright future, ensured by the mantle 
of the Academy. Well, to be sure, not many counted on achieving 
the rank of academician. But now virtually all were 
thunderstruck by the other innovations. And it got worse for 
everyone. 
  Despite the breakup of the country of which we all were 
citizens a few years ago, the number of representatives of 
science in Russia alone has considerably surpassed the figures 
cited two paragraphs above. The number of scientific 
institutions has increased to 445, about 61,000 scientific 
workers are now employed in their work force and there are 419 
academicians and 594 corresponding members in the ranks of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences. And once again, as in the past 
example, the branch workers also considerably swell these 
figures. And it has become clear that the state is in no 
position to maintain this bulky and cumbersome structure. 
  Scientists must be given their due: some of them foresaw 
such 
a turn of events. Academician L. Keldysh, director of the 
Physics Institute of the Academy of Sciences, already two years 
ago in the VESTNIK [Herald] of the Academy of Sciences, 
published his prediction that the forms of organization of 
science prevailing in our country were impossible in any 
reasonable economy and he proposed his own program for the 
preservation of science and reorganization of the Academy. He 
directly raised questions concerning what kind of science was 
needed by a country experiencing hard times, whether society was 
in a position to support it and what had to be done in order to 
preserve fundamental science in a volume allowing the 
resurrection of the status of our country as one of the leading 
in the world. No one listened. Or did they not wish to listen? 
  The Academy has many other concerns. It is already the 
second 
month, for example, that its presidium has been busy trying to 
wangle the allocated budgeted sums for maintenance of the 
Academy from the Ministry of Finance. The money is coming, but 
with a great delay, and therefore is depreciated before reaching 
the pocket of the scientific specialist or the institute at 
which he works. The academicians are becoming nervous. As always 
in such cases, those responsible for the prevailing situation 
have already been found: these are the Ministries of Finance and 
Science and Technical Policy. The other day the list of the 
guilty parties was supplemented by still another department: the 
Ministry of Labor, which published an explanation of payment for 
the activity of scientific workers that did not fully satisfy 
the Academy, that is, its full members. 
  Do not hurry to take on faith the assertion by the Academy 
that the government is by plan destroying Russian science. Under 
very difficult conditions the state last year was able to 
allocate 130 billion rubles for maintaining the Academy (in the 
relatively prosperous year 1990 this sum was 1.9 billion). Is 
this a great sum? To be sure, it is inadequate. And although for 
each worker -- and according to the personnel department, 
together with watchmen and mechanics there is a total of 138 402 
people -- almost a million rubles is allocated for the year, it 
must be understood that 30% of this money is ``eaten up'' 
by 
expenditures for electric power, water, heat and rent, and 
60% 
is for salaries, true with a frightful lag, but nevertheless 
indexed. In actuality, no budgeted money remains for science. 
About 35 billion additional was received for carrying out 
scientific research from different funds and programs set up and 
managed under the patronage of the Ministry of Science and 
Technical Policy. The Academy is very nervous that these sums 
may be received only by winning in a competition. It has been 
the custom that the institutes receive money only from the hands 
of the presidium. And therefore the ministry is being accused of 
fine management, and in its place it is proposing its own 
services. With respect to distribution, naturally. 
  But meanwhile at the Academy institutes changes are 
nevertheless going on. Applications are being drawn up for 
grants from different funds; good possibilities are being 
afforded not only by the Soros Fund, but also by the Russian 
Fundamental Research Fund and by different foreign universities, 
and soon a Fund for Research in the Humanities and a 
Technological Fund will be in operation. For the time being all 
these apparent changes are on the initiative of the Ministry of 
Science and Technology. The Academy presidium, however, 
dispatching one letter after another to the president of the 
country, as before is asking for only one thing: money, money, 
money. 
  In December the salaries were increased for scientific 
workers under the budget. By a factor of 1.9. It is true that 
there are no funds for implementing this increase. But for the 
academicians not everything was clear: a presidential decree had 
stipulated life payments of 150,000 rubles for academicians and 
75,000 for corresponding members. But, indeed, each of them 
already has an academic degree and therefore it was expected 
that the increased salaries would automatically be supplemented 
by a 50% increment for a doctoral degree. The Ministry of 
Labor, however, insists that the scientific degrees have already 
been allowed for in the salaries of the Academy elite. This has 
already been kicked around several times in the government and 
no one can make sense of who is right in this situation. 
  Somehow it is even awkward to tell about all this. 
Involuntarily one recalls: when during the past year the Soros 
Fund, taking into account the low wages of scientific workers, 
announced the possibility of payment of 500-dollar stipends and 
as a condition stipulated that the competitors have published 
works in publications authoritative in the scientific world 
during the last five years, only 23,000 such scientific workers 
were found in Russia. The Americans sent notifications of the 
awarding of the 500-dollar stipends to the home addresses of 
those receiving the awards, having evidently heard a lot about 
our academic customs. The presidium, however, has given no 
attention to the scandalous character of the situation -- 
although it was high time to do so. It advanced from its ranks 
of servants of science candidates for the title ``outstanding 
scientist'' and ``young talent.'' Now in the heart of the 
Academy institutes there are 5000 ``outstanding scientists'' who 
have been tapped for a 75,000-ruble scientific stipend and 
another thousand ``young and talented'' scientists designated by 
the state for a 50,000-ruble increment to their salary... 
  An infinite number of examples can be cited. When certain 
problems are solved new ones arise. A solution is found for some 
and others lie in wait. And it is becoming clear that by 
cultivating the incomprehensible status of the Academy as some 
public-state structure, the problems of fundamental science, 
alas, are not being solved. It is the opinion of A. Shabad, 
co-chairman of the Academy's Electors Club, that the time has 
come to stop hiding one's head under the wing of undesignated 
state funding. The activity of the Academy must be directed into 
the juridical channel. If it is a public organization it should 
exist at the expense of its founders or sponsors. However, if it 
is a state organization it must be admitted that the state has 
the right to determine the priority purposeful programs and fund 
them with rigorous bookkeeping and oversight. And the illusions 
that it is possible to suffer through the tough times, just hang 
in, outwait the difficult times, while remaining in the former 
incomprehensible status, have no basis whatsoever. 
  It must be honestly acknowledged, as Academician Keldysh 
appealed for two years ago, that a rigid restriction must be 
placed on the number of research fields and projects supported 
by society, henceforth being oriented solely on first-class 
undertakings and maintaining them at a level as close as 
possible to the world level. And nevertheless there is no money 
left over and in the immediate future there is evidently nowhere 
from which it can come. Therefore scientific workers must not be 
fed the illusions of far-reaching changes. The meager wages (and 
at some institutes the salaries of old-timers do not exceed 
25-40 thousand rubles) do not solve any problems but only 
aggravate them. It happens that some man of science within the 
walls of his own institute sees, perhaps on payday, the same pay 
that he earned long ago at a different place and for performing 
completely different obligations, and has to settle for it. It 
not rarely happens that so-called commercial activity, based on 
the equipment and carried out in the facilities belonging to an 
institute, inevitably results in the cutoff of work on 
scientific problems and the income supposedly received from such 
activity does not even cover payments for communal services. So 
is it worthwhile to continue the agony? 
  Evidently the time has come for a return of science to the 
walls of the universities (not the numerous newcomers, but those 
where there are recognized scientific schools). There is nothing 
unusual in this -- in the world there are exceedingly few 
examples of scientific pursuits which are detached from 
university centers. And without dragging it out, there should be 
an expert evaluation of all scientific projects, making it 
possible to bring together in scientific centers those who are 
capable of doing this. Many far-sighted scientific directors, 
incidentally, are already doing this. But the academicians, 
evidently, must be guided by Platonic principles of organization 
of scientific cooperation. So it has come about that Peter the 
Great's model has come to an end. Possibly the desire of 
Academician Keldysh not to remain in the position of 
academician-secretary of one of the academy departments can be 
considered a first step in this direction? In this way he 
decided to protest against an unreasonable form of organization 
of science, feeling that any attempt at artificially prolonging 
its existence will have sorrowful consequences for science. 
Possibly it is necessary to trust his instinct in this case as 
well? 

