Language: <F P=105> Vietnamese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Bac Hai] </F>
  [Text] Although there is no basis for affirming this, 
public opinion holds that there are a number of individuals in 
Hanoi whose "wealth" is tied to the smuggling of rubies. Because 
of this, they have become wealthy very quickly. 
  But the truth is, most of those engaged in smuggling rubies 
out of Vietnam are foreigners. An Indian businessman said that 
he had purchased a 50-carat Vietnamese ruby in Bangkok for 37 
million baht ($1.5 million). After cutting the stone, he sold 
the 27.5-carat ruby for $3 million. This is not, however, the 
largest. Nguyen Xuan An, the director general of the Vietnam 
Gemstone Corporation, said that a rough ruby weighing 57.6 
carats is now being kept at the state storehouse. 
  In 1984, with the help of Czech specialists, Vietnamese 
geologists discovered the first ruby in Luc Yen in Yen Bai 
Province, 275 km northwest of Hanoi. This is an alluvial area 
containing Burmese-colored rubies, purple sapphires, and a 
number of other colored stones. People have surveyed a number of 
zones and preliminarily evaluated the distribution of rubies 
here. In their survey, geologists zoned the Khoan Thong Valley, 
creating the preconditions for the birth of a joint gemstone 
venture with the Thai B.H. Corporation. In a number of other 
valleys such as Nuoc Ngap and Lung Cay, the locations of 
gemstones, mainly rubies, were determined. In 1987, geologists 
found another alluvial mining area containing rubies in Quy Chau 
in Nghe An Province, 250 km southeast of Hanoi. By chance, 
several rubies were discovered in the waste disposal yard of the 
Chau Cuong tin mine. The survey program here revealed the 
presence of rubies over a broad area. A broad zone running 
parallel to Highway 48 was zoned for geological surveys. Because 
the secret got out, at the end of 1990, large numbers of people 
started coming here, with the number sometimes reaching several 
tens of thousands. They dug everywhere in this zone, which gave 
rise to the names Doi Ty [Billion Hill] and Doi Trieu [Million 
Hill]. Some were lucky, but hundreds of others died in the pits. 
Doi Ty became Doi Tu [Death Hill], with almost 100 people buried 
alive. Robbery, gambling, and prostitution became rampant and 
could not be controlled. With the help of the central echelon, 
after 2 years of great effort, the local authorities managed to 
reestablish order there. 
  The government has promulgated many policies to expand the 
ruby mining and processing industry. This includes organizing 
bidding on plots of land ranging in size from 1-5 hectares, 
allowing various economic elements, including individuals, to 
participate, encouraging foreign corporations to invest together 
with domestic corporation, and lowering the export tariff on cut 
rubies from 5 percent to 1 percent. However, out of concern that 
the masses will carry on mining activities spontaneously outside 
the control of the various-echelon authorities, the government 
has yet not lifted the ban on conducting gemstone surveys, which 
was promulgated in September 1991, except in zones adjoining 
mines now in operation. If this problem is resolved soon and 
control over this valuable resource is organized well, the 
Vietnamese gemstone industry will develop rapidly, creating jobs 
for hundreds of thousands of laborers, particularly in the 
processing sector. 

