BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of Yemeni Presidential Council statement issued in </F>
Sanaa on 30 April] 
  [Text] In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate. 
God's peace and blessings be upon the most honorable of prophets 
and messengers. O sons of our great Yemeni people: The 
Presidential Council, which was greatly grieved by the fierce, 
bloody fighting in the 'Imran camp between comrades-in-arms from 
the 1st and 3d Armored Brigades--which started at 2100 on 27 
April, which coincided with the first anniversary of the day of 
democracy and constitutional legitimacy, and ended at 0900 on 28 
April-- would like to present the following facts to you: 
  Sincere efforts have been made during the transitional stage 
and since the establishment of the unified state, the Republic 
of Yemen, to merge the armed forces as part of a well-studied 
and comprehensive plan that would eliminate the remains of 
divisive colonialism and put an end to partisan and individual 
loyalties so that the military institution would act solely in 
the service of the homeland and the people. However, these 
efforts have continuously been strongly opposed by the leaders 
of the Yemeni Socialist Party [YSP], who have obstructed all 
these efforts. They have not hidden their fear that their loss 
of control over several military units might rob them of the 
card they are using to achieve their political aims -- 
threatening to restore the pre-22 May 1990 situation if they do 
not get a sufficient number of seats in the House of 
Representatives to enable them to maintain an equal share of the 
power they enjoyed during the transitional period. The clashes 
and the regrettable riots in Ta'izz on 19 December 1993 were 
meant to prevent the parliamentary elections on 27 April. Due 
to the people's resolve and will, the parliamentary elections 
took place on 27 April last year. The results defined the size 
of every political party in the field, thus enhancing the fears 
of the YSP secessionists. Despite the concessions made to 
preserve unity and achieve national accord, these secessionist 
elements in the YSP leadership could not stand the idea of 
losing even a meager percentage of their seats in the 
government. They, therefore, concealed their exasperation until 
the time became ripe to fabricate a crisis from pretexts and 
excuses that would allow them to dictate their conditions and 
demands to restore the few positions they lost, or else they 
would employ the card of separation, bargaining over unity to 
conceal their true aims. 
  We were taken by surprise, just like you, by the eruption of 
a crisis, which began with the return to Aden of Presidential 
Council Vice Chairman brother 'Ali Salim al-Bid on 19 August for 
no reason and without prior warning. The escalation of that 
crisis began in a well-contrived manner by launching campaign of 
words aimed at stimulating emotions, justifying rebellion 
against constitutional legitimacy, and foiling the results of 
the first general parliamentary elections. Personal demands 
were concealed behind public demands for local consumption in 
order to deceive the public in Yemen and abroad. Nevertheless, 
it was impossible to carry out the sinful separatist scheme, 
which became increasingly obvious, due to our people's adherence 
to unity and democracy. The secessionist elements among the YSP 
then began to foment sedition and conflicts in the society by 
inciting sectarian and regional feuds, and by misdirecting the 
Armed Forces in a bid to implicate them in conflicts and 
destructive fighting in the hope that a sisterly or friendly 
party, like the Arab League, would then interfere to disengage 
the forces in a manner that would allow for the return of the 
military units to the part of the country to which they belonged 
and make it possible to split the country and restore the pre-22 
May 1990 situation. 
  The first attempt to execute that plan took place in the 
wake of the signing of the pledge and accord document in Amman 
on 20 February, corresponding to 10 Ramadan. Then, troops from 
the 5th Armored Brigade from Aden and the al-Wahdah Brigade from 
Hadhramaut were sent to besiege the al-'Amaliqah forces and to 
terrorize citizens in the Abyan Governorate. That plan was 
foiled. However, a few days later, the secessionist elements 
fomented a sedition in the Harbi Sufyan area and then in 
Shabwah. Then, elements inimical to the revolution and unity 
joined the YSP command's secessionist elements to inflame civil 
strife. That plan, too, was foiled. That was followed by the 
events that took place at the Ba Suhayb camp in Dhamar. Most 
recently, the scene of the plot was the 'Imran camp, where 
fighting flared between brothers and comrades-in-arm from among 
the personnel of the 3d Armored Brigade and the 1st Armored 
Brigade after they experienced years of love and peace since the 
proclamation of unity. However, the secessionist forces issued 
hasty orders for the command of the 3d Armored Brigade to open 
fire with tanks and machine guns on the personnel of the 1st 
Armored Brigade, some of whom were performing prayers at the 
camp's mosque while others were safely having their lunch. The 
joint military committee was also present at the camp. 
  Consequently, many of the sons of our unified people and 
Armed Forces were martyred. Perhaps it is our fate as people 
adhering to their homeland's unity to pay the price for the 
suspicious aid that the secessionists receive--a price paid in 
innocent souls and chaste blood. It was no coincidence that 
that terrible and bloody fighting took place on the first 
anniversary of the first general elections in united Yemen. 
Choosing the day of democracy as a date for the fighting was 
meant to spoil our people's joy. It was a premeditated attack 
imposed by those seeking to circumvent the pledge and accord 
document, evade its implementation, and to push the homeland 
back to the pre-22 May 1990 situation. 
  The Presidential Council expresses its heart-felt 
condolences 
to the families of the martyrs, to our Armed and Security 
Forces, and to the masses of our Yemeni people. It reaffirms 
its commitment to take care of bereaved families and to treat 
the wounded. It stresses that the martyrs are the martyrs of 
unity and the sons of the unified Yemeni homeland. Their souls 
and chaste blood are dear to us. As the brother Presidential 
Council chairman proposed, the Presidential Council urges that 
the regrettable 'Imran camp calamity be a lesson to everyone and 
a deterrent for those who play with fire. The Presidential 
Council urges everyone to heed reason, logic, wisdom, and 
dialogue, and to place the interest of the homeland above all 
other considerations. It also stresses the need to respect 
constitutional legitimacy, to abide by the people's will and 
national options, and to absolutely and unconditionally accept 
the principle of peaceful alternation of power. It urges the 
House of Representatives to play its constitutional duty. It 
stresses the need to implement the pledge and accord document, 
starting with the articles dealing with security and military 
issues. The Presidential Council also calls for a halt in 
military incidents by immediately removing military tension, 
withdrawing military units from the former border areas, and 
redeploying them in accordance with the stipulations of the 
pledge and accord document. 
  The Presidential Council also stresses the importance of 
respecting the people's will through unconditional abidance by 
the democratic option, which is the people's unequivocal choice. 
The Council urges extensive national efforts by the sons of our 
people, by political forces, and by mass organizations to defend 
unity and prevent fighting. They are urged to exercise 
political vigilance and national, unionist awareness to ward off 
the dangers posed to the homeland and its unionist gains. It 
also calls on the personnel of the Armed and Security Forces to 
act at the level of the people's confidence in them -- as 
defenders of the homeland and a shield for the revolution, 
unity, and constitutional legitimacy. It urges them to be fully 
vigilant to avert the intentions of those who want to foment 
sedition and divide the homeland. The Council will acquaint the 
people with all the facts when the investigations conclude and 
when the names of all those responsible for what has happened 
are declared. 
  We beseech God to spare our beloved Yemeni homeland any harm 
and to safeguard our people against any affliction. God's peace 
and blessings be upon you. 

