BFN 

<F P=106> [Richard Ford article: "Government Defends 1 Million Pounds </F>
Price Tag on Immigration"] 
  [Text] The Home Secretary yesterday defended new 
immigration rules that will allow foreign millionaires to get 
round strict controls if they invest 750,000 pounds in 
government bonds or shares. 
  Opposition parties and immigrant welfare groups condemned 
the 
move, but Michael Howard dismissed the criticism as claptrap and 
said there had been only a modest change to existing regulations. 
  The Government said it wanted to encourage investment, with 
the prospect of creating more jobs and employment opportunities. 
But immigrant groups said the change showed there was "one law 
for the rich and one for the poor." 
  Mr Howard said the new regulations would enable people who 
could make a contribution to the economy of Britain to settle 
here. Kenneth Clarke, Chancellor of the Exchequer, said: "I know 
of no country in the world that cuts off its nose to spite its 
face by saying, `If you want to invest in business and jobs 
here, you cant actually live here.'" 
  From October, foreign "entrepreneurial investors" with 1 
million pounds at their disposal will be able to bypass usual 
entry rules as long as they invest 750,000 pounds in government 
bonds, shares or corporate bonds and intend to make their main 
home in Britain. 
  Under existing rules, special provision is made for foreign 
residents with 200,000 pounds cash or 20,000 pounds a year to 
dispose of in Britain, or for businessmen who have 200,000 
pounds cash and set up a business that creates at least two jobs 
for Britons. 
  Graham Allen, Labour spokesman on immigration, said: ``Under 
these arrangements, if you are a millionaire, you will get in. 
If you are an ordinary person, a husband trying to reunite with 
his wife, for instance, it is a lot tougher. 
  ``I would like to know who these millionaires are. Who will 
be granted access to the United Kingdom? Will it include the 
drug barons, heavy donors to the Conservative Party and those 
involved in financial scandals?'' 
  Claude Moraes of the Joint Council for the Welfare of 
Immigrants said the move was an insult to the black and Asian 
men and women who had built their own businesses in Britain. 
They had not been given any special treatment and had used 
their entrepreneurial flair to exploit opportunities. 
  Mr Howard's action follows a report in March that urged the 
Government to adopt a selective immigration policy to address 
skills shortages and create jobs and investment. The report, 
published by the Institute of Public Policy Research, 
highlighted policies adopted by America and Canada to attract 
entrepreneurs. 
  Other changes to immigration controls announced by the 
Government include a clampdown on those who abuse the rules, 
such as private students and medical patients, and efforts to 
remove sexual discrimination. 

