Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Alvaro Ayala and Raul Gutierrez from the "24 </F>
Hours" newscast] 
  [Text] Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff continues to 
live in the eye of the hurricane. A special Security Council 
session -- a session attended by the president as well as the 
government, justice, and defense ministers, among others -- 
decided not to authorize Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff's 
request to transfer Medellin Cartel prisoners to their native 
city. Here is a report by Alvaro Ayala: 
  [Begin recording] 
  Ayala: The prosecutor general today said he will 
not resign, adding that he will study the National Security 
Council decision to block the transfer to Itagui of members of 
the Medellin Cartel currently held at the La Picota and Modelo 
jails in Santa Fe de Bogota. 
  De Greiff: The Prosecutor General's Office will 
study the decision with due respect to the Security Council's 
opinions and recommendations, and it will adopt appropriate 
measures in a timely manner. 
  Unidentified reporter: Can the fact that Medellin 
Cartel prisoners will not be transferred to the jail in Itagui 
be seen as weakness on the part of the government? 
  De Greiff: No, I cannot make any additional 
comments other than those I have just made. 
  Reporter: The attorney of [Cali Cartel members] 
Gilberto Rodriguez and Julio Fabio Ordinola just said that they 
will surrender if you guarantee that they will be held at a 
Valle del Cauca Department jail. Can you guarantee such a thing? 
  De Greiff: I will also have to study this. I 
cannot say any more. 
  Reporter: [words indistinct] 
  De Greiff: No, I cannot say anything else. 
  Reporter: Just one more question. There is the 
impression that the executive branch is not heeding your orders. 
  De Greiff: Let each person judge this for himself 
according to his conscience and heart. 
  Reporter: If the Cali Cartel members surrender, 
will you continue to work for the process of submission to 
justice by drug traffickers? 
  De Greiff: I obviously have to accept it because 
this is what is established by Colombian law. [end recording] 
  The following are details of the Security Council communique 
that refused to authorize the prosecutor general's request. The 
communique stated that the government clearly disagrees with 
Gustavo de Greiff and that it has information concerning the 
reunification of the Medellin Cartel. Here is a report by Raul 
Gutierrez: 
  [Begin recording] 
  Gutierrez: The Security and Defense Council 
issued a severe warning to the prosecutor general for insisting 
on the transfer of Carlos Alzate, a.k.a. Arete; Carlos Aguilar, 
a.k.a. Mugre; Gustavo Gutierrez, a.k.a. Maxwell; Jose Fernando 
Posada; and Jorge Pizano from La Picota jail in Santa Fe de 
Bogota to the jail in Itagui, near Medellin. After meeting 
under the leadership of President Gaviria, the council 
recommended that the transfer not be carried out. It also 
expressed its serious disagreement with De Greiff for having 
stated that the Medellin Cartel prisoners do not intend to 
resume their criminal activities. 
  Government Minister Fabio Villegas: Information 
available to the Higher Council of National Security and Defense 
permits us to state that they [Medellin Cartel prisoners] not 
only have the means to reunify, but also that their intentions 
appear to be leaning toward reunifying their criminal 
organizations, even uniting with the Valle cartels with which 
they have had contacts within the past few days. 
  Gutierrez: The council gave its full support to 
the justice minister and the director of the Penitentiary and 
Prison Institute, thereby enabling them to maintain the state of 
emergency in the prisons and keep organized crime chiefs 
dispersed in various prisons. 
  Villegas: This was done because we believe the 
transfer would represent a grave danger to public order, prison 
security, the security of Medellin, and the nation's security, 
and it also would provide a means for the last remnants of the 
Medellin Cartel to reunify. 
  Gutierrez: To prevent anything from being left 
out, the Higher Security and Defense Council recommended to the 
justice minister that he ask the prosecutor general to change 
the venue of the legal processes against the five members of the 
Medellin Cartel. [end recording] 

