Table      of Contents 

   JAPAN:  Auto Industry - FEATURE:  Auto Companies, Parts Suppliers 
Taking Advantage of NAFTA 

   Construct ion Equipment Industry - 1993 Construction Equipment 
Shipments Down 8.1 Percent 

   Economic Trends - FEATURE:  Mixed Reaction to Proposed MFA 
Safeguards on Textile Imports; Japanese Firms Expect Continued 
Exchange Rate Instability 

   Financial Issues - FEATURE:  Ashikaga Bank Suspends Dollar 
Remittances to North Korea; FEATURE:  Favorable Tax Treatment for 
Pro-North Korea Businesses; FEATURE:  Securities Firms, Banks Show 
Interest in Mexico; FEATURE:  Norinchukin Striving for Universal 
Bank Status 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - CHINA:  Apparel Firms Establish 
Operations in Shanghai, Shandong, Jiangsu 

   CZECH REPUBLIC:  Sakura Bank Signs Cooperation Agreement With 
Czech Banks 

   INDONESIA:  FEATURE:  Kanebo, Toyobo Building Textile, Garment 
Plants 

   KAZAKHSTAN:  Mitsubishi Negotiating Oil Pipeline Feasibility 
Study 

   UZBEKISTAN:  Banks Sign Cooperation Agreements With Uzbek 
National Bank 

   VIETNAM:  Electronics Parts Firm To Triple Production of Coils 

   Machine Tools/Robotics - March Machine Tool Orders Declined 6.1 
Percent 

   Semiconductors/Computers/Electronics - NEC To Establish Research 
Center in Germany 

   CHINA:  Domestic Developments - FEATURE:  Approaches To 
Transforming State Enterprises Outlined; Fujian Suspends Unqualified 
Projects in Development Zones; Guangdong Overfulfills Quota for 
Selling Treasury Bonds; Guangdong Suspends Approval of Land Sales 
for Luxury Projects; Statistics Show Gap in Staff Wages in Shenzhen; 
Fiber-Optic Cable To Link Hangzhou, Fuzhou, Nanchang; Computer 
Software Sales Reach RMB 4 Million; Sichuan Becomes Largest Natural 
Gas Producing Province 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - Border Trade Slows Between 
Heilongjiang's Harbin City and Russia; Shandong Province Encourages 
Foreign Investment in Agriculture; Japanese Investment in Shandong 
Shows Sharp Increase; Shandong Signs Cooperation Agreement With ROK 
Province; Shandong Reports 150 New Joint-Venture Projects With 
Singapore; Sino-Singaporean Industrial Park To Be Built in 
Shandong's Qingdao; Agricultural Bank, Australian Firm Set Up Joint 
Consulting Venture; Australia, Guangdong's Zhuhai Cooperate in 
Building Glass Wool Plant; Philippine Aluminum Group Sets Up Company 
in Fujian's Xiamen; Beijing Contracts Construction Projects, Labor 
Service Abroad; Jilin First Quarter Results in Attracting Foreign- 
Funded Enterprises; Hebei Signs Letter of Intent With Brazil; CITIC 
Hong Kong Expands Golf Course in Conghua City; New World Group 
Largest Overseas Investor in Wuhan; Bank of China Hong Kong Invests 
$470 Million in Shandong; Hong Kong Bank Leading Foreign Lender to 
China; CITIC Pacific To Expand Investment in Mainland Power 
Projects; Foreign Firms Consider Relocation in Face of Rising Hong 
Kong Costs; Hong Kong Inflation Falls to 7.7 Percent in April; 
Haikou Bonded Area Introduces Preferential Investment Policies; 
Fuzhou State-Owned Firms Receive Foreign Capital 

   Taiwan:  Trade Deficit With Japan Expected To Hit $15 Billion for 
1994; Some Restrictions on Investment in PRC To Be Lifted; Indirect 
Investment in PRC Continues in First Quarter; Meeting on Economic 
Ties With Italy Held in Taipei; Registered Investments, Machinery 
Imports Down in First Quarter 

   SOUTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Government Puts Brakes on Samsung Auto 
Venture; FEATURE:  Shipbuilders Face Japanese Competition, Foreign 
Trade Pressure; Growth Rate in Crude Oil Imports Slows in First 
Quarter; Automobile Exports to Some International Markets Stalled; 
Exports to Russia Increasing; Exports to China Decreasing; Daewoo 
Securities, Cheil Bank To Invest in Chinese Stock; Hyundai Completes 
Offshore Natural Gas Facility; Hyundai To Build Steel Container 
Plant in Qingdao, China; Tongyang To Build Steel Tube Plant in 
Shanghai; Daewoo To Take Over Three Sudanese Textile Corporations; 
Lucky Metal Advances Into European Market; Hanguk Pharmaceutical 
Exports to Chile, Brazil 

   SOUTHEAST ASIA - INDONESIA:  Prospects For Renewed Economic Ties 
With Iraq; Indonesian-Malaysian Consortium Planning Thermal Power 
Plant; Nation Becomes Third Largest Coal Exporter 

   LAOS: Thai Land Development Venture Division of Profits 

   MALAYSIA:  Technology Findings To Be Commercialized; Japan To 
Establish Fiber Optic Cable System 

   SINGAPORE:  Line To Get Tankers, Container Ships by 1996 

   THAILAND:  Exports Increase 19.7 Percent, Overall Economy 
'Satisfactory'; Rice Exports, Earnings Increase in First Quarter 

   VIETNAM:  Draft Labor Law Recognizes Right To Strike; Economic 
Courts To Start Operations in July; Trends in Japanese Investment, 
Aid Described; Navy Company, Japanese Counterpart Form Joint 
Venture; List of BOT Infrastructure Construction Projects; Hanoi 
Prison To Be Singaporean Hotel Venture; Thai Bank, Conglomerate in 
Partnership With Agriculture Bank; French Bank Loans to Businesses; 
52 Foreign Investment Projects in Agriculture Licensed; Early 1994 
Export Index Reported; Malaysia To Help Build Export Processing 
Zone; More Foreign Projects Licensed in April; UK Firm To Build 
Hanoi Trade Center; First Quarter Industrial Output Up 12.1 Percent; 
Indian, French Firms To Build $40 Million Cement Plant; Proton To 
Assemble Cars in SRV 

   (Pacific Rim Economic Review FBPSP 94-11) 

   JAPAN:  Auto Industry - FEATURE:  Auto Companies, Parts Suppliers 
Taking Advantage of NAFTA -- SUMMARY:  Nissan Motor Co., Honda Motor 
Co., and their respective parts suppliers are taking steps to 
increase local production and further integrate their North American 
operations.  According to media reports, the companies are trying to 
lower costs, given the appreciation of the yen, and are also 
responding to incentives provided by the North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA) to integrate production among their factories in 
Canada, Mexico, and the United States. 

   High Yen, NAFTA Spur Higher Local Content -- Japanese automobile 
manufacturers and auto parts makers with production facilities in 
North America are rapidly increasing the ratio of locally made 
parts.  According to the 21 April NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN, their 
general aim is to avoid losses stemming from appreciation of the 
yen, but the "underlying aim" is to profit from the "tariff-free 
nature" of NAFTA.  Previously, the companies were motivated to 
increase local content levels to "ease" economic friction between 
Japan and the United States, but according to NIKKEI SANGYO, their 
actions now have "strategic meaning." 

   NIKKEI SANGYO stated that "each company is strongly conscious of 
NAFTA" and is anticipating the benefits from the lowering of tariffs 
between Canada, Mexico, and the United States.  In particular, the 
firms are looking to substitute "high priced imported goods" with 
locally produced parts that will cost less due to favorable exchange 
rates and lower tariffs.  NIKKEI SANGYO reported that several 
companies are even looking to reduce production costs in Japan by 
exporting "suitable" parts from North America to Japan.  In 
addition, Japanese auto parts makers want to remain price 
competitive with their U.S. competitors for orders from the U.S. 
"Big Three" automakers, which are increasing output now that U.S. 
auto market has recovered. 

   Nissan at the 'Forefront' of Integrated Production -- According 
to the 21 April NIKKEI SANGYO, Nissan is at the "forefront" of other 
Japanese automakers in localizing production in North America and is 
urging its affiliated parts makers to take advantage of NAFTA.  The 
11 May NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN reported that Nissan is aggressively 
promoting both the production and export of autos and parts from its 
production bases in the United States and Mexico to regain price 
competitiveness affected by appreciation of the yen. 

   In the United States, according to the 29 April NIHON KEIZAI 
SHIMBUN (NIKKEI), Nissan has decided to increase auto production by 
an average of 10 percent to over 440,000 autos in FY94.  Nissan 
Motors Manufacturing Co. (NMMC), Nissan's U.S. production base in 
Tennessee, will soon reach full capacity production for the first 
time since it was established in 1980.  NMMC currently produces two 
passenger vehicles, the Altima and Sentra, and one commercial 
vehicle, the Nissan Truck.  According to NIKKEI, NMMC will increase 
Altima production from 161,000 units in FY93 to 180,000 in FY94, a 
12 percent rise; increase Sentra output from 139,000 to 140,000, a 
1.0 percent increase; and expand Nissan Truck output from 100,000 to 
l20,000, a 20 percent increase. 

   Nissan is trying to bolster local production by increasing 
shipments from the United States.  The 14 April NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 
reported that the company will stop exporting Nissan Trucks from 
Japan to Canada, and instead will begin shipping them to Canada from 
NMMC.  Nissan will ship 3,300 trucks from NMMC to Canada in FY94, 
which should cut the "transport lead time" from one month to one 
week and save approximately $200 dollars per vehicle.  Eventually, 
Nissan expects that nearly 70 percent of the cars it sells in 
Canada, including the Sentra and Altima, will be made by NMMC. 

   In Mexico, the 11 May NIKKAN KOGYO reported that Nissan will 
increase auto production from 180,000 units in FY93 to 200,000 in 
FY94.  NISMEX, Nissan's Mexican subsidiary, has three plants in 
Mexico.  Its Aguascalientes plant plant assembles AD Wagons, AD 
Vans, and Sentras; the Cuernavaca plant also produces Sentras as 
well as Nissan Trucks; and the Lerma plant manufactures engine parts 
and materials, according to the 26 April NIKKAN KOGYO. 

   The 11 May NIKKAN KOGYO also reported that Nissan has decided to 
begin exporting its Mexican-made vehicles to Central and South 
America instead of relying on vehicles exported from Japan.  The 
company is encountering "severe" competition by South Korean 
automakers, and appreciation of the yen has reduced the price 
competitiveness of vehicles imported from Japan.  According to the 
paper, Nissan has decided on this move to regain price 
competitiveness and maintain its foothold in the expanding Latin 
American market. 

   Localizing Production of Critical Components -- The 4 May NIKKEI 
reported that Nissan is increasing engine production in North 
America to the point where "virtually all" engines for U.S.- 
assembled vehicles are made in Mexico and the United States, making 
it the "leader" among Japanese automakers.  Nissan plans to expand 
engine production in North America by 15 percent to 415,000 units 
per year (11 May NIKKAN KOGYO).  NIKKEI stated that this move by 
Nissan will help it maintain price competitiveness and meet local 
procurement goals. 

   NISMEX is responsible for producing engines for all Altimas and 
all 2,400-cc Nissan Trucks produced in North America.  The 26 April 
NIKKAN KOGYO reported that Nissan is also expanding its capacity to 
locally machine crankshaf ts used in engines assembled by NISMEX. 
Nissan will invest about 3 billion yen ($29 million) in new machine 
tools at its Aguascalientes plant to increase the number of 
crankshafts processed from 5,000 to 15,000 units per month by the 
summer of 1995. 

   NMMC has been tasked with producing 1,600-cc engines used in 
Sentra models and the "Quest" minivan, which Nissan jointly 
developed and is producing in Ohio with Ford Motor.  Furthermore, 
NIKKEI reported that NMMC will begin producing a 3,000-cc engine- 
-now exported from Japan--for large Nissan Truck models.  This will 
increase NMMC's engine output by 20,000 units a year, which will 
raise the ratio of engines produced in North America for autos 
assembled in the United States to "about 99 percent."  Nissan will 
continue to import about 5,000 engines for the 2,000-cc Sentra 
models, since the volume is too small to warrant local production, 
NIKKEI reported. 

   Nissan has also decided to produce "multi-ring beam suspensions" 
in the United States and Mexico.  [For information on Nissan's 
suspension production, see the 20 April 1994 Pacific Rim Economic 
Review, page 3].  According to the 31 March NIKKEI, the company will 
soon be manufacturing in the United States or Mexico virtually all 
"critical" parts, except transmissions, for autos built in North 
America. 

   Nissan-Affiliated Parts Makers -- The 7 April NIKKEI SANGYO 
SHIMBUN reported that Kansei Corp., a Nissan-affiliated manufacturer 
of automotive meters, is building a "mutually inclusive" auto parts 
production and supply system between its bases in the United States 
and Mexico.  Because parts imports from Japan are no longer price 
competitive, Kansei is moving to integrate production in North 
America to maintain economies of scale and lower costs. 

   Kansei will begin shipping about 200,000 meter components 
annually from its Tennessee base to its factory in Aguascalientes, 
Mexico, for assembly in instrument panels for Nissan Sentras 
assembled in Mexico.  According to the paper, Kansei will also begin 
shipping 150,000 ashtrays annually from Mexico for Sentras built in 
the United States. 

   According to the 21 April NIKKEI SANGYO, Unisia Jecs Corp., a 
Nissan-affiliated maker of "high function" auto parts, is also 
moving to establish a "mutual" supply system of auto parts between 
its plants in North America.  The company plans to ship power 
steering pumps and other parts from the United States to Mexico and 
send oil pans from Mexico to the United States. 

   Honda To Produce Autos in Mexico, Suppliers To Follow -- On 9 
May, Honda Motor Co. announced that it would build passenger 
vehicles in Mexico.  According to the 11 May NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN, 
Honda will become the first Japanese automaker to have production 
bases in all three NAFTA countries, and the second, following 
Nissan, to manufacture autos in Mexico.  The company also hopes to 
export vehicles made in Mexico to other Latin American countries. 
The 5 May NIKKEI stated that Honda is looking to establish its North 
American plants as "export bases."  The company already exports 
thousands of vehicles from the United States to Japan and other 
countries, and on 4 May, it announced that it will export Civics 
manufactured in Canada to Taiwan and Brazil.  [See the 18 May 1994 
Pacific Rim Economic Review, page 1]. 

   Regarding its Mexican production plans, Honda plans to build a 
new auto plant this July near its motorcycle plant in Guadalajara at 
a cost of $50 million, NIKKAN KOGYO stated.  When operations begin 
in November 1995, the plant will produce 15,000 Accords annually for 
sale in Mexico.  Once production reaches 30,000 units per year, 
Honda will begin exports to other countries in Latin America, but 
the company does not plan to export finished vehicles from Mexico to 
Canada or the United States.  On the other hand, all Accord engines 
and a number of parts will be exported from the United States to 
Mexico. 

   Honda Parts Suppliers Expanding Local Production -- According to 
the 3 February NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN, Mitsuba Electric Manufacturing 
Co., a Honda-affiliated maker of electrical equipment, is moving 
aggressively to shift production of automobile parts to the United 
States to raise its local content ratio.  Initially, Mitsuba will 
transfer the assembly of starter motors to its U.S. joint venture 
firm, CME Corporation, and may eventually transfer the assembly of 
fan and wiper motors. 

   Mitsuba is planning to increase its local content ratio for parts 
produced in the United States to 9O percent by FY97, which will be 
double that of FY92, according to the 21 April NIKKEI SANGYO. 
Mitsuba plans to reach a 75 percent local content level in 1996, and 
then will adjust procurement levels based upon exchange rate levels. 
The paper stated that it would be cheaper for the company to export 
from Japan if the yen falls to between 120 and 130 to the dollar. 
If the yen stays around 100 to the dollar, however, Mitsuba "cannot 
make a profit" unless its local procurement level is raised to 90 
percent. 

   NIKKEI SANGYO also reported that Showa Co., a Honda-affiliated 
maker of hydraulic shock absorbers, has merged three of its North 
American subsidiaries to "benefit from greater economies of scale," 
and Stanley Electric Co., a Honda-group member that makes automotive 
electrical equipment, has begun designing and producing metal molds 
in the United States.  The paper stated that these firms are moving 
to lower production costs by producing in the United States, not 
only for Honda, but also to satisfy increasing orders from the Big 
Three auto manufacturers. 

   Construction Equipment Industry - 1993 Construction Equipment 
Shipments Down 8.1 Percent -- According to figures compiled by the 
Japan Construction Equipment Manufacturers' Association, total 
shipments of construction equipment in 1993 fell 8.1 percent 
compared to 1992 to 1.72 trillion yen ($16.4 billion).  This was the 
third consecutive yearly decline.  Excluding auxiliary equipment, 
shipments were down 8.5 percent to 1.52 trillion yen ($14.5 
billion).  Total auxiliary equipment shipments came to 210.2 billion 
yen ($2 billion), down 5.5 percent. 

   Of the eight construction equipment categories, tunneling 
machines showed an increase of 17.0 percent, but all other 
categories fell. Shipments of construction cranes were down 22.5 
percent, basic machinery 21.3 percent, tractors 4.6 percent, and 
hydraulic shovels 1.0 percent.  Domestic demand fell 8.9 percent to 
1.28 trillion yen ($12.17 billion), while foreign demand was down 
5.9 percent to 434.1 billion yen ($4.13 billion).  (Tokyo NIKKAN 
KOGYO SHIMBUN 9 May 94 p 10) 

   Economic Trends - FEATURE:  Mixed Reaction to Proposed MFA 
Safeguards on Textile Imports -- SUMMARY:  A trade issues 
subcommittee of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry 
(MITI) has recommended applying Multifiber Arrangement (MFA) 
safeguards on textile imports to Japan to help the industry 
restructure, according to press reports.  There are doubts within 
industry circles, however, that MITI will actually enact the 
safeguards because this action may be perceived as a shift in 
Japan's trade policy. 

   The Trade Issues Subcommittee of the Textile Industry Council, 
which is an advisory organ of MITI, publicly disclosed its 
recommendations on 17 May, according to the 18 May NIKKEI SANGYO 
SHIMBUN.  Based on these recommendations, MITI has begun defining 
implementation rules for enacting the safeguards. 

   According to the 18 May Osaka Edition of MAINICHI SHIMBUN, the 
subcommittee recommended the application of MFA safeguards because 
the rapid increase in textile imports, mainly from China and other 
Asian countries, is "destroying the production foundation" of the 
domestic textile industry.  Since 1987 the industry has experienced 
"record deficits" of 7 to 1O billion yen ($67-95 million) annually. 
In 1993, textile imports accounted for a 51 percent share of the 
domestic textile market, MAINICHI reported.  MFA safeguards, when 
applied, would mainly target China, which in 1993 had the largest 
share--47.5 percent--of textile imports, the 18 May YOMIURI SHIMBUN 
noted.  Other leading textile importers are Pakistan with 14 percent 
of the market, South Korea with 1O.5 percent, and Taiwan with 5.9 
percent. 

   The 18 May NIKKEI SANGYO noted that MITI will first gather data 
on the actual volume of the targeted textile imports and 
"technically assess" the resulting damage to the domestic industry 
in order to determine when MFA safeguards should be applied.  It 
will also examine any existing regulations concerning the targeted 
imports and "politically assess" the effectiveness of these 
regulations. 

   Once a decision has been made to apply MFA safeguards, they will 
be effective for three years, after which no new measures could be 
applied until a year had passed, according to the 18 May YOMIURI 
SHIMBUN.  During the first year, MITI will strive to maintain 
imports of the targeted textiles at the same level, or slightly 
above the level, of the previous year.  During the second and third 
year it will cap any increases in imports at 6 percent a year.  The 
safeguards will be cancelled if they "did not sufficiently assist 
the domestic industry." 

   The 18 May ASAHI SHIMBUN observed that there is a good chance the 
domestic textile industry can restructure under MFA safeguards.  It 
also asserted that Japan can develop and maintain a foundation for 
textile production and "never have to rely on restricting imports 
again." 

   Other "pluses" of enacting MFA safeguards, the YOMIURI article 
noted, are that the domestic industry would have time to restructure 
and could gradually adjust its employment structures.  The "minuses" 
are that consumers would have to pay higher prices for products and 
that MFA safeguards "run counter to import expansion measures" which 
are currently being promoted to reduce Japan's trade surplus. 

   Textile Industry Welcomes MFA Safeguards as Forward Step -- 
Several textile industry leaders have welcomed the proposal to apply 
MFA safeguards, the 18 May NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI) reported. 
Reiichi Yukimura, chairman of the Japan Chemical Fiber Association, 
stated that it is a "landmark event" that safeguards are even being 
considered.  According to the 18 May Osaka MAINICHI, Minoru Shibata, 
chairman of the Japan Spinners Association, believes safeguards 
should be "expedited." 

   People within the industry do not view the proposed MFA 
safeguards as a "bulldozing measure," the 18 May NIKKEI noted.  The 
19 May NIKKEI SANGYO reported that a team from the Japan Spinners 
Association, which has been studying this issue, noted that the 
United States and Europe have "taken care" of their textile 
industries using MFA safeguards far more than Japan realizes and 
that the MFA is recognized as an international rule "because it has 
so much international support."  According to NIKKEI SANGYO, some 
within the Japanese textile industry are "angry" because the United 
States and Europe have used their "skillful diplomacy" to protect 
their textile industries, while Japan "has not established any 
defenses." 

   MFA Action Doubted Because of Unclear Standards of Procedure -- 
Some within the industry are also dissatisfied because there are no 
clearly  defined procedures for enacting MFA safeguards, according 
to the 18 May Osaka MAINICHI.  In the past, the 18 May ASAHI noted, 
MITI has assumed a position of "not taking any MFA actions," and 
thus, has never defined any implementation rules.  The 18 May NIKKEI 
noted that textile manufacturers question MITI's "earnestness" 
regarding safeguards because the subcommittee recommendations, which 
were expected in March, were delayed until May.  Consequently, MITI 
will not complete its elaboration of implementation rules until 
July.  Manufacturers are also gloomy over prospects for any concrete 
actions because MITI has incorporated "policy assessments" as part 
of the process for determining relevant cases. 

   The response of general trading companies has been mixed, the 18 
May NIKKEI SANGYO noted.  Some companies welcome the MFA safeguards 
because they feel that unless they are enacted, the domestic 
industry will be "hollowed out and there will be no one to do 
business with."  Some trading companies, such as Marubeni, wonder 
why MFA measures have "suddenly appeared, since the MFA will soon be 
abolished globally."  NIKKEI SANGYO also observed that MFA 
safeguards are a "double-edged sword" for textile companies who have 
already shifted production overseas as a survival strategy and are 
now exporting textile products back to Japan. 
   Japanese Firms Expect Continued Exchange Rate Instability -- 
According to an article in the 19 May NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI), 
Japanese "market sources" believed that the U.S. Federal Reserve 
Board's (FRB) announcement of an increase in the official discount 
rate (ODR) from 3.0 to 3.5 percent on 17 May will have a "limited 
upward" effect on the value of the U.S. dollar, and expect the yen 
to remain "high relative to the dollar."  They listed two reasons 
for the limited impact of the ODR increase:  Japanese institutional 
investors, such as life insurance companies, are not investing in 
dollar-denominated assets such as U.S. treasury bonds; and Japanese 
exporters will increase sales of dollars in the next two to three 
months. 

   The 19 May NIKKEI article reported that life insurance companies 
remain "cautious about investing in treasury bonds" because of the 
associated foreign exchange risk.  According to the NIKKEI article, 
Sumitomo Life Insurance was the "only" large institutional investor 
that bought treasury bonds immediately after the FRB's announcement. 
The NIKKEI article noted, however, that Sumitomo Life's action did 
not lead to yen sales and dollar purchases in the foreign exchange 
market, because Sumitomo Life sold dollar futures simultaneously to 
hedge the foreign exchange risk.  A Sumitomo Life fund manager, 
quoted in the NIKKEI article, said that he had to make futures 
contracts to sell dollars because there are "so many uncertain 
factors" surrounding the yen-dollar exchange rate, including the 
outcome of the U.S.-Japan framework talks, and therefore the risk of 
investing in treasury bonds would remain "high." 

   In an article in the 19 May ASAHI SHIMBUN, a fund manager of a 
large life insurance company was also quoted as saying that he did 
not invest in treasury bonds because "the yen-dollar exchange rate 
in the Tokyo market was unaffected by the FRB's announcement."  He 
continued saying that as long as Japan had a large trade surplus, 
the current tendency of the dollar to lose value would remain, and 
so would the risk accompanying investments in treasury bonds. 

   The 19 May NIKKEI article reported that Japanese exporters, 
mainly in the automobile and electronics industries, would probably 
increase sales of dollars in the futures market in next two to three 
months.  Exporters expected that the FRB's decision to raise the ODR 
would lead to a higher dollar and did not commit to futures 
contracts to sell dollars in the next quarter.  Exporting firms have 
thus far sold "only" 2O-3O percent of their dollars in the futures 
market for the July-September period.  Consequently, the article 
noted, exporters have to increase sales of dollars to make up the 
shortfall of yen funds, which will suppress the rise of the dollar 
against the yen. 

   Exporters appear to be content to sell their dollars at about 1O5 
yen per dollar.  For example, a financial officer of Toshiba 
Corporation, an electronics manufacturer, was quoted in the NIKKEI 
article as saying that Toshiba "has to sell" its dollars at around 
105 yen per dollar.  A financial officer of TDK, a magnetic media 
manufacturer, also said that TDK would sell "at least half the 
dollars it planned to sell for the July-September quarter" at the 
105 yen rate.  The company does not expect the dollar to rise 
"substantially" for some time to come.  A financial officer of 
Canon, a camera and electronics manufacturer, was also quoted as 
saying that it would sell dollars at the 105 yen rate, since it 
expected the exchange rate to stay at around the 105 yen level. 

   In the 19 May ASAHI, Keio University Associate Professor Heizo 
Takenaka said that it was "still too early" to tell whether the 
value of the dollar would stabilize.  Takenaka maintained that the 
dollar might remain "unstable" because of "uncertainty over U.S. 
economic fundamentals" and "distrust over the Clinton 
administration's economic policy management as seen in the cases of 
health care reform and ratification of the [GATT] Uruguay Round 
agreement by the Senate, both of which are facing difficulty." 
Takenaka concluded that as long as U.S. concern over inflation 
remains and Japan does not take "decisive measures" to reduce its 
trade surplus, a change in the current trend of a strong yen and a 
weak dollar is "impossible." 

   In another article in the 19 May ASAHI, Yukihiro Harada, director 
of the Research Institute of the Long Term Credit Bank of Japan, 
noted that, although a "dollar crisis" was avoided for the time 
being, the structural pairing of a U.S. fiscal deficit and a 
Japanese trade surplus had not changed.  Harada asserted that in 
order to stabilize the yen-dollar exchange rate, Japan should make 
"substantial" income tax cuts to stimulate domestic demand, and the 
United States should reduce its fiscal deficit.  Harada also 
expected the yen-dollar exchange rate to remain "relatively stable" 
thanks to policy coordination by the G-7 countries, "at least until 
the Naples summit in July."  He noted, however, the possibility of 
the exchange market becoming "turbulent" again after the summit. 

   Financial Issues - FEATURE:  Ashikaga Bank Suspends Dollar 
Remittances to North Korea -- SUMMARY:  Ashikaga Bank's recent 
decision to suspend sending U.S. dollar remittances from other 
Japanese banks to North Korea via U.S. banks will have little effect 
on the total money flow from Japan to North Korea, according to 
Japanese press articles.  Several articles suggested that Ashikaga 
Bank's action was due to "pressure" from the U.S. Government. 

   According to the 19 May evening editions of NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 
(NIKKEI), SANKEI SHIMBUN, YOMIURI SHIMBUN, and the 2O May morning 
edition of ASAHI SHIMBUN, on 19 May Ashikaga Bank, Japan's 27th 
largest bank and the bank most directly involved in money transfers 
to North Korea, announced that in April it had suspended sending 
U.S. dollar remittances to North Korea on behalf of the customers of 
other Japanese banks.  The bank stated that the decision was its own 
and did not result from Ministry of Finance (MOF) pressure.  In 
addition, the bank made it clear that the suspension applies "only 
to dollar remittances from other Japanese banks being sent via U.S. 
banks," and does not affect dollar remittances from its own 
customers, Eurodollar and Deutsche mark remittances via European 
banks, or yen remittances. 

   Suspension Will Have Little Effect on Remittances to North Korea 
-- Financial sources quoted in the 19 May NIKKEI stated that 
Ashikaga Bank's action will have "little effect" on the total money 
flow from Japan to North Korea "because most remittances are made in 
yen."  The 20 May ASAHI also noted that as long as money transfers 
from Japan to North Korea are deemed legal, and the United Nations 
does not formally impose economic sanctions against North Korea, 
remittances from Japan to North Korea are expected to continue. 

   According to the 11 April NIKKEI BUSINESS, about 90 percent of 
remittances from Japan to North Korea are transferred through 
Ashikaga Bank [For further details, see the 20 April 1994 Pacific 
Rim Economic Review, pp 7-9].  The 19 May SANKEI reported that 
Ashikaga Bank has been serving as the main bank for pachinko machine 
manufacturers of Korean descent in Gumma Prefecture, which adjoins 
Tochigi Prefecture, Ashikaga Bank's base.  Because of that 
connection, owners of pachinko machine manufacturing companies who 
are "sympathetic to North Korea" have been using Ashikaga Bank to 
send money to North Korea. 

   Alleged Pressure from MOF, U.S. Government -- Several press 
articles suggested that Ashikaga Bank suspended dollar remittances 
to North Korea via U.S. banks because of MOF and U.S. Government 
"pressure."  For example, the 19 May NIKKEI said that Ashikaga Bank 
had "voluntarily" suspended dollar remittances out of 
"consideration" for the U.S. Government, which has been "irritated" 
by Japanese remittances to North Korea because of the DPRK's 
suspected nuclear weapons program.  The 20 May ASAHI quoted 
financial sources as saying that Ashikaga Bank had suspended dollar 
remittances because it feared "some sort of retaliation" from U.S. 
monetary authorities if the bank continued sending dollar 
remittances to North Korea via U.S. banks.  The 19 May SANKEI also 
claimed that the bank's decision was the "result of U.S. monetary 
authorities tightening up" dollar remittances by third countries to 
North Korea via U.S. banks. 

   According to press articles, the MOF denied exerting any pressure 
or issuing administrative guidance to Ashikaga Bank to suspend 
handling of dollar remittances.  According to the NIKKEI, SANKEI, 
and ASAHI articles, the MOF's International Finance Bureau stated 
that it had taken no action against Ashikaga Bank, and emphasized 
that the decision was Ashikaga Bank's own.  According to the NIKKEI, 
SANKEI, and ASAHI articles, the MOF also stated there is no 
discrimination on the part of the Japanese Government against North 
Korea receiving money transfers. 

   FEATURE:  Favorable Tax Treatment for Pro-North Korea Businesses 
-- SUMMARY:  In a recent magazine article, a prominent Korean 
affairs specialist claimed that if Japan's tax authorities were to 
end preferential tax treatment extended to Korean business owners in 
Japan, and if prefectural governments tightened their audits of 
North Korean-affiliated financial institutions, money transfers from 
Japan to North Korea would be "effectively reduced," even without UN 
economic sanctions. 

   Favorable Tax Treatment -- In an article published in the June 
1994 issue of the monthly THIS IS YOMIURI, Katsumi Sato, editor in 
chief of the journal GENDAI KOREA (Modern Korea)--a monthly 
publication for Korea specialists--asserted that Japan's National 
Tax Administration Agency (NTAA) has given favorable tax treatment 
to Korean business owners belonging to the Korean Federation of 
Commerce and Industry (KFCI), which is an organ of the pro-North 
Korea General Federation of Korean Residents in Japan (Chosen 
Soren).  According to Sato, this favorable treatment is based on an 
agreement on taxation matters signed by the NTAA and KFCI in October 
1976.  According to a booklet entitled "Chosen Soren" published by 
Chosen Soren in February 1991, and cited by Sato, the agreement 
stipulates that: 

--The NTAA will resolve all tax problems concerning KFCI members 
through "negotiations with KFCI." 

--The NTAA recognizes KFCI members' payments of regular membership 
fees to trade and industry organizations as business deductions. 

--The NTAA will "positively resolve" the issue of declaring as tax 
exempt payments by KFCI members to operate Chosen Soren schools. 

--The NTAA recognizes expenses for travel to third countries for 
business activities as business deductions. 

--The NTAA will resolve the tax cases of KFCI members "presently 
contested in court" through negotiations with KFCI. 

   Sato also cited the 14 January 1992 issue of CHOSEN SHOKO SHIMBUN 
(Korea Commerce and Industry Newspaper) as reporting that "in 1991 
the KFCI peacefully resolved tax problems of KFCI members and 
further strengthened our collective bargaining rights with Japan's 
NTAA."  Sato considers NTAA's recognition of KFCI's collective 
bargaining rights as constituting preferential treatment for KFCI 
members, since the NTAA does not recognize the right of Japanese 
citizens to bargain collectively concerning tax matters.  Sato also 
considers the NTAA's method of resolving the tax problems of 
individual businessmen through negotiations with KFCI to be 
favorable treatment, since the NTAA does not permit Japanese 
business owners to negotiate in the same manner. 

   Sato speculated in his article that this favorable tax treatment- 
-at least in part--has enabled North Korean business owners in Japan 
to contribute large amounts of money to North Korea.  According to 
Sato, a number of businessmen make contributions of over 100 million 
yen ($95,000) annually to North Korea.  The largest contribution 
ever made by a Korean individual was 5 billion yen ($47.6 million), 
made at the peak of Japan's bubble economy in 1987.  In 1994, with 
the economy still in recession, one Korean individual contributed 
boring equipment worth 350 million yen ($3.33 million) to North 
Korea.  According to Sato, the amount of money transferred from 
Japan to North Korea in 1990 is estimated at 60 billion yen ($571 
million). 

   'Loose Auditing' of Chosen Soren Credit Associations -- Sato also 
pointed to "loose auditing" of Chogin Credit Associations--which 
serve Chosen Soren members--by prefectural governments as another 
reason for the flow of funds to North Korea.  Sato stated that an 
"enormous" amount of money had been loaned out and left unaccounted 
for by the Chogin Credit Associations.  According to the 30 March 
1993 issue of AERA, a total of 8.2 billion yen ($78 million) had 
been loaned to four Chosen Soren-related firms and one individual by 
Chogin Credit Associations, but had not been repaid [for details, 
see the 21 April 1993 Pacific Rim Economic Review pp 7-9]. 
According to the AERA article, the Chogin Credit Associations serve 
Chosen Soren members and operate in 38 of Japan's 47 prefectures, 
and prefectural governments are responsible for auditing credit 
associations operating within their jurisdictions.  Sato estimated 
the total deposits of Chogin Credit Associations at approximately 
2.37 trillion yen ($22.6 billion). 

   Sato concluded his article by stating that if NTAA canceled the 
1976 agreement with KFCI and applied the same rules to Korean 
business owners as it does to Japanese owners and, if prefectural 
governments tightened their auditing of the Chogin Credit 
Associations, money transfers from Japan to North Korea "would 
effectively be reduced" without the imposition of UN economic 
sanctions against North Korea. 

   FEATURE:  Securities Firms, Banks Show Interest in Mexico -- 
SUMMARY:  With the signing of the NAFTA agreement, Japanese 
securities companies and banks have shown renewed interest in 
setting up or expanding operations in Mexico.  Japan's "big four" 
securities firms are planning to establish representative offices 
there, and at least two Japanese banks will soon receive permission 
to begin operations. 

   Securities Companies Waiting to Open Representative Offices -- 
Deregulation of Mexico's financial markets is progressing in the 
wake of NAFTA, according to the 12 May NIKKEI KINYU SHIMBUN. 
Japan's "big four" securities companies--Nomura, Nikko, Yamaichi, 
and Daiwa--are waiting for Mexican financial authorities to disclose 
the official policy on foreign securities firms opening 
representative offices in Mexico, which is expected to be announced 
in May.  In the meantime, the four are planning to establish 
representative offices under the auspices of their U.S. 
subsidiaries.  The Mexican Government has already decided its policy 
on full subsidiaries of foreign corporations, as opposed to 
representative offices. 
   However, the securities firms have opted to open representative 
offices because they are less costly and allow the securities 
companies to continue their practice of covering all Mexican 
business from their U.S. offices.  With the opening of the 
representative offices, the big four expect to enhance their 
information collection capabilities, forge stronger links with 
customers, and expand their underwriting businesses.  The companies 
attempted to establish representative offices in Mexico in 1991, but 
were delayed by complications involving NAFTA.  The representative 
offices in Mexico, with the exception of Nomura's office in Sao 
Paulo, Brazil, will be the first established by any of Japan's 
securities companies in South and Central America. 

   Mexico Encouraging Japanese Banks to Establish Branches -- 
Foreign banks had been virtually excluded from the Mexican market, 
with Citibank being the only foreign bank with an authorized branch, 
according to the 5 January NIKKEI KINYU.  [For reporting on Japanese 
banks in Mexico see the 9 February 1994 Pacific Rim Economic Review, 
pp 3-4.]  However, since the implementation of NAFTA, Mexican 
financial authorities, including the deputy secretary of foreign 
commerce, have encouraged Japanese banks to set up bases of 
operations there, according to the 22 April NIKKEI KINYU.  The 
deputy secretary stated that foreign banks with branches in the 
United States would be treated just like U.S. entities under NAFTA 
and strongly urged Japanese banks to set up offices. 

   In March, Mexico's Secretariat of Finance and Public Credit 
explained part of its policy on foreign entities entering Mexico's 
financial markets, according to the 12 March ASAHI SHIMBUN.  In 
April it announced that banks could apply by 31 July for 
authorization to open branches in the latter half of the year, 
according to the 22 April NIKKEI KINYU.  Mexico's ambassador to 
Japan, Sergio Gonzalez Galvez, said two Japanese banks will be among 
those foreign banks Mexico will soon allow to operate there, 
according to a 31 March KYODO News Service report. 

   Two Japanese banks already have reciprocal arrangements with 
Mexican banks, according to the 18 January NIKKEI KINYU.  The Long- 
Term Credit Bank of Japan has a cooperative arrangement with the 
National Foreign Trade Bank of Mexico, which it established in 
November 1993 to assist Japanese companies entering the Mexican 
market, according to the 23 November 1993 NIKKEI.  The Bank of Tokyo 
has a similar arrangement with National Finance Bank (NAFIN), which 
it established in April 1990 and upgraded in late 1993, according to 
the 24 December NIKKEI.  In addition, the Bank of Tokyo conducts 
business with other Mexican banks and commissions them to represent 
the bank in conducting full branch operations, according to the 1 
January NIKKEI. 

   Banks Active in Samurai Bond Market -- The 12 May NIKKEI KTNYU 
article observed that corporate and government demand for funds is 
strong in Mexico, especially for samurai bonds or yen-based bonds 
issued in Japan by nonresidents.  The Mexican Government issued 
samurai bonds in 1993 for the first time in 16 years.  According to 
the 12 May NIKKEI KINYU, Mexico was the leading issuer of samurai 
bonds last year. 

   NAFTA has prompted Fuji Bank to enhance its business with the 
Mexican Government and its affiliated financial institutions in 
anticipation of an increasing Japanese corporate presence in Mexico, 
according to the 15 March NIKKEI KINYU.  Working with its wholly- 
owned U.S. subsidiary, Fuji Capital Markets, Fuji Bank in 1993 
managed the placement of 35 billion yen ($333 million) in samurai 
bonds issued in Japan--10 billion yen ($95 million) for the Mexican 
Government, 10 billion yen ($95 million) for NAFIN, and 15 billion 
yen ($142 million) for the National Foreign Trade Bank of Mexico. 
   For the first time since Mexico experienced its debt crisis in 
1982, Fuji has resumed "what amounts to" long-term financing for 
private Mexican companies, the 21 February NIKKEI reported.  The 
bank has invested in a portion of the $100 million in bonds 
privately placed by a nonferrous metals refining company, which has 
a contract to export silver through Japanese trading companies.  The 
arrangement is essentially a long-term loan collateralized by export 
sales, which are managed by Fuji's wholly-owned U.S. subsidiary, 
Fuji Bank and Trust, the article observed. 

   Daiwa International Trust Bank, a wholly-owned subsidiary of 
Daiwa Securities, was designated to manage samurai bonds issued by 
Mexico's state-run oil company, Mexican Petroleum (PEMEX), according 
to the 15 May NIKKEI.  It will manage the payment of principal and 
interest on some 20 billion yen ($190 million) in samurai bonds to 
be issued in June 1994 and underwritten by Daiwa Securities. 

   The government-affiliated Export-Import Bank of Japan recently 
signed an agreement for an untied loan for a maximum of $200 million 
to NAFIN, according to the 13 April NIKKEI.  The funds will be 
channelled by NAFIN through local financial institutions to Mexican 
companies and applied to the development of pollution-prevention 
facilities.  This is the second loan in Japan's environmental aid 
program to Mexico since 1991.  Chiyoda Corp., an oil refining and 
petrochemical plant engineering firm, won a contract to build two of 
the three facilities PEMEX will build in connection with the 
environmental aid program, according to the 7 April NIKKEI SANGYO. 
The roughly 8 billion yen ($76 million) contract is part of a $900 
million project for improving the environment. 

   In addition, NAFTA has led to the revival of multinational loan 
syndicates in Mexico, the 20 March NIKKEI reported.  The Industrial 
Bank of Japan is the syndicate leader for the $300 million Japanese 
banks offered in short-term trade loans to PEMEX out of a combined 
total of $1.1 billion in loans by both Japanese and U.S. banks.  The 
article observed that Japanese banks are eager to participate in 
future loan syndications. 

   FEATURE:  Norinchukin Striving for Universal Bank Status -- 
SUMMARY:  Norinchukin Bank is on its way to becoming a "universal 
bank," benefitting from its close links to Japan's agricultural 
credit cooperatives and from assistance from the Ministry of Finance 
(MOF), which together with the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries (MAFF) oversee the bank, according to press reporting. 
Norinchukin also received preferential treatment in 1993 concerning 
the interest rate on loans extended to housing loan companies.  Last 
year the bank established Norinchukin Securities and a trust fund 
management subsidiary. 

   Norinchukin or the Central Bank for Agriculture and Forestry, is 
nearing its goal of becoming a universal bank, according to the 14 
March NIKKEI KINYU SHIMBUN.  A universal bank is a European-style 
bank engaging in the full range of financial services, including 
commercial, trust and investment banking, and the securities 
business.  Operating under the joint auspices of the MOF and MAFF, 
Norinchukin has total assets of 43 trillion yen ($41O billion) and 
serves as the central bank for Japan's agricultural credit 
cooperatives.  These cooperatives have deposits totalling 63 
trillion yen ($6OO billion), more than the nation's largest 
commercial bank, according to the 17 May ASAHI SHIMBUN. 

   'Secret Deal' Favors Norinchukin -- Norinchukin and its 
affiliates recently were reported to have been involved in a 
"secret" agreement between the MOF and MAFF, the 15 May ASAHI 
reported.  A "secret memo" was reportedly exchanged between the 
finance and agriculture ministries in February 1993 regarding the 
reduction of interest rates on loans made by agricultural financial 
institutions affiliated with Norinchukin to seven housing loan 
companies that were experiencing financial difficulties and faced 
restructuring.  (Japanese agricultural financial institutions are 
under the jurisdiction of the MAFF, while Japanese housing loan 
companies are under the jurisdiction of the MOF.)  The agreement 
provided that the Bank of Japan (BOJ) would offer low-interest loans 
to Norinchukin, which would then channel the funds to the 
agricultural financial institutions, ASAHI reported.  In return, the 
agricultural financial institutions would accept a reduction in the 
interest rates receivable from the distressed housing loan companies 
as part of the restructuring plan the MOF was then devising.  [For 
details on the housing loan companies' bad loans, see the 26 January 
1994 Pacific Rim Economic Review, pp 6-8.]  The plan involved the 
remission or reduction of interest rates on loans made to the 
housing lenders by their parent financial institutions, which 
included the agricultural institutions affiliated with Norinchukin. 
While private financial institutions accepted complete remission of 
interest or a reduction to 2.5 percent, the Norinchukin-affiliated 
financial institutions were allowed to maintain a considerably 
higher rate of 4.5 percent.  Nevertheless, because the agricultural 
financial institutions were not amenable to "reductions of any 
sort," the 17 May ASAHI reported, the restructuring plan 
necessitated a promise from the BOJ beforehand for low-interest 
"assistance loans." 

   The agricultural institutions argued that their high loan 
exposure to the housing lenders made interest rate reductions on the 
scale accepted by the private banks unacceptable, the 16 May NIHON 
KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI) reported.  At the time the MOF was planning 
to restructure roughly 6 trillion yen ($57 billion) out of the 14 
trillion yen ($133 billion) in total loans owed by seven of the 
eight housing lenders to Norinchukin and the agricultural financial 
institutions affiliated with it.  As of the September mid-FY93 
accounting period, roughly 60 percent of the housing lenders' 
combined loans receivable were nonperforming and this total was 
expected to increase, according to the 17 May NIKKEI KINYU. 

   MOF Enlists Norinchukin's Help -- The 17 May ASAHI explained the 
reason behind the preferential 4.5 percent interest rate for 
Norinchukin's affiliates.  It was a "pay back" for the assistance 
Norinchukin provided the MOF in 1992 in passing the Financial System 
Reform Bill.  The bill, intended to increase competition in the 
finance industry, had not gone to the Diet for deliberation because 
of opposition party resistance.  Since a related bill would allow 
Norinchukin to establish a securities subsidiary, the MOF enlisted 
Norinchukin--with its considerable influence over Diet members 
representing agricultural interests--to assist in passing the bill, 
ASAHI noted.  Norinchukin's management met politicians in both the 
ruling and opposition parties, while the agricultural cooperatives 
contacted their Diet members to support the bill.  The bill passed, 
and the MOF showed its "appreciation" to Norinchukin by not 
requiring its affiliates to shoulder the severely reduced interest 
rates to the housing lenders required of other banks and by 
arranging low-interest loans from the BOJ. 

   Norinchukin Subsidiaries Show Strong Performance -- Subsequently, 
Norinchukin established Norinchukin Securities, one of only three 
bank securities subsidiaries established in July 1993 after passage 
of the Financial System Reform Law, according to the 11 May NIKKEI 
KINYU.  The subsidiary earned ordinary profits of 200 million ($1.9 
million) for FY93 which ended in March 1994.  Of the five bank 
securities subsidiaries established to date, two posted FY93 losses 
and of the three that made money, only Norinchukin Securities showed 
the "current account surplus" the MOF requires for the three-year- 
period from the inception of operations.  Norinchukin Securities' 
profits were bolstered primarily by commissions on sales of 
investment trust funds to another affiliate in the Norinchukin 
Group, Norinchukin Investment Management Co.  Some 60 percent of the 
corporate and samurai bonds, which are yen-denominated bonds issued 
in Japan by non-residents, underwritten by Norinchukin Securities as 
of March 1994 were purchased by the prefectural-level credit 
divisions of agricultural credit cooperatives and other affiliates 
of Norinchukin, according to the 14 March NIKKEI KINYU. 

   Similarly, Norinchukin Investment Management Co. is the only 
investment trust fund management company of the five established in 
September 1993 that is expected to post profits for FY93, according 
to the 26 April NIKKEI KINYU.  It posted ordinary profits of 30 
billion yen ($285 million), bolstered by commissions on direct sales 
of investment trusts to affiliated institutions, while the four 
subsidiaries established by private commercial banks all posted 
losses of roughly 200 million yen ($1.9 million).  The NIKKEI KINYU 
observed that the private bank subsidiaries losses were expected to 
continue to suffer losses in FY94 and that the gap between their 
profitability and that of Norinchukin Investment would widen.  It 
attributed this widening gap to the support the Norinchukin 
affiliates can offer Norinchukin Investment in the form of stable 
sales.  Some 40 percent of Norinchukin Investment's sales of stock 
and public bond investment trusts were to the prefectural-level 
credit divisions of agricultural credit cooperatives and the other 
agricultural financial institutions, according to the 14 March 
NIKKEI KINYU. 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - CHINA:  Apparel Firms Establish 
Operations in Shanghai, Shandong, Jiangsu -- Japanese business 
newspapers in the past few weeks have carried a number of reports 
concerning Japanese textile companies and clothing manufacturers 
setting up or expanding operations in China.  Three of the largest 
joint venture undertakings are as follows: 

   Mizuno--A leading manufacturer of sporting goods and apparel, 
Mizuno, together with its subsidiary, Hong Kong Mizuno, and the 
Chinese sporting goods merchandising firm, Shanghai Stationery 
Corp., on 1 April established a joint venture company to manufacture 
and export sportswear.  The new company, Shanghai Mizuno Co. Ltd., 
is capitalized at $2 million, with Mizuno and Hong Kong Mizuno 
contributing 90 percent and Shanghai Stationery 1O percent.  The 
joint venture firm will begin building a 2,000-square meter factory 
in Shanghai in June.  Total investment, including real estate, will 
be about 200 million yen ($1.9 million).  Shanghai Mizuno will 
import the materials for ski wear and windbreakers from Japan and 
export the finished product back to Japan.  The company plans to 
produce 150,000 pieces in the first fiscal year and 500,000 by the 
third year.  (Tokyo NIKKEI RYUTSU SHIMBUN 5 May 94 p 10) 

   Gunze--Japan's largest manufacturer of knit underwear, Gunze, 
together with the trading company Mitsui &amp; Co. and the Jinan 
Knitting Factory, have established an underwear manufacturing joint 
venture company in Jinan City, Shandong Province.  The new company, 
Jinan Gunze Fashion Co. Ltd., is capitalized at $1.5 million, with 
Gunze and Jinan Knitting each contributing 46 percent, Mitsui 5 
percent, and the Chinese trading firm Shandong Provincial Textile 
Import Export Company 3 percent.  Jinan Gunze Fashion will begin 
producing children's underwear in July and will gradually expand its 
product line.  The company anticipates sales of about 240 million 
yen ($2.3 million) in three years.  (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 12 
May 94 p 12) 

   Kaitaku--An apparel manufacturer based in Okayama City, Okayama 
Prefecture, Kaitaku is expanding its presence in China by 
establishing joint venture companies in Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, 
and Qingdao, Shandong Province, and by building a wholly owned 
textile mill in Shanghai.  The Jiangsu joint venture, Suzhou 
Kaitaku, will invest about 30 million yen ($286,000) to buy a local 
mill, which will begin producing pajamas on 25 May.  It will have a 
production capacity of 50,000 garments per month.  The company's 
wholly owned subsidiary, Shanghai Kaitaku, will complete 
construction of a washing and knitting mill as early as December. 
In Qingdao, Kaitaku will convert its Kaitaku Qingdao Office, 
established in 1991, into a joint venture company to produce and 
inspect work clothing. 

   Kaitaku formed its first Chinese joint venture company in 1992 by 
investing 60 percent in Wuxi Kaitaku Fashion Co. Ltd., located in 
Wuxi, Jiangsu Province.  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 19 May 94 p 35) 

   CZECH REPUBLIC:  Sakura Bank Signs Cooperation Agreement With 
Czech Banks -- Sakura Bank, one of Japan's 11 commercial banks, has 
signed cooperation agreements with the first and third largest 
commercial banks in the Czech Republic.  According to the 
agreements, the Czech banks will provide Sakura with information 
about Czech industry, while Sakura will introduce Japanese companies 
considering business operations in the Czech Republic to both banks. 
Sakura will also provide the Czech banks with information on the 
economies of Asian countries.  This is the first time a Japanese 
bank has concluded a cooperation agreement with a bank in the Czech 
Republic.  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 2O May 94 p 7) 

   INDONESIA:  FEATURE:  Kanebo, Toyobo Building Textile, Garment 
Plants -- SUMMARY:  Kanebo and Toyobo, two of Japan's largest 
textile companies, are building production facilities in Indonesia. 
Kanebo is investing in a large cotton spinning and weaving mill as 
part of its plan to shift all of its cotton textile production to 
Indonesia and China.  Toyobo is, for the first time, investing in an 
overseas garment production plant to strengthen its "end product" 
business. 

   Kanebo, together with its subsidiary, Kanebo Cotton Yarn (KCY), 
are in the process of shifting domestic production of cotton and 
mixed cotton yarn and cloth to Indonesia and China as part of the 
Kanebo Group's restructuring plan, according to the 27 April NIKKEI 
SANGYO SHIMBUN.  The 27 April NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN noted that the 
closure of three KCY spinning and weaving mills in Japan last fall 
left the firm with 106,000 "surplus" spindles, of which 82,000 will 
be shipped to production sites in China and Indonesia.  The 
remaining 24,000 spindles will be eliminated.  Continued losses in 
Kanebo's textile operations lie behind its decision to move cotton 
textile production overseas, according to the 27 April NIHON KEIZAI 
SHIMBUN.  Kanebo's total investment in its Indonesian operations 
will be 4 billion yen ($39 million), NIKKEI SANGYO reported. 

   Indonesian Mill To Ship Cotton Fabric Back to Japan -- "PT Kanebo 
Indonesia Textile Mills," the company's new production facility, is 
being built in Java in the Cikampek City bonded processing zone, 
according to the NIKKEI SANGYO article.  Investment in the project, 
which will begin operations in January 1995, will be $18 million, of 
which Kanebo will contribute 18.23 percent and KCY the remainder. 
The 27 April NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN reported that the president of the 
new company will be a KCY managing director.  NIKKEI SANGYO reported 
that production equipment from two domestic KCY mills closed last 
autumn--its Nagano spinning mill and Saidaiji weaving mill--will be 
shipped to the new Indonesian mill.  The NIKKAN KOGYO article 
specified that 30,000 spindles and 144 weaving machines will be 
shipped to Indonesia from the two closed mills.  The Indonesian 
mill, which will employ 600 people, will spin 2,250 tons of cotton 
and mixed cotton yarn and will produce 10.75 million meters of 
fabric annually, generating yearly sales of 2.5 billion yen ($23.8 
million). 

   When the new mill is completed, all cotton cloth produced will be 
exported to Kanebo's Nagahama dyeing mill in Shiga Prefecture for 
dyeing and final processing, according to NIKKEI SANGYO.  The 
finished fabric, 60 percent of which will be dress shirt cloth, will 
be "reexported" to garment companies in Asia and also sold 
domestically. 

   Joint Venture With Shanghai Cotton Factory -- Kanebo and KCY have 
formed a joint venture company with the Shanghai No. 15 Cotton 
Spinning and Weaving Factory to produce high-quality cotton yarn and 
fabric, according to the 15 April NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN.  The new 
company, "Shanghai Huazhong Spinning and Weaving Ltd.," will be 
established in May with Kanebo and KCY contributing 50 percent and 
the Shanghai company SO percent of the 1.4 billion yen ($13.5 
million) in initial capital. 

   Production equipment will be transferred from KCY's Matsuzaka 
mill in Mie Prefecture--which was closed last year--and from other 
KCY facilities.  The joint venture plant will begin operating in 
July, producing high-quality medium and fine-grade combed cotton 
yarn and dyed yarn at an annual rate of 3,8OO tons of yarn and 1.4 
million meters of woven cloth. 

   Toyobo To Build Joint Venture Clothing Plant in Bandung -- 
Toyobo, Japan's leading textile company, together with two 
subsidiaries and an Indonesian garment company, will build a joint 
venture clothing plant in Bandung, Indonesia, according to the 27 
April NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN.  This is the first overseas clothing 
plant Toyobo has invested in, and it will help the company 
strengthen its "end processing business." 

   The new company, "STG Garment," will be capitalized at $2.5 
million, with Toyobo contributing 30 percent; two of its 
subsidiaries, Shinko Sangyo and Eikogyo, 45 and 5 percent, 
respectively; and Gistex, a Bandung weaving and sewing company, 20 
percent.  Total investment will reach $8 million.  The president of 
the joint venture will be a Shinko Sangyo executive.  The plant will 
make medium-quality white shirts, polo shirts, and jogging suits for 
export to Europe, the United States, and Japan.  The plant, which 
will begin operating at yearend, will employ 550 people and will 
have 265 sewing machines.  All fabric and other materials will be 
produced in Indonesia.  The 27 April NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN added that 
the cotton fabric supplied to the new company will come from 
Toyobo's Indonesian cotton spinning and weaving mill and that the 
new company will turn out 1.2 million garments annually. 

   KAZAKHSTAN:  Mitsubishi Negotiating Oil Pipeline Feasibility 
Study -- Mitsubishi Corp., Japan's largest trading company, is 
negotiating a contract with the Kazakhstan Government concerning a 
feasibility study for the construction of a 1,200 km oil pipeline. 
Mitsubishi expects to receive the contract in early summer.  The 
pipeline, which would cost between $600 million and $1 billion, 
would connect the Tengiz oilfield with refineries in Chimkent, in 
south-central Kazakhstan, and Almaty, the capital.  A pipeline 
already connects refineries in Pavlodar, in northeast Kazakhstan, 
and Chimkent.  (Sendai KAHOKU SHIMPO 5 May 94 p 9) 

   UZBEKISTAN:  Banks Sign Cooperation Agreements With Uzbek 
National Bank -- Sakura Bank, one of Japan's leading commercial 
banks, and Bank of Tokyo, a commercial bank specializing in foreign 
exchange, have signed separate cooperation agreements with the 
National Bank for Foreign Economic Activity of Uzbekistan, according 
to the 19 May NIKKEI KINYU SHIMBUN.  The two agreements will 
facilitate exchanges of information to promote Japanese investment 
in Uzbekistan.  Sakura and the Bank of Tokyo will introduce Japanese 
trading companies planning to expand into Uzbekistan to the National 
Bank, which in turn will introduce them to potential Uzbek business 
partners. 

   The Uzbek National Bank for Foreign Economic Activity oversees 
all of Uzbekistan's international financial activities as well as 
financing for domestic industrial development, according to the 14 
May ASAHI SHIMBUN.  Currently, Yusuke Matsuzaki, formerly the 
president of a Japanese financial subsidiary in London, serves as a 
senior advisor to the National Bank and is assisting it in locating 
overseas business partners for small to medium sized Uzbek 
businesses. 

   VIETNAM:  Electronics Parts Firm To Triple Production of Coils -- 
Sumida Electric Co., a manufacturer of parts for electronic products 
and communications equipment, plans to triple the number of coils 
used in electronic parts that are manufactured in Vietnam through 
consigned production.  Sumida's coil production in Vietnam will be 
expanded from last year's level of 20 million to 60 million in FY94. 
Last summer Sumida began the consigned production of coils used in 
electronic circuits with a state-owned television plant in Ho Chi 
Minh City, using equipment transferred from a Sumida plant in the 
Philippines.  Sumida wants to increase the ratio of locally procured 
materials, which is now in the 70 percent range, to the 80 percent 
level through cost reductions.  The coils have been shipped to 
audiovisual and communications equipment manufacturers in Europe, 
the United States, and Japan.  Sumida plans to market its expanded 
coil output to "Japanese electronic parts companies operating in 
Europe, the United States, and Asia." 

   Sumida is planning to develop a "strong production base" in 
Vietnam because with the appreciation of the yen, the cost advantage 
of consigned production in Vietnam and China has increased. 
According to Sumida President Shigeyuki Yawata, "production costs 
are roughly the same as in China," although transportation costs are 
higher in Vietnam.  The company will decide by the end of FY94 
whether it will develop its production base by supplying additional 
equipment to the Ho Chi Minh City manufacturer or whether it will 
build its own production plant.  (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 13 May 
94 p 9) 

   Machine Tools/Robotics - March Machine Tool Orders Declined 6.1 
Percent -- According to statistics compiled by the Japan Machine 
Tool Builders' Association, machine tool orders for March 1994 
declined 6.1 percent compared to March 1993 to 50.92 billion yen 
($484.95 million).  This is the first time in three years that the 
year-on-year decline has been in single digits, it is also the first 
time in 1994 that orders have reached the 50 billion yen level. 

   Domestic orders came to 30.15 billion yen ($287.1 million), down 
16.8 percent from last year, but were up 35.3 percent from February. 
By sector, orders from the automobile industry were about the same 
as last year, electrical machinery industry orders were up over 30 
percent, but orders from the general purpose machinery industry fell 
36.3 percent.  Exports increased 15.6 percent from last year to 
20.78 billion yen ($197.84 million).  Within the industry the 
prevalent view is that "the bottom of the slump occurred between 
October and December last year," but "while inquiries have 
increased, orders have not."  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 12 May 94 
p 13) 

   Semiconductors/Computers/Electronics - NEC To Establish Research 
Center in Germany -- NEC Corp. announced on 19 May that it will 
establish a science and technology research center in Germany, the 
company's first in Europe and its third overseas.  "C&amp;C Research 
Laboratories NEC Europe" will be inaugurated in July as a division 
of NEC Europe at a cost of about 100 million yen ($955,000) for its 
first fiscal year.  The center will be located in the technopark of 
the German Society for Mathematics and Data Processing (GMD) outside 
of Bonn.  Initially, it will employ six researchers, but that number 
will increase to about 20 in the near future. 

   The center will concentrate on research in parallel processing 
algorithms, technological simulations centering on numerical 
processing, and multimedia communications.  In addition, the center 
will have an NEC Cenju-3 massively parallel processing supercomputer 
and will conduct joint research on parallel processing with the GMD. 

   NEC hopes its German center will help the company "enrich" its 
European-based research and development.  The company already has 
research exchange relationships with a number of European 
institutes, including the Swiss National Supercomputer Center, the 
German Aerospace Research Institute, and the French National Data 
Processing and Automation Research Institute in the fields of 
supercomputing, next-generation communications, and artificial 
intelligence.  (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 20 May 94 p 7) 

   CHINA:  Domestic Developments - FEATURE:  Approaches To 
Transforming State Enterprises Outlined -- SUMMARY:  Recent press 
reports suggest that the government is urging all localities to 
follow the principle of "one plant, one policy" in searching for 
appropriate individual solutions in making China's medium- and 
large-sized state enterprises competitive in the free market within 
three to five years.  Localities are also looking for ways to make 
smaller state-owned enterprises more competitive. 

   According to the 16 March issue of Beijing XIAOFEI SHIBAO, the 
Deputy Director of the State Economic and Trade Commission, Chen 
Qingtai, recently stated that China's 1300 large- and medium-sized 
state enterprises will all be gradually forced into market 
competition within three to five years, with only the fittest 
expected to survive.  In endorsing the guideline of "one plant, one 
policy," Chen noted that, although enterprises gained more autonomy 
since being granted 14 decisionmaking powers, some enterprises still 
require financial and technical infusions while others need to be 
shut down, merged, leased out, auctioned off, or declared bankrupt. 
All localities must formulate their own specific plans to solve 
their problems.  However, final approval on important changes, such 
as the sale of an entire plant, property right transfers, joint 
ventures, and shareholding conversions must be obtained from the 
relevant departments. 

   The 16 March issue of Beijing XIAOFEI SHIBAO gave an example of 
an  approach to transforming state enterprises. In Jiangsu Province, 
an international tender was offered for the contracting of a group 
of large- and medium-sized money-losing state enterprises in 
Nanjing.  Under the tender, foreign contractors will be responsible 
for paying wages, operating expenses, and state and profits taxes, 
and would be required to meet production quotas and to introduce 
advanced management and operational methods.  In return, they will 
be granted full autonomy in production, sales, personnel, finance, 
and materials.  Three Nanjing enterprises with assets valued between 
40 to 100 million yuan have already been contracted by Thai and Hong 
Kong consortia. 

   The 24 March issue of Chongqing GAIGE SHIBAO reported that the 
Shunqing District of Nanchong, Sichuan formulated a plan to 
implement enterprise reform at the end of 1993.  Many Shunqing state 
enterprises are to be transformed into limited companies or 
shareholding cooperatives.  The techniques of contracting out and 
leasing out will also be employed.  Department cadres have been sent 
down to train personnel and assist in actual implementation.  Seven 
out of the 10 selected enterprises have already completed the asset 
evaluation process, and there is a good chance that the target of 
transforming 60 percent of local state enterprises into shareholding 
companies this year will be attained. 

   According to the 14 April issue of Beijing JINGJI CANKAO BAO, the 
municipal government of Fuzhou, Fujian has made impressive progress 
since the second half of 1992.  So far, twenty-eight enterprises 
have been "grafted" to foreign investors either through the 
introduction of joint operations or the transfer of property rights. 
Thirty-eight enterprises have been merged and sixteen enterprises 
have reversed their losses by wholly or partly engaging in "state- 
owned, privately-operated" practices. 

   The 13 April issue of HEBEI RIBAO reports that the "one plant, 
one policy" is also being adopted by Baoding, Hebei to reverse 
enterprise losses.  Because the situation in each plant is 
different, the mayor and party secretary personally led a group of 
experienced cadres to each plant to study and formulate solutions. 
As a result, some plants were divided into smaller ones, some were 
converted into shareholding companies, and some were contracted out. 
Other plants were merged, entered into joint ventures, or had their 
ineffective leaders replaced.  The 11 and 25 April issues of the 
PRC-owned Hong Kong magazine CHING CHI TAO PAO [ECONOMIC REPORTER] 
reported on 21 plants in Baoding that welcome foreign participation. 
Foreigners may choose to invest in capital, technology, marketing, 
or management and will be granted shares. 

   The Shanghai municipal government is using another approach in 
reforming smaller state-owned enterprises.  In a concerted effort to 
more rapidly develop the private sector and to identify new ways to 
reform small state-owned enterprises, the government is for the 
first time this year allowing workers and individuals to buy up 
certain small state, or collective-owned enterprises, according to 
the 16 March issue of Beijing ZHONGGUO FANGZHI BAO.  The city's goal 
for 1994 is to increase the number of private enterprises and 
increase their scale to above that of the average national level. 
Currently, relevant departments are moving quickly to formulate 
regulations on the development of individual and private 
enterprises.  With a few exceptions, all proposals to establish 
individual and private enterprises that meet the state criteria will 
be approved.  The state also encourages individuals with sufficient 
funds to lease out or contract out small state-owned and collective 
enterprises or convert them into shareholding companies.  The local 
government further allows individuals to buy these small "state or 
collective" enterprises and transform them into "private" 
enterprises. 

   According to the 15 April issue of Shanghai WEN HUI BAO, some 202 
workers in a small Shanghai lamp factory paid one million yuan to 
buy their factory.  The paper notes that this is the first time in 
Shanghai's history that a small state-owned enterprise has been 
totally transformed into a privately-owned and privately-run 
shareholding company.  The sale actually benefits both the state and 
the factory, according to the paper.  The state is able to preserve 
the value of state assets and convert stagnant assets into funds 
needed for key construction projects.  Meanwhile, the enterprise is 
enlivened because it now enjoys full autonomy and is free from 
problems associated with being part of the "big rice bowl."  It also 
benefits from clearly defined property rights, a more flexible 
operating mechanism, and a direct relationship between workers and 
profits. 

   Fujian Suspends Unqualified Projects in Development Zones -- 
Fujian Province has suspended 20 unqualified development area 
projects and has recovered 102 square km of land.  The province now 
has 116 plots of land designated as development areas, in which 
there are a total of 1,077 foreign-invested projects, of which 478 
have begun operation or will soon do so.  When all foreign-invested 
projects have been completed, an estimated $1O billion in foreign 
funds will have been introduced.  (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE O945 
GMT 14 May 94) 

   Guangdong Overfulfills Quota for Selling Treasury Bonds -- 
Guangdong Province has fulfilled ahead of schedule the 1994 quota 
set by the central authorities for selling two-year state treasury 
bonds.  A total of RMB 1.2 billion worth of two-year state treasury 
bonds had been sold throughout the province as of 21 May.  This 
achievement has been possible because the financial, banking, 
propaganda, and other relevant departments have closely cooperated 
with one another, party and government leaders at all levels have 
personally taken the lead in buying state treasury bonds, and the 
cadres and people have responded to the government's call to buy 
state treasury bonds.  (Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio Network 
1000 GMT 21 May 94 

   Guangdong Suspends Approval of Land Sales for Luxury Projects -- 
Guangdong's State Land Department recently issued a circular 
ordering authorities at all levels to stop providing land for 
building luxury offices, housing, villas, and tourist attractions. 
Foreign-funded real estate projects and low-income housing projects 
will not be affected.  The department pointed out that since the 
state strengthened macroeconomic control, a great deal of land 
allocated for housing construction has been left idle due to a lack 
of funds over the last two years.  It has been reported that housing 
completed throughout the province in the first three months of this 
year is only valued at RMB 9.86 billion, as compared with the 1993 
figure of RMB 53 billion.  (Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO 13 May 94 p 5) 

   Statistics Show Gap in Staff Wages in Shenzhen -- According to a 
report by the Shenzhen Municipal Statistical Bureau of Guangdong 
Province, the uneven development of enterprises in Shenzhen has 
meant that one can find huge wage differences among staff and 
workers.  Among enterprises in the city, the highest per capita 
monthly salary earned by staff and workers is RMB 3,038, while the 
lowest is only RMB 251, lower than the minimum wage level of RMB 285 
set by the municipal labor department.  A total of 54.9 percent of 
Shenzhen's enterprises pay their workers less than the average 
monthly wage level in the city, while 1.9 percent pay their workers 
above the minimum level.  According to wage statistics from 3,561 
independent accounting units in the city, the annual per capita wage 
of staff and workers last year was RMB 8,145 and the monthly per 
capita wage was RMB 679, up 14.3 percent over the year before, after 
taking inflation into account.  (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 1369 
GMT 20 May 94) 

   Fiber-Optic Cable To Link Hangzhou, Fuzhou, Nanchang -- China's 
longest fiber-optic cable will be laid in East China to ease the 
telecommunications problems there.  The cable will be more than 
4,000 km long and will link Hangzhou in Zhejiang Province, Fuzhou in 
Fujian Province, and Nanchang in Jiangxi Province.  It will cost 
$161 million.  Though the specific figures have not been decided, 
some of the financing will be supplied by the World Bank in the form 
of loans for importing sophisticated equipment.  The Zhejiang 
portion will be 423 km long and will cost $9.6 million.  Foreign 
financing will cover $1.84 million.  The project is scheduled to 
start in October and be completed by the end of next year.  (Beijing 
CHINA DAILY (BUSINESS WEEKLY) 15-21 May 94 p 4) 

   Computer Software Sales Reach RMB 4 Million -- The annual value 
of computer software sales has reached RMB 4 million.  There are 
currently 2,000 enterprises specializing in software technological 
development and production, and more than 800,000 professionals are 
involved in software development.  The China Software Corporation, 
the biggest company in this sector, earns more than RMB 100 million 
annually from its software sales.  (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 1321 
GMT 18 May 94) 

   Sichuan Becomes Largest Natural Gas Producing Province -- Sichuan 
has become the largest natural gas producing province in China.  The 
province produced 7 billion cubic meters of natural gas last year 
and is predicted to turn out 7.3 billion cubic meters this year, 
accounting for almost half of the total volume in the country. 
Sichuan's gas reserves have been estimated at between 7,000 and 
8,000 billion cubic meters, or 60 percent of the country's total. 
(Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 1114 GMT 23 May 94) 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - Border Trade Slows Between 
Heilongjiang's Harbin City and Russia -- Yang Yidian, director of 
Heilongjiang's Harbin City Foreign Investment Management Bureau, 
told reporters in Hong Kong on 23 May that Harbin's border trade 
with Russia has stagnated and has been on the decline this year. 
Harbin's overall trade was $44O million last year, of which its 
trade with Russia accounted for approximately 33 percent.  Since 
Russia canceled visa exemptions  for Chinese citizens on 15 January 
this year, border trade has dropped significantly.  Yang Yidian 
expects a 10-20 percent increase in the city's overall foreign trade 
for this year, but forecast a 20-30 percent drop in its border trade 
with Russia.  (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 1333 GMT 23 May 94) 

   Shandong Province Encourages Foreign Investment in Agriculture -- 
Shandong Province recently introduced measures to encourage foreign 
businessmen to invest in the development of the agricultural sector. 
Foreign businessmen will be encouraged to invest their money to 
transform low- and medium-yield farmlands, to build and improve the 
agricultural infrastructure, and to vigorously develop agricultural 
projects earning foreign exchange.  Businessmen will also be 
encouraged to use foreign funds to import new varieties and 
technology, to develop special, rare, and high-quality products, and 
to improve the technology used in processing, preserving, and 
storing farm and poultry products.  A preferential tariff policy 
will accomodate the import of equipment and other materials needed 
to develop agriculture and earn foreign exchange.  When a foreign 
firm invests $10 million in the development of barren hills and 
lands, a preferential tax policy will be granted according to state 
regulations.  The province will allocate 3 million mu of shallows 
for the utilization of foreign capital to expedite the development 
of aquatic products.  When a foreign firm invests in a saltwater 
breeding project, it will be allowed to process, store, and 
transport produce of the same type and will be given preferential 
tax treatment according to the relevant state regulations.  (Hong 
Kong LIEN HO PAO 12 May 94 p 21) 

   Japanese Investment in Shandong Shows Sharp Increase -- Over the 
past year, Shandong Province has become a key economic and trading 
partner of Japan.  The value of import and export trade with Japan 
in 1993 reached $1.949 billion, an increase of 32.85 percent over 
1992 and accounting for 26.3 percent of the province's total import 
and export value. At the end of 1993, the province had 730 projects 
involving $1.82 billion in Japanese investment.  Some 55 projects, 
involving $1.22 billion, were developed with Japanese government 
loans and 675 projects received direct investment by Japanese 
businessmen.  (Jinan Shandong Radio 2300 GMT 11 May 94) 

   Shandong Signs Cooperation Agreement With ROK Province -- An 
economic team from the ROK's South Kyongsang Province signed a 
cooperation agreement with Shandong's Weihai city to set up an 
industrial park in the Weihai Economic and Technological Development 
Zone.  This park will primarily seek to attract pollution-free, 
high-technology industries cable of earning foreign exchange.  The 
park is designed to occupy a total area of 1.6 square km.  The land- 
use period is contracted at SO years.  (Jinan Shandong Radio 2300 
GMT 18 May 94) 

   Shandong Reports 150 New Joint-Venture Projects With Singapore -- 
Over the past few years, Shandong Province has achieved rapid 
development in economic and trade cooperation with Singapore.  In 
1993 alone, it built 150 new joint-venture projects with Singapore, 
involving foreign capital of $390 million, showing an increase of 
nearly 200 percent over the sum of the previous seven years.  During 
the first quarter of 1994, Singapore invested $1OO million in 
Shandong.  (Jinan Shandong Radio 2300 GMt 14 May 94) 

   Sino-Singaporean Industrial Park To Be Built in Shandong's 
Qingdao -- Singapore's Megaway Group and the Qingdao Economic 
Development Company signed an agreement on 15 May to construct a 
$100 million industrial park in Qingdao's economic development zone 
in Shandong Province.  The park will cover 5 square km along the 
Qingdao bonded zone.  It will import advanced equipment, technology, 
and management systems from Singapore.  The infrastructure of the 
park will cost approximately $100 million.  The first phase of the 
construction, which will cover an area of one square km, will be 
completed in one year.  It is expected that the overall construction 
will be completed in three years.  The Asian Industrial Park 
Development Company was established to supervise the park's 
construction.  (Beijing CHINA DAILY 17 May 94 p 2) 

   Agricultural Bank, Australian Firm Set Up Joint Consulting 
Venture -- The Agricultural Bank of China and the Australian firm 
Hassal &amp; Associates signed an agreement on 18 May to set up a 
consulting and financing joint venture, the Jinhai International 
Business Development and Consulting Company, in Beijing.  The bank's 
Trust and Investment Corporation and the Jinqiao Financial 
Consulting Company will provide 50 percent of the investment. 
According to bank officials, the new venture will offer many small 
Australian companies business opportunities in China.  (Beijing 
CHINA DAILY 19 May 94 p 2) 

   Australia, Guangdong's Zhuhai Cooperate in Building Glass Wool 
Plant -- Zhuhai City's Aquatic Products Supply and Marketing General 
Company and Australia's CSR Investment (Asia) Company Ltd. signed a 
contract in Zhuhai on 17 May to establish the CSR Guangdong (Zhuhai) 
Glass Wool Products Company Ltd., a joint venture which will be 
located in the town of Baiqiao in Doumen County.  The Chinese side 
will supply 40 percent of the investment in the form of land, and 
the Australian side will provide the funds for the remaining 60 
percent.  The $45-million plant, which will use modern equipment, is 
expected to go into operation by the end of 1995, with a production 
capacity of 12,000 tons of glass wool products annually.  When 
completed, the plant will be the largest glass wool products 
producer in China.  (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO 18 May 94 p A6) 

   Philippine Aluminum Group Sets Up Company in Fujian's Xiamen -- 
The International Aluminum (Hong Kong) Limited Company, a subsidiary 
of the Philippines Aluminum Group International Limited Company, 
recently set up the wholly-owned International Aluminum (Xiamen) 
Limited Company in Xiamen, Fujian Province.  The company will build 
a factory in the Xinglin Investment Area for Taiwan businessmen. 
The factory will have a total area of 30,000 square meters, require 
an investment of $8 million, and go into operation in late 1995, 
producing 9,000 tons of various types of aluminum products per year 
for markets in Southeast Asia, Hong Kong, and Macao.  (Beijing 
ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 1024 GMT 21 May 94) 
   Beijing Contracts Construction Projects, Labor Service Abroad -- 
Beijing Municipality has made big strides in undertaking contracted 
projects abroad.  In 1993, it signed contracts worth $500 million, 
concluded business amounting to $150 million, and sent 3,000 
laborers abroad, showing an increase of 28 percent, 36.3 percent, 
and 50 percent respectively over 1992.  In addition to undertaking 
contract projects and labor service in Malaysia, Japan, Hong Kong, 
Singapore, Indonesia, the CIS, the United States, Macao, Thailand, 
Tunisia, and Botswana, Beijing has also developed new business 
partners in the  United Arab Emirates, South Africa, Pakistan, and 
Gabon.  (Beijing BEIJING RIBAO 10 May 94 p 1) 

   Jilin First Quarter Results in Attracting Foreign-Funded 
Enterprises -- As of the first quarter of 1994, Jilin Province had 
registered 2,522 foreign-funded enterprises and introduced $2.76 
billion of foreign investments.  At present, Jilin has 12 joint- 
venture enterprises each with an investment of more than $10 million 
and 31 foreign-funded enterprises each with an investment ranging 
from $5 million to $10 million.  Jilin Petrochemical Company. Ltd., 
a joint-venture enterprise run by the Jilin Chemical Industrial 
Company and the Hong Kong Lianghe Petrochemical Company, Ltd., began 
operation on 28 April.  The company has a total investment of 1.42 
billion Renminbi.  The annual production quota is 35,000 tons of 
acrylic acid, 40,000 tons of epoxy ethane, and 60,000 tons of 
alcoholic ether.  (Changchun JILIN RIBAO 8 May 94 p 1) 

   Hebei Signs Letter of Intent With Brazil -- Hebei Province signed 
a letter of intent on five economic and trade projects with the 
Goias State of Brazil on 16 May.  These projects include the 
establishment of a joint-venture tractor repairing plant in Brazil, 
economic and trade cooperation between Hebei Pharmaceutical Plant 
and a firm in Brazil, the joint processing of textile products in 
Shijiazhuang No.2 Cotton Textile Plant, the establishment of an 
agent in Brazil to promote sales of products from Shijiazhuang Silk 
Plant, and the processing of jeans with supplied materials at Shirun 
Textile Company, Ltd.  (Shijiazhuang HEBEI RIBAO 17 May 94 p 1) 

   CITIC Hong Kong Expands Golf Course in Conghua City -- Despite 
the central government's reported ban on the development of new golf 
courses, CITIC Hong Kong has signed a contract with Guangdong's 
Conghua City to expand a golf course and spa resort there.  The 
project involves an investment of 1 billion yuan.  The Chinese side 
is providing the land and the Hong Kong side is providing the 
capital.  CITIC Hong Kong will have operating rights for 50 years. 
Club members come mainly from Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea, as well 
as from mainland China.  (Hong Kong MING PAO 12 May 94 p B3) 

   New World Group Largest Overseas Investor in Wuhan -- In the last 
two years, Hong Kong's New World Group has invested over 2.3 billion 
yuan in Wuhan to construct an airport, a 17-km airport expressway, 
the Wuhan Chang Jiang Road bridge, mass housing projects, and to 
manage hotels,  transform old industries, and develop real estate 
development. The group has  become the largest foreign investor in 
the city.  New World is the majority shareholder in Wuhan's new 
Tianhe Airport, China's first joint-venture airport, which will 
begin operations next month.  (Hong Kong MING PAO 23 May 94 p B2) 

   Bank of China Hong Kong Invests $470 Million in Shandong -- While 
attending a symposium on new investment trends in Shandong, Huang 
Diyan, director of the Bank of China (BOC) Hong Kong and Macao 
Management Office, said that the BOC Group has invested $470 million 
to finance 200 projects in Shandong in such areas as the energy 
industry, communications, manufacturing, water projects, the 
construction of economic development zones, housing, and tourism. 
(Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO 21 May 94 p 17) 

   Hong Kong Bank Leading Foreign Lender to China -- John Gray, 
chairman of the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation (HSBC), 
says that HSBC lending on the Chinese mainland ranks first among 
foreign banks.  At present, HSBC has five branches and four offices 
in China.  It hopes to open more branches in mainland cities and to 
develop its securities and credit card businesses while focusing on 
corporate lending and short-term trade  financing.  Gray said that 
HSBC is ready to help overseas investors do business in China. 
(Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 1204 GMT 17 May 94) 

   CITIC Pacific To Expand Investment in Mainland Power Projects -- 
Hong Kong-listed, mainland-funded CITIC Pacific will expand its 
involvement in energy projects in China in spite of mixed signals 
from Beijing on the rate of return allowed for power projects. 
Larry Yung Chi-kin, chairman of CITIC Pacific, said that electricity 
capacity was desperately needed by China and that the 15 percent cap 
on investment returns was too low.  Yung said that power projects in 
which CITIC Pacific was involved in China had a return of more than 
15 percent.  The group operates power stations in Ligang, Jiangsu, 
and Xinli, Henan, in addition to holding a 25 percent share of a 
power station in Shanghai's Pudong New District.  Mr. Yung also said 
that CITIC Pacific's parent company, CITIC Hong Kong, was 
considering  plans to enter the oil refining business, with 
potential projects in Shandong and the Pearl River Delta.  (Hong 
Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING (BUSINESS) POST 24 May 94 p 2) 

   Foreign Firms Consider Relocation in Face of Rising Hong Kong 
Costs -- Multinational companies are seriously considering moving 
all but their essential China-related business out of Hong Kong to 
escape soaring commercial and residential rents and rising staff 
costs, according to Mark Bernard, a director of Chesterton Petty 
realtors.   Mr. Bernard said the business community was at "the end 
of its tether" and Chesterton Petty was receiving 40 calls a month 
from corporations moving to Singapore or other regional centers, 
where  rents were at least 50 percent cheaper than Hong Kong.  In 
contrast, six months ago the number of firms seeking to move was one 
or two, he added.  (Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (PROPERTY 
POST) 18 May 94 p 4) 

   Hong Kong Inflation Falls to 7.7 Percent in April -- Government 
statistics show that slower increases in food prices brought 
inflation down to 7.7 percent in April for an average of 7.4 percent 
for the first four months of the year.  However, concerns persist 
that a tight labor market and limited land supply will continue to 
fuel inflation for the rest of the year.  Anthony Chan, regional 
economist at MeesPierson Securities, said that he did not expect 
inflation to show a significant decrease because "asset  price- 
inflation has an impact on various components of the Consumer Price 
Index" and the tight labor market showed that the economy was close 
to full capacity.  (Hong Kong EASTERN EXPRESS 24 May 94 p 26) 

   Haikou Bonded Area Introduces Preferential Investment Policies -- 
The Haikou bonded area in Hainan has recently introduced six 
preferential policies to encourage investment.  1. Chinese and 
foreign businessmen will be able to invest freely in the bonded area 
and launch construction projects where they have obtained land-use 
rights.  They are also allowed to offer real estate projects in the 
bonded area to other businessmen for investment and to transfer, 
lease, or mortgage their real estate.  2.  Enterprises in the bonded 
area do not have to obtain import-export licenses for their goods 
unless otherwise specified.  Products whose raw materials come from 
other areas and whose value has increased by over 20 percent through 
processing in the bonded area can be exported as the bonded area's 
products. 3.  Building materials, production and management 
equipment, fuel used in production, and a reasonable amount of 
communication equipment imported by enterprises for their own use in 
the bonded area are exempt from customs duty.  4.  Enterprises in 
the bonded area are allowed to engage in foreign trade.  5. 
Insurance and financial firms in the bonded area are allowed to deal 
in foreign exchange and settle their accounts in foreign currencies. 
6.  Businessmen in the bonded area are allowed to come and go 
freely.  (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO 12 May 94 p C3) 

   Fuzhou State-Owned Firms Receive Foreign Capital -- According to 
Fuzhou Vice Mayor Sun Haishan, 53 percent of the city's state-owned 
enterprises receive foreign financing.  The introduction of foreign 
capital is one of the four methods the city is using to reform its 
state-owned enterprise system.  Last year, 28 enterprises signed 
contracts to jointly operate 30 projects requiring a total 
investment of $82 million, of which $25 million was to be 
contributed by foreign partners.  After receiving foreign financing, 
most state-owned enterprises achieved marked improvements.  One 
large state-owned light industrial enterprise, which suffered a 
total loss of RMB 170 million over the last 10 years of operation, 
made a profit of over RMB 1 million in the year in which it received 
foreign capital.  (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO 18 May 94 p B16) 

   Taiwan:  Trade Deficit With Japan Expected To Hit $15 Billion for 
1994 -- Taiwan's trade deficit with Japan has continued to worsen 
and is expected to hit $15 billion this year, according to the Board 
of Foreign Trade.  The boards believes Taiwan's dependence on 
Japanese-produced key component parts prolongs the trade imbalance 
problem.  Last year, the value of Taiwan's imports from Japan 
increased by 6.53 percent from the previous year and accounted for 
30.08 percent of the country's total import value.  (Taipei CHING- 
CHI JIH-PAO 17 May p 13) 

   Some Restrictions on Investment in PRC To Be Lifted --  The 
Industrial Bureau under the Ministry of Economic Affairs has worked 
out a plan to open 633 areas for investment in the PRC.  The 633 
areas include textile products, machinery, farming machinery, 
information products, and automobile and locomotive parts.  In 
addition, Taiwan also plans to permit imports of 60 semi finished 
products, including raw materials and medicine, from the PRC. 
(Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 6 May 94 p 2) 

   Indirect Investment in PRC Continues in First Quarter -- 
According to the Investment Examination Commission under the 
Ministry of Economic Affairs, in the first three months of 1994, the 
government approved 314 indirect investment projects in the PRC by 
Taiwan enterprises, with a total investment amounting to $246 
million.  Since the government lifted the ban on indirect investment 
in the PRC five years ago, some 10,144 projects have been approved, 
with a total investment of $3.836 billion.  The main areas in which 
Taiwan enterprises invest are electronic and electrical products, 
plastic products, food and beverages, precision tools and machinery, 
and basic metal products.  Shanghai remains Taiwan businessmen's 
first choice for investment, followed by Dongwan and Shenzhen in 
Guangdong Province, Tianjin, and Xiamen.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 
8 May 94 p 2) 

   Meeting on Economic Ties With Italy Held in Taipei -- The Sino- 
Italian Joint Committee of Industry and Commerce held its first 
meeting in Taipei on 10 May.  The Taiwan delegation told the Italian 
delegation about Taiwan's policy to turn Taiwan into the operation 
center of the Asia-Pacific region.  The Italian delegation expressed 
the Italian Government's wish to sign an investment protection 
agreement, an agreement on avoidance of dual taxation, and an 
agreement on protection of intellectual property rights with Taiwan. 
The meeting may bring about a breakthrough in Taiwan-Italian 
economic and trade relations.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 11 May 94 p 
9) 
   Registered Investments, Machinery Imports Down in First Quarter 
-- The Council for Economic Planning and Development [CEPD] on 11 
May announced that in the first quarter of this year, the amount of 
investment registered by newly established companies dropped 38 
percent from last year's 256.7 billion NT [New Taiwan] dollars to 
160 billion NT dollars.  Money spent on machinery imports dropped 
1.5 percent from the amount spent last year.  Last year, Taiwan's 
export growth rate was only 4.2 percent, the lowest among the four 
little dragons.  A CEPD official believes that "Taiwan's business 
investment in the PRC and the Southeast Asian region have affected 
the competitive edge of Taiwan exports."  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 
12 May 94 p 2) 

   SOUTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Government Puts Brakes on Samsung Auto 
Venture -- SUMMARY:  The ROK government, following the 
recommendation of an economic policy think tank and its own 
guidelines on industrial specialization, has "informally" told 
Samsung to shelve its plan to build automobiles, the South Korean 
press reported.  The decision was made despite polls showing public 
support for the venture, and Samsung's conclusion of a favorable 
technology transfer agreement with a Japanese automaker. 
"Knowledgeable sources" say the setback is temporary, and that 
Samsung will be able to carry out its plan within the next few 
years. 

   Samsung's plan to manufacture automobiles was rejected by the ROK 
Government, according to press reports, ending months of speculation 
on the outcome of Samsung's controversial bid.  The government's 
decision followed a finding by the Korea Institute for Industrial 
Economics and Trade (KIET) that Samsung's entry would impact 
negatively on the domestic industry.  The government was also 
concerned over the credibility of its highly publicized industrial 
specialization policy, which limits to three the main fields in 
which a conglomerate can participate, the 1O May MAEIL KYONGJE 
SINMUN (MKS) reported. 

   Samsung's plan to enter the auto industry first surfaced in the 
ROK press on 14 June 1993, when MKS and HANGYORE SINMUN reported 
that the group was "seriously considering" going into automobile 
production, despite a promise made a year earlier to limit its 
involvement to commercial vehicles.  Both newspapers suggested that 
the move would be viewed as a "test case" of the administration's 
policy to limit the expansion of conglomerates.  At the time, 
Samsung had already chosen a factory site, was hiring personnel, and 
was seeking a foreign partner for technical cooperation, the two 
papers noted. 

   On 17 January, MKS reported that the Korea Development Institute 
(KDI), a policy advisory group with close ties to the ROK 
Government, agreed in principle with Samsung's bid to enter the 
passenger car market.  KDI had maintained that increased exports 
would compensate for any inefficiencies brought about by overlapping 
investment and further argued that the government should support the 
domestic auto industry with positive programs and not subject it to 
"unreasonable restrictions."  In its 26 April report, KIET 
acknowledged that Samsung's venture would, over the long run, result 
in greater efficiency and better technology for the ROK auto 
industry, but that the near-term effects would "shock" existing 
automakers and cause a decline in product competitiveness, the 27 
April MKS reported. 

   Specifically, KIET concluded that Samsung's involvement would 
delay the development of unique ROK models, have a negative effect 
on efforts to indigenize technology, raise costs as a result of the 
competition to hire technicians, inflate the price of auto parts, 
and waste investment capital, the newspaper reported.  MKS opined 
that KIET's report was neither a "yes" nor a "no" but rather "seemed 
to imply" Samsung should wait three to four years before 
implementing its plan. 

   Persuaded by KIET's arguments, the ROK Government exercised its 
veto by threatening to deny Samsung a technology import license 
which the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy (MOTIE) issues for 
technology transfers with foreign companies.  According to the 29 
April MKS, Samsung had selected Japan's Nissan Motors for technical 
cooperation because of its willingness to transfer core technology 
which would allow Samsung to compete in the world market.  Mindful 
of MOTIE's priorities, Samsung chose Nissan over Toyota, which was 
also being considered, because the latter imposed export 
restrictions that Nissan was willing to forego.  Another factor was 
Toyota's earlier abrogation of a technology transfer agreement with 
Daewoo for a more lucrative venture in China, which made a lasting 
impression on South Korean officials, MKS noted. 

   According to the 29 April MKS, Samsung sought to lay the 
groundwork for a positive ruling by emphasizing that its agreement 
with Nissan was the "most favorable" it had ever signed with a 
foreign company.  Besides putting no restrictions on where the cars 
could be sold, Nissan authorized Samsung to make engineering changes 
and agreed to sell its best technology, including the VQ engine and 
QT suspension, while offering body and chassis designs free of 
charge.  According to MKS, Samsung planned to manufacture a 2,000cc 
"next generation" car, which Nissan is now developing, and three new 
models which would be jointly developed.  Initial production was 
planned at 50,000 units annually. 

   Notwithstanding these efforts and a Korea Gallup Poll showing 
public support for the project (11 May MKS), the ministry 
"informally" notified Samsung it would deny the transfer request if 
it were submitted, the 10 May MKS stated.  According to a "high 
MOTIE official" cited in the same paper, the government's decision 
was based on KIET's finding that Samsung's entry would harm existing 
manufacturers.  The newspaper also cited a Blue House source who 
claimed that most officials believed Samsung's plan would "destroy" 
the ROK auto industry.  The MOTIE official reportedly said his 
ministry would postpone a formal announcement to give Samsung a 
chance to back out voluntarily. 

   According to the 12 May MKS, Samsung stated it will press ahead 
despite the rejection.  The newspaper quoted a "highly placed 
source" in Samsung's secretariat (the group's executive body 
responsible for overall policy and planning) as saying that "there 
is no change at all in the group's intention to move into the 
passenger car business" and that the firm will use "all necessary 
means" to accomplish this.  The same source added that Samsung 
recognizes that its goals are not entirely consistent with the 
administration's policy on industrial specialization, but that these 
differences can be narrowed.  Samsung reportedly is watching the 
government's moves closely so as to "respond to its particular 
concerns. 

   Citing "knowledgeable sources," the 12 May MKS reported that 
Samsung will delay its technology transfer request "until things 
settle down."  Samsung planners are now marshaling arguments against 
the decision, including an assertion that "it goes against the 
principle of equity" to prohibit a domestic firm from building autos 
when foreign manufacturers are allowed to sell their cars in the 
domestic market.  According to the MOTIE official cited above, the 
government's decision, in any case, may only be "temporary." 
Another "informed source" reportedly stated "it is necessary to keep 
in mind that in 1992 when Samsung got into commercial vehicles they 
were given permission only after a year's delay." 
   The source then "implied indirectly" that Samsung would be 
producing its cars "during the present administration." 

   FEATURE:  Shipbuilders Face Japanese Competition, Foreign Trade 
Pressure -- SUMMARY:  According to recent ROK press reports, 
Japanese shipbuilders are starting a "war" for shipbuilding orders 
in order to once again become the top shipbuilding nation.  At the 
same time, Japan is launching a "counteroffensive" in international 
arenas to try to stop the expansion of ROK shipbuilding facilities. 
The ROK press has reported that South Korea is also coming under 
pressure from other advanced countries with regard to these plans. 
However, some officials connected with the ROK shipbuilding industry 
point out that many of the expansion projects are already too far 
under way to be stopped. 

   On 12 March, 21 top leaders in the South Korean and Japanese 
shipbuilding field met in Tokyo.  According to the 4 May CHUGAN 
MAEGYONG, the two sides had held 15 such meetings since 1982, 
working together and sharing information.  The meeting originally 
was to be held last fall, but was delayed due to internal discord 
among ROK shipbuilders over the issue of expanding shipbuilding 
facilities.  Meeting participants included Song Yong-su, chairman of 
the Korea Shipbuilders Association and of Hanjin Heavy Industries; 
Kim Chong-kuk, chairman of Hyundai Heavy Industries; Yun Yong-sok, 
chairman of Daewoo Shipbuilding and Heavy Machinery; Yi Hae-kyu, 
chairman of Samsung Heavy Industries, Kwon Yong-ha, executive 
director of the Korea Shipbuilders Association; and Goda Shigeru, 
chairman of the Shipbuilders Association of Japan.  CHUGAN MAEGYONG 
noted that the atmosphere at the meeting was very "chilly," and that 
no formal statement was issued at the meeting's end.  The 17 March 
HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN described the meeting as a "defensive and 
offensive battle" over ROK shipbuilders' expansion plans.  During 
the talks, the Japanese side tried to "pry" into the ROK plans, but 
offered no "encouragement," CHUGAN MAEGYONG reported.  The head of 
Japan's Namura Shipbuilding reportedly said that ROK shipbuilders 
should "give up" the shipbuilding "battle."  According to the 
journal, Japan seems "oversensitive" to South Korean plans because 
of ROK shipbuilders' growing competitiveness.  As ROK shipbuilders 
rapidly improve their technological level, the relative superiority 
of Japanese shipbuilders is "notably weakening."  CHUGAN MAEGYONG 
observed that, if South Korea does move ahead with its expansion 
plans, there will be an unavoidable "championship match" between ROK 
and Japanese shipbuilders. 

   HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN noted that Japan is responding to the 
situation by aggressively pursuing new orders abroad and reducing 
costs domestically.  CHUGAN MAEGYONG commented that Japanese 
shipbuilders are starting a "war" for shipbuilding orders in order 
to once again secure the top position.  Japan lost the title to 
South Korea in 1993, after holding it for more than 35 years.  The 
journal reported that the strong yen and high labor costs were 
factors in Japanese shipbuilders' loss of competitiveness. 

   According to HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN, labor costs account for more 
than 20 percent of the cost of a Japanese-built ship.  The daily 
reported that in 1993 Japanese-built ships were priced 10 percent 
higher than ROK-built ships.  CHUGAN MAEGYONG reported that Japanese 
shipbuilders had been "relaxed," because they expected international 
ship prices to increase this year.  However, prices have actually 
fallen.  Thus, in order to erase last year's "deficient" 
performance, Japanese builders are starting a price "offensive." 
HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN noted that Japan has been able to reduce 
production costs somewhat by rationalizing management and has 
recently won orders by offering lower prices.  The paper calculated 
that Japan received orders totalling 1.29 million gross tons in 
January alone, while ROK shipbuilders only received orders totalling 
340,000 gross tons for all of January and February. 

   In addition to cutting costs and fighting for international 
orders, CHUGAN MAEGYONG reported that Japan is launching a 
"counteroffensive," using forums such as research institutes and the 
OECD shipbuilding committee to highlight the "recklessness" of ROK 
shipbuilders' expansion plans.  For example, a report from the 
Nomura Research Institute called South Korea's boom in shipyard 
expansions "a dangerous gamble," warning that it will lead to excess 
capacity in the latter half of the 1990's.  According to the 22 
March HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN, on 21 March, the ROK Ministry of Trade, 
Investment, and Energy (MOTIE) noted that signs of trade friction 
were appearing in the shipbuilding industry, as Japan and the 
European Union opposed ROK shipbuilders' expansions.  The paper said 
that pressure from advanced nations became concentrated during the 
March meeting in Tokyo of ROK and Japanese shipbuilders, as well as 
at a shipbuilding meeting attended by South Korea, Japan, and the 
European Union, on 14 March, and at the OECD shipbuilding committee, 
held in Paris from 14 to 18 March.  According to HANGUK KYONGJE 
SINMUN, at the OECD meeting Japan and the European Union exhibited 
an "uncompromising" attitude by adopting a joint statement opposing 
the ROK expansion.  Even the United States brought up the issue in 
its statement.  The paper concluded that the expansion issue has 
become the largest issue in the international shipbuilding arena. 

   Despite the international pressure against South Korean expansion 
plans, the ROK press has noted that halting the projects would be 
difficult.  Ku Pon-yong, chief of MOTIE's shipbuilding office, 
observed that some industry representatives feel trade pressures 
might "soften" if shipbuilders "regulated themselves" regarding the 
expansion issue.  However, Ku added the expansions already have 
progressed to the point where it would be difficult to avoid 
international trade pressure.  Some industry officials agree that it 
is "too late" to entrust the issue to self-regulation.  CHUGAN 
MAEGYONG explained that expansion work at Hyundai, Samsung, and 
Halla--some of the major ROK ship builders--is already more than 50 
percent completed.  Halting the investment (which amounts to about 
400 billion won ($500 million) per company) would result in enormous 
investment losses for the companies, HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN 
calculated.  In addition, the government would have to assume an 
enormous financial burden, because it would be forced to compensate 
firms for their lost investment. 

   Growth Rate in Crude Oil Imports Slows in First Quarter -- In the 
first quarter of 1994, South Korea imported 150.1 million barrels of 
crude oil, an increase of 1.2 percent over the 148.3 million barrels 
imported in the first quarter of 1993.  This increase is much lower 
than the 10-percent increase seen in the first quarter over the past 
two to three years.  The slower growth rate comes as domestic oil 
consumption declines.  South Korea consumed 109 million barrels of 
oil in January and February, a 6.2-percent increase over the 1O3 
million barrels consumed in the same period in 1993.  By comparison, 
oil consumption in the first two months of 1993 ROK oil consumption 
rose 12.5 percent over the first two months of 1992.  Most of the 
crude oil imported in the first quarter--79.8 percent--came from the 
Middle East, while 15.7 percent came from Southeast Asia, and 4.5 
percent came from North America and Africa.  (Seoul HANGUK KYONGJE 
SINMUN 19 Apr 94 p 9) 

   Automobile Exports to Some International Markets Stalled -- 
Exports of ROK automobiles to China, Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan, 
which totalled more than 100,000 in 1993, have almost halted 
recently.  Some of this seems to be due to reinforced import 
controls in China, an economic crisis in Turkey, and foreign 
currency shortages in Iran.  Last year South Korea exported 22,100 
automobiles to China, but exports have virtually stopped after 
several hundred cars were exported at the beginning of this year. 
Hyundai Motors and Daewoo Motors did not export any cars to China in 
April, while Kia Motors only shipped 23 cars.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE 
SINMUN 21 May 94 p 9) 

   Exports to Russia Increasing -- According to the Korea Trade 
Promotion Corporation [KOTRA], ROK exports to Russia in the first 
four months of 1994 totalled $356 million, a 104.8-percent increase 
over the same period in 1993.  KOTRA expects this year's exports to 
Russia to top the $1-billion mark.  Exports of television sets, 
VCR's, refrigerators, video tapes, telephone exchanges, and refined 
petroleum have already exceeded last year's totals.  (Seoul 
KYONGHYANG SINMUN 26 May 94 p 9) 

   Exports to China Decreasing -- ROK exports to China in April 
showed a year-to-year decrease for the first time in 50 months. 
According to the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy, in April 
the volume of ROK exports to China decreased by 2.3 percent compared 
to April 1993's volume of $54O million.  As of April, year-to-date 
exports to China had increased by 11.7 percent over the same period 
in 1993, much lower than the 94.1-percent increase in 1993.  Steel 
and auto exports also decreased in April.  Steel exports fell due to 
Chinese import controls and to increasing ROK demand.  Auto exports 
fell after the Chinese Government banned the import of automobiles 
through the informal channels which ROK companies had utilized. 
(Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 21 May 94 p 1) 

   Daewoo Securities, Cheil Bank To Invest in Chinese Stock -- 
Daewoo Securities and Cheil Bank, in collaboration with other 
foreign financing institutions and corporations, will invest in the 
Chinese stock market later this year.  A total of 31 institutions- 
-including some from China, Britain, Hong Kong, and Malaysia--will 
take part in the venture and invest $2OO million in the market.  The 
enterprises will meet in Beijing on 29 May to establish the CEIM 
(China Enterprise Investment Management Company) with paid-in 
capital of $25 million.  Daewoo and Cheil will have stakes of 5 
percent ($1.25 million) and 2 percent ($500,000), respectively. 
Chong In-yong, former ROK deputy prime minister and current vice 
president of the Asian Development Bank, will serve as CEIM 
chairman, while Kim Chang-hui, president of Daewoo Securities, 
serves as vice chairman.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 25 May 94 p 
18) 

   Hyundai Completes Offshore Natural Gas Facility -- On 19 May 
Hyundai Heavy Industries completed its offshore natural gas 
production platform in China's Yacheng field.  The facility cost $18 
million.  Beginning in March 1995, Hyundai plans to start building a 
$15-million facility to refine natural gas from the Yacheng area. 
(Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 20 May 94 p 11) 

   Hyundai To Build Steel Container Plant in Qingdao, China -- 
Hyundai Precision &amp; Industry will invest up to $20 million to build 

a steel container plant in Qingdao, China.  The plant, named the 
Hyundai-Qingdao Container Manufacturing Company, will have an annual 
production capacity of 40,000 20-foot equivalent units.  The plant 
will make finished products, as well as supply its own parts. 
Hyundai is collaborating on the plant with Samsung Precision 
Industry, Chinwon Industrial Company, and Taewon Machinery Industry 
Company.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 25 May 94 p 11) 

   Tongyang To Build Steel Tube Plant in Shanghai -- Tongyang Iron 
Pipe Company will build a large-caliber steel pipe plant in 
Shanghai, China.  Tongyang, which currently exports $15 million of 
the tubes to China every year, has decided to build a joint venture 
plant there.  The joint venture plant will have an annual capacity 
of 200,000 tons of large-caliber steel tubes.  Tongyang will invest 
about $50 million in the plant, which will be located in Jinshan 
District, Shanghai.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 14 May 94 p 9) 

   Daewoo To Take Over Three Sudanese Textile Corporations -- Daewoo 
Group will take over three state-run textile corporations in Sudan, 
using funds supported by the Export-Import Bank.  On 17 May, the 
Export-Import Bank approved a 5.5-percent $70-million loan, which 
will mature in eight to 1O years.  The loan will cover much of 
Daewoo's $100 million cost for the projects.  Daewoo will take over 
a cotton spinning plant, a spinning and weaving plant, and a leather 
processing plant.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 19 May 94 p 2) 

   Lucky Metal Advances Into European Market -- Lucky Metal has 
registered its gold bars at the London Bijou Metal Association 
(LBMA), opening the door to the European market for the company. 
After comprehensive testing by the LBMA, Lucky registered its brand 
for trading on the LBMA market.  Lucky Metal produced 32 tons of 
pure gold in 1993 and exported 22 tons to Southeast Asia.  (Seoul 
MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 26 May 94 p 11) 

   Hanguk Pharmaceutical Exports to Chile, Brazil -- Hanguk United 
Pharmaceutical Company recently signed contracts to export pills and 
intravenous pharmaceuticals to Chile and Brazil.  The $2 million 
export contracts cover 17 pharmaceutical items, including anti- 
cancer medicines, antibiotics, and ulcer medicines.  In August, the 
company will ship $600,000 worth of pharmaceuticals to Chile and 
$300,000 to Brazil.  The company is also negotiating shipping dates 
with Argentina and Guatemala.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 23 May 94 
p 20) 

   SOUTHEAST ASIA - INDONESIA:  Prospects For Renewed Economic Ties 
With Iraq -- Indonesian Trade Minister S.B. Joedono and Iraqi 
Foreign Minister Mohammad Sa'id al-Sahhaf recently discussed 
renewing economic ties in anticipation of the lifting of the UN 
embargo on Iraq.  Indonesia's exports to Iraq had reached $83.3 
million in 1990, but amounted to only $500,000 in 1991 and 1992. 
Imports from Iraq also dropped from $177.8 million in 1990 to 
$600,000 in 1991.  Imports rebounded slightly in 1992 reaching $1.1 
million.  Prior to the embargo, Indonesia had exported tea, 
pharmaceuticals, garments, and glass products to Iraq, and imported 
crude oil from Iraq.  (Jakarta BISNIS INDONESIA  20 Apr 94 p 5) 

   Indonesian-Malaysian Consortium Planning Thermal Power Plant -- 
An Indonesian-Malaysian consortium is planning to build a coal-fired 
thermal power plant complex in South Sumatra, Indonesia.  The 
project-- undertaken on a 'build, own, and operate" basis--is a 
joint venture between Bukaka Teknik, a major Indonesian engineering 
firm, Sikap Project Management Systems, a Malaysian firm that builds 
power plants, and Worldwide Holdings, a Malaysian financial and 
hotel conglomerate.  Bukaka will hold a 30 percent stake and Sikap 
and Worldwide will each have 35 percent stakes. This will be the 
first large-scale infrastructure project undertaken by private 
companies from the two countries. 

   The first phase of the project involves the construction of two 
150,000-kw generating plants in Bukit Assam, South Sumatra, at a 
cost of about $340 million.  Construction is scheduled to begin in 
early 1995, and the plants will be in operation in 3 years.  The 
electricity generated will be sold to Indonesia's state-owned 
electricity corporation. 

   In the project's second phase, two additional generating units, 
each with a capacity of 500,000 kw, will be built at another 
location in Sumatra at a cost of $550 million each.  The completion 
target date is the year 2000.  Electricity from these units will be 
transmitted via underwater cable to Java and through cables under 
the Malacca Strait to Malaysia. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 11 May 
94 p 3) 

   Nation Becomes Third Largest Coal Exporter -- Ambyo Mangunwijaya, 
president of state-owned P.T. Bukit Asam Coal Mining Industry, said 
that Indonesia is now the third largest coal exporter in the world 
after Australia and South Africa.  He said Indonesia's coal 
production has increased sharply over the last four years from 8.7 
million tons in 1989 to 27 million tons in 1993 and that exports 
soared from 2.7 million tons to more than 17 million tons in the 
same period.  He noted that Bukit Asam has doubled its output in 
South Sumatra to 10 million tons a year with an additional 
investment of $340 million. (Jakarta THE JAKARTA POST 6 May 94 p 1) 

   LAOS:  Thai Land Development Venture Division of Profits -- The 
Thai Hemarat Land Development Public Company has entered into a 
joint venture with Laos to develop an industrial estate.  The 
project will cover an area of 960 hectares and require an investment 
of $160 million.  The entire project will be completed in nine to 
ten years.  During the first 25 years, the company will get about 70 
percent of project's profits with the remaining 30 percent going to 
Laos.  From the 26th to the 35th year, the company will get 40 
percent while Laos will take 60 percent; from the 36th to the 45th 
year, the company will get 60 percent, while Laos will take 40 
percent; and from the 46th year on, Laos will take over the entire 
industrial estate.  (Bangkok Voice of Free Asia 1030 GMT 23 May 94) 

   MALAYSIA:  Technology Findings To Be Commercialized -- The 
Malaysian Technology Development Corporation (MTDC) is in the 
process of commercializing the country's 24 latest technological 
discoveries, Science, Technology, and Environment Minister Datuk Law 
Hieng Ding said.  He noted that the MTDC was looking for local and 
international markets.  Among the technological discoveries are 
destruction-free nuclear test equipment and a vaccine for a type of 
chicken disease. Seven technologies had been commercialized over the 
past year, he said.  (Kuala Lumpur BERNAMA 0640 GMT 12 May 94) 

   Japan To Establish Fiber Optic Cable System -- Telekom Malaysia 
has awarded NEC Corp. of Japan a $17O-million contract for a 2,332- 
km submarine fiber optic cable system, scheduled for completion in 
July 1995.  The project will link peninsular Malaysia (Mersing, 
Johor) with Sarawak (Kuching, Mari, Bintulu), Sabah (Kota Kinabalu), 
and Labuan.  Tan Sri Mohd Rashdan Baba, chairman of Telekom, said 
that the system will improve the clarity of voice transmissions and 
reduce distortions in data communication.  Rashdan also said that 
the submarine fiber optic cable system, the first amplification 
system for Southeast Asia, will meet Malaysia's telecommunications 
needs for the next 10 years.  (Kuala Lumpur BERITA HARIAN 22 Apr 94 
p 8) 

   SINGAPORE:  Line To Get Tankers, Container Ships by 1996 -- Eight 
new ships--two tankers and six container ships-- will be delivered 
to Neptune Orient Lines (NOL) over the next three years at a cost of 
$512.5 million, according to NOL chairman Herman Hochstadt.  The new 
ship construction is part of NOL's fleet renewal program to reduce 
the fleet's average ship age to 7.9 years.  The industry average is 
11.6 years.  NOL's fleet, including those on order, totals 64 
vessels with a combined tonnage of 3.3 million deadweight tons.  The 
group now has 26 container ships, seven product and general cargo 
vessels, and 12 crude oil tankers.  (Singapore THE STRAITS TIMES 13 
May 94 p 47) 

   THAILAND:  Exports Increase 19.7 Percent, Overall Economy 
'Satisfactory' -- According to a report on the economy presented to 
the Council of Economic Ministers by the Bank of Thailand (BOT) and 
the National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB), 
Thailand's overall economic performance remained satisfactory. 
Exports during the first quarter of this increased by 19.7 percent 
compared to the same period last year.  According to the BOT, 
foreign markets--especially the United States and the Asia-Pacific 
region--are major factors accounting for the expansion of exports. 
The NESDB said the inflation rate during the first quarter was 4.8 
percent, compared to 3.3 percent during the same period last year. 
(Bangkok Radio Thailand Network 0000 GMT 24 May 94) 

   Rice Exports, Earnings Increase in First Quarter -- Rice exports 
in the first quarter increased by 19.55 percent in quantity and 56.3 
percent in earnings over the same period last year.  A total of 
1,573,533.3 tons of rice worth $580 million was exported between 
January and April, up from 1,316,175.78 tons worth $371 million last 
year.  Japan has become the major buyer of Thai rice, purchasing a 
total of 758,098 tons since October last year, causing a steady 
increase in domestic prices.  The price increase has affected 
Thailand's exports of low grade rice as buyers of low grade rice 
have turned to countries such as Vietnam.  However, less rice was 
exported in April because of the rising prices.  Only 285,619.76 
tons of rice were exported last month, as compared to 349,076.56 
tons in April 1993.  (Bangkok BANGKOK POST 24 May 94 p 24) 

   VIETNAM:  Draft Labor Law Recognizes Right To Strike -- According 
to Hoang Minh Chuc, vice chairman of the Vietnam General Federation 
of Labor, the draft labor law, which will be presented to the spring 
session of the National Assembly, recognizes workers' right to 
strike, but only when negotiations are deadlocked.  Workers at 
facilities such as hospitals, utilities (water and electricity) and 
enterprises essential for the economy such as oil, gas, and 
communications will not be allowed to strike.  This draft law is the 
result of three years of study of the labor laws of France, Iraq, 
the old Soviet Union, and the Philippines and the labor law under 
the former Vietnamese Emperor Bao Dai.   (Hanoi THOI BAO KINH TE 
VIET NAM 27 April 94 p 3) 

   Economic Courts To Start Operations in July -- Vietnam's economic 
court system will start operations in July 1994.  The courts will 
have two main functions:  to resolve disputes and to declare 
enterprises bankrupt.  The courts will be part of the People's Court 
system and will be established at both the provincial and national 
levels.  The development of the market economy has led to problems 
with enterprises that must be properly managed.  Economic disputes 
were previously handled by a government economic arbitration 
organization.  (Hanoi THOI BAO KINH TE VIET NAM 27 April 1994 p 8) 

   Trends in Japanese Investment, Aid Described -- Trade between 
Japan and Vietnam amounted to $1.45 billion in 1993 accounting for 
23 percent of Vietnam's external trade.  As of the first quarter 
this year, Japan also ranks sixth among foreign investors in 
Vietnam, with 53 projects and some $475 million in registered 
capital.  Japanese investment in Vietnam is expected to increase 
strongly in 1994.  Japanese companies have been negotiating with 
Vietnamese partners on major investment projects in cement, steel 
production, as well as oil, gas, and minerals exploration.  They are 
also investigating investment possibilities in export processing 
zones and industrial parks in Hanoi, Haiphong, Hon Gai, Ho Chi Minh 
City, Dong Nai, and Vung Tau.  Some projects are reportedly worth 
$100-$200 million each.  SAIGON GIAI PHONG commented that economic 
cooperation between the two countries is still low relative to their 
potential. 

   Japan is also the largest source of development assistance to 
Vietnam giving approximately $1 billion, of which $76 million is 
gratis aid and the rest is soft loans.  In fiscal year 1993, 
Japanese development assistance to Vietnam amounted to approximately 
$550 million.  (Ho Chi Minh City SAIGON GIAI PHONG 20 April 94 p 2) 

   Navy Company, Japanese Counterpart Form Joint Venture -- The 
Haiphong navy company Hai Thanh under the Ministry of Defense and 
the Japanese company Kotobuki Holding Ltd. have formed a 40-year 
joint venture to build and operate a five-star hotel in Ho Chi Minh 
City.  Licensed in December 1993, the "Hako" joint venture is 
capitalized at $46.1 million.  The Japanese partner will contribute 
70 percent of the prescribed capital.  (Hanoi QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 18 
Apr 94 p 3) 

   List of BOT Infrastructure Construction Projects -- The 
Vietnamese Government has drawn up a list of twelve infrastructure 
construction projects to be built by private foreign investors under 
its "build, operate and transfer" (BOT) system.  The government's 
goal in designating specific power plants, expressways, and other 
construction as BOT projects is to expand the use of foreign funds 
and accelerate the pace of economic modernization.  The existence of 
the list was revealed by people from "U.S. engineering circles" 
whose participation the government sought. 

   There are four BOT power-generation projects under the 
jurisdiction of the Energy Ministry: a 200-megawatt (mw) Can Tho 
thermal plant on the Mekong River, a 120-mw Kontum hydroelectric 
project in the Central Highlands, a 360-megawatt Ban Mei 
hydroelectric plant outside Hanoi, and a 1,200-mw coal-fired plant 
in Quang Ninh. 

   Highway construction projects are the Ho Chi Minh City 
expressway, the Can Tho bridge on Highway 1, and bridges for 
expressways to be built in Haiphong, Quang Ninh, and Ho Chi Minh 
City.  Three Construction Ministry projects will be selected from 
among plans for waste treatment facilities, waterworks, and other 
projects in Vietnam's largest cities. 

   According to "engineering industry sources," French companies are 
preparing feasibility studies for the Ho Chi Minh City expressway, 
while a Singapore consortium is studying construction of some of the 
bridges.  With the lifting of the U.S. embargo, "the government has 
also presented the list to American firms."  (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO 
SHIMBUN 17 May 94 p 2) 

   Hanoi Prison To Be Singaporean Hotel Venture -- Hanoi's Hoa Lo 
Prison will soon be replaced by the Hanoi Tower Center in a 45-year 
joint venture between the Hanoi Civil Construction Company and the 
Singaporean Buron Engineering Company PTE. Ltd.  The joint venture 
is capitalized at $33.2 million.  Prescribed capital is $20.2 
million.  The Vietnamese partner will contribute 24 percent and 
grant the venture land use rights for 45 years.  The Singaporean 
partner will contribute $15.5 million, or 76 percent.  Part of Hoa 
Lo will be preserved as a historic site.  (Hanoi THOI BAO KINH TE 
VIET NAM 2O April 94 p 6) 

   Thai Bank, Conglomerate in Partnership With Agriculture Bank -- A 
memorandum has been signed between the Vietnam Agriculture Bank, 
Thailand's Siam Commercial Bank Ltd. and the Charoen Pokkhaphan 
Group Ltd. establishing a 20-year joint venture bank.   Vina Siam 
Bank has a prescribed capital of $15 million, of which the 
Vietnamese partner will contribute 34 percent and the two Thai 
partners 33 percent each.  Vina Siam Bank intends to serve Thai 
investors, whose presence in Vietnam continues to grow.  (Hanoi THOI 
BAO KINH TE VIET NAM 27 Apr 94 p 4) 

   French Bank Loans to Businesses -- Credit Lyonnais provided loans 
totalling $26 million in the first quarter of this year, with $10 
million more promised.  Also in this period, deposits in the bank's 
two branch offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City reportedly totalled 
about $19 million.  In 18 months of operations, Credit Lyonnais has 
given mostly short-term loans to hundreds of businesses, joint 
ventures, and individuals, with priority given to those buying farm 
products for export and importing materials for domestic production. 
In the coming period, the bank will extend more loans to projects to 
encourage European investors to come to Vietnam.  (Hanoi VNA 1436 
GMT 16 May 94) 

   52 Foreign Investment Projects in Agriculture Licensed -- Fifty- 
two foreign investment projects in agriculture have been licensed to 
date with a total capital of $114.6 million.  Most of these are 
concentrating on building and modernizing establishments for the 
export of farm products and food processing.  One of the more 
prominent projects is the enlargement of the Lamson Sugar Plant, a 
$50 million joint venture with a British company, which will enable 
the plant to raise its production capacity to 6,000 tons of cane per 
day.  (Hanoi VNA 0615 GMT 17 May 94) 

   Early 1994 Export Index Reported -- The export index for the 
first four months of 1994 reached $940 million, an increase of 17 
percent compared with the corresponding period last year.  It is 
projected that in the second quarter, the average export index will 
reach $300 million a month. (Hanoi Voice of Vietnam 1100 GMT 16 May 
94) 

   Malaysia To Help Build Export Processing Zone -- The State 
Committee for Cooperation and Investment has issued a license for 
the construction of the SRV's sixth export processing zone (EPZ) 
named Noi Bai-Soc Son on the outskirts of Hanoi.  This EPZ will be 
built on 1OO hectares of land by the Hanoi Industrial Construction 
Company and the Renong Group of Malaysia with a total investment of 
$20.4 million.  The Vietnamese side will contribute 30 percent of 
the authorized capital.  The Noi Bai EPZ will specialize in the 
manufacture of high-quality electronic goods. (Hanoi VNA 1450 GMT 13 
May 94) 

   More Foreign Projects Licensed in April -- In April, the State 
Committee for Cooperation and Investment (SCCI) granted licenses to 
20 foreign investment projects with a total capital of $262 million. 
This brings to 90 the number of projects licensed in the first four 
months of this year with a combined capital of $1.6 billion.  The 
most notable projects licensed last month include an oil product 
contract capitalized at $55 million, the Coca Cola-Ngoc Hoi soft 
drinks project at $20 million, the Hue Beer Joint Venture Company at 
$24.3 million, and the Sai Gon Airport joint venture hotel at $24 
million.  The SCCI made it known that 72 more projects with a total 
capital of $1.4 billion are under its consideration.  Half of the 
projects under consideration are medium and big ($10 million or 
more) ones.  Last month the SCCI withdrew licenses from 14 projects. 
As of late April 1994, the number of foreign investment projects in 
operation in Vietnam was around 770.  (Hanoi VNA 1459 GMT 13 May 94) 

   UK Firm To Build Hanoi Trade Center -- A license has been issued 
by the State Commission for Cooperation and Investment for the Hanoi 
Trading Center Company. The company is a joint venture between the 
Hanoi Trading Company and a British company.  The venture will build 
a trade center in Hanoi comprising an international shopping 
complex, office block, residential units, and restaurants.  The 
total capital of the company is $41 million, with $14 million 
authorized.  The Vietnamese side will contribute 30 percent of the 
total capital.  The joint venture will operate for 40 years. (Hanoi 
Voice of Vietnam 2300 GMT 12 May 94) 

   First Quarter Industrial Output Up 12.1 Percent -- Industrial 
output in the first quarter increased 12.1 percent over last year. 
Increases were recorded in the central state-owned sector of 13.7 
percent; in the local state owned-sector of 10.5 percent; and in the 
non-state sector of 9.7 percent.  Most key industries posted a 
higher growth rate than in the first quarter of last year. 
Industries showing higher growth rates included electricity with 9.6 
percent; coal with 4.3 percent; crude oil with 20.8 percent; and 
cement with 15 percent.  The success was mainly due to stable 
prices.  The electricity supply to southern provinces was improved 
and more foreign outlets have been found for products, with new 
orders from the EC, CIS, and some African countries.  However, 
industrial production is still faced with a lack of investment 
capital.  Some sectors lack floating capital due to unsold products 
and contraband goods.  At the end of April 12,000 metric tons of 
paper and 11,600 metric tons of steel were sitting in warehouses. 
(Hanoi VNA O644 GMT 25 May 94) 

   Indian, French Firms To Build $40 Million Cement Plant -- India's 
JK Cement Works, part of the JK Synthetics group, will set up a 
cement plant in Vietnam.  The plant's capacity will be 1,200 metric 
tons per day and will be built in collaboration with France's 
Lafarge Coppee.  The total project cost is $40 million, which will 
be funded by the Asian Development Bank.  Lafarge Coppee and a local 
Vietnamese partner will operate the plant.  JK will ship close to 
$20 million worth of equipment--including most of the machinery and 
instrumentation--from India. In addition, JK will net another $5 
million for providing manpower, castings and pressure parts, which 
will come from local sources.  Work on the project is expected to 
start late this year.  (Delhi THE ECONOMIC TIMES 20 May 94 p 8) 

   Proton To Assemble Cars in SRV -- The Malaysian car manufacturer 
Proton has received approval for the import, assembly, and sales of 
cars in Vietnam.  Proton said that the SRV State Committee for 
Cooperation and Investment [SCCI] approved a joint venture between 
itself, Mitsubishi Corporation, and Mitsubishi Motors Corporation 
(Japan) and a local Vietnamese company, Vietranscimex.  The SCCI 
approved the project at the end of April and registration procedures 
for the company, Vina Star Motors Corporation, are to be completed 
in May.  Operations are scheduled to begin in March 1995.  Proton 
will hold a 25 percent stake--$4 million in legal capital--in Vina 
Star with the remainder equally shared among Mitsubishi Corp., 
Mitsubishi Motors, and Vietranscimex.  The project in Ho Chi Minh 
City will have a total investment value of $5O million.  (Kuala 
Lumpur NEW STRAITS TIMES 14 May 94 p 15) 

EAG/1June1994/ECONF/TECHTF/EAST ASIA GROUP/PF 01/2144z Jun 

