BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following review of the 8 April 
issue of Cairo AL-SHA'B summarizes articles that are Islamic in 
nature. 
<H5>  CONTENTS: </H5>
  1. Journalist 'Abd-al-Sattar Abu-Husayn Held in Military 
Prison 
  2. Journalist's Detention Linked to Report on Bright Star 
Exercises 
  3. Hamas Claims Responsibility for 'Afula Operation 
  4. Article Attacks Communist, Secular Writers 
  5. Article by 'Adil Husayn 
  6. Call for Trial of Dr. Butrus Butrus-Ghali 
  7. Egyptian Human Rights Organization 
  8. U.S. War on Egyptian Exports 
  9. Islamists Win al-Mansurah University Elections 
<H5>  JOURNALIST 'ABD-AL-SATTAR ABU-HUSAYN HELD IN MILITARY PRISON </H5>
  An 800-word report by Mahmud Bakri on page 1 says "the 
campaign against the newspaper AL-SHA'B has reached its peak in 
the past few days." Journalist 'Abd-al-Sattar Abu-Husayn was 
arrested at his home at 2300 on 4 April and was then subjected 
to extensive interrogation at the office of the military public 
prosecutor. The report goes on to say that "in an unprecedented 
move in the history of military justice," he was brought before 
a military crime court in al-'Abbasiyah less than 24 hours after 
his arrest. Without mentioning the charges brought against him, 
the report says the concerned authorities prevented defense 
lawyers from attending his interrogation, which was held in 
"complete secrecy." The authorities also prevented his 
relatives and journalists from AL-SHA'B and other newspapers 
from visiting him in the military prison. The report adds that 
several journalists staged a sit-in at the Press Association on 
6 and 7 April to protest his arrest. The journalists issued a 
statement denouncing the "ferocious onslaught" on the newspaper 
AL-SHA'B. Furthermore, the report says police forces arrived 
twice on 6 April at the newspaper's premises on the pretext that 
there were "scuffles and sit-ins" within the premises. The 
report adds that the police force continues to have an 
"intensive security presence" around the premises. 
<H5>  JOURNALIST'S DETENTION LINKED TO REPORT ON BRIGHT STAR </H5>
EXERCISES 
  An 800-word editorial entitled "Abduction" by Chief Editor 
Majdi Ahmad Husayn sheds light on the reasons for the arrest of 
AL-SHA'B journalist 'Abd-al-Sattar Abu-Husayn. The chief editor 
says at first it was feared that the journalist was kidnapped by 
arms merchants because he wrote an investigative report 
[AL-SHA'B issue of 22 March] that he had honestly copied from 
U.S. newspapers on investigations being held by the U.S. 
Congress and the U.S. Justice Department on commissions paid on 
U.S. arms deals with Egypt. However, by 6 April it became clear 
that he was being held by the military authorities because he 
wrote a report in AL-SHA'B on 1 April on the presence of U.S. 
and European military officials in Cairo to arrange for the 
Bright Star Exercises. The chief editor says he received an 
order from the information minister's office on 6 April banning 
the newspaper from publishing further reports on this subject. 
<H5>  HAMAS CLAIMS RESPONSIBILITY FOR 'AFULA OPERATION </H5>
  The newspaper publishes a 500-word report by Muna Yasin on 
page 1 entitled "Palestinian Mujahidin Avenge the al-Haram 
al-Ibrahimi Massacre." The mostly factual report says Hamas has 
claimed responsibility for the car bombing of a bus in 'Afula in 
northern Israel in which eight Jews were killed and 52 others 
were wounded, saying it was in retaliation for the Hebron 
massacre. The report then cites a Hamas statement that was 
broadcast on Radio Monte Carlo on 7 April. In the statement 
"Hamas asks the inhabitants of the occupied territories to stock 
up on foodstuffs in preparation for a stage during which the 
country will face an all-out war in a very short time." In the 
statement, Hamas also "appeals to 'Arafat to postpone the talks 
with Israel for one year with the promise that it will force the 
occupation troops to withdraw without conditions from the West 
Bank and Gaza Strip within this period." 
<H5>  ARTICLE ATTACKS COMMUNIST, SECULAR WRITERS </H5>
  A 900-word article by Dr. Mahmud Himayah, director of the 
Preaching Department of the School of Religion in Asyut, 
comments on the government decision to ban Shaykh 'Umar 
'Abd-al-Kafi from delivering Friday sermons. He says, "the 
remnants of communists and secular people" are behind the 
campaign against men of religion in Egypt. They control the 
media and have close ties with high-ranking government 
officials. They attack such prominent preachers as Shaykh 
al-Ghazali, Shaykh al-Sha'rawi, and Shaykh 'Abd-al-Kafi. Even 
the grand iman of al-Azhar has not escaped their insults. They 
do this in the name of "fighting extremism" and safeguarding 
"national unity." Dr. Himayah says the "great calamity" is that 
these secular writers have become so influential with the 
government that one or two articles by them against a certain 
preacher will ensure that this preacher is expelled from his 
mosque or post. Himayah asks what crime Dr. 'Abd-al-Kafi has 
committed. He says Dr. 'Abd-al-Kafi is persuasive and 
reasonable. Thousands of youths attend his sermons. He deduces 
that "success in this bad time has become a crime for which the 
preachers must be called to account." Himayah asks what is wrong 
with Dr. 'Abd-al-Kafi's call on actresses and female singers to 
repent and wear the veil. He asks, "Is this another crime for 
which he must punished?" Himayah says in this age "virtue has 
become vice and vice has become virtue." 

<H5>    ARTICLE BY 'ADIL HUSAYN </H5>
  A 4,000-word article by Labor Party Secretary General 'Adil 
Husayn on pages 5 and 7 deals with several topics, including the 
television interview with former al-Shawqiyun terrorist 'Adil 
'Abd-al-Baqi and the film "The Terrorist." Regarding the 
television interview with 'Abd-al-Naqi, which was screened 
several times, including one time with subtitles in English, 
Husayn casts doubt on 'Abd-al-Baqi's character and maintains 
that he has ties with the General Intelligence Department and 
the Interior Ministry. To substantiate this view, the newspaper 
publishes a picture that was printed in the newspaper AKHBAR 
AL-HAWADITH on 27 January showing 'Abd-al-Baqi receiving an 
award from the Interior Minister. Husayn then asks what the 
"repentant youth" said to deserve all this attention. He says 
'Abd-al-Baqi denied that foreign governments had provided the 
terrorists with money and weapons. 'Abd-al-Baqi says the 
terrorists obtained money through theft, trade, and collection 
of donations. Husayn says the al-Shawqiyun are a "marginal" 
group that is not a serious threat to public security and is not 
responsible for the escalation of political violence. 
  Regarding the film "The Terrorist," Husayn said he saw the 
film and did not find it to be high quality. He asks why the 
film is surrounded by so much fanfare. He says the film wants 
to say that: "We are before a vicious, wicked, and murderous 
Islamic religion. In contrast, we are before a good and 
beautiful Christian religion. The rest of the Muslims have 
nothing to do with Islam. Good Muslims are not religious. Any 
Muslim who becomes religious necessarily becomes a terrorist." 
  Husayn maintains that "never in its history has Egypt 
witnessed this level of torture and indiscriminate killing." 
He claims that there are now 60,000 repeat 60,000 detainees in 
Egypt, compared to 7,000 detainees during the last days of 
President al-Sadat. 
  Husayn says matters have not stopped at fighting extremists 
and terrorists but have included attacks on al-Azhar and its 
scholars. He says Al-Azhar, due to several considerations, 
usually does not intervene in controversial issues unless they 
threaten the tenets of the religion. Nevertheless, we see that 
its limited role is not accepted. Husayn says the attacks on 
Shaykh al-Sha'rawi, the ban on Shaykh al-Ghazali and prominent 
Islamic thinker Dr. Muhammad 'Amarah from appearing on 
television, and the expulsion of Dr. 'Abd-al-Kafi from his 
mosque cannot be within the framework of fighting extremists but 
is an "all-out war" against righteous religious figures. 
  Husayn says he has heard about six new prisons being built 
secretly in the Egyptian desert. He asks for whom these new 
prisons with high walls and modern equipment are being prepared. 
<H5>  CALL FOR TRIAL OF DR. BUTRUS-GHALI </H5>
  On page 7 the newspaper carries a 150-word report that says, 
"the Egyptian Committee in Support of the People of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina continues to prepare for the popular trial 
that will be held for the United Nations and its secretary 
general, Dr. Butrus Butrus-Ghali, on charges of negligence in 
the massacres to which the Bosnian Muslims are being subjected." 
A preparatory committee headed by Yahya al-Rifa'i and including 
Mahfuz 'Azzam and Hasan Duh as members will collect all papers 
and documents incriminating the UN secretary general. Dr. 
'Izz-al-Din Fudah will act as a prosecutor in the case. 
<H5>  EGYPTIAN HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATION </H5>
  On page 7, the newspaper publishes a 250-word statement by 
the Egyptian Human Rights Organization asking President Mubarak 
to intervene to stop the systematic human rights violations 
inside Egyptian prisons. The statement calls for the formation 
of an independent committee to hold a comprehensive and neutral 
investigation on prison conditions. It also calls for the 
abolition of the Interior Ministry's supervision of the prisons 
and for their transfer to the supervision of the Ministry of 
Justice. 
<H5>  U.S. WAR ON EGYPTIAN EXPORTS </H5>
  On page 7, the newspaper publishes a 250-word report that 
says the "U.S. Administration has stepped up its war against 
Egyptian exports, especially textiles." The report adds that 
the main reasons for this "war on Egyptian exports" are: 1) 
Egypt has not undertaken a real and tangible effort to include 
Israel in the Middle East market for cooperation between Israel 
and the Arab states. 2) The Egyptian Government has rejected 
several Israeli projects for strengthening cooperation between 
the two countries. The report says the United States insists on 
the need for strengthening Egyptian-Israeli economic relations. 
"These U.S. demands are considered a repetition of the demands 
of the U.S. trade secretary, who visited Cairo recently and 
asked Egypt to exert greater efforts to persuade the Arab 
countries to end their boycott of Israel." 
<H5>  ISLAMISTS WIN AL-MANSURAH UNIVERSITY ELECTIONS </H5>
  On page 7, the newspaper carries a 200-word report that says 
the Islamists have won all seats in the elections for the 
al-Mansurah University Teaching Club. The elected members are 
Dr. Hasan Mushrif for the College of Agriculture, Dr. Ahmad 
al-Wasif and Dr. Ahmad Sami for the College of Engineering, Dr. 
Muhammad al-Dusuqi and Dr. Tahir Hamzah for the College of 
Sciences, and Dr. Mamduh Mansur for the College of Pharmacology. 

