Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Ivanov, with information supplied by </F>
POSTFAKTUM, under the rubric "Details": "Did the Vladivostok 
Mayor Take Bribes?"] 
  [Text] The Vladivostok conflict related to the 
criminal accusations against Mayor Viktor Cherepkov, already 
covered by NOVAYA YEZHEDNEVNAYA GAZETA, continues to 
develop. 
  On 15 February Vladivostok's Leninskiy Rayon court was 
supposed to hear the civil suit brought by head of the Maritime 
Internal Affairs administration [UVD], Colonel Vladimir Ipatov, 
against city administration head Viktor Cherepkov. The colonel 
demanded that the mayor pay him 10 million rubles in moral 
damages caused by the fact that the mayor had damaged his honor 
and dignity when he publicly stated at a press conference that 
the Maritime militia was corrupt and that they had to fight 
crime within the militia itself. 
  Meanwhile, according to an official statement of the 
Vladivostok administration press service, the mayor's office had 
some documents at its disposal which could support Cherepkov's 
claim, and the office was ready to present these papers in court 
on 15 February. However, due to the request of the plaintiff 
Colonel Ipatov, the hearing was postponed until March. 
  The previous NOVAYA YEZHEDNEVNAYA GAZETA articles described 
the position of the kray UVD that its deputy commander was 
convinced of "a certain mafia group being behind the 
Cherepkovs." We would like to remind you that a computer stolen 
from a Vladivostok school last year was found in Cherepkov's 
apartment during a search. This served as the reason for the 
arrest of the mayor's son, 19-year-old Vladimir Cherepkov, a 
cadet at the Pacific Higher Naval School, who is a suspect in 
this burglary case. 
  Cherepkov insists that the search in the administration 
building, which took place on the morning of 12 February, was 
conducted by the procuracy and militia with the purpose of 
removing any documents supporting the mayor's accusations of 
corruption against the militia. The militiamen, however, failed 
to find the papers during the search; evidently someone had 
managed to hide them. The mayor's press service says that it is 
prepared to produce the documents for the mass media. 
  On 16 February, Cherepkov senior's lawyer, S. Ulitskiy, made 
a statement in which he cast doubts on the objectivity of the 
kray procurator, Valeriy Vasilenko. Among other things Ulitskiy 
said that, during his appearance on Maritime TV on 14 February, 
Procurator Vasilenko promised to be objective when considering 
all complaints about any violations in the case of Viktor 
Ivanovich Cherepkov. But the very next day, in an interview 
published in the VLADIVOSTOK newspaper, the procurator said: "In 
an ordinary situation he would already been put away, were he 
not Cherepkov! With the proof we've got, he would be behind bars 
by now..." 
  Therefore, Cherepkov's lawyer thinks that the kray 
procurator, whose job it is to provide control over proper 
enforcement of the law and to display special objectivity, 
declared him guilty beforehand and declared the necessity of his 
detention (not only before trial but even before officially 
charging him with anything). 
  The lawyer considers that in his actions the procurator is 
violating part 1 of Article 49 of the new Russian Constitution, 
which stipulates that every person is presumed innocent until 
proven guilty according to the regulations set by federal law 
and finalized by a sentence that is legally enforced. 
  Under such circumstances, thinks defense lawyer Ulitskiy, 
Vasilenko cannot supervise the investigation of Cherepkov's 
case. Neither can this be done by any other procuracy officials 
of Maritime Kray, as they are subordinate to Vasilenko. 
  NOVAYA YEZHEDNEVNAYA GAZETA promises to inform its readers 
on 
the further development of events. It is possible that in the 
near future more details will come to light in the case of 
Cherepkov junior, who is in detention now, as well as in the 
kidnapping case of the 4-year-old son of investigator Irina 
Monakova, who is working on the mayor's son's case. According to 
the inquest data, the boy was kidnapped and later returned by 
Monakova's live-in partner, who had asked six of his buddies to 
act as the kidnappers. However strange it may seem, the 
investigating officers still do not know their names. Lack of 
clarity continues to haunt the further investigation of the 
bribery charges extended against the mayor and other Vladivostok 
administration officials. 
  Meanwhile, the price of stocks of several enterprises are 
plummeting at Vladivostok international stock exchanges. The 
same happened at exchanges in April of 1993 after Aleksandr 
Rutskoy's speech at a parliament session in which he spoke about 
corruption and abuse of power in the course of the Maritime Kray 
privatization process. 

