CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zou Huixian (6760 2264 0341), member of Xinjiang </F>
Autonomous Region CPPCC Standing Committee: "Optimize the Social 
Environment for Women"] 
  [Text] In Xinjiang, the leaders, to different extents, are 
not putting enough emphasis on the dissemination and 
implementation of the "Protection of Women's Rights Act," and 
the relevant departments are not vigorously cooperating with one 
another. The main reason is that in some comrades' opinion, "the 
`Women's Act' is a woman's act, and all that is needed is for 
the women to get together and work on it." Within the party and 
government leading groups, the lack of woman leaders is clearly 
a problem. Violation of women's rights is still a fairly serious 
problem. In the market place, money worship has enticed some 
people to turn women into a commodity. 
  According to Article 4 of the "Women's Act," the provincial, 
municipal, and autonomous region people's governments must set 
up organs to protect women's rights. Xinjiang has set up a 
protection group under the Women and Children Work Committee to 
coordinate with various departments on protecting women's 
rights. The departments must fulfill their own responsibilities 
and seize this task. The "Women's Act" has given the protection 
of women's rights an extensive legal scope, which is very 
important. But practice has proved that without a clear and 
detailed program that is compatible with Xinjiang's own 
characteristics, women's rights still do not have the legal 
protection they deserve with regard to many specific issues. 
Xinjiang's People's Congress has decided to include the 
promulgation of detailed rules to implement the "Women's Act" in 
the 1994 legislative plan. Personnel has been selected and 
transferred from the People's Congress and Women's Federation, 
and the investigating and drafting work will begin soon. It is 
hoped that Xinjiang's people's government will provide the 
necessary funding and support so guarantee the success of this 
endeavor. 
  It is suggested that party committees at all levels elect 
more woman cadres to the next level party schools or lower the 
requirements for further studies at the relevant colleges so as 
to provide more opportunities for women to make progress and 
move up. Effective measures should be taken to put more 
qualified woman cadres in leadership positions. 
  It is suggested that we take advantage of the Fourth World 
Women's Conference to once again give publicity to the "Women's 
Act" to help expedite its implementation. We must enforce the 
law strictly and prosecute and punish harshly all criminal acts 
in society that violate women's rights or cause bodily harm to 
women. 
  Prostitution and other sexual services and other ugly and 
evil phenomena poison the soul and corrode the body of our 
society; they are the root causes of many evils. I urge the 
people's governments at all levels and the public security, the 
political and law, the judicial and other relevant departments 
to make the task of eradicating this "social evil" a part of 
their comprehensive administrative responsibility, and I urge 
them to strengthen control, enforce the law stringently, and 
emphasize both prosecution and prohibition, so as to guarantee 
results. 

