Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Franz Miller, Fraunhofer Society, Munich, under </F>
the rubric "Research and Technology": "Immune Diagnostics/Quick 
HIV Test Could Reduce Risk in Blood Transfusions. Sensor Enables 
Testing of Blood Donation As Late As Just Before the 
Transfusion"; first paragraph is an introduction] 
  [Text] Wednesday, 10 Nov 93 (HANDELSBLATT)--Microsystem 
engineers at the Fraunhofer Institute for Solid-State Technology 
(IFT) in Munich together with microbiologists at the Institute 
for Medical Microbiology and Health of Regensburg University 
have developed a new testing method by means of which banked 
blood can be tested for HIV immediately before transfusion. The 
first testing instruments are available as prototypes, but they 
still have to be certified first by the Paul Ehrlich Institute 
before series production. 
  A car accident. The profusely bleeding front-seat passenger 
is taken to the hospital. Diagnosis: just cuts and lacerations, 
which are sutured. But blood transfusions become necessary 
because of heavy loss of blood. The patient, afraid of HIV 
infection, panics. "Don't worry," the doctor reassures, "I am 
now putting a sample of the blood into this testing instrument, 
and in 10 minutes you will be able to see for yourself that the 
banked blood is free of HIV antibodies." This could soon be 
everyday medical practice if the new HIV test goes into 
production. 
<H5>  Up to 1000 Specimens Tested Automatically </H5>
  The heart of the analysis system is a biosensor that detects 
an antigen- antibody reaction. This highly sensitive biological 
sensing device causes any antibody to attach to just its quite 
specific antigen. This is usually described, approximately and 
in simplified fashion, by the lock-and-key principle. If the 
proper antigen is put into the blood specimen and the reaction 
takes place, then this is proof that the antibodies looked for 
are present in the specimen. 
  Antibodies are detectable in the blood of any HIV-infected 
patient several weeks after the infection. The analysis reaction 
just has to be transformed into a visible or other kind of 
signal. Most conventional HIV tests are based on this 
measurement principle and indicate the existence of antibodies 
by means of a change of color. The new HIV test employing a 
biosensor is essentially a further development of the 
conventional tests and is closely similar. However, the enzyme 
immune tests used thus far take several hours, whereas the 
biosensor makes its test result known in 10 minutes. "But this 
quick result cannot be obtained in diagnostic tests, because 
positive test results first have to be confirmed by a second 
independent test," qualifies Professor Hans J. Wolf, a 
microbiologist and director of Regensburg University's Institute 
for Medical Microbiology and Health. 
  The biosensor can produce a substantial cost saving with 
very 
large test quantities and relatively low hit rates--as is 
usually the case in HIV tests: It is not consumed so long as no 
positive specimen appears. No bothersome specimen preparation, 
pipetting, dilution, purification and so forth are required for 
a test. A single compact analyzer is sufficient, in which up to 
1000 specimens are automatically inserted, prepared one by one, 
and, clocked online, pumped through the biosensor measuring 
chamber. 
  The decisive advantage of the biosensor analysis system lies 
in its automated system configuration--and this is the 
trend-setting direction for all advanced test development. The 
complicated handling with the dangerous, in this case 
potentially infectious, specimens was integrated into the 
instrument. Accordingly it is suited not only for serial tests 
at blood banks or other blood-processing establishments, but is 
also plainly cut out for on-site use. So the doctor needs only 
to put the blood specimen into the unit and then the test 
proceeds automatically. 
  That the two so different institutions cooperated 
intensively 
as early as from the first idea--over four and a half years 
ago--was decisive for the scientists' success. There was basic 
preliminary work to do in finding out how microelectronic 
sensors can be coupled with proteins. HIV was chosen as the 
model system from the start. Finally a suitable measurement 
principle was found and investigated and further developed into 
a functioning signal converter for the detection of antibodies. 
<H5>  Quartz Oscillators Convert the Measuring Signal </H5>
  Quartz oscillators--thin wafers made of pure quartz 
crystal--that because of their high reliability are used as 
frequency-, cycle- or time-regulating components are the heart 
of the measuring system. They are found in timepieces, in 
advanced digital scales and also in computers or engine 
controllers. As mass-produced electronic products they are not 
particularly expensive. Quartz oscillators are excited to 
oscillate by means of an electronic alternating field. If 
something is deposited on the quartz oscillator, with the 
increase in mass the frequency also changes. This change is 
detected by an oscillator and frequency counter. 
  Once the measuring principle was functioning, the team dealt 
for a long time with the problem of how biological material can 
be put onto quartz wafers. Unlike other research teams, they 
used gold electrodes here, which permit good adhesion and 
stability of the biological material. Then there was a 
breakthrough too: The hydrophobic interaction between a protein 
and gold surface brings about such good adhesion that the 
proteins are not washed off. 
  Finding suitable antigens for the coating was the job of 
Professor Hans J. Wolf, who has already developed several 
conventional HIV tests and other virus tests. "We know the 
general sequence of the HIV genome, and with the aid of our 
self-developed computer-aided protein analyses selected virion 
envelope regions which we knew are well recognized by the immune 
system of infected patients." These proteins--the regions are 30 
to 40 amino acids long--were produced chemically and tested with 
normal sera. Color reactions indicated whether the sera 
recognize this little piece of the virion envelope. 
  The now finished testing system is based on the flow 
injection principle, which consists of two liquid circuits 
driven by pumps: a circuit in which the specimens are prepared 
and automatically lined up in a waiting loop. An injection valve 
feeds them, precisely timed, into the liquid stream of the 
measuring circuit. The carrier stream constantly flows through 
the measuring chamber containing the sensitive quartz oscillator. 
  The flow-through compartment's geometry is chosen so that 
the 
antibodies come into as good as possible contact with the quartz 
oscillator. The quartz oscillator's mass increases as soon as 
antibodies attach to the quartz oscillator. This is detected and 
the infective specimens are labeled. The quartz oscillator 
employed has to be replaced now. 
  "Every test by the new analysis system presented a clearly 
discernible signal," Professor Hans Wolf reports. The analysis 
system is so sophisticated in terms of medical standards and 
system engineering that it can be transformed into a marketable 
product, he says. However, it still has to be certified by the 
Paul Ehrlich Institute, which should be no problem according to 
Professor Wolf's experience thus far. The time frame for the new 
analytical method's being employed in medicine: three to five 
years. 

