BFN 

  [Text] The Advisory Committee for Energy (advisory body to 
the minister of international trade and industry) held a 
subcommittee meeting on demand and supply on 21 June to compile 
a long-term estimate on the demand and supply of energy up to 
the year 2010. 
  The estimate sees reliance on oil in 2010 to decline by 10.5 
percentage points to 47.7 percent. Annual rate of increase in 
demand will be held down to around 1 percent, 0.4 percent lower 
than the growth rate originally projected in 1990. The Ministry 
of International Trade and Industry [MITI] will implement its 
energy policy according to this estimate. 
  The long-term energy demand and supply estimate is compiled 
every two to four years to project future demand and supply. 
The present one is intended to be a numerical basis for 
implementing new policies, and will serve as a guideline for 
future government energy policy. 
  According to the projection, energy demand in 2010, 
converted 
into crude oil, will be 423 million kiloliters, representing an 
increase of 62 million kiloliters compared to the actual demand 
in FY 1992. While demand for industrial energy, or energy used 
in factories, will remain low, demand for energy from the 
nonindustrial sectors, such as households, and the 
transportation sector is expected to grow. 
  In terms of supply, reliance on oil and other mineral fuels 
will be reduced substantially to avert the greenhouse effect. 
Nuclear energy will be increased to become the number two 
primary energy source, while use of natural gas will also be 
expanded. The plan also calls for increasing new energy 
sources, such as solar energy and power generation using 
garbage, by 1.8 percent over that in 1992 to 3 percent of 
overall energy supply. As a result, it will be possible to hold 
down per capita emission of carbon dioxide in the year 2000 to 
the 1990 level. 
  Based on this estimate, the government plans to set targets 
for oil-substitute energy, which will be decided upon by a 
cabinet meeting in July. 
  MITI's Agency of Natural Resources and Energy is considering 
introducing the summer time system, as well as development of 
energy-saving technology, including electric cars and 
next-generation liquid crystal display equipment, to achieve 
these targets. 

