BFN 

  [Text] Since 13 June, Fujian's Nanping, Sanming, Longyan, 
Ningde, Fuzhou, Quanzhou, and some other areas have been hit by 
heavy torrential rains and severe flooding. Weather and 
hydrological forecasts have indicated that most parts of Fujian 
are expected to be hit by another torrential rainfall and even 
more severe flooding over the next two to three days. 
  In view of this situation, the provincial party committee 
and 
government yesterday morning called an emergency flood 
prevention and disaster relief meeting. Provincial Party 
Committee Secretary Jia Qinglin delivered a speech, in which he 
emphatically called for attaching top priority to the safety of 
the people's lives and property and taking forceful measures to 
reduce flood losses to a minimum. 
  The provincial party committee general office and provincial 
people's government general office jointly issued a emergency 
circular yesterday, calling for further improving the province's 
flood prevention and disaster relief work. 
  The circular stated: All areas in the province should keep 
close watch over the torrential rain and flooding, should take 
necessary precautions, should make the necessary preparations, 
and should strive to reduce flood losses to a minimum losses. 
Leaders at all levels in the province should become 
ideologically prepared to combat large-scale natural calamities, 
including a large-scale flood. The principal leaders at all 
levels in the province should personally take charge of the 
on-going flood prevention and disaster relief work, should go 
deep into each and every flood prevention front, as well as 
organize and mobilize the broad masses of cadres and people to 
combat the flood and provide disaster relief. 
  The circular also urged disaster-stricken areas across the 
province to more energetically push ahead with the on-going 
flood prevention and disaster relief work, to take forceful 
measures so as to resume production as soon as possible, 
particularly grain production, and to strive for a sustained 
increase in the province's grain output this year. The relevant 
departments across the province should waste no time in 
transporting and delivering relief funds and goods to the 
disaster-stricken areas to assist flood prevention and disaster 
relief work. The agricultural, civil affairs, water 
conservancy, and insurance departments at all levels in the 
province should also organize and dispatch personnel to the 
disaster-stricken areas to help grassroots units and people 
tackle problems and overcome production and livelihood 
difficulties. 

