BFN 

  [Text] Lima, 5 May (EFE) -- Today, the Peruvian Army and 
police will start patrolling Lima and the port of Callao to 
prevent possible terrorist attacks, as the 14th anniversary of 
the day, 17 May 1980, the Shining Path began its activities 
approaches. 
  Last night, there were four attacks with explosives against 
the offices of the state company Electrolima [Lima Electric 
Power Enterprise] and three other attacks against the Credit 
Bank in Lima, which caused only property damage. 
  According to a military communique, a similar attack took 
place on 3 May in the Military Village of Chorrillos District in 
Lima, with no casualties resulting. 
  On 17 May 1980, one day before the general elections in 
which 
Fernando Belaunde Terry was elected president for the second 
time, a Shining Path group entered the small town of Chuschi, 
Ayacucho Department, and destroyed electoral material. This was 
the first action of the terrorist organization. 
  According to sources from the Counterterrorism Directorate 
(Dincote) cited today by LA REPUBLICA, there is the fear that 
the Shining Path may unleash a campaign of violence in Lima on 
orders from its current chief, Oscar Ramirez Durand, alias 
"Feliciano." 
  There is also the fear that the Shining Path will increase 
its activities in memory of the events of 6, 7, 8, and 9 May 
1992, when the security forces occupied the Canto Grande 
penitentiary in Lima after the terrorists took over the prison. 
  Meanwhile, hundreds of kilometers north of Lima in the 
jungle 
region of Huanuco Department, where a military operation against 
three Shining Path columns is being carried out, a captured 
terrorist, Ely Puertas, alias "Juan," revealed to EXPRESO the 
painful conditions of his colleagues. 
  Puertas says the "Mar Rojo Batallion" he belonged to has 300 
men, many of them civilians who were recruited under the threat 
of death. He added that the Shining Path members are hungry and 
thirsty, as they have only tubers and fruit to eat, and they 
want to take refuge under the repentance law, but the chiefs 
prevent them from doing so. 
  Today, the Peruvian Government extended the state of 
emergency for 60 days in four provinces of the southern Andean 
Apurimac Department "to facilitate the operations against 
terrorism." There are no civil liberties in the emergency 
zones, which are under military control. 

