Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Gjergj Zefi, Deputy Chairman of the </F>
Democratic Alliance Assembly and ALEANCA Deputy Editor in Chief, 
To Be Tried"] 
  [Text] Mr. Gjergj Zefi, deputy chairman of the Democratic 
Alliance Assembly and ALEANCA deputy editor in chief, was 
summoned to the Tirana Prosecutor's Office yesterday. 
Prosecutor Gezim Lleshi informed him of the initiation of 
criminal proceedings against him on the charge of "insulting the 
state." The charge arises over a statement by Mr. Gjergj Zefi 
published in KOHA JONE on 1 February, the day after the arrest 
of the journalists Aleksander Frangaj and Martin Leka. In this 
statement, deploring the unjust arrest of his fellow 
journalists, Mr. Gjergj Zefi employed the expression: This is 
not a state, but a band of mafiosi putting Albania in serious 
danger. 
  The Tirana Prosecutor's Office, which apparently now mainly 
spends its time reading newspapers, has initiated criminal 
proceedings over this expression. Gjergj Zefi has been ordered 
not to leave the cities of Shkoder and Tirana. 
  In connection with the charge and his expected trial, Mr. 
Gjergj Zefi declared to the press yesterday: 
  I am from Shkoder, and my two fellow journalists were 
arrested at a time when the entire public in my home town was 
waiting for those implicated in the crime of 14 January [murder 
of Democratic Alliance member Gjovalin Cekini] to be arrested 
and the covens that link the state officials, mafiosi, and 
professional criminals that are strangling the city to be 
flushed out. This is the greatest irony. Before Gjovalin 
Cekini's blood has dried, journalists are arrested! I therefore 
issued the above statement. I am thinking of the murder of 
Gjovalin Cekini, the systematic violation of the embargo by 
certain sections of the state, who use not small cars but huge 
tanker-trucks, and the strategy of terror and tension that these 
people invested with power employ in Shkoder and beyond. I do 
not know what else one can call a state that is composed of 
professional murderers, mafiosi, and state officials who throw 
their weight around however they like, and does nothing. I also 
have other facts that I will make public at my trial, which I am 
calmly expecting, in order to prove with unfettered powers of 
judgement that we are dealing with a band of mafiosi that is 
putting Albania in serious danger. 

