Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The members of the Alliance of Independent Forces 
for Radical Change [AFICR] platform met on 17 January under the 
chairmanship of Mr. Bonaventure Muanateba to examine the latest 
message to the nation by the head of state. In this regard, 
Muanateba's AFICR reaffirmed and supported the appointment of a 
prime minister without political leanings. 
  For its part, the Active Forces of AFICR [FAAFICR], who also 
met on 17 January, support the candidacy of Professor Mulumba 
Lukoji to the office of prime minister. In addition, 
nationalists, parliamentarians, counselors to the republic, 
party leaders, and associations from civil society have decided 
to support Professor Mulumba Lukoji's candidacy. 
  On this issue, we have also received the reaction of the 
Young Mobutists Front [FROJEMO] on the present political 
situation. Here is our report: 
  [Begin recording] [First unidentified spokesman] Members of 
the AFICR platform met today, Monday 17 January, under the 
chairmanship of Bonaventure Muanateba Tomuningo Mushinua, 
chairman, to examine the head of state's latest message to the 
nation. After the meeting, the following steps were taken: 
  1. On the question of candidates for the post of prime 
minister, AFICR notes with regret that the present approach by 
the head of state consisting in presenting two candidates, 
Tshisekedi wa Mulumba and Mulumba Lukoji, who come from the same 
region and belong to the same tribe, could bring us back to the 
situation experienced in 1965 between Prime Ministers Tsombe and 
Kimba, both from Katanga. It therefore reaffirms and supports 
the appointment of a prime minister without political leanings. 
  2. On the question of representation in the High Council of 
the Republic [HCR], the interim parliament, the AFICR condemns 
the bi- polarization which excludes (?the forces) already on the 
country's political arena. As a center platform, it demands its 
80 seats in the HCR in order to get involved with the others -- 
including Antoine Gisenga's UFONAL [expansion unknown] -- in 
working out mechanisms for running the country. 
  3. On the dissolution of parliament and the HCR, the AFICR 
deplores the attitude of certain political leaders who view and 
describe the ordinance dissolving the parliament -- i.e. the HCR 
-- and convening at the same time the extraordinary session of 
the HCR, interim parliament, as a coup d'etat, whereas all that 
the head of state did was to apply the will of the negotiators. 
  4. Concerning Monsignor Monsengwo, the AFICR advises the 
Catholic prelate to take advantage of this opportunity to leave 
the political scene and leave politics to politicians. 
  5. On the wave of illegal occupation of government houses, 
the AFICR demands that such occupants be convicted and that the 
Zairian state retrieve these houses without further delay. 
  6. Lastly, the AFICR reminds everyone in the national and 
international community that there is only a one and indivisible 
AFICR, in compliance with Article 9 of the Charter, led by Mr. 
Bonaventure Muanateba, its presidium chairman. 
  [Second unidentified spokesman] [Words indistinct] Professor 
Mulumba Lukoji as candidate for the post of prime minister. We 
nationalists, parliamentarians, counselors to the republic, 
negotiators, leaders of political parties and associations in 
civil society, met today on the eve of the first session of the 
HCR -- interim parliament -- to examine the situation prevailing 
in the country. 
  Considering the head of state's two messages to the nation, 
to which we fully subscribe; 
  Considering that after the second message of 14 January more 
than half of the negotiators signed the so-called People's 
Palace accords, thereby approving the scheme recommended by 
these accords as a means of ending the crisis our country is 
passing through; 
  Considering that the implementation of these accords implies 
the setting up of a representative government of national unity, 
headed by a politically neutral, unifying, and nationalist prime 
minister who will steer a conflict-free transition; 
  Have, in the light of the foregoing, decided to give our 
full 
and unreserved support to the candidacy of Prof. Mulumba Lukoji 
for the post of prime minister. 
  [Third unidentified spokesman] The FAAFICR met this Monday, 
16 [as heard] January, at their usual headquarters to consider 
the speech delivered by the president on Friday, 14 January, at 
2000. At the end of this important meeting, the following 
decisions were made: 
  1. The FAAFICR recalls for the benefit of the national and 
international community its communique of 5 January demanding a 
unifying prime minister who is not known to have championed the 
cause of politics of exclusion and who is accepted by all 
regions so as to avoid a splitting of Zaire into several states. 
  2. The FAAFICR is unable to understand the position of the 
radical opposition when, in a letter dated 12 January, it 
presents the candidacy of Mr. Etienne Tshisekedi, seeking his 
appointment to the post of prime minister by an ordinance of the 
head of state, whereas all along Mr. Tshisekedi has been the 
only legally recognized prime minister appointed by the 
sovereign national conference. If that is the case, why seek a 
fresh appointment by presidential decree? One then understands 
someone is poking fun at our people -- and this is very 
dangerous for the future of our country. 
  3. Lastly, the FAAFICR supports Prof. Mulumba Lukoji's 
candidacy to the post of prime minister. In his case, at least, 
even though he hails from Kasai Oriental, he is accepted by his 
people -- first, by Katanga and then by the other regions as a 
whole -- and Zaire can bank on him. 
  [Fourth unidentified spokesman] We, youngsters of FROJEMO, 
thank the head of state and the entire political class for the 
efforts they are making at the moment to get the country out of 
the predicament in which we find ourselves. The people count on 
them and we believe today's meeting will be an important one and 
will be marked in letters of gold in the history of our country. 
So we will not talk much. We sincerely wish them a successful 
meeting in order that Zaire may live long. [end recording] 

