Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Andres Cisneros, secretary general of the </F>
Argentine Foreign Ministry] 
  [Text] The article entitled "Risky Aftermaths of the London 
Treaty" by Edgardo Aguilera, published by LA PRENSA a few days 
ago, includes -- in my opinion -- inaccurate information and 
assessments that cannot remain unanswered. 
  It is not true, as Aguilera asserts, that the islanders' 
income from fishing in the Malvinas "will probably increase with 
the entry into effect... of another ocean zone, known as the 
Falkland Outer Conservation Zone (FOCZ)." Aguilera bases this 
statement on a comment attributed to the Falklands governor who, 
"based on this fact, was assessing the possibility of extending 
the fishing season and increasing by 10 percent the number of 
fishing licenses to be granted in 1994." 
  The truth, however, is quite different. For a start, we are 
not referring to a "London Treaty," but to a mere fishing 
agreement that may or may not be renewed every year. Secondly, 
in this agreement we have made sure that Great Britain limits to 
150,000 tonnes the amount of fish extracted this season. It 
does not matter where it fishes, either in the new zone 
established by a common agreement with Argentina or in the ones 
previously agreed upon; Great Britain cannot surpass the 
aforementioned amount, and therefore the establishment of the 
FOCZ will not cause any "damage." Moreover, it could well 
benefit Argentine fishing, because every ship the islanders send 
to the new zone will help reduce the number of ships operating 
between the islands and the continent -- up to now the busiest 
zone -- which will clearly benefit Argentine ships and help 
preserve the resources. 
  As for the comment by David Tatham, it by no means entails 
increasing fishing above the 150,000 tonnes ceiling. In spite 
of what the article says, all it does is announce the price they 
will charge for each fishing license and a longer term for each 
permit -- factors related to their commercial policy, always 
within the fixed 150,000 tonnes limit... Argentina, in turn, 
has similar variables, and I would say much better ones than 
what the aforementioned article suggests. Thanks to our 
comparative advantages, better infrastructure, and a growing 
operative efficiency, we can offer licenses for longer periods 
at more attractive prices. This fact, during the past two 
years, has been reflected in clear Argentine leadership in that 
fishing region. 
  Something that is not mentioned in Aguilera's article -- 
which is so gloomy about the government's action -- is that 
right from the beginning of these annual fishing agreements, 
Great Britain has maintained the 150,000 tonne ceiling while the 
Argentine ceiling has done nothing but rise. This year it has 
risen to 220,000 tonnes, which will allow an income equivalent 
to almost half our traditional beef exports. 
  It is also not true that the establishment of the FOCZ will 
be necessarily negative because the preservation zone has been 
turned into an exploitation zone. We are talking about 
renewable resources, where preservation measures are justified 
if fishing reaches the point of depredation. But if the volumes 
set by the two countries do not together threaten the 
preservation of resources, all that is allegedly being preserved 
ends up lost with no benefit accruing to anyone. 
  Every year Argentina and Great Britain carry out joint 
investigations and coordinate their own predictions to 
scientifically assess the total fishing volume within the 
preservation limits. If this coordinated policy determines the 
need to ban fishing in a given zone, this is decided on a yearly 
basis. For the time being the market demand does not threaten 
this resource being exploited jointly. 
  Neither is it true that the fishing boom [preceding word in 
English] represents a true and permanent increase in the 
islanders' income. Quite the contrary, as the very charts 
published by Aguilera show: Since these fishing agreement with 
Argentina were signed, the British volumes have done nothing but 
drop: 44 million pounds in 1991, 40 in 1992, and 31 in 1993. 
  Fishing is, in fact, very important for the islanders (it 
represents 49 percent of their income) and they are perfectly 
aware that maintaining these conditions depends, in the very 
near future, on the good will of Argentine foreign policy and, 
in the long term, of some type of agreement with our country 
that will surpass the not always guaranteed annual renewals of 
agreements signed so far. 
  Aguilera's comment about Heathcoat Amory is opportune. He is 
the second consecutive British minister of state for foreign and 
commonwealth affairs to publicly recommend that the islanders 
seek more significant agreements with our country. 
  It is also true that the profits obtained from fishing will 
generate deep-rooted changes in Falklands society, which sooner 
or later will understand that their best alternative to exploit 
this and other natural resources, and to enter the next century 
with a flourishing economy, unavoidably entails basic agreements 
with the only neighbor God gave them on Earth. 

