BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special article" by intern reporter Yang Fan (2799 1581): </F>
"Smooth Progress Made in First 100 Days of the Year of Reform -- 
Interview With Feng Bing, Deputy Secretary-General of the State 
Commission for Restructuring the Economic System"] 
  [Text] Beijing 9 Apr (WEN WEI PO)--The year 1994, a "year 
of reform" to Chinese officials, is a crucial one in which the 
reform of the market economic structure will be conducted in a 
comprehensive way. In the 100 days from 1 January to 10 April 
1994, how have things been going with the various reform 
measures newly presented? What are the social effects? Facing 
these questions, Feng Bing, deputy secretary-general of the 
State Commission for Restructuring the Economic System answered: 
"Generally, the implementing of various reform measures has 
been very smooth, and the assessment from top to grass roots is 
very high." 
  Feng Bing indicated that over the past 100 days, reform in 
the macroeconomic regulation and control system has been 
conducted, including finance, taxation, banking, foreign 
exchange, foreign trade, and planned investment. 
<H5>  Tax and Fiscal Reform Is in Period of Fine Tuning </H5>
  He said measures for tax and fiscal reform are basically in 
operating normally and in a period of fine tuning. From the 
angle of effects, internal financial revenue in the first 
quarter markedly increased. Taking January and February for 
example, internal financial revenue was 50.7 billion yuan, up by 
32.1 percent over the same period last year; financial 
expenditures were 49.15 billion yuan, up by 29.1 percent. 
Income was 1.55 billion yuan higher than expenditures. 
Conditions for the issuance of 12.92 billion yuan of national 
bonds were sound, and people were vying for their purchase. 
  In the course of reform, the phenomenon by which some 
localities and enterprises arbitrarily raised prices by taking 
advantage of taxation reform surfaced for a time. Aiming at 
this phenomenon, the State Planning Commission and Taxation 
Administration jointly published the "Circular on Banning Price 
Rises By Taking Advantage of Tax Reform," with the State 
Council's approval, while augmenting propaganda about and 
explanation of the new tax system and removing some people's 
misunderstanding of taxing price subsidies, thus enabling a 
prompt solution to the problem. 
<H5>  Sound Condition in Foreign Exchange Reform </H5>
  The main contents of reform in the banking structure this 
year are, namely, augmenting central bank's functions, and 
implementing separation of banking of a policy nature from 
commercial banking. Work in this arena is actively under way. 
As Feng Bing disclosed, at present the central bank is fast 
recovering banknotes from circulation, with 90 percent of the 
banknotes issued before the spring festival recovered, and the 
condition of monetary operation is sound. 
  Foreign exchange and foreign trade restructuring with the 
merger of the two-track exchange rates and implementation of the 
system of foreign exchange settlement and selling of foreign 
exchange as the main contents were originally a cause of anxiety 
because of many uncertain factors and greater risk. However, in 
the 100 days since the new structure was implemented, progress 
has been smooth, and conditions are better than expected. The 
only trouble came in foreign exchange coupons; because of 
insufficient consideration of the issue, some stores allowed a 
price hike of goods to be purchased with foreign exchange 
coupons exclusively. This resulted in a run on foreign exchange 
coupons and panic buying with them. Later, responsive measures 
were adopted, and the problem was promptly pacified. The market 
exchange rate has all along been kept at the comparatively 
rational level of 8.7 yuan against the dollar. Feng Bing 
believes that in view of the import-export situation and the 
revenue and expenditures in foreign exchange, it is entirely 
possible to stabilize the exchange rate at the present level 
through regulation of the foreign exchange market. 
  The planned investment structure is under reform according 
to 
the original plan. The "change from fund allotment to loans" is 
being converted to the "change from loans to investment." The 
train of thought of plural investment bodies has already been 
set, with major foundation work completed. However, it will 
take some time to shape the system. 
  Reform of the modern enterprise system has not yet spread on 
a wide scale as of today, and is still in an experimental phase, 
with 100 enterprises carefully selected for the experiment. The 
chief hurdles to enterprise transition to the modern enterprise 
system are, first, excessive social burdens; second, excessive 
overstaffing; and third, heavy debt burdens. Feng Bing believes 
the solution to those problems primarily calls for the 
enterprises' own efforts; however, support and help from 
governments at all levels are also indispensable. 

