Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Hamida Ben Salah] </F>
  [Excerpt] Tunis, Jan 6 (AFP) -- Leading Palestinians on 
Thursday [6 January] said they failed to persuade PLO chief 
Yasir 'Arafat to stop "monopolizing" decisions on the peace 
process and make the organization more democratic. 
  "'Arafat is continuing to monopolize power," delegation 
leader Haydar 'Abd-al-Shafi said at the end of a five-day 
mission at the PLO headquarters in Tunis to press for more 
democracy. 
  He blamed PLO executive committee members for showing no 
interest in making joint decisions. 
  "We cannot blame Abu-'Ammar ('Arafat). A man can only 
monopolize power if he has no partners who want to share it with 
him," said 'Abd-al-Shafi, a former leader of the Palestinian 
negotiating team to bilateral peace talks with Israel. 
  He said democracy within the executive committee would have 
"positive effects at all levels of the Palestinian organization." 
  But 'Abd-al-Shafi confirmed reports Wednesday that the 
executive committee had met one delegation demand by giving him 
full powers to organize a broad dialogue grouping all factions 
with the aim of uniting the Palestinians. 
  The delegation arrived here Sunday calling for the adoption 
of nine points included in a memorandum signed two weeks before 
by 120 prominent Palestinian personalities from the occupied 
territories and the diaspora last month. 
  The memorandum called for more democracy in running PLO 
affairs and demanded a change in the conduct of negotiations 
with Israel over limited autonomy in the Gaza Strip and the West 
Bank town of Jericho. 
  'Arafat, who has been accused of being autocratic, is yet to 
comment on the proposals. 
  The petition called for mapping out a strategy for the 
self-rule negotiations, setting up a committee for directing the 
talks, and choosing negotiators based on merit rather than on 
political considerations. 
  The petition also demanded respect for human rights. 
  Haydar 'Abd-al-Shafi said Monday: "There is no hope for us 
if 
we don't practice real democracy." 
  The delegation wanted 'Arafat to make a "commitment to more 
democracy, set up a collective leadership, broaden the base for 
making decisions, and encourage diverse Palestinian 
participation without favoritism," he said. 
  'Abd-al-Shafi urged that the leadership must make a "total 
and serious" commitment to all aspects of democracy, and that 
decision-making must not be left entirely in 'Arafat's hands. 
  A founding PLO member, he stressed the need to use 
Palestinians of ability at this "decisive" time, when the 
organisation and Israel are struggling to make headway in 
implementing the accord for self-rule. [passage omitted] 

