BFN 

  [Text] Atami, Shizuoka Pref., May 14 KYODO -- A Social 
Democratic Party (SDP) [of Japan -- SDPJ] policy study group 
decided Saturday [14 May] to oppose a motion calling for the 
dismissal of House of Representatives Diet Steering Committee 
Chairman Keiwa Okuda, group members said. 
  The motion against Okuda was submitted to the lower chamber 
secretariat Friday by the largest opposition Liberal Democratic 
Party (LDP), which has 206 members in the 511-seat lower chamber. 
  The LDP, which lost its 38-year grip on power last summer, 
is 
now stepping up a drive to take back power from the coalition 
government of Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata, which was reduced to 
a minority government following the SDP's departure from the 
coalition last month. 
  Okuda is a member of Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party], whose 
Secretary General Ichiro Ozawa has been acting as chief 
coalition strategist and is regarded as the prime force in 
sweeping Hata to power. 
  The SDP study group, called "Democrats" which has a 
parliamentary strength of 23 lower chamber seats, made the 
decision not to support the motion in a meeting of its 
legislators and local supporters in Atami, Shizuoka Prefecture. 
  Former SDP Chairman Makoto Tanabe told the meeting, 
"Allowing 
the LDP to depose the Diet Steering Committee chairman on the 
strength of the (large) number of legislators would amount to 
undercutting parliamentary democracy." 
  The LDP may not be able to push the motion through the lower 
chamber, as the group's decision to dissent may prompt other 
legislators to vote against it, political sources said. 
  The LDP's initial plan to formally table the motion on the 
floor of the lower chamber on Tuesday may be scrapped, they said. 
  The 74-member SDP is considered the swing vote in the lower 
house because neither the LDP nor the governing coalition, which 
controls 182 seats, single-handedly have a majority in the lower 
chamber. 
  The study group also decided to oppose another move by the 
LDP to submit a no-confidence motion against the Hata 
administration, the legislators said. 
  The group will instead become a driving spirit behind a move 
to establish a fresh coalition government by soliciting into its 
fold liberal legislators from the new party Sakigake 
[Harbinger], the Democratic Socialist Party, the Japan New Party 
as well as members of the LDP, they said. 
  The group will try to put together legislators from a wide 
political spectrum who can uphold their ideals of scaling down 
the self-defense forces, expanding Japan's noncombatant roles in 
U.N. peacekeeping operations, and shifting emphasis from direct 
to indirect and asset tax, they said. 

