BFN 

  [Text] Aden, Yemen, June 13 (AFP) -- A ceasefire declared 
by the Yemen government failed to take hold on Monday as 
shelling resumed after a brief pause in bombardments that killed 
six more civilians and wounded 28, an AFP correspondent reported. 
  The government in Sanaa had announced a new three-hour 
ceasefire to start at 6.00 a.m. (0300 GMT), but after a brief 
lull the sound of artillery fire could be heard at the very 
moment the truce should have started. 
  President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih had ordered the ceasefire "to 
test how the other party will respect the new ceasefire 
initiative and to give them a chance," an official statement in 
Sanaa said. 
  Hospital officials in this southern port city said that six 
civilians had been killed and 28 wounded in overnight shelling 
by Salih's northern forces which damaged five houses in 
Al-Mansurah, a suburb of Aden. 
  Twenty-two wounded southern troops loyal to Salih's rival 
'Ali Salim al-Bid were taken to the Al-Jumhuriyah hospital here 
on Sunday, officials said. 
  The Sanaa government said the ceasefire -- the fourth 
announced since June 6 -- had been requested by the "Yemen 
Socialist Party rebels," a reference to al-Bid and his followers. 
  It said the request came via Mujahid Abu-Shawarib, who has 
been acting as a mediator between the government and certain YSP 
officials. 
  "The Yemen government agreed to this request and President 
'Ali 'Abdallah Salih gave his order to all military leaders to 
cease fire," it said. 
  "This period is to test how the other party will respect the 
new ceasefire initiative and to give them a chance. 
  "If they don't respect the ceasefire in this period, the 
Yemen government will continue fighting," the statement said. 
  On Sunday the Yemeni government announced a five-day period 
for dialogue to end a civil war raging between northern and 
southern forces in Yemen since May 5. 
  A previous ceasefire announced by Sanaa late Friday broke 
down when fighting resumed early Saturday. 
  Both sides blame each other for the failure of the 
ceasefires. 

