BFN 

<F P=106> ["Third-Round DPRK-USA Talks To Be Held in Early July" -- </F>
KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, June 23 (KCNA) -- A spokesman for the 
DPRK Foreign Ministry answered a question put by KCNA today 
regarding the third round of DPRK-U.S. talks expected to be 
held. 
  He said: 
  Some time ago, the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song received 
former U.S. President Mr. Jimmy Carter and had a sincere talk 
with him for hours over matters of common concern. 
  He told Mr. Carter that the key to a solution of the nuclear 
issue was to build confidence between the DPRK and the United 
States. And he made an important proposal to break the present 
deadlock between the DPRK and the United States and reach a 
fundamental solution of the nuclear issue. 
  On this basis, a series of working contacts were made 
between 
the DPRK and the U.S. recently to hold the third round of talks. 
  Robert Gallucci, head of the U.S. side's delegation to the 
DPRK-U.S. talks, in a letter to his counterpart of our side 
June 20 confirmed the question of laying a groundwork for the 
talks and proposed to hold the third-round talks to discuss the 
guarantee of security and overall political and economic issues 
between the DPRK and the United States. 
  The head of our side in his reply letter June 22 confirmed 
well-intentioned measures to be taken by us for the third-round 
talks and agreed to the U.S. side's proposal. 
  In the letter we emphasized our stand that "sanctions" and 
dialogue are incompatible. 
  On June 22, U.S. President Bill Clinton expressed welcome 
toward our stand and said the discussion of "sanctions" against 
us at the UN Security Council would be withdrawn formally and 
they would come out to the third-round talks. 
  The third-round DPRK-U.S. talks are expected to be held in 
Geneva in the first week of July. 
  We expect that the third-round talks will be held on a fair 
and equal basis so that a substantial agreement may be reached 
for a fundamental solution of the nuclear issue and for the 
improvement of relations between the DPRK and the United States 
as a whole. 

