Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Judy Dempsey report: "Brown Coal With Green Appeal"] </F>
  [Text] Years of research are finally paying off for the 
Mining Academy of Freiberg, in the east German state of Saxony: 
its Institute for Agglomeration and Air Pollution is scheduled 
to mass-produce an environmentally friendly brown coal briquette. 
  Not all east Germans can take the invention seriously. 
"You're telling me that a 'green' lignite briquette exists?" 
says Jochen Hoefer, a former miner. "I know all about the 
lignite. The dirty, dusty air. We inhaled the stuff for more 
than 40 years, and we burned the stuff in our homes." 
  Wolfgang Naundorf, head of the institute, is not surprised 
by 
such descriptions: "Precisely because lignite is so dusty and 
contains such a high level of sulphuric acid, we began research 
on inventing the green briquette during the 1980s because we 
wanted to have clean air." 
  At first, the experiments were haphazard. This was largely 
because the former communist authorities in east Germany had no 
inclination to fund research that might slow down production of 
brown coal. Until unification, brown coal accounted for more 
than 85 per cent of primary energy consumption in the five east 
states. 
  "We got no financing or support for our research. We did it 
as a purely academic exercise," says Naundorf. Despite the lack 
of resources and modern equipmeht, the institute persevered. 
  Ralph Wallenberg, one of the scientists involved in the 
research, explains how, after many attempts, they found the 
successful formula. They added 3.5 grams [g] of calcium hydrate 
(a combination of lime, chalk and gypsum) to every 100g of raw 
lignite. The calcium hydrate was mixed with the lignite as a 
suspension in water. 
  The added calcium compounds reduced sulphuric acid emissions 
when the briquettes were burnt but had the disadvantage of 
weakening their structure. The researchers hardened the 
briquettes again by adding some pulverised hard-coal coke, or 
anthracite. 
  "The sulphuric acid emissions have been reduced from 3 per 
cent to 0.5 per cent and the calorific, or heating content, has 
been increased by between 5 and 10 per cent," says Wallenberg. 
  The institute could not have continued its research had it 
not received a contract last year from the giant Mitteldeutsche 
Braunkohle (Mibrag) lignite fields, which straddle the states of 
Saxony and Saxony-Anhalt, and which were being sold to an Anglo- 
American consortium led by Britain's Power-Gen and NRG of the 
US. "After much discussion, the consortium, although pretty 
sceptical about their value, decided to keep two of Mibrag's 
briquette- producing factories open," says Johann Neudert, head 
of one of Mibrag's engineering departments. 
  Naundorf says: "We had to work fast. On a dry coal basis, 
Mibrag has one of the highest sulphuric acid contents in 
Germany. It is between 2.5 and 4 per cent. Under European Union 
regulations, any solid fuels burned in small-scale outlets, for 
instance for domestic heating, must be reduced to 1 per cent by 
January 1995, otherwise they must be closed down." The contract 
enabled the institute to complete its research successfully. 
  The institute's staff know that one contract will not secure 
their future. At present, the state of Saxony provides a third 
of the institute's costs. The remaining two-thirds has to be 
raised by the staff even though they have had no previous 
experience of seeking research grants. Naundorf's small 
research department has been reduced by 10 to 16 members. 
  The need to secure more contracts to raise financing is even 
more critical because the academy is faced with probably the 
most serious crisis since its foundation in 1765: the collapse 
of manufacturing, and the shortage of students. 
  The closure of large heavy industry enterprises that used 
brown coal has been followed by the rapid run-down of the 
region's mining sector. Since 1990, more than 100,000 mining 
jobs have been lost and primary consumption of brown coal has 
plummeted from 91 million tonnes in 1989 to less than 51 million 
tonnes in 1993. The academy depended on the mining industry for 
its livelihood and very existence. Since the 18th century, it 
has trained generations of geologists and mining engineers, 
natural scientists and chemists. 
  "But now, we can hardly get enough students to fill the 
courses. The industry has few jobs," says Naundorf. Both the 
institute, set up in 1924 to conduct research into the 
properties of lignite, and the academy are finding it hard to 
pay staff. Morale is not high. 
  Wallenberg says one of the main drawbacks is equipment. "We 
cannot buy new equipment unless we win contracts. And if we 
don't win contracts, we can't refine our experiments to win 
contracts or pay our salaries." 
  Equipment notwithstanding, outsiders say they are struck by 
the academy's innovative standards. "The east German institutes 
do not have the state-of-the-art when it comes to equipment, but 
the people in Freiberg and, in my experience, east German 
scientists in general have the knowledge," says Michael Gillen, 
a mechanical engineer at the research department at Bord na 
Mona, Ireland's largest peat and turf company. 
  "They have all this brainpower which previously they could 
not use to its full potential. They compensated for the 
shortage of spare parts or new equipment by becoming highly 
creative and innovative," he added. 
  Bord na Mona recently contracted the institute to increase 
the durability and water resistance of the Irish peat briquette. 
"We might as well tap into the huge fund of knowledge," says 
Gillen. Selling that knowledge might secure Freiberg's furure. 

