Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Togolese president, General Gnassingbe Eyadema, 
flew to Abuja this evening from Yaounde, capital of Cameroon, to 
discuss with the head of state, General Sani Abacha, the 
Nigerian-Cameroon affairs over the Bakassi Peninsula. President 
Eyadema had held about two and half hours' discussion with 
President Paul Biya in Cameroon before coming to Abuja. His 
talks with the Nigerian head of state took place at the special 
lounge of the Abuja International Airport. The meeting lasted 
about one and a half hours, after which President Eyadema 
returned to Lome. Nigeria's foreign affairs minister, 
Ambassador Babagana Kingibe, later talked to State House 
correspondents on the meeting: 
  [Begin recording] [Kingibe] Well, as you know, the relations 
between Nigeria and Togo, they have always been excellent and 
very, very close. Nigeria and Togo have always taken 
initiatives jointly, initiatives of a kind that is aimed at 
advancing the process of integration, the process of 
understanding, and the process of cooperation in our subregion. 
And it is in this context of regular and close consultation 
between Togo and Nigeria that the President of Togo came for 
about a three-hour visit. Of course, when two leaders of the 
region, like they did, meet, of course they would discuss 
current issues, they would discuss issues of concern to the 
region, issues of concern to the OAU, and that kind of review 
of... 
  [Unidentified Correspondent, interrupting] Excuse me, sir. 
The Togolese head of state was supposed to have held some two 
hours' meeting with the Cameroonian president. What would he 
bring by way of the kind Cameroonian [words indistinct]? 
  [Kingibe] I am sure that the president of Togo would have 
briefed the head of state on the consultations he might have 
held with the president of Cameroon. Mind you, I think it is a 
presumption that they would have discussed the dispute over the 
Bakassi. But whatever it is, they held a tete-a-tete meeting, a 
closed-door meeting between the two of them. We have been 
informed that the meeting had been in the usual brotherly 
atmosphere, and had been fruitful, and that both leaders emerged 
happy from the meeting. 
  [Correspondent] What is the latest situation at the Bakassi 
Peninsula? 
  [Kingibe] Well, I think that troops are maintaining their 
code of conduct, which is, not to be provocative, not to provoke 
any incidents and maintain their positions, and not to initiate 
any action, except perhaps in self-defense. And it has been 
quiet since, and I am glad about that because we do need a quiet 
atmosphere in the field in order to allow us to take up the 
diplomatic way forward. 
  [Correspondent] Have you heard anything on President Biya's 
proposals to Nigeria? 
  [Kingibe] The position is that when earlier on, before the 
introduction of a new element by the arrival of the French 
troops, we were in close consultation and constant touch. And 
the process of consultation between the two heads of state led 
to our head of state inviting the president of Cameroon to come 
to Abuja for discussions. And after further consultations the 
president of Cameroon accepted it. In fact, he suggested that 
perhaps, symbolically, they should meet at a border town, and he 
suggested that perhaps Maiduguri would be a symbolically more 
appropriate place to meet. To which the head of state agreed. 
And the head of state went further -- as a gracious host -- to 
say to President Biya that he can pick or choose any date of 
convenience to him, he is waiting for him. And we are at this 
stage, and I am sure that the meeting will come off as soon as 
President Biya consults his diary, and a convenient time is 
found, I am sure he will come. 

