Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Patrick Marx: "Aeronautics -- Airbus </F>
Strengthens Its Industrial Presence in China"] 
  [Text] Despite U.S. competition, the European constructor 
has not given up on establishing itself on the Chinese market. 
Indeed, the company has just signed an agreement to involve 
more local companies in the provision of parts for its aircraft. 
  Airbus Industrie, which sold 18 aircraft to China in 1993, 
decided to hold out on Boeing, which sold 46 that same year (14 
percent of its deliveries -- LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES editor's note) 
on this market which analysts believe boasts tremendous 
potential in 10 years or so. In fact, the European consortium 
has just signed an agreement with China Aviation Supplies 
Corporation aimed at extending existing forms of industrial 
cooperation with other Chinese entities, like the Xian Aircraft 
Company, based in Shanxi province, and the Shenyang Aircraft 
Corporation, in Liaoning. These companies produce doors for all 
the European large aircraft and emergency exits for the small 
machines. The new agreement covers the delivery of various 
parts used in the manufacture and maintenance of aircraft, and 
is worth several hundred million dollars. 
  The three main constructors -- Boeing, Airbus Industrie, and 
McDonnell Douglas -- are locked in a merciless confrontation on 
the Chinese market. 
  This market is experiencing one of the strongest surges of 
growth in the world, with an upward curve of 20 to 30 percent, 
with some aircraft manufacturers not hesitating to rank it as a 
top priority -- together with the Japanese market, and with the 
exception of the United States -- for the next 16 years. 
According to the agreed predictions, growth in the 
Asian-Pacific area should represent an outlet for 3,000 
airliners worth something like 1,500 billion francs [Fr] between 
now and the year 2010. This growth will supposedly be led by 
China, which could alone account for between 600 and 800 
aircraft worth more than Fr230 billion. 
<H5>  China 75 Percent Equipped by Boeing </H5>
  In order to gain a lasting foothold in this eldorado, the 
aircraft manufacturers are making eyes at Beijing, and proposing 
to involve the country in the production process, thereby 
helping China to familiarize itself with the various aeronautic 
technologies. Boeing and McDonnell Douglas have already found 
suppliers there. Indeed, after a first industrial agreement 
signed in 1985, McDonnell Douglas even launched the coproduction 
of short and medium range aircraft in the MD-90 and MD-95 range 
together with the Shangai [as published] Aviation Industry 
Group. Three-fourths of the Western aircraft comprising the 
fleet of Chinese airlines are Boeing machines. Moreover, the 
U.S. company is not hesitating to weigh up the pros and cons of 
negotiating the "most favored nation status" clause attributed 
to China in order to boost sales. 
  Airbus Industrie is lagging behind the United States. The 
GIE [Economic Interest Group], which is involved in 
international cooperation via 1,500 suppliers in 27 countries, 
has just set up a new base in China which will cover commercial, 
industrial, and after-sales service activities, the management 
of which was entrusted to Rolf Hue, previously the regional 
sales manager for the Pacific. From this post, he will also 
cover Hong Kong (where two other clients, Cathay Pacific and 
Dragonair, are based -- LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES editor's note) and 
Macao. Now he will have to consolidate the agreement which has 
just been concluded with China Aviation Supplies Corporation. 

