BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on insurgent activities in Peru compiled from Peruvian 
media monitored through 5 May. 
  National Counterterrorism Directorate, Dincote, personnel on 
21 April arrested Lupita Ruiz Paredes, aka Maritza, who is the 
Shining Path, SL, military commander in Peru's southern part. 
She participated in many attacks in various townships of 
Cajamarca Department, including three ambushes in which 20 
policemen were killed. (Lima EXPRESO in Spanish 22 Apr 93 p A2) 
  Police arrested four of the 10 SL "subversives" in charge of 
indoctrinating residents of Mirgas district in Huaraz 
Department, and seized a large quantity of subversive 
propaganda, ammunition, explosives, and Army uniforms. This 
column also protected drug traffickers who operate in the 
Maranon jungle. (Lima EXPRESO in Spanish 23 Apr 94 p A13) 
  Nine members of the SL People's Aid of Peru faction, 
including political commander Neri Juana Alvarez Chavez, 23, aka 
Lucia, and military commander Guillermo Quispe Chipana, 34, aka 
Roberto, were presented to the press in Lima. They had 
perpetrated at least six attacks that claimed the lives of 15 
people. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 23 Apr 94 p A13) 
  Alleged "terrorists" on 28 April shot to death Benito 
Escalante Apaza, who was a leader of the Manuel Scorza 
shantytown, in the Lima district of San Juan de Lurigancho. 
(Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 29 Apr 94 p A18) 
  El Callao Counterterrorism Provincial Police arrested Lidia 
Rene Campos Casas, aka Jenny, and her bodyguard Richard Walter 
Pereda LLajaruna, aka Wilmer. She was in charge of coordinating 
the actions of the SL metropolitan committee in Lima and the 
so-called base force operating in Cajabamba, Cajamarca. They 
were members of a gang that killed eight policemen during an 
ambush in Cajabamba in 1992. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 29 
Apr 94 p A16) 
  On 29 April Dincote presented to the press in Lima 11 
members 
of an alleged SL command that had perpetrated many attacks in 
which 12 policemen, four members of the military, and eight 
civilians were killed. Weapons, explosives, and subversive 
materials used by this command were also exhibited. (Lima LA 
REPUBLICA in Spanish 30 Apr 94 p 12) 
  On 30 April alleged "terrorists" dynamited nine vehicles 
owned by a sugar mill in Paramonga District, Barranca Province. 
The police said that the attackers were members of an SL cell 
that operates in the Norte Chiquito area. The forces arrested 
10 suspected SL members shortly after the attack. (Lima LA 
REPUBLICA in Spanish 30 Apr 94 p 12) 
  The Supreme Court of Military Justice on 29 April confirmed 
that SL top leader Edmundo Cox Beuzeville had been sentenced to 
life imprisonment on charges of betraying his country. He will 
serve his sentence in the Yanamayo prison in Puno Department. 
(Lima LA REPUBLICA in Spanish 30 Apr 94 p 13) 
  National Police personnel arrested five alleged SL 
"terrorists" who are members of the so-called "Popular Artists 
Movement." They were in charge of reorganizing the SL cells in 
Huanuco. (Lima LA REPUBLICA in Spanish 1 May 94 p 23) 
  On 30 April Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement "subversives" 
burned four vehicles that were traveling on the highway linking 
Satipo with Ipoke, Satipo Province, Junin Department. One of 
the drivers was seriously wounded. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 
1 May 94 p A17) 
  The Huallaga Front antisubversive forces arrested 25 SL 
members and seized weapons, communications equipment, and 
subversive propaganda during operations conducted over the past 
four days in SL camps in Huanuco and San Martin Departments. 
(Lima LA REPUBLICA in Spanish 3 May 94 p 3) 
  Colonel Eduardo Mendoza Rodriguez, Cajamarca National Police 
subregional director, reported that 151 civilians and 15 
military had died as a result of the antiterrorist struggle in 
Cajamarca Department over the past 12 years. He said that 220 
attacks and 15 clashes between the police and "terrorists" were 
perpetrated during this period. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 5 
May 94 p A17) 

