Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 3 (XINHUA) -- Chinese top legislator 
Qiao Shi said here today that the National People's Congress 
(NPC), China's parliament, is always happy to expand its 
cooperation and exchanges with its counterparts in other 
countries and help to stablize the population in Asia and the 
rest of the world. 
  Qiao Shi, chairman of the NPC's Standing Committee, said 
this 
at a meeting with participants in the 10th Asian 
Parliamentarians' Meeting on Population and Development (APPD), 
which opened here today. 
  Welcoming all the participants, Qiao noted that most of the 
Asian countries are faced with the problems of population and 
development. The solution of this problem is of great 
significance to world peace, stability, prosperity and 
development. 
  In recent years, Asia has been enjoying booming economic 
growth and many countries here have also gained remarkable 
achievements in the population and family planning sectors, Qiao 
said. 
  He added that Asian countries have made great contributions 
to the solution of the population and development problem of the 
world. 
  Qiao told the guests that China's economy has logged 
relatively fast growth since it launched its reform and opening 
up drive more than a decade ago. 
  However, owing to its large population, the ratio of China's 
natural resources and industrial and agricultural products to 
its population is still very low, Qiao said. 
  In the past 20 years, China has been vigorously pursuing 
family planning. The decline of the birth rate has eased the 
contradiction between population growth and socio-economic 
development, natural resources and environmental protection. 
  Yet, China still has a long way to go in controlling 
population growth and lifting its people's living standard, Qiao 
stressed. 
  On the meeting, Qiao noted that the gathering was conducive 
to the strengthening of friendship among parliamentarians from 
various countries and to the solution of the population and 
development problems in Asia. 
  Fukusaburo Maeda, chairman of the Asian Population and 
Development Association, expressed thanks on behalf of all 
participants for China's warm reception and good organization. 
  Population and development are the biggest issues facing 
today's world, Maeda said. 
  He told Qiao that China has made great contributions in this 
area and expressed the hope that it would continue to do so. 

