Microelectronics 

<F P=102>   94WS0344A Duesseldorf WIRTSCHAFTSWOCHE in German 6 May 94 pp 
92-98 </F>

<F P=103> 94WS0344A </F>
<F P=104>  Duesseldorf WIRTSCHAFTSWOCHE </F>
<F P=105>  German </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Burkhard Boendel: "Never Say Never"] </F>
  [Text] Europe's semiconductor manufacturers are once 
again making gains after years of severe rationalization. In the 
new growth markets their new products have excellent starting 
positions. 
  When the Association of German Electrical Engineers (VDE) 
had 
evaluated a survey on the state of German microelectronics sent 
out to electrical engineering and electronics firms and 
mechanical engineering firms last year, the result was 
depressing: two-thirds of the owners and managers surveyed 
judged that Germany would lose its share in world leadership or 
had already lost it. 
  The magazine BILD DER WISSENSCHAFT also asserted in its 
March 
issue that Germany's manufacturers were threatening to "sleep 
through their last chance in microelectronics" in the case of 
application-specific chips, so-called ASICS. Current statistics 
seem to corroborate the pessimists: in 1993, for the first time, 
no Europeans were represented among the top ten semiconductor 
manufacturers in the world. And the Americans have taken over 
the leadership in production in Europe. 
  But in reality other facts than the bare market figures 
leave 
little room for self-pitying laments. Europeans are producing 
again in Europe and are investing, particularly in new chip 
factories ("fabs"). 
  --Last year the Finnish electronics company Nokia AB moved 
its color television production from Singapore back to Bochum. 
This was made possible by a new chip from Philips. The color 
decoder--the key to picture and color processing--combines all 
the necessary functions on a single silicon square. The advanced 
integration carried out by the Dutch company brings such great 
savings in cost that the return to the Ruhr area was worthwhile. 
  --A few months ago, SGS-Thomson opened Europe's most modern 
production plant in Crolles near Grenoble, where the 
French-Italian company produces semiconductors with structures 
of 0.5 micrometers, soon even 0.35 micrometers. 
  --Siemens is expanding its plant in Regensburg, where 
4-megabit storage chips--so-called DRAMS--are produced, and is 
building a top-quality wafer factory in Dresden for 2.4 billion 
German marks [DM] to manufacture 16- and 64-megabit chips. 
  --At the end of May Temic Telefunken Microelectronic GmbH 
will open a new factory in Heilbronn, among other things for the 
manufacture of components for infrared data communication. These 
will mean the end of the cable spaghetti between laptop, printer 
and modem. It is not only for the modules which integrate sender 
and receiver on one chip that Temic is assuming the role of a 
global frontrunner. The production technology which comes with 
it is also worth showing the world: the silicon wafers are in 
hermetically sealed transport cubes--so-called Standard 
Mechanical Interfaces (SMIF-POTS)--which are opened by 
processing robots at the processing stations. The new processing 
technology makes it possible to have spatially limited clean 
rooms with corresopndingly lower investment and with throughput 
time cut in half. "Here we are more than a year ahead of the 
Japanese and the Americans in technology," proclaims managing 
director Frank Dieter Maier proudly. 
  The investments are the expression of regained strength and 
a 
signal "that we are going on the offensive again," says Doug 
Dunn, chairman of the board of Philips Semiconductor 
International BV in Eindhover (see accompanying interview). By 
now the competition has noticed it too: Armin Vogel, marketing 
manager of Intel GmbH in Munich, notes, "The efforts of the 
Europeans in recent years have been significant, we're paying 
more attention to them." And when technology gurus like 
Daimler-Benz director Hartmut Weule talk about the "strategic 
significance of micrelectronics for Germany's international 
standing," the all-clear can be sounded: "We have not been poor 
relations for a long time now," concludes Ingolf Runge, director 
of the Fraunhofer Institute for Solid Body Technology in Munich. 
  The first and most important step for the European 
renaissance in semiconductor market is the regained 
profitability of the European quartet of Philips, SGS-Thomson, 
Siemens and Temic (see accompanying box). But not only the 
global players are winning. Small chip boutiques like the 
Society for Silicon Applications mbH (SICAN) in Hannover or the 
Microelectronic Applications Center GmbH Thuringia (MAZET) in 
Erfurt are setting up a high-tech network all over the country 
and are providing services particularly for mid-sized companies 
with special chips in small numbers. 
  And research institutions like the Heinrich Hertz Institute 
for Information Technology in Berlin also contradict the ominous 
croaking about Germany being behind in microelectronics. For 
instance, the Berlin information technologists recently 
succeeded in combining lasers and photodiodes in a component 
using electronic chips. The system transforms optical signals to 
electrical ones, and vice versa. In the near future this 
technology will make possible the cheap production of 
opticoelectronic components, such as will be required in massive 
quantities for the planned data highways. This masterpiece from 
Berlin caused worldwide turmoil. The American telecommunications 
giant AT&amp;T was among the first companies to acquire test 
samples. 
  The most impressive example of the Europeans' new strength 
is 
the production of socalled DRAM storage at Siemens. Until one 
and a half years ago the factory in Regensburg resembled a 
shredder for thousand-mark notes. The company pumped several 
billion marks into development and production. In spite of their 
immense efforts, the business was running a deficit for a very 
long time--until two years ago, when Ulrich Schumacher, then 33 
years old, took over the sector, which had been left for dead. 
With management methods like simultaneous engineering and a 
systematic orientation of the development team toward process 
and product optimization, the youngster achieved the turning 
point. Within a single year yield from the Regensburg factory 
nearly doubled, from 45 percent to over 80 percent, the silicon 
surface for the chip was reduced from 75 to 58 square 
millimeters, and the production process was simplified from 18 
steps to 15. Now Siemens is running the most rationalized 
production site in the world for 4-megabit storage chips. "That 
is our cash cow," Schumacher says gleefully. The result: While 
until recently Siemens' retirement from the DRAM business was 
taken for granted, now Regensburg is being expanded--and in 
Dresden a completely new plant is being constructed, which board 
member Juergen Knorr says is intended principally to produce 
DRAMs. 
  This makes sense because Siemens has turned itself into a 
technology leader. Last fall, it was the Munich group of all 
people, the ones who were always arriving too late with their 
new chip generations, who were the first company in the world to 
present a functional model for a 64-megabit storage chip, far 
ahead of Toshiba, Fujitsu, Texas Instruments or Hitachi. The 
race to catch up in technology has been successful. 
  And there's more. In important growth markets, particularly 
in ASICs-- special chips which are constructed according to the 
client's instructions--the Europeans are even leading the global 
technology race: 
  --An example from telecommunications (market volume: $10 
billion; trend: annual growth of 15 percent). With the GSM 
standard for digital mobile radio the Europeans have staked 
their claim in a growth market which will take over the role of 
the computer industry within the next decade. 
  Those to profit most from the growth market in chips for 
mobile radio, besides the American manufacturer Motorola, are 
mainly Siemens and SGS- Thomson. Technologically the Munich 
company is a clear leader in the field with highly-integrated 
chip sets and have a market share of just under 70 percent of 
components for this high frequency technology: "Besides Motorola 
there are no manufacturers who do not use our semiconductors," 
says marketing director Rolf-Juergen Bruess. Nokia--number two 
behind Motorola in the finished product sector and at present 
purveyor of the lightest handsets--has now selected Siemens as 
its strategic partner in chip development and delivery. 
  --An example from the automotive industry (market volume: $5 
billion; trend: annual growth of just under 20 percent): the 
permeation of the automobile with electronics will shoot up in 
the next few years to up to 20 percent of the production value. 
Air bags, ABS, engine and gear control, air conditioning: 
nothing will function without silicon. But automotive 
electronics "is one of Europe's strong points," as Carl 
Muehlner, business manager of Dataquest GmbH in Munich, 
acknowledges. Temic, for example, has reduced the price of ABS 
chips over the last few years by two-thirds. At the same time 
the efficiency of the component has quadrupled. 
  And the Europeans are not letting up. For instance, Philips 
has already set its sights on first place in the electronic road 
barriers which are now flooding the marketplace. Bosch developed 
the Controller Area Network (CAN), a data net to which all 
electrical and electronic devices in the car can be linked. CAN 
could even make itself into the world standard. Mercedes-Benz is 
already introducing CAN into top-of-the-line cars. 
  --An example from the chip card industry (market volume: 
$155 
million; trend: annual growth of just under 40 percent): 
Pocket-sized computers scored a breakthrough in the telephone 
card; now there are further mass applications like health 
insurance and bank cards (see WIRTSCHAFTSWOCHE 49/1993). Cards 
as a substitute for tickets in local travel are also being 
tested. By the end of the decade a world market of over a 
billion dollars for the chip card semiconductors alone is 
beckoning. At the moment Siemens, SGS-Thomson and Motorola are 
dividing up the business among themselves. The knowhow for 
future contactless cards is being developed here. Nothing is 
going to change in the market distribution in the near future. 
The demands for security and functionality are too elaborate, 
the price war too bitter. 
  --An example from the multimedia industry (market volume for 
all multimedia products: $20 billion; trend: annual growth rates 
around 20 percent): Chip producers in Germany have been 
developing electronics for digital television for years. One of 
the frontrunners is ITT Intermetall GmbH, subsidiary of the 
American ITT company, with research, production and management 
located in Freiburg, which introduced the first components for 
digital picture and sound processing at the beginning of the 
80's and is now moving to the second product generation with the 
chip set DIGIT3000. Philips, the largest manufacturer of picture 
tubes and the electronic regulators that come with them, has 
also developed the components for a completely digital picture 
and sound processing tot he production stage. That these 
preliminary achievements cannot be converted immediately into 
world success is due to the fact that the Europeans were unable 
to agree promptly on the introduction of digital television. 
Perhaps they will succeed now with digital radio (digital 
audio-broadcasting, DAB) where they failed with television. At 
any rate, chips have been developed for digital radio which are 
already being successfully tested in experimental transmissions 
by Intermetall. The preliminary studies are not so far advanced 
either in Japan or in the US. 
  That leaves the computer. Here the Europeans have not had 
much to offer until now. In particular, the program completely 
lacks the proprietary processors with which Intel was able to 
catapult itself to world leadership with no close rivals. And 
even attacks against Intel's dominance are not being launched by 
the European companies, but by Apple, Motorola and IBM with the 
power PC. 
  But there is sufficient knowhow in this area in Europe. IBM, 
for example, had the processor for its new parallel computer 
developed in the Bonn Institute for Discrete Mathematics under 
Professor Bernard Korte. Korte says, "We could do the same 
thing, of course, with a European processor manufacturer." If 
there were any. But the tendency to hold back is breaking down: 
SGS-Thomson has started a new business area, in order to enter 
the market for microprocessors in the near future. Philips 
manager Dunn, who is ruling out involvement in processors for 
his company at the moment, knows the golden rule in the chip 
business: "Never say never." 
  [Box, pp 96-97]: 
<H5>  "In the Black Again" </H5>
  The recovery of the European chip industry is progressing 
well: 
  --In 1993 Philips was in the black in the chip division. 
With 
a gross margin of 11 percent in the semiconductor sector, the 
Dutch company is among the world's most profitable producers. In 
1993, with sales of $2.3 billion, they dropped to twelfth place 
in world rankings, but "we want to be at least in eighth place 
by 1998," says Philips manager Dunn. 
  --SGS-Thomson is planning to extend its world market share 
to 
five percent by the end of the decade, which means doubling the 
current share (sales: $2.1 billion) and placing among the top 
ten. So far the French-Italian conglomerate's plan is working: 
for years productivity has been rising by 15 percent annually to 
the current $115,000 per employee. For high-performance chips 
which are being used for the regulation of read/write heads in 
hard disks, and for special storage components (EPROM), 
SGS-Thomson is unquestionably among the world leaders. In 1993 
the company was again able to show a profit: $160 million. 
"SGS-Thomson shocks pessimists," was THE WALL STREET JOURNAL's 
comment on the successful recovery. 
  --The microelectronics sector of Siemens AG will pass the 
break-even point this year, sooner than anticipated, according 
to semiconductor manager Juergen Knorr. Most divisions are 
already showing profits today. Next year, according to Knorr, 
the whole semiconductor sector will "yield a positive result." 
The growth in sales accelerated last year to 21 percent (sales 
in 1993: $2.1 billion dollars). Knorr wants to join the ranks of 
the Top Ten in the next few years. 
  --Daimler-Benz subsidiary Temic Telefunken Microelektronic 
GmbH in Heilbronn, sectioned off from AEG and German Aerospace 
as an electronics company in 1992, grew by almost 20 percent as 
the smallest and newest member of the European semiconductor 
quartet (sales: DM1.1 billion for semiconductors) and even 
showed profits. 
  [Interview with Doug Dunn] 
<H5>  "Good Money With Chips" </H5>
  The semiconductor head at Philips sees no reason for 
European pusillanimity in the semiconductor market. 
  --Herr Dunn, are we still dependent on Japan in 
microelectronics? 
  Dunn: The Japanese will always be an extremely 
powerful challenge. But the danger of strategic dependency, 
particuarly in storage chips, has been eliminated. Now Korean 
and American producers are in a similarly strong position in the 
storage area, and don't forget Siemens. There is plenty of 
competition. Along the whole spectrum of semiconductors things 
look even better. The Japanese have no processors, the Americans 
are sharing the market among themselves. But they have few logic 
components for special applications, such as in the area of 
telecommunications. There Europe is very strong. The Japanese 
always dominated in standard products. But client-specific 
solutions will gain greatly in importance in the future. 
  --How could it ever come about that European chip producers 
became so weak? 
  Dunn: The semiconductor industry is a part of the 
whole electronics industry. And things went very badly with them 
in the past. Just think of the entertainment industry. And in 
the PC sector we have no domestic market worth mentioning. 
  --But these deficiencies still exist? 
  Dunn: Yes. But in the first place we have harsh 
rationalizations behind us. We are earning good money again in 
Europe with chips. In the second place, today we are much more 
client-oriented and go where our customers are. And in the third 
place, important growth markets are coming into existence in 
Europe, in which we have excellent starting positions. 
  --There is no general awareness of this yet. 
  Dunn: Unfortunately, you are right. We must 
finally shake off the image of being perpetual losers in the 
area of microelectronics. That is not only inaccurate, but even 
counterproductive. If we have no faith in ourselves we will not 
achieve anything. 
  --Won't the good prospects in the new markets be useless as 
soon as Japan and America attack with concentrated power? 
  Dunn: Our foundation is strong enough. But the 
question is whether we should continue with our present 
structure. I think that in future we will have to cooperate even 
more in order to share the high cost of investment in research 
and development or in factories. At the end of this decade we 
will have very many virtual companies, in which manufacturers 
work together in a very limited way towards a goal without being 
financially committed. Together with SGS-Thomson we have 
developed a 0.5-micrometer process which is being installed in 
the new factory in Crolles. Siemens has stated its intention of 
taking a partner on board in Dresden. Motorola, IBM and Apple 
developed the power PC together. These are signs of the 
structures of the future. 

