BFN 

<F P=106> [Ilya Bulavinov report: ``Security Council Opposes Prime </F>
Minister's Decision. Viktor Chernomyrdin Cherishes Radioactive 
Memories of the USSR''] 
  [Text] Yesterday, the Security Council's Interdepartmental 
Commission on the Environment presented a memo to the council's 
secretary, Oleg Lobov, on the need to revise agreements 
reaffirmed during Viktor Chernomyrdin during his recent visit to 
Hungary. The issue is the possibility of burying radioactive 
wastes of the Hungarian ``Paks'' nuclear power station in 
Russia. KOMMERSANT-DAILY has learned that the prime minister 
discussed the impending scandal with Boris Yeltsin, too, during 
their meeting in Zavidovo on the evening of 6 April. 
  On 30 March, Viktor Chernomyrdin issued a directive tasking 
the Atomic Energy Ministry, upon agreement with the Foreign 
Ministry and the State Nuclear Supervision Committee, with 
signing a document with the Hungarians whereby Russia would 
``accept for reprocessing spent nuclear fuel of the `Paks' 
nuclear electric power station, with vitrified (that is, 
encapsulated in glass cubes) radioactive wastes of the 
reprocessing to be buried on Russian territory.'' It has turned 
out, however, that this is only the tip of an iceberg detected 
by environmentalists. In fact, the agreement to accept 
Hungarian radioactive wastes has been prompted not only by the 
desire to earn money. 
  Under the prime minister's directive, the Atomic Energy 
Ministry was to sign a protocol as part of a bilateral treaty 
between the Soviet Union and Hungary, which was concluded back 
in 1966. At the time, when building nuclear power stations 
abroad, Moscow usually undertook to reprocess and to store 
radioactive wastes on its territory. Having declared itself the 
legal successor to the USSR, Russia has effectively taken over 
the obligation. 
  The problem is that on 21 April 1993 Boris Yeltsin signed an 
edict obliging the government to make provisions for the return 
of nuclear wastes reprocessed (vitrified) by Russia to their 
respective owners when negotiating intergovernment agreements on 
the construction and operation of nuclear power stations abroad. 
Moreover, the Law on the Protection of the Environment prohibits 
``radioactive wastes from other states'' from being brought into 
Russia ``for the purposes of storing or burying.'' Under the 
documents, Russia has effectively no objections against the 
reprocessing of the wastes, but it refuses to keep them on its 
territory for further storage. The prime minister could hardly 
be unaware of the documents. During the visit, however, he 
preferred to bear in mind only the old treaty that suits Hungary 
alone. This may cost him plenty. According to KOMMERSANT-DAILY 
information, today the State Duma is also planning to discuss 
the matter of burying Hungarian wastes. 
  The Security Council's Interdepartmental Commission has 
demanded that agreements between Russia and Hungary be brought 
in line with the presidential edict and Russian law. The 
environmentalists' resolve has been boosted by the fact that 
representatives of the Foreign Ministry, the State Nuclear 
Supervision Committee, and the Environmental Protection Ministry 
have voiced disagreement with the draft protocol in response to 
the commission's unofficial requests. They have made no official 
denials, however, that they themselves have been involved in 
drafting the document. Meanwhile, radioactive waste storages in 
Chelyabinsk Oblast at the ``Mayak'' Production Association, 
which vitrifies nuclear wastes, have long been overfilled. The 
regional authorities' official stance on the ``parcel'' from 
Hungary is yet unknown -- they also prefer to keep silent. 

