BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Banyat Thasaniyawet and Nattaya Chetchotirot: </F>
"Sudden About-Face Makes Political Tension Worse"] 
  [Text] The Democrat Party's about face, which came abruptly 
on Tuesday night and was reconfirmed yesterday, has virtually 
dashed all hopes that the political tension which has gripped 
the country for about two weeks will come to a quick end. 
  The party made it clear that it would neither second nor 
vote 
for the motion to be submitted to Parliament calling for the 
setting up of an ad hoc committee "to compile and reword" the 
Constitution. 
  The party's sudden turnaround was in contrast to the 
position 
adopted by government "whips" on Tuesday in favour of 
constitutional and political reform. However, the whips 
maintained that the Government would not initiate the motion, 
but would leave that task to the initiative of individual MPs. 
  Noticeably, the hardline stance adopted by the majority of 
the Democrats came after Army Commander-in-Chief Gen Wimon 
Wongwanit issued a statement through the Army spokesman pledging 
full support for the Chuan administration in the face of 
protests by hunger striker Chalat Worachat and his supporters. 
  Some observers said the army chief's pledge had encouraged 
the Democrats not to bow to the demands of the group and, at the 
same time, to further deepen the conflict with the Phalang Tham 
Party [PTP], strange bedfellow in the coalition government. 
Other observers interpreted the pledge as both a blessing and a 
warning to the Government. 
  As of yesterday, the backtracking by the Democrats and NAP 
[New Aspiration Party] left the PTP the only party to submit the 
motion. Yet, there was a split in the PTP between the ministers 
who are in favour of toeing the Democrat line and the religious 
faction which wants to keep its promise to pro-democracy groups 
to press ahead with the motion. Finally, the party reluctantly 
opted out, but individual MPs went ahead to table the motion. 
  Informed PTP sources said Chamlong Simuang, the party's 
founder, did not second the motion at the insistence of senior 
party members, who did not want him to be seen openly supporting 
Chalat and his backers. 
  Even if the PTP MPs had succeeded in submitting the motion, 
the chances appear slim that the motion will be endorsed by the 
House. None of the Democrats would vote for it, as they have 
said explicitly, nor could the PTP rely on the Opposition vote. 
Although the Opposition earlier announced that they would 
support the motion, they appeared to have changed their minds 
yesterday after learning of the Democrats' about-face. 
  Latest reports yesterday afternoon indicated that House 
Speaker Marut Bunnak, also a Democrat, had proposed to the PTP 
to withdraw the motion and offered to help resolve the dispute. 
But how he could single-handedly end the stalemate without 
support from the Democrats is anybody's guess. 
  What appears to be certain is that Chalat will not end his 
fast tomorrow as earlier predicted. He announced through his 
aides that he would end the hunger strike when the House agreed 
to form a panel to write a new charter, which had been expected 
to happen tomorrow. Now that the situation has changed, he is 
likely to continue his fast. Observers doubt that Mr Marut will 
be able to convince him to change his mind. 
  Not only have the Democrats managed to further alienate the 
PTP, they have also made more foes among their former allies, 
the pro-democracy groups which have loosely formed the 
Organisation for Political Reform in support of Chalat's hunger 
strike. Protests were reported in Nakhon Ratchasima and Maha 
Sarakham yesterday in reaction to the Democrats' backtracking. 
Observers said they anticipate more protests. 
  What have the Democrat gained from this exercise, which, as 
already seen, appears to have worsened the already tense 
political atmosphere and caused more confusion? This is not to 
mention the new wounds that have been inflicted on the coalition 
and its parties. The only consolation appears to be the Army's 
pledge to stand by the Government. 
  Analysts believe the Democrats may have felt the protest was 
the last straw and so are ready to face any consequences. The 
Democrats can effect a Cabinet reshuffle to boot out the PTP or 
to dissolve Parliament, or Prime Minister Chuan Likphai may step 
down so a new Cabinet can be formed, with the likelihood that 
the Chat Thai Party would replace the PTP. 
  With this latest move by the Democrats which has further 
deepened the chasm of mistrust between them and the PTP -- one 
may be sure that the breakup of the Government will come sooner 
than expected. 

