BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with unidentified leader of the Ulster Freedom </F>
Fighters by Eamonn Mallie; place and date not given; quotation 
marks as published] 
  [Text] "Because of the job I am in, people will say I am a 
bastard, but if I wasn't doing it, someone else would be." So 
says the former British Army soldier who is now commander of the 
Ulster Freedom Fighters [UFF], an illegal Protestant terrorist 
force. 
  On Wednesday [13 April], UFF gunmen tried to murder a 
wheelchair-bound multiple sclerosis victim just days after he 
had returned from Lourdes seeking a miracle cure for his 
illness. Paul O'Neill, a 33-year-old Catholic, was hit in the 
face and arms as eight shots were fired through the windows of 
his Belfast home. His father, Aidan, 61, was wounded in the 
chest. Police dismissed claims that the family had any link 
with IRA terrorists. 
  Twenty-four hours later, Loyalist paramilitaries shot dead a 
Sinn Fein councillor's wife at her home in the city. 
Mother-of-two Theresa Clinton, 33, was hit when a UFF gunman 
sprayed the house with bullets. 
  The attacks are part of a long line of brutal sectarian 
murders mounted by Protestant paramilitaries. Loyalists have 
been responsible for eight of the 11 terrorist murders in the 
province this year. According to its leader, the UFF intends to 
continue its attacks in the North and has targeted for 
assassination John Hume, the Social Democratic and Labour Party 
[SDLP] MP who has been holding talks with Sinn Fein leader Gerry 
Adams. The UFF is also threatening to take its campaign into 
the Irish Republic. 
  Of the Irish Prime Minister, Albert Reynolds, and his 
involvement in the Downing Street Declaration, the UFF leader 
said: "The more interference, the more intransigence on his 
side, the more inevitable a Loyalist assault on the South." 
  As a first step, the UFF is attempting to build up recruits 
in border areas. "We see ourselves as less British as time 
passes," said the leader. "It is evident from what has been 
happening since the Anglo-Irish agreement and the Downing Street 
Declaration that the British Government's long-term objective is 
a united Ireland and we feel they are preparing the groundwork. 
  ``They are putting structures in place so that when that 
eventually comes about it will not be such a long step.'' 
  He showed no trust in the present Secretary of State for 
Northern Ireland, Sir Patrick Mayhew. "He's certainly one of 
the greener Secretaries of State. I wouldn't trust him. He has 
lied and lied again. 
  ``Our short-term aim is to take the fight to Sinn Fein-IRA 
in 
a pro-active campaign instead of a reactive campaign. We're 
only at the start of this process. Our enemy is coming from 
three fronts, Sinn Fein-IRA, the Irish government and the SDLP. 
Anybody with the objectives of the pan-nationalist front or who 
aids and abets them will be targeted. 
  ``We feel we're being taken into a united Ireland against 
our 
will and we will do everything to resist that. 
  ``If we have an internal settlement and we sort out our own 
problems without the interference of Britain or Dublin and we 
get an accountable government back, we will then stretch out the 
hand of friendship. 
  ``The Dublin government is the bigger threat. We don't see 
our own government as a threat, but its long-term objective 
seems to be that it wants to leave. We believe if they could 
leave tomorrow they would.'' 
  Lord Carson, the father-figure of Loyalism, once predicted 
that "the final battle will be between Loyalists and the British 
Army." But the UFF leader said: "It is too early for that to 
happen. It would be a sorry state of affairs if our own 
Government turned our own army against us, considering that a 
lot of us in the Loyalist community served in the armed forces 
and I have served." 
  He refused to discuss the size of the Protestant 
paramilitary 
forces saying only: "There's an ongoing recruitment drive in all 
areas." This drive includes recruits into Ulster Young 
Militants, the junior wing of the UFF. A typical recruit was 
described in this way: "He is 16 to 18 years, mostly working 
class. We're not going for hoods-they are carefully vetted and 
sworn in." 
  Security sources have acknowledged that the Loyalist 
paramilitaries are increasingly well armed and trained. Sinn 
Fein repeatedly alleges that this has happened with the help and 
awareness of British intelligence. They are thought to have 
received a huge consignment of weapons via South Africa in the 
late Eighties. In recent months, they have deployed 
rocket-propelled grenades in targeting Sinn Fein advice centres 
in west and north Belfast. In the past two years, the UFF have 
also carried out a series of attacks on the homes of members of 
Republican organisations and on the SDLP, where entire families 
suffered bomb and gun attacks. 
  Thirteen members of Sinn Fein have been killed, as have a 
further seven people married to, or connected with, Sinn Fein 
members. 
  Asked if it is justifiable to target innocent women and 
children, the UFF leader replied: "There is an onus on everybody 
to minimise risk to civilians, but in the present situation 
there are going to be civilian casualties -- though regrettable. 
I am not trying to justify it. It is not a deliberate ploy or 
aim. The reverse has happened in our community." 
  Of the SDLP leader John Hume, the UFF commander said: "At 
the 
minute within working-class areas, John Hume has brought the 
SDLP almost to the point where they are inseparable from Sinn 
Fein. No matter which way Mr Hume puts his peace process, we 
don't see it as a peace process. We see it as a Dublin process. 
We couldn't do business with Hume. He will never be able to 
recover and gain the confidence of Unionists. He's part of the 
pan-nationalist front and he's a target." 
  In a further defence of the use of violence, the UFF leader 
added: "The British Government hasn't had the will to defeat the 
IRA. There has been a policy of containment instead of an 
offensive policy. If your Government doesn't have the will to 
defend its people then surely any man has the right to defence. 
The line the SDLP and the Dublin government are taking at the 
minute gives encouragement to Sinn Fein and the IRA. 
  ``Mr Reynolds has stated there is a yawning gap between Sinn 
Fein and the British Government. We can assure Mr Reynolds 
there is an even wider gap between himself, Sinn Fein and the 
IRA and the Loyalist community. He may talk about structures 
being put in place ... what the man has got to realise is he's 
not paying a price at this point for his government's 
interference. He's getting away scot-free. Would he be so 
quick to interfere if the conflict was transferred South?'' 

