Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, Jan. 31 KYODO -- The government and the 
ruling parties are set to include an income tax cut without 
tying it to a consumption tax hike in the economic stimulus 
package to be announced Thursday [3 February], government and 
party sources said Monday. 
  The sources said the tax cuts would total 6 trillion to 7 
trillion yen and be retroactive to January. 
  The splitting of the tax cut and consumption tax hike will 
be 
officially decided at a joint economic forum of the government 
and the coalition parties, the sources said. 
  The forum held a meeting Monday evening, and Deputy Prime 
Ministry Tsutomu Hata, who chairs the forum, told reporters 
after the meeting that a final decision will come by Wednesday. 
The decision, the sources said, will be to finance the cut in 
income and residential taxes by issuing short-term 
deficit-covering bonds. 
  But the Finance Ministry is continuing to insist on tying 
the 
income tax cut to a raise in the consumption tax rate, currently 
at 3 percent. 
  Given the ministry's insistence, the forum is to include a 
provision in the fiscal 1994 tax reform plan to "correct" the 
ratio of direct to indirect tax revenues in one or two years to 
fund the tax cut, the sources said. This means, in effect, 
hiking the consumption tax rate. 
  Hata said, "tax cuts without any future (funding) 
expectations are dangerous for the nation," indicating an 
consumption tax hike will be implemented in the future. 
  The sources said that to meet the antipathy of some in the 
coalition to any reference to a consumption tax, the forum is 
also considering stipulating that a fixed proportion of 
consumption tax revenue be used for social welfare, and 
recommend changing the name to a "welfare tax" or "livelihood 
tax." 
  The decision, if made as the sources predict, will mean a 
setback for the Finance Ministry, which has been insisting on 
inclusion of concrete timing and scale of a consumption tax hike 
as a "collateral" for repaying the deficit-covering bonds. 
  The Finance Ministry faced strong objections led by the 
Social Democratic Party (SDP) -- The largest in the coalition -- 
to such a move from and the threat of shaking the coalition 
government if it pushed its demands too hard, the sources said. 
  A consumption tax hike would also be highly unpopular with 
the public at a time when the economy is so weak, and could also 
draw criticism from the United States, which is seeking strong 
measures to stimulate domestic demand to reduce Japan's huge 
trade surplus, they noted. 
  The Finance Ministry had insisted that the same fiscal 1994 
tax reform bills that specify the cuts also clearly spell out a 
hike in the consumption tax rate to around 7 percent from its 
current 3 percent, to be implemented in April next year. 
  But the SDP and Komeito [Clean Government Party], at 
Monday's 
meeting of coalition parties again opposed linking the income 
and residential tax cuts with the consumption tax increase, the 
sources said. 
  Meanwhile, some cabinet members at a meeting of government 
and coalition party leaders, called for reviewing the tax issue 
later under a broader policy to address the nation's aging 
society, taking into account the concerns of such people as 
fixed-income pensioners. 
  Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, although indicating he 
would leave it to the coalition how to handle the funding of the 
tax cuts, effectively made it difficult to include the tax hike 
by saying he wanted the tax issue decided Wednesday and included 
in Thursday's stimulus package, the sources said. 

