BFN 

<F P=106> ["Issue and Opinion" column by Salamah 'Ukur: "No to U.S. </F>
Blockade"] 
  [Text] In the first American reaction to His Majesty King 
Husayn's remarks about the U.S. blockade of Jordan, a State 
Department spokesman said his country will likely reconsider its 
approach rather than lift the siege altogether. 
  It would seem our information minister does not mind our 
ships being inspected at the Port of al-'Aqabah instead of the 
Suez Canal or further out at sea. At his news conference, Jawad 
al-'Anani simply criticized the checking procedure itself. 
  Inspection of the ships at the Port of al-'Aqabah is a 
blockade, pure and simple. Is there any reason the blockade 
should remain??!!! And what justification is there to inspect 
incoming ships carrying goods intended for Jordan?!! 
  By way of justifying the blockade of al-'Aqabah Port, the 
pressure being applied on Jordan, the extreme inconveniences it 
is experiencing, and the high cost to Jordan's national economy, 
the U.S. Administration argues that it wants to ensure that the 
goods aboard incoming ships do not find their way to blockaded 
Iraq. If that is the intention, why are the ships bound for 
Iran and Turkey -- both with borders with Iraq -- not subjected 
to the same routine??!! 
  We are aware that the U.S. Administration encourages trade 
between Turkey and Iraq as a reward for Turkey's shameful stand 
in the second Gulf war. We are also aware that Washington, 
grateful for Iran's stance during the 30-state aggression, 
avoids even a mere reference to Iraqi-Iranian relations. 
  The U.S. Administration is keen not to provoke Iran at this 
stage lest it lurch into the anti-American camp. 
  It is possible, then, that there are reasons and pretexts 
other than those advanced by the U.S. Administration to explain 
its unfair blockade of Jordan. 
  His Majesty King Husayn, acknowledged for his foresight, has 
exposed the intentions harbored by the U.S. Administration 
against Jordan. 
  To quote his majesty, the United States wishes to press 
Jordan into signing a unilateral and immediate peace treaty with 
Israel even before the border dispute or such issues as occupied 
Jordanian territory and misappropriated Jordanian waters are 
sorted out. The U.S. Administration wants to see Jordan lead 
the way for the Arabs in the matter of ending the Arab boycott 
of Israel. 
  Seeing that Jordan is not about to oblige Washington on 
these 
Israeli-inspired demands, the U.S. Administration is attempting 
to twist Jordan's arms and force it down on its knees. 
  It is an exercise in self-delusion for the U.S. 
Administration to think that Jordan, with its limited resources 
as they are, will go down on its knees and abandon its occupied 
territory, water, and stolen rights. Endowed with such 
leadership as the Hashemites, Jordan will kneel only to God. 
  The U.S. Administration is denying Jordan its peacemaking 
and 
stabilizing role in the Middle East. However, let it be known 
that, limited resources notwithstanding, Jordan can still play 
havoc with the peace process and neutralize or even end the U.S. 
role in it. With America's Israeli bias now absolute and 
hostility toward the Arab nation undisguised, Jordan's stand is 
all the more understandable. 
  The Palestinian leadership may have been ensnared by the 
U.S. 
Administration into the Oslo, Cairo, and Davos agreements -- by 
all standards unilateral and unfair. Jordan, however, will not 
be coerced into accepting anything that falls short of its 
satisfaction or that of future Jordanian, Arab, and Muslim 
generations. 
  Let it be known by the U.S. Administration that, as far as a 
peace treaty with Israel is concerned, Jordan will synchronize 
its moves with Syria and Lebanon. For us, peace has to be 
comprehensive, based on UN resolutions and an Israeli withdrawal 
from all the occupied territories, including Jerusalem, or it 
can wait. And, just for the record, certain Gulf oil states, 
while maintaining a boycott of Jordan and building bridges with 
Israel, are doing so at the behest of the United States. 

