BFN 

<F P=106> [Mariann Nordstrom report: "Iceland Stands Firm Against </F>
Norway"] 
  [Text] Reykjavik -- "Iceland cannot halt the fishing in 
the loophole [area of Barents Sea disputed by Norway and 
Russia]. It is in international waters," Icelandic Prime 
Minister David Oddsson said in an interview with AFTENPOSTEN. 
"The disagreement between Norway and Iceland should be resolved 
through negotiations, and this is a possibility to which we 
Icelanders are open. And we have informed Prime Minister Gro 
Harlem Brundtland of this, and the ball is now in Norway's 
court," he said. 
  The prime minister from the conservative Independence Party 
and Foreign Minister Jon Baldvin Hannibalsson from the Social 
Democrats disagree about many things, but on this issue they 
seem in harmony: "The conflict must be resolved in 
negotiations," the foreign minister also said. "But we cannot 
reach agreement while Norway is unilaterally calling the tune 
and tells Iceland alone that we have to get out of the 
loophole," he said. 
  Women's Alliance Althing deputy and member of the Fisheries 
Committee Anna Olafsdottir Bjornsson put it like this: "When 
fishing in Icelandic waters is restricted, we have to look at 
other possibilities, and it is therefore natural for Icelanders 
to fish in the Barents Sea. On the Icelandic side there is some 
confusion about what the rules are for the loophole and the 
protected area around Spitsbergen. Fishermen and fishing boat 
owners are asking which agreements and treaties ban Icelandic 
fishermen from going to these areas, but it is difficult to find 
any such agreements," she pointed out. "There are gaps in the 
international agreements, and these must be filled as soon as 
possible." 
  The loophole lies outside the economic zones in the Barents 
Sea, but cod stocks that are administered by coastal states 
Norway and Russia are found in it from time to time. 
  No indication is given of what sort of solution Iceland 
wants. However, there is much to indicate that the Icelanders 
will not give in until they have been granted quotas in areas 
that Norway is currently keeping closed to the Icelanders. 
  Iceland has found itself in the midst of an economic crisis 
since 1987 when cod fishing had to be restricted because of 
overfishing and a poor growth rate among each year's young. The 
cod quota has been reduced from 450,000 to 150,000 and this 
reduction has remained in force for six years. "We are the only 
European nation that bases its economic existence on fish. 
Almost 80 percent of our export income comes from fishing," 
Foreign Minister Hannibalsson said. 
  But despite continued strict quotas and despite the fact 
that 
the price of fish on the world market has, according to the 
OECD, fallen by 22 percent between January 1992 and September 
1993, last year was not as bad as many people feared. This is 
due in part to moving over to new fish types, but also to a 
large extent to what the Icelanders call "outlying seas," 
including the loophole. Total catches increased by 4 percent 
over 1992, something that in turn led to an increase in GNP of 1 
percent, according to the OECD. 
  One person who has sent trawlers to the Barents Sea is 
director Gudrun Larusdottir of the Stalskip company in 
Hafnafjordur. The refrigerator trawler Ymir has been to the 
loophole twice and will travel there again if this is the only 
way of getting hold of fish. 
  "I only go to the Barents Sea if I have to," Gudrun 
Larusdottir said. ``If I had enough fish in Icelandic waters I 
would not go to the loophole. It is distant, it is expensive, 
and fishing is unpredictable. 
  "It is unreasonable of the Norwegians to be so inflexible 
toward the Icelanders on this issue. Norwegian fishermen take 
Norway haddock on the Reykjanes Ridge outside Iceland's 200-mile 
economic zone. This is an area that the Icelanders look on as 
their loophole, a spawning ground for fish that belong to our 
fish stocks. If we are not allowed to fish in the loophole we 
will drive the Norwegian fishermen off the Reykjanes Ridge," 
Gudrun Larusdottir said. 
  "We think that we have a responsibility for the Reykjanes 
Ridge," Anna Olafsdottir Bjornsson said. "But we cannot expect 
others to respect this view if we cannot respect the views of 
others," she pointed out. 
  The Norwegian consul in Akureyri, Gunnar Ragnars, director 
of 
Iceland's biggest shipping company and fishing company, 
Utgerdarfelag Akureyringa H.F., agrees that this is a difficult 
issue for Iceland "because our behavior and attitude here are at 
odds with the guidelines we have laid down in international 
forums for the preservation of fish stocks." "The Norwegians 
and other foreigners fish on the Reykjanes Ridge, and we are not 
that happy that foreigners fish our fish that is 
quota-restricted. But we have to make sure that we speak the 
same language on all matters," he stressed. 
  "Iceland recently received a letter from the Norwegian and 
Russian prime ministers," Prime Minister Oddsson said. ``We 
have replied that we are open for discussions with the various 
sides to resolve the disagreement. 
  ``We strongly hope that we can solve the problem as soon as 
possible. It is less than pleasant to have problems with our 
best friends; it is not usual for us not to be friends with 
Norway. During the cod wars against the British Norway was very 
helpful. That is something we have not forgotten. We want to 
put an end to this disagreement,'' Prime Minister Oddsson said. 
  "There have been contacts at all levels on this issue, but 
so 
far at least no solution has been arrived at," Marius Hauge, 
deputy director at the Norwegian Fisheries Ministry, said. "We 
will have to look at how to handle future contacts with the 
Icelanders. We have noted that they want contacts; they are 
probably anxious that the whole business will get completely out 
of control," he said. 
  On the subject of Norwegian fishing on the Reykjanes Ridge, 
Hauge pointed out that the biological situation for the stocks 
of Norway haddock is fundamentally different from that of the 
cod in the Barents Sea. "The Norway haddock is chiefly an 
international stock that also wanders into the Icelandic and 
Greenland economic zones. The exploitation of this fish is to 
be discussed in international forums in the near future," Hauge 
said. 

