Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Bablumyan and Valeriy Konovalov, </F>
IZVESTIYA: "Between the Dram and a Tragedy"] 
  [Text] What keeps a man freezing in the street warm? 
The thought of a warm apartment, hot shower, and warm bed 
waiting for him. 
  In Yerevan these days, everything is in reverse. 
  It is depressing to return home from the frosty street. As 
to 
a cold bed, just the thought of it gives one the shivers. People 
here do not undress when they go to bed--on the contrary, they 
put on as many clothes as possible. Even a knit cap does not 
quite protect one from the feel of an icy pillow. People feel 
much colder in apartments at night than during the day in the 
street. 
  And this is not just for a day or two. A constant feeling of 
hunger is intolerable precisely because it is constant. 
  Many people here, including one of the authors of this 
article, have bluish, slightly swollen hands; even a slightly 
below freezing temperature causes them to swell and darken. It 
is not frostbite but the consequence of constant exposure. You 
acquire this condition in your apartment, not on the street. 
  Children and the elderly are the worst off, of course. 
Everybody in Armenia suffers, however, in their own way: the 
ordinary citizen, the family, the enterprise... And not just 
from the cold. 
<H5>  A 17-point Earthquake Is No Longer Frightening </H5>
  Only one person was working at the gigantic Masis Footwear 
Association in the middle of the weekday: General Director 
Rudolf Arutyunyan. In a gloomy mood, he was sitting in a 
spacious cold office, doing calculations that were making him 
even gloomier. 
  Until very recently, nobody ever saw him like this, and 
could 
not even imagine it. Energetic, self-assured seemingly under any 
circumstances--this was the familiar image of him. The 
enterprise, whose fame transcended the borders of Armenia, has 
now been idle for weeks. The entire collective has been sent on 
compulsory leave--first for last year, and immediately 
afterward--for the current one. 
  "First, we have no raw material..." explained Arutyunyan. 
  One could stop right there, as in a famous joke about the 
absence of bullets, but the point is that there is no one single 
problem facing Masis and Arutyunyan which, had it been solved, 
could make the situation easier. Yes, the leather tanning plant, 
idled because of the scheduled cut-off of electricity, will get 
back on line any moment now, and with this leather one could 
somehow resume making footwear. But even if a miracle happened 
and they began to get supply of lasts from Armavir, bottom parts 
for children's shoes from Chisinau, rubber from Ukraine, raw 
material and semifinished components from Kursk, Belarus, and 
Italy, how are they to pay for these supplies; how to transport 
the finished product; how to pay for incredibly expensive power 
and fuel? 
  A few years ago Masis produced 23 million pairs of excellent 
footwear a year, of which only 7 million remained in Armenia 
while the rest were exported. Right before the stoppage of 
production, annual output amounted to 5 million pairs, and now 
even this level is unlikely to be achieved. 
  Arutyunyan adds up what the steam from the boiler house will 
cost the enterprise, and how much transportation costs would be; 
the bottom line is that there is no way to make ends meet, and 
the enterprise cannot afford to operate at a loss. 
  What makes it even more painful for the director to suffer 
through inaction and lack of prospects is that he has at his 
disposal state-of-the-art equipment, as well as highly skilled 
world-class specialists and craftsmen. The reputation of 
Armenian footwear makers--as well as, by the way, clothes and 
rug makers--is high around the world. The largest foreign firms 
used to gladly enter into cooperation with local enterprises, 
deliver machinery and semifinished products, and create joint 
enterprises. The Masis trademark, for instance, was well known 
and commanded respect in the world market. Now all this is in 
the past. 
  "Of 138 large enterprises in our sector, only 38 are 
operating now," Minister of Light Industry Rudolf Teymurazyan 
told us. "Economic conditions make normal production impossible. 
Imagine, for instance, an eight- or nine-point earthquake; at 
this level a city is totally destroyed and the population dies; 
if the force of the earthquake keeps increasing and reaches, for 
instance, 17 points, it is not going to do any more damage than 
it already has. This analogy can be applied to our financial 
situation. Prices have shot into outer space. The gap between 
the level of production costs and wages, the cost of fuel and 
power, and the cost of transportation, on the one hand, and 
potential earnings on the other may now increase to any size 
without changing the situation. 
<H5>  What Am I To Buy With My Salary: Toothpaste or 10 Eggs? </H5>
  Putting together a family budget resembles the Masis 
director's sad calculations. The minimum wage in Armenia is 110 
drams; the average wage is 250 drams. The difference between 
them, however, much as between pensions and allowances on one 
hand and the president's salary on the other, is not that 
tangible. Prices are out of reach in relation to any local 
income. With the level of prices and the exchange rate, 100 
drams correspond to approximately one dollar. That is, most 
people here have a monthly income in the range of $1.5-3. 
  In the stores, and it is almost the same in farmers markets, 
a kilogram of beef costs 260 drams; butter--350-500 drams; 
sugar--90; onions--100-150; cheese--350; and sausage--450; a 
bottle of vodka costs 600 drams, champaign--800; a pack of 
cigarettes--between 10 (Astra) and 60 (Magna) drams; a tube of 
toothpaste--100; a bar of household soap--50; and 10 eggs--100 
drams. 
  So, after deducting apartment rent and the cost of public 
transportation, for one monthly salary one can buy here two 
packs of cigarettes, or 10 eggs, a tube of toothpaste, or 300 g 
of butter... 
  (Let us note in parentheses that here, too--although not as 
frequently as in Moscow--one can see people who have enough 
money to buy any food or other goods in expensive stores, and 
even patronize the rare casinos and restaurants. There are, of 
course, members of various sorts of mafia among them, which is 
tenacious everywhere, but for the most part they are people who 
do business outside Armenia, or their relatives. In Armenia 
itself it is almost impossible to operate a normal business 
now--limited and costly communications eat up any earnings.) 
  So, how do most people live, or rather, survive? 
  For most, the only affordable items are probably fish and 
bread, which is sold by coupons--350 g per person a day for half 
a dram. Potatoes used to be relatively cheap, but lately their 
prices have gone up considerably, and now they cost as much as 
oranges. This is the meager and monotonous ration that has now 
replaced the traditionally abundant Armenian table in most 
families. 
  There is one more expense item, as necessary as it is 
burdensome: candles and kerosene. 
<H5>  You Want To Build a House--Build a Hospital Next To It </H5>
  It is difficult to get used to cold and hunger, but people 
have no choice. They have lived without heating for so long that 
children who are beginning to talk do not know what the 
radiators in the apartment are for. Hot showers and baths are 
science fiction here. An attractive woman with traces of past 
grooming confessed to us that Whiskas advertising simply 
irritates her, but when she sees shampoo and bubble bath on the 
screen she gets hysterical. 
  Actually, watching television is a rare pastime for an 
Armenian these days. Electricity in apartments is turned on for 
an hour and a half a day. At least in the past the utility kept 
the schedule of "rolling switch-on" by microrayon; people could 
prepare for it and plan things in advance. Now the schedule is 
off quite frequently, and nobody knows when the lights will come 
on. They live in constant readiness for a sudden two-hour-long 
flash, during which you have to manage to accomplish everything: 
cook food, do the laundry, recharge a battery--for those who 
have one, heat water... Television is certainly not a priority 
at such moments. 
  People have to make do with candles and kerosene cookers. 
One 
candle costs 15 drams; a liter of kerosene--120 drams (as a 
reminder--the average monthly salary is 250 drams). Naturally, 
these sources are used only when absolutely necessary. 
  Everything that burns goes for heating, including books. It 
is rare to see a building entrance in Yerevan these days that 
has a door--they have all been used up as fuel. One increasingly 
sees stumps in place of trees in the city. 
  Lately, so-called "illegal plug-ins" have become widespread. 
All sorts of ingenious and sometimes very original devices 
enable city residents to plug into power lines supplying 
facilities that have a regular supply of power. A local joke: A 
man begins to build a house for himself, and at the same time a 
hospital next to it. He is asked: 
  "But why do you need a hospital?" 
  "For an `illegal plug-in'..." 
  Those who have left temporarily or for good to live in more 
hospitable places take a long time to shed the habits of Yerevan 
life. They take matches with them when they take a bath or visit 
a bathroom--to light a candle. They blow at a table lamp before 
going to bed. They jump when the lights are turned on in the 
apartment... 
  There are many who are leaving. First and foremost, they try 
to get the children out--not only to normal living conditions 
but also to an education. Schools and colleges are closed--at 
this point until spring. The fate of an entire generation--which 
means the nation's future--is in jeopardy. 
<H3>  It Is Cheaper To Stay Home Than Work, But Getting Divorced 
Is the Best </H3>
  If early retirement is an option, many leave work. The 
difference between any kind of pay, as we noted above, is of 
little substance, and when you stay home you save energy and 
money by eliminating transportation costs. 
  Pensions, unemployment benefits, and allowances for families 
with many children and single mothers are distributed through 
the Ministry of Labor and Social Security Services. Minister 
Ashot Esayan told us how meticulously this work is performed; he 
also told us that lately his staff have begun to uncover 
instances of fictitious divorces for the purpose of claiming 
single mother benefit. 
  Charitable aid coming to Armenia through various channels 
also is concentrated in this ministry and distributed by it. 
This is not an easy task, not only because there is not enough 
for everyone, but also because communications with the outside 
world are difficult. For instance, they received a shipment of 
kerosene cookers from the United States, but have not been able 
to get the accompanying kerosene out of Batimu. However, even 
moral support is of great significance here. 
  Here, by the way, is the account number where monetary aid 
may be sent. 
  Yerevan, Myasnikyanskiy State Commercial Bank, 141 635. 
<H5>  Not Only Unhappy Families Are Unhappy in Their Own Way </H5>
  One cannot explain Armenia's current troubles by the 
preponderance or the legacy of the party nomenklatura. Its 
members have been long removed from power. And the reforms and 
democratization initially proceeded here without delay and 
aggressively. Redistribution of land and decollectivization, for 
instance, were implemented earlier and on a larger scale than in 
other former Union republics. 
  But first an earthquake, and then Karabakh, the 
confrontation 
with Azerbaijan, and then destabilization in neighboring Georgia 
became factors that overrode everything else. 
  Separation from the ruble zone has affected Armenia more 
painfully than others. The national currency--the dram--is not 
becoming a full-fledged currency and is hampering opportunities 
both for enterprises and commercial traders. 
  Is a free market and liberalization in the economy possible 
at all in this situation? Would it not be more logical, as some 
opposition members suggest, to go the opposite way--tighten the 
administrative reins and centralize all resources and 
distribution channels? 
  "No," Armenian Prime Minister Grant Bagratyan told us. "Even 
in these conditions a market economy is much more viable. 
Expensive as food is, it is still available--and only because 
the main landowner is the private farmer rather than kolkhozes. 
We are now beginning privatization in other economic spheres as 
well. We will stop the production decline; as to the dram's 
exchange rate in relation to the dollar, we have already 
stabilized it. Of course, the situation in general is so hard 
for the populace that people's attitude toward the government in 
these circumstances cannot be positive. It is hard to be loved 
in these conditions. 
  The rating of the government, and of the president, has 
dropped perceptively lately. Many people who just recently were 
the president's ardent supporters now criticize him sharply. 
People are irritated both by the optimism frequently displayed 
by the prime minister and the extreme reserve in forecasts that 
has been lately characteristic of the president. 
  "How could Levon say something like this on New Year's 
Eve?!" 
we heard more than once. "As if it is not enough that families 
had such a meager holiday meal on the table--then the president 
added insult to injury by saying that it may get worse. How can 
it get any worse?" 
  While there is a perceptible shift in society's attitude 
toward the president and the government--despite the fact that 
there are no serious alternative forces in sight, because the 
room for maneuver in politics and economics is too small--when 
it comes to the question of Karabakh, the position remains the 
same and quite unshakeable. Nobody here questions the fight to 
take Nagorno-Karabakh from Azerbaijan, and the solidarity with 
Karabakh Armenians remains across the board and sincere. 
  Armenian Minister of Defense Serzh Sarkisyan is a civilian, 
a 
philologist by education. He fought in Karabakh, however, and 
has a reputation as a talented military commander. He reasserted 
to us that the Armenian army is not engaged in combat 
operations, but it is unthinkable to leave Karabakh residents 
without support. By the way, his own wife and children live in 
Stepanakert. 
  There is one more point on which probably all parties, 
movements, and all strata of society agree--the necessity to 
strengthen ties with Russia, the hopes for Russian aid. Many are 
inclined to idealize the situation in Russian politics and the 
economy--the difference in the standard of living and the 
stability of the two countries' currencies is just too great. 
<H5>  How Long Can One Keep Pushing a Trolley Bus? </H5>
  Peasants are today on much more solid ground than urban 
residents. We saw proof of this in Artashatskiy Rayon. As 
everywhere in Armenia, land here is mostly divided among 
individual owners. All in all there are more than 300,000 
private farms in the country--considerably more than in immense 
Russia. These farms are small--between one and 10 hectares. 
However, for such traditional sectors as viticulture and 
horticulture, this size is optimal. 
  Despite the high cost of fuel, fertilizer, and manufactured 
feed concentrates, as well as the general economic crisis, 
harvest yields are high. The yield of potatoes last year, for 
instance, amounted to 420,000 tonnes--a record over the past 10 
years. The decline in the size of livestock herd has been 
halted. The problem right now is not production but distribution 
of agricultural output. 
  In the same Artashatskiy Rayon, for instance, which is 
located quite close to Yerevan, it is still too costly for 
peasants to bring produce for sale in the capital. 
  This is precisely why, as Minister of Agriculture Ashot 
Voskanyan told us, the ministry also shifted from production 
management to organizing services for peasants, distributing 
their output, and pricing policy. 
  One way or the other, at least the countryside feeds itself 
well. Only a small part of the republic's population live there, 
however--most live in Yerevan and other major cities. But 
private farming's potential is sufficient to provide for all 
urban residents. And not only with respect to foodstuffs. 
  This is quite noticeable if one looks at enterprises 
processing local agricultural output. Director of the Aygorg rug 
factory Eduard Agadzhanov told us that since decollectivization 
to this day the problem of wool procurement has ceased to be a 
problem for him altogether. Private suppliers are much more 
reliable and provide better quality than state suppliers. 
  There is a score of enterprises of completely different 
specializations that have been able to find for themselves a way 
out of the incredibly difficult conditions and develop 
production. The Bazalt defense plant is setting up production of 
trolley buses and furniture; the famous Ararat cognac factory is 
expanding its distribution market; bakery plant No. 4 has 
doubled the output of bread... Nevertheless, the decline in the 
Armenian economy is serious and painful. It is not easy to get 
reliable statistics in this respect in Armenia itself: some data 
are classified, others differ tremendously from one another, or 
are frankly unrealistic. 
  According to experts of the Moscow center SovEcon, the 
picture looks like this: According to preliminary estimates the 
gross domestic product for last year will amount to only 38 
percent of the 1990 level, while in Russia, for instance, it 
will amount to 57.6 percent, in neighboring Azerbaijan--48 
percent, and in the CIS as a whole--55.5 percent; the volume of 
industrial production--30.5 percent, in agriculture--55 percent, 
and in construction--20 percent. In all other indicators Armenia 
is also considerably behind both Russia and the CIS. 
  Meanwhile, outside the gates of even relatively well-to-do 
enterprises there are streets with very few cars, because 
gasoline is very expensive. Streets down which where one sees 
people dragging bundles of firewood and brushwood. Here and 
there one gets a glimpse of a scene that would be 
incomprehensible, for instance, to a Muscovite: Passengers are 
pushing a trolley bus, and only this way getting through what is 
quite often a considerable part of the route going through a 
microrayon where the electricity has been turned off--to an area 
where there is light. 

