CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview by Hans D. Barbier: "We Want a Europe of </F>
Competition; the Economic Policy Program of the League of Free 
Citizens; A Conversation With Joachim Starbatty"] 
  [Text] "We are against the Maastricht Treaty because we 
love Europe." With this formulation, Joachim Starbatty, deputy 
chairman of the League of Free Citizens, outlines the party's 
position with regard to the European Union [EU]. Starbatty 
rejects two points of the treaty with particular vehemence: the 
firm timetable toward a single European currency, and the 
emphasis on the role of industrial policy in the economic policy 
of the EU. In both, the unified currency and industrial policy, 
he sees a turning away from the principle of competition. 
  From the debates concerning the Maastricht Treaty, and from 
the positive and negative reactions of the mail he has been 
receiving since the party was founded, one might think that this 
slogan "We do not want the Europe of Maastricht" can drive him 
into the corner of nationalism and "Germany first" sentiment. He 
fights against that by pointing out his spiritual relationship 
to one of the founding fathers of the concept of the European 
Community, Alfred Mueller-Armack. 
  As a young economist, says Starbatty, Mueller-Armack's plea 
for the basic pattern of European integration, which was 
prevalent even then, convinced him: harmonization through 
competition. He said competition meant, even in politics, 
finding the best solutions, and, in the competitive process, 
homogenizing them and adapting them to one another. Thus, 
competition gives rise to homogenization, but it is not a 
prerequisite for homogenization. 
  The Treaties of Rome were pledged to uphold the spirit of 
competition. Even then, he said, Ludwig Erhard and 
Mueller-Armack had to argue with the foreign policymakers who 
would have preferred a drawing-board Europe. He said now the 
economists played an inferior role in the debate surrounding the 
further development of Europe. Because in the meantime, the 
integration pattern has been turned around completely. Now, the 
issue is not "harmonization through competition," but 
"competition through harmonization." 
  Behind that, Starbatty opines, is the misleading conception 
that all market conditions and overriding political data be made 
uniform before the competitive process could take root. Not only 
does Starbatty consider this pattern to be totally wrong from 
the economic standpoint; he also considers it risky in terms of 
the prospect of European unification. He said that the 
harmonization via the resolution--such as the homogenization of 
all social standards and working conditions, the superfluous 
homogenization of taxes--would cost a good deal of money in the 
interior of Europe in order to render the consequences of 
harmonization homogeneous, such as, for example, cost-related 
unemployment in less developed regions. On the outside, however, 
he said that Europe, which had been harmonized by the regulatory 
route, was sealing itself off so as not to jeopardize the 
harmonization successes that have, supposedly, been achieved. 
"Whoever follows the slogan competition through harmonization is 
turning Europe into an expensive fortress," says Starbatty. 
  Therefore, the Free Citizens' League was not just entering 
the lists in the marketplace in favor of suppliers, but also in 
favor of the regulations and legal systems in unifying Europe. 
In any event, he said, the tendency to render everything uniform 
had to be halted: he said the social laws and tax laws were 
examples of rules that in no way would have to be harmonized to 
guarantee the four freedoms--of goods, money, services, and the 
mobility of people. 
  Sarbatty rejects the suspicion that the Free Citizens' 
League 
is following a nationalistically colored policy by virtue of the 
example of the party's attitude toward the acceptance of the 
reform states of East Europe. He said the Free Citizens' League 
supported the acceptance of these countries. He said it was 
precisely the proponents of an orderly harmonization who kept 
raising the barriers for an expansion of the EU. In an initial 
step, he said, the borders would have to be opened for those 
products of the reformed countries in the case of which these 
countries were in a strong competitive position: textiles, 
leather, steel, agricultural products. 
  Starbatty mistrusts the slogan: "expansion through 
intensification." Against a backdrop of harmonization, that 
could quickly be construed as an alibi for a policy that places 
no particular value on new members. The more harmonization is 
scrapped, he said, and the more authority over details the 
council and the commission have, the more arguing would occur 
concerning the weight attached to voting and veto powers in the 
deciding committees. The entry negotiations of Austria and the 
Nordic countries offered a foretaste of such conflicts. In the 
final analysis, there was the policy of exclusion. A harmonized 
Europe was closing itself against the newcomers out of fear of 
their voting power. 
  In Starbatty's opinion, harmonization by decree is not only 
a 
policy that would damage the openness and integration of Europe. 
As a result of such a policy, in particular, the mid-sized and 
small enterprises would be placed at a disadvantage. He said 
they could not afford to build up an ever greater apparatus for 
observing countless values and guidelines. The motto 
"competition through harmonization" promoted concentration, in 
point of fact, he said. Logically, then, industrial policy would 
grab for the major enterprise units. In that way, in the final 
analysis, everything that stood for the unification of Europe at 
the beginning of the policy would turn against competition. 
  Starbatty knows that a "No to Maastricht" is a far cry from 
a 
program of economic policy that convinces voters who would like 
to have information concerning the configuration of individual 
policy areas that are very close to their lives. For this 
reason, he valued the notion of giving a few positive guidelines 
of economic, financial, and social policy to the "Brunner 
Party," which was named for its founder. 
  In the course of the conversation, it becomes apparent that 
this program, in large measure, corresponds to that which 
economists and consultants who are oriented toward liberal 
regulation recommend as recipes for market economic reforms. "I 
do not believe there is another party with such a thoroughly 
liberal program that is oriented toward the principles of a 
market economy," says Starbatty. From his experiences in giving 
advice in the policy of economics, however, he knows that 
programs in political practice tend toward imprecision. He 
places that much greater emphasis on giving the economic program 
of the Free Citizens League shape, orienting it uncompromisingly 
toward the principles of a market economy. "Practice brings 
compromises," he says. 
  In the policy of the labor market, Starbatty considers a de 
facto or de jure reform of the responsibility of the parties to 
the rate agreements to be of primary importance. More decisions 
have to be shifted to the operational level, he said, so that 
once again, greater differences in wages would result, and the 
firms could more shape the degree of their involvement in terms 
of labor in a more flexible way. Flexibility of working hours, 
on which agreement was reached this year in the agreements of 
the rate talks marked, at any rate, the modest beginning of the 
reform process, he said. 
  In terms of social policy, he said, the principle of its 
subsidiary nature would have to come into its own. In urgent 
cases, the community would have to understand, assurances would 
have to be provided against incalculable risks, but they would 
have to be provided in accordance with the principles of 
actuarial mathematics. The state could promulgate an obligation 
to provide insurance, but it would have to leave it to the 
individual to decide who the provider of that insurance coverage 
would be. Even the entity "security" could, and would, have to 
be provided under competitive conditions. If society did not 
want to eliminate a collectively organized safety net 
altogether, those entities that provide coverage would have to 
be organized on the principle of capital coverage, and not 
financed, as they are today, on the principle of shifting 
assets. In addition, whether as a result of self-involvement or 
contribution refunds, incentives would have to be created to use 
the services provided by the collective systems sparingly. 
  In taxation policy, Starbatty considers two reform 
principles 
to be of primary importance: easing up on the tax on capital 
investment, and the capital gains tax, in order to stimulate 
growth and employment, and lowering the wage and income tax 
rates. Starbatty not only wants to decrease the rates, however. 
At the same time, he wants to level off the wide range of 
tax-lowering exceptional situations. Without going into detail, 
Starbatty looks favorably upon those considerations of 
consolidating welfare payments, the family tax offset payments, 
and the income tax into a "negative tax" or "citizens' money." 
  The agricultural aid package is something Starbatty wants to 
revamp--from price subsidies, the cornerstone of the 
organization of the European agrarian market--to direct income 
subsidies (deficiency payments). 
  Starbatty has no opinion at all concerning industrial 
policy: 
not on a national or European level, not as a "shock absorbing" 
policy, and not as a "forward-looking" policy. Turn it however 
you will: in the last analysis, industrial policy may be defined 
in terms of the definition supplied by a mid-sized businessman: 
"Industrial policy consists of taking money from successful 
enterprises and giving it to unsuccessful ones." Starbatty 
allows a broad-based research program that is not specifically 
addressed to any one industry of product to hold sway. 
  At the end of the interview, he returned once more to the 
topic of Europe: "Whoever sees regulatory policy as a policy of 
competition cannot approve of any pattern of integration that 
leads to a Europe of regulated harmonization." 
<H5>  [Box, p 17] </H5>
  The Free Citizens League is one of 23 parties admitted to 
participate in the 12 June European election. Its chairman is 
Manfred Brunner, who left the employ of the commission as "an 
opponent of Maastricht." He has also become well-known as a 
result of his constitutional complaint against the Maastricht 
Treaty, and because of his sympathizing contacts with the 
Austrian right-wing populist Joerg Haider. The decisiveness of 
the repudiation of a centralistic Europe and the uncompromising 
support for the principles of the market economy have become, as 
with no other party involved in the European election, the 
trademark of the Free Citizens League. Because of this special 
feature, we present the economic program in an interview with 
Joachim Starbatty. As deputy chairman, Starbatty is the economic 
policy head of the party. He is a professor of economics in 
Tuebingen. He was a pupil of Alfred Mueller-Armack, and, in his 
younger days, he worked as an expert in economic and currency 
policy matters in the [Christian Democratic Union/Christian 
Social Union, CDU/CSU] caucus in the Bundestag. He was a member 
of the CDU, but then he left the party. He has been a member of 
the Free Citizens League since its founding in January 1994. 

