BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS correspondent Vyacheslav Bantin] </F>
  [Text] Hiroshima 24 May TASS -- Completely stopping nuclear 
tests, production of fissionable materials for military 
purposes, and enhancing in every possible way an international 
dialogue on strategical stability have now become top priority 
tasks for nuclear powers, Chief of the Analysis and Prognosis 
Department in the Russian Foreign Ministry Ednan Agayev said at 
the U.N. disarmament conference, which opened in the Japanese 
city of Hiroshima today. 
  Agayev noted that now the nuclear restraining philosophy 
does 
not serve as a factor greatly influencing interrelations between 
Russia and the United States, and expressed the opinion that 
largest nuclear powers are now gradually reconsidering their 
concepts of nuclear restraint. In particular, it is testified 
by the fact that they are adhering to the moratorium on nuclear 
tests, which was until now considered to be an indispensible 
part of the nuclear strategy, he added. "It would be naive to 
think that international negotiations on banning nuclear tests 
within the conference on disarmament framework, which are 
underway in Geneva, will move ahead easily and speedily," the 
high-ranking Russian Foreign Ministry official noted. "But the 
rejection of nuclear tests by all states will, undoubtedly, help 
successfully holding them," he said. 
  Agayev said that limiting and stopping production of 
fissionable materials for military purposes is one of the most 
important efforts made in this direction by nuclear powers. 
"The fulfillment of this task could become a reality, if 
nuclear powers would look at their nuclear arsenals as an 
attribute of history and actively seek for their reduction," he 
said. 
  Touching upon the problem of international security under 
conditions of a gradual reduction in nuclear weapons, the 
Russian official emphasised the importance of the dialogue on 
strategical stability which Russia is continuing currently not 
only with the United States and other nuclear powers, but also 
with such countries as Germany and Japan. Consultations on 
security with the participation of military and intelligence 
departments' representatives might help strengthen mutual trust 
and expedite cuts in nuclear arsenals, he added. 
  "The dialogue on strategical stability helps elicit ideas 
which might form the basis of a new concept of security that is 
called on to replace nuclear restraint," the Russian diplomat 
noted. 

