CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Liu Xiangru (0491 4161 1172): "Summary in </F>
Symposium on Chengde Model of Population Control"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] The Population Society of 
China, the ZHONGGUO RENKOU BAOSHE [Population Journal of China], 
the Hebei Provincial Family Planning Commission and the Hebei 
Provincial Population Society jointly held, between 26 - 30 July 
1993, a symposium in Chengde City, Hebei Province, on the 
"Chengde Model of Population Control." Attending and addressing 
the symposium were Peng Peiyun, State Councillor and chairman of 
the State Family Planning Commission; Yang Kuifu [2799 7608 
1318] and Jiang Zhenghua [5592 2973 5478], vice chairmen of the 
said state commission; Li Honggui, head of the general office of 
the state commission; Gu Erxiong, Vice Governor of Hebei; Zhang 
Chunyuan [1728 4783 0337], Deputy Director of the Population 
Society of China and other comrades. Over 100 people were 
present at the symposium including theoreticians on population 
of the ZHONGGUO RHONCHI BAOSHE, the Beijing University, the 
People's University of China, the Population Information 
Research Center of China, the Hebei University, the Hebei 
Teachers' University and the Hebei Provincial Institute of 
Social Sciences and comrades of the family planning commissions 
in various cities and prefectures in Hebei Province, the 
Hanzhong Prefecture in Shaaxi Province, the city of Yancheng in 
Jiangsu and the Shanxi Provincial Family Planning Commission. 
[passage omitted] 
<H5>  I. Chengde's Major Experience in Population Control </H5>
  The City of Chengde is a typical hilly, old, minority and 
poor district. It economy is not well developed. The rural 
population accounts for 95 percent and the minority population 
makes up 48 percent of the total population in the district. Six 
of the eight counties under its administration are 
poverty-stricken ones which the state and the province need to 
provide major assistance. The leading comrades in the city often 
realize that the city's population growth is hampering the 
economic development of the hilly city. They are determined to 
place the population growth under control. They often educate 
the people by using publicity and education, strengthening 
scientific management and providing high-quality services to 
help control the birth rate on a regular and legal basis and 
with a scientific approach. For several years running, the city 
has successfully maintained its rate of family planning above 95 
percent and its rate of natural population growth below the 10 
percent level. The total number of women of child-bearing age 
and the child birth rate is lower than the replacement rates. 
Since 1988, the city of Chengde has been rated as an advanced 
family planning city for five years in a row, and four of its 
eight counties have been elected national advanced counties for 
birth control. 
  The symposium summarized Chengde's experience in family 
planning in the following eight aspects: 
  1. Reach a common understanding. "It is necessary to control 
birth in order to eliminate poverty, and it is essential to 
emancipate from ignorance in order to become well-to-do." "We 
must attach importance to both types of production [the 
production of means of subsistence and the production of human 
beings] and develop both resources (human and natural 
resources)." To regard population growth as a strategic 
breakthrough to help the rural areas become rich is no longer 
the understanding of the principal party and government leaders 
and the leading comrades in charge of birth control, but also 
that of the leading bodies in Chengde. It is not only the 
understanding of the local leadership, but also that of the 
leading bodies at all levels. It is not only the understanding 
of the cadres, but also that of the broad masses. Only there is 
an unified and correct understanding, will it be possible to act 
correctly and in a unified manner. 
  2. Strengthen leadership. The party committees and 
governments at all levels have achieved their goals in "giving 
priority to the four aspects" in doing the work of family 
planning. They give priority to helping those who seek family 
planning advises register at the maternity clinic, to discussing 
any issue on family planning, to studying any issue on birth 
control and to helping them make the final decision. On the 
daily agenda of the party and government leading comrades, 
"family planning is always an important item, no matter how busy 
they are. The supply of funds is always available for population 
control, no matter how tight the financial situation is. Cadres 
in charge of family planning are always assigned, no matter how 
small the authorized size of a government body." In dealing with 
major issues in family planning, the leadership at all levels 
invariably set up on-the-spot offices to resolve problems. 
During the period from 1990 to 1992 alone, the leading comrades 
of the administrative office of the Chengde Prefectural CPC 
Committee set up on-the-spot general offices in 567 villages 
throughout 113 townships to tackle issues on population control. 
As a result, they had successfully solved 117 specific problems. 
  3. Give extensive publicity. Whenever one enters Chengde 
City, one would feel the widespread publicity on family 
planning. Publicity covers China's state affairs, state policy 
and laws on family planning, basic knowledge on population and 
family planning and general knowledge on contraceptives and 
eugenics. Publicity has been given in the form of news media, 
school education, video and audio tapes, literary and art works, 
contests, repeated comparisons of facts and figures and 
face-to-face education. The contents are varied and colorful. In 
the course of giving publicity to family planning, the policy of 
birth control is often linked with the aspiration in shaking off 
poverty and becoming well-to-do. 
  4. Stable policy. At the beginning of the 1980s, the policy 
of family planning in the rural areas of Chengde was 
comparatively rigid. After gradual improvement, it has now 
become a fairly stable childbirth policy. "Regulations on Family 
Planning in Hebei" stipulates that a rural couple in the hilly 
area may have two children. This policy conforms with the actual 
situation in Chengde's rural district. It is more reasonable. 
Therefore, this policy wins the support of the majority of the 
people there. 
  5. Strong contingents. The first contingent is one of 
management for family planning. There is a committee for family 
planning in each township and a deputy head in every village 
assigned in charge of planned parenthood. There is a leader for 
each group of women of child-bearing age. The second contingent 
is one of professionals for family planning. The third 
contingent is one of mass autonomy [qun zhong zi zhi 5028 5883 
5261 3112]. The aforementioned three contingents form a network, 
covering all areas. Persons in charge of family planning are of 
high quality, and they are professionally devoted in carrying 
out their assignments. The leadership at all levels sincerely 
appreciate their work for family planning. 
  6. Scientific management. After many years of practice, 
Chengde has already summarized its experiences and worked out 
ten management systems including the system of "four lines and 
one emphasis." The four lines are the party line, the political 
line, the special line for family planning and the line of 
associations, while the one emphasis is to place emphasis on 
controlling couples of child-bearing age. Other systems include 
the dual target management system, the contract system for 
family planning, the contract system for the control of women of 
child-bearing age, the management system of dividing families 
into different groups and posting signs, the system of 
management prior to pregnancy and the management system for 
family planning among people of floating population. These 
systems ensure the control of population growth and turn birth 
control into a regular practice and scientific way of life. 
  7. Departmental cooperation. Chengde has established a 
powerful leading organ and set up a system under which four 
major departments divide the work of family planning while 
maintaining close ties with each other. The city has clearly 
defined the duties and functions of each department, supervised 
their work and enjoyed a veto power. It truly takes 
comprehensive measures to improve the work of family planning by 
pooling the efforts of all four departments, and attained 
excellent results. 
  8. Serve the people from all sides. The party committees and 
governments at all levels in Chengde have linked the work of 
family planning with peasants' aspiration to shake off poverty 
and become well-to-do. They always link the two kinds of 
production together, develop economy without ignoring population 
control and make population control serve economic development. 
The city's department in charge of family planning implements 
the preferential policy and strives to help the masses build up 
family fortunes. It also enforces a policy to encourage people 
practice family planning in order to shake off poverty, improve 
the social security and retirement system, encourage grooms to 
live with their wives' families after marriage and support and 
take care of their wives' old parents. It always takes the 
interests of the people into consideration, helps them solve 
their actual problems and combine childbirth with their 
production and daily life. It helps people change their views on 
family planning by providing them with services in many areas. 
<H5>  II. On Chengde Model of Family Planning </H5>
  1. Background in Evolving Chengde Model of Family Planning. 
  In face of the serious situation of China's spiraling 
population, the theoreticians on population and workers in 
charge of family planning have always been looking for a model 
of population control to effectively check population growth. In 
May 1992, the Population Society of China, the ZHONGGUO RHONCHI 
BAOSHE and the Jiangsu provincial family planning commission 
held a symposium in Suzhou to study the "Southern Jiangsu Model" 
for population control in economically developed areas. At the 
symposium, Peng Peiyun, Chairman of the State Family Planning 
Commission, divided the work of family planning in the whole 
country into four categories. The first category is family 
planning work in the economically developed or fairly developed 
area where population is well under control. The second category 
is family planning work in the economically developed or fairly 
developed area where family planning is out of control. The 
third category is family planning work in the economically 
underdeveloped area where population is well under control. The 
fourth category is family planning work in the economically 
underdeveloped area where population growth is out of control. 
Chairman Peng also pointed out that some economically 
underdeveloped areas in China such as the Hanzhong Prefecture in 
Shaaxi Province, the Zhangjiakou Prefecture and the Chengde 
Prefecture in Hebei Province, the Bazhong County in Sichuan 
Province and the Longsheng Multinational Autonomous County in 
Guangxi, have scored remarkable achievements in controlling 
population growth, because the leadership there attach 
importance to family planning work. To earnestly summarize and 
popularize the experiences of these localities will be of great 
significance in improving the work of family planning in most of 
the areas in China and helping some cadres change their passive 
attitude and overcome their fear of difficulties in promoting 
family planning. 
  After the conclusion of the symposium on the Southern 
Jiangsu 
Model, theoreticians on population and workers for family 
planning have promptly studied the work for the control of 
population growth in economically underdeveloped areas. In their 
studies, the theoreticians have discovered that Chengde is a 
fairly typical "hilly, old, minority and poverty-stricken" 
district. After exploring various ways and carrying out various 
experiments over a protracted period of time, they have 
developed a management mechanism which conforms with the local 
economic and cultural situation, and found the road to success 
in family planning. By using on-the-spot inspection tours, the 
leadership of the State Family Planning Commission and scholars 
on population growth highly praised Chengde's experience in 
controlling population growth. They regarded Chengde as a 
typical example of an underdeveloped district in successfully 
controlling population growth. To study Chengde's experience in 
controlling population growth will be of great significance in 
promoting family planning in most of the areas in China. 
[passage omitted] 
  2. Theoretical Background in Developing Chengde Model of 
Family Planning 
  Western experts in demographic economics believe that 
economic development plays a significant role in promoting 
population growth when the per-capita income is below US$300. 
Both economic development and population growth are full of 
vitality when the per-capita income is between US$300 and 
US$700. Economic development notably restrains population growth 
only when the per-capita income reached US$700. Chinese scholars 
on population also believe that in China, a turning point in 
population growth will appear, only when the per capita income 
reaches 1,500 to 2,000 yuan. The practice of family planning in 
Chengde challenges this kind of theory. In an area where the 
economy is not well developed, Chengde tries to control 
population growth, while developing its economy. It has realized 
its goal in placing its population under effective control while 
rapidly developing its economy. 
  Chengde's experience once again tells us that in a nation 
where the economy is not well developed and the pressure from 
population is extremely high, we can no longer sit tight to wait 
for our social and economic conditions to change any more. 
China's state of affairs shows that on the one hand we must 
regard economic construction as the central task, vigorously 
develop the productive forces in society, and strive to create 
conditions for China's four modernization program and check 
population growth; while on the other hand, we must unswervingly 
implement the basic state policy on family planning, adopt 
strong measures to effectively control population growth and 
create a fine environment in terms of population for the 
development of our economy. 
  3. Comparison between Chengde Model and Southern Jiangsu 
Model 
  China's uneven economic developments leads to the uneven 
development of the family planning program and the use of 
different forms in population control. There are already several 
models for population control in China. The Southern Jiangsu 
model is a typical example of population control in an 
economically developed area, while the Chengde model is one 
which prevails in an economically underdeveloped area. 
  The Souther Jiangsu model of population control is a 
mechanism aimed at diverting the pressure exerted on the society 
by population such as employment, social distribution, social 
security, social welfare and other social benefits to each 
family to restrain family growth. Economic development and 
various mechanisms of restraint including the mechanism with the 
benefits as the guiding factor help people change their concept 
on childbirth and achieve the goal of controlling population 
growth. 
  The Chengde model of population control is aimed at 
fostering a management mechanism which conforms with the local 
economic and cultural conditions and follows the path of 
controlling population growth and developing the economy 
simultaneously in an underdeveloped area. The effective control 
of the population promotes economic development, while the rapid 
economic development helps people change their concept on 
childbirth. 
  4. Intension [nei han 0355 3211] of Chengde Model of 
Population Control. 
  As for the intension of the Chengde model of population 
control, many views were expressed at the symposium. 
  The Chengde model of population control organically combines 
educational guidance, resounding organization, scientific 
management, standardization and meticulous work. It creates a 
fine social environment for overall and coordinated family 
planning. It is a model that will make a breakthrough in 
lowering the rate of population growth and promoting social and 
economic development in a coordinated manner. 
  The Chengde model of population control is a comprehensive 
pattern aimed at controlling population growth in a planned 
manner with education paving the way, with the state policy on 
population providing the guidance and with economic factors 
playing the leading role. 
  The Chengde model of population control is one with which 
the party committees and governments regard the control of 
population growth as an important task and set up a set of 
mechanisms for family planning suited to the local conditions, 
link family planning with the people's aspiration to shack off 
poverty and become well-to-do, make breakthroughs in controlling 
population growth and embark on a new path of maintaining "lower 
birth and death rates and low population growth." 
  -- The Chengde model of population growth is a one with 
emphasis on services and management. It adopts comprehensive 
measures to achieve its goal. 
  -- The Chengde model of population control is one which 
takes the lead in bringing about population changes and makes 
the economy and population develop in a coordinated way. 
  -- The Chengde model of population control is one with 
economic construction as its central task. Meantime, it places 
population under strict control, while linking family planning 
with the aspiration to shake off poverty and become well-to-do. 
It also helps the economy and population develop in a 
coordinated manner. 
  5. Operational mechanism of Chengde Model of Population 
Control. 
  Some people believe that the operational mechanism of the 
Chengde model of population control is divided into three 
structural levels -- the macro-structural level, the 
mesostructural level and the micro-structural level. 
  1) From the macro-structural point of view, this model is an 
operational mechanism for population and economy. the lowering 
of the rate of population growth will certainly promote social 
and economic development, because funds for raising children can 
be saved and invested in improving the quality of life and 
developing the economy; and in promoting educational development 
and economic construction. Educational development and the 
changes in the concept and behavior on childbirth also brings 
about social progress. On the other hand, economic, educational 
and social developments also create material conditions for 
population control. After a series of actions and 
counteractions, various essential factors such as population, 
economy, education and society undergo adjustments to adapt 
themselves to each other. They will gradually creates a virtuous 
cycle of growth and improvement. 
  2) From the meso-structural point of view, this model is an 
operational mechanism which combines guidance, encouragement and 
administrative and social restraint. When guidance is given, 
efforts are made to guide people ideologically and materially. 
Education on population has been promoted and meticulous 
ideological and political work carried out among the people. The 
leading comrades play their exemplary role well and give 
publicity to the typical examples. The people have been given 
both material and moral encouragement. The social insurance 
program is developed in families where family planning has 
helped people shake off poverty and become well-to-do. Efforts 
have also been made to evaluate the people on how they carry out 
their birth control program. Those who have distinguished 
themselves are rewarded, while those who have done poorly are 
punished. Measures are taken to give more benefits to those who 
have less children. They make those with less children feel 
glorious and those with more children feel guilty conscious. 
  In developing the restraint mechanism, emphasis has been 
placed on administrative as well as social restraint. Signs of 
administrative restraint are: The principal leadership shoulders 
the overall responsibility, while others shoulder the 
responsibility of each of their own department to implement its 
population control program, work out the policy and regulations 
for family planning and resolutely act according to rules and 
regulations and in coordination with other administrative 
measures. As for social restraint, associations for family 
planning are set up at various levels. Party and Communist Youth 
League members and activists take the lead in mobilizing the 
masses to participate in the family planning program, to educate 
and supervise themselves and to create fine public opinion and 
environment in the society and in exerting pressure on views and 
acts which run counter to the family planning program. 
  3) The micro-structure refers to the administrative 
mechanisms in control of married women of child-bearing age. 
Chengde serves every family through its administrative offices, 
contingent of professionals and advisors and the mechanism of 
mass autonomy by giving people pre-wedding education and 
advising them on marriage, pregnancy, childbirth, child-raising 
and retirement. It gives pre-wedding education to the unmarried 
young people and advises the newly wed on married life and 
childbirth and help them set up plans for the next generation. 
It provides consultations for prenatal care and advises on 
health care for the babies and young children. It also teaches 
women how to correctly use contraceptives at their request. 
  Another group of people believe that the operational 
mechanism of the Chengde model of population control includes 
the mechanism of social restraint, the mechanism of motivation 
by benefits, the mechanism of publicity and education, the 
mechanism of management before pregnancy and the mechanism of 
mass autonomy. The mechanism of social restraint is the core and 
the mechanism of motivation by benefits is the motive force and 
trend of development. The mechanisms of publicity and education, 
management before pregnancy and the mechanism of mass autonomy 
are protective measures. 
  6. Effect of Chengde Population Control 
  The assessment of any model of population control should be 
made on the basis of the population effect, the economic effect 
and the social effect. Chengde has achieved remarkable effects 
in all these three aspects. 
  1) Population effect. Chengde's rate of family planning has 
always been maintained above 98 percent since 1989. In 1992, a 
year of China's third peak of childbirth, the birth rate was 
only 11.72 per thousand and the rate of natural population 
growth was only 6.29 per thousand. If we calculate according to 
the birth rate of women of child-bearing age in the 1970s, 
Chengde would have over 800,000 babies less between 1981 and 
1991. 
  2) Economic effect. The effective control of the population 
greatly alleviates the pressure exerted by excessively rapid 
population growth on the economic development. Chengde's per 
capita income growth and rate of GNP growth in 1991 ranked top 
among the eight prefectures in the province. 
  3) Social effect. The development of family planning brings 
about profound changes in people's knowledge on childbirth and 
in their concept of values on children and their obligations in 
society. People now prefer late marriage, late childbirth and 
less children rather than early marriage, early childbirth and 
more children. They prefer a new form of life over the rural or 
retirement life. The young people take care of their children, 
while old people are also well taken care of. According to a 
survey conducted by Du Peng and others from the People's 
University of China, 16.3 percent of the people in Chengde 
Prefecture regard a single child as adequate, 68.7 percent of 
them regard two children as adequate, while only 12.8 percent of 
them prefer three or more children. This indicates that notable 
changes have taken place in people's concept on childbirth. 
  7. Development Trend in Chengde Model of Population Control 
  If we analyze the basic trend in population growth, we 
realize that changes of the production of human beings generally 
have to go through the following several stages -- the stage of 
using control as the leading factor, the stage of mixed 
restraints and the stage of using economic and social conditions 
to spontaneously check population growth. 
  The stage of using control as the leading factor means that 
various means and ways of control are mainly used to check 
population growth in the area where the economy is not well 
developed. This is the original pattern to bring about 
population changes in an economically backward area where the 
population growth is excessively rapid. This pattern is adopted 
because the local economy is backward, and there is no economic 
foundation to spontaneously reduce the population growth rate. 
The backward economy may even serve to increase the population. 
The Chengde model of population control belongs to this type. 
  The model of mixed restraints uses both economic and control 
factors in controlling population growth. The characteristics of 
this model is that although the factor of economic conditions to 
spontaneously control population growth is growing, there are 
still no social and economic conditions to spontaneously lower 
the population growth rate. It is necessary to use means of 
control to check population growth. The southern Jiangsu model 
belongs to this type. 
  The model of using economic and social conditions to 
spontaneously check population growth mainly appears in 
economically developed countries or districts. When social 
production enters the stage of industrialization, the 
modernization of science and education, education and culture 
and the raising of living standard serve to change people's 
ideas and concepts on values and on childbirth, and help people 
realize the modernized goal of maintaining low birth and death 
rates and low population growth. 
  At the symposium, many comrades freely expressed their own 
views on the Chengde model of population control. 
  Some of the comrades believe that Chengde has achieved a 
great deal in population control today. In addition to the fact 
that the leading comrades at all levels have attached importance 
to and truly worked hard for population control, and 
persistently grasped the two types of production simultaneously, 
Chengde's success is also closely connected with the competent 
basic-level organizations and their efforts in giving publicity 
and education, in energetically serving the masses and in 
managing their affairs with a scientific approach. It is also 
because the policy on childbirth is quite close to that of the 
masses and the people's customs and work style are good. In 
light of the actual difficulties in carrying out production and 
living in hilly districts and on the river embankments, the 
"Hebei Provincial Regulations on Family Planning" stipulates 
that the masses living in Hebei's hilly districts and river 
embankment areas may have second child four years after their 
first one. This policy is quite close to the people's 
aspiration on childbirth. Work on family planning in this 
connection can be carried out more easily. 
  Some comrades also said that Chengde's experience in 
controlling population growth is good. However, it is nothing 
unique. It is a combination of the experiences in various 
localities. Therefore, it cannot be called a "model." It should 
be called "Chengde Experience." Others also pointed out that the 
"low birth and death rates and low population growth rate" of 
Chengde's population are unstable. The population will bounce 
back once the administrative restrains were loosened. Moreover, 
problems such as the low quality of life, high rate of birth 
defects and high sex ratio of babies also exist. The Chengde 
model of population control still fails to bring about a 
modernized population change. It is too early to call it a 
"model." 
  In dealing with these arguments, Li Honggui, head of the 
general office of the State Family Planning Commission, pointed 
out at the symposium that it is a misunderstanding to regard 
everything as good, whenever a "model" is mentioned. A "model" 
is not something rigid and unchangeable. There is still room for 
development and improvement. Yang Kuifu, Vice Chairman of the 
State Family Planning Commission said that there are different 
opinions on whether it should be called Chengde's model of 
population control or Chengde's experience in population 
control. We may continue to explore, but this will not affect us 
in analyzing Chengde's way of thinking, practice and experience 
in controlling population growth. The "Southern Jiangsu Model" 
was a term in connection with the economic model of Southern 
Jiangsu. Actually it can be called "Southern Jiangsu 
Experience." If Southern Jiangsu can be called a "model," so can 
Chengde. As for some people's saying that Chengde combines the 
experiences of various localities, Yang Kuifu said that I 
believe, it is something good to learn from other localities. 
Chengde is good in learning from others' strong points, apply 
them in its own areas and improve upon them. I think this is 
something unique itself. To learn from the advanced for one's 
own use and make further improvements is a form of creation and 
development itself. Particularly in today's era of information, 
various prefectures should learn from and encourage each other, 
and join their efforts in improving themselves. [passage omitted] 

