BFN 

  [Text] Shenyang, June 23 (XINHUA) -- Vice-Premier Zhu 
Rongji stressed here the need to reform the system of 
circulation of means of agricultural production, to stabilize 
their prices and to protect the farmers' enthusiasm for growing 
crops. 
  During a June 14-21 tour of north-east China's Jilin and 
Liaoning Provinces, Vice-Premier Zhu said the reform of the 
system of grain purchases and sales (which is aimed at suitably 
raising the prices of the government-purchased and sold grain) 
is being carried out smoothly in the two province. 
  As a result, the prices of grain are basically stable. The 
farmers are satisfied and become much more enthusiastic to grow 
crops. Meanwhile, the urban residents have expressed their 
understanding of the reform and support it. 
  Vice-Premier Zhu, who is also a member of the Standing 
Committee of the Political Bureau of the Communist Party of 
China, noted that grain price control is the core of the party's 
rural policy and an important economic pole for arousing the 
farmers' enthusiasm. 
  Now the farmers' enthusiasm has been aroused, it is 
necessary 
to stabilize or cut the prices of chemical fertilizers and other 
agricultural production means so as to allow the farmers to 
fully benefit from raised prices of government-purchased grain. 
  Vice-Premier Zhu said that only after this could the 
agricultural production be promoted and the farmers' income be 
increased. When the farmers' purchase strength is enhanced, the 
industrial products will have a big market and there will be a 
firm foundation for the development of national economy. 
  How to reform the system of the circulation of farm 
production means and to practically control the prices of 
chemical fertilizers and other agricultural production means is 
the main purpose of Vice-Premier Zhu's inspection tour of the 
two provinces in north-east China. 
  During some informal discussions with local farmers and 
cadres, Vice-Premier Zhu pointed out that in order to 
effectively control the prices of fertilizers and other farm 
production means, it is imperative to increase the production of 
fertilizers and distribute imported chemical fertilizers 
effectively. 
  He said it was also necessary to reform the system of 
circulation of farm production means to reduce the length of the 
circulation chain, streamline the administrative structure, 
improve the management and decrease the circulation costs. 
  Moreover, administration of the market should be 
strengthened, and people who drive up prices to reap staggering 
profits should be dealt with severely, Zhu added. 

