BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on economic activities monitored through 23 June. 
  This year, the foreign and domestic debt of the federal 
government increased 18.4 percent. In December 1993, it 
totalled 157.8 trillion real cruzeiros and 187 trillion real 
cruzeiros in May 1994. The domestic debt increased the most (23 
percent), going from 95.6 trillion real cruzeiros to 117.6 
trillion real cruzeiros. The main reason for this increase was 
the issuance of public certificates, the stock of which went up 
from 62.2 trillion real cruzeiros to 69.3 trillion real 
cruzeiros. (Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 21 
Jun 94 Business and Finance Section p 1) 
  The greatest volume of savings account deposits since the 
implementation of the Collor Plan was registered in May, as 53.3 
trillion real cruzeiros were deposited, equivalent to 5.1 
percent of GDP. In February 1990, one month before Collor came 
to power, savings account deposits were equivalent to 5.4 
percent of GDP, a figure that dropped following the freeze on 
bank accounts. The lowest savings deposit volume was registered 
in November 1991, when it amounted to 2.9 percent of GDP. 
  Savings accounts are sought by the public because of their 
monthly earnings, and because it has been guaranteed that the 
savings rules will not change. Savings account deposits are 
expected to increase in June, as the large investors have 
already detected that they will be one of the best investments 
with the implementation of the real. Savings accounts have now 
become the second favorite option in the financial system, 
following private title applications, which are equivalent to 
7.4 percent of GDP. Federal public titles come third, with 
applications equivalent to 4.7 percent of GDP. State and 
municipal titles come fourth, with applications equivalent to 3 
percent of GDP. Financial Investment Funds, FAF, and Special 
Interest-Bearing Deposits, DEF, come fifth, with applications 
equivalent to 1.1 and 0.5 percent of GDP respectively. (Rio de 
Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 22 Jun 94 Business and 
Finance Section p 5) 

