Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Panama City KW Continente in Spanish at 
2030 GMT on 23 January broadcasts live Ruben Dario Carles' 
speech to the Nationalist Liberal Republican Movement (Molirena) 
convention, during which he was elected presidential candidate. 
  Carles starts by saying a political campaign entails hard 
work and that he is willing to work hard, because he is a 
Molirena member and because he will be the first Molirena 
president. He lauds several party officials and gives special 
recognition to the excellent work and courageous position of 
Vice President Guillermo Ford, had earlier renounced his 
presidential aspirations in favor of Carles. 
  Concerning his tour of the interior of the country and talks 
with farmers and ranchers, Carles says: "One of the main 
responsibilities of a serious government is to ensure that there 
is food for the people. Thus, we are going to give all our 
protection, support, and backing to the country's agriculture 
producers. In my talks with them, I have warned them our 
protection cannot be used as an instrument to increase their 
prices and profits. We will give them fair protection, because 
the government has to do all it can to make producers more 
efficient. Our protection will enable them to become more 
efficient and competitive and, thus, offer better prices to 
consumers. To further this end, the government must ensure that 
the cost of supplies and services will be lower, as this will 
allow farmers, ranchers, and agriculture industrialists to be 
more efficient. I have promised that my government would give 
them fair protection--we will not allow abuses or undue price 
hikes--so that they can be competitive. I have promised to give 
them fair protection in the meat, milk, rice, corn, sorghum, 
tomato, and vegetables sectors." 
  Carles goes on to state that he was the country's 
comptroller 
general for four years and that he could not promote 
expenditures or money disbursements. He appraises the positive 
results of his fiscal discipline program but emphasizes that he 
will have other duties once he is president of the Republic. He 
says: "I will improve Panamanians' standard of living. This is 
not done by putting more money into their pockets, rather, 
first, by giving them better services. The government's task 
should be to ensure that Panamanians receive the public services 
that correspond to the effort and money assigned to it by the 
government. I know we will have to change several government 
structures, but we have to make sure that public services are 
being received satisfactorily. This is where the struggle 
against poverty begins. 
  "When the poor people send their children to schools and 
they 
are given sound education, the poor will no longer be poor, 
because they will have hopes and possibilities. Schools are not 
delivering the desired quality of education, and there are 
several reasons for this. Had I and my brothers not gone to 
school, we would still be back in Penonome. Education is what 
made the difference. Education is the great leveler. It gives 
poor people possibilities. The poor who study and take 
advantage of opportunities can get ahead. We are going to give 
sound education. If the government does not make an effort to 
give quality education to its citizens, the poor will continue 
to be poor, and the situation in the country will become 
serious, because they will have no hope. Life has no meaning if 
we are poor and without hope." 
  Carles says: "During the first 100 days of my government, I 
intend to improve public services, and you will all see how 
things will change." 
  He goes on to say: "A government is effective only if it can 
offer jobs to young people and better services to all citizens. 
A government can only do this if it makes decisions, cuts 
excessive autonomy, and does away with small autonomous bodies 
that do not allow government employees to do their jobs 
effectively. I was in Colon the other day and asked an engineer 
why the building of a road was taking so long. He replied: How 
can I advance if IRHE [Institute of Hydraulic Resources and 
Electrification] has not moved the electricity posts so I can 
build my road? How can a government organization jeopardize the 
work of another institution? Do you know what this requires? A 
strong government. Somebody has to make decisions. Either you 
do your work or you go home right away." 
  Carles cites the Panama Canal issue, saying: "We have to 
manage the canal efficiently. You will be given later details 
on what we will do. We have to make good use of the reverted 
lands and assets. We have to resolve the problem of the military 
bases without hesitation or quivering. Omar Torrijos placed us 
under the Pentagon's umbrella. Thus, so-called nationalists 
should stop praising Omar. He died a long time ago and left us 
with this problem. I do not see any problem in establishing 
relations with the United States--something which will be 
convenient and just for Panama--on the issue of the military 
bases." 
  Carles mentions the public debt and says Molirena has worked 
hard to solve this problem, which was left by the past regime. 
He also broaches the problem of security and advocates an 
improved civilian police corps to counter the lack of security 
and to ensure that the country will not return to militarism. 

