BFN 

<F P=106> [Report from Beijing by special correspondent: "T.K. Ann </F>
Resigns His Post as CPPCC Vice Chairman"] 
  [Text] An informed source here disclosed that T.K. Ann, an 
incumbent vice chairman of the mainland's Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC] National Committee, 
recently tendered a verbal resignation to the higher leadership 
in Beijing, asking to be discharged from the post of vice 
chairman of the CPPCC National Committee. 
  It is said that the reason he gave in support of his 
resignation is that he is too old and his health is not good 
enough to allow him to perform his duties competently in such an 
important position as CPPCC vice chairman. Therefore he hopes 
that the position can be given to someone younger. 
  However, his request was rejected at once by the ranking 
mainland Chinese official concerned, who urged him to keep the 
post and promised him that all he needs to do as vice chairman 
is to attend a few important meetings of the CPPCC or other 
organizations in Beijing and to show up at some major functions 
in Hong Kong. 
  T.K. Ann, now 82 years old, is not merely an entrepreneur, 
but also a linguist of rather high standing. His extensive 
knowledge and ability were appreciated by Deng Xiaoping, who 
therefore nominated him as vice chairman of the CPPCC National 
Committee. 
  Taking up the post as chairman of the Hong Kong Textile 
Industry Federation in the 1950's, T.K. Ann later held a series 
of other posts: member of the Hong Kong Legislative and 
Executive Councils, and chairman of the Trade Development 
Council. In the 1980's, he was appointed by the Chinese side to 
be member of the Standing Committee of the CPPCC National 
Committee. At the same time, he held such important posts as 
vice chairman of the Hong Kong Basic Law Drafting Committee and 
member of the Hong Kong Basic Law Consultative Committee, 
playing an influential political role in both China and Hong 
Kong. 
  In March 1993, T.K. Ann was further elected vice chairman of 
the CPPCC National Committee, thus reaching the peak of his 
political career. Only one year later, however, he unexpectedly 
tendered his resignation. 
  T.K. Ann has always deliberately maintained a low political 
profile in his different positions. Seldom has he readily 
stated his stance on public occasions. He has always tried to 
decline interviews by reporters, and if he could no longer 
decline, he would confine the interview to a discussion on 
academic matters or to chats on personal affairs; never would he 
touch on sensitive political issues. 
  Business figures very close to T.K. Ann said advanced age 
and 
poor health are certainly reasons for his resignation, but the 
fact that he is indifferent to and tired of politics -- as he 
often has said in private -- could possibly be another reason. 
  It is said that in recent years T.K. Ann has had to devote 
much of his time and energy to the management and operation of 
the Winsor Industrial Group, a company listed on the Hong Kong 
stock market with him as group chairman. This is perhaps 
another reason why he is tired of the official post. 

