Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Text of Minprirody of Russia press service announcement </F>
"Greenpeace, To Put It Mildly, Is Wrong"; with commentary] 
  [Text] In late 1993 the Russian branch of Greenpeace 
distributed a report entitled "Russia: "A Dump for Western 
Wastes." Following that articles with similar content appeared 
in the Russian mass information media. 
  In connection with this, the press service of Minprirody 
[Ministry of the Environment and Natural Resources] is 
authorized to announce that the allegation that Russia has 
already become a proving ground for disposing of dangerous 
industrial wastes from Western countries has no basis at all and 
is pure disinformation. 
  The data cited in the Greenpeace report stating that in 6 
years 96 attempts were made to import 34 million tonnes of waste 
to Russia illustrate only intentions and nothing more. Attempts 
made are not yet accomplished facts which constitute a real 
threat to Russia's ecological security. 
<H5>  Commentary </H5>
  As experience accumulated has shown, the system for 
exporting 
and importing industrial waste which operates in our country 
does not do a reliable job of insuring us against the 
infiltration of large batches of dangerous waste into Russia's 
territory. According to the decree of the government, MBES 
[Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations] of Russia issues the 
licenses and the State Customs Committee monitors the import of 
waste. The basis for issuing a license is the agreement of 
Minprirody of Russia, which conducts the necessary expert 
ecological study in such cases. This system applies to all 
subjects of economic activity on Russia's territory, and the 
violation of it entails administrative and criminal 
responsibility. 
  According to Minprirody data, the territorial nature 
protection organs have rejected the overwhelming majority of 
proposals of Western firms and Russian intermediary firms on the 
basis of the findings of expert ecological studies. 
  In 1992-1993 they approved licenses to import only small 
batches of industrial waste, largely for research purposes (for 
example, 130 kilograms of polymer waste -- the Mikas AG Joint 
Stock Company, 800 kilograms of automobile scrap -- the 
Association of Engineering Research, and so forth). In addition, 
licenses to import about 50,000 tonnes of waste from Ukraine and 
Kazakhstan were permitted to be issued. But that is another 
subheading, as they say. These wastes (metallurgical tailings 
and granular slag) serve as raw material for Russia's cement 
enterprises and have been supplied to Russia within the 
framework of cooperation since the days of the former USSR and, 
most importantly, are not classified as dangerous wastes. 
  Data from the Greenpeace report which was already mentioned 
are more evidence of the effectiveness of the present system; 
according to the report 4,000 tonnes of waste and 7,500 old 
tires have been disposed of in Russia in the last 6 years, and 
that is 8,500 times, meaning almost to the fourth order, less 
than those 34 million tonnes which were indicated as attempted 
imports. 
  For your information: every year about 25 million tonnes of 
dangerous waste are formed in the OECD [Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development] countries and more than 
200 million tonnes -- in the United States. 
  Incidentally, it is appropriate to mention that the 
radioactive waste which figures as a component of this 4,000 
tonnes represents spent nuclear fuel from atomic power plants 
built by the Soviet Union and is imported to Russia under 
existing agreements to which Article 50 of the Law "On 
Protecting the Natural Environment" does not retroactively 
apply. So one should not be too hasty and "ring the bell before 
looking at the church calendar." 
  In order to stop the illegal attempts to import dangerous 
waste, the danger of which cannot be underestimated, Minprirody 
is working in close contact with law enforcement organs as well 
as the nature protection departments of Latvia, Poland, Germany, 
and a number of other countries. 
  Taking into account the ever-increasing desire of foreign 
firms to increase waste imports, including dangerous waste, into 
Russia, Minprirody of Russia has prepared a packet of documents 
needed to ratify the Basel Convention and a draft decree of the 
RF Government which, among other things, envisions compiling a 
list of wastes whose import onto Russia's territory must be 
prohibited. 
  Let us say in conclusion that an objective evaluation of the 
real state of affairs fundamentally refutes Greenpeace's theory 
that Russia has been converted into a dump for Western waste. 
This once again illustrates Greenpeace's inadequate 
understanding of the essence of Russian ecological problems, 
which brings to mind that this organization's choice of 
priorities was made in advance, rather than dictated by Russia's 
interests. 
  However, sharing the concern of public organizations and the 
mass information media over foreign firms' attempts to import 
dangerous wastes into Russia, Minprirody of Russia invites them 
to participate in cooperation and a mutual exchange of 
information on the attempts made for this purpose in order to 
set up a double barrier, state and public, against dangerous 
wastes. 
  For additional information, call: 254-49-88. 

