Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Robert Corzine report: "Green Space in the Tunisian Desert"] </F>
  [Text] Tourists seeking a sleepy or swinging Mediterranean 
resort would be disappointed if they took the turning into the 
southern Tunisian town of Sfax. 
  A stinging smog bathes the industrial city, the result of a 
steady pall of smoke coming from a nearby phosphate plant. A 
mountain of gypsum, the waste product from the process, 
dominates the skyline. It is also the source of pollutants 
which have leached their way through to the nearby sea to kill 
much of the local marine life. 
  The casual visitor might think that a new oil derrick or two 
sticking up above the sprawling town and its hundreds of small 
metal and furniture workshops and car repair yards would do 
little to spoil the scenery. Yet local environmental concerns 
have been one of the strongest influences on British Gas's 
approach to its second-largest foreign project to date. 
  The need to persuade sceptical Tunisian officials that 
British Gas's operations in and around Sfax would not create a 
new source of pollution to rival the phosphate plant was a 
constant theme during years of negotiations, according to Jack 
Barnes, the British engineer who oversaw the company's growing 
involvement in Tunisia from 1989 until his recent retirement. 
  British Gas's presence in Tunisia stems from its purchase in 
1988 of the international oil and gas assets of Tenneco, the US 
company. In 1991, it discovered the Rhemoura oil field which 
underlies Sfax. Offshore oil finds were made in 1992. The 
company began development work on the 500m pounds offshore 
Miskar gas field south of Sfax late last year, and expects the 
first Miskar gas to flow in 1995. 
  The company's 40m pounds investment in oil production in the 
area is much smaller than the Miskar project, which includes a 
large land-based processing plant. But the company knew that 
the way in which it ran its oil operations would indicate to 
sceptical local officials how it might handle the much larger 
and more politically sensitive gas field development. 
  Producing oil in urban areas has long been a practice in the 
US, where "nodding donkey" pumping units can be seen in settings 
as varied as supermarket car parks and behind false building 
facades in Hollywood. British Gas engineers studied sites in 
Texas and Florida to help ensure that the operations in Sfax 
caused a minimum of disruption. 
  In Sfax, as elsewhere, public concerns centred around 
possible inconvenience and safety. British Gas held a series of 
town meetings to explain its proposals. Gaining the support of 
the regional governor was also a priority according to Barnes, 
especially as one of the first exploratory wells was drilled in 
a field next to his official residence. 
  The long wires needed for seismic testing were laid along 
streets and alleyways at night and had to be picked up before 
dawn to avoid people who were going to work. "It was a tedious 
and cumbersome process," according to William Lehmann, general 
manager of oil operations. "We had to be particularly careful 
when doing the thumping" that sends the seismic waves into the 
ground. 
  The complex geologic structure of the latest exploration 
well 
now being drilled in Sfax required the use of oil-based mud to 
lubricate drill bits and to carry rock cuttings back to the 
surface. 
  There was no local hazardous waste disposal site, so British 
Gas had to seek its own solution. 
  The contaminated cuttings are taken to a bio-remediation 
site 
the company built south of Sfax where Joe Frank Dean, a former 
rodeo cowboy from New Mexico, herds millions of bacteria which 
eat their way through the toxic particles. The clean cuttings 
and nutrient wastes are then tilled into nearby farm land. 
  The process of convincing the Tunisians that British Gas 
intended to follow the best environmental practices in all its 
activities extended to arranging visits by leading Tunisian 
officials to similar British Gas facilities in the UK. 
  The company even looked at ways in which the mountain of 
gypsum could be used, going so far as to find a second-hand 
plant in the US which could be shipped over to convert the waste 
into road aggregate. But a shortage of cash in Tunisia put paid 
to the scheme. 
  Company officials were determined that no comparisons could 
be made between the much maligned phosphate plant and its own 
gas processing facility. A helicopter search of the coast 
produced a site that promised to be as inconspicuous as 
possible. The plant, hidden from the main coastal road by a 
small hill and a belt of olive trees, will occupy only 15 
hectares of the 69 hectare site. 
  It is at the Hannibal processing site, however, that British 
Gas's environmental strategy came unstuck, although ironically 
in a way which is unlikely to raise many local concerns. 
  The "sour" gas from the Miskar field contains large amounts 
of sulphur, carbon dioxide, nitrogen and liquid condensates 
which require lengthy processing to remove. The extracted 
sulphur and condensates will be sold separately from the clean 
gas. 
  But British Gas engineers were stumped when they looked for 
economic ways in which to dispose of the carbon dioxide, a 
suspected greenhouse gas. Re-injection of the gas was 
considered, but there were serious doubts about the technology 
involved and worries that the cost would make an already 
marginal project uneconomic, according to Richard Hart, 
operations manager. 
  The result is that 1.10 million cubic meters of carbon 
dioxide -- a "fair amount" concedes Hart -- will be released 
into the atmosphere each day. 

