BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Bosnian Prime Minister Haris Silajdzic by </F>
Renaud Girard in Paris; date not given: "Silajdzic: `Europe 
Scorns Our Right To Legitimate Defense'"] 
  [Text]Haris Silajdzic is an energetic man in his 
forties, with simple and direct ways who speaks excellent 
English. Just as much at ease in an international forum as he 
is on the streets of Sarajevo, he embodies the new generation of 
staunchly European Bosnian politicians. He was appointed prime 
minister last fall from the post of foreign minister, and since 
then has constantly demanded that Europe respect its commitments 
toward the aggressed Bosnia. Passing through Paris, he held a 
long meeting late on Friday afternoon [3 June] with Alain Juppe 
at the Foreign Ministry, then with President Mitterrand at the 
Elysee. 
  [Girard] In your opinion, what is required for there to be a 
long-lasting cease-fire in Bosnia-Herzegovina? 
  [Silajdzic] We want Serbian troops to withdraw completely 
from the Gorazde safe area, as the United Nations and NATO have 
requested. Only then can we start negotiations on putting a 
stop to the hostilities. 
  [Girard] Do you think that your troops have any chance of 
cutting off the Brcko corridor? (linking Serbia with the areas 
of western Bosnia and Croatia that have been conquered by the 
Serbs.) 
  [Silajdzic] We are not concerned today with cutting any 
corridors, but rather with obtaining a real cease-fire that will 
enable us to begin negotiations. To be able to talk, there must 
first be an atmosphere of peace. The problem with the 
negotiations we have had in the past with the Serbs is that they 
were held in an atmosphere of constant attacks on our towns by 
Belgrade's forces. 
  [Girard] But the Bosnians are no longer on the defensive. 
You now have a real army which the Serbs, who are good gunners 
but bad infantrymen, are increasingly afraid of. Why do you not 
seize on this advantage? 
  [Silajdzic] I trust you are not being serious! Your question 
implies that the aggressors, who have ravaged half the country, 
destroyed our towns, killed so many civilians, opened 
concentration camps, and systematically raped, have now become 
the victims. The facts speak for themselves. Serbia is the 
aggressor. The Serbian infantry is armed to the teeth, backed 
up by tanks, artillery, and ground-to-ground missiles and 
anti-aircraft guns -- all weapons that we do not have. There is 
no offensive in Brcko or Bosnia. There is fighting, to resist 
aggression. Our resistance cannot be described as an offensive. 
  [Girard] What are your conditions for a political solution 
to 
the conflict? 
  [Silajdzic] First, that the areas where genocide has taken 
place, that have seen ethnic cleansing, are not handed over to 
the perpetrators of these crimes. The Serbian militia that have 
invaded these areas must return home and their leaders, who 
orchestrated the ethnic cleansing operations, should be tried 
and sentenced as war criminals by an international tribunal. 
  [Girard] There was a war crimes tribunal in Nuremberg 
because 
there were victors capable of setting one up. However, in the 
current situation, how can we practically reconcile political 
settlements and a war tribunal? 
  [Silajdzic] I do not accept the equation that justice equals 
strength. If you say that we can only see that justice is done 
if we are victorious, then it is a return to the stone age. We 
want to obtain both the political settlement of the conflict and 
the setting up of a war court. Innocent people have been 
killed: There must be a court. These days, when you kill a 
man, you are put in prison or you are sentenced to death by 
lethal injection, like in the United States. If you kill a 
dozen people, you are called a "serial killer" and you are sent 
to a psychiatric prison. If you kill 200,000 people, you are 
cordially invited to Geneva... 
  [Girard] Where the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina is 
concerned, what percentage have you demanded for the 
Croatian-Muslim federation and what percentage of the occupied 
territory would you agree to leave to the Serbs? 
  [Silajdzic] Which Serbs are you talking about? We believe 
that those who orchestrated this fascist project for a greater 
Serbia, based on ethnic cleansing, are a small minority of the 
Serbian people. 
  Most Serbs have left the country because they do not approve 
of this criminal policy. We still have with us some 200,000 
Serbs, loyal to their country, Bosnia, and to its government. 
If the Serbs want to live separately and among themselves -- 
inside the sovereign state of Bosnia-Herzegovina, of course -- 
then they may do so, but only in those areas where they were in 
the majority before the conflict began. 
  [Girard] Which means what percentage? 
  [Silajdzic] We are not talking in terms of percentages here, 
we are talking about a principle. For example, the federation 
we have founded with the Croats does not include a single 
village which had a majority of Serbs before the war. For their 
part, the Serbs occupy many towns that did not have a Serbian 
majority, but they want to acquire these regions for themselves. 
We will not accept that. 
  [Girard] I note that you are not opposed to areas where the 
Serbs could live among themselves. What percentage of the 
country does that represent? 
  [Silajdzic] We said that before the war, 58 percent of the 
country was inhabited by a Bosnian or Croatian majority or quite 
simply by Bosnians. The problem is that any idea of division or 
partition is itself a criminal idea because, in my country, 
people were living together, and not just in the same town, but 
in the same street, the same building, the same house, and often 
sharing the same bed. How can you divide that up? What do you 
do with the children of mixed couples, who are neither Serbs, 
Croats, or Bosnians? To my eyes, dividing people up like that 
is a crime in itself. That is why we disagree with certain 
Western governments, since they would let this happen. 
  [Girard] How? 
  [Silajdzic] By giving practically carte blanche to the 
fascist regime in Belgrade to kill and hunt defenseless people. 
We can respect a decision of non-intervention, or even of 
strict neutrality. But there is no longer any neutrality when 
we are prevented from arming and defending ourselves, and if a 
blind eye is turned while the Belgrade regime conquers all the 
land it wants. Now the Serbs are claiming that the status quo 
should be maintained, and many Western governments are ready to 
give in to them. Some even say to us: If you do not accept the 
peace plan, we will withdraw our blue helmets! Europe is 
scorning our right to legitimate defense. 
  [Girard] What is the situation with your alliance with the 
Croats? 
  [Silajdzic] We have lived with the Croats for centuries. Of 
course, we are two separate regions, but we share the same 
culture and the same literature. 
  Why did we fight against the Croats in 1993? After the 
Serbian aggression of April 1992, everyone began to fight to 
survive. It is true that one of the Serbs' greatest 
achievements was to provoke this fratricidal struggle between 
Croats and Bosnians. Now, we enjoy good relations with Croatia 
and, on this issue at least, I am optimistic about the future. 

