Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Prec Zogaj: "Hooligans Assault With a </F>
Knuckle-Duster Teodor Keko, Deputy and ALEANCA Editor in 
Chief--Procedures To Settle Accounts With Opposition Journalists 
Accelerated"] 
  [Text] Handcuffs, iron bars, and brass knuckles are the 
fringe benefits now awarded to journalists of the free and 
opposition press. A handful of prosecutors and ministers, and 
bandits and hooligans of the night, have closed ranks in the 
defense of Selami's model democracy, mercilessly striking out 
against journalists. This unprecedented political aggression 
reached an unexpected climax at about 2000 on Thursday evening 
[10 March]. Deputy Teodor Keko, one of the founders of the 
opposition press, a well-known writer, and for the last two 
months editor in chief of ALEANCA, was treacherously assaulted 
in the dark, close to the Tirana Prosecutor's Office and very 
near his own apartment. He had just emerged from his home, 
accompanied by his wife, when an unknown person emerged from a 
group of three that had taken up positions, and struck the 
deputy above the left eyebrow with a set of brass knuckles, 
causing three wounds with the weapon's three studs on the 
knuckles. Neither the deputy nor his terrified wife managed to 
learn anything about the three assailants, who ran away without 
a word, perhaps so as not to reveal their dialect. 
  The guards at the Tirana Prosecutor's Office and Deputy 
Prosecutor Fatos Dervusgu administered first aid to the deputy, 
who was sent to hospital, where he received the necessary 
treatment. 
  This shameful act against a deputy and a journalist 
represents an extremely dangerous escalation of this 
unprecedented violence against journalists. 
  One week ago, the Ton-Ton Macoutes of Shkoder delivered an 
almost fatal blow with an iron bar to Gjergj Zefi, deputy 
chairman of the Democratic Alliance's Assembly and an ALEANCA 
journalist, solely because he had denounced sections of the 
Shkoder mafia, those very same groups that are growing rich from 
smuggling oil and who were denounced the evening before last by 
Appeal Court Judge Zef Brozi. 
  Gjergj Zefi had not left his sick-bed before the forces of 
darkness planned another assault against editor in chief Keko. 
It seems that these forces that are today trying to strangle 
the country see it as more appropriate to settle accounts with 
ALEANCA with iron bars and brass knuckles. Otherwise, how can 
one explain that Keko was struck after taking over ALEANCA's 
editorial desk? He has immunity as a People's Assembly deputy. 
Any prosecution raised against him would involve contriving a 
case, assembling parliament in order to remove his immunity, and 
risking criticism from Europe and abroad, in other words, a long 
and dangerous road. In such cases, there are ways to accelerate 
the process. Hooligans, whether paid or unpaid, attack the 
journalist and deputy, and this achieves the same purpose. 
  In any case, even if common criminals who do not read 
newspapers did not receive orders to assault the journalist, 
their ominous daring has been inspired by the aggression of the 
state itself against the free press. Under such circumstances, 
we are faced with serious attempts at political assassination, 
in other words terrorism. Responsibility for these incidents, 
and others that will occur, fall squarely on the shoulders of 
the present government and the bodies of justice that are not 
taking a single step to protect journalists. 
  The ALEANCA staff issued a strong protest against the 
violence of the night-time streets and the fascist-style forms 
of revenge on opposition journalists. We appeal for the support 
of all our readers, citizens, policemen, prosecutors, and 
judges. It is not only Gjergj Zefi and Teodor Keko that have 
been assaulted today. The bars and brass knuckles struck their 
faces, but the blows were suffered by freedom of the press in 
Albania, without which a free and democratic society is 
unimaginable. 

