Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 19 March (MTI) -- Prime Minister Peter 
Boross, deputy chairman of the ruling Hungarian Democratic Forum 
(MDF), is confident that his party will fare well at the 
parliamentary elections in May and he himself can remain prime 
minister. Boross was speaking at a forum where the party's 
program was laid out, in Budapest on Saturday [19 March]. 
  He also spoke of what could not be implemented from the 
MDF's 
program, since when it was drawn up nobody could foresee the 
collapse of the Soviet Union, the South Slav war, and the 
economic recession in Western Europe. 
  On the past four years, the prime minister said that as a 
result of 40 years of socialism, the situation is still very 
bad, but the country's infrastructure has started to develop and 
inflation could be held under control. 
  Given the security policy vacuum in East-Central Europe, 
Hungary's situation is not simple, with Russia coming into play 
as well as the West and the United States, Boross said. 
  "In this situation, we want to provide for Hungary by 
linking 
it to the economic circuit leading to the market system of the 
future," he added. This is why Hungary, after agreeing with its 
friends in advance, is now applying to the European Union even 
if it knows that transition needed for full membership will take 
four to six years, the prime minister said. "We have to declare 
now where our country belongs." 
  According to Boross, the present and coming period requires 
serious people living for the country, considerate words, and 
predictability. He expressed his conviction that today the MDF 
is the political force that meets these requirements due to its 
personnel composition, belief, seriousness, determination, and 
firmness. 
  Boross said that, contrary to negative articles appearing in 
the Western press, his talks with leading politicians convinced 
him that they are well aware of how things stand in Hungary 
today. 
  He also said that Hungary's radio and television programs 
prove that the two institutions are not under governmental 
control despite all Western press allegations to the opposite. 
  Asked by reporters if AWACS would be a topic of his talks 
with Belgian Prime Minister Jean-Luc Dehaene arriving in Hungary 
on Sunday [20 March], Boross said this question was also a 
likely topic, but the main issue will be bilateral links. 
  He added that Hungary has greater demands concerning the 
joining of various organizations and the prescheduled meetings 
give Hungarian politicians a good chance to outline Hungary's 
arguments and win over potential supporters. Boross hoped EU 
members will decide in favor of Hungary, so Dehaene's visit is 
very important for the country's future. 

