Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jet Bruinsma and Jose Smits: "Lubbers Wants </F>
Debate on Asylum-Seekers -- Dankert Wants a Separate Treaty With 
Germany"] 
  [Text] During the weekend ministers received a letter from 
Prime Minister Lubbers asking them to think deeply about the 
increasing asylum-seeker numbers. The public discussion on the 
subject made that necessary, the prime minister said. 
  In his letter Lubbers also pointed to the large number of 
votes given to the Center Democrats and CP'86 in the municipal 
elections. 
  In his letter, which the cabinet will debate on Friday [18 
March], Lubbers did not propose any concrete measures to reduce 
the number of asylum-seekers. But Lubbers did ask a number of 
questions which, according to some people in the know, were 
"clear" and "very pertinent." Because the document had already 
been written, Lubbers did not refer to the comments by VVD 
[People's Party for Freedom and Democracy] parliamentary leader 
Bolkestein on KRO [Catholic Radio and Television Broadcasting] 
television on Sunday evening. Bolkestein said that the 
Netherlands should only accept Europeans. 
  Lubbers asked his colleagues whether "we" knew for certain 
that everyone who asked for asylum in the Netherlands should 
actually be accepted. People without papers are accepted in the 
asylum process in the Netherlands, in contrast to some other 
European countries. They are accommodated as long as the 
procedure is ongoing. Lubbers asked his cabinet colleagues 
whether this was not a factor which made it more attractive for 
refugees to go to the Netherlands. 
  The prime minister indicated that a decreasing number of 
asylum-seekers are entering the Netherlands via Schiphol 
airport. But since the total number is nevertheless increasing 
strongly this year (55,000 are expected this year in comparison 
with around 35,000 last year), it is an obvious conclusion that 
they are coming overland, via Germany and Belgium. But then 
should not these asylum-seekers really have asked for asylum 
there, Lubbers wanted to know. After all, international 
agreements have been made on this subject. 
  In his letter the prime minister looked at the whole "chain" 
followed by asylum-seekers, namely acceptance, reception and 
accommodation. He expressed amazement about the fact that the 
government had made money available for 25,000 temporary homes, 
but that only four had been built. 
  During consultations between parliament and Foreign Affairs 
State Secretary Dankert on Wednesday it emerged that the cabinet 
is considering taking measures to reduce the number of 
asylum-seekers coming from Germany. At present 60 percent of 
asylum-seekers are entering the Netherlands from Germany. 
  Now that the so-called Schengen treaty is not taking effect 
(partly because of opposition from France), Dankert wanted to 
make a separate treaty with Germany about checks at its external 
border, for the benefit of the Netherlands. 
  The Schengen treaty included agreements between a number of 
European countries on tight checks on various matters, including 
the movement of foreigners at the external borders of the treaty 
area, in exchange for free movement at the internal borders. 
  The Netherlands has already made a "reciprocal agreement" 
with Germany. Under this treaty, foreigners who can be 
demonstrated to have stayed in Germany for a time can be sent 
back to Germany. They are taken by the military police to the 
Netherlands-German border. But it is not clear whether this 
labor intensive method is actually applied in every case. 
  The CDA [Christian Democratic Appeal] wants the cabinet to 
train additional military police officers and use them to expand 
checks at and behind the border, it emerged on Wednesday. These 
checks are also regarded necessary to fight the increasing 
smuggling of drugs, arms and illegal foreigners. 
  The PvdA [Labor Party] is mainly pushing for a European 
political settlement in order to distribute the number of 
asylum-seekers fairly across Europe. At present France accepts 
just as many asylum-seekers as the Netherlands, although in 
proportion to the number of its inhabitants it should do far 
more. 
  Germany's effort is comparable with that of the Netherlands. 
However, stricter asylum legislation there has led to a 
reduction, while the number of asylum-seekers in the Netherlands 
is increasing. 
  The cabinet also wants to free up the reception centers for 
asylum-seekers by making the application procedure quicker. 
Both the CDA and PvdA support the cabinet in this. The present 
procedure is too long and bureaucratic, according to the 
coalition. 

