Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] An impasse over salaries between the National 
Research Council (CNPq) and a group of five civilian researchers 
scheduled to spend the winter in the frozen land of the 
Commander Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF) may interrupt 
Brazilian research in the frozen continent for 10 months. The 
scientists want monthly payments of $5,500 (3.63 million real 
cruzeiros), which are equivalent to the salaries paid to 
military personnel, and the CNPq is offering $1,700 (1.2 million 
real cruzeiros). 
  The researchers refused to leave for Antarctica this week as 
scheduled for a 10-month period at the station, and just eight 
military officers supplying logistics support for the project 
traveled. According to Heber Reis Passos, the Trade Union of 
Federal Servants in the Science and Technology Area director, 
the problem started when the Navy Ministry, responsible for the 
entire project during its first eight years, disengaged itself 
from the research field, which was taken over by the Science and 
Technology Ministry last year. 
  Following this disengagement, the scientists began to 
collect 
their payments as per the CNPq payment schedule for people 
working abroad, while military personnel continued collecting 
their payments as per their ministry's payment schedule. Reis 
said: "When the researchers saw that they would not receive 
equal treatment, they refused to leave for Antarctica." 
  The EACF currently develops projects on the ozone layer, 
magnetism, pollution, cosmic rays, and meteorology, among 
others. Heber Reis believes the absence of scientists during the 
winter at the Antarctic station might mean an "irreparable 
hiatus" in the program. Reis said: "The country will lose 10 
months of research work, which is absurd." 
  CNPq Technological Development Superintendent Guilherme 
Brandao believes this threat does not exist. He emphasized that 
the CNPq has contacted researchers who already have been at the 
station before to replace those who refused to leave for 
Antarctica. With this, Brandao hopes to minimize the delay's 
consequences. He emphasized: "We probably will send a new 
group within three months on the next support flight." [passage 
omitted] 

