BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by JORDAN TIMES staff reporter Nirmin Murad] </F>
  [Text] His Majesty King Husayn and Syrian President Hafiz 
al-Asad will meet in Damascus Thursday [19 May] where the two 
leaders are expected to discuss the latest developments in the 
Middle East peace process, official sources said. 
  The King was quoted as saying that there will be a 
"Jordanian-Syrian summit in Damascus on Thursday," in his 
meeting with representatives of blocs and committees of the 
Lower House of Parliament Monday. 
  His announcement, according to parliamentary sources, came 
after the King briefed the deputies on Jordan's "great 
satisfaction with the level of Jordanian-Syrian coordination" 
over the Middle East peace process and on the bilateral level. 
  The King was also quoted as saying that his satisfaction 
with 
Syrian coordination did not extend to the Palestine Liberation 
Organisation (PLO) with which, he said, "coordination is much 
below the expected standard." 
  But despite this, the King also underscored Jordan's 
insistence that the "Palestinians plan for themselves and take 
their own decisions." 
  Jordan, the King said, will continue to extend support to 
the 
PLO as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian 
people." 
  The King, according to the sources, underlined the Kingdom's 
continued commitment to the "comprehensiveness of the solution 
of the Middle East problem" and that Jordan will not enter the 
"race" on the different tracks to sign agreements before fully 
negotiating the points leading up to that agreement. 
  "The King said Jordan will not sign a peace agreement before 
fully neogtiating all the details leading up to that agreement," 
one parliamentary source said. 
  The King told the deputies Jordan had always maintained its 
position that no peace can be comprehensive "without Arab 
coordination." 
  That is why Jordan, the King was quoted as telling the 
deputies, "had always put nationalism above patriotism." 
  The King's message was that the Kingdom will continue to 
deal 
with developments in the peace process "from a nationalist point 
of view rather than from its own narrow interests," as one 
deputy put it. 
  On another front, deputies interviewed by the JORDAN TIMES 
said, the King's public statement that Jordan was committed to 
maintain its democratisation process was in response to 
complaints voiced by the deputies over how the House was 
portrayed in the official media, particularly television. 
  According to parliamentary sources, Irbid Deputy 'Abd 
al-Razzaa Tubayshat raised the issue of how TV coverage could 
instill in people's mind "the message that Parliament was being 
criticised for the way it handles its duties." 
  Parliamentary sources said that the King resonded by 
dispelling any criticism of the House and reiterating the 
Kingdom's commitment to democratisation "because it is linked to 
the Arab people's dignity, freedom and right to participation in 
building their present and making their future." 
  The official news agency, Petra, reported Monday that the 
King called on the parliamentarians to continue their 
distinguished work in the fields of legislation and monitoring 
government performance, pointing to the importance of having 
well-defined relations among the executive, legislative and 
judicial authorities. 

