Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Fallen Walls"] </F>
  [Text] Another taboo of the modern world has collapsed with 
the end of the trade embargo imposed by the United States on 
Vietnam. After 19 years the embargo was maintained mainly for 
historical reasons. 
  Little remains of the differences that led the two countries 
to war in the 1960's and 1970's. Vietnam has withdrawn its 
troops from Cambodia. With a single party system, and without 
worrying about subjects like human rights, Vietnam has gradually 
opened its market to the rest of the world. 
  The truth is that Vietnam allowed itself to be contaminated 
by the winds of trade and prosperity that turned the Far East 
into the greatest laboratory of economic experiences at the turn 
of the century. To a certain extent the embargo created more 
distress for American companies than for the Vietnamese 
themselves. 
  In a country where everything literally had to be 
constructed 
or reconstructed, capital from Taiwan, Japan, Singapore, South 
Korea, and from the former colonial world power, France, among 
other European investors, poured in. 
  Melting the ice with the United States was more difficult, 
but it began in the mid-1980's when the Americans were still 
grieving over the humiliation of the military defeat. 
Curiously, there were not as many difficulties on the 
Vietnamese side. The economic reforms thus gained momentum in 
1986. Given the events in the USSR, the failure of Communism 
contrasted with the bewildering acceleration of the market 
economies in the neighboring countries. 
  U.S. goodwill, which Vietnam needed to gain access to 
international capital, was generated through a cooperative 
attitude over a subject that touched the heart of the Americans: 
The location of the prisoners of war whose whereabouts were 
unknown. Last year President Clinton withdrew the veto the 
United States imposed on help from international financial 
institutions. From then on, the embargo was psychological and 
political rather than economic. 
  We wonder when and how the same thing will happen with Cuba. 
The main objective of that embargo was to combat Communist 
infiltration in the continent and in the direct area of 
influence of the United States. 
  That motive no longer exists. The Cuban Government is in 
tatters and whenever they can, Cubans move from a government job 
to small private businesses. 
  Paradoxically the embargo is the only way Fidel Castro can 
still touch the nationalist feelings of the increasingly 
disillusioned Cubans. It is his last chance to carry the Cuban 
flag. 
  If the embargo were lifted it would be doubtful if the Cuban 
regime would survive the avalanche of opportunities that would 
be created by the arrival of capitalist agents, that is, 
development. 

