Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] His Majesty King Husayn has expressed pride in the 
distinguished performance of the members of the Armed Forces, 
Public Security forces, General Intelligence Directorate, and 
Civil Defense forces based on their awareness, honesty, 
sacrifices, and strength to safeguard this homeland's security 
and stability. His majesty the king greeted all the sons of the 
homeland, whatever their circumstances, in this delicate stage. 
He reiterated his pride in all those who shouldered their 
serious and delicate responsibilities to represent Jordan in the 
peace talks following the national decision to move toward 
Madrid in order to work for the interest of the country and to 
preserve the right of the people and the whole nation to life. 
The king made these remarks during his meeting at the Royal 
Hashemite Court today with the senior officers in the public 
security, general intelligence, and civil defense fields. 
  The king reaffirmed Jordan's commitment to move toward a 
just 
and comprehensive peace that will provide the next generations 
with a free and honest life. 
  His majesty touched on Arab coordination, beginning with 
Jordanian-Palestinian coordination. He noted that the talk in 
this regard stems from our concern about the kinsfolk and 
brothers in the occupied territory with whom we have lived 
through difficult and tough circumstances by steadfastness and 
adherence to their land. 
  King Husayn said: These circumstances require the 
Palestinian leadership to choose and clearly define the features 
of its march, asking God that it reflects what we firmly believe 
is found in the conscience and heart of the Palestinian people 
in the occupied territory and elsewhere and that it shoulders 
the responsibility that will enable it assume its duty and major 
role to serve the Palestinian people on the path of achieving 
their aspirations and hopes. 
  King Husayn: With regard to the relationship with us, we are 
walking on the road followed by our fathers and grandfathers. 
We shared our daily bread as one community in Palestine and 
Jordan. 
  His majesty said: Our democratic march is an expression of 
our belief that everybody should participate in decisionmaking 
and laying down the features of the future through awareness, 
determination, honesty, sincerity, and cooperation between the 
three branches of power and the people who are our strength, the 
reason of our existence, and the objective of our determination. 
  King Husayn called for preserving national unity and 
safeguarding it through belief, reason, and logic. He also 
called for a unique example to be given for the coming 
generations. 

