BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Government's Analyses of </F>
Stabilization Processes"] 
  [Text] The stabilization program of the Macedonian [The 
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] Government is 
globally being realized. The achieved economic results are 
within government expectations. This was published in the 
Ministry of Development's report on realization of the 1994 
government's stabilization program in the first months of this 
year. This is immediately followed by references to several 
unexpected moments, more or less neglected at the very 
beginning. The Greek embargo is the central such problem, along 
with all of its harmful consequences. The inability to purchase 
raw materials, increased transportation costs, inability to 
distribute products to foreign markets -- all contributed to 
reduced production and even closing down of certain factories. 
Lower production figures resulted in lower supply, decreased 
ability of financing the current production and public sector, 
and, finally, increase in deficit, especially in the economy. 
The country's balance of payments is also disturbed as 
Macedonia is not able to make use of the credits agreed on with 
the World Bank, previously realized through import of equipment 
and raw materials. 
  The economy continues to be highly insolvable and under a 
blow of high bank interests rates not duly coordinated with the 
fall of inflation. All of this presents a danger of wider 
social unrest and failure of the stabilization program. 
  On the other hand, limited wages, along with the stable 
course of the denar and restrictive monetary and public 
expenditure polices, kept prices down. The inflation is in 
rapid decrease ever since the beginning of the year -- February 
market prices fell to 6.8 percent and to 2.4 percent in March 
and April -- and all this is far below the inflation predicted 
with the stabilization program. The government is also 
satisfied with public expenditure figures -- the adopted fiscal 
regulations announce lowering in deficits. The finances 
required for public needs were 11.8 billion denars in the first 
three months of this year, which is a real increase of 39 
percent as compared to the same period last year. The budget 
income has increased by 47.6 percent and that of social funds by 
26.2 percent. Nonetheless, the dynamics of income was not in 
accordance with the outcome. Positive results were reached only 
in the pension fund, the deficit for which was lowered from 367 
million denars in January to 215.4 million denars in February 
and only 57.9 million denars in March. But the government 
neglected the personal tax. 
  The total monetary mass in the first three months was in 
coordination with financial transactions and demand for cash. 
As for the foreign currency sector, courses of hard currencies 
are stable, although this is achieved at the cost of imports, 
which the government is aware of. The exports decreased by 13.1 
percent in the first 3 months, whereas the imports increased by 
8.7 percent. 
  The government mostly criticizes its program for slow 
implementation of structural reforms in the real and financial 
sectors. The planned reconstruction of 25 firms with biggest 
losses is slowed down by slow privatization and control over it, 
and overstepped deadlines for privatization. 
  The government is making efforts to be ready for unexpected 
problems in the social welfare. It is preparing 8,000 denars 
aid for citizens who will lose jobs, as well as increased aid 
for the 50,000 families receiving welfare. For this purpose, 
the government is raising funds now, so that it prevents wider 
social unrest. 

