CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nikita Kirichenko, Aleksandr Privalov and Andrei </F>
Sharov: "Shokhin Has the Opportunity to Become the Hercules of 
the Russian Stables"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  There Is No Rebuke In My Letter, And I Had All Of You In Mind </H5>
  On Monday, 14 March, Economy Minister Aleksandr Shokhin took 
a small document of 9 typed pages to the prime minister. The 
subject of this document was the economy ministry's new 
prognosis for the development of the Russian national economy in 
1994. On Friday the little document was already officially sent 
to the government apparatus for discussion within the council of 
ministers and for further submission to the Duma. 
  We would not be talking about the materials of the economy 
ministry in such detail and so personally had it not been for 
one circumstance: the new prognosis by the ministry marks out 
all preceding computations presented by Viktor Chernomyrdin at a 
council of ministers meeting on 4 March in terms of predictions 
for both the economy and the budget. Moreover, the conclusions 
that arise from the new prognosis regarding the need to correct 
the budget may create fairly acute intrigue within the 
government. 
  The fact is that the economy ministry's old, December, 
prognosis predicted an industrial downturn of 7 percent in 1994 
as compared to 1993. The finance ministry calculated its budget 
based on this data. More precisely, it calculated not the entire 
budget, but the income portion; it thought up the expenditure 
portion on its own, without coordinating with the economics 
ministry. This lack of coordination resulted in the fact that 
centralized capital investments into the budget turned out to be 
smaller than those which the economics ministry used to create 
its prognosis. Thus, it turned out that the old prognosis and 
the draft budget did not coincide. 
  But let us note that the old prognosis was composed by Yegor 
Gaydar, who left the government in an untimely manner. The new 
prognosis by Aleksandr Shokhin, who is more sober in his 
assessments, turned out to be less optimistic. According to the 
latest ministry calculations, the downturn will equal 12 percent 
at best and 20 percent at worst. 
  Twenty versus 7 is considerable, quite considerable. This is 
why the lack of agreement between the budget and the prognosis, 
which was noticeable in the old prognosis as well, becomes 
readily apparent. It is completely clear that such unbalanced 
documents, once they reach the Duma (according to a government 
resolution, both the budget and the prognosis are sent to the 
Duma), will not be left untouched by Aleksandr Pochinok. Who 
will be given the axe? 
  We think it will be Aleksander Shokhin rather than Sergei 
Kubinits, and here is why. First of all, Shokhin will pay for no 
real reason, just as the bearer of bad tidings. After all, the 
pessimistic variant of the economy ministry's prognosis looks 
more like the truth, no matter how sad this is. It may be noted, 
incidentally, that it corresponds fully to KOMMERSANT's 
calculations, although they were made using a different 
methodology. Secondly, according to Shokhin, it is the 
monetarists who are firing volleys from the main guns, since the 
economy ministry's new prognosis states simply and honestly that 
the drift in the direction of a lesser downturn is possible only 
by means of deficit financing of supplementary centralized 
capital investments, and, consequently, greater inflation. If 
the anti-inflation pathos reaches the hearts of Duma members, 
then the government may sacrifice Shokhin. What remains for him? 
This week he will have to choose one of two alternatives. 
  The first alternative involves pushing a few buttons on his 
pocket calculator to perform a trick with the prognosis by 
increasing the VVP [Gross domestic product] deflator and by 
adjusting financial indicators in the prognosis to correspond to 
the budget's computation base. In this case the budget deficit 
does not increase, Shokhin and Dubinin slobber all over 
themselves, remain in the Duma until death, having disgraced 
those of little faith and having acquired approval of the 
proposed documents. All of this is well and good, but for the 
national economy this means an even greater downturn than the 
predicted 20 percent, since, because of the increase in the 
deflator, real investments will turn out to be much less. 
  The second alternative for Shokhin is to cross himself, 
stick 
to his budget variant and hope to drum up some large investment 
while repudiating the budget. 
  According to KOMMERSANT experts, it is somehow inappropriate 
to have an economy minister (any minister, whether Shokhin or 
not) perform tricks with the deflator, like Bulgakov's Woland. 
It is especially inappropriate to do this now, when the 
situation in the economy smells more and more of "gasoline"; 
something must be done quickly. 
<H5>  The Gasoline That It Smells Of Is Already Produced </H5>
Spontaneously 
  In general, any inhabitant of Russia will willingly confirm 
the fact that the situation in the Russian economy demands not 
just decisive action but some sort of qualitatively-different 
action than that taken heretofore. But the inhabitant will 
confirm this on his own narrow-minded, or as the popularizers of 
science would say "everyday," level. Consequently, it will be 
easy for a highly-educated Duma member to ignore such a 
confirmation and to insist on a continuation of the previous 
course of therapy. 
  Here's an old joke. The mother forgot to put sugar into the 
tea for her little son. The son is stirring the tea with his 
spoon with no result. "Mom, it's not sweet!" "Keep stirring, it 
will get sweet." 
  So, it looks like no matter how long you stir, things are 
not 
going to get sweet. The reasons for this are systemic; the 
inhabitant experiences them in his very bones. The problems, or 
at least one of the problems, that besiege the Russian economy 
are beginning to spin out of control. 
  Judging by everything, a new downturn mechanism in the 
economy is beginning to appear. Its essence is the transition to 
a classical depression within the regimen of compulsory 
automatic fluctuations. After all, simplistically defined, 
depressions are crises of overproduction with subsequent cuts in 
entrepreneurship, high unemployment and low prices. All of these 
features that are characteristic canonical forms of depression 
are beginning to reveal themselves here. 
  Overproduction is obvious. It is true that here, under 
conditions of an industrial downturn, overproduction is 
relative, but recently it has manifest itself quite 
authentically -- in the sales crisis that is growing more and 
more urgent (see the survey of wholesale prices in KOMMERSANT 
Number 8). Economic activities are also being curtailed. 
Moreover, this is proceeding now at an increasing pace -- 
whereas during the second 6 months of last year the number of 
lengthy stoppages of enterprises and production increased by an 
average of 7 percent per month, in February of this year the 
pace doubled. Finally, the slowing price dynamic is logically 
included in this somber picture. 
  Especially alarming is the development of two or more 
interrelated problems. For example, the downturn, the sales 
crisis, and unemployment. As soon as they reach a fully 
discernible stage, they will begin to urge each other forward 
unstoppably. (Let us recall that the pace of growth of 
unemployment during the last 4 months is higher by a factor of 2 
than in the course of the first 10 months of last year.) The 
"domino principle" will begin working with its full force -- the 
downturn gives rise to a further curtailment in production. Here 
a kind of technological multiplicator quite clearly takes hold. 
In turn, the growing technological gap reaches a critical level, 
and not just individual shops but entire enterprises cease 
production, and not temporarily, but permanently. From this come 
unpaid vacations and firings. Unemployment grows, demand falls. 
And so on and so forth, until -- until what? 
  At least until there is a change in priorities of government 
economic policy. It is understandable that such a change in and 
of itself is no guarantee of an immediate (or even a slow) turn 
for the better. However, without this kind of change it is 
impossible to speak of any improvement. The country has no money 
and stock issues are suppressed. By what miracle will demand be 
revived? How will the creation or maintenance of job slots be 
paid for? How will investment activity be revived when, after 
having reached a certain level, it is capable of attracting home 
the Russian capital that has migrated all over the planet? 
  Unfortunately, until recently the government has not sought 
answers to such obvious questions; moreover, it somehow seemed 
embarrassed to even ask them. It seems that now a very 
noteworthy moment has come in the economic history of our 
country. On the one hand, these questions are beginning to be 
asked, and on the other -- it is not too late to ask them. Such 
a miraculous coincidence will not last long - we must beware 
that such questions will quite soon become academic. 
<H5>  The Last Chance for the Prime Minister to Remain in the </H5>
Shade and the Last Chance for Zavlabs [Laboratory directors] to 
Come Into the Light 
  Let us look in greater detail at the political collisions 
that are being created by Shokhin's predictions. 
  For this we must go back in time and remember the last 
presidential message and the meetings of the presidium of the 
council of ministers and the expanded council of ministers held 
to deal with the budget and the directions of economic policy 
for 1994 in the light of the aforementioned message. 
  Let us recall that the president, recognizing the need to 
reform Russian reforms, on the one hand called upon the 
government to use all its power to fight inflation, and on the 
other hand, looked with understanding at the fact that 
enterprise directors (in last year's terms -- "red" or even 
"red-brown") impatiently expect government repayment of debts 
and support, even if it is selective and sometimes structural. 
The president also admitted that the new mass class of owners in 
Russia (thanks to vouchers) nevertheless needs social protection 
(and not at all from the work force). 
  In other words, the president gave the government the power 
to make decisions along a very broad spectrum of economic policy 
directions, as long as the decisions made sense. 
  But as we have already written before, the government did 
not 
use the chance to raise the banner of reform to a new height. 
This is not surprising; after all, the council of ministers used 
materials still prepared by the team of Fedorov-Gaydar and 
agreed upon amongst themselves. As a result, in his speech the 
prime minister had only to swear unity with the president and to 
lament the fact that the "zavlabs" were first to abandon ship. 
  Presenting his predictions to the prime minister, Aleksandr 
Shokhin (whether he wanted to or not) not only placed a 
complicated dilemma before himself and before Sergei Dubinin as 
to how to behave in the Duma, he also quite firmly and 
impartially pushed the prime minister towards making a national 
political decision. Now Mr. Chernomyrdin will have to decide 
whether Mr. Shokhin is interpreting the president's message 
correctly in proposing the variant of "stock issue investments 
in exchange for a slowing of the downturn." 
  Naturally, although the problems of industry are closer to 
the prime minister than the fate of the "zavlabs," and although 
Aleksandr Shokhin is evidently much more personable than Boris 
Fedorov, presenting the Duma with a budget based on Shokhin's 
predictions is equivalent for the prime minister to entering 
into open polemics with factions opposed to the government. 
There is a double risk in this. First of all, no one wants to 
get tangled up with the Duma. Secondly, the president has left 
himself the option to make clarifications at any moment about 
that which he had in mind in his message, and here Shokhin may 
not have guessed right. For example, Aleksandr Nikolayevich did 
not guess correctly which of the four living ex-presidents of 
the U. S., in the opinion of the Russian president, is insulting 
our great power to the largest degree with his behavior at the 
present time. 
  For Russian monetarists, for whom the last refuge is the 
state duma, Shokhin's prognosis is also the question of 
questions. Their game plan is evident. If Shokhin decides to 
reconfigure the budget, to "hammer it out" in the Duma to such 
an extent that the question of his removal is put on the agenda, 
then Chernomyrdin may become scared, and for the sake of making 
peace with the attacking side, may propose the post of economics 
minister to one of the monetarists. This is their last chance, 
for if Shokhin's attempt is not successful and his version of 
the 1994 budget is passed, the question of political 
rehabilitation of "zavlabs" will be delayed another year. Even 
then who knows how it will be decided, because the "zavlabs" 
evidently (at least a little, and only amongst themselves) 
cannot but have doubts that their reform was ideal. 
Consequently, a chance remains that if reform proceeds 
differently, reform successes might be somewhat greater than 
with their participation. 
  On the other hand, they are afraid of frightening Shokhin, 
and for this reason are not yet criticizing his prognosis, the 
essence of which is undoubtedly known to them. First of all, 
they have their own people in the economy and finance 
ministries, and, secondly, they know better than anyone else 
that the old prognosis does not coincide with the budget (after 
all, they created it themselves and made a comparison). 
  Evidently, this is why the press, which chronically supports 
Russian monetarists and any of their innovations, has only 
published articles directed at Aleksandr Shokhin personally. 
They say (with reference to the authority of Boris Fedorov) 
things such as that with the indecent reputation that the 
authors of articles have attributed to Aleksandr Shokhin he will 
have to work in the health ministry (as if it befits people with 
poor reputations to work there). Such articles naturally can 
greatly aid criticism of the economics ministry prognosis, 
setting even those deputies who understand very little about the 
budget against it. Truly, can a person be correct if newspapers 
write that today some journalists do not like his reputation? 
  In the light of the aforementioned, we see one powerful 
factor that may influence Chernomyrdin in making a fateful 
political decision. This is the reaction to the situation by 
Mishel Kamlessyu, director of the MVF [International Monetary 
Fund]. If, as a result of meetings with Chernomyrdin and 
Shokhin, he says something to the effect that the crash of the 
Russian economy must be stopped at any price, this means that we 
do not have to worry about our homegrown monetarists. 

