Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kampala, March 14 (AFP)--The new armed struggle 
between government forces and Joseph Kony's Lord's Resistance 
Army (LRA) rebels is threatening to bring a new round of civil 
war in northern Uganda, observers here noted on Monday [14 
March]. 
  The fluid political atmosphere caused by eruption of new 
fighting, followed the collapse in January of secret talks 
between President Yoweri Museveni's government and LRA rebels, 
now estimated to number a few hundreds. Museveni, who has 
insisted that Kony's rebels were now a spent force, issued a 
three-week ultimatum for the rebels to surrender but they have 
so far defied him. 
  The rebels, who claim to be fighting a holy war against what 
they call a foreign occupation of Uganda, have stepped up 
ambushes and abductions in northern Ugandan districts of Kitgum, 
Gulu, Apac and Lira since the talks failed. 
  Heavily-armed government troops, backed by Armed Personel 
Carriers (APCs), have on the other hand been deployed at 
strategic points, along Lira-Kitgum road in preparation for what 
looks like a possible massive counter offensive against the 
rebels. Sources here have also said that a low-flying military 
combat helicopter and a nummber of APCs were now patrolling the 
bush along the Lira-Kitgum road, an area where the rebels have 
intensified their activities in the last two weeks, rendering 
the road impassable and paralysing all normal activities in the 
region. 
  Last Monday, the LRA rebels engaged government troops in a 
fierce battle in the area, which left one rebel killed and a lot 
of property of fleeing villagers destroyed. The battle was the 
result of a surprise attack by government forces on the rebels' 
hideout at Minakulu in Apac district, which forced the 
guerrillas to pull back towards the Murchson Falls Nataional 
Park, where they are believed to be having bases, along the 
banks of the River Nile. 
  But so far government forces have made no attempts to strike 
the suspected rebel bases in the national park, the sources 
said. 
  The renewed fighting, which observers here expected now to 
escalate with another big government offensive aimed at wiping 
out the rebellion once and for all, has thrown the population in 
the region into panic and revived memories of six years of a 
bloody civil war, which has killed and injured thousands of 
people since it erupted with a vegeance in 1987. 
  Chances for a peaceful settlement appears to have been 
severely shattered, with both sides apparently now resigned to 
settle the issue militarily. 
  Consequently, observers are increasingly fearful that the 
general chaos and civil disobedience, resulting from the 
unending rebel hostilities in northern Uganda, could disrupt the 
democratisation process in this part of the country, which is 
also home to most leading opponents to Museveni's "no-party" 
political system. 
  Two weeks ago, all Constituent Assembly candidates' campaign 
rallies were suspended for a week in Kitgum district due to 
growing insecurity. The elections, scheduled for March 28, are 
only two weeks away, with no near solution to the conflict in 
sight. 
  Museveni, who recently concluded a working visit to the war- 
ravaged region, has again repeated his earlier appeals to the 
rebels to renounce rebellion, but the rebels appear to be 
sticking to their guns until the government guaranteed their 
immunity to prosecution on surrender. 
  The rebels fear possible charges for torture and murder they 
committed on the civilian population during their operations in 
the region, and had demanded government guarantees before they 
could surrender, but the government rejected the demands. 
  At least six girls, reported abducted from Puranga Catholic 
Mission two weeks ago are still being held hostage by the rebels 
in an unknown locality. 

