Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Lidia Reboucas] </F>
  [Text] A high-level Cuban Government mission officially 
signed last week a technological and scientific cooperation 
agreement with several Brazilian states. The agreement includes 
the exchange of teachers, researchers, and students between 
universities and institutes of the two countries, to expedite 
the training process in the areas of greatest scientific 
interest. 
  The Cuban mission, which was made up of Higher Education 
Minister Fernando Vecino Alegret, Higher Education Vice Minister 
Miguel Garrido, International Relations Director Fernando Rojas 
Avallos, and Matanzas University Rector Angel Vega, visited 
several Brazilian universities in the Brasilia Federal District, 
and in the states of Amazonas, Roraima, Rio de Janeiro, and Sao 
Paulo, to identify areas and possibilities for cooperation. 
  In the state of Sao Paulo, the mission's visit was 
coordinated by Roberto Muller Filho, secretary of science, 
technology, and economic development. Muller accepted the entry 
of 10 Cuban scientists as visiting professors to carry out 
research at the University of Sao Paulo (USP), Sao Paulo State 
University (UNESP), and Campinas State University (Unicamp). 
The agreement also includes scholarships for Cuban students in 
Sao Paulo universities for masters degrees and Ph.D.'s, as well 
as for Brazilian professors from Sao Paulo agricultural 
technical schools to be trained in Cuba. 
  The main areas of knowledge for exchange are: molecular 
biology, civil construction materials, immunology, agriculture 
and livestock, health, education, physics, genetics, biology, 
energy, and biotechnology. Vecino said: "The main purpose of 
the scientific exchange with Brazil is to strengthen the 
postgraduate studies of Cuban professors." 
  He explained that Cuba has 46 universities with 24,000 
professors, of whom only 20 percent have doctorates. He added: 
"The goal is that at least 50 percent of that amount get their 
doctorates." 
  The Sao Paulo Science and Technology Secretariat will 
provide 
additional funds, along with the Sao Paulo Federation to Support 
Research (Fapesp), to finance the scholarships for the 
researchers and postgraduate students. Muller reported that the 
program will start with the arrival of 10 Cuban scientists to 
carry out joint research, who will get about $1,500 per month. 
  Cuban Minister Vecino also visited the Sao Paulo State 
Federation of Industries (FIESP) to evaluate the possibility of 
the transfer of business technology through associations. 
  As a result of the visit to the FIESP, a business delegation 
will visit Cuba in the first half of this year to identify the 
areas of interest. 

