Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Joan Reventos, president of the Senate's </F>
General Committee for the Autonomous Communities, by Luis R. 
Aizpeolea; place and date not given: "The Senate Must Totally 
Change Its Role"] 
  [Text] On 2 February, Joan Reventos, 66 years of age, 
was appointed president of the Senate's General Committee for 
the Autonomous Communities. The veteran Catalan Socialist 
politician will thus head the experiment aimed at transforming 
the Senate into a Chamber of the Autonomous Communities. 
  The Senate has just created a new entity, a Committee for 
the 
Autonomous Communities. Its objective is to test the 
possibilities of transforming the Senate into a Chamber of the 
Autonomous Communities. The Parliamentary parties have embraced 
the experiment, although the nationalist parties have expressed 
some reservations. 
  [Aizpeolea] What will this Committee contribute to the 
Senate 
and to the development of the State of the Autonomous 
Communities? 
  [Reventos] Its contribution can be fundamental, an authentic 
turning point in the operation of the Senate, which, in the long 
term, could be transformed into a Chamber of the Territories or 
of the Autonomous Communities. This Committee will be unique, 
first, in that the autonomous governments and the national 
government can all share representation with the senators, 
within the same body. The number of senators will be double 
those of other committees. And secondly it will be unique in 
that this Committee will actually be a Parliament in which 
important matters relative to the autonomous communities will be 
discussed, and which in this respect will serve to lower 
tensions in the State of the Autonomous Communities. 
  [Aizpeolea] The Committee for the Autonomous Communities did 
not have a good start. On 2 February, the day it was 
established, the representative of the PNV [Basque Nationalist 
Party] relinquished his seat on the Committee, because he 
considers that the Committee diluted the distinctiveness of the 
autonomous communities. 
  [Reventos] It is true that the PNV representative, Ricardo 
Sanz, has left the Committee, but it is also true that he has 
associated himself with the joint work of the Senate's Executive 
and Chamber Business Committees and that he is contributing his 
ideas to that work. Everything new arouses interest and 
reservations. But the results of the work done in the Committee 
for the Autonomous Communities will be arrived at strictly by 
consensus. 
  [Aizpeolea] The nationalist parties--the PNV and the CiU 
[Convergence and Union]--fear that this Committee may be a 
maneuver to shrink bilateral relations with the State central 
government, to which the autonomous community governments, 
headed by nationalists, want to accord primacy. 
  [Reventos] At this point in time, bilateral relations 
between 
the central government and the autonomous governments are 
irreplaceable, and their elimination would be a fiasco. The 
Committee will be the body in which matters of common interest 
to the autonomous communities will be debated. The Committee 
must bring diverse volitions together and inspire confidence on 
matters that may attract the interest of the autonomous 
communities. 
  [Aizpeolea] What matters of common interest to the 
autonomous 
communities may be debated in the Committee? 
  [Reventos] The application of European Community guidelines 
affecting the autonomous communities, agreements that affect two 
or more communities, and issues that by force of attraction 
affect all of them. A clear example is the transfer of 15 
percent of the IRPF [Personal Income Tax] revenue to the 
autonomous communities. Had there been a Committee for the 
Autonomous Communities, it would have been the proper body in 
which to hold the debate. 
  [Aizpeolea] What is currently the Committee's first action? 
  [Reventos] The reform of the 11 so-called slow-track 
statutes. In committee, we have heard the representatives of the 
Legislative Assemblies of the autonomous communities, and the 
reform will go to the plenary session of the Committee for the 
Autonomous Communities on 1 March. 
  [Aizpeolea] What is to be the Committee's task from now 
until 
summer? 
  [Reventos] The Committee has the task of rendering an 
opinion 
on matters relating to autonomies that may come before the 
Chamber. Between now and June we will hold two general meetings 
on the State of Autonomous Communities, one at the plenary 
session of the Committee and the other at the plenary session of 
the Senate. The presidents of the autonomous community 
governments will be present at both meetings. 
  [Aizpeolea] Do you think those meetings will indeed be 
attended by the presidents of the autonomous governments, or 
rather by their representatives assigned to this Committee? 
  [Reventos] The president of the Senate has addressed the 
presidents of all the autonomous communities and proposed to 
them individual or collective talks. I, too, am willing to 
travel anywhere and everywhere I may be called, to explain the 
importance of this Committee. To date, we have not received a 
single negative response. 
  [Aizpeolea] Do you think that Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez 
will come to the Committee to debate with the presidents of 
communities on the State of Autonomous Communities? With 
Ardanza, Pujol, or Rodriguez Ibarra? 
  [Reventos] Why not? The central government of the State is a 
full-fledged member of the Committee, just as are the autonomous 
governments. There, Felipe Gonzalez can debate on autonomy with 
Ardanza, Pujol, Rodriguez Ibarra, and any other presidents of 
autonomous communities. 
  [Aizpeolea] Is there an external model of the one you are 
testing? With it, are we moving toward federalism? 
  [Reventos] It borrows something from the experience of the 
German Bundesrat and from that of the United States' federal 
formulas. But it also has its own individuality. Therefore, I 
dare not give it a name. The test of its initial phase will 
define it. 
  [Aizpeolea] You are saying that the work of this Committee 
is 
a test to which you cannot give a name. To what can it lead, and 
within what time? 
  [Reventos] If the results of the Committee's initial phase 
are good, the Senate may totally change its role and transform 
itself into a Chamber of the Autonomous Communities. This would 
require that the Constitution be amended. And with that, the 
role of the Congress would be redefined. But I do not wish to 
set time limits. We intend to take it step by step. 

