Language: <F P=105> Afrikaans </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Alet van der Westhuizen: "ANC's Women's League </F>
Will Not Tolerate New Government's `Games'"] 
  [Text] Over the years, the Women's League of the ANC 
[African National Congress] has been at the forefront of the 
struggle to emancipate women. 
  But that is not where the struggle ends. On the contrary, it 
is possible that the struggle is only now beginning, in light of 
the fact that the Women's League will have to defend itself 
against "games" by a new government. 
  This is what Nosiviwe Mapisa, 38, the League's 
secretary-general, tells me. 
  Sitting behind a big desk in her office at ANC headquarters 
in Johannesburg, she is precise and deliberate about the future 
of women in South Africa, especially after the 27 April election. 
  "Our struggle for the rights and recognition of women will 
continue even after the ANC has come to power. We will not 
tolerate any unreasonableness or games from a new government." 
  "We have a future vision for all the women of South Africa, 
and for that reason we will insist that they have at least a 
30-percent representation in the future government." 
  According to Mapisa, it is also a given that the government 
of the future will have to be "gender sensitive" and that women 
must be able to make their contribution to the writing of a 
constitution. 
  The most important short-term objective that the Women's 
League now has is to draw up a manifesto of women's rights 
before the 27 April election. "The manifesto must be ready so 
that it can be put on the table when the electors meet after the 
election." 
  Mapisa says that when the ANC comes to power, that will be a 
victory for many oppressed people, but that is not where the 
ANC's work ends. "It does not matter who leads the country in 
the future; that government must also provide for the needs of 
women. 
  "The government will have to protect women through 
legislation and keep them from being vulnerable as they are now." 
  According to Mapisa, the Women's League does not foresee 
functioning as a separate organization in the future. "There is 
no longer any need for a bunch of different women's 
organizations." 
  "It is necessary that a single women's movement be formed 
that can functional nationally." 
  "If we really want to see to it that women in the future are 
recognized and noticed, programs will have to be offered on the 
national level. That is why it is important that an umbrella 
organization be formed that speaks on behalf of all women." 
  As far as development is concerned, women's education is 
high 
on the Women's League's agenda. "Rectifying action will be 
useless in the future until women are brought up to a level 
where they can meet the demands made of them." 
  "There are still many illiterate women in South Africa. It 
is 
to them that we must now reach out so that they too can learn 
skills that will allow them to contribute to the future of the 
country." 
  There is no ambiguity within the ranks of the Women's League 
on the question of common law. "We are completely opposed to 
that on principle, because in the first place it affects only 
African women, and in the second place it is only to the 
detriment of women most of the time." 
  "The Women's League even feels that it is its duty to 
educate 
those women who are still subject to common law." 
  According to Mapisa, there are still many women, especially 
in rural areas, who do not know what their rights as women are. 
"And for the rest of their lives they will be inferiors in the 
eyes of their community and husbands, because they do not know 
better." 
  "There are many women, such as we in the Women's League, who 
are more enlightened and independent. And it is our duty to 
impress upon women that they have rights, too." 
  "We do not intend by this to destroy all traditions and 
culture through our efforts. On the contrary, the doors of 
culture will in fact be opened. But the Women's League believes 
that culture and traditions that adversely affect women must be 
questioned," she says. 
  The reason for violence, Mapisa says, is that people are 
finally moving toward freedom. 
  She believes that there are forces that are opposed to the 
liberation process and that are trying to divide the people of 
this country. 
  Despite the violence, however, the League's policy is to 
reach out to all the women of South Africa. 
  "By way of the National Women's Coalition, we are reaching 
out to Inkatha women, especially those in Natal where the 
violence is the worst. 
  "We believe that the time will come when all the women of 
the 
country will be able to stand together, because they accept the 
emergence of a new South Africa. That means that it will not 
happen over night, but if we are all willing to work for it, it 
is not impossible." 
<H5>  [Box, p 19] </H5>
<H5>  Women's League's New Structure </H5>

  -  Winnie Mandela, president 
  -  Thandi Modise, vice president 
  -  Nosiviwe Mapisa, secretary general 
  -  Bathabile Dlamini, deputy secretary general 
  -  Adelaide Tambo, treasurer 

    Other members: 

  -  Ntombi Shope (Eastern Transvaal) 
  -  Lulama Xingwana (PWV [Pretoria-Witwatersrand-Vereeniging) 
  -  Stella Sgcau (Transkei) 
  -  Neziswa Jordaan (Grens) 
  -  Manto Shabalala (Southern Transvaal) 
  -  Sally Peterson (PWV) 
  -  Hilda Ndude (Western Cape Province) 
  -  Nompumelelo Madlala (PWV) 
  -  Nomaindia Mfeketho (Western Cape Province) 
  -  Mavivi Manzini (PWV) 
  -  Nkosazana Zuma (Southern Natal) 
  -  Baleka Kgositsile (PWV) 
  -  Miranda Ncuku (Natal Midlands) 
  -  Nomvula Mokonyane (PWV) 
  -  Ruth Mompati (Northern Cape Province) 
  -  Lindiwe Zulu (PWV) 
  -  Nomatyala Hangana (Western Cape Province) 
  -  Maureen Madumise (Northern Orange Free State) 
  -  Keibone Gumbi (PWV) 
  -  Sayo Skeyiya (Southern Natal) 


