BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 17 (XINHUA) -- Wang Daohan, chairman 
of the Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Strait 
[ARATS], today sent a letter to Gu Zhenfu [Ku Chen-fu], 
president of the Straits Exchange Foundation [SEF], to invite 
him once again to hold a high-level meeting between the two 
organizations at a selected place. 
  The letter reads: One year ago, the Wang-Gu talks made an 
historically significant step in the development of cross-strait 
relations. I am pleased to see that various contacts and 
exchanges between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait have been 
conducted vigorously since then. Some progress has been made in 
implementing the agreement during the five negotiations between 
the colleagues of ARATS and the SEF. Particularly during the 
meeting between Mr. Tang Shubei and Jiao Renhe [Chaio Jen-he] 
early this year, a high degree of consensus was reached in terms 
of routine discussions between ARATS and the SEF. The meeting 
made a plan for this year's ARATS-SEF negotiations and other 
issues relating to the negotiations and achieved another interim 
result in promoting ARATS-SEF relations and cooperation since 
the Wang-Gu talks. It is my belief that various results which 
have been achieved since the Wang-Gu talks should be highly 
valued. 
  The letter continues: Since the unfortunate "Qiandao Lake 
Incident" occurred, the development of cross-strait relations 
have been adversely affected. I am very impressed by your 
active and reasonable attitude towards maintaining the overall 
development of cross-strait relations. Amid heavy mists and 
obstacles, the two organizations should work even harder to push 
forward ARATS-SEF negotiations and exchanges. Maintaining and 
promoting the development of cross-strait relations with a 
100-times greater enthusiasm has a bearing on consolidating and 
developing the original intention and achievements of the 
Wang-Gu talks. There is no reason for relaxation. It is highly 
necessary to hold a high-level meeting for communications and 
contacts. 
  The letter says: I sent you a letter early this year, 
inviting you to visit Beijing during the turn of spring and 
summer. I learned that you would be very glad to come to the 
Mainland to meet me. Recently, you wrote an article expressing 
the hopes to further strengthen high-ranking contacts between 
the two organizations. I deem it highly necessary to hold such 
a meeting. Strengthening high-ranking contacts between the two 
organizations is beneficial to further improving understanding, 
eliminating misunderstanding, overcoming discrepancies, and 
promoting cooperation in a bid to create an atmosphere of 
frequent exchanges and relaxation for the meeting. I would like 
to renew my suggestion to hold a meeting for reviewing ARATS-SEF 
cooperation, discussing ways to strengthen our ties and expand 
our cooperation, and conducting communications on policy-related 
issues and other issues. If it is inconvenient for you [to come 
to Beijing], such a meeting can be held in Taipei or another 
place agreed upon. 

