BFN 

  [Excerpt] At today's weekly cabinet session, Prime 
Minister Yitzhaq Rabin reiterated that special steps would be 
taken to prevent the PLO from establishing governing 
institutions in Jerusalem. Such activities include preparations 
for PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arafat's arrival in the territories. 
Our political correspondent Shlomo Raz reports: 
  [Begin recording] [Raz] The cabinet held a routine meeting 
today, contrary to recent sessions which were called urgently to 
deal with political crises such as housing shortages and the 
Kupat Holim sick fund debt. The focus of today's session was on 
Jerusalem. This, at least, was the impression given by Economy 
and Planning Minister Shim'on Shetrit. 
  [Shetrit] It is conspicuously evident to us that clear steps 
will be necessary to prevent the establishment of PLO political 
institutions of a governing nature, as opposed to the 
professional and non-profit institutions which existed in the 
past. 
  [Raz] What about a visit to Jerusalem by 'Arafat? 
  [Shetrit] Such a visit to Jerusalem was not discussed today, 
and the prevailing assessment is that it will not take place. 
  [Tel Aviv IDF Radio in Hebrew at 1000 GMT on 12 June adds 
that "the ministers were briefed by security officials on 
political developments and the situation in the territories and 
the Palestinian autonomous areas. The cabinet still does not 
know the date of 'Arafat's planned visit to the Gaza Strip and 
Jericho." IDF radio notes that "the ministers were also briefed 
on developments on the Jordanian track, and the ministers 
expressed the assessment that despite all their fuss, the 
Syrians had been informed in advance." 
  [In a recorded passage, Minister Shim'on Shetrit says: "We 
received the impression that except for some lip service, there 
is no real Syrian opposition. This is a comprehensive process 
which pertains to the entire Middle East, and Jordan realized 
almost at the last minute that it could miss the train. It is 
good that Jordan recognized this fact, and the way it is 
participating in the process is very encouraging."] 
  [Raz] Here is what Agriculture Minister Ya'aqov Tzur had to 
say. 
  [Tzur] In my opinion, police activity is showing good signs 
in the field. I personally drove through Jericho several days 
ago and I must say that seeing a Palestinian police base in what 
used to be the Hanan camp and witnessing the joint patrols and 
the quiet in the town indicate a good potential. Therefore, as 
I understand things, the sooner 'Arafat arrives the better for 
the pushing of the financing of economic activity. Let us hope 
that 'Arafat arrives in the Gaza Strip and Jericho not just to 
visit but in order to stay. 
  [Tel Aviv IDF Radio in Hebrew at 1000 GMT on 12 June also 
reports that the cabinet discussed steps to prevent the 
establishment of Palestinian governing institutions in 
Jerusalem. In a recorded passage Agriculture Minister Zur says: 
"I think that the prime minister's unequivocal statements on 
this matter deterred the Palestinians from making statements and 
adopting positions which contravened the agreement."] 
  [Raz] Minister Tzur definitely sounded optimistic. The 
assessment is that 'Arafat will prefer to fly between the Gaza 
Strip and Jericho via helicopter. The cabinet also prefers this 
option which is much easier from the security standpoint. 
[passage omitted] 

