CSO 

<F P=106> [All quotation marks as published] </F>
  [Text] New Delhi, March 8: The Prime Minister, Mr. P.V. 
Narasimha Rao, announced on Tuesday the government's 
determination to put an end to `export of terrorism' by Pakistan 
into India and also to focus world attention on the basic case 
of Pakistan's illegal occupation of some areas of the Indian 
State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
  Replying to the discussion on the motion of thanks to the 
President's address in the Lok Sabha, Mr. Rao firmly declared 
amidst applause from members that the resolution recently 
adopted by Parliament on Kashmir would be implemented "in letter 
and spirit" and the government would foil any attempt from any 
quarter to interfere in the internal affairs of India. 
  The House later adopted the motion with voice vote, 
rejecting 
the Opposition amendments. 
  This was probably the first time that the Prime Minister 
came 
out with a statement indicating that India would now go in for a 
counter-offensive against Pakistan's propaganda about violation 
of human rights in Kashmir. He also termed Pakistan as an 
`aggressor'. 
  A total rejection of the demand for carving out of new 
States, a strong defence of the Dunkel proposals, a rebuttal of 
the slogan that India was buckling under outside pressures in 
economic matters and an assurance that the government would have 
talks with party leaders to decide on electoral reforms and the 
issue of identity cards to voters were the highlights of the 
Prime Minister's hour-long speech. 
  Mr. Rao's speech was bold, assertive and aggressive and drew 
cheers from the treasury benches. Obviously, the government 
securing a clear majority in the House emboldened the Prime 
Minister. 
  On the Ram Janmabhoomi controversy, the Prime Minister said 
the Supreme Court was seized of the matter and hearing has 
started. He appealed to the members not to be agitated over it 
because once the Supreme Court gives its opinion, action would 
be initiated on the lines of opinion. The government would come 
to the House and take its opinion and arrive at a consensus 
after the court verdict. 
  Mr. Rao pointed out that a look at the President's addresses 
during the last three years would clearly bring out the change 
that was taking place every year. The year 1992 reflected the 
economic crisis facing the country and the reforms proposed, 
1993 referred to the threat to the very survival of India as a 
nation and its secular character while 1994 started on a note of 
optimism, on which they have to build up now. 
  On Kashmir issue, he said there existed two, three 
complications which needed to be disentangled. The government 
was dealing with utmost patience and firmness the problem of 
Pakistan exporting terrorism into the Valley. This had to be 
tackled on many fronts. The latest the government thought of was 
the need to intensify development efforts in Jammu and Kashmir. 
More details in this regard would be given to the House at the 
appropriate time. The need for involvement of people in 
development activities and better coordination was given 
attention to. 
  He said Pakistan was creating problems for India and harping 
on violation of human rights in Kashmir out of its own internal 
compulsions. India had to face the situation. "Our record is 
clear. Wherever there are excesses, action is being taken". To 
say that there was violation of human rights in Kashmir is 
factually wrong and "we refuse it". 
  The Prime Minister declared that terrorism in Kashmir would 
be put down with an iron hand and the territorial integrity of 
India would be protected. Nothing would come in the way of 
efforts in this direction. The sufferings of people of Kashmir, 
as a result of terrorism, should be ended. "We are determined to 
see that export of terrorism from Pakistan is stopped". 
  Stating that Pakistan's propaganda against India on human 
rights was "totally uncalled for", he questioned Pak's 
locus standi to raise the issue when it was an 
aggressor. In this context, he said that India's basic case on 
Kashmir had taken a back seat, while irrelevant issues like 
human rights had come to the surface. The world has to be told 
about this. 
  Mr. Rao referred to the demands for new States gaining 
momentum and made it clear that the "time and the situation do 
not warrant carving of new States". "This is no time for us to 
open the Pandora's box for new States", he said and assured that 
steps would be taken to develop the backward areas, keeping in 
view the demand for creation of Jarkhand, Uttarakhand, etc. 
short of carving of new States, ways to solve the problems of 
backward areas and better treatment to them would he attended to. 
  Terming the problems being faced in the North East as 
`complex', he said that the region needed special attention and 
the government was giving greater attention to stop infiltration 
from outside. 
  The Prime Minister said that on the whole the situation in 
the country had stabilised now, creating confidence among the 
people outside and within the country that the economic activity 
had now been accelerated. Following this, massive investments 
were coming to the country in infrastructure sector. "Never 
before did we have a shot in the arm as we are having today", 
but much more needed to be done. 
  He pointed out that the massive step up in the outlay for 
rural development from Rs [rupees] 7,000 crore in the Seventh 
Five Year Plan to Rs 30,000 crore in the Eighth Plan reflected 
the government's determination to develop rural areas. The 
impact of the schemes on rural poverty and rural unemployment 
were studied by independent groups and it was revealed the 
benefits were accruing to rural people. 
  He said that the outlays for rural development in the Ninth 
Plan was proposed to be fixed at Rs. 90,000 crore. Rural areas 
would be blooming with activity, he added. 
  Mr. Rao ridiculed the slogan that the government's decisions 
were influenced by international agencies. Whatever the 
government was doing was "totally" its own plans based on the 
needs of the people. It was not correct to say that decisions 
were taken at the instance of outside agencies. 
  He stated that the Dunkel proposals have become "a horse 
that 
was already dead", but everyone was still flogging it. "I have 
gone into every aspect of the Dunkel proposals, particularly on 
the agriculture side. I reiterate that on the agriculture side 
we have nothing to lose, but we are having much to gain", he 
declared. 
  The Prime Minister further said that exporters of 
agricultural products would get a shot in the arm due to Dunkel 
proposals. "I don't find Indian farmers suffering anywhere 
because of the Dunkel". 
  Responding to interruptions from Opposition members, he 
assured them that the government was prepared for a debate on 
the Dunkel proposals. Certain comments being made on these 
proposals stating that the interests of the farmers would be 
adversely affected were totally baseless. 
  When Mr. Nitish Kumar (JD [Janata Dal]) said that the 
farmers 
would have no right to multiply the seeds, the Prime Minister 
shot back saying that India would have its own law in this 
regard. The Bill would be coming in this session itself. 
  Mr. Rao gave the details progress in the implementation of 
the three schemes introduced by the government in 1993 for the 
benefit of the poor, particularly rural women and urban youth 
and also the schemes meant for welfare of Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections. 
  Clarifying the points raised by Mr. Ram Vilas Paswan (JD), 
Mr. Somnath Chatterjee (CPI-M [Communist Party of 
India-Marxist]) and Mr. Jaswant Singh (BJP [Bharatiya Janata 
Party]) and others, the Prime Minister said that he would 
consult leaders of political parties on electoral reforms, issue 
of identity cards and other allied matters. Stating that the 
government had no bias on any of these matters, he said that 
whatever was decided by all the parties would be implemented. He 
said he would convene a meeting of party leaders to discuss the 
issue. The government would not take any hasty decision, he 
assured. 
  He said that the progress of implementation of land reforms 
during the last two years was commendable. 
  Mr. Rao told Mr. Paswan that the government had not shelved 
any programme meant for the welfare of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes initiated by the earlier JD government. On the 
other hand, the government had added new schemes. 
  He said the Finance Minister would give details about the 
action taken on JPC [Joint Parliamentary Committee] report on 
securities scam. On Bofors investigation, he said the government 
was yet to receive the documents from Geneva Cantonal court. 

