BFN 

  [Excerpts] Tunis, 7 June, JANA -- Brother 'Umar 
al-Muntasir, secretary of the General People's Committee for 
Foreign Liaison and International Cooperation, congratulated the 
chairman and members of the bureau [as received] of the 60th 
session of the OAU Council of Foreign Ministers which started in 
Tunis. He also hoped for a better political and economic future 
for Africa. He added: I would like to express my gratitude and 
appreciation to all the states of the African continent and to 
the OAU and its secretary-general for their supportive stands 
toward the Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriyah, which 
never ceased offering initiatives to find a peaceful solution to 
the dispute known now as the Lockerbie crisis. This African 
support constituted -- with the support we received from other 
major regional organizations -- a general position which 
reflected the will of the majority of the international 
community and which should be acknowledged and taken into 
account. [passage omitted] 
  The brother secretary went on to say: We remind the African 
states of the importance of taking urgent measures to confront 
the attempts aimed at interfering in the African affairs, 
usurping the freedom and independence of the peoples, plundering 
their resources and obstructing the development process they 
chose for themselves. This forces us to coordinate and consult 
one another to adopt a united stand in order to confront these 
challenges which threaten the security, safety and sovereignty 
of the states of the (African) continent. 
  The brother secretary also said: The OAU dealt with the 
Libyan-Chadian border dispute for several years during which the 
two countries cooperated with the organization and the ad hoc 
committee and this kept the matter within the framework of the 
African continent. [passage omitted] [item ends in mid- 
transmission] 
  [Tripoli Libyan Television Network in Arabic at 1930 GMT on 
7 
June, in a related report adds: 
  ["Consequently, the two countries [Libya and Chad] managed 
to 
solve the dispute with their mutual consent; and proceeding from 
the spirit of African fraternity and the relation of good 
neighborliness, the Great Jamahiriyah and the sister republic of 
Chad agreed to end their territorial dispute after the Great 
Jamahiriyah complied with the ruling passed by the International 
Court of Justice. 
  ["He added: Within the framework of its respect for the 
international charters which it has never ceased to take into 
account in its international relations, the Great Jamahiriyah 
signed an agreement with the republic of Chad to implement the 
ruling since it recognized that this ruling had decided the fate 
of a region which was the subject of a dispute between two 
neighboring sister countries. Practical measures started to be 
taken to implement the ruling in accordance with the agreed 
timetable and in an atmosphere of understanding and full 
cooperation and under the supervision of UN monitors. This 
agreement was crowned yesterday with the signing of a treaty of 
good neighborliness and cooperation during the Chadian 
president's visit to the Great Jamahiriyah."] 

