Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "North Korea's Nuclear Intent Must Be </F>
Reexamined"] 
  [Text] How should we cope with North Korea's nuclear 
weapons, if it possesses them? Is present negotiation strategy 
to prevent North Korea from manufacturing nuclear weapons still 
effective? On what basis is the government encouraged to have 
confidence that North Korea has no nuclear weapons at present? 
  We have no specific objection to the fact that diplomatic 
negotiation methods are the most effective for the solution of 
the North Korean nuclear issue. This is why we hoped for success 
in the U.S.-North Korean nuclear negotiations. We have not 
discarded, even now, the hope that our expectation will be met 
at last. Negotiations should proceed with flexibility, and such 
flexibility should be based on reciprocity. This condition, 
however, will become meaningless if North Korea cancels its 
withholding its withdrawal from the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty [NPT], threatened by the North Korean Foreign Ministry, 
becomes a reality. 
  The logic that one should be even more flexible in this case 
may sound persuasive. In other words, just as the chairman of 
the opposition party urged, we should reject the imposition of 
sanctions on North Korea and should try to bring North Korea to 
the negotiating table. Based on this, however, we will be in a 
strange position of having to block the resolution for sanctions 
in the event the North Korean nuclear issue is referred to the 
UN Security Council after inspection negotiations are ruptured 
between the International Atomic Energy Agency and North Korea. 
We do not believe that this is what the government has in mind. 
  Foreign Minister Han Sung-chu said that "we will maintain a 
flexible, yet resolute attitude toward the nuclear issue." We 
would like to interpret his remarks as expression of the will to 
actively join the resolution for sanctions by the UN Security 
Council, if it is necessary and indispensable. The problem is 
North Korea's attitude. We must judge, first, whether North 
Korea's threat of withdrawal from the NPT is another negotiating 
card or expression of its will not to discard nuclear 
development. 
  For this judgment, one should not be self-righteous but 
should assume a cool, realistic standpoint. In view of serious 
unfavorable effects on our security in case negotiations on the 
North Korean nuclear issue go wrong, one should listen to the 
other side's allegation. Therefore, one should ponder over the 
attitude of the government to worry about the possibility of 
heightened tension when Patriot missiles are deployed to the 
U.S. Forces in the ROK. This is because negotiations are 
possible only when one's defensive posture is strong. 
  What presents an even more serious problem is true aspects 
of 
North Korea's nuclear development. There cannot be any clear, 
accurate answer to this question. No one can be definitely 
sure that North Korea has no nuclear weapons. This is why the 
U.S. administration, not to mention the U.S. Congress, is 
leaning toward a hard-line policy. Should we consider this 
merely as military egoism of the United States? In the event it 
becomes suddenly known that North Korea possesses nuclear 
weapons, the present negotiation method must certainly be 
reexamined. 
  Our suspicion is increasing as to why North Korea is so 
persistently refusing IAEA's full-scope inspection, even so far 
as warning of its cancellation of withholding its withdrawal 
from the NPT. Nevertheless, the split in our national opinion is 
deepening. This is indeed deplorable and troubling. 

