Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Statement by Jan Minciewicz, chairman of the main governing </F>
board of the Union of Poles of Lithuania, taken from interview 
conducted by V. Kuznetsov, under the rubric "In Political 
Parties and Social Movements": "We Must Look to the Future"] 
  [Text] Yesterday the Fourth Congress of the Union of 
Poles of Lithuania, created in 1988, opened. In this period of 
time, it has followed a path from social to sociopolitical 
organization with a faction in the Seimas of the Republic of 
Lithuania which won in the elections to the Vilnius and 
Salcininkai rayon soviets. Our correspondent, V. Kuznetsov, 
asked the chairman of the main governing board of the Union of 
Poles of Lithuania, Jan Minciewicz, to tell about the Union's 
tasks and problems. 
  Five years have already passed since the day the Union of 
Poles was created, and in that time it has lived through various 
things. We lived through a kind of revolution too. While in 1988 
we were registered as a social organization, in 1992, on the eve 
of elections to the Seimas, we acquired the status of a 
sociopolitical organization which along with political parties 
received the right to participate in elections on a multiparty 
basis. And now we have a faction consisting of four people in 
the Seimas. Undoubtedly, this suggests the support of voters, 
especially voters of the Vilnius District. The recent elections 
to the Vilnius and Salcininkai rayon soviets, which as you know 
were very difficult, ended in victory for our organization. In 
these soviets our representatives constituted about 80 percent 
of the membership. All these things are, as they say, our 
political achievements. 
  As for our organization itself, we are preparing for the 
congress. Conferences of our branches in Vilnius and Vilnius, 
Salcininkai, Svencionys, and Trakai rayons as well as those of 
the primary organizations in Kaunas, Druskininkai, and Zarasai 
have been held. What is significant is that they came out in 
favor of preserving our organization's present status as a 
sociopolitical organization. That is to say, there are no 
prerequisites either for depoliticization (becoming a social 
organization again) or for transformation into a political 
party. I think that the congress will support this opinion of 
our rayon branches too. But the status of sociopolitical 
organization has its minuses too. First of all it restricts 
potential for drawing youth and high school students into our 
ranks, that is to say, it deprives us of a future. For according 
to existing legislation, we cannot create our organizations in 
schools and other educational establishments. This also applies 
to interdictions on creating them in labor collectives. 
  But persecution of activists of the Union of Poles of 
Lithuania after the disbanding of the Vilnius and Salcininkai 
rayon soviets and the administration of these territories 
through "governors" had a special effect on our organization's 
numbers. And these 2 years left their deep marks. We believe 
that the disbanding of these soviets was not justified and had 
serious consequences. Look at what is happening today with the 
allocation of land in Vilnius Rayon. Recently this issue was 
reviewed by state control, which drew the conclusion that the 
allocation of land by the "former governor" was illegal. But it 
is "spinning its wheels," although in our opinion there is every 
reason to rectify this situation--construction has begun in only 
a handful of cases. And the authority of the rayon soviet is not 
sufficient, there must be a decision of the government. But that 
is only part of the consequences of the disbanding of the 
soviets, which the Union of Poles of Lithuania has participated 
in cleaning up; with the help of jurists we provided various 
kinds of help to the people who were illegally harmed. Of course 
that is not our function; it should be done by the rayon soviet, 
which, as was already said, was unjustifiably disbanded. All 
this persecution brought down upon our activists--firings, 
summons to the procurator's office, discrediting in the 
press--played its role. The size of the Union of Poles of 
Lithuania fell by almost half, from 15,000 to 8,000 people, 
although the situation in various rayon organizations changed in 
different ways. Thus, while in Vilnius Rayon membership declined 
by half, in Trakai, in contrast, it rose, and in others it did 
not change at all. Here I must also talk about one other problem 
which disturbs us a great deal--the planned reform of the 
administrative-territorial division. At one time, to be more 
precise on 29 January 1991, the Supreme Soviet of the Republic 
of Lithuania adopted a decree which said that rayons of the 
Vilnius District must constitute one territorial unit with its 
own status. No one rescinded this decree, so it has legal force. 
But now new plans for the administrative-territorial division 
have appeared, and not one of them takes this decree into 
consideration. I think the congress will express an opinion on 
this issue, especially since our faction in the Seimas has 
prepared its own plan for a solution to the 
administrative-territorial division of the republic. What is our 
position? We believe it is unacceptable to unite the city of 
Vilnius with Vilnius Rayon, since neither the city nor the rayon 
wants this. But to call things by their real names, this is 
necessary for the Polish population which constitutes a majority 
in Vilnius Rayon to "dissolve" into this megapolis. Another goal 
is to divide the land of peasants living there and transfer it 
to the city. But the main goal is of course political--to ensure 
that the Polish population does not constitute a majority. That 
same goal is pursued by the resettlement of Vilnius Rayon with 
residents of the city by allocating lots for construction to 
them (as was already said, frequently illegally). But our plan 
is based on the Supreme Soviet decree which I already mentioned 
and, incidentally, international requirements which do not allow 
the dissolution of national minorities who live in close 
quarters. This, in our opinion, should mean the unification in 
Vilnius District of the Vilnius, Salcininkai, and Trakai (with 
the exception of Elektrenai) parts of Svencionys and Sirvintos 
rayons. However, there are many opponents of this plan. But the 
discussion of this issue will take place in the very near future. 
  What other problems of internal political life today disturb 
the Union of Poles, and in fact everyone who supports us? The 
Democratic Party of Labor of Lithuania [DPLL] has already been 
in power a year and a half. I must note that many of those who 
support us voted for it. They rendered their support in the 
presidential elections to A. Brazauskas too. Why? During that 
time it was obvious that a change of power was needed and a 
political force able to change the situation fundamentally 
should come to power. 
  Whether four or eight deputies were elected from the Union 
of 
Poles, nothing could fundamentally change. And many people voted 
for the DPLL and A. Brazauskas in the hope of getting rid of all 
the troubles. Unfortunately, that did not happen, and one can 
verify only deterioration in all areas. And while the 
socioeconomic situation, or rather its deterioration, affected 
everyone, issues of Polish culture, language, and national 
self-consciousness as a whole were more acute to those who 
elected and support us. Let us take our Polish university whose 
creation V. Landsbergis "blessed." However, about 100 students 
are in their third year of study there, but the school still has 
no formal status and no premises. On the contrary: a week ago a 
directive was received from the administration of the city 
soviet that the Polish university was to vacate the premises it 
occupies at 5 Sibaciaus Street and no other premises were 
offered. And what is being done with Polish television? Some 
authorities have begun to broadcast it, but others are shutting 
it down, arbitrarily superimpose other programs on its programs, 
and so on. The publication of textbooks in the Polish language 
is also declining. And this is already state policy--the 
decision was made by the Ministry of Culture and Education. And 
who is training cadres for Polish schools? The pedagogical 
university trains only specialists in Polish studies, but what 
about biology, chemistry, and geography? Not to mention the 
teaching of foreign languages or even the Lithuanian language in 
Polish schools. For example, there are 74 teachers of the 
Lithuanian language working in the schools of Salcininkai Rayon. 
But only 17 of them are Lithuanian specialists. The rest are 
chance people, teachers of other subjects. Given this situation 
can we really expect the teaching of the state language to 
improve? For if we are speaking of the state language, the 
question must be fundamentally resolved. Incidentally, the draft 
law on the state language which is already being reviewed in 
Seimas committees also has a number of provisions with which we 
find it difficult to agree. Thus, according to Article 5 on 
areas where national minorities live in close quarters, 
residents may be served in the language of this minority along 
with the state language in communications and health care 
institutions and on transport. That is to say, they may be 
served, and so they may not be! But this is a step backward as 
compared with the Law on National Minorities which says that the 
language of the minorities must be used in institutions of power 
with which people deal. Unfortunately, this is not the only 
defect of this draft. The draft does not guarantee that 
representatives of national minorities will receive higher 
education either. Of course we will express our opinion in the 
committee and in the Seimas, but I am not certain that the vote 
will be in our favor. 
  Yes, there are many problems, but we do not believe, unlike 
other political forces, that a permanent change in government or 
early elections will help us resolve them quickly. Our opinion 
is that first we must respect both our own laws which have 
already been adopted and international norms. For when Lithuania 
was accepted into the Council of Europe, it set the condition 
that we sign "Charters on Local Autonomy," where the rights of 
national minorities are defined. But up to this point this 
document has not been reviewed in the Seimas and, accordingly, 
has not been signed. To touch upon international problems, I 
would like to say a few words on the Lithuanian-Polish treaty 
which the signatories have been preparing to sign for a fairly 
long time. I believe that many of the things which I already 
spoke of and which are not being resolved at this time in our 
republic could have been envisioned in that treaty. They above 
all include exercise of the rights of the Polish population 
living on Lithuania's territory, the problem of the Polish 
university and Polish television, and so on. As for the preamble 
of this treaty and the historical evaluation of well-known 
events, I think that treaties are signed in the promise of 
future relations. The past is a matter for historians, but we 
must look to the future; otherwise we will never move forward. 
For those who were born here, in the Vilnius District, before 
the war are not to blame for being born on the territory of 
Poland. Therefore formulas which are acceptable not only to 
Lithuania and Poland but also to the Polish population of the 
Vilnius District must be found. 

