BFN 

  [Text] The Argentine Foreign Ministry yesterday said that 
it was not aware of the existence of a report written by a 
commission created by the Defense Ministry to investigate 
reports on war crimes in the Malvinas Islands. CLARIN's 
exclusive publication of the report appeared in yesterday's 
edition. 
  Deputy Foreign Minister Fernando Petrella revealed that the 
Foreign Ministry is not officially aware of the report mentioned 
by CLARIN, adding almost with resignation that "it would 
eventually become aware of it." 
  The publication of the Defense Ministry report is a hurdle 
in 
the path of the policy of seduction being implemented by the 
Foreign Ministry to strengthen diplomatic and trade relations 
with the United Kingdom. 
  In this particular case we must add the cyclical pushing and 
pulling between foreign and defense officials on issues like the 
Malvinas or the UN peace missions. 
  The report publishes, for the first time, the full names of 
Argentine soldiers who were wounded and are registered as 
executed. According to the investigation, at least nine 
Argentine soldiers in the Malvinas Islands died at the hands of 
British soldiers in a way that clearly violates Geneva 
Convention articles on treatment of war prisoners. 
  Petrella yesterday said that if the existence of the report 
is confirmed -- the Defense Ministry did not deny it -- it 
should be submitted to the British Government "as a matter of 
principle" in order to check whether "parts of it have not 
already been covered by the British investigators." 
  The deputy foreign minister was referring to a Scotland Yard 
investigation team that collected information from Mount Longdon 
battle survivors in London and Buenos Aires. It was reported 
that the British police had concluded that in the Malvinas 
Islands "there were assassinations, but not executions." 
  The investigation started following the publication in 1991 
of a book by former British Corporal Vincent Bramley entitled 
"Excursion to Hell." In the book Bramley described how the 
British military executed an Argentine soldier who had been 
taken prisoner following the bloody battle of Mount Longdon. 
  Bramley yesterday told Radio del Plata that "the only case 
of 
execution I know about is the one involving the soldier I 
mentioned in my book." Bramley expressed hopes that the two 
countries' governments "will sit down and work together in order 
to clarify this matter for good." 
  "The British Government ordered an investigation. The 
Foreign Ministry asked British investigators to visit Buenos 
Aires to collect the evidence available here. The team of 
investigators stayed in Buenos Aires for 20 days. They talked 
with veterans and then issued a report to the crown prosecutor, 
who must decide what to do with the report," the deputy foreign 
minister said. 
  The serious facts unveiled by the investigation presided 
over 
by military vicar Norberto Martina places the government in the 
predicament of having to decide whether to denounce the war 
crimes committed by British soldiers before international 
organizations. 
  Officials responsible for designing the government's foreign 
policy know well that if they go to a international court with 
documents proving that British soldiers were involved in 
attempted homicide, homicide, dangerous handling of prisoners, 
use of forbidden weapons, and execution of soldiers wounded 
during combat in the Malvinas Islands, they will have no choice 
but to throw away the policy of slow rapprochement with the 
United Kingdom that the Foreign Ministry has been implementing 
ever since Carlos Menem became president. 

