BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, May 03, BNS -- The Bank of Estonia in a 
study delivered to the parliament explores the reasons behind 
the last months' increasing rise in consumer prices and wages 
the viability of measures to get the inflation under control. 
  The survey shows that the current relatively high inflation 
rates are a natural phenomenon for an economy in transition like 
ours, said Kaupo Pollisinski, chief spokesman for the central 
bank. 
  The rise in the consumer price index in Estonia for the 
first 
three months of the year ended at nearly 20 percent, smashing 
hopes to keep inflation within the far more optimistic estimates 
made last year end. Topping the disappointing monthly figures 
was a record 8.9 percent inflation for a single month in March. 
  The central bank in its study says the record inflation in 
March was caused 92 percent by a rise in the spending on 
housing, food, transport and communications. 
  The price rise in March above all hit people in the lower 
income group of the society, the central bank says. The 
consumer price index for the less well-off was 2.5 percent 
higher than that for the richer population, or 7.9 and 5.4 
percent, respectively. For the last four months, inflation has 
been 6.1 percent higher for families in the low income group 
than those in the upper segment. The purchase basket of food 
became 24.5 percent more expensive for the lower income group 
over the January-March period. The rise in the same sector for 
the high-income segment was 18.4 percent. 
  Experts at the Bank of Estonia say there are four main 
factors that effect inflation most in Estonia: - the ongoing 
opening of the economy; - higher growth rates in the 
productivity of work when compared to the industrially developed 
countries; - arising from this is the continuing difference of 
the price level in Estonia from that of the foreign countries. 
Also to be taken into account is that the price level in one of 
Estonia's main trade partners -- Russia -- has been extremely 
unstable; - the fixed exchange rate of the Estonian kroon to the 
German mark. 

