BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Tokyo FNN Television Network in 
Japanese at 2240 GMT on 18 June, in its regular Sunday "News 
2001" newsmagazine program, carries a 37-minute discussion on 
the DPRK nuclear issue with Foreign Minister Koji Kakizawa at 
the FNN studio in Tokyo and (Thomas Hubbard), U.S. acting 
assistant secretary of state, in Washington linked by satellite 
hookup. The program, moderated by newscasters Yuji Kuroiwa and 
Megumi Sekito, also has political commentator Kenichi Takemura 
and Keio University professor Yoshiaki Kobayashi participating 
as guest commentators. 
  An interview with Foreign Minister Kakizawa begins at 2251 
GMT. Kuroiwa asks him if he feels the crisis over the DPRK has 
receded as a result of Carter's meetings with Kim. Kakizawa 
says: "We need to watch a little longer. In connection with the 
U.S.-DPRK talks, President Kim Il-song talked about freezing 
nuclear programs. But what does freezing nuclear programs mean? 
Did he mean to say he is willing to accept inspections of 
nuclear facilties including special inspections? This point 
needs to be confirmed through diplomatic channels." He adds 
even the South-North Korea summit will need to be preceded by 
working-level meetings, thus suggesting that some time will pass 
before the government can pass judgment on the situation -- on 
whether "the situation will head for better." 
  Asked about a possible UN sanctions resolution, Kakizawa 
replies: "When Secretary of State Christopher phoned me the day 
before yesterday, he clearly said the discussions on sanctions 
by the United Nations will continue." Kakizawa says he thinks 
the United States has not revised its policy on "acting in 
cooperation with other countries in putting pressure on the 
DPRK, and drawing out concessions from the country by exerting 
such pressure." 
  Moderator Kuroiwa asks again whether the United States had 
made a concession to the DPRK and has decided not to ask it 
about its development programs in the past. Kakizawa says: "I 
have heard all kinds of stories to that effect coming from the 
United States, but they have not been verified." 
  Kakizawa adds: "On holding the third U.S.-DPRK talks, there 
is the premise that the DPRK will fully accept IAEA verification 
actions, including special inspections. The special inspections 
will cover nuclear waste storage facilities. It is said that 
since some fuel rods have been removed, verifications hereafter 
will be difficult. But if inspections can be conducted on areas 
other than those currently allowed, then we will be able to find 
out about the past operation of the reactor to a certain degree." 
  The foreign minister says he wants a solution which will not 
ignore or forgive what the DPRK currently has as regards nuclear 
arms. He insists "Japan cannot accept the neighboring DPRK 
possessing nuclear arms." 
  [Editorial Report] Referring to Japan's stand on UN 
sanctions, Kakizawa states: "Our nation is always clarifying 
its stand toward attaching importance to discussions at the 
United Nations. Even if sanctions are discussed at the United 
Nations, those would not be intended to punish North Korea for 
developing its nuclear program. Rather, UN sanctions should be 
designed as the international community's message to encourage 
North Korea's return to the framework of the IAEA. In this 
sense, a consultative settlement of the issue is our final goal." 
  When asked about the possibility of U.S. concession to the 
DPRK, Kakizawa says: "No U.S. officials have formally said yet 
that the United States can tolerate North Korea's nuclear 
weapons development program." Kakizawa then calls for Japan's 
serious and thorough discussion of crisis management, saying: 
"U.S. Assistant Secretary of State [Robert] Gallucci said that 
the DPRK already has the plutonium to produce one or two nuclear 
bombs. In addition, North Korea is reportedly developing 
missiles which can reach Japan. So, we must deal with the issue 
taking into account the fact that, unlike the Gulf crisis, the 
DPRK issue is an immediate threat to Japan. However, we do not 
have to become too nervous about such provocative remarks by 
North Korea as covering Seoul with a sea of fire. What we have 
to do at the level of the public is to discuss the nation's 
crisis management as our own problem." 
  When asked whether Japan intends to open a direct dialogue 
with North Korea, Kakizawa notes that normalization talks with 
the DPRK should be resumed upon Pyongyang's request, saying: 
"Six rounds of Japanese-DPRK normalization talks have been held 
in Beijing, but the talks have been suspended since November 
1992, when the North Korean delegation stormed out of the talks. 
We have repeatedly conveyed to North Korea our position that we 
will always be happy to resume the talks; the door is always 
open." 
  Kakizawa then notes that the upcoming U.S.-North Korean 
talks 
and ROK-North Korean talks may pave the way for the resumption 
of Japanese-DPRK normalization talks. He adds that a settlement 
of the nuclear issue is the absolute prerequisite for a 
successful conclusion to the Japanese-DPRK talks, saying: "The 
Japanese-North Korean normalization talks may make considerable 
progress if North Korea freezes its nuclear development program 
and fully accepts IAEA inspections." 
  Kakizawa then touches on Japan's stand toward Kim Il-song's 
proposal for Western aid to use in replacing the DPRK's existing 
reactors with light-water reactors. He says: "I think that the 
proposal will become a major subject hereafter, and it may be 
possible for Japan to cooperate in this field. However, 
considerable progress in the normalization talks would be the 
precondition for doing that." 
  With regard to possible UN Security Council (UNSC) sanctions 
against North Korea, moderator Kuroiwa asks if Japan is ready to 
implement UNSC sanctions. In reply, Kakizawa notes: "Regarding 
the contents of such sanctions, the United States briefed us in 
advance on its proposal. Japan is not in position to disclose 
the U.S. plan, and it is difficult for us to make formal 
comments. When the UNSC approves the U.S. plan, the first phase 
of the sanctions would be imposed if North Korea demonstrates no 
cooperation to the IAEA within 30 days. I think it is quite 
certain that Japan will participate in the first phase. The 
second phase would be imposed if the DPRK continues its nuclear 
development program and remains a threat to international peace, 
and this would include a ban on remittances from Japan. But, 
the second phase has to be determined by another UNSC 
resolution. If North Korea continues to refuse IAEA inspections 
at the time of that step, Japan would have to deal with the 
issue as an immediate threat to its national security. In this 
regard, we would have to do everything that we can do even 
though the ban on remittances involves many difficulties." 
  As for tangible measures for UNSC sanctions, Kakizawa says 
that the UNSC currently plans no military actions against the 
DPRK. However, he notes that even a ban on trade can involve 
such compulsory actions as boarding searches by the military, 
and that a constitutional controversy may arise in Japan over to 
what extent Japan can take part in such actions. He states: 
"From a common- sense point of view, it would be difficult for 
Japan to mobilize the Maritime Self-Defense Force and to allow 
it to conduct boarding searches. So, I guess the focal point is 
what Japan can do in the area of logistics. At present, there 
are many legal limitations even on constitutional logistical 
operations. When legislative decisions are needed, we will have 
to wait for debates in the Diet." When asked if the government 
intends to be involved in every logistical operation, Kakizawa 
replies that "what we can do will depend on the nation's 
discussions hereafter." 

