Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Russian Foreign Intelligence Service officer </F>
Boris Petrovich K., by Vladimir Sedykh; date and place not 
given: "Intelligence Officer at the Service of Science and 
Technology"] 
  [Text] We met with Boris Petrovich K. in the mansion 
on a twisting Moscow street known to everyone writing on 
espionage topics. It houses the Russian Foreign Intelligence 
Service [FSK] press service. As to our interlocutor, his service 
record in intelligence goes back as far as 1952. Behind him are 
four extended foreign tours of duty and a couple of dozen short 
trips. Not every experienced professional intelligence officer 
can boast such a service record. All Boris Petrovich himself 
said, however, was that for 40 years he had been an intelligence 
officer at the service of science and technology. 
  [Sedykh] Please explain what you mean by this. 
  [K.] All my career has been associated with scientific and 
technological [S&amp;T] intelligence, whose main task is to track 
advanced foreign technologies and obtain the appropriate 
information, as well as samples, for the purpose of improving 
the scientific and industrial potential of our country. The 
needs of the military-industrial complex [VPK], weapons of mass 
destruction, and developments in the area of critical 
technologies were given priority, of course. That is, those 
areas that represented a direct threat to our national security. 
In the greater scheme of things, I made my own small 
contribution to the acceleration of scientific-technical 
progress. 
  [Sedykh] This sounds sort of academic. Why do you not give 
some concrete examples of useful returns from S&amp;T 
intelligence, 
or to put it plainly, industrial espionage. 
  [K.] Whichever name you call this line of foreign 
intelligence work, compared to other lines of work--political 
intelligence, foreign counterintelligence, illegal 
intelligence--S&amp;T is the most profitable. Let me start with 
the 
fact that information obtained by our staff on the problems of 
nuclear energy enabled Soviet science, with considerable savings 
in material resources and time, to create atomic weapons and 
deprive our main enemy of the time--the United States--of the 
ability to use nuclear blackmail. We seriously helped our 
scientists in industrial applications of powder metallurgy. Not 
too many people know that S&amp;T provided anticipatory 
information 
on the spread abroad of a dangerous illness--AIDS, and its 
medical and biological parameters. S&amp;T also provided 
important 
information for the work on eliminating the consequences of the 
Chernobyl disaster. 
  As you can see, S&amp;T is aimed not only at perfecting 
technical 
ideas, but also protecting the interests of humanity. And there 
is probably no need to prove the cost-effectiveness of S&amp;T 
intelligence. It has never had government handouts and never 
cost our taxpayers a penny. 
  [Sedykh] If you do not mind, let us move from the general to 
particular. For instance, what was your work day like in 
intelligence? 
  [K.] First I would like to point out that intelligence work 
assumes maximum levels of strength, will power, and nerves. 
Naturally, I, just like my colleagues, tried not to set myself 
apart in any way from the bulk of our diplomats, specialists, 
and other "clean" personnel abroad. I will not reveal a great 
secret, however, in telling you that within half a year the 
special services of the country of assignment learned who is who 
in our colony. While the "clean" staff of foreign 
representations consider themselves off duty after 1700, we 
continue working. Therefore it is very important to mask your 
activism--explain it, for instance, by a character trait: I am 
such a restless person that I even work in the evenings. 
  [Sedykh] Did you succeed? 
  [K.] In principle, you can fool the special services. With 
me, for instance, as we found out later, they assumed for a long 
time that I was a KGB co-optee but not that I was a career 
officer. Still, the most important part for us is to not expose 
our sources. 
  [Sedykh] How do you do that? 
  [K.] To mask specific interest in particular persons you 
have 
to surround yourself with numerous acquaintances and business 
connections, that is, official contacts. This is particularly 
important at the stage of assessing foreigners who potentially 
could be of interest from an intelligence standpoint. With 
agents, you have different problems. The most vulnerable area in 
the system of special relations is the personal meeting. That is 
why intelligence frequently resorts to impersonal forms of 
contacts with agents--through dead drops or radioelectronic 
exchange of information. It also goes without saying that you 
have to be able to skillfully dodge physical surveillance. 
  [Sedykh] Speaking of the latter. Boris Petrovich, tell us 
some methods of foiling this greatest evil for an intelligence 
officer. 
  [K.] In West European countries, where I worked most, the 
embassy and our other representations were usually under 
constant surveillance. However, the resources of the opponent's 
special service are not limitless. We took advantage of this; 
for instance, we simulated conferences or mass events at the 
embassy and then fanned out in the city. They would pick up one 
or two of ours, but the rest would have a chance to break off. 
Or, two or three intelligence officers get in a car, with the 
operational driver behind the wheel. At a certain point on the 
route--safe from the viewpoint of surveillance--the colleague 
who has to conduct an operation jumps out of the car and escapes 
surveillance. When a meeting is planned with an especially 
valuable agent, or an important operation, the rezidentura as a 
rule also conducts countersurveillance, to make sure that the 
intelligence officer is not "tailed" by the opponent. I 
personally accustomed the surveillance to my habit of drinking 
coffee every day at 1100 in the same restaurant. For a day, a 
week, a month they dutifully followed me there. Then I noticed 
that they had stopped. Once in a while they would check that I 
still indulged in my coffee habit, and then lay off. This is 
when I went into action. 
  [Sedykh] Let us say you have your coffee at 1100. Nobody 
follows you. You can have a meeting with your source. Where, and 
how? 
  [K.] Usually in restaurants--naturally, those that are not 
anywhere close to state and government buildings, police or 
gendarmerie, or military facilities. I should note that the 
meeting place must be recorded in the rezidentura, so that none 
of our other people would show up there and, God forbid, bring a 
tail. So we eat and drink. I take the documents, give him the 
next assignment (I am generalizing, of course), the source gets 
the money, and we each go our own way. Sometimes the materials 
have to be returned to the agent in a matter of hours. Then you 
have to work with a partner who copies the documents right in 
the car while you are having your meal. 
  [Sedykh] Tell me please about an unexpected episode in your 
professional practice. 
  [K.] There was an incident--quite recent, by the way. 
Therefore I will avoid details and specific descriptions. One 
category of our clients are the so-called walk-ins, those who on 
their own want to establish contact with intelligence. There was 
a major specialist in electronics who got into debt and decided 
to fix his problem by selling secrets. He came to the county 
where I worked. I met him several blocks away from our embassy 
when he asked me "Could you give me directions to the Soviet 
Embassy?" My mental antennae went up and I tried to engage him 
in conversation. Leaving aside some details, I will only tell 
you that we ended the day in a restaurant; in my pocket was a 
microfiche of a top secret document on antimissile defense, but 
something was bothering me--the amount the foreigner was asking 
for the microcircuits exceeded all permissible standards. The 
Center, however, authorized the deal. We decided not to wait for 
money from Moscow and scraped up this amount by sweeping all our 
foreign representations. 
  [Sedykh] And then what? Did he become a source? 
  [K.] He absolutely refused to cooperate. We approached him 
several times, tried to work with him on the territory of a 
neighboring country--no success. 
  [Sedykh] What about compromising materials? 
  [K.] Which? We are strictly forbidden to use blackmail. 
  [Sedykh] How is your life in retirement now? Are you tempted 
to get into battles again? 
  [K.] I would love to if my health permitted. I ended up with 
a category II disability, however, and cannot work in 
intelligence. So I devote my time to the collection of beer mugs 
I started while abroad. 
  [Sedykh] Then, Boris Petrovich, the way to go for you is to 
join the Beer Lovers Party. 
  "True," the youthful-looking retired spy chuckled. 

