BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 7 KYODO -- The "mood is good" in resumed 
"framework" trade talks between Japan and the United States on 
medical equipment, a Japanese official said Tuesday [7 June]. 
  But the Foreign Ministry official told reporters after the 
first session of a two-day working-level meeting that the two 
sides agreed not to comment on details, noting he would probably 
be able to offer better information Wednesday. 
  He added that time was limited on the first day, with 
discussion starting in the afternoon and most of the session 
devoted to questions and answers by the two sides confirming the 
progress made before the talks stalled in February. 
  Government procurement of medical and telecommunications 
equipment is one of three priority areas, along with automobiles 
and auto parts, and insurance business. 
  Medical equipment is the last item in working-level talks on 
the priority areas that got restarted last Wednesday with 
discussions on the insurance business. Telecommunications 
sector talks were held separately last Friday and Saturday. 
  Asked whether the talks on government procurement are near 
agreement compared with other areas, the official said, "we feel 
relaxed" because substantial progress had been made by February. 
But he refused to describe the talks as a "front-runner," 
stressing that anything could happen "midway." 
  Japan and the U.S. agreed to resume working-level talks 
again 
on already-ended topics after making further progress but 
failing to narrow the gap on the crucial issue of "objective 
criteria." 
  On the medical equipment issue, the Japanese official said 
the two sides are arranging to meet again in mid-June. 
  U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor reportedly indicated 
in Paris that the U.S. is not seeking agreements in all three 
sectors before the Naples summit of the Group of Seven leading 
industrialized nations in July. 
  However, the Japanese official also suggested the 
possibility 
of such sectoral agreements, saying that no deadline was set 
when Japan and the U.S. agreed two weeks ago to restart the 
bilateral trade talks. 
  But he noted, "We are not aiming for that." 

