Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Colonel General V.M. Zhurbenko, deputy chief of the 
general staff of the Russian Army, has been visiting Finland 
this week. The colonel and his retinue have for several days 
been following operations of the Finnish defense forces; they 
have also visited the Mannerheim Museum. Matters concerning the 
Leningrad military district, however, have not been discussed 
during the visit. Jaakko Lensu reporting. 
  [Begin recording] [Lensu] Col. Gen. Zhurbenko says that the 
manpower of the Leningrad military district is no secret, but... 
  [Zhurbenko in Russian followed by interpreter in Finnish] 
The 
figures are changing every day. Not even the chief of staff of 
the Leningrad military district, who is present here, can say 
what the daily situation is. 
  [Lensu] According to Zhurbenko, information is exchanged 
constantly with the Finnish Defense Ministry. From 1986 the 
number of troops in the Leningrad military district has 
decreased one and a half times, according to Zhurbenko, and by 
the end of next year the troops will decrease further. 
Lieutenant General Sokolov, chief of staff of the Leningrad 
military district, notes for his part that Finland has not even 
asked about this. 
  [Sokolov in Russian interspersed by the voice of the 
interpreter in Finnish] The representatives of the leadership of 
the Finnish defense forces have not asked any questions about 
this during our visit, because they already know everything they 
want to know about this matter. 
  [Lensu] The host of Zhurbenko's visit, Lieutenant General 
Matti Kopra, says for his part: 
  [Kopra] The Finnish defense forces have received the same 
information that, according to the Vienna agreement, is given 
each year in the CSCE report; and the latest information has 
just arrived a little while ago. An entirely different matter 
is the disarmament and reduction questions connected with cuts 
in conventional forces, where Finland does not take part. And 
there, as far as we have understood, Russia has a problem in the 
sense that they are of the opinion that they are too much 
bothered by these flank questions. What their stance is on that 
and how they are going to find a solution to that is their 
business, which has nothing to do with us. 
  [Lensu] A couple of days ago Admiral Jan Klenberg, the 
commander of the defense forces, spoke about Finland's security 
and noted that the treaty limiting conventional forces, that is 
the CFE [Conventional Armed Forces in Europe] Treaty, has 
arrived at an interesting stage. According to Adm. Klenberg, it 
looks like the implementation of the regional flank rules 
concerning the areas near Finland were in danger. The 
leadership of the Russian Armed Forces have for a long time 
wanted to transfer extra troops to the southern flank, to the 
area of Caucasian unrest. The limits of the CFE Treaty stop the 
transfer of extra tanks, which are necessary according to the 
Armed Forces, to this southern flank. This has made the 
leadership of the Russian Army demand changes in these 
paragraphs of the CFE Treaty, which were signed by NATO and the 
Warsaw Pact countries at the time. Whether this plan is 
implemented is another matter. To get an answer to this problem 
might not be so important because, as heard, the guests were not 
asked anything about this. Apparently, with this unsolved 
problem, it is easier to justify the Finnish defense forces' 
need for money. [end recording] 

