Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 14 Jan (XINHUA) -- To enhance management 
over ground reception equipment for satellite television 
transmission, the State Administration for Industry and Commerce 
[SAIC] recently formulated provisions on relevant issues 
regarding the sale of satellite ground reception equipment. The 
provisions are as follows: 
  1. The registered capital of units engaging in the sale of 
satellite ground reception equipment must not be below one 
million yuan. They must have the capability to provide 
after-sales services for satellite ground reception equipment, 
and have no fewer than three specialized personnel with the 
capability to install, tune, test, repair, and provide 
maintenance. 
  2. Provincial-level industry and commerce administration 
organs, together with the same level of domestic trade, radio 
broadcasting and television, and electronic industry 
administration departments, shall designate sale units of the 
satellite ground reception equipment and report the unit 
designation to the SAIC for the record. The SAIC shall, 
together with the State Council's domestic trade, radio 
broadcasting and television, and electronic industry 
administration departments, designate units that register with 
the SAIC. Provincial-level industry and commerce administration 
bureaus and the SAIC shall respectively publicize the designated 
sale units. Undesignated units and individuals are forbidden to 
conduct the sale of satellite ground reception equipment. 
  3. Industry and commerce administration organs must 
strengthen management over sale units of satellite ground 
reception equipment. Prefecture and city-level industry and 
commerce administration organs should, under the unified 
organization of provincial-level industry and commerce 
administration organs, carry out checks once a year on sale 
units' operation of satellite ground reception equipment. 
Provincial-level organs shall report the results to the SAIC. 
The SAIC shall conduct unscheduled spot checks of sale units. 
  4. Sale units shall only sell satellite ground reception 
equipment to those units and individuals who can produce 
purchase certificates issued by radio broadcasting and 
television administration departments, and to those units whose 
names are listed as state designated sale units. Sale units 
shall only sell equipment that is produced by enterprises 
designated by the state; they shall only sell imported satellite 
equipment approved by the state. They are forbidden to sell 
smuggled, counterfeit, inferior- quality satellite ground 
reception equipment or equipment produced by enterprises that 
are not designated by the state. They are forbidden to sell 
products not authenticated by the State Council Product Quality 
Supervision and Management Department, or by 
quality-authentication organs authorized by it. They are 
forbidden to sell satellite ground reception equipment without a 
quality-authentication certificate, and products without the 
seal of quality-authentification. 
  5. Those who engage in the sale of satellite ground 
reception 
equipment in violation of the provisions shall be ordered by 
industry and commerce administration departments to cease. The 
departments shall confiscate their equipment and impose a fine 
that is equivalent to two times below the sale amount. Units 
designated by industry and commerce administration departments 
shall either dispose of or auction off the confiscated 
equipment; the proceeds of the sale will be delivered to the 
state treasury. 

