BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by staff reporter Ban Mingli (3803 2494 7787): </F>
"`Fluctuations' in Commodity Prices"--first four paragraphs are 
RENMIN RIBAO editor's note] 
  [Text] [Begin editor's note] An economist once 
compared prices to the "first button" of clothing. He meant 
that only by fixing its position can all the other buttons be 
positioned in the right place and can all the clothes be neat 
and tidy. His comparison makes some sense. 
  Of all the continuously deepening reforms, price reform has 
the same importance as foreign exchange and tax reforms. In a 
certain sense, price reform has a more extensive meaning because 
prices run through all links of the economy and prices are the 
soul of market growth. 
  Price reform involves tens of thousands of households and 
its 
success firstly depends on the state's macroeconomic policy and 
control and on the behavior of managers. It is also closely 
bound up with the correct concept of prices fostered by the 
masses under the conditions of market economy. 
  Prices are a hot subject of research among economists and 
management departments. There are two issues which are 
discussed or encountered most often in the daily lives of the 
general public, namely the question of price fluctuations and 
the question of price stability. Why do prices fluctuate? Why 
must prices remain stable? Our topic begins here. [end editor's 
note] 
<H5>  Kaleidoscopic Fluctuation </H5>
  Today, prices are changing as often as a kaleidoscope. 
  Examples are easy to find. In the case of cucumber, between 
February and March, the market price for one kilo was four yuan 
or more while one kilo cost six yuan or more in the same period 
last year. Each kilo of rape or celery costs two yuan or so 
this year, but it cost only one yuan or more last year. 
  Seasonal changes are also very obvious. The retail price for 
each kilo of eggs in season is 5.4 yuan but falls to 
approximately four yuan out of season. In winter, meat 
consumption is higher, so meat prices are higher than in summer. 
  Prices during festivals and holidays also change. During 
major traditional festivals each year, television sets and 
refrigerators sell better and at higher prices than in ordinary 
times. Products like freshwater fish are often cheaper on 
Mondays than on Sundays. 
  In the past, a commodity did not have much difference in 
price in all parts of the country except for minimal regional 
price differences. Today, several prices exist for the same 
commodity in the same street. The same commodity will have 
different prices in big and small shops or in collectively run 
or privately run shops. Prices are even different in different 
state-owned shops. The price difference ranges from several 
yuan to dozens of yuan to hundreds of yuan and makes customers 
unable to make a decision. 
  Before reform, prices remained constant for several decades. 
Now they change every year, every month, and even every day. 
The prices of the means of production also fluctuate greatly. 
  Examples are too numerous to quote. 
  Among greatly differing individual phenomena there is a 
"general" fluctuation. We must admit that fluctuation is a 
basic characteristic of prices. Reform is first meant to bring 
back this "nature" to prices so that they change quickly 
according to their value and fluctuate according to market laws. 
  Fluctuation originates with "relaxation." This relaxation 
means that the state no longer directly fixes the prices of most 
commodities but gives enterprises the right to fix prices and 
gives this right back to the market. Therefore, the old price 
system under which "there was only one permanent price for one 
commodity across the country" has come to and end. 
<H5>  Price Increase Is an Associate </H5>
  Fluctuations should be rises and falls, ups and downs. 
However, looking back at the course of price reform over the 
past 15 years, we discover that there have in fact been rises 
and falls. But we cannot deny that there have been more rises 
than falls and that the extent of the rises has been larger than 
the falls. 
  What are the reasons? 
  First, the original price level was fixed in keeping with 
the 
level of economic development and the economic management system 
of the 1950's, which was far from high. Artificially fixed 
product prices were irrational right from the beginning. The 
very rigid system in turn made it impossible for prices to be 
readjusted in keeping with market changes, so it was inevitable 
that the price structure was distorted. Therefore, the "price 
scissors" not only appeared in industrial and agricultural 
products but also between different products in the same 
industry, causing an unfair distribution of interests. A 
distorted price system inevitably suppressed the incentive for 
production. Once price limitations were removed, hidden 
inflation was exposed, thus leading to price increases in the 
course of structural readjustment. 
  As the economy develops, the cost of many products are also 
being raised. This is not only because they are restricted by 
resources which require an increasingly large investment, but 
also because the wages of staff and workers, namely labor costs, 
are increasing. 
  All of these are the driving forces behind price 
increases. Therefore, at the present stage of economic 
development, to some extent it is a necessity for the general 
price level to keep rising. 
  How much pressure has price fluctuation brought to us? Over 
the past 15 years of reform and opening up, there have been 
small fluctuations every year and great fluctuations on three 
occasions. 
  The first occasion was in 1979 when the state considerably 
raised purchasing prices of agricultural and sideline products 
through planned price regulation and raised prices of surplus 
purchases of grain and cotton. In that year, the purchasing 
prices of six grain crops were raised by 21.6 percent. In 1980, 
retail prices of eight nonstaple foodstuffs, including meat and 
eggs, were raised accordingly, and retail prices of commodities 
in society rose by 36 percent. 
  On the second occasion, prices increased considerably and 
the 
increase lasted for a fairly long time. Prices rose by 8.8 
percent in 1985 and by 18.5 percent, which was the highest, in 
1988. In 1989, they rose continuously by 17.8 percent. This 
stage was both a period of speedy growth in the national economy 
and a stage during which important progress was made in price 
reform. 
  The third occasion was that in the wake of the economic 
rectification from 1988 and 1991, the state, taking the 
establishment of a socialist market economy as the goal, 
quickened the progress of price reform in 1992. However, 
regrettably, in 1993 prices increased considerably again. In 
that year, retail prices rose by 13 percent. 
  If we illustrate the extent of price increases over the past 
15 years in comprehensible figures, the general level of retail 
prices in 1993 rose by 2.54 times. Calculated by the quantity 
of final production in 1993, it rose by at least one trillion 
yuan. 
  Faced with the state's financial difficulties and given the 
fact that enterprises have not been invigorated and the 
multi-strata and unfair distribution of income in society, huge 
amounts have been shouldered by the state, enterprises, and 
consumers. This is undoubtedly a remarkable achievement in 
reform. Today, as we look back at this historical episode, it 
shows that we are not unfamiliar with price fluctuations. We 
should not fear them because we are able to keep fluctuations 
under control. 
<H5>  Attitudes Are Changing </H5>
  Price is a very profound economic question as well as a very 
popular topic. Today, people have all kinds of misgivings about 
price fluctuation: To what extent will prices rise? Can we 
endure it? 
  Nevertheless, we cannot but admit that behind these worries, 
people's attitudes are slowly changing. The good wish that 
prices will only go lower and will not rise or remain unchanged 
forever is no longer an ideal people pursue. 
  A survey of 100 households was carried out. "Which of the 
following two situations are you in favor of?" 
  In economic development, 1) prices remain unchanged and 
standards of living remain low; 2) prices increase and standards 
of living improve. [as published] 
  The result was that over 50 percent were in favor of the 
second choice. This was a public opinion poll done by the 
Beijing Municipality's Chaoyang District Price Administration in 
towns of the district at the end of 1993. 
  Coincidentally, subsequent to the Spring Festival of 1994, 
this reporter invited five ordinary factory and hospital staff 
and workers to an informal discussion. They were the district's 
National People's Congress deputies and Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference delegates and their minds 
carried many of the real views of many ordinary people. When 
asked to express their views on the relationship between 
commodity prices and living standards, they chose the second 
choice as well. 
  The two surveys show the same attitude. With practice for 
the past 15 years, people are making new judgments about the 
relationship between commodity prices and economic development 
and between commodity prices and living standards. More people 
do not want price stability with a backward economy and are 
beginning to acknowledge and accept price fluctuations in the 
course of development. Obviously, their outlook is changing. 
  Price fluctuations are no longer regarded as vile. "How good 
it would be if speedy economic development was not accompanied 
by price rises!" "How good it would be if wages would increase 
and commodity prices did not increase!" Many people now say 
that this is only wishful thinking. 
<H5>  Tolerance is Enhanced </H5>
  The change in attitude is not merely a change in outlook, 
its 
foundation is the enhancement of economic tolerance. 
  If what price changes in the early period brought to city 
dwellers was merely that they could buy peanut kernels 
everywhere and daily increasing quantities of meat and edible 
oils, then the several price readjustments that followed until 
1991 resulted in increases in the prices of agricultural and 
sideline products by 168 percent, a rise in the costs of 
extractive industries by 163 percent, and a rise in the prices 
of raw and semifinished materials and manufactured industrial 
goods of 127 percent, and so forth. Amidst price fluctuations, 
we said goodbye to a society where there was a shortage of 
commodities and faced a world with a great variety of 
commodities. 
  Fluctuations have also readjusted a distorted and twisted 
price structure. The previous irrational price parity between 
industrial and agricultural products and the uncoordinated price 
parity between extractive industry and processing industry have 
been changed radically. The function of price as a "barometer" 
is continuously stimulating incentives for production and 
potential and has become a lubricant fostering the market. All 
of this is like lengthening the shortest piece of wood in a 
wooden pail and deepening the wooden pail, as in the "wooden 
pale theory" of economics, so it can hold more water. This 
water is the development of the economy. 
  Not long ago, the Beijing Municipal Price Administration 
made 
a detailed examination and review of the relationship between 
economic development and commodity prices. Based on the actual 
data of each year, they plotted graphs for GDP and commodity 
prices for the years between 1979 and 1992. The results showed 
that this period was a period of speedy economic growth in 
Beijing. Compared with 1978, GDP in 1992 had risen by 550 
percent, showing an average annual growth of 14.3 percent in 14 
years, while commodity prices during the same period rose by an 
average of 7.46 percent. 
  If we fix the growth rate of the per capita living 
expenditure income of Beijing residents in the previous 14 years 
at 1, then the incremental ratio of price increases is 0.33, and 
thus the growth ratio between income and commodity prices is 
1:0.33. Excluding the price factor, the per-capita living 
expenditure income of urban residents has had an actual increase 
of 130 percent, representing an average annual growth of 6.1 
percent. [all figures as published] 
  In other words, although commodity prices have risen, income 
has also increased and actual living standards have improved. 
<H5>  Fluctuation Is An Inevitable Phenomenon </H5>
  Acknowledging the inevitability and positive significance of 
price fluctuations is not the same as acknowledging that prices 
can rise wantonly. Although the rate of economic growth is in 
proportion to the degree of price increases, in practice the two 
lines are not always parallel. 
  After examining the relationship between the two, the 
Beijing 
Municipal Price Administration discovered that in the wake of 
the beginning of every growth cycle, as economic growth 
quickens, prices rise continuously; after the rate of economic 
growth reaches its zenith, prices continue to rise; and as the 
rate of economic growth begins to fall to its lowest point, 
prices rise to their highest point. 
  This is to say price increases sometimes go in a different 
direction from the rate of economic growth. But under what 
circumstances? In the wake of excessively speedy economic 
development, when the growth rate must slow down while price 
increases do not fall, inflation occurs. This is obviously not 
a good thing. 
  To explain the situation, they used several ratios. 
Beijing's rate of economic growth in 1985 was 8.6 percent, a 
decrease of nine percentage points from the 17.6 percent in the 
previous year, and the price index in the same year rose by 18.6 
percent, and the ratio between them was 1:2.05. In 1989, its 
economic growth rate was 4.4 percent, a decrease of 8.4 
percentage points from the previous year, while the price index 
rose sharply to 18.5 percent, and the ratio between them was 
1:3.9. 
  A question is thus raised: When economic growth is in 
proportion to price increase, we need to pay attention to 
another relationship, namely, in what ratio should the two be 
controlled so nothing serious occurs? 
  There are three ways to analyze this. 
  First, if we fix the rates of GDP growth in the previous 14 
years at 1, then the ratio between economic growth and price 
increases between 1979 and 1992 was 1:0.95. 
  Second, if we compare annual average growth rates of the two 
in the previous 14 years, namely, if we take the annual average 
GDP growth rate of the previous 14 years as 9.1 percent and 
compare it with the 7.7 percent annual average rate of price 
increases, we have a ratio of 1:0.85. 
  Economist Zhang Zhuoyuan maintains that it is comparatively 
rational if the ratio between the national economic growth rate 
and the rate of price increases is 1:0.6. 
  Although the above three methods of calculation choose 
different figures, they reflect a law, namely that the disparity 
between economic growth and price increases should not be so 
great. By synthesizing several analyzes and viewing Beijing's 
reality in the previous 14 years, the Beijing Municipal Price 
Administration maintained that the growth ratio between the two 
should be ideally controlled at 1:0.9 and not more than 1:1.5. 
Otherwise, if price increases are too great, it will be 
difficult to coordinate all relationships among all sections in 
economic operations. 
  These circumstances tell us that there is a limit to even 
good things. On this, Chen Dezun, vice president of the Market 
and Price Research Institute, maintains that it is obviously 
impossible to keep prices from rising in the developing economy 
of today; if we keep prices from rising, economic growth will 
slow down; and it is possible for prices to keep rising given 
slowed economic growth. He holds that maintaining a 
comparatively high rate of economic growth without the 
occurrence of serious inflation is a practical choice, and the 
fact that the rate of economic growth is appropriately higher 
than the level of price increases guarantees that most people 
can endure such fluctuations. 
  For prices, we need moderate fluctuations rather than 
shocks. 

