Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yevheniya Romaniv: "The Old Year in the Mirror </F>
of Statistics"] 
  [Text] Enough of wordy indignation over our economy. Even 
the sharpest, most withering and insulting diatribes are just 
"commentary" to which the latest feeble government has already 
adjusted. We can only console ourselves that it is doing so 
little that there will be fewer mistakes to correct later. 
Better to talk specifics--statistical figures, and look at the 
example of Lvov Oblast to see how well we're managing in our 
independent state. 
  Labor. In 1993 the volume of industrial output 
fell by 15.9 percent--more than three billion karbovantsy in 
monetary terms. December was the laziest of the 12 brother 
months (a 29.6-percent decline), meaning the crisis is getting 
worse. Nor did January put a stop to our decline; many 
enterprises, after all, started their new business year with the 
holidays. Two thirds of the oblast's enterprises reduced their 
output, especially the Yavorov and Rozdol sulphur operations, 
the tobacco factory, the Drogobych Oil Refinery, and the 
Elektron and Kineskop associations, where the decline ranged 
from 64.9 to 31 percent. 
  Farm work ended the year with just one plus on the chart of 
its basic indicators--grain production. Everything else (sugar 
beets, flax, potatoes, vegetables) shows nothing but minuses. 
Still, almost all the planned areas have been sown for grain and 
fodder for the next crop. 
  Meat production, like milk yields, declined between 31 and 1 
percent in all rayons. The "champions" were the livestock 
farmers of Nikolayevskiy, Pustomytovskiy, and Busskiy rayons 
(meat), and Brodovskiy and Mostisskiy rayons (milk)--not 
counting the hill territories, of course. The champion laggards 
were Gorodokskiy and Mostisskiy rayons, where egg production 
declined by 98 and 82 percent, respectively. 
  Prices. It was this pathetic labor output, 
clearly, that produced the chronic goods shortage, especially 
food--and immediately, secret prices reacted; lately they have 
been on the verge of jumping even higher. Throughout 1993 they 
rose by an average of 44 percent a month (70 percent in 
December). Leading the way were oil, fish products, and 
margarine (103-fold and 90-fold increases in the year), eggs, 
bread, butter, tea, meat, and dairy goods (81-fold to 71-fold), 
alcoholic beverages, sugar, cheese, confections, and groats 
(63-fold to 50-fold). 
  The cost of non-food products kept rising. The biggest jump 
(90-fold to 50-fold) was in hand soap and detergents, knit 
goods, and building materials. In price policy, 1993 was most 
discriminatory toward children, although it was only making up 
earlier imbalances caused by artificially reducing prices on 
those goods under populist slogans that were economically 
unsound. Preschoolers' clothing jumped 170-fold (!) while 
women's rose 102-fold and men's 82.9-fold. 
  In village markets, prices on honey, oil, lard, poultry, and 
eggs rose 82-fold to 55-fold. Sales in the markets, as in the 
stores, declined due to people's reduced purchasing power. On 
the black market, the highest prices were on children's clothing 
and shoes, furniture, electrical appliances, perfume, caviar, 
and imported food items. 
  Wages. It's not by chance we're discussing wages 
right after prices, although they ought to be tied to labor. By 
objective economic laws, everyone should receive as much as he 
earns. Hence, if a plant's output declines there ought to be 
minuses on the payroll too. Our wage system, brought up in a 
troubled home where Mother Labor's vote counted less than Father 
Social Protection's, took the wrong path. Instead of going 
according to the results of output, wages blindly followed 
prices and neglected their own worth month by month. The result: 
overall production has dropped appreciably while pay has risen 
substantially. In November, for example, average wages rose by 
25.4 percent to 254,900 karbovantsy. That's the result of a 
destructive price policy that is out of sync with labor output 
and remuneration. We preach world prices but ignore world 
production and world wage levels. That's why we're in such a 
fix. Even that big pay jump in November--received in December, 
by the way--was not enough to cover the cost of December's 
grocery basket. Compare average wages of 254,900 with fixed food 
costs of 416,943 karbovantsy. 
  The very concept of "average wages" today is doubtful. The 
gap between the highest and lowest average sectorial wages 
widened greatly--8.3-fold in November, for example. Wage 
fluctuations are even greater between specific sectors. Workers 
in financial organs (banks) and insurance were paid an average 
of 1,216,700 karbovantsy, versus 146,500 in health care and 
social security and 165,500 in culture. In industry, wages were 
296,300, but this relatively decent figure was due to miners; 
workers in other trades got considerably less. 
  Demography. Given these statistics, I think, we 
can understand the continuing demographic decline in 1993. 
Natural increase fell by 40 percent over the year and stood at 
1.2 per 1,000 inhabitants, versus 2 per 1,000 in 1992. It was 
due to a birth rate that fell from 13.2 to 12.6 per 1,000 
combined with a death rate that rose from 11.2 to 11.4 per 
1,000. In all civilized countries, demographic indicators lead 
every other statistic. Prosperity there is not measured by the 
number of cars or kilograms of sausage per inhabitant but by the 
standard of living in the particular country--because people who 
live well live a long time. Sad to say, we can't be proud of 
that statistic or any other. 
  Let Bismarck's statement that every nation has the 
government 
it deserves be our guide during this pre-election period. And 
although we won't be electing a government but a parliament, it 
will still have to approve the Cabinet of Ministers and will 
determine whether it deserves the people's trust. Which depends 
on us. Let's not be wrong! 

