BFN 

<F P=106> [Sergey Balyutskiy report under the "Neighbors" rubric: </F>
"`Stones' on Borders. A Cooling Has Become Apparent in 
Lithuanian-Russian Relations"] 
  [Text] Vilnius -- Relations between Vilnius and Moscow, 
which only recently were almost a model of good-neighborliness, 
have started to cool appreciably of late. At a routine briefing 
A. Slezevicius, the republic's prime minister, voiced regret 
that several of his letters to V. Chernomyrdin, leader of the 
Russian Government, have gone unanswered. Moreover, according 
to the premier, Russian economic policy in respect of Lithuania 
is becoming increasingly aggressive. 
  All this has obliged A. Brazauskas, president of the 
republic, to send his own message to Boris Yeltsin. 
Lithuanian-Russian relations were also discussed at a session 
of the Coordinating Council on Foreign Policy. The decisions 
adopted there were evidently quite serious, since the Lithuanian 
head of government declared that "Lithuania will take 
appropriate measures if Russia does not alter its decision 
regulating exports and imports. One of these measures could be 
to restrict the transit of electricity to Kaliningrad Oblast." 
  What has prompted Lithuania's leaders not only to "avoid 
kisses" but even to threaten to "throw stones"? In the opinion 
of certain Russian Embassy staffers in Lithuania -- an opinion 
which coincides, incidentally, with that of the republic 
government's apparatus staffers -- the stumbling block is 
Kaliningrad Oblast, the Russian enclave on the Baltic coast. In 
signing the treaty on trade and economic cooperation back in 
November last year, the Russian premier stipulated, in exchange 
for most-favored-nation status in trade, a number of measures 
providing for Kaliningrad Oblast's life-support system to be 
facilitated. It was a question, in particular, of simplifying 
the fiscal-customs regulations on the border of Lithuania and of 
preferential transit across its territory for Russian freight. 
Today, the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs believes, 
nothing real has been done in this area. Moreover, the 
Lithuanian side does not conceal its reluctance to reach 
agreement on organizing Russian military transit on the basis of 
a bilateral agreement, intending to define its regulations only 
in internal documents. 
  The two states' diplomats are also failing to find a common 
language in questions of delimiting the border. 
  "Unfortunately, it has not been possible to reach any 
compromises," Deputy Foreign Minister V. Domarkas declared after 
returning from the latest round of talks on this question. The 
sea border is the stumbling block. In the Russian side's 
opinion, Lithuania is proposing a solution which runs counter to 
the UN Law of the Sea Convention. The Lithuanian Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs takes a different stand: Various international 
documents propose different methods for determining the position 
of a sea border, he believes, and the contracting parties single 
out paragraphs which are advantageous to themselves. 
  It can be assumed that the diametrically opposite 
interpretation of international documents is mainly influenced 
not by the sides' competence or even by the experience of the 
participants in the talks. The main reason is the perfectly 
understandable desire to gain possession of the quite 
significant oil fields located on disputed regions of the 
seabed. In our restless times people do not reach agreement 
quickly where there is a smell of oil.... 

