Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 1993 was the year of wind energy. The market for 
this clean and renewable energy source is experiencing a strong 
boom. According to the German Wind Energy Institute (DWI), the 
German wind energy park accumulated a total of 100 megawatts of 
rated output in 1993 (70 megawatts in 1992). One of the reasons 
for the increase, along with Federal and state funding programs 
and the selling price of 16.5 pfennigs per kilowatt hour 
guaranteed by the current input law of 1991, is the clear 
tendency to build large plants with a rated output of at least 
500 kW, now being produced serially by several manufacturers. 
Experts anticipate that within 2 years at the most windmills 
with rated output of a megawatt and more will be available in 
series. 
  The tendency to larger size has continuously increased the 
affordability of windmills, according to the rule of thumb, 
``the bigger, the cheaper.'' Today it is possible for windmills 
in windy areas, generally situated on the coast, to produce 
current at a cost of 8 to 16 pfennigs per kilowatt hour, which 
is scarcely more expensive than energy from conventional power 
plants. Armin Keuper of the DWI anticipates that at these sites 
wind energy plants could be functioning even without state 
funding within 5 to 7 years at most and be ``commercially 
successful.'' That is why more and more professional investors 
are getting involved with wind power along with the communes and 
associations of environmentalist citizens. Even banks have 
discovered wind generators as investment possibilities. 
  The move to larger plants is amazing in view of the fact 
that 
at the very beginning a large-scale project which foundered took 
the wind out of the sails of the wind power movement. The 
socalled ``Large Wind Energy Plant,'' popularly known as 
``Growian,'' was shut down in 1987 after a four-year test run 
because of technical flaws. After the failure of the 
three-megawatt generator and the dropping of the project by the 
disappointed major companies the industry went for small, simple 
plants, ``away from technical development at one fell swoop and 
towards progress in small steps,'' as Keuper says. Such steps 
have brought about the development of wind technology from 
plants under 100 kW to today's size. Thus energy utilization per 
rotor surface has doubled over the last 10 years; wind current 
has gradually become about 30 percent cheaper since 1988. This 
was also helped by manufacturers' lowering of prices, which was 
made possible in part by increased productivity in serial 
production and was partly forced upon them by increasingly 
strong competition in the marketplace. 
  Volker Friedrichsen, managing director of the company Vestas 
Deutschland GmbH in Husum, says, ``Technical improvements were 
achieved with the jump to each new size level because of 
increased experience.'' The Danish parent company is the largest 
international producer of wind energy plants. Their robust 
construction methods, rooted in agricultural technology, and 
gradually enhanced by modern technology, is very successful in 
the marketplace; the proof is the 4,300 wind wheels they have 
installed all over the world. This has not prevented other 
manufacturers from looking for success with innovative and 
technically demanding ideas. These include wind wheels with 
electronically regulated rotor blade installation for optimal 
wind utilization, with a variable rotation rate instead of a 
fixed one, and most recently also with a driveless generator, as 
offered by the company Heidelberg Motor GmbH in Starnberg or 
Enercon GmbH in Aurich. Technology pioneers are particularly 
hoping for greater economy based on higher efficiency from these 
new developments. 
  However, this advantage has not yet appeared. So far, in 
Keuper's professional opinion, there are ``hardly any 
differences'' between the plant concepts available on the market 
in price per kilowatt hour. Other experts point out that for 
enduring market success the plants have to establish themselves 
not only in Germany, but also on the world market. Here the 
traditional plants are considered to be proven, reliable 
technology. This reputation, which encourages business with the 
developing and emerging nations as well as with the Eastern 
European states, still has to be earned by high-tech windmills. 

