BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Hisham Milhim from Washington] </F>
  [Text] Jordan's King Husayn has said the Jordanian-Israeli 
talks, which will begin in the region next month, will be 
difficult, long, and serious, adding that their success will 
depend on Israel and whether it gives up the occupied Jordanian 
territory. He said that nothing justifies questioning the 
recent Jordanian-Israeli agreement and its timing. 
  Interviewed by Radio Monte Carlo, King Husayn said: The 
movement on the Palestinian track makes it unreasonable for 
Jordan to lag behind. He repeated many times that it is time 
Jordan concentrated on guaranteeing its existence and 
continuation and on safeguarding its democratization option and 
political pluralism. King Husayn added that he was surprised by 
Syria's criticism of the agreement, expressing hope that the 
Jordanian-Syrian contacts will resume to discuss integration and 
cooperation between the two countries. 
  Syria, which viewed the agreement as a violation of Arab 
coordination -- particularly following the visit to Damascus by 
the Jordanian monarch -- canceled a scheduled visit to Amman by 
Prime Minister Mahmud al-Zu'bi. 
  Regarding the Syrian position, King Husayn said: 
  [Begin Husayn recording] In fact, I was surprised by the 
Syrian reaction. I have not heard anything from His Excellency 
brother Hafiz al-Asad on a personal level. We have been in 
continuous contact until the latest stage. I paid a visit to 
Damascus, we met, and we discussed all issues. Therefore, I 
believe the political dimension concerning the Middle East 
issues, as well as our decisive and pan-Arab issues, will be 
tackled on our level, myself and my brother the president. 
  Regarding the coordination in general, we used this term and 
did our utmost to achieve it. I am not here dealing with this 
issue in light of the recent Syrian stand, but in light of its 
basis, namely, the Jordanian-Palestinian situation. Our issues 
and interests are interlinked. So, we should be together in 
confronting the dangers facing us. Coordination in the full 
sense of the word has not been achieved yet on any level. Every 
now and then we ask the brothers how far they have gone in their 
talks, or we tell them where we are, if they ask. 
  Our brothers in Syria have their own definite and known 
problems concerning the occupied Syrian territory. We have our 
own problems. Coordination has not reached the level of minor 
details. They, in Syria, might have a longer breath in light of 
their circumstances, situation, and potentials. However, our 
issue and its interlinkage with the Palestinian issue made us 
discuss this issue. Jordan, Syria, the Palestinian brothers, 
and Lebanon started from the same point in Madrid. We are 
seeking a comprehensive peace. This, however, does not mean we 
relinquished our right to address our issues. We also do not 
assume that Syria will relinquish its right to address its 
issues. [end recording] 

