Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] [Announcer] The former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia will soon conduct its census. In this framework, it 
is very important to know the exact number of Albanians living 
there. The government there has been, and is, creating obstacles 
regarding the exact number of Albanians. For more details, we 
have invited Bujar Muharremi into our studio: 
  [Muharremi] It is true that a census is expected to be 
conducted in Macedonia during April. Much has been and is still 
being spoken about this problem. There are malicious 
anti-Albanian attitudes, and there are also manipulations. This 
census is especially important for determining the status of the 
Albanian people living in the ancient land of their forefathers. 
This is a census that will show whether the number of Albanians 
living in Macedonia is 40, 20, or 22 percent as declared by the 
Macedonian officials. This census will show whether the 
Albanians are a state-forming people in the former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia. 
  The Albanian Government has expressed its support for a 
correct census, in the presence of international observers to 
ensure that it is accurate and convincing. This census should 
be conducted in such a way as to ensure the full participation 
of the Albanian people. However, there are several facts that 
account for the obstacles that have been put in place to prevent 
the full participation of Albanians in this census. The top 
Macedonian authorities have decided that the persons who will 
take part in the census should have passports issued during 1993 
or after. [passage omitted] 
  Thus, if a person does not have a passport issued during 
this 
period, he will automatically loose the right to be registered. 
This problem becomes more acute if we consider that hundreds of 
Albanians can come from Western European countries, where they 
are temporarily employed, to be registered. Thus, it will be 
almost impossible for them to take part in this census. 
  Reports from Macedonia confirm that, every day, hundreds and 
hundreds of Albanians gather near the police stations waiting to 
get new passports, so as to be able to register. There are even 
reports, such as those coming from Tetove and Gostivar, that the 
police have used violence against Albanians who want to have new 
passports as soon as possible in the face of delaying actions by 
the Macedonian authorities. 
  Let us point out something else. The enrollment commissions 
are not allowed to compile lists in two languages, in Albanian 
and Macedonian. This creates the conditions for manipulation, 
especially in those cities such as Prelep, Manastiri i Rese, 
etc., in which the population is mixed or where the majority is 
Macedonian. Under these conditions, we can pose the question: 
Do the Macedonian officials favor a correct and convincing 
census of Albanians and will they create the conditions for a 
normal census of the Albanian people? On the contrary, the 
Albanians in Macedonia, as they have ascertained, will boycott 
this census. However, let us wait and see what the future will 
bring regarding this problem. 

