BFN 

  [Text] According to Slovak Foreign Minister Eduard Kukan, 
the Slovak Government will try to settle property differences 
with the Czech Republic before this year's Slovak parliamentary 
elections, which should take place in October. This was stated 
by the Slovak foreign minister during his visit today in Prague. 
More from Marika Taborska. 
  [Taborska] The present Slovak Government is interested in 
settling the remaining open questions in Czech-Slovak relations. 
However, according to Slovak Foreign Minister Eduard Kukan, it 
is doubtful there will be enough time to settle the issue 
conclusively because of the fall parliamentary elections. Eduard 
Kukan talked with his Czech counterpart, Josef Zieleniec, about 
the current state of bilateral relations--in particular, as they 
relate to the division of former federal property and to 
international agreements. Zieleniec was asked what was achieved 
in discussing the biggest Czech claim resulting from the balance 
of accounts of the former State Bank of Czechoslovakia. He said: 
  [Begin Zieleniec recording] This problem is very old, and 
finding a solution to it is difficult. The key lies in the Czech 
National Bank's claim vis-a-vis the National Bank of the Slovak 
Republic. The claim amounts to about 24 billion korunas [Kc]. On 
the other hand, there are two separate claims to gold. One is 
linked to the so-called Slovak gold, which is symbolic and was a 
Slovak national collection, and the second resulted from the 
division. 
  However, I wish to say that these are two disproportionate 
claims. On the one hand, there is the claim of Kc24 billion and, 
on the other, the gold claim whose overall value is well under 
Kc1 billion. The gold is a highly visible, symbolic claim, but, 
from the viewpoint of the balance of mutual claims, it is not as 
important as the claim of the Czech National Bank vis-a-vis the 
National Bank of the Slovak Republic. For the time being, this 
question is frozen because we are dealing here mainly with the 
Slovak acknowledgement that this claim is justified. The 
question of repayments is one thing, but an acknowledgment of a 
claim is of key importance. [end recording] 

