Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Milan Dragovic] </F>
  [Excerpts] Zagreb, Feb 24 (AFP) -- The beleaguered Moslem 
enclave of Mostar is first priority for UN troops enforcing a 
ceasefire between Croat and Moslem forces in Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
a UN official said Thursday [24 February]. 
  "We are going to intervene at the most contested points on 
the front line," an official from the UN Protection Force 
(UNPROFOR) General Staff told AFP. 
  Some 1,200 UN troops from the Spanish battalion, based at 
Medjugorje 25 kilometres (15 miles) south of Mostar, should be 
the first to be deployed once the ceasefire takes effect Friday 
at 1100 GMT, but an effective intervention would depend on a 
significant increase in UN ground troops. 
  "In the circumstances, we are going to use our resources in 
the most honest and rational way possible," the official said. 
  The 55,000 Moslems living in the east of Mostar have been 
under constant fire for the last 10 months by Croat forces, who 
want to make Mostar the "capital" of their self-proclaimed 
Bosnian republic. 
  On Wednesday, the day the ceasefire was agreed, Croat forces 
fired 15 mortar and artillery shells on the sector, UNPROFOR 
spokesman Bill Aikman said in Sarajevo on Thursday. 
  The agreement between General Rasim Delic of the Moslem-led 
Bosnian army and General Ante Roso, commander of the Bosnian 
Croat HVO [Croatian Defense Council] militia, calls for a "total 
and immediate end to hostilities" and the deployment of UNPROFOR 
troops in "sensitive areas and key sites." 
  It resembles the February 9 accord concluded by Moslems and 
Serbs for Sarajevo under UNPROFOR auspices and reinforced by the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ultimatum issued the same 
day, made effective last weekend. 
  Heavy arms bigger than 12.7 mm are to be withdrawn from 
specified front lines -- 10 kilometres (six miles) for mortars 
and 20 kilometres (12 miles) for artillery guns and tanks -- or 
put under UN control by midday March 7. 
  A joint commission chaired by UNPROFOR was to be set up on 
Friday at Kiseljak to help reopen roads, allowing free movement 
and the "return to normal life" for the population. [passage 
omitted] 
  Fighting between Croat and Moslem forces continued Wednesday 
in central Bosnia, especially at the Croat-controlled town of 
Vitez where mortar and artillery fire intensified. [passage 
omitted] 
  In Zagreb's UNPROFOR headquarters on Thursday, questions 
were 
raised about the will of Croat and Moslem forces to stop 
fighting. "In the face of people who want to fight each other, 
we cannot do much," said a senior official. 
  But Kofi Annan, visiting head of the UN peacekeeping 
operations department, took an optimistic tone after meeting 
with Croatian President Franjo Tudjman. 
  "We are both encouraged by the latest developments and the 
involvement of the major powers," he said after the meeting in 
Zagreb on Thursday. "Both the United States and Russia are 
active and, apart from Sarajevo, we hope there is going to be a 
real movement for peace in the region." 
  Annan said he had raised the question of extending the 
mandate for the 15,000 UN troops deployed in Croatia, which 
expires at the end of March. 
  "The president raised the issue of a more assertive 
implementation of the UNPROFOR mandate, to create a situation 
where displaced people will be able to return to their homes," 
he said. 
  According to the Croatian government, some 25,000 Croats 
have 
been driven from their homes by separatist Serb forces, which 
control a quarter of Croatian territory. 

