Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 26 Jan (NA) -- Foreign Ministry 
Secretary General Andres Cisneros said that "having the 
justification is not enough" when he referred to the Malvinas 
Islands, and he explained that the current policy on this matter 
is centered on negotiations with Great Britain. 
  Thus, Cisneros answered a series of criticisms by expert 
Federico Ruiz Guinazu, who maintained that "the Foreign Ministry 
is mistaken regarding the Malvinas" because it does not center 
its demands on the basis of "sound rights that must be 
reiterated repeatedly." 
  Cisneros stresses: "Isolation alienated the country from the 
world's centers of power, it caused a confrontation with the 
United States at an immense cost, and it systematically 
alienated it from the rest of Latin America; although the 
country tried to establish a minimum of ties with the 
continent's countries, in the end we ended up clearly being the 
unpopular party." 
  He defended the current policy when he indicated that Brazil 
and Chile had never been "potential partners because they had 
always been two of our hypothetical military opponents." 
  The Malvinas was the third hypothesis, "which ended up with 
the country embarking on a war with the country that is the 
owner of the world's third-largest navy, an ally of the planet's 
most powerful nation, a policy-making partner in NATO [acronym 
given in English], and a permanent member of the UN Security 
Council." 
  The official highlighted the fact that currently trade with 
Chile has tripled in view of reciprocal investment amounting to 
several million dollars, and that Brazil "is the main purchaser, 
the second- largest supplier, and it is a partner in a common 
market [Common Market of the South], together with two other 
members, that will change the region's history." 
  Regarding the Malvinas, Cisneros maintains that in this 
matter "a community of interests and the joint exploitation of 
resources that will, in time, provide the basis of coexistence 
that one day will help in agreeing to a non-traumatic transfer 
of sovereignty" is currently being sought. 
  "The negotiating alternative evolves, not from the 
replacement of the law, but as a second stage that is logically 
the continuation of the basically legitimate alternative, which 
for 50 years has demonstrated that it is capable of obtaining 
the justification for us, but not the islands." Cisneros said in 
a signed note to a Buenos Aires morning newspaper. 
  In this respect, he indicated that Argentina has always 
pointedly and efficiently demanded Argentina's rights over the 
islands at each and every one of the appropriate forums. 

