BFN 

  [Text] Australia has proposed a limited exchange of 
military information as part of "trust-building" measures among 
countries in the Asia-Pacific region. According to the first 
draft of a paper presented to a meeting yesterday, Australia 
proposed exchange of data on military strategy, doctrine and 
defense budgets, as well as "information on current and planned 
force acquisitions, and military orders-of-battle". 
  The Australian paper was presented and discussed yesterday 
at 
the special meeting toward the ASEAN Regional Forum being 
launched in Bangkok in July. The paper was commissioned by 
senior officials of ASEAN and their dialogue partners who met in 
Singapore last year. 
  Australia also proposed the setting up of a regional 
security 
studies center, a maritime information database, strategic 
planning exchanges and the posting of observers at military 
exercises as part of the "trust-building measures". 
  The studies center could serve as the repository for 
information supplied by regional governments which could then be 
disseminated on a non-official basis to other institutes and 
governments, said the draft obtained by the BANGKOK POST. The 
maritime data base could be attached to the studies center and 
offer information on maritime traffic, environmental issues, 
piracy and smuggling, the draft said. 
  Regular planning exchanges "could provide an opportunity to 
exchange perceptions on strategic and military developments, to 
discuss issues of common concern, and to consider opportunities 
for practical co-operation," the draft said. The draft argues 
for "observers from other regional powers" to be present at 
military exercises which have so far been primarily bilateral or 
trilateral. Australia in fact was commissioned to produce a 
paper on confidence building measures applicable to the region, 
an official said. But Australia decided to use the word trust 
instead because confidence-building is seen as a Cold War term. 
  "We want to have a clean start," an Australian official 
said. 

