BFN 

<F P=106> [Fourth of seven question-and-answer talks sponsored by the </F>
State Economic and Trade Commission and the State General 
Administration of Taxation, chaired by Jiang Qiangui, director 
of the State Economic and Trade Commission's Enterprise 
Department: "Answers to Questions Regarding Enterprises' 
Implementation of the New Tax System" -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Video opens with shots of three men and two 
women seated at a long table in a room, then cuts to show medium 
shots of the moderator] [Jiang] Viewers and comrades: We are 
presenting today the fourth lecture in the series "Answers to 
Questions Regarding Enterprises' Implementation of the New Tax 
System." The major topics of this lecture are how to fill out 
value-added tax invoices, tax returns, and other relevant 
issues. Deputy Director [of the State General Administration of 
Taxation's Turnover Tax Department] Chen [Jie], could you please 
tell us how to fill out value-added tax invoice forms? 
  [Chen] As for how to fill out the form, detailed regulations 
can be found in the regulations governing the use of value-added 
tax invoices issued by the State General Administration of 
Taxation. Generally speaking, it is necessary to fill out the 
forms honestly. [words indistinct] I would like to explain 
technical problems such as how to fill out the price, amount, 
tax rate, and tax amount columns. First of all, prices which do 
not include value-added taxes should be filled in in the 
unit-price column. As for the sale amount, which is called the 
amount column in the invoice, it should be filled in with 
enterprises' sale amount, not including the value-added tax. As 
far as the tax rate is concerned, it depends on what tax 
category a specific commodity belongs to. For example, if the 
tax rate for the commodity is 17 percent, then you should write 
17 percent; if the tax rate is 13 percent, then you should write 
13 percent. As to the tax amount, its formula is as follows: 
the sale amount multiplied by the tax rate equals the tax 
amount. The tax amount should be filled in in the tax amount 
column. [passage omitted] 
  [Jiang] Do you have any question about this issue? 
  [Liu Jian, deputy manager of the Beijing Medical 
Radiographic 
Equipment Plant] When we levy value-added tax, we should show a 
tax certificate and fill in the tax certificate number in the 
form. Don't you think such a procedure is too complicated? 
  [Chen] When we sell commodities which are not tax-free, we 
must fill in commodity names and value-added tax amounts. The 
purchaser can file for tax refunds with the invoices on which 
tax rates are clearly indicted. Otherwise, they are not 
eligible for tax refunds. This procedure helps promote mutual 
supervision among enterprises. [passage omitted] 
  [Chen Shuqi, chief of the financial section of the No. 4 
Beijing Pharmaceutical Plant] Deputy Director Chen, products 
produced by pharmaceutical plants are often lost or damaged 
while being shipped. The procedure for returning products 
stipulated in the new taxation law is fairly complicated. Is it 
possible to retain the former procedure -- that is, to use the 
central bank's repudiation notice as evidence of a commodity 
return? 
  [Chen] I agree that the current regulations are relatively 
complicated. The current regulations, to put it simply, are 
this: If the purchaser returns the goods before paying for them 
or registering them in the account, the invoices for such goods 
should be returned. If the goods have been paid for or 
registered in the account, the purchaser should go to the local 
taxation organ to ask for a return certificate in duplicate. 
One copy of such a certificate should be returned to the 
seller. After receiving such a certificate, the seller shall 
issue a red invoice which should be sent to the purchaser. With 
this red invoice, the seller can readjust the sale income amount 
in the account record, while the purchaser can readjust the cost 
of the goods purchased. This procedure is indeed relatively 
complicated. [passage omitted] 
  [Zhang Qipeng, chief accountant of the Beijing Automobile 
Industrial Corporation] I have a question for you. We have a 
large amount of merchandise left over from 1993 on which we have 
paid taxes. Now we are not able to offset this tax payment. We 
do not know when we are allowed to offset this tax payment. We 
are waiting for detailed information. Because of this, we are 
suffering from insufficient operational funds. How are we 
supposed to solve this problem? Can this particular tax payment 
be reduced, exempted, or suspended? 
  [Chen] First of all, let me explain how to deal with the 
problem of tax payments for goods in stock. In 1994, your 
enterprise is allowed to calculate tax payments in three phases. 
In January and February, your enterprise is allowed to 
calculate monthly tax payments according to your amount of 
sales. The third phase covers the period from March to 
December. [passage omitted] 
  [Zhang Qipeng] My next question is about the reduction and 
exemption of value-added tax. Are enterprises allowed to 
postpone tax payments when they encounter financial problems? 
  [Chen] The problem concerning a reduction and exemption for 
value-added tax indeed exists. When enterprises experience 
financial problems, they are allowed to postpone their tax 
payment, but they have to apply for the postponement first. 
They can file a report with local taxation organs to explain 
temporary problems they are having. 
  [Jiang] Because the value-added tax is levied by the State 
General Administration of Taxation, shall such authorization 
procedures be approved by this organ? 
  [Chen] Concerning the limit of authorization, the general 
rule is this: Unified tax reduction and exemption is to be 
approved by the State General Administration of Taxation. Only 
central authorities have the power to decide on tax reduction or 
exemption. As for postponements of tax payments, enterprises can 
seek approval from local taxation organs. 
  [Jiang] This is the end of today's lecture. 

