BFN 

  [Text] President Suharto and Vietnamese President Le Duc 
Anh held official talks at Jakarta's Merdeka Palace this 
morning. The outcome of the talks was disclosed by 
Minister-State Secretary Murdiono as follows: 
  [Begin Murdiono recording] The two sides, both at the 
ministerial and head of state levels, share the view that 
current bilateral ties are very cordial and based on mutual 
understanding. The Vietnamese president's current visit is 
viewed as an important momentum for upgrading existing bilateral 
relations. The two sides believe there is no bilateral problem 
which cannot be solved. 
  During their talks, the two leaders briefed one another on 
the domestic situation of their country, especially regarding 
economic development. Both leaders are confident that bilateral 
ties can be further upgraded in the coming years. Both also 
praised each other's successes in economic development. 
  Touching on political issues, both sides exchanged views on 
how to solve the problem of the overlapping continental shelf. 
Consequently, both sides agreed that this problem should be 
settled quickly on the basis of the Law of the Sea Convention. 
It was also agreed that technical officials should speed up 
their work. Should they fail to reach an agreement on this 
issue, they must report it to the higher authority immediately. 
  The two sides also discussed the issue of Vietnamese 
refugees, or boat people, currently held at Galang island. More 
than 8,000 Vietnamese refugees still remain at Galang island. 
Only a few of them can expect to get political asylum and be 
resettled in a third country, while the majority of them consist 
of people who must be repatriated to Vietnam. The two sides 
also agreed to find an early solution to the refugee problem. 
  When the two leaders discussed multilateral and regional 
issues, the Vietnamese leader indicated his country's desire to 
get an observer status at the next meeting of APEC [Asia Pacific 
Economic Cooperation] in Jakarta. Whether Vietnam's request 
will be granted depends on the APEC criteria on the status of 
observer. As we know, for the time being, namely, for three 
years, APEC will not consider accepting new members. During the 
talks, President Suharto stressed the importance of APEC views 
and resolutions, which will benefit not only its members but 
also all countries, including developing ones. 
  Vietnam also expressed its desire to join ASEAN and 
President 
Suharto once again explained ASEAN's views and objectives, 
namely, forging cooperation so as to boost the welfare of each 
member country and strengthen national resiliency. These 
objectives are not aimed at other countries. ASEAN does not 
want to become part of other regional groupings in the world. 
  The Nonaligned Movement [NAM] was another topic of 
discussion 
between the two leaders. Both at the ministerial and 
presidential levels, Vietnam expressed its high appreciation of 
the role played by Indonesia as NAM chairman. Vietnam also 
praised Indonesia's success in implementing resolutions adopted 
at the NAM summit meeting in Jakarta in 1992 and in raising the 
prestige of the movement. President Suharto also mentioned 
important moves he had initiated in his capacity as NAM 
chairman. We all know that the NAM chairman's meeting with the 
Japanese prime minister at the G-7 summit meeting in Tokyo was 
indeed an important breakthrough in the efforts to reactivate 
the North-South dialogues. 
  As for economic talks, Vietnam invited Indonesia to take 
part 
in its infrastructure development, which now involves carrying 
out economic reforms and adjusting to the situations in other 
countries. Cooperation in agriculture was also another topic of 
discussion with Vietnam expressing its desire to buy fertilizers 
from Indonesia. Cooperation in marketing coffee and rice was 
also discussed. I must stress here that it is not Indonesia's 
policy to export rice. What is important is how to maintain our 
rice self-sufficiency, which we successfully achieved in 1984. 
Vietnam also sought possible cooperation in producing soybeans, 
shrimp, and garlic. In addition, Vietnam wanted to learn from 
and requested technical assistance from Indonesia in promoting 
its tourism industry. Vietnam seems to be very impressed with 
our tourism industry, which does not have a negative impact on 
our culture. In other words, Vietnam wants to learn how to 
promote tourism while at the same time continuing to preserve 
its national culture. [end recording] 

