BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Engineer Mohaqqeq: "The West's Formulas for </F>
Propaganda Against the Islamic Republic of Iran"] 
  [Excerpts] The campaign to deceive world public opinion 
and mold minds to serve Western interests, spearheaded by the 
United States campaign in favor of Zionism and against Islam, is 
among the most important policies of the United States, Britain, 
Zionism and its minions. They also make their greatest 
investment for this purpose. 
  The fact that the Islamic Revolution in Iran is the 
fountainhead of the awakening of the world Muslims and has 
openly exposed the true misanthropic nature of the United States 
has resulted in ever increasing expenditures in the cultural and 
propaganda fields against Islamic Iran. Extensive efforts are 
being made to distort the image of the Islamic Republic of Iran. 
  The motto of all the Western mass media, which are 
controlled 
by the psychological warfare centers, is: "In order to belittle 
the message of the Islamic Revolution and prevent them having 
any effect on world public opinion, accusations should be heaped 
on the Islamic Republic of Iran." This design has been 
implemented comprehensively and regularly in the past 15 years; 
and on certain occasions, its intensity and volume have even 
been increased. 
  Whenever world public opinion or a Western country becomes 
suspicious of the conduct of the government of one of its 
subservient countries and lodges a protest, the Islamic Republic 
of Iran exposes the facts effectively; and for this it is 
subjected to accusations. The following examples will help in 
understanding this: 
  When an Arab reactionary government takes a step in the 
direction of despotic Israel, its main concern is about Iran's 
objections, the propaganda from our press, and the spreading of 
their message to the Muslim nations. As a result it fears the 
protests of the public in the Muslim countries and seeks some 
recourse. On such occasions, the Israeli, Western, and Arab 
media make concerted accusations that the Islamic Republic of 
Iran has covert relations with the Zionist regime. These 
accusations are then disseminated in the Arab media, especially 
in the headlines of the country that intends to take a step in 
Israel's direction. 
  Usually such items are carried in some remote corner in the 
Israeli publications, are then cited by Western media, and then 
are picked up by the Arab reactionaries and flaunted 
extensively. Of course in the West, such reports are only used 
to the extent that the target country (the Arabs) can quote 
them. [passage omitted] 
  Today the West's involvement in the massacre of the Bosnian 
Muslims is clear to all. Today, as before, the voice of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran is the most outspoken in denouncing the 
collusion of the West and the Serbs. And now the West is 
seeking to justify its shortcomings with regard to the Bosnian 
Muslims to the world public. 
  The West does not wish to have its collusion with the Serbs 
mentioned and exposed, and so continues its propaganda to 
conceal its true visage. However, the voice of our people and 
government officials is loud. Therefore we should anticipate a 
spate of hostile propaganda against ourselves in accordance with 
their aforementioned pattern. 
  Soon they will unleash a deluge of stale and baseless 
accusations against our country which will not necessarily 
pertain to Bosnia-Herzegovina. It could be a false claim of 
some counterfeit U.S. dollars, unfounded allegations that Iran 
is attempting to manufacture a nuclear bomb, or charges that 
Iran is a danger to its neighbors. Perhaps they will find some 
new pretext regarding the violation of human rights in our 
country and may persuade the so-called human rights 
organizations such as Amnesty International to issue a statement 
against the Islamic Republic of Iran. They may even attribute 
to us the downing of some plane of theirs or an explosion in a 
commercial building in New York to us. They can resort to just 
anything. 
  The United States needs to accelerate its campaign of 
accusations against the Islamic Republic of Iran, but now 
Bosnia-Herzegovina has also raised its voice. The Bosnian 
president has called for the resignation of the UN secretary 
general and has exposed the West's shortcomings in defending the 
honor and lives of the Bosnian Muslims. [passage omitted] 
  The U.S. defeat in Somalia, the rise of Islamism among the 
people of the Islamic countries, conditions in Algeria and 
Egypt, the Islamic Resistance Movement in Palestine, the 
struggle of the Muslim people in Lebanon, the dissolution of the 
Soviet Union, and in particular, the tragedy of the Bosnian 
people in the heartland of Europe are all manifestations of 
divine radiance overwhelming the darkness of heresy. 

