BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Three Conclusions After the EU Election"] </F>
  [Text] Three main conclusions can be drawn from the 
election to the European Parliament [EP]. 
  The first conclusion is international and shows that the 
democratic deficit in the EU [European Union] is also to be 
found among voters. Not only were turnouts were low -- 
bordering on the insulting -- but it was also the case that in 
far too many places the European elections also played a 
domestic political role, even though the point of European 
integration is that is should be based on important 
international issues being put ahead of national 
narrow-mindedness. 
  The second conclusion is national. The voters' judgment on 
the Social Democratic Party proved to be a real punch in the 
nose, and its effects cannot but be both lasting and painful. 
The old wounds in the Social Democratic Party between opponents 
and supporters of the EU will open again, and new confrontations 
cannot but restrict the party leadership's freedom of movement 
and fuel Eurofears. 
  The third conclusion is that European integration must not 
continue being so laughable that not even a common election day 
could be agreed upon. The fact that Denmark waited until Monday 
[13 June] to count its votes while the other countries are able 
to make their results public on Sunday is a reflection of 
Denmark's fickle relationship with the EU. How it is possible 
to expect the voters to take part seriously in an election in 
which the counting of the votes depends on a country's 
willingness to pay its tellers overtime? Given that the running 
of the EP costs 5 billion kroner per year, we might envisage 
that the EP itself could take care of the cost of the European 
elections. Then we would at least be spared the spectacle of 
the timing of the announcement of individual countries' final 
results being dependent on misguided national thrift. 
  The issue of a common election day and a faster count is not 
new. Five years ago there was a similar debate, but the issue 
will be forgotten all too quickly once the EP gets back into its 
daily routine and there are another five years before the next 
encounter with the voters. 
  Just as the sixteen newly elected Danish EP deputies should 
make a common election date an issue -- albeit one with a lower 
profile -- our delegation ought also on its own behalf -- and 
that of its colleagues -- to turn the spotlight on the status of 
the European deputies. Too much of a gulf is created between 
the people and elected representatives by the fact that 
deputies' salaries, double mandates [the same person being both 
a national and European deputy], and tax-free benefits give 
rise to much more interest (and annoyance) than other pretty 
important issues on the European agenda. 
  The election was a personal triumph for the Conservatives' 
Poul Schluter and -- in relative terms -- perhaps an even bigger 
triumph for the Radical Liberals' Lone Dybkjaer, and a party 
triumph for the Liberal Party. The result shows that voters 
stuck to what they know, regardless of whether they know it from 
television or politics. 
  The election also produced a result which is very close to 
the prediction Gallup made on election day, 9 June. In relation 
to Gallup's prediction the final detailed count moved one seat 
from the June Movement to the Liberal Party. And despite a 
bigger divergence in percentage shares of the vote, the AIM 
polling organization had the correct distribution of seats. It 
is almost impossible to make more detailed predictions about an 
election result where seats are not only allocated according to 
votes for individual parties, but also according to electoral 
alliances. Several newspapers which are not reticent when it 
comes to making use of opinion polls and to voicing and 
commissioning political commentaries on the basis of these same 
opinion polls have been offended that opinion polls have been 
treated and commented on along with the results. Consequently 
they have aired the view that the politicians should remain 
silent until the final result is available. But this is 
rubbish. The politicians have a clear right to refuse to 
comment, but if they do choose to comment it is obvious to 
everyone that their views are based on opinion polls and not an 
actual election result. And also, the discussion of whether 
there is any justification for opinion polls will no longer be 
necessary when --it is to be hoped -- we have a common election 
day with the count taking place the same day as the election. 

