BFN 

<F P=106> [Lubor Kohout commentary: "From Baudys' Realm of Fantasy"] </F>
  [Text] Fairy tales are meant for children; of course, some 
adults like them too. Especially the old, traditional ones. 
The appeal of modern fairy tales is not so strong. Defense 
Minister Antonin Baudys, with the support of his subordinates, 
told us one like this last Friday [18 March]. The minister 
deemed it necessary to respond to the articles published in 
CESKY DENIK. They claimed that strains of bacteria and viruses 
intended for use as the basis for biological weapons are being 
stored (or concealed) in our military facilities. 
  If we summarize the statements made by the ministerial and 
army top brass, this is what we get: Bacteriological and 
virological weapons were never developed in our secret military 
facilities, and not at all for the purposes of the Warsaw Pact. 
The institute in Techonin never took part in such activity; the 
scientists in its laboratories only worked on immunological 
research. According to Ales Macela, the current vice president 
of the Military Medical Academy and a leading research worker at 
the Techonin institute, there were no technical conditions in 
his institute for achieving genetic changes in individual 
strains. The two batches of strains of bacteria and viruses -- 
the one in Techonin and the one that was kept in the building 
leased to the Klinlab (Clinical Laboratories) limited company in 
the Central Military Hospital in Stresovice -- were simply 
harmless batches prepared in case the state was involved in a 
defense emergency. Moreover, 80 percent of them were common 
viruses and a mere 20 percent were exotic viruses. Summa 
summarum: By storing the aforementioned strains, the army in no 
way violated the international convention on prohibiting the 
use, development, and accumulation of biological weapons. The 
interdepartmental commission, whose establishment was initiated 
by Baudys, decided that it was no longer necessary to keep the 
strains and, therefore, the viral banks were destroyed. 
Absolutely nothing happened -- irresponsible journalists from 
CESKY DENIK just want to injure our army. 
  In considering whether it is CESKY DENIK or the gentlemen 
from the Defense Ministry and the army who are telling fairy 
tales, it is enough to recall some of the facts confirmed by 
Minister Baudys himself and Chief of the General Staff Nekvasil: 
On 13 February, in connection with the personnel changes in the 
military health service department, Baudys finds out for the 
first time about the existence of batches of strains. An 
investigation follows, and on 17 February an interdepartmental 
commission is set up on Baudys' initiative. The swift 
destruction of the first batch in Stresovice begins during the 
next seven days. The defense minister personally orders the 
destruction. The chief of the General Staff also gives his 
personal guarantee that the destruction was carried out safely 
and that there was no risk. On 9 March the ministerial and army 
top brass receive the news that there is another batch of 
strains in Techonin in East Bohemia. Another swift destruction 
follows. 
  Other facts, not mentioned by Baudys, speak plainly. The 
whole affair has been investigated since the beginning by 
officers from Military Defense Intelligence (VOZ), who were 
present at the destruction along with the Military Police. VOZ 
is also taking care of the Techonin research documentation; of 
course, on Friday Ales Macela claimed that it is still stored in 
Techonin. The Defense Ministry is handing over part of the case 
to the Security and Information Service. What on earth for? 
After all, only allegedly "common and no longer necessary" 
strains were destroyed! 
  There were several ways Minister Baudys could have acted 
before Friday. One of these was telling the truth. He could 
have said that genetically altered viruses and bacteria 
developed for use as biological weapons had been concealed 
without his knowledge. He could have admitted that they are 
still -- in all probability -- "stored" in other, so far 
unknown, places. He chose another course of action, and thus 
associated himself with the people who had developed and 
concealed these materials. Parliamentary Foreign Affairs 
Committee Chairman Jiri Payne declared yesterday that the whole 
incident has to be thoroughly investigated. It only remains for 
me to add that, if CESKY DENIK has not reported the truth, the 
authors of the articles are, according to the law, criminally 
liable. They could, for example, have committed the crime of 
spreading alarming reports. If the defense minister is familiar 
with the criminal law, then he knows that he is required to 
submit a complaint. He will probably not do so, however, and he 
knows why. The ministerial fairy tales would not be enough to 
obtain a conviction in a law-governed state. 

