BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prime Minister Efrain Goldenberg by Sara </F>
Gandolfi in Milan; date not given: "Shining Path Is Alive, But 
We Will Make It Repent" -- first paragraph is CORRIERE DELLA 
SERA introduction] 
  [Text] Peruvian President Fujimori is launching "operation 
smile." The objective: getting Europeans to forget the 
authoritarian winds which blew across Peru and to relaunch the 
image of a Peru where there is still everything to gain. 
Freshly appointed Prime Minister Efrain Goldenberg will reap 
the first fruits today, with the signing of a framework 
agreement with our government to promote Italian overseas 
investments. "We offer total economic and social stability, 
with no bureaucratic barriers, and no prohibited sector," 
Goldenberg promised, reeling off the figures of Peru's 
ultra-liberal rebirth: Inflation has shrunk from 7,650 percent 
in 1990 to 20 percent (forecast) this year, and in 1993 GDP 
growth reached 7 percent, "the highest figure on the American 
continent." Not to mention the grand privatization plan. Peru 
is selling everything, from telephones to airlines. Within the 
year, it will also be auctioning its little jewel of the Andes, 
the miniature train which runs from Cuzco to Machu Picchu, 
passing alongside the peaks of the Cordillera. 
  [Gandolfi] The economic framework is rosy, but the 
international community is concerned at the military's influence. 
  [Goldenberg] The president, as the Constitution states, is 
the supreme head of the Armed Forces. He carries out this duty 
in complete freedom, as he has demonstrated several times since 
1990. I can assure you that in Peru, the commander in chief is 
Fujimori. 
  [Gandolfi] But your predecessor is said to have resigned 
over 
concessions made to the Armed Forces, in particular the decision 
to have the officers involved in the assassination of nine 
university students and a Lima professor tried by a military 
court. Do you feel that you are in a difficult position? 
  [Goldenberg] No, military courts are part of our legal 
system. In the case in point, three powers of state were 
involved: Congress, a sovereign Congress elected by the people, 
which issued a law; the executive, which did not place a veto; 
and finally the judiciary, which is autonomous and independent, 
and which decided the case should be tried by the military 
court. Three powers of state could have changed this decision, 
but none of them did so. For you, does this make the system a 
ward of the military? 
  [Gandolfi] Peru will manage, therefore, to convince the 
United States, which has threatened to block economic aid, that 
Fujimori will respect human rights? 
  [Goldenberg] It is not our problem to convince the United 
States, nor any other country. We are acting in the sole 
interests of Peru. When it comes to human rights, the state 
guarantees these fully. In Peru, there has been a single major 
violator of human rights, and that has been terrorism. The two 
movements which have done everything possible to destroy Peru, 
which are responsible for the death of 27,000 people and for 14 
years of terror. In the state's counteroffensive, there have 
been sporadic cases of violation by the police. But every time 
such a situation is reported, it is investigated, it is judged, 
and the culprits are severely condemned, as in the case which 
you referred to earlier. 
  [Gandolfi] Fujimori has succeeded in capturing Shining Path 
chief Abimael Guzman, but the guerrilla war continues. How will 
you defeat them? 
  [Goldenberg] They are not guerrillas. They are terrorists, 
criminals of the worst kind. In Peru, the witness protection 
program has been a big success. It allows everyone who want to 
stop being a terrorist and to collaborate with the forces of 
justice to reintegrate into society. In recent months, more 
than 4,000 former terrorists have come forward. This is a major 
success. There are still active terrorists, and we are 
combating them with all the weapons which the Constitution 
allows us to use. Massive military and police operations are 
under way in the northeast, in zones dominated by drugs 
trafficking where there is a strong terrorist presence. There 
are at least several hundred of them. 
  [Gandolfi] Guzman has repented and is providing information? 
  [Goldenberg] He is not part of the witness protection 
program. It is not a pardon for someone who has been captured 
and condemned. 
  [Gandolfi] Rumors are going around that one of Fujimori's 
opponents in the 1995 elections will be former UN Secretary 
General Perez de Cuellar. Does this worry you? 
  [Goldenberg] As far as I know, neither de Cuellar, nor 
Fujimori has announced that he is standing. De Cuellar is an 
illustrious Peruvian, who is entitled to put himself forward 
just like many others. 
  [Gandolfi] Would he make a good president? 
  [Goldenberg] No comment. 

