CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Stacy Sullivan: "Albania's Frightened Press </F>
Under Siege"] 
  [Text] Tirana, Albania -- When 25-year-old 
Aleksander Frangaj, editor in chief of the most popular daily 
newspaper in Tirana, left the courthouse in the nation's capital 
in the first week of March, a crowd gathered outside the police 
van that drove him back to Tirana Prison. 
  "Sander! Sander! Sander!" they chanted. 
  Frangaj, who had been in prison for a month awaiting trial 
for exposing state secrets, held up two fingers in a V. This 
victory gesture was often flashed in 1991, during the elections 
that toppled the Communist government and brought the ruling 
Democratic Party to power. But now, instead of a sign of 
allegiance, it was a symbol of ridicule. 
  After communism in Albania fell in 1991, the groundwork for 
a 
free press seemed to take hold. Three years after the Democratic 
Party swept into power, however, journalists complain they are 
once again feeling the symptoms of dictatorship. 
  Last October, the government passed a controversial press 
law 
that imposes high fines on offending journalists. Reporters and 
editors have also been punished under the country's recently 
amended penal code from 1977. Additionally, many journalists 
tell tales of harassment and even beatings after publishing 
critical reports on the government. 
  Frangaj was arrested after a reporter at his newspaper, KOHA 
JONE (OUR TIME), wrote that soldiers would be required to leave 
their weapons in the barracks when off-duty. The information was 
allegedly obtained from a top-secret Ministry of Defense 
document that a ministry official pilfered and released to the 
newspaper. 
  The crowd that gathered after Frangaj's court appearance 
consisted mainly of fellow journalists who had come to express 
their solidarity with the accused and protest the increasing 
pressure being brought to bear on journalists. 
  So far this year, a dozen reports of Albanian journalists 
being arrested, beaten or harassed have surfaced. Six media 
watchdog organizations -- the International Federation of 
Newspaper Publishers, the International Federation of 
Journalists, Reporters sans Frontiers, the Balkan Federation of 
Journalists, the Committee to Protect Journalists and Article 19 
-- have sent protests to Albanian President Sali Berisha against 
the arrests of Frangaj and his reporter, Martin Leka. 
  Frangaj, who was acquitted of the same charge last year 
after 
reporting on tank movements near Albania's northern border with 
Yugoslavia, was found innocent again this time. But the court 
sentenced Leka to 18 months in prison for "collaborating to 
release state secrets," the harshest punishment against a 
journalist since communism fell. 
  The press in Albania is reeling from nearly 50 years of the 
most hardline rule in Europe. 
  Partly as a result of its past, most of Albania's main 
newspapers are mouthpieces of various political parties and are 
filled with propaganda and party polemics. Radio and television 
are still state-controlled. There are many independent papers, 
but they too are politicized and seldom separate opinion from 
fact. 
  Government officials say the press law was necessary to 
regulate a press that, they claim, is slanderous and 
unprofessional. 
  "In the papers I have been married several times and have 
kids, villas and property all over," said Edward Salemi, chair 
of the ruling Democratic Party. He is single and lives in a 
Tirana apartment. 
  Even though the Albanian Helsinki Committee has issued 
protests against the treatment of journalists, assistant 
director Kutim Casko complains about the press as well. 
  "Journalists don't have an awareness for the sacred mission 
they must do," he said. "Instead, they have become the 
politicized victims of party politics. They terrorize people." 
  At the time of passage, the widely contested press law 
provoked a 48-hour strike by many of Albania's leading papers, 
which printed only their mastheads, leaving their pages blank. 
Numerous international organizations lodged protests. 
  Ironically, however, it is the 1977 penal code, which has 
gone largely unchallenged, that has most gravely affected 
journalists. 
  The law, drafted under the late Communist dictator Enver 
Hoxha, was used by officials to arrest Frangaj and Leka. At 
least three others are now under arrest and awaiting trial for 
alleged violations of the law. 
  Illyrian Zhupa, editor in chief of the independent 
opposition 
paper POPULLI PO (PEOPLE'S YES), was arrested for slander 
February 9, after the newspaper ran an investigation of a 
scandal that Zhupa said implicated "several key figures in the 
government." 
  Zhupa, whose trial date has not yet been set, also complains 
that his offices have been broken into and documents have been 
stolen. 
  "It's too early for a free press in Albania," he said. 
  The staff at the newspaper of the main opposition party, the 
Socialists, also complain about the pressure they have come 
under. 
  In January, a worker named Luftetar Matohiti from the 
industrial city of Elbasan wrote a letter to ZERI I POPULLIT 
(THE PEOPLE'S VOICE) criticizing the government and reminding 
President Berisha of the time in the 1920s when a man became a 
national hero for killing an Albanian ruler. This was considered 
an insult to the president, and Matohiti was sentenced to two 
months in Tirana Prison. 
  ZERI I POPULLIT's second-highest editor, Shyqyri Meka, was 
fined $1,000 US for publishing an article that was critical of 
the "upper organs of the state." 
  After his colleagues at KOHA JONE were arrested, Gjergj 
Zefi, 
deputy editor of the ALEANCA (ALLIANCE), wrote an article the 
next day protesting the arrests and calling the government a 
"mafia band." 
  "The government has decided to attack all of its political 
opponents. This speaks of a mentally sick state. That is the 
only way to explain the arrests of the two journalists," he 
wrote February 1. 
  After his article was published, Zefi was placed under city 
arrest for criticizing upper organs of the state. He was allowed 
to travel only from his hometown of Skodra, in northern Albania, 
to his office in Tirana. 
  March 2, just a few days after his colleague Leka was 
sentenced, Zefi was found lying unconscious in the street in 
Skodra, after having been clubbed on the head. Zefi, who is also 
vice chair of the Democratic Alliance (a splinter group of the 
ruling Democratic Party) had written several articles about 
alleged smuggling of oil by local mafia into the former 
Yugoslavia in defiance of the UN embargo. 
  Zefi also organized a meeting of the Democratic Alliance in 
January, after which a gunman, firing into the crowd outside the 
building, killed one party member. No suspect was ever 
apprehended, although Democratic Alliance members claim they 
know who did the shooting. 
  Zefi had been the editor of the now-defunct LAJMETARI, based 
in Skodra. His predecessor at the paper was clubbed in the same 
way last year after reporting on the alleged mafia, and has 
since left the country. 
  Arben Imami, general secretary of the Democratic Alliance, 
said journalists at his paper are scared. 
  "We have survived so much -- you know, 50 years of a 
totalitarian regime, a press law, a penal code -- but now there 
is a real danger of being eliminated, physically eliminated, and 
law-enforcement authorities are not doing anything about it," 
said Imami. "We are facing a new period." 
  The attacks on Zefi and his predecessor are not the only 
cases of violence against journalists. 
  Last month, while trying to verify the charges against 
Frangaj and Leka, a journalist who reports for the cable 
television station WTN was punched in the face at the Tirana 
Prosecutor's Office. 
  In early January, a knife-wielding visitor lunged at Apollo 
Bace, a journalist for the independent paper DITA INFORMACION 
(INFORMATION OF THE DAY), when Bace answered his door. Bace said 
a cigarette lighter in his pocket saved him from injury. 
  That attack followed several articles Bace wrote about the 
Church of Scientology, as well as an article criticizing 
President Berisha DITA INFORMACION had run several days earlier. 
  The Association of Professional Journalists in Albania has 
lodged a protest against the attempted stabbing, and has 
appealed to the Albanian authorities to apprehend and punish 
those who attack journalists. 
  Albania's press law, based on a German press law from 
Rhineland-Westphalia, imposes fines on journalists ranging from 
$1,000 to $8,000 US. In a conference organized by the 
Friedrich-Ebert Foundation, which prepared the law for Albania, 
German media lawyer Kurt Braun defended the law, but said the 
fines were excessive in a country where journalists earn on 
average the equivalent of $40 US per month. 
  Braun also questioned whether Albania had the appropriate 
legal framework to ensure proper implementation of the law. 
  "This law leaves much open to misapplication," he said, 
pointing out Albania's lack of a constitution and its 
inexperienced judiciary. 
  Marcus Jaeger, a European Community lawyer, said, "If the 
Albanian public could be sure there would be competent judges, 
there would be much less fear of new laws." 
  "I think it's better to have a bad press law than to be 
without a law," said Beqir Skreli, a reporter at ZERI I 
POPULLIT. "The problem is putting this law into practice. 
We...are fined, while the journalists at RILINDJA DEMOKRATIKE 
[DEMOCRATIC REBIRTH, the daily of the ruling Democratic Party] 
haven't been cited for a single case," he said. "The knife has 
two edges. So far it has shown only one -- against the 
opposition." 

