BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondents Vladimir Gondusov and Mikhail </F>
Shevtsov] 
  [Text] Moscow June 14 TASS -- The president of Russia on 
Tuesday took a decision on the start of a peacekeeping operation 
in Abkhazia, Colonel-General Georgiy Kondratyev, Russian deputy 
minister of defence, has announced at a press conference. 
Kondratyev has been entrusted with an overall supervision of an 
operation to bring a peacekeeping force to the region of 
Georgian- Abkhazian conflict. 
  A peacekeeping force is to be brought to the region under an 
an agreement, signed in Moscow on may 14, this year, by the 
conflicting sides with the mediation of Russia. Georgia's and 
Abkhazia's final consent to the introduction of a peacekeeping 
force was obtained as a result of Russian Defence Minister Pavel 
Grachev's recent trip to the Transcaucasus. 
  Kondratyev explained that in line with President Yeltsin's 
decree on Russia's participation in a peacekeeping operation in 
the area of the Georgian-Abkhazian conflict, the mission will be 
started by Russian units stationed in the Transcaucasus, the 
345th Paratroop Regiment, deployed at Gudauta, in particular. 
The regiment had participated in peacekeeping activities 
earlier. The start of a peacekeeping operation at such a 
strength does not require consent from the Federation Council. 
  The Russian Defence Ministry's operations group, led by 
General Kondratyev, is due to leave Moscow for the conflict area 
on Tuesday with a view to reconnoitering at the places of the 
introduction of a peace-making force and command post locations. 
  The peacemaking operation will be carried out in three 
stages. Combat engineer units are to be brought in during the 
first stage from June 15 to 21 for mine-clearing operations. 
Communications and control facilities are to be airlifted to 
set up the peacekeeping force's main headquarters in Sukhumi. 
  Headquarters are also to be set up in the western zone at 
Gali and in the eastern one in Zugdidi. At the same time one 
battalion from the regiment and two from the Russian group of 
forces in the Transcaucasus will be getting ready to enter the 
conflict zone on a peace-making mission. They are to enter the 
disengagement area from June 16 to 19 and take up combat 
positions at the disengagement line on both banks of Inguri 
river. 
  The second stage will begin after the presidential decree to 
this effect is considered at a Federation Council meeting which 
is scheduled for June 21. Those present are expected to be 
addressed by Russian Defence Minister Pavel Grachev as President 
Yeltsin's special representative in charge of the consideration 
of the matter. 
  In the event of a positive decision by the parliament, the 
Russian peace-making force in the region will be reinforced by 
two battalions from among the peacekeeping divisions from 
Leningrad and Volga military districts. The peacekeeping 
operation in Abkhazia is to be arranged in full by June 26. It 
will be carried out in close coordination and cooperation with 
the U.N. mission in Georgia. 
  On the whole, the peacekeeping operation is to involve about 
2,500 Russian peacekeepers on a purely voluntary basis and with 
contracts signed. 
  Kondratyev pointed out that the Defence Ministry's 
peacekeeping operation must be financed as a separate item 
outside the military budget. Last year the Defence Ministry 
spent 26,000 million roubles for peacekeeping actions. 
  The deployment of a peacekeeping force in Abkhazia, 
according 
to preliminary estimates, will cost Russia 2,000 million roubles. 
  Kondratyev did not rule it out that officers from Ukraine, 
Belarus, and Kazakhstan may join the peacekeeping operation at 
the second stage as observers. 

