BFN 

  [Text] Hanoi VNA April 24 -- An agreement on goods in 
transit was signed here yesterday afternoon between Vietnamese 
Trade Minister Le Van Triet and Lao Trade Minister Sompadit 
Volasan who is on a working visit to Vietnam. 
  The signing ceremony was witnessed by representatives of the 
governmental office, Foreign Ministry, the General Department of 
Customs and other concerned offices. 
  Later Trade Minister Sompadit Volasan and his party was 
received by Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet. 
  At the reception, Premier Vo Van Kiet said that the 
Vietnam-Lao traditional friendship and cooperation which was 
built and fostered by the two parties, governments and peoples 
and have overcome the trial of time would be further 
consolidated with the new forms and more effectiveness in 
conformity with the interests of the people of each country and 
the trend of peace, stability, cooperation and development in 
the region. He affirmed that Vietnam would do their best to 
made the friendship and cooperation and the agreements signed 
become a vivid reality for the prosperity of each country thus 
actively contributing to build a Southeast Asian region of 
peace, stability and development. 
  For his part, Minister Sompadit Volasan expressed his 
satisfaction at the results of the trade cooperation between the 
two countries in the past time. He highly valued the 
achievements recorded by the Vietnamese people in its 
construction of economic renovation and affirmed that the 
agreement on goods in transit which has just signed and other 
agreements signed formerly between the two countries would be an 
important basis to open a new period of the close fraternal 
relation between Vietnam and Laos. 
  While in Vietnam, the delegation led by Minister Sompadit 
Volasan met with a delegation of the Vietnamese Trade Ministry 
led by Minister Le Van Triet. The two sides reviewed the 
situation of implementation of the trade agreement of the 
1991-1995 period and the amendment agreement on trade for the 
period of 1991-1995 signed on June 30, 1993 in Vientiane. Host 
and guest also discussed measures to strongly promote the trade 
cooperation between the two countries in the fields of 
production of household goods, protection of household goods 
production in each country and inquirements [as received] of 
markets. 

