Germany 

<F P=102>   AU0504195094 Hamburg WELT AM SONNTAG in German 3 Apr 94 p 26 </F>
<F P=103> AU0504195094 </F>
<F P=104>  Hamburg WELT AM SONNTAG </F>
<F P=105>  German </F>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Jochen Kummer report: "`Struggle for Freedom' of Kurds in </F>
Germany -- With Heroin and Blackmail"] 
  [Excerpts] Last week, scenes from Kurdish terrorism on 
German soil dominated television screens and front pages. The 
prohibited terrorist Workers Party of Kurdistan [PKK] turned 
Germany into a theater-of-war: It controlled nationwide highway 
blockades and attacked policemen, it laid fires, and had fanatic 
compatriots set themselves on fire. [passage omitted] 
  As the Duesseldorf Higher Regional Court realized, since 
1984 
Germany has been the European focus of the PKK, which has its 
headquarters in Cologne. About 500,000 Kurds have meanwhile 
settled in Europe -- 400,000 of them in Germany. About 40,000 
Kurds in Germany are classified as PKK sympathizers and about 
400 as members. They entered the country legally as respectable 
workers with Turkish citizenship, they came as asylum-seekers, 
or they were illegally taken to Germany. [passage omitted] 
  The commander and secretary general of the Marxist-Leninist 
"cadre party," PKK, is Abdullah Ocalan. According to findings 
of the German intelligence services, he is lodging, together 
with his wirepullers, in Damascus in Syria. 
  "The orders for attacks and demonstrations come from 
abroad," 
Ernst Uhrlau, president of the Hamburg Office for the Protection 
of the Constitution, says. A "Central Committee" of the PKK in 
Europe coordinates the activities; the so-called area committees 
are subordinate to it. 
  By Ocalan's order, the PKK organized six large-scale waves 
of 
attack in Western Europe and Germany in 1992 and 1993. About 
600 perpetrators participated in about 50 attacks in 
European-wide violent actions on 24 June 1993. On 4 November, 
about 60 violent attacks of Kurds on Turkish institutions and 
private houses were ascertained all over the FRG. 
  As a result, the PKK was banned in Germany. The 35 Kurdish 
groups that were prohibited at the same time as the PKK have 
disguised themselves with harmless names, but, according to 
findings of Germany security authorities, they are in reality 
arms of the PKK octopus that are registered as 
"suborganizations" in the local registers of associations, such 
as: "Kurdistan Art and Cultural Center in Nuremberg and 
surroundings -- registered association," "Kurdish Women's Center 
in Leverkusen -- registered association," "International 
Friendship in Munich -- registered association," "Center of 
Media Culture in Hagen -- registered association," "Mesopotamian 
Cultural Association in Bremen -- registered association," 
"Kurdish Cultural Center in Hamburg and surroundings -- 
registered association," etcetera. 
  A Kurd called Kani Yilomaz, who acts on the direction of 
Ocalan, acts as the spokesman of the PKK leadership in Europe. 
It was he who propagated the PKK's preparedness to discontinue 
its violent actions in Germany this week. 
  Apparently, the Kurds' drug deals in Germany yield enormous 
profits for the war against Turkey. [passage omitted] 
  The second special field of the Kurds is the extortion of 
protection money. With this method, they cash donations for 
their political struggle. 
  In Berlin, where 50,000 Kurds live, Kurds and Turks are so 
active in this field that the police established a special 
investigation group in March 1993. Hans-Ulrich Voss, managing 
director of the Berlin Criminal Investigation Department, 
described how the collection of donations works: "First" PKK 
representative approach businessmen "very politely" and ask for 
"donations" for the struggle for liberation. DM200 are 
requested from owners of kebab stalls, while owners of travel 
agencies and insurance agencies have to pay up to DM20,000 -- 
these amounts are often requested every month. 
  Turkish private persons are visited at home late at night. 
Their donations are calculated according to the size of the 
Turkish family's car. Hesitant victims are brought to heel by 
referring to one's knowledge of the children's route to school. 
  The shop windows of those Turks who still refuse to pay are 
broken or incendiary devices are thrown into the shops. With 
such attacks, the Kurds achieve a welcome additional effect: 
According to initial appearances, German right-wing extremists 
are initially blamed for such attacks. 
  However, the Berlin special investigation group discovered: 
"Collectors of donations" from Turkey, not -- as originally 
assumed -- xenophobic Germans, are responsible for many 
destroyed shop windows and arson attacks in Berlin-Kreuzberg. 
  According to Berlin experiences, only about 10 percent of 
the 
victims admit that they have been blackmailed; 10 percent claim 
that they pay "voluntary donations." The rest, 80 percent, are 
silent. 
  In Frankfurt on Main, the Municipal Office granted licenses 
for 2,500 "public houses and restaurants" -- 40 percent of which 
were to foreigners. Frankfurt senior detective officer Roland 
Ullmann estimates that "there is hardly anybody who does not 
pay." 

