BFN 

  [Text] Harare May 30 SAPA -- Zimbabwe's main political 
opposition, the Forum Party, appeared to be in a state of 
confusion on Monday as its leader dismissed weekend reports that 
he had been expelled and promised that party rebels who had 
tried to get rid of him would themselves be thrown out. 
  Former Chief Justice Enoch Dumbutshena, 75, was quoted in 
Monday's issue of the independent daily GAZETTE as saying: 
"They cannot, absolutely cannot, expel me." He said the 
weekend's developments were unconstitutional and the work of "a 
bunch of malcontents". 
  Reports on Sunday said 300 Forum Party (FPZ) members 
representing five provinces met on Saturday and passed a vote of 
no confidence in Mr Dumbutshena. They were responding to claims 
that he was arrogant, a tribalist and incompetent. 
  Themba Dlodlo, a university lecturer and FPZ secretary 
general, was appointed acting-president. "I can only be 
expelled by the National Executive...or by a meeting of the 
congress of the party," Mr Dumbutshena said. "I take no notice 
of their action and the Forum Party will carry on as usual. If 
they want to form their own party they are free to do so." 
  A meeting of the party executive would be called which would 
"certainly see more expulsions". 
  The GAZETTE also quoted senior party officials as saying 
they 
fully backed Mr Dumbutshena, but observers said the new division 
was certain to damage the party's credibility and deeply 
disillusion supporters. 
  When it was launched two years ago the FPZ was seen as the 
only choice among several opposition parties split by bickering 
capable of mounting a serious challenge to President Robert 
Mugabe's ruling ZANU [Zimbabwe African National Union] (PF 
[Patriotic Front]) party in elections next year. 
  The FPZ recently alarmed the ruling party in its first test 
of public opinion by running in two local government 
by-elections. It took one seat in the western city of Bulawayo 
because ZANU (PF) failed to put forward a candidate, and another 
in Harare where its candidate trounced a well-known ZANU (PF) 
figure. 
  But the party has been repeatedly torn by squabbling, most 
seriously in March when 22 officials were expelled for holding a 
public demonstration against Mr Dumbutshena. 

