BFN 

  [Text] A news conference has been held at Iqamat el-Mithaq 
[near Algiers]. It was attended by the national pressmen and 
chaired by His Highness Shaykh Sabah al-Ahmad al-Sabah, the 
Kuwaiti foreign minister. 
  The Shaykh began his news conference by praising the 
positive 
development in Kuwait's relations with Algeria and the rest of 
fraternal countries before dwelling on the possibility of the 
state of Kuwait giving financial assistance. He also dealt with 
the oil issue and the possibility of reducing Kuwait's quota in 
a bid to rally the oil prices. 
  [Begin al-Sabah recording] I hope that this news conference 
will be an opportunity to explain Kuwait's stance on the main 
issues of common interest to our two countries and to the Arab 
and Islamic nation. I would like at the beginning to praise the 
constructive talks which I have had in Algeria. I was honored 
to have a meeting with His Excellency President Liamine Zeroual, 
the head of state, to whom I conveyed a message from his 
brother, His Highness Shaykh Jabir al-Ahmad al-Jabir, the amir 
of the state of Kuwait, on our two countries' relations as well 
as other topics of common interest. 
  I would like here to praise the atmosphere which prevailed 
during our meeting. It was an atmosphere of brotherhood, 
clarity, and frankness. I have acquainted myself at this 
meeting with the Algerian officials' viewpoints on current 
issues. 
  I also had talks with Mr. Mokdad Sifi, the head of 
government, and with my brother and colleague Mohamed Salah 
Dembri, the minister of foreign affairs. I explained at these 
talks Kuwait's principled stance on a number of current issues. 
I would like to point out here that I was glad to find 
understanding of and appreciation for our position and our 
efforts. I would like to reiterate my gratitude and 
appreciation for Algeria and my brother the foreign minister and 
his aides for providing an atmosphere of amity for our visit and 
for their warm hospitality. [end recording] 

