Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vagram Stepanyan: "Armenia Will Have a </F>
Full-Strength Army by Spring"] 
  [Text] [words illegible] successfully. This statement was 
heard at a briefing of state minister of the Republic of Armenia 
and Chairman of the Republic Call-Up Commission Vazgen 
Sarkisyan, at which Major General Artur 
Arutyunyan, chief of the republic's Main Mobilization 
Administration, was also present. 
  According to the state minister's report, the republic 
call-up has been fulfilled by 100.16 percent. These are not 
simply figures--a real person stands behind each of them. For 
the first time in the past four years the call-up was organized 
and conducted on the exterritorial principle, i.e., none of the 
conscripts, not counting individual exceptions, will serve in 
the places of his immediate [words illegible]. However, as he 
noted, there are still regions where the call-up periods have 
been extended for good reason. In particular, in Gyumr and 
Vanadzora it will go on for another 10 days in order to bring 
the lacking 511 and 244 persons respectively up to strength. 
  Thus, speaking in military fashion, the task has been 
accomplished. However, the task is not limited only to a 
quantitative aspect. It also has a qualitative side which must 
be made sure of by thorough, daily, and goal-directed work in 
the units. Otherwise,the successfully completed first stage of 
the campaign will prove to be a useless waste of effort, time, 
and funds. Actually, it is already possible today to talk about 
the existence of the institution of the organizing of national 
armed forces. Now the matter depends on the improvement of their 
military training and combat readiness, as well as on the 
establishment of general army discipline. Incidentally, 
according to Mr. Sarkisyan, a number of commanders of different 
ranks have been relieved of duty for non-fulfillment of these 
requirements as well as for inability to create conditions for 
the psychological "assimilation" of new recruits and lack of 
skill in investigating their non-regulation (neustavnyy) 
interrelations, which has led to certain accidents. Some 147 
deserters are already on the run from this recruitment through 
the fault of such apologies for commanders. Criminal punishments 
will be applied to them. 
  Basically the call-up went without hindrance and in an 
organized manner. 
  At the same time, as the briefing participants noted, there 
are still parents who suffer from the "defect" of protecting 
beloved children from service in the army in every way possible. 
Such psychology is characteristic also of refugees from 
Azerbaijan and the Yezids who consitute a national minority in 
the republic. Nevertheless, the assurance was expressed that as 
a result of the appropriate actions this situation will be set 
right by spring, i.e., by the next call-up. 
  Answering the journalists' questions, the speakers reported 
about the intention to conduct regular inspections in military 
units which will make it possible to eliminate shortcomings and 
to resolve various problems. Today, in the words of the state 
minister, they have no problems with food and clothing. There 
exists only a problem with barracks. The fact is that in the 
southern part of the republic there are none at all and one must 
build new ones or [word illegible] old ones. [word illegible] 
important task one can [word illegible], the latest news [word 
illegible] also in the creation of higher educational 
institutions which will permit replenishment of the ranks of the 
national army with highly educated and skilled officers. 
  In conclusion Mr. Sarkisyan expressed gratitude to all the 
services that participated in the call-up campaign: the rayon 
military commisariats, internal affairs organs, military police 
personnel, and local authorities as well as the journalists 
present for assistance in the successful completion of the 
autumn call-up. 

