BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Dr. Sa'ib 'Urayqat, head of the </F>
Palestinian delegation to the Washington peace talks and head of 
the Elections Committee in the self-rule areas, in Jericho, by 
Shihatah Abu-al-Majd, in Cairo; date not given; from the 
"Dialogue From Afar" Program -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Abu-al-Majd] What progress is there in the transfer 
of authority to you and what are the tasks of the Palestinian 
police in the coming stage? 
  ['Urayqat] The Israeli forces' withdrawal from the Jericho 
area and the transfer of authority in all spheres were completed 
in the past two days. The Israeli flag in Jericho was lowered 
after 27 years of occupation and the Israeli Army withdrew, but 
they left behind a devastated infrastructure. For example, the 
hospital in Jericho on 14 May 1994 was worse than it was on the 
eve of 5 June 1967. 
  Naturally the Palestinian national (?security) forces' 
entry, 
deployment in the whole Jericho area, and assumption of their 
duties swiftly and in an orderly manner had a great impact on 
the people but the feeling that we have just begun still 
persists. 
  The road ahead is long, difficult, and full of obstacles. As 
a Palestinian, I can say that the planting season has begun but 
it is not yet the harvest season. This is the time to tighten 
our belts, a time for continuous hard work to achieve the dream 
of construction, especially as the normal progress in our areas 
has actually ceased since 1967. 
  [Abu-al-Majd] What are your most important worries as a 
Palestinian National Authority member on Palestinian land? 
  ['Urayqat] The most important issue is the establishment of 
the infrastructure in the liberated areas, in the areas from 
which the Israeli forces have withdrawn. The infrastructure 
includes water, electricity, health, education, agriculture, 
industry, trade, communications, and roads. As I said, the 
normal progress and growth of these sectors in 1967, so our 
tasks are very difficult. 
  As you know, many countries around the world have extended 
aid, and studies were conducted (?by) the Palestinian economic 
team and the World Bank. We hope that the implementation of the 
scheduled projects, especially in the main sectors, such as 
health, education, water, and general health, will begin 
tomorrow if not today. 
  Regarding other issues facing us, construction is not easy; 
it is a complex, lengthy process. The Palestinian leadership, 
led by brother 'Abu-'Ammar [Yasir 'Arafat] has adopted strategic 
resolutions. A date for nationwide general elections and local 
government elections has been set. 
  [Abu-al-Majd] When will these elections be held? 
  ['Urayqat] The scheduled date is 15 October. As you know, a 
comprehensive accord was signed last week with the EC countries, 
which have become our partners in the election process. 
Preparations for these elections have been under way since 
November, when President 'Arafat issued instructions to form a 
committee for local government and elections. We are now 
working on all levels, including the spheres of law, training, 
preparations, and organization, in order to see that elections 
are held in no later than 15 October. But we must say that 
elections, whether on the national or local levels, cannot be 
held without the completion of the Israeli forces' redeployment 
in the entire West Bank. This means that the talks that began 
in Washington some time ago should continue and that the 
transitional phase agreement should be fully implemented as soon 
as possible so that we will be able to hold elections. 
  [Abu-al-Majd] And when will these forces be redeployed from 
the West Bank? 
  ['Urayqat] As I said, according to the Oslo Accord, this was 
set for 13 July, but the Gaza-Jericho negotiations broke down, 
which might automatically mean a delay in implementing the 
accord. Hence, the elections date was changed from 15 July 
[date as heard] to 15 October and we hope the Israeli forces 
will complete their redeployment and withdrawal from populated 
areas in the West Bank no later than the beginning of October. 
  [Abu-al-Majd] When will 'Abu-'Ammar arrive in Jericho? 
  ['Urayqat] Personally I don't know. I heard yesterday he 
will 
return on 15 June, but I say that brother 'Abu-'Ammar must come 
as soon as possible. 'Abu-'Ammar is used to suffering and 
building from scratch, and he must be with us to join us in 
laying the cornerstone of the infrastructure required for all 
our institutions. We now say that the time for work has begun, 
although the journey began (?yesterday). As I said, this is a 
season for planting, not harvesting, and we are all required to 
unite and pool our resources, efforts, capabilities, and 
expertise because we now have a chance to lay the foundation for 
a Palestinian society for the next century. 
  [Abu-al-Majd] You are demanding unity of the Palestinian 
fold 
at this important, crucial stage of the Palestinian people's 
history. Naturally there some in the self-rule areas who oppose 
the ongoing peace process. How will the Palestinian police and 
the Palestinian security forces deal with these groups? 
  ['Urayqat] First, the Palestinian opposition comprises the 
best of our social-conscious Palestinian people. Their 
opposition is not to the peace but to the conditions of the 
peace process. It is their natural right to express their views 
and say whatever they want. They are an inseparable part of the 
Palestinian people. The Palestinian police will act according 
to the law; all people will be under this law, without 
distinction. As for public and individual freedoms and freedom 
of expression, they will be protected by Palestinian law, by the 
Palestinian authority, by Palestinian society. 
  Our political life is built on several bases, represented by 
genuine democracy, political pluralism, and freedom of 
expression. 

