Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Excerpts] In recent months the Navy has captured more than 
40 insurgents and some 160 drug traffickers as they were 
transporting drugs from Aguaytia towards the area of 
Constitucion and Palcazu, an area of increasing drug trafficking. 
  This according to Rear Admiral Juan Luis Podesta Llosa, 
chief 
of the Politico-Military Command of the Ucayali Front, who also 
said that the most turbulent area in his region of 
responsibility is the province of Padre Abad (Aguaytia). 
  He said that the province is still experiencing much 
violence 
because of the relationship that exists between drug traffickers 
and terrorists. 
  "The insurgents are seeking funding sources for their 
criminal activities and they have found them in Padre Abad," 
Podesta said. 
  He said he is not able to advance toward full pacification 
in 
the region as fast as he would like, but that in recent months 
they had captured more than 40 terrorists, of which some 18 had 
expressed a wish to avail themselves of the Law on Repentance. 
  He explained that the drug collection points near Aguaytia 
had been moved to Palcazu, with the result that the "rattling" 
(method of carrying drugs in small quantities to the collection 
centers) has a broader road to travel between the coca area of 
Aguaytia and Palcazu. The Navy was able to capture about 160 
drug traffickers there in the last six months, according to 
Podesta. 
  "This," he said, "is why drug trafficking operations have 
been moved to Palcazu, a region for which the Ucayali Front does 
not have responsibility." 
  He said that in the case of Ucayali, all the leaders of the 
terrorist groups have been identified thanks to various 
repentants. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  Most Important Capture </H5>
  Podesta Llosa considers the capture of Leo Humberto Pena 
Gutierrez, formerly of San Marco University, and known as 
comrade Marcos, Gramdzo, or Felix, the most important capture 
this year because he was a leader in two SL [Shining Path] 
companies, "Adversity" and "Daring," while at the same time 
being the military deputy of the "Nippon" battalion, all of 
which are active in the Ucayali area. He was also one of the 
leadership in the Huallaga Regional Committee of the Shining 
Path. 
  With that capture and the capture of comrade Atilio--Roman 
Rengifo Murrieta--only eight of the Navy's most wanted 
terrorists remain at large in the Ucayali region. 

