BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Bureaucratic Diplomacy That Goes Against the </F>
People's Common Sense"] 
  [Text] Politics operates in the realm of common sense. 
Politics that strays greatly from the people's common sense not 
only invites their distrust but is unable to gain their support. 
What makes us venture to discuss the elements of such politics 
is that we feel appalled and even angered at the lack of common 
sense and crudeness of the recent Ministry of Foreign Affairs' 
[MOFA] view concerning the use of nuclear weapons (the written 
statement to the International Court of Justice [ICJ]). 
  The written statement came with the World Health 
Organization's (WHO) request that the ICJ pass judgment on 
whether or not the use of nuclear weapons violates international 
law. MOFA officials put together a written statement in the 
name of the Japanese Government. Initially, the written 
statement declared: "One cannot go so far as to say that the 
use of nuclear weapons, under positive international law, 
violates the law." At the same time, according to the 
statement, "Given the immense destructive and killing power of 
nuclear weapons, their use cannot be said to be in accord with 
the spirit of humanitarianism that is the basis of international 
law." 
  MOFA was to have submitted the written statement secretly to 
the ICJ, but its contents were revealed by media reports. A 
stream of doubt and criticism then poured forth from Diet and 
cabinet meetings. It was therefore decided to put forth the 
statement after removing the preceding half, i.e. "one cannot 
say that the use of nuclear weapons violates the law." MOFA was 
reportedly reluctant at first to remove part of the statement 
but, taking into account the situation in the Diet on the eve of 
passing the budget as well as the sentiment of the prime 
minister and others, the ministry yielded. 
  Even though MOFA officials took the purely legal 
interpretation that "one cannot say that the use of nuclear 
weapons, under international law, violates the law," one cannot 
deny, as Prime Minister Hata said, that the statement has given 
"the impression to the average person that (the Japanese 
Government) recognizes (the use of nuclear weapons)." Even in 
the absence of a treaty banning the use of nuclear weapons 
themselves, however, humanitarianism and pacifism have appeared 
in the background of various international laws, beginning with 
the UN Charter. MOFA's written statement itself alludes to 
this. Considering this, it is clear that nuclear weapons -- 
which in an instant inflict large-scale and indiscriminate 
casualties on citizens as well as destruction of the earth's 
living creatures, mankind included, and cultural treasures -- 
are contrary to the spirit of international law. 
  Moreover, Japan has experienced the bombing of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki, and successive governments have made the non-nuclear 
policy our national policy. Given the feelings of the Japanese 
people, of course, and the government's position, we have the 
obligation to make clear both at home and abroad at every 
opportunity that the use of nuclear weapons violates the spirit 
of an international law based on humanity. We have to say that 
MOFA's recent view is an arbitrary one which, trampling on the 
common sense rooted in the people's many historical experiences, 
is hard to excuse. 
  Since the birth of the coalition government, there has been 
at times a lack of leadership and a growing number of cases in 
which important policies have been determined through 
bureaucratic guidance. With such cases as the plutonium issue 
and North Korea's suspected nuclear program, concerns are 
growing abroad over Japan's possibly acquiring nuclear weapons. 
In light of this, MOFA's action is to be criticized not only 
for lacking in diplomatic sense but for greatly harming the 
national interest. 

