CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aleksandr Batygin: "Those Who Attempted To Set </F>
Up the Urals Republic Found Themselves... Ahead of the 
Locomotive"] 
  [Text] Today the State Duma will hold parliamentary 
hearings on "The Idea of the Urals Republic and the Prospect of 
Developing Parliamentarism in Russia." The initiative belongs to 
the Committee on Federation Affairs and Regional Policy, and was 
supported by the Duma Council. The greatest persistence in 
preparation of the hearings, however, was shown by Larisa 
Mishustina, a deputy of the parliament's lower chamber and a 
former chairman of the Glasnost Commission of the Sverdlovsk 
Oblast Soviet. 
  It would probably be appropriate to recall the chronology of 
events surrounding the sensational proclamation of the Urals 
Republic, which was characterized by the center as an onslaught 
of separatism on the regional front and produced the harshest 
measures in response. 
  A year ago, on 25 April, an opinion poll was conducted among 
Sverdlovsk Oblast residents. Of almost 2.3 million persons, 83.4 
percent replied positively to the question "Do you agree that by 
its powers the oblast should be equated to a Russian Federation 
component republic?" On 1 July of the same year the oblast 
soviet adopted the decision "On the Status of Sverdlovsk Oblast" 
whereby it proclaimed itself a Russian Federation constituent 
republic. On 27 October the session adopted a Urals Republic 
constitution and set elections to its legislative assembly for 
21 December. The elections did not take place, since on 9 
November 1993 the president of the Russian Federation issued a 
decree "On Suspending the Activities of the Sverdlovsk Oblast 
Soviet of People's Deputies." On top of that, the head of the 
oblast administration, Eduard Rossel--the ideologist of the 
creation of the Urals Republic--was dismissed from his job. 
  Thus the "mutiny on the ship" was put down; the attempt to 
raise the oblast's status, treated as a manifestation of 
separatism, was nipped in a bud. The new national constitution 
does not mention the self-proclaimed republic among Russian 
Federation components--it still lists Sverdlovsk Oblast. And 
now--the somewhat unexpected parliamentary hearings; a return to 
an apparently closed topic. Are Urals residents persisting? 
  A conversation in the Duma with "troublemaker" Larisa 
Mishustina on the eve of the hearings brought some clarity. 
  "Accusations of separatism are absolutely groundless," she 
dismissed my doubts resolutely. "There was never a question of 
seceding from Russia, of our own money and customs. There is 
nothing in the idea of the Urals Republic that could worry 
Moscow. We were acting within the framework of the constitution." 
  Turbulent processes, which lately have shaken regions 
formerly removed from big politics, have brought Russia to a 
qualitatively new state. Decentralization of power is taking 
place; republics, krays, oblasts, and autonomies gradually are 
coming into their own--into the political arena as independent 
subjects. The regions want not only to decide their fate but 
also to actively build the future state. This desire is 
especially great among those who are traditionally called the 
backbone of the Fatherland. 
  There are thousands of problems emerging today in the 
Russian 
provinces which need immediate resolution at the local level, 
without waiting for vague and belated "directives" from the 
center. Quality management is only possible today at the level 
of the regions, where direct feedback exists between the local 
authorities and the population. 
  "Naturally at the same time economic and political equality 
of the regions in their relations with the center should be 
ensured in real terms and codified in the law," says L. 
Mishustina. 
  The proclamation of the Urals Republic, in the opinion of my 
interlocutor, did not pursue the goal of attaining privileges 
only for its region. 
  "We were fighting," says the deputy, "for the constitutional 
rights of all regions of this level--those possessing a powerful 
economic potential, developed internal market, and democratic 
traditions. Our experience in proclaiming a republic should not 
be forgotten--it is a contribution to the development of the 
idea of federalism in Russia: Sooner or later this issue would 
have come up in another part of the country. Yes, we were in a 
hurry; that is why we moved like a battering ram and we are glad 
that the constitution proclaimed the principle of equality of 
subjects. Now we can, without staging a political showdown, 
calmly sort out the relations between the center and the 
regions, analyze the pluses and minuses. Until the law on the 
status of Federation components is adopted. But the task of the 
parliament is not only to adopt laws, but also to enlighten, to 
try first to understand what is happening on the local level, 
how federal relations are developing... By the way, we do not 
intend to limit ourselves to parliamentary hearings; we will 
hold seminars, conferences." 
  In their new capacity as Duma deputies, Larisa Mishustina 
and 
her colleagues now have the opportunity to look at the problem 
from a broader viewpoint, from different angles. Academics, 
members of the president's administration and his advisers, and 
jurists have been invited to today's hearings; Eduard Rossel 
will be there, too. By the way, when L. Mishustina and 
like-minded colleagues from Russia's Choice met with the 
president recently, she asked Boris Nikolayevich to reconsider 
the fate of the former head of Sverdlovsk Oblast administration, 
who in her opinion had been unfairly dismissed from his job. 
Yeltsin did not make a decision on the spot, but took the 
deputy's request into consideration. 
  Some time in the past our president said: "Federalism is a 
territorial form of democracy." It appears that the time has 
come to implement this thesis in practice. 
  ...In the Duma I also had a conversation with an expert--V. 
Yevdokimov, a chief scientific associate of the Institute of 
Philosophy and Law of the Urals Branch of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences. 
  "The Sverdlovsk Oblast administration," says Vyacheslav 
Borisovich, "could unilaterally announce: Beginning such and 
such a date we will reduce our transfers to the state budget. 
Instead of pressure, they chose a different way--to do 
everything legally to find a legitimate way to solve the problem 
of achieving the economic equality of Federation components. I 
will repeat what Larisa Pavlovna said: There is no separatism in 
the proclamation of the Urals Republic--only the principle of 
economic equality." 
  In our opinion, the political-legal experiment of Sverdlovsk 
residents--proclaiming themselves a republic--despite being 
unconstitutional at the time, deserves attention. It was 
rejected in the best traditions of the command-administrative 
system, without talking things out with the authors, without a 
serious study of the proposal's substance. I have a persistent 
feeling that in the strategic development of ideas of federalism 
the Urals people ran "ahead of the locomotive" and therefore 
found themselves ruthlessly crushed by the state system of 
administration, which is only beginning to acquire new features. 
  Nevertheless, the question remains open. In a sense, I think 
that regardless of its outcome, today's conversation in the Duma 
on the role and status of regions on the basis of the Urals 
example should be marked as a credit to our young parliament. 

