BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Franco Foresta Martin: "Cold Fusion Siena-Style </F>
Gives Fresh Hope"] 
  [Text] Siena -- We have become used to press conferences 
where the extraordinary results of cold fusion experiments are 
announced. In the golden epoch of Fleischmann and Pons, that is 
exactly four years ago, we went to half a dozen of them. 
However, after the commotion about the results, the enthusiasm 
invariably died down. Other researchers did not manage to 
reproduce the experiment, or it gave contradictory results. The 
acclaimed excess of energy from a modest test-tube remained a 
laboratory riddle. 
  Professors Sergio Focardi, Roberto Habel, and Francesco 
Piantelli, and University of Siena Rector Luigi Berlinguer, know 
this story very well. Therefore, at the opening of the press 
conference they called in the public hall of the university at 
12 o'clock yesterday, they gave correct and well-balanced 
information to the journalists. 
  "We are carrying out research that we judge to be of great 
scientific importance," they said. "However, we are reluctant 
to talk about cold fusion and of eventual applications, because 
we do not want to arouse a commotion. If we have been forced 
into convening journalists, it is because the news started to 
circulate in an uncontrolled way after the publication of our 
work in NUOVO CIMENTO (the magazine published by the Italian 
Society of Physics). It is our duty to report exactly what we 
are doing." 
<H5>  Chance Discovery </H5>
  The maximum caution then, but between the folds of the cold 
technical report there is also great enthusiasm about the 
results. We heard from the spokesman for the trio of 
researchers, Prof. Sergio Focardi, a physicist from Bologna 
University, how this new scientific adventure on the most 
controversial and mysterious energy research front began and how 
it is developing. 
  It all started by chance in 1989 when Prof. Francesco 
Piantelli, a biophysicist from Siena University, measured an 
anomalous production of heat while he was carrying out studies 
on samples of organic material (gangliosides) in a hydrogen 
atmosphere on a nickel support. 
  He talked about this with his colleagues, Focardi from 
Bologna and Habel from Cagliari, and together they agreed that 
the possible cause of the thermal anomaly was a reaction between 
the nickel and hydrogen. In fact, under certain physical 
conditions, nickel is a metal that is extremely voracious for 
light gases. Various experiments were carried out, and finally, 
in 1992, the three singled out an "optimal" configuration from 
the point of view of reproducibility and stability. 
  "It is an aluminum cylinder, five centimeters in diameter 
and 
10 centimeters high, that contains a nickel bar and a platinum 
resistance. This small cell is filled with hydrogen at half an 
atmosphere and then sealed. The resistance is switched on. 
When the system reaches 170 degrees it starts to exhibit the 
excess of heat that, even without further introduction of 
hydrogen, lasts for months and months. The power produced is 
about 50W. The energy balance is extraordinarily favorable; the 
little cell releases double the energy put into it." 
<H5>  Nickel and Hydrogen </H5>
  What happens? A hypothesis that has been put forward with a 
thousand cautions by the three researchers, is that, at a 
temperature of 170 degrees, nickel charges itself with hydrogen 
(in the sense that the hydrogen atoms penetrate into its crystal 
lattice). Here, for a physical reason that is still to be 
understood completely, a fusion reaction would take place 
between the nuclei of the atoms of hydrogen (protons) and the 
nuclei of the atoms of heavy hydrogen (protons and neutrons) 
that are naturally contained in hydrogen, in the proportion of 
1:6,000. The reaction would give rise to helium-3 and 
electromagnetic energy that would be absorbed by the crystal 
lattice. The analysis of the hydrogen contained in a small cell 
that has functioned for weeks, was carried out using a mass 
spectrometer and reveals, in fact, a net peak of helium-3. The 
examination of the nickel bar shows that the microscopic 
structure of the metal appears to be devastated. 
  The three researchers stress that ordinary chemistry 
certainly cannot explain all this, starting from the energy 
developed that should be 3,000 times less than that which has 
been observed. "At this point it is our duty to continue the 
research, increasing it and extending it to other laboratories," 
announced Rector Berlinguer. He also referred to the noteworthy 
interest that has been shown in the experiment by Italian 
industry and, in particular, to a proposal of collaboration put 
forward by Fiat. The adventure continues. 

