Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Mitsubishi Motors has spent years developing 
internal combustion engines and electric vehicles in the pursuit 
of technology that achieves a balance among energy savings, 
cleanliness, and mobility. With the ESR, we have developed an 
advanced experimental research vehicle that, through the 
implementation of revolutionary new technology, realizes a 
superior combination of these factors. 
  The ESR uses a high-efficiency compact electric generating 
plant -- composed of batteries, an electric motor, an engine, 
and an electricity generator. This system gives the ESR an 
energy consumption rate superior to either combustion engines or 
conventional electric vehicles. 
  ESR employs the Series Hybrid Electric system, with which 
the 
vehicle is always driven by an electric motor. The Series Hybrid 
Electric system is known as the most efficient among hybrid 
systems with two driving modes. The first is battery-operated 
mode, in which batteries supply energy to an electric motor. 
This driving mode has zero emissions. Second is hybrid mode, in 
which an on-board electric generating plant supplies power to 
the electric motor when the batteries run low. 
<H5>  Energy Savings &amp; Clean Air </H5>
  -- A compact, lightweight AC induction motor and motor 
controllers assure highly efficient motor operation with 
excellent response at low and high speeds. 
  -- The 1.5-litre petrol engine developed specifically for 
generating electricity incorporates the optimized inner cylinder 
gas flow technology that is the base of our MVV (Mitsubishi 
Vertical Vortex) engine. This water-cooled in-line 4-cylinder 
engine has a high expansion-ratio cycle. The engine runs at a 
constant speed to achieve both high efficiency and the cleanest 
possible exhaust emissions. 
  -- A highly-efficient, light, and compact AC generator has 
been adopted. Also, a turbo generator has been employed to 
convert exhaust energy into electricity. 
  -- An energy regenerative brake system is available to 
convert the vehicle's kinetic energy into electricity to charge 
the batteries. In addition, solar cells are built into the roof 
to generate electricity from sunlight. 
  -- Assisted by Mitsubishi Motors' proprietary navigation 
system, ESR will always operate in Battery-operated Mode in 
areas near hospitals and schools to achieve zero exhaust 
emissions. The electrically heated catalyst system achieves 
ultra-low exhaust emissions even in Hybrid Mode. 

<H5>    Mobility </H5>
  -- The adoption of highly efficient alkaline batteries, a 
lightweight body design, and reduction of drag and rolling 
resistance make a range of 500 km or more possible in 
Battery-operated Mode. (At 40 km/h constant speed on a flat 
road) Hybrid Mode provides a far greater driving range. 
  -- ESR is equipped with a fuzzy logic control automatic 
transmission with three driving positions. 
<H5>  Recycling </H5>
  -- During the development of ESR, we gave consideration to 
the recovery of used batteries, while also researching possible 
ways of recycling the motor and controller. 

