Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Science and Technology Agency and the Power 
Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation have decided on 
a plan to build the world's first "monobloc reactor" that will 
have fuel reprocessing facilities and fuel assembly facilities 
incorporated into a single unit. This prototype reactor 
(Reactor No. 2) will be a successor to the plutonium-fueled 
"Monju" prototype fast breeder reactor which is due to become 
fully operational in April. 
  In a monobloc reactor, nuclear materials can be handled 
internally and need not be brought out of the facility. Hence, 
there is no need to worry about the possibility of plutonium 
being robbed by terrorist groups. It will be an advanced atomic 
reactor which burns fuel with highly toxic transuranic elements 
mixed in it, thus reducing the danger of producing nuclear dust. 
The plan will be included in the government's "long-term plan 
on nuclear power development and utilization" which will be 
finalized this summer, and it envisages putting the reactor into 
operation around 2015. The system is expected to contribute to 
soothing foreign countries' concerns about Japan's use of 
plutonium. 
  Normally, plutonium is generated when uranium is burnt in a 
nuclear reactor, and highly enriched plutonium can be used on 
the warheads of nuclear missiles. Plutonium reprocessing and 
fuel processing, as such, are considered very delicate 
technologies, and even peaceful-purpose facilities are subject 
to strict inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency 
and de facto surveillance by the United States. 
  Japan, which believes the fast breeder reactor (FBR) should 
be the country's main nuclear reactor in the forthcoming 
century, needs to make its plans transparent so it will not be 
suspected of having nuclear weapon designs -- as the DPRK (North 
Korea) currently is. Japan must also develop an FBR system which 
cannot be converted for use in making nuclear arms. 
  A monobloc reactor will not require plutonium shipments, 
except for one initial load. Therefore, the system is expected 
to easily gain the understanding of the Clinton government which 
wants to enforce the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
  In addition, the system has the great merit of being able to 
burn the transuranic elements, which can emanate strong 
radioactivity for hundreds to tens of thousands of years, in the 
reactor. When the atomic nuclei of these elements are bombarded 
by neutrons, the elements change into substances of shorter 
radioactivity or lower radioactivity, which means they can be 
easily stored underground. 
  Above all, the system precludes the possibility of pure 
plutonium--which is generated in the reprocessing process at 
present--being used in making arms. 
  In order to incorporate this new technology into a prototype 
reactor, the Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development 
Corporation intends to change--in the future--the core of the 
"Monju" reactor, which will become operational in April. Going 
into the 21st century, the corporation will also launch related 
research and development projects including one to study the 
burning of transuranic elements. 
  On the first prototype reactor to be built in the early 21st 
century, the electric power industry has already decided that it 
should be of a "top-entry" [word published in English] type 
wherein coolants are poured in from the top of the reactor. 

