BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ukrainian Defense Minister Vitaliy Radetskyy </F>
by Anatoliy Smetanin; place and date not given: "Army General 
Vitaliy Radetskyy, Ukrainian Defense Minister: `Political Party 
Will Not Influence the Army'"] 
  [Text] Now, in the period of their formation, Ukraine's 
Armed Forces, as is known, are having a hard time; servicemen 
and their burdens are not to be envied. One could feel this 
during our interview with Vitaliy Radetskyy, who honestly and 
openly answered all of our questions. 
  [Smetanin] You served in the Soviet Army for 30 years; now 
you are head of the Ukrainian Armed Forces. You know all the 
problems facing the Army. Is it within our power to change 
something for the better today? To what extent does this depend 
on the Defense Ministry? 
  [Radetskyy] To a great extent, and I will tell you why. 
Today, hollering for Ukraine is not enough; patriotic boasting 
is not enough. You surely have noticed: As time goes by, 
officers, or generals, are leaving the Defense Ministry one 
after another -- either being transferred or fired. We will 
continue operating this way, because I need professionals, not 
bawlers. I have conducted an analysis. What have I discovered? 
Here is a typical example for you: An officer was an alcoholic 
in the Soviet Army, and still continues to drink and loaf. I 
asked him what is the reason? I did it earlier, he says, 
because I disliked the system, the politics. And what is the 
reason now? There is no reason. This is the first example. 
  Second, in the uproar and euphoria of independence, the 
central apparatus has been filled by many nonprofessionals. 
Well, imagine a high-ranking official making miscalculations by 
hundreds of equipment units! He is ignorant of many things, 
this is his tragedy, therefore one has to get rid of such a man, 
to transfer him to another post where he can work effectively. 
  Third, by now, we have a lot of young commanders of 
companies, battalions, regiments, divisions, and corps. They 
should be trained. Who has to do it, if not Defense Ministry 
officers and generals? It is an inconspicuous job that requires 
much knowledge, experience, and effort. It is much easier, you 
must admit, to come to a regiment, blame its commander for 
idleness, set a term for eliminating shortcomings, and go away. 
  No, we are not going to support such a style! One must 
change the men's psychology, such parasitical disposition. Thus 
far, some have not understood that they are serving under the 
Defense Ministry of the [independent] country, not in a district 
staff under the watchful eye of the Moscow General Staff which 
can send its messengers with a prompting word, a helping hand, 
and a receipt for every occurrence in life. No, by now, we have 
to think by ourselves; say, a chief of the chemical troops has 
to think for himself how to train and assign cadres, how to deal 
with state orders for equipment, armaments, and materials, how 
to anticipate the development of his troops... All this must by 
done by ourselves alone, and one has to face up to hard work and 
education! 
  [Smetanin] But we have some reform under way in the Army. 
  [Radetskyy] That is not the word. Reform, especially in 
military structures, includes in itself the reducing, expanding, 
and reequipping of troops. Just look at what we have inherited 
from the former USSR Armed Forces: three districts, part of an 
antiaircraft defense grouping and the Air Force, and various 
command posts. It is disgraceful to speak of reform in this 
case. We need a concrete plan to construct the Armed Forces. 
By now, such a plan has been worked out, and is being examined 
by the commander in chief. However, the most painful question 
surely regards state restrictions on military means. The Army 
has survived for almost two years without a budget. As for now, 
we have received only part of the means that we need to maintain 
combat readiness. If we are not going to beef up science, the 
military-industrial complex, and the Army, then, no matter what 
we call it -- reform or a plan to construct the Armed Forces -- 
we will get nowhere. I understand that the state gives what it 
can, but one should pay more attention to servicemen nonetheless. 
  [Smetanin] I fully agree with you, because, as you surely 
know, 67 percent of officers are dissatisfied with their 
service, 87 percent are annoyed over their low earnings, and 85 
percent are disappointed with their poor standard of living... 
What can you say to them? 
  [Radetskyy] Yes, there are many discontented servicemen, and 
this percentage is an indicator of their discontent. However, 
it is also true that everything has its origin in the economic 
situation of our state. We have 70,000 families without housing 
right now! Where do I see a way out of this? We have adopted a 
resolution and will attempt to implement it: The construction 
of housing should be obligingly conducted with the building of 
family hostels, not those with a common hall and kitchen, but 
two-room apartments with furniture, in which principally the 
commanders of platoons or companies will be lodged. Right now, 
we are reevaluating rents, in order to increase them, surely. 
  The paying of salaries is a very acute problem today. An 
officer, as you know, lives from paycheck to paycheck, but if 
the salary is paid -- as happens now -- in installments and 
irregularly, this causes great tension. We are trying 
everything to avoid such a situation, but sometimes this is 
beyond our control. What is within our control? We are now 
pressing for paying per diem, if an officer is on duty; those 
with class specializations will be paid remuneration. The 
Cabinet of Ministers has received our proposal to acknowledge a 
free transportation pass for officers, at least for junior ones. 
We will also reexamine the payment of so-called "field 
commissions" ["polevyye"]. 
  [Smetanin] I have the impression that professionals, 
instead of joining our Army, leave Ukraine, in particular, for 
Russia, and you try to order them to stay, especially pilots. 
Can you shed some light on this situation? 
  [Radetskyy] Let us begin with the statement that any such 
cases involve specific individuals and concrete circumstances, 
therefore one should approach each case objectively. The 
question concerns young officers, Ukrainian citizens, not those 
who are going to leave, say, for Russia or somewhere else. 
Unless we keep our young officers today, we will forfeit the 
future of the Army. 
  Now, about those who want to leave. I did foresee this 
problem as early as 1992, when the oath of allegiance was first 
administered. I appealed to not hurry its administration on a 
mass scale. Now we have to pay for that. With regard to 
officers who choose to serve in other CIS countries, nothing and 
no one should stand in their way. One must thank them for their 
service and help them leave in a civilized manner. 
  [Smetanin] You call it "in a civilized manner," when an 
officer after 20 years of service with housing here is not 
permitted to leave without resigning his apartment, which, of 
course, leaves him without a roof over his head at his new place 
of service. Where is he to live with his family in such a case? 
  [Radetskyy] If such a thing happens, then, I will repeat 
myself, one has to approach it with steps appropriate to each 
individual case. I know about several such examples: Before 
leaving, fictitious divorces are settled, then a "betrayed" 
wife, having privatized her apartment, sells it for hard 
currency and drives off happily to be with her husband. Such 
things also happen, therefore, one must approach this carefully, 
but without offensive suspicion. 
  [Smetanin] During his time in office, your predecessor kept 
his office open to representatives of political parties, while 
making statements that the Army should be outside of politics... 
  [Radetskyy] When I received my nomination for the post of 
defense minister, representatives of many parties rushed to me 
with proposals on cooperation. However, I stated firmly that 
the Army will not be influenced by them. There is a law stating 
that we should be impartial and outside politics. The task of 
the Army is to defend the state from external enemies, not from 
internal ones; I will respect all political forces, but they 
should not exercise any influence here. The Armed Forces are 
ruled by state ideology. 
  [Smetanin] ...And it should be implemented by the workers of 
education as well as social and psychological services. 
However, it seems to me that these workers -- except for the 
replacing of Soviet marshals' portraits with those of Ukrainian 
hetmans -- have no other reasons to be proud of themselves. 
  [Radetskyy] What is more, upon examining the work of the 
social and psychological service, I did see that they have not 
accomplished anything during their two years of existence: They 
did not draft a single project, a single blueprint on their 
topics; they did not publish one single handbook! When I 
gathered them at a department meeting and asked whether anyone 
had conducted a training seminar with soldiers, it turned out 
that nobody had! Here you have a state ideology. It is not 
enough to shout about the immediate introduction of the state 
language in the Army. With regard to language, this issue does 
not need to be forced -- people will gradually adopt the 
language by themselves, without any pressure. 
  Besides, ideological work in the Army requires means; it 
requires a book on the history of Ukrainian statehood, which is 
inseparably linked with Russia's history. We were together 
during so many centuries, and not all of that past was so bad, 
as it is sometimes presented nowadays. I will add that we need 
to change people's attitudes toward our army and service in the 
Armed Forces, as well as the preparation of young people for 
military service. Let us take such a phenomenon as desertion 
from military units -- this happens even though we no longer 
have a transpolar region, a Karabakh, or even a Chukotka today... 
  I cannot understand this dividing servicemen into Russians, 
Ukrainians, Jews, and Tatars... If a serviceman is a Ukrainian 
citizen, if he is an able man and can be useful in the Army, he 
should be promoted and supported in every way possible. 
  [Smetanin] This can also be said, by the way, about the 
Soviet Army, criticized justly and unjustly nowadays, in which a 
native of Cherkassy Oblast, Ukrainian Vitaliy Radetskiy, has 
risen from the ranks to be commander of Odessa Military 
District. Later, he became Ukraine's defense minister. 

