Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on drug seizures and arrests related to drug trafficking 
monitored through 10 February. 
<H5>  Argentina </H5>
  Agents of the Salta Police Dangerous Drug Department on 3 
February arrested three Salta residents linked to Bolivian 
trafficking and seized 7 kg of cocaine. They operated in the 
cities of Yacuiba, Bolivia, in Salvador Mazza and Salta, 
Argentina. (Buenos Aires CLARIN in Spanish 5 Feb 94 p 28) 
<H5>  Bolivia </H5>
  Narcotics Education Campaign Director Laura Edith Baldivieso 
has reported that there are 22,000 regular drug consumers in 
Bolivia, and that 150,000 people use drugs. (La Paz PRESENCIA in 
Spanish 24 Jan Section 2 p 1) 
  The Social Defense Secretariat reported that agents of the 
Special Antinarcotics Force have seized 6,800 liters of 
acetone--the most ever confiscated in one year--and arrested 
Ercelio Calle Villegas, Raul Almanza Morales, Teodosio Soliz 
Vilca, and Hector Rodriguez Chipana. It was discovered in two 
trucks coming from Arica, Chile at a La Paz Customs checkpoint. 
On 24 January the Mobile Police Unit for Rural Areas, Umopar, 
seized a truck carrying 59 kg of cocaine sulfate 10 km from 
Bulo-Bulo, in Chapare. Bolivian citizen Julia Mercado Mercado 
was arrested at the Viru-Viru airport in Santa Cruz as she was 
about to board a plane for Buenos Aires. She had 80 capsules 
containing 860 grams of cocaine hydrochloride in her stomach. 
UMOPAR personnel destroyed nearly eight cocaine laboratories, 
16 maceration pits, 270 liters of diesel, 5 kg of lime, six 
liters of ammonia, 18 liters of kerosene, and other controlled 
substances. The forces seized a station wagon carrying 40 kg of 
cocaine at a checkpoint on the highway to Cochabamba. (Santa 
Cruz de la Sierra EL MUNDO in Spanish 28 Jan 94 National Section 
p 4) 
<H5>  Brazil </H5>
  The Federal Narcotics Council collected 18.64 million real 
cruzeiros in the first auction of assets seized from 
traffickers. The 36 lots which were auctioned today in Brasilia 
included cars, motorbikes, calculators, cassette players, and 
junk. National Narcotics Secretary Isaac Barreto Ribeiro said 
the money collected is equal to that allocated to the Fund for 
Prevention, Rehabilitation, and Combat Against Drugs in 1993. 
Ribeiro said a second auction will soon be held in Sao Paulo, 
where several planes are waiting to be sold. He added that 
nearly 3,000 pieces of property have been seized from drug 
traffickers nationwide. (Brasilia Voz do Brasil Network in 
Portuguese 2100 GMT 9 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Chile </H5>
  Investigative Police agents have placed two alleged 
traffickers at the disposal of the Santiago Criminal Court on 
charges of supplying drugs to discotheques in Santiago. They 
are Hugo Barria, 45, and Marco Maluje, 36, [who] were arrested 
with 2 kg of cocaine hydrochloride. (Santiago EL MERCURIO in 
Spanish 23 Jan 94 pp C1-C4) 
  Carabineros personnel have arrested David Choque Gomez, 21, 
and seized 5 kg of cocaine paste at the Port of Iquique. Choque 
bought the drugs from a Bolivian citizen in the township of 
Colchane. (Santiago EL MERCURIO in Spanish 24 Jan 94 p C9) 
  Antinarcotics agents have arrested Peruvian citizens Carmen 
Ramos, 33, and Luisa Luna, 37, and seized 2 kg of cocaine 
hydrochloride at the Chacalluta border pass as they were about 
to hand over the drugs to traffickers in Arica. Carabineros 
personnel have arrested nine cocaine traffickers in Santiago, 
Valparaiso, and Chuquicamata. They are Raul Baldomero Castro, 
19, Catalina Angelica Ramos, Jorge Emilio Ovando, Luis Cristian 
Ramos, Francisco Antonio Marchant, 27, Ana Maria Soiza, Juan 
Alejandro Medina, Graciela Gioconda Valenzuela, and a 17-year 
old minor. (Santiago LA TERCERA DE LA HORA in Spanish 25 Jan 94 
p 30) 
  Agents of the Fourth Region Antinarcotics Department have 
arrested Jorge Santander who was in possession of 1.6 kg of 
cocaine. He is the alleged financier of a gang of traffickers 
who operate in La Serena and Coquimbo. (Santiago LA TERCERA DE 
LA HORA in Spanish 28 Jan 94 p 38) 
  On 28 January the Arica Antinarcotics Brigade seized 52 kg 
of 
cocaine paste, one of the biggest seizures in the past few 
years, and arrested Bolivians David Encina, 32, and Jose Encina, 
25, who introduced the drug to Chile apparently from the 
bordering township of Sajama, Cochabamba. They were about to 
deliver the drug in Arica. (Santiago EL MERCURIO in Spanish 30 
Jan 94 p C1, C10) 
  Carabineros officers of Graneros today found a plantation of 
some 3,000 plants of marijuana concealed in a corn plantation in 
the Sixth Region. Carabineros confiscated an estimated 10 tons 
of marijuana. The brothers Francisco and Jose Pinilla, who 
rented the land where the plantation was found, were arrested. 
(Santiago Television Nacional de Chile Imagen Internacional in 
Spanish 0000 GMT 4 Feb 94) 
  Carabineros personnel have discovered three marijuana 
plantations in the Fifth, Sixth and Seven Regions. Carabineros 
Captain Enrique Haedo said 2,000 marijuana plants were 
discovered in San Clemente and the total weight of the crop was 
5 metric tons. Carabineros also found 95 marijuana plants, 
approximately 150 kg, in San Antonio. The (Chimbarongo) 
Carabineros detachment in San Fernando seize 50 marijuana 
plants. During the first seizure farmers Jose Domingo Amigo 
Moya,44, Juan Enrique Ramirez Avendano, 27, and Oscar Antonio 
Avendano Bustos, 46, were arrested and arraigned. According to 
Capt. Haedo a good portion of the marijuana seized was intended 
for the Vina del Mar Music Festival. (Santiago Radio Cooperativa 
Network in Spanish 2200 GMT 9 Feb 94) 
  Members of the Carabineros OS-7 antinarcotics brigade have 
discovered a plantation of 700 plants of marijuana, some 130 to 
230 centimeters tall, in Quebrada de Amolana, near Ovalle, in 
the Fourth Region. It has been determined that the plantation, 
almost ready to be harvested, weighs approximately 1.6 metric 
tons. (Santiago Radio Cooperativa in Spanish 1000 GMT 10 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Paraguay </H5>
  Dinar, National Narcotics Directorate, personnel have seized 
1,700 kg of very pure cocaine hydrochloride during a raid of a 
house on Juana de Lara and Lomas Valentina Streets in the city 
of Pedro Juan Caballero. They arrested the owner of the house 
Dora Gonzalez de Fernandez, 42, and her husband Fortunato 
Fernandez Amaral. Two cartels have appeared in Amambay 
Department and it is feared that traffickers will engage in 
bloody attacks this year. The Special Commando Force has begun 
a clean-up operation in San Pedro and Amambay Departments, where 
it destroyed six hectares of marijuana plants near the Aguaray 
River and 11 hectares in the Yby Yu district owned by drug 
trafficker Sebastian Spencer, who was arrested in Sao Paulo. 
(Asuncion NOTICIAS in Spanish 4 Feb 94 p 50) 
  Two weeks ago the Dinar Regional Office No. 1, with the 
cooperation of the Special Commando Forces, began "Operation Hot 
Summer" in San Pedro Department. The operation resulted in the 
discovery of a clandestine airstrip at Carumbe farm, which 
belongs to Elio Morinigo Gimenez, 70 km south of San Pedro city. 
So far the antinarcotics forces have destroyed 21 marijuana 
plantations, which represent some 70 tonnes of marijuana, and 
seized two vehicles, revolvers, rifles, and shotguns. The 
presence of antinarcotics forces has stopped two cartels from 
struggling for the monopoly of the traffic of cocaine, ether, 
acetone, and weapons between this city and Santa Cruz, Bolivia. 
It is believed that the powerful traffickers are building a 
bunker to prevent the cocaine from being detected by satellite. 
(Asuncion NOTICIAS in Spanish 10 Feb 94 pp 46-47) 
<H5>  Uruguay </H5>
  The Montevideo police arrested an Uruguayan drug trafficker 
and are searching for three Bolivian criminals who are members 
of the so-called "Bolivian link" that transports cocaine from 
Uruguay to Europe. The detainee received 0.5 kg of cocaine for 
each shipment he managed to send to Europe. He has already been 
arrested in Germany and in the United States on charges of 
murder and drug trafficking. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 1730 GMT 5 
Feb 94) 

