Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] YOMIURI SHIMBUN conducted a nationwide public 
opinion poll on 19-20 March to determine the trend in public 
support for Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's administration. 
The results showed the Hosokawa cabinet's approval rating 
decreased 2.9 percent from last month, down to 55.1 percent. 
This was a decrease for the second consecutive month, with the 
cabinet marking its worst support rating. 
  Of the respondents, 34 percent expressed disapproval of the 
cabinet, up 4.5 percent over last month. Regarding policies 
they disapproved of, 48 percent of the respondents cited "rice 
and other farm policies," a surge of approximately 20-percent 
over last month. This indicates that the people's complaints 
regarding the rice shortage have gushed out. 
  The latest cabinet approval rating is still high in 
comparison to those of previous cabinets. The Hosokawa 
administration, which faces difficult problems, such as the 
growing discord in the ruling coalition alliance and the 
considerable delay in deliberations over the draft national 
budget for the next fiscal year, has relied heavily on its high 
approval rating to keep itself going. However, the continued 
decline seems to have dealt it a serious blow. 
  Regarding reasons for supporting the cabinet, 53 percent of 
the respondents expressed passive approval of the cabinet, 
saying "it is at least better than previous cabinets." However, 
the percent decreased as regards other reasons for supporting 
the cabinet. For example, only 18 percent said "the cabinet's 
political stance can be rated highly." 
  Ratings for the administration's policies also decreased in 
nearly all areas. For example, 34 percent of the respondents 
said they highly rated the cabinet as regards "political reform 
and political ethics." 
  As for reasons for not supporting the cabinet, 21 percent of 
the respondents said "it has accomplished nothing noteworthy," a 
marked 6-percent increase over last month. 
  As for policies disapproved of by the respondents, "rice and 
other farm policies" topped of the list, with 48 percent of the 
respondents citing it. This was followed by "economic and price 
policies" at 44 percent, and a "tax system policy" at 33 
percent. The disapproval rating for "rice and other farm 
policies" increased by 19 percent over last month. This is an 
indication of strong public disapproval over the government's 
mishandling of the rice shortage issue. 

