Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["The Key Facts of the Elections" -- EL TIEMPO headline] </F>
  [Text] After analyzing the results of the 13 March 
elections, the following data appears to be most relevant: 
  Absenteeism prevailed. On this occasion it reached the 
alarming figure of 70 percent. 
  There was a strong surge of independent movements, 
especially 
the Christians, thanks to a lack of unity and discipline among 
the traditional parties. 
  The 19 April Movement-Democratic Alliance [AD M-19], which 
was the "star" [vedette] of the 1991 elections, was the big 
loser, because it was left with no seats in Congress. 
  These are some of the most interesting aspects of the 
parliamentary elections after analyzing all the data. 
  EL TIEMPO presents a summary of the most interesting points 
of the 13 March elections. The parliamentary map could suffer 
slight changes next week as soon as the general vote count 
concludes. 
<H5>  Apathy </H5>
  The country had not registered such abstention levels in the 
past 15 years. 
  Little more than 5 million out of 17 million Colombians 
qualified to vote actually voted. 
  The negligent attitude shown by the voters contributed, to a 
great extent, to the generalized debacle of dozens of 
candidates, many of whom have ample experience. 
  Paired with this trend, "political bosses" lost weight and 
electoral density. 
  Galanism suffered a collapse. Its Senate representation is 
limited to the seat of Narino leader Parmenio Cuellar. 
  Veteran leaders of this political force, such as Rafael 
Amador, Maria Cristina Ocampo, Mauricio Guzman, and Arturo 
Sarabia Better, were left out. 
  Liberalism also lost important figures in Congress such as 
Orlando Vasquez Velasquez and failed to have elected new and 
outstanding persons such as Juan Lozano, former private 
secretary of Luis Carlos Galan. 
  One of the highest abstention rates was registered in Santa 
Fe de Bogota -- 75 percent. The capital city district elected 
representatives with only 8,000 votes. 
<H5>  Strength of the Minorities </H5>
  In contrast to the collapse of the AD M-19, which until 
prior 
to the elections was defined as the first great minority, the 
Christian movement registered a surprising rise. 
  The Christian Movement, C-4 [expansion unknown], Lay 
Movement 
for Colombia, and National Christian Party secured three 
senators with heavy voting. They are currently disputing a 
fourth seat. It will all depend on the result of the recount of 
votes garnered by Ponco Renteria and Claudia Rodriguez de 
Castellano. 
  We must stress that women have progressively won greater 
participation in the Legislative Branch. They won the seats for 
six senators and 18 representatives. They only had one senator 
in the dissolved 1990 Congress. 
  Santa Fe de Bogota registered the highest female 
representation. Six women were elected to the 18 seats at the 
Chamber of Representatives. 
  It is also interesting to note what happened at the 
coffee-producing axis [eje cafetero], Caldas, Quindio, and 
Risaralda, where three women were elected to the 11 seats at the 
Chamber of Representatives. 
  In contrast, Antioquia Department elected no woman. 
<H5>  Classic Majorities </H5>
  The Liberal Party consolidated its majority at the Senate 
and 
garnered 1,731,753 votes. The Conservative Party, including all 
its currents, garnered 759,057 votes. 
  Liberalism expanded its representation at the Senate. It won 
57 seats in 1991 and 59 in this election. 
  Theoretically speaking, Conservatism increased from 22 to 31 
senators. This figure includes those elected from the New 
Democratic Force, which also has leaders of Liberal origin and 
the National Salvation Movement. 
<H5>  Leftist Downfall </H5>
  Other movements that originated from the peace agreements, 
along with the AD M-19, which certain analysts define as the 
center left, were among the casualties. 
  The Patriotic Union (UP) and Hope, Peace, and Liberty (EPL) 
lost representation in the Chamber of Representatives. For 
example, they lost all representatives in Antioquia Department. 
The same was true in Arauca. 
  Nevertheless, the Communist Party managed to have Manuel 
Cepeda Vargas elected senator with heavy voting. 
  The MOIR [Independent Workers Revolutionary Movement] also 
managed to have Jorge Santos elected to the higher chamber. 

