BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 2 (XINHUA) -- China published a white 
paper on the "situation of Chinese women" here today, pleading 
renewed efforts to further improve both living and working 
conditions of the female population which is playing an 
increasingly important role in China's state affairs. 
  The white paper, issued by the Information Office of the 
State Council of the People's Republic of China, consists of a 
foreword and eight chapters. 
  Through facts and figures, the 20,000-word-plus report 
reviewed the historic liberation of Chinese women in the course 
of the new democratic revolution and the socialist revolution 
under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, as well as 
their status and role under the socialist system. 
  According to the white paper, the Chinese women have 
achieved 
truly historic advances toward the goal of "equality, 
development and peace" over the past 45 years, especially in the 
15 years since the introduction of reform and opening to the 
outside world. 
  "This great forward march is an important component of the 
progressive cause of women worldwide; it is also an important 
part of the progress China has made in human rights," it notes. 
  China is a developing country. Owing to the constraints of 
social development and the influence of old concepts, the 
condition of Chinese women is "still not satisfactory", as there 
exist various difficulties and resistance which have prevented 
the full realization for equal rights to women with respect to 
their participation in political and government affairs, 
employment, access to education, as well as marriage and family, 
the white paper admits. 
  "The Chinese Government is making every effort to develop 
the 
economy, strengthen the legal system, eradicate all backward 
ideas of discriminating against and looking down on women and 
promote equal rights for men and women in all spheres of social 
life as stipulated in Chinese law," the report says, adding that 
this will speed the realization of the various development goals 
of the Nairobi strategies in China before the end of this 
century. 
  A leading official from the information office of the State 
Council said the white paper was published with the aim to 
enabling the international community to acquire a better 
understanding of women's conditions in China, host to the fourth 
world conference on women. 
  He said that China is actively preparing for the conference 
on women, which is to be held in Beijing in September 1995. 

