Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by C. Raja Mohan: "U.S. Secretary May Help Break </F>
Trade Barriers"] 
  [Text] Washington, Feb. 2--The U.S. Commerce Secretary, Mr. 
Ron Brown, is likely to visit India later this year. At a 
meeting here yesterday with Mr. Brown, the Indian Ambassador, 
Mr. Siddhartha Shankar Ray extended the invitation. His 
acceptance is probably an important step in overcoming the 
current political obstacles to the Indo-U.S. relationship and 
giving it a new economic and commercial focus. 
  The details of the visit will be worked out in due course. 
The expectations are that it could take place around August. 
When it happens it will be first visit to India by a 
Cabinet-level official from the United States in more than half 
a decade. The absence of sustained high level political and 
economic interaction has been a major impediment to the 
improvement of bilateral relations. 
  Mr. Ron Brown is no ordinary politician. He is the first 
African-American in the United States to hold the post of 
Commerce Secretary. Until now the African-American 
representation in the Cabinet has been symbolic and without 
significance. Mr. Brown may have broken that glass ceiling. 
Before his appointment to the Cabinet in the Clinton 
administration, Mr. Brown headed the Democratic National 
Committee and managed the first successful democratic bid for 
Presidency in 12 years. Although hobbled by some scandals, Mr. 
Brown has brought an unprecedented energy to the department. 
  With the emphasis of the Clinton administration on 
revitalising economic strength, Mr. Brown has successfully 
pushed the Commerce department towards the front and centre of 
economic diplomacy. Insisting that exports are the key to 
American economic growth and its international competitiveness, 
Mr. Brown has given a new weight to the Commerce department in 
the inter-agency wrangles within the Clinton administration on 
export controls. He has helped the department win the battle for 
substantive liberalisation of regulations on exports of such 
dual use technologies as computers and telecommunication 
equipment. 
  Elusive thrust: Despite the proclaimed emphasis of 
the administration on enlarging democracies and free markets, an 
economic thrust to the Indo-U.S. relationship had remained 
elusive. The South Asia Bureau in the State department had 
focussed on a mechanical application of the slogans of human 
rights and non-proliferation, besides a futile but activist 
diplomacy on Kashmir in its approach to India. The agenda only 
helped derail the relationship. 
  Though enthusiasm was lacking in the State department for 
making mutually beneficial trade the centrepiece of relations, 
there has been a dramatic surge in American commercial interest 
in India. Since the reforms began in 1991, the United States has 
emerged the largest single foreign investor in India, 
contributing more than 40 per cent of total direct foreign 
investment approved. The trade between the two countries has 
dramatically expanded American exports in the first 11 months of 
1993 increased by an impressive 38 per cent, notwithstanding the 
overall stagnation in India's imports. India's exports 
registered a respectable 20 per cent in the same period. The 
annual bilateral trade is approaching the level of $7,000 
millions, with a surplus in favour of India. 
  For all the remarkable movement on the trade front, India 
had 
largely remained out of the American strategic commercial focus, 
at least till recently. Even as political setbacks to the 
relationship mounted in the recent months, there have been signs 
of expanding American economic attention to India. A few days 
ago, the Under-Secretary of Commerce for International Trade, 
Mr. Jeffrey E. Garten, announced that the Commerce department 
was unveiling a new strategy for the "big emerging markets" in 
the developing world. India was identified as one such. Last 
week, speaking to foreign correspondents, Mr. Brown confirmed 
the new approach towards big emerging markets, and declared his 
intent to end the "neglect of India." 
  It is in this context that the Indian embassy here has 
broached the subject of the Commerce Secretary's visit to New 
Delhi. As in the past trade and economic cooperation continue to 
follow the flag. A signal from Washington and New Delhi that the 
two sides are keen on expanding the relationship is likely to 
give a big boost to commercial interaction. Mr. Brown is 
expected to lead a large contingent of businessmen when he 
visits India. Besides the visit, a number of issues of immediate 
interest were discussed at the meeting between Mr. Brown and Mr. 
Ray. 
  India is keen that Washington lift non-tariff barriers to 
software exports to United States, most notably the visa 
restrictions. India is pressing for a long-term renewal of the 
bilateral preferential trading arrangements in areas where it is 
now a strong exporter. New Delhi is eager to ensure that India 
has better access to the American market in technology, and 
wants the United States to bring greater transparency and 
predictability to export control mechanisms. 


