BFN 

<F P=106> [By Zheng Hangsheng (6774 2635 3932): "Thoughts on Mode of </F>
Current Cultural Development"] 
  [Text] At present, China's society is going through a 
period in which the change from a traditional society to a 
modern society is being accelerated. A prominent expression of 
a period in which the society is changing from one type to 
another is that the ideology is lively and various ideas tend to 
be very complicated. This is more so in a period in which the 
change from one type of society into another is being 
accelerated. We can see the ideological tendency of enriching 
and developing the original theories, newly emerged ideological 
tendencies, newly introduced ideological tendencies, the 
ideological tendency of reviving old ideas under new pretenses, 
the tendency of mixing up different kinds of ideas in different 
ways, and so on. Sociology mainly analyzes the ideological and 
cultural phenomena of the society and their influence on the 
operation of the society from the angle of the society's 
mainstream culture, subculture, and counter culture. 
  The phenomena of the three kinds of culture, the mainstream 
culture, subculture, and counter culture, exist in all 
societies. However, different societies handle these three kinds 
of culture differently. If the relationship between these three 
kinds of culture is handled properly, the benign operation and 
coordinated development of the society will be promoted; if it 
is not properly handled, the society will operate in a neutral 
manner, its development will be obscured, and it may even fall 
into malign operation or lopsided development. Therefore, 
correctly handling the relationship between these three kinds of 
culture is very important to any society. This is also true of 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics and is a 
particularly urgent task in China's society today when the 
change from one type of society to another is being accelerated. 
  Mainstream culture is the culture which occupies a 
ruling or guiding position in a society. The mainstream culture 
of China's society today is nothing but the socialist culture 
with Chinese characteristics which takes Marxism as its 
guidance, absorbs the fine cultural heritage of the Chinese 
nation and of the world, and serves the people. The main melody 
of the times in China today comprises socialist theories with 
Chinese characteristics and the party's basic line, patriotism, 
collectivism, and socialism; the creative spirit of the masses 
of the people in reform, opening up, and modernization; and the 
traditional virtues of the Chinese nation. This mainstream 
culture and main melody are where the fundamental values of our 
country lie. They are the sources of the powerful cohesive 
force of our country's society; the spiritual factors ensuring 
and promoting the socialist social and economic development, 
political stability, social progress, and nationality 
consolidation; and they are also an inspiring force ensuring and 
promoting the smooth progress of the change from one type of 
society into the other and the success of modernization. 
Therefore, how to handle the mainstream culture and the main 
melody is not a dispensable or minor issue but, to a certain 
extent, it can be said to be a major issue which has a bearing 
on the future and destiny of our country. A society which has 
lost its mainstream culture is like a body without a backbone 
and is unable to stand a storm. We should soberly understand 
that the diversification in social life and the complicated 
ideological tendencies that follow in the period in which the 
society changes from one type to another provide both an 
opportunity and a challenge to the development of the mainstream 
culture and the main melody. Besides, only the victor of the 
challenge can talk about opportunity. 
  The diversification in social life in the period in which 
the 
society changes from one type into another has also provided 
conditions and motive force for the rise and diversification of 
the subculture. The increasing diversification of the 
subculture is one of the conspicuous characteristics in the 
period in which the change of the society from one type into 
another is accelerated and it is also an unavoidable tendency. 
Generally speaking, the diversification of the subculture is 
conducive to the development and progress of the society and is 
something good. It shows that a society is full of vitality and 
vigor. The participants [cheng dan zhe 2110 2137 5074] in 
subculture are large numbers of colonies and small colonies 
formed as a result of differences in nationality, class, 
stratum, occupation, region, sex, age, and so on. In the period 
in which the society change from one type into another, because 
of the emergence of various new occupations and the intensified 
social division and social mobility, the number of colonies and 
small colonies also increases rapidly. On the one hand, they 
belong to major colonies represented by the mainstream culture 
and are governed by the mainstream culture to varying degrees. 
On the other hand, they also have culture which expresses their 
unique concepts, codes of conduct, and interests, that is, the 
subculture or secondary culture. The overwhelming part of 
the subculture has the same direction as that of the mainstream 
culture and is conducive to safeguarding and improving the 
existing social order. This part of the subculture is not 
excluded, but encouraged and propped up, by the mainstream 
culture and is sometimes absorbed as part of the latter. 
Therefore, generally speaking, if proper guidance is given, 
diversification of the subculture is something good. 
  Under what conditions then is the subculture harmful to the 
mainstream culture? There are mainly two conditions: First, 
the diversification of the subculture has obscured and even 
submerged the mainstream culture; second, the diversification of 
the subculture has induced a malign inflation of the counter 
culture which is harmful to social progress. Therefore, at 
present, when the mainstream culture is being challenged and is 
faced with the increasing diversification of the subculture, it 
is all the more necessary to emphasize the mainstream culture. 
This tells us that in the face of diversification, we cannot 
forget centralization; of course, conversely, in emphasizing 
centralization, we cannot forget diversification either. 
  The diversification of social life in a period in which 
the society is changing from one type to another has, at the 
same time, left space and room for the generation and unchecked 
spreading of counter culture. Counter culture is that 
kind of subculture which negates and deviates from the 
mainstream culture. It is necessary to carry out specific 
analysis on the role of counter culture under different 
historical conditions. In class societies before the 
socialist society, some counter culture which deviated from and 
negated the mainstream culture of the reactionary ruling classes 
might have a certain progressive significance and the counter 
culture of the advanced classes often represented a kind of new 
social culture. Generally speaking, in the socialist society, 
counter culture is harmful to the stability and development of 
the socialist society. Counter culture has different forms and 
the degree of their harmfulness to the society also varies. 
Some do harm to a part or parts of the society while others do 
harm to the overall situation. Of course, we cannot overlook 
either of these. The purpose of negating and deviating from the 
mainstream culture of counter culture which does harm to the 
overall situation is to replace the mainstream culture. 
Challenges to the mainstream culture mainly come from this kind 
of counter culture. 
  According to the abovementioned, during a period in 
which the society is changing from one type to another, 
particularly when this change is accelerated, the question of 
what cultural mode should be practiced is clear. This is to 
say: The mainstream culture must have a clear-cut stand, 
subculture must be diversified, and counter culture must be 
brought under control. Sociological studies in light of 
China's reality have also shown us the same truth. It should be 
pointed out that over quite a long period, "insufficiencies" in 
three aspects have evidently existed in handling the 
relationship between the three kinds of culture, that is, the 
emphasis on the mainstream culture has been insufficient, the 
guidance given to the subculture has been insufficient, and the 
resistance to the counter culture has been insufficient. This 
has brought about negative influences on various aspects of 
social life, on the healthy development of reform and opening 
up, and on the building of spiritual civilization. Therefore, 
it is very important to increase our understanding of, and to 
reach a consensus on, the cultural mode mentioned above. 
  That "the mainstream culture must have a clear-cut 
stand" means the mainstream culture must emphasize its own 
existence and express, in a clear-cut manner, what it advocates, 
permits, restricts, and opposes. It must stand firm before 
major issues of principle and should not disregard what is wrong 
and what violates the law. Things which spread the idea of 
negating party leadership and the socialist system, spread 
decadent ideas and sentiments, disseminate superstition, and 
play up pornography and violence are harmful to our cause and to 
the physical and mental health of the people, particularly 
children and teenagers, and are divorced from the broad masses 
of the people and cannot be allowed to spread unchecked. What 
does it mean by "arming the people with scientific theories, 
guiding them with correct public opinion, portraying people in a 
noble spirit, and encouraging the people with fine works"? 
Viewed from the angle of sociology, this means arming, guiding, 
portraying, and encouraging people with the mainstream culture 
and main melody. The reason why the mainstream culture can play 
such a role is that the overwhelming majority of the members of 
society look for their own standards for judging what is true, 
good, and beautiful and what is false, ugly, and evil from the 
mainstream culture and from various aspects of it, such as 
culture for standardization, culture for appreciation of the 
beautiful, and culture of knowledge. The mainstream culture has 
an extremely great influence on the overwhelming majority of 
members of the society in their formation and selection of their 
fundamental value standards, codes of conduct, and ways of 
thinking. If the mainstream culture of a society is ambiguous 
or weakened, the members of the society will not know what 
course to take and will have a sense of loss and the society 
will be out of control. What does it mean to avoid the tendency 
to stress material progress at the expense of cultural and 
ideological progress? Viewed from the point of sociology, this 
mainly means stressing material progress at the expense of the 
mainstream culture and the main melody. Therefore, these are 
different ways of stressing the mainstream culture and the main 
melody. 
  Regarding the necessity for diversified subculture in the 
mode that "the mainstream culture must have a clear-cut stand, 
the subculture must be diversified, and the counter culture must 
be brought under control," I do not think many people have 
different views and, regarding the necessity of bringing counter 
culture under control, not too many people have different views 
either because the harm to the operation of the society from the 
counter culture in criminal establishments and the pornography 
industry, and among drug traffickers and drug addicts, is known 
to all. However, regarding the necessity for the mainstream 
culture to have a clear-cut stand, the situation is different. 
Views differ greatly regarding whether or not the mainstream 
culture is needed, what kind of mainstream is needed, and 
whether or not the mainstream should have a clear-cut stand. 
Some people have always, consciously or unconsciously, negated 
and obscured our socialist mainstream culture in one way or 
another. 
  For example, one viewpoint holds that "China's official 
ideology" -- actually meaning the mainstream culture in Chinese 
society--is undergoing the process of "fading out or weakening" 
and stresses that the tendency of this process of the "fading 
out or weakening of ideology" has become the "guiding 
development direction" since reform and opening started. 
Obviously, the so-called process of the "fading out or 
weakening of ideology" is in reality another expression of the 
"fading out of the mainstream culture or weakening of the 
mainstream culture." According to this view, the tendency of 
the "fading out or weakening of ideology" will continue to be 
the "guiding development direction." 
  For some time, terms like "weakening" and "fading out of 
ideology" seem to have been in fashion and popular. Advocated 
and publicized by some people at home and abroad, it seems as if 
the process of the "weakening of ideology" and that of the 
"fading out of ideology" in China has become a self-evident fact 
and he who does not agree with it is "rigid." As a matter of 
fact, neither of these conforms with facts or is exact. Some 
people have very inappropriately classed our party's eradicating 
past "leftist" mistakes and shattering the fetters of "taking 
class struggle as the key link" as the "weakening of ideology" 
and have classed the process of shifting social life on to the 
orbit of taking economic construction as the center as the 
"fading out of ideology." In fact, it is quite understandable 
for some Western politicians and propagandists to put it that 
way because they have always held biased and even hostile views 
on the socialist system, the leadership of the CPC, and the four 
cardinal principles stipulated in the Constitution. This is 
determined by the characters of their bourgeois parties and by 
the stand, viewpoints, and methods of the bourgeoisie. What 
makes it difficult to understand is that some people who are 
especially engaged in sociological scientific research have 
followed their example and said similar things. At the very 
least they are not sober-headed. As a matter of fact, all 
countries have their own ideology and there is no country which 
does not have ideology. It is impossible for all ideology to 
"fade out" and the essence of the question is what kind of 
ideology should "fade out." Are countries in which the call for 
the "fading out of ideology" is the loudest not energetically 
and wantonly imposing their own ideology on to other countries 
in the world today? In those countries, the so-called "fading 
out of ideology" was quite hypocritical at the very beginning 
and its aim is to swallow up our ideology and to replace our 
ideology with theirs. The issue is very clear. In our country, 
the so-called "fading out of ideology" simply does not exist. 
The only issue which exists is that of emancipating the mind, 
seeking truth from facts, and eliminating erroneous ideas which 
are not in conformity with the party's basic line. Evidently, 
instead of being an issue of the "fading out of ideology" it is 
precisely an issue of making ideology in China which is guided 
by Marxism, conforms better with reality, and is more 
scientific. Likewise, the so-called "weakening of ideology" 
simply does not exist in China either. The only issue which 
exists is that of adopting various measures to earnestly 
strengthen the ideology in China. After various erroneous ideas 
which do not conform with "one center, two basic points" are 
eliminated, the ideology in China will become more scientific 
and will be strengthened. The resolution by the Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee pointed out that we 
should study Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought, strengthen the 
study on Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics, strengthen the study on philosophy 
and social sciences guided by Marxism, and we should 
energetically advocate, under the condition of a socialist 
market economy, upholding a correct view of life and civilized 
and healthy ways of living and opposing money worship, extreme 
individualism, decadent life-styles, and so on. Where can one 
find any traces of the "fading out of ideology" or the 
"weakening of ideology" here? Therefore, such a viewpoint, which 
is apparently right but actually wrong, is untenable. 
  Another viewpoint, for example, which can be called the 
theory of "dividing the country into three," holds that in China 
today the official ideology, the Western instrumental [gong ju 
1562 0367] rationalism, and the traditional Chinese culture have 
maintained "a set-up of dividing the country into three" and 
stresses that "it is impossible for any of them to unify the 
whole country." It is very clear that according to this view, 
the three kinds of culture are on an equal footing, none is 
primary or secondary and they have divided the entire culture 
into three. First of all, the mainstream culture, which plays a 
guiding role universally to our society and infiltrates all 
parts of it (in this sense, it "unifies the whole country"), can 
no longer be seen and has disappeared. As a matter of fact, 
the mainstream culture of our society today, that is, the 
socialist culture with Chinese characteristics which takes 
Marxism as its guidance, absorbs the fine cultural heritage of 
the Chinese nation and the world and serves the people, as 
mentioned above, is a unity of centralization and 
diversification: Centralization in ideological 
guidance--guidance of Marxism; diversification in cultural 
forms, cultural streams and schools, and academic 
views--therefore, it is necessary to let a hundred flowers 
blossom and a hundred schools of thought contend. Here, it 
is necessary to guard against two tendencies: One is 
centralization excluding diversification and the other is 
diversification excluding centralization. Both tendencies are 
one-sided. The viewpoint of the theory of "dividing the country 
into three" is a kind of one-sidedness which leads to 
diversification excluding centralization. Second, according to 
this view, the correct relationship between these three kinds of 
culture cannot be seen either. Undoubtedly, the issue of using 
foreign culture for reference, including Western culture, and 
the issue of inheriting the Chinese traditional culture are 
involved. Of course, we should pay attention to reference and 
inheritance because our mainstream culture should be an open 
culture enriched with the fruits of human civilization, 
including the absorption of the most valuable achievements made 
in the era of capitalism. However, the purpose of paying 
attention to reference and inheritance is to organically 
integrate, through reference and inheritance, the cream of the 
traditional culture of our nation and of foreign culture with 
the fine traditions and revolutionary spirit formed in the 
course of revolution and construction carried out by the people 
under the leadership of our party over a long period of time. 
On this basis, we should constantly blaze new trails in 
building and developing the socialist culture with Chinese 
characteristics. 
  In short, to develop the socialist market economy in a 
healthy and coordinated manner; to correctly handle the 
relationship between reform, development, and stability; to 
build the spiritual civilization while building the material 
civilization; and to adhere to the principle of "grasping with 
both hands" and "grasping firmly with both hands," we must 
uphold and develop our mainstream culture and main melody, give 
correct guidance to the diversified subculture, prevent various 
kinds of counter culture from spreading unchecked, and minimize 
the harm caused by counter culture. This is exactly an attitude 
of seeking truth from facts in correctly dealing with social 
cultural phenomena. 

