Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Installment No 53 of the serialized memoirs of Xu Jiatun: </F>
"Xu Jiatun's Hong Kong Memoirs"] 
  [Text] Zhao Ziyang had warned me that in order to maintain 
Hong Kong's stability and prosperity, "its economy must not be 
allowed to collapse. On the (one in ten thousand) chance that 
it did, the burden would be too great for us to bear." 
  I agreed with Zhao Ziyang's view, having calculated at the 
time that the Hong Kong government had annual revenues of $36 
billion HK and annual expenditures of over $30 billion HK, 
meaning that at the exchange rates of the time, Hong Kong was 
spending over $10 billion RMB, or more than Jiangsu Province's 
annual revenues of over $7 billion RMB. 
  If Hong Kong's economy collapsed, in order to maintain Hong 
Kong's spending, not to speak of $10 billion RMB, could the 
Central Government come up with even $3-5 billion RMB to support 
the Hong Kong government? This was highly unlikely. And in 
light of Hong Kong's economic development realities, it would be 
necessary first to preserve Hong Kong's social stability, or 
relative social stability, in order to even attempt to maintain 
its economic prosperity. This was a primary consideration in 
both the Sino-British talks, as well as in the process of 
drafting the Basic Law. 
  Hong Kong was situated in the heart of the Asia-Pacific 
region, in relation to which Hong Kong alone was relatively 
stable. China itself had been through decades of unrest, and 
Southeast Asia had also been in a state of constant upheaval. 
  Hong Kong's stability depends mainly on China. China's Hong 
Kong policy under the KMT had been not to regain sovereignty, 
but rather to maintain the status quo, which policy remained in 
effect after the founding of the PRC. In modern history, Hong 
Kong had experienced instability only twice. The first time 
was the Japanese invasion of China, when Hong Kong was occupied 
for three years and eight months, which was the longest period 
of turbulence in Hong Kong's history. The second was two brief 
periods of instability after the founding of the PRC: In 1956, 
when the KMT engineered an insurrection in Kowloon and 
Ch'uan-wan; and in 1967, when the CPC led the so-called 
"Anti-British resistance," neither of which two periods of 
instability lasted very long. 
  After the Sino-British talks began, Hong Kong also 
experienced sharp turbulence, with stocks and real estate 
plummeting abruptly, and capital flight and emigration coming in 
severely growing waves, the fundamental cause of which was 
economic, with supply exceeding demand. This, in addition to 
political factors, meant that China's recovery of Hong Kong was 
touching off some unrest. 
  In short, Hong Kong's long-standing stability, in addition 
to 
its economic and monetary policies of freedom and low taxes that 
had turned Hong Kong into a capital and refugee haven for China 
and many Southeast Asian countries and regions, were also 
factors in the development of Hong Kong's funding and talent. It 
could be said that Hong Kong was prosperous precisely because it 
was more stable than other regions. 
  So how could we continue its stability? The external factors 
were very hard to predict and estimate. If the British Labor 
Party came to power, might it change Britain's Hong Kong policy? 
For instance, might it radically change Hong Kong's democratic 
course, or take a harder line in Sino-British relations? Might 
Taiwan continue its past practice of stirring up unrest in Hong 
Kong? We estimated such a possibility to be very small, as 
Taiwan was busy enough with its own affairs, so that stirring up 
unrest in Hong Kong would have few pluses. And while it was 
possible that China itself might turn "left," this was not seen 
as a major consideration at the time, as we held it to be 
unlikely. 
  We were most concerned about two possibilities: First, that 
Western and Taiwanese forces might exploit Hong Kong to effect a 
change of system in inland China and undermine inland security, 
by turning Hong Kong into an anti-Communist outpost. In fact, as 
they had long since acted in this way, at issue was whether they 
would go so far as to make things unbearable for China. 
  Second, we were concerned that instituting democratic, 
representative government too quickly might be too hard for the 
various social strata to adapt to, causing unrest and affecting 
investor confidence. 
  In light of the past experiences of the Philippines, Taiwan, 
South Korea, India, and certain African countries in instituting 
democratic government, the transition of colonized countries to 
democracy almost always led to social unrest, affecting investor 
confidence. As these countries were all larger than Hong Kong, 
which had a tiny area and sensitive people, chaos such as had 
occurred in Manila, Seoul, and even India would be inconceivable. 
  In addition to these external factors in Hong Kong's 
stability and prosperity, there were also two internal factors: 
1) The British administration; 2) local Chinese endeavors. Of 
these two factors, while the major one was the endeavors of the 
local people, particularly the Chinese, from a policy and 
administrative perspective, the British Hong Kong government's 
administrative expediting of Hong Kong's stability and 
prosperity was also an objective fact that should not be ruled 
out. 
  The Hong Kong Administration had three features. One was its 
colonial nature. The Hong Kong governor appointed by the 
British Crown held centralized power, not only holding political 
power, but also being the supreme local military officer, as 
well as probably the highest official in charge of the region's 
intelligence system. The Hong Kong administration represented 
not only the British Government, but also the interests of U.S. 
capitalists, including participation by local Hong Kong 
spokesmen for British financial groups, such as Hong Kong and 
Shanghai Banking Corp and Jardine Matheson spokesmen serving as 
Executive Council (EXCO) members, as well as British 
financial-group delegates, such as T'ai-Ku and Chartered Bank 
delegates in EXCO. (This was prior to 1983, as Jardine Matheson 
and Chartered Bank had no EXCO members in later years). 
  Later, the Hong Kong administration began to recruit 
participation by Chinese delegates having good relations with 
Britain, with new developments occurring in this area after the 
publication of the Sino-British Joint Declaration, in that most 
of those recruited for the future SAR Government were capable of 
maintaining more ties to the British side. And the government 
leadership also saw a noncolonialist change. 

