BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Anatoly Yurkin] </F>
  [Text] Moscow April 19 TASS -- The foreign press is 
accusing the Russian Pacific Fleet of discharging radioactive 
waste into the sea. It is characteristic that these accusations 
coincided with the beginning of the large-scale Russian 
operation "Fishing Season". The purpose of the operation is to 
put a stop to the depletion of fish stock in the Far East, 
particularly off the south Kurils, General Andrey Nikolayev, 
supreme commander of the Russian frontier troops, member of the 
Security Council, told ITAR-TASS. 
  He said that in addition to frontier guards and military 
aircraft, ships of the Pacific Fleet participate in the 
operation. 
  The effort to strenthen protection of national interest 
along 
Russia's eastern boundaries proved effective, as shown by 
communiques of the Supreme Command of the Russian frontier 
troops. A stop was put to ostentatious calls of groups of 
Japanese fishing vessels into Russian territorial waters and to 
large-scale poaching. Highly-manoeuvrable groups of ships 
promptly react to the situation and prevent violations of state 
border. 
  Far from everybody likes the normalisation of the situation 
in the Far East where Russia's neighbours have been permitting 
themselves lapses from the observance of the international norms 
and rules. Certain forces in Japan and in other countries of 
the region do not want the "thawing of glaciers" remaining from 
the past war. To thaw them by business cooperation and 
development of mutually- advantageous economic relations means 
to increase the might of the industrialised Japan and of the 
fabulously rich Russia. Experts believe that this does not suit 
rivals and that new portions of sensations are fed to the media. 
  The world public is aware that Russia does not discharge 
technological waste into the sea the way this is done by many 
other countries, Japan included. But going by publications, 
also in TOKYO SHIMBUN, this is not the matter of radioactive 
waste but that of its being the product of the operation of 
atomic submarines of the Russian Pacific Fleet. This fleet of 
the Russian Navy is seen as a menace in the Pacific and in the 
world ocean. Some circles are ready to go any lengths to 
present an unfavorable picture of the Pacific Fleet. So they 
speculate on economic and technological difficulties of the 
utilisation of waste of atomic submarines. 

