BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature: by Nikolay </F>
Zherebtsov, Andrey Petrovskiy; edited by Vladimir Shishlin] 
  [Text] The agreement on gradual settlement of the Black Sea 
Fleet problem signed by Ukrainian and Russian presidents the 
previous Friday has become "the starting point" for the solution 
of this issue by military departments. Russian Defense Minister 
Pavel Grachev, who came to Sevastopol to negotiate with his 
Ukrainian counterpart Vitaliy Radetskyy, expressed this opinion 
to journalists on Thursday. 
  Grachev underlined: "I have come to constructively speak on 
the Black Sea Fleet problem given the will of Ukraine's and 
Russia's peoples and, of course, the fleet's mariners." Grachev 
added that Russia "has enough forces and funds to buy the entire 
Black Sea Fleet." 
  He recognized that "the positions of the Ukrainian and 
Russian delegations slightly differ," at the same time he added 
that "there are no unsolvable issues." 
  Plenipotentiary representative of the Russian president at 
the negotiations Yuriy Dubinin, who came to the Crimea together 
with Grachev, also thinks that further development of the 
agreement reached between Boris Yeltsin and Leonid Kravchuk in 
Moscow would be the major theme of these negotiations. During 
his conversation with journalists he pointed out that the 
previous agreements on the Black Sea Fleet between Moscow and 
Kiev had not been fulfilled "due to the counteraction on the 
part of the lower structures of power." 
  Addressing the Black Sea Fleet personnel in the morning, 
Grachev underlined that he would do his utmost so that 
Sevastopol would become Russia's major base on the Black Sea. 
Grachev believes that the fate of the fleet should be solved 
immediately, "we need just and precise solutions." "We must do 
everything in order to preserve the Black Sea Fleet for Russia 
as the most combat efficient and sanguineous units of the 
Russian armed forces." 
  At the same time Grachev underlined that Russia would never 
fight "with Ukraine's people. This is the major position to 
which the Russian party would adhere at the negotiations." 
  The negotiations in Sevastopol started with a private 
meeting 
between Grachev and Radetskyy. 
  A reliable source in the Black Sea Fleet headquarters 
reported to Interfax about one of the variants of the Black Sea 
Fleet division considered by Moscow -- strategic ships 
(antisubmarine crafts, cruisers) will belong to Russia and 
tactical crafts (sweepers and coast guard boats) -- to Ukraine. 
  The issue on the stationing of the fleet's Russian and 
Ukrainian units is expected to become the subject of a sharp 
discussion. 
  On the eve of the negotiations Radetskyy declared to 
journalists that "Ukraine's Navy would be deployed in Izmail, 
Ilyichevsk (near Odessa), Ochakov, Kherson, and up to Kerch." 
  In Radetskyy's words, "the presidents would be informed 
about 
the proposals worked out during this meeting with Grachev and 
would make the final decision." After that "the agreement on 
the creation of Russia's naval base on Ukraine's territory, in 
case it is reached, should be obligatory ratified by the 
Ukrainian parliament," stressed Radetskyy. IF Note: At his 
regular briefings held on Thursday the presidential press 
secretary Vyacheslav Kostikov pointed out that Boris Yeltsin 
shows "restrained and moderate optimism and hopes that Grachev 
and Radetskyy would be able to reach agreements." Kostikov 
indicated that as before Yeltsin believes that the servicemen 
should primarily remove tension and excessive emotions. 
"Yeltsin also hopes for Kravchuk's sound sense and for the fact 
that the Ukrainian leadership would mind the existing realities." 

