BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with British Prime Minister John Major and French </F>
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, by Fabrice Rousselot; reprinted 
from the English language version of Paris LIBERATION; place and 
date not given: "The Downing Street Version: Balladur and 
Major"] 
  [Text] Prime Minister John Major and his French 
counterpart, Edouard Balladur, have played pivotal roles in the 
final stages of the political co-operation that made possible 
the Channel Tunnel link between Britain and France. Major and 
Balladur are both struggling to maintain popularity, control and 
respect at the head of right-wing parties. The success of the 
Channel link will be crucial for both. 
  [LIBERATION] What does the Channel Tunnel represent for your 
country? 
  [Major] It is a potent symbol of Britain's new role in 
Europe. We share with France an enormous pride in the 
achievement and skills of those who have designed and 
constructed one of the greatest engineering projects of the 
century. The tunnel links Great Britain with the Continent for 
the first time in many thousands of years. It will bring us 
nearer still to the French people, with whom our ties have grown 
ever closer over past years. 
  [Balladur] The Channel Tunnel will bring our two countries 
closer in many ways, not just economically. It will help 
strengthen economic cohesion within the European Union. France 
can expect to see an increase in tourism -- which is its primary 
source of foreign currency. 
  [LlBERATlON] What impact is the tunnel expected to have? 
  [Major] It will be a direct link to the single market for 
our companies who export goods, and for the millions who travel 
from Britain every year. 
  In linking Britain to the French rail system and beyond that 
to the wider European rail system, it will give our exporters 
the chance to benefit from long rail runs for the first time. 
It will also provide our business community with previously 
unparalleled access to important capitals such as Paris and 
Brussels. As for tourism, millions of Britons already travel to 
the Continent every year by ferry and air. The opening of the 
Channel Tunnel will provide healthy new competition. I hope, 
too, that it will encourage as many French tourists to visit 
Britain as British tourists visit France. 
  [LIBERATION] In France, the highspeed train link between 
Paris and Calais is already in place. Britain must wait another 
10 years. Why has it taken so long for the Conservative 
government to make a decision regarding the "British TGV [Train 
A' Grande Vitesse]"? 
  [Major] It was never intended that a new line would be built 
in Britain before the tunnel opened. The present rail lines 
through Kent have been improved to take tunnel traffic and will 
provide sufficient capacity until some time after the turn of 
the century. But, given that capacity is unlikely to be 
sufficient in the next 10 years or so, we are pressing ahead 
with our plans for a new line to be ready within that timeframe. 
We expect the line to reduce the London to Paris journey time 
by 20-25 minutes. There are a number of factors which make the 
British and French situations different. For example, French 
terrain is more suitable for railways than south-east England 
(being flatter), land values in Kent are higher than in northern 
France -- and in France there was existing local demand for a 
new rail link to serve the Lille area. 
  [LIBERATION] Great Britain is not as intensely committed to 
the scheme as France, particularly where the rail link is 
concerned. Is this a serious handicap? 
  [Balladur] It is not for me to judge the choices an 
important partner of France chooses to make. I will simply say 
that the high-speed TGV rail system in France has boosted the 
railway industry, as demonstrated by the success of our 
GEC-Alsthom [General Electric Company] in winning the South 
Korean railway contract. We intend to build on this; that is 
why the government has decided to build the Mediterranean (Lyon 
to Nice) and Eastern (Paris to Strasbourg) TGV lines. TGV gave 
the SNCF [French Railway Network] state railway new perspectives. 
  [LIBERATION] After centuries of fighting invasions as an 
island, do the British fear losing sovereignty and identity with 
such a tunnel? 
  [Major] Not at all. It is certainly true that the British 
have never been accustomed to the idea of getting into a train 
and arriving in another country. The sea crossing, however 
short, has represented a barrier. But countries such as France, 
which have always had land boundaries, are clearly sovereign and 
have distinct identities. Britain is no different in that 
respect. 
  [Balladur] The main feature of British civilisation has 
undoubtedly been its extraordinary expansion throughout the 
world. I cannot believe that the great British people, in order 
to protect their identity, would now be cowering on the very 
island from which they set sail to travel the world. 
  On the contrary, I am convinced that Britain has a major 
role 
in the building of Europe, not least in the originality of its 
contribution to the overall structure. 
  [LIBERATION] Britain has been accused by some of its 
European partners of trying to slow down enlargement of the 
Union. Does the tunnel mean Britain will be more "at the heart 
of Europe?" 
  [Major] In fact it was Britain that was the foremost 
advocate of enlargement and fought to have the states of the 
European Free Trade Association brought into the Union at the 
earliest date. In this we were successful. 
  [Balladur] Britain has made a remarkable contribution to 
the strengthening of Europe in a large number of areas, for 
example the setting up of the single market. The British 
Government and people have, like their French counterparts, a 
high opinion of their national destiny. But we all realise that 
our old nations, while preserving their identity and 
sovereignty, must co-operate more within the European framework. 
Closer cooperation between our two countries is of particular 
importance in ensuring that European opinions of the 
international scene are taken into account. In fact, the 
Yugoslav crisis shows that, at present, the involvement of other 
European countries depends largely on a move by our two 
countries which has brought our other European partners along 
with it. 
  [LIBERATION] What about the co-operation between France and 
Britain? Will it grow both on an economic and political level? 
  [Major] Our ties with France are already extremely close. 
We are partners in the European Union, NATO, the UN Security 
Council and the G7 group. We work together closely on foreign 
policy, defence and many other issues. We invest enormous 
amounts in each other's economies and many companies -- over 
2,000 at the last count -- are co-located in one way or another 
in both Britain and France. 
  Defence co-operation has been growing strongly in recent 
years. We have more defence projects with France than with any 
other partners. Our troops are used to working side by side on 
exercises and in UN peacekeeping operations. Together we have 
made the greatest troop contribution to peacekeeping in former 
Yugoslavia. 
  I am sure our links in these and many other areas will 
continue to grow. 
  [Balladur] Collaboration between France and Britain is close 
and productive. It also goes back a long way. Ninety years 
ago, our two countries formed the Entente Cordiale. The 
vitality of this agreement is founded on basic interests that we 
share, notably as nuclear powers and permanent members of the 
Security Council. 
  Today, our troops are once again working side by side in 
Bosnia. If the institutional debate has sometimes -- quite 
understandably -- uncovered differing sensibilities on the part 
of Britain and France, I am pleased to say that, when we are 
faced with a crisis, our two countries are essentially on the 
same side. That is why I have every confidence in the strength 
of our future political co-operation. 
  As far as our economic, scientific and industrial 
co-operation is concerned, this is particularly strong. Allow 
me to quote the most obvious examples. Concorde, Jaguar, the 
TGV trains.... Examples of successful Franco-British projects 
abound. 
  I am convinced that the cross-fertilisation of our 
economies, 
as symbolised by the Channel Tunnel, will be more marked in the 
years to come and I am delighted about this. 
  [LIBERATION] Could the Channel Tunnel be a commercial 
failure? 
  [Major] Eurotunnel has built and will operate the tunnel 
wholly as a private venture. In doing so they have backed their 
own judgment about future profitability. The new choices the 
tunnel offers both to the transport industry and the public will 
ensure both its full use and its success. 
  [Balladur] The Channel Tunnel represents a large undertaking 
which has broken new ground. One can never rule out the 
possibility of running into difficulties in the initial stages. 
However I am convinced that as soon as the French and British 
people -- not forgetting all the other Europeans -- understand 
the advantages of the tunnel, it will enjoy the success it 
deserves. 
  [LIBERATION] Will you use the Channel Tunnel yourself? 
  [Major] I am very much looking forward to being able to use 
the tunnel, both on business and privately. 
  [Balladur] Of course. 

