Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Provincial Government Carries Out Practical Tasks, Sets 26 </F>
More New Tasks for This Year After Basically Completing 26 Tasks 
Last Year" -- XINHUA RIBAO headline] 
  [Excerpts] Thanks to concerted efforts and solid work 
throughout the province, 24 of the 26 key practical tasks 
designated for 1993 by the provincial people's government have 
been completed or basically completed; the remaining two tasks 
have been partially completed after appropriate adjustments were 
made in a realistic spirit. [passage omitted] 
  To strengthen agriculture as the foundation of the national 
economy, the provincial government, in carrying out the 
practical tasks, focused on speeding up the construction of 
water conservancy projects and developing agriculture in an 
all-around way. [passage omitted] 
  Smooth progress was made in forming joint stock enterprises 
and enterprise groups as a way to establish a socialist market 
economic system, and to speed up reform and opening up. Across 
the province, six limited liability stock companies which raised 
funds from society had their stocks listed; 104 limited 
liability stock companies which raised funds from specific 
sources, and 600 limited liability companies were established. 
The stock cooperative system was implemented in 9,500 
enterprises, including city and town collectively owned 
enterprises, as well as village and town enterprises, and 108 
provincial-level enterprise groups were formed. The pace of 
market construction quickened, resulting in the establishment of 
63 markets for production factors, 138 markets for the means of 
production, and 250 wholesale markets for agricultural, 
sideline, and industrial products across the province. Six of 
these markets registered a business volume of more than 1 
billion yuan. Ten provincial-level, wholesale commodity markets 
were established, overfulfilling the task by 100 percent. 
Progress was made in encouraging foreign-funded or 
joint-venture banks to set up branches in Jiangsu. Changzhou 
and Huiyin cities carried out experiments in balance sheet ratio 
management. The export-oriented economy maintained vigorous 
growth, taking in $5.97 billion in export-generated foreign 
exchange for the entire year. A total of 10,248 new wholly or 
partly foreign-owned enterprises were approved, $2.84 billion in 
foreign capital was actually put to use, $330 million worth of 
new labor service contracts were signed, and $260 million worth 
of business was conducted, all of which represent an 
overfulfillment of relevant tasks. A total of 210 overseas 
nontrading enterprises were organized, which means 130 percent 
of the plan was completed. 
  Significant progress was made in infrastructure 
construction, 
such as transportation, energy, and communications, to solve 
"bottlenecks" in the province's economic development. 
Preliminary work on the new Nanjing Airport was basically 
completed, and the annual tasks regarding land requisition, 
demolition, and relocation were completed. Remodeling and 
expansion projects at the Xuzhou and Yancheng Airports were 
completed satisfactorily. The Jiangsu Airlines opened new 
routes to Beijing, Guangzhou, Shenzhen, and Hong Kong. The work 
of land requisition, demolition, and relocation along the entire 
Shanghai-Nanjing expressway was completed, and the annual plan 
for roadbed earthwork and stonework, culverts, and bridges was 
fulfilled. Preparations for the initial stage of the Jiangyin 
Changjiang Bridge proceeded smoothly. [passage omitted] 
  Satisfactory results were achieved in key scientific and 
technological projects, new product development, and major 
technical transformation projects. Good progress was made in 20 
key scientific and technological projects, some of which yielded 
positive results. The tasks to implement 166 projects at or 
above the provincial-level under the Torch Program, as well as 
to verify 181 new and high-technology enterprises and 3,000 
provincial-level new scientific and technological products, were 
overfulfilled. Smooth progress was made in 10 key industrial 
experimental projects, and the plans for launching 100 major 
projects to develop new products and 100 key technical 
transformation projects were either fulfilled or overfulfilled. 
Four of the 10 engineering research centers and intermediate 
testing bases were inspected and accepted by the authorities. 
Second-stage construction tasks for 12 demonstration bases 
engaged in comprehensive agricultural experiments are proceeding 
smoothly according to contracts. Work commenced on all 107 
science and technology demonstration townships and towns, which 
are still under construction. 
  Along with faster progress in promoting socialist material 
civilization, the practical task of promoting socialist 
spiritual civilization also yielded positive results. Nine-year 
compulsory education was extensively implemented in 28 counties 
(cities and districts) and in 420 townships and towns. [passage 
omitted] 
  To implement the guidelines of the Third Plenary Session of 
the 14th CPC Central Committee and the Seventh (Enlarged) 
Plenary Session of the Eighth Jiangsu Provincial Party 
Committee, and further promote economic development and social 
stability, the provincial government has decided, after 
conducting relevant studies, to concentrate on carrying out the 
following 26 practical tasks in 1994: 
  1. To continue to speed up the construction of water 
conservancy projects. [passage omitted] 
  2. To support the construction of counties (cities) into 
commodity grain, fine-quality cotton production bases, and to 
establish demonstration zones for high-quality, high-yield, and 
high-efficiency agriculture. [passage omitted] 
  3. To raise the per capita income of peasants across the 
province by 150 yuan, increase the per capita income of peasants 
from diversified production in Huaibei and three other cities by 
80 yuan, and establish 30 leading enterprises for processing 
agricultural and sideline products through integrated trade, 
industry, agriculture, production, supply, and marketing. 
[passage omitted] 
  4. To establish provincial-level imported seed quarantine 
zones and specialized seed markets, and achieve a 60-percent 
rate in seed supply for the province's major farm crops. 
[passage omitted] 
  5. To basically complete work to designate primary farmland 
protection zones across the province. [passage omitted] 
  6. To increase the proportion of state-owned large and 
medium 
enterprises experimenting with the shareholding system in the 
province to 20 percent, select 100 large and medium enterprises 
and reorganize them into limited liability stock companies that 
raise funds from specific sources, and select a few experimental 
enterprises and allow them to issue stocks to the public and 
list stocks for trading on the market within the 
state-prescribed scope of stock issues. 
  7. To vigorously cultivate and develop markets. [passage 
omitted] 
  8. To actively encourage the development of individually and 
privately run enterprises. [passage omitted] 
  9. To encourage the establishment of a couple of 
foreign-funded banks, ask state commercial banks to set up two 
or three provincial-level branches in Jiangsu, and form the 
Jiangsu Life Insurance Company. [passage omitted] 
  10. To bring in more than $7 billion in export-generated 
foreign exchange for the province, set up 8,000 "wholly or 
partly foreign-owned" enterprises, secure $10 billion in 
contracted foreign capital, put $4 billion in foreign capital to 
actual use, sign $330 million worth of labor service contracts, 
realize $260 million in business volume, and increase foreign 
exchange from technological and turnkey exports. 
  11. To submit the general plan for building the Jiangsu 
Industrial Park to the central government and start construction 
work upon approval by the State Council. [passage omitted] 
  12. To complete 15 million cubic meters of earthwork in 
building the Shanghai-Nanjing Expressway, 95 percent each of 
roadbed earthwork for the entire line and of engineering work on 
culverts and passageways, 65 percent of bridges, and 10 percent 
of the road surface. [passage omitted] 
  13. To start building the new Nanjing Airport, complete all 
design tasks, basically complete airfield and runway 
construction earthwork and the foundations of the airport 
terminal building, and start work on auxiliary projects. 
  14. To further accelerate the construction of ports along 
the 
coast and the Chang Jiang. [passage omitted] 
  15. To construct and put into operation electricity 
generators with an installed capacity of 1.225 million kw, and 
start work on the No. 2 Yangzhou Power Plant and the 
second-stage project of the Ligang Power Plant. 
  16. To achieve a net increase of 1.25 million telephone 
exchanges in urban and rural areas, install 700,000 telephones 
in the cities and the countryside, attain a 4-percent telephone 
popularization rate across the province, achieve a net increase 
of 15,000 long- distance business telephone lines, construct the 
first-level Zhengzhou-Xuzhou fiber-optic cable, expand the 
transmission rate of the Jiujiang-Nanjing fiber-optic cable to a 
fifth-level digital standard transmission rate, complete the 
second-stage Nanjing- Shanghai digital microwave expansion 
project by year's end, construct and put into operation the 
Yangzhou-Yancheng fiber-optic cable, and establish television 
and telephone conference systems from the provincial to city 
levels. 
  17. To increase the capacity to process an additional 120 
million tonnes of industrial waste water per year and an 
additional 200 million standard cubic meters of industrial waste 
gas per day, impose deadlines for corrective action on 600 
heavy-polluting village and town enterprises in the province, 
ensure that 200 of those enterprises will basically complete 
their remedial tasks, and increase the proportion of fly ash 
control zones in 100 small towns to 50 percent. 
  18. To implement 100 projects each under the Torch Program 
and the Spark Program, develop and put into production 100 major 
new products, carry out 20 key scientific and technological 
projects and 10 key industrial experiments, and build 10 
engineering research centers, intermediate testing bases, and 
technology development centers. [passage omitted] 
  19. To carry out full-scale, nine-year compulsory education 
in an additional 15 counties (cities and districts) and 350 
townships (towns), and eradicate illiteracy among 350,000 young 
and middle-aged people. [passage omitted] 
  20. To maintain the province's birthrate at around 14.5 per 
thousand, increase the actual family planning rate to more than 
90 percent, and raise the actual family planning rate to more 
than 85 percent in counties (cities) which are no longer under 
special provincial family planning control. 
  21. To complete the task of remodeling 100 hospitals in 
townships and towns. [passage omitted] 
  22. To complete construction of Nanjing Museum's storeroom, 
start building Nanjing Museum's exhibition hall and the 
provincial fine arts museum's office building, and basically 
complete construction of the provincial swimming and diving 
facility, and remodeling of the Wutaishan Stadium. [passage 
omitted] 
  23. To vigorously develop the labor market, actively 
increase 
employment opportunities, and find jobs for 160,000 unemployed 
workers in cities and towns. [passage omitted] 
  24. To continue reform of the housing system. [passage 
omitted] 
  25. To supply tap water to an additional 2 million people in 
rural areas. [passage omitted] 
  26. To continue to carry out double-support activities in an 
extensive, in-depth, and sustained manner, and strive to build a 
couple of cities and counties (cities) into national 
double-support model towns. 

