Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yu. M. Veretennikov, chief specialist, Agrosa </F>
LTD, and A. K. Lysov, director, mechanization laboratory, VIZR: 
``From Policy to Practical Deeds''] 
  [Text] Efforts to solve a problem upon which both the 
country's food sufficiency and the health of its citizens depend 
to a considerable degree have been at a standstill for many 
years. The problem? A perpetual shortage and low quality of 
equipment for pesticide application. With the disintegration of 
the USSR the situation has worsened even more--there are 
practically no specialized enterprises manufacturing sprayers 
left in Russia. 
  Machines made by the only plant in the CIS, 
Lvovkhimselkhozmash (in Ukraine), require significant 
improvement, and moreover, they are supplied to Russia at 
monopoly prices that are unjustifiably high. The situation is 
also aggravated by the fact that the sprayers presently 
available in the countryside are not only obsolete but also 
almost completely worn out. This means that growth of harvest 
losses and of the ecological danger is inevitable, because 
pesticides will be used not matter what, employing primitive 
methods and various contrivances. 
  All of this is happening at a time when the latest models of 
spraying equipment of various modifications and purposes that 
are competitive even in the foreign market have been created in 
Russia. Their advantages were confirmed by extensive field tests 
in different regions of the former USSR in the period from 1971 
to 1991. Because the demand of Russian agriculture for such 
equipment is enormous, it would be suitable to establish a 
subsector based on qualitatively new spraying procedures, and to 
encourage defense industry enterprises to contribute their 
resources. 
  The Agros LTD partnership, the VIZR [All-Union Institute of 
Plant Protection], the VISKhOM [All-Union Scientific Research 
Institute of Agricultural Machine Building] and the KBM [not 
further identified] of the Department of Defense Industry have 
united their efforts and proposed an innovative program to the 
government of the Russian Federation titled the ``Complex of 
Work to Organize Production of Technical Resources for 
Application of Chemical and Biological Plant Protection 
Resources and Plant Growth Regulators on the Basis of New 
Procedures Characterized by Minimum Ecologically Safe 
Consumption Norms,'' which is written for 1993-1996. The Russian 
Federation Agroindustrial Union was the client for the program. 
  Introduction of this innovative program into Russian 
agriculture will make it possible: 

  -  to reduce the energy- and material-intensiveness of 
production systems in comparison with existing ones by 1.5-2 
times; 
  -  to create a system of special equipment for high-precision 
application of pesticides and biologically active substances of 
a new generation with consumption rates from 1 to 100 gm/ha, 
thus ensuring clear patent rights and competitiveness of the 
machinery in the domestic and foreign markets; 
  -  to reduce the consumption rate of the preparations employed 
by 
1-3 times (for different types of preparations) by purposeful 
processing of plants with prescribed parameters and controllable 
drop size, which will have a positive effect on the ecological 
situation of agricultural communities; 
  -  to raise the effectiveness and uniformity of application of a 
preparation to the object of application, as a result of which 
entry of toxic chemicals into the environment will decrease by 
2-10 times, and loss of expensive preparations will drop; 
  -  to introduce resources into agricultural practice for 
monitoring and automating control of production processes used 
to apply chemical and biological plant protection resources; 
  -  to reach the posed objectives in coordination with regional 
``Saving the Black and Azov Seas'' programs, and with projects 
in continguous fields of science and engineering, and in 
particular, decontamination of areas subjected to radioactive 
contamination by the accident at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power 
Plant. 

    We hope that this program will be adopted by the government. 
It's time from us to move on from policy to practical deeds! 
  COPYRIGHT: ``Kolos'', ``Zashchita Rasteniy'', 1993 


