BFN 

  [Text] Havana, Jun 4 (AFP) -- The 124 Cubans who have 
occupied the residence of the Belgian ambassador in Havana for 
the past week to obtain political asylum in a foreign country 
are "waiting against all reason," Willy Verriest, emissary sent 
by the Belgian Government, stated on Saturday. 
  "It is a situation without a short term solution because 
Cuban authorities are not going to authorize the asylum seekers 
to leave the country. The Cuban authorities say they will not 
allow the seizing of an embassy to be a way to pressure to leave 
the country; they will not accept this," Verriest told the 
foreign media. 
  "To obtain authorization to travel to any country -- 
regardless of the country -- it is necessary that normal 
procedures be followed," added Verriest. Verriest was the 
Belgian Ambassador to Cuba from 1986 to early 1990. 
  "The positions of both governments are clear: Cuban 
authorities have given guarantees (that the occupants will not 
be subjected to retaliation when they leave the residence) and 
we have acknowledged those guarantees," he emphasized. 
  Asked if any progress had been made in the negotiations with 
the occupiers of the Belgian Ambassador's residence, Verriest 
declared: "There has been no progress. The advances are not 
sufficient." He added: "We asked the people to leave but I see 
that they remain in the residence." 
  He said he had the impression that the 124 occupants (68 
men, 
32 women, and 24 children) are, up to now, "a group that is very 
homogeneous," with a politicized discourse. 
  On Tuesday, in several messages sent to the foreign media, 
the occupants presented themselves as people who "peacefully 
oppose" the regime and said they would refuse any contact with 
Cuban authorities. They stated in their documents that they 
would rather "immolate themselves" before abandoning their 
objective of leaving Cuba and receiving asylum "in any other 
country." 
  According to several diplomatic sources in Havana, the 
current objective of Cuban authorities is to break the group's 
unity. As evidence, the sources say that on two occasions, at 
least, several people have entered the residence and that the 
124 occupants suspect those people to be state security members. 
  The Cuban media has mentioned the spotty entrance of 
additional asylum seekers and has said those people also want to 
be exiled. Four persons entered the diplomatic headquarters on 
Sunday, however, in an unexplained manner because there is a 
heavy police presence around the residence. One of them left on 
Monday and the other three on Wednesday night. In their place, 
two other individuals entered the residence, in an equally 
mysterious manner, on Thursday night, according to official 
Cuban and Belgian sources. 

