Goals 

<F P=102>   944Q0282A Moscow OBSHCHAYA GAZETA in Russian No 12, 25-31 
Mar 94 p 9 </F>

<F P=103> 944Q0282A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow OBSHCHAYA GAZETA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Vladimir Petrovskiy, first deputy UN </F>
secretary general, by Irina Denisova: "I Devote My Free Time to 
Work"] 
  [Text] As is often the case with our compatriots 
working abroad, more is more often known and written about them 
"over there" than at home. Vladimir Petrovskiy is no exception. 
The rank of first deputy UN secretary general and leader of this 
organization's European headquarters has secured for him 
extensive celebrity in the diplomatic world. In Russia, on the 
other hand, Vladimir Fedorovich is "known by sight" only by his 
foreign policy department colleagues, in the main. OBSHCHAYA 
GAZETA's interview with Vladimir Petrovskiy is an attempt to 
right this injustice. 
  [Denisova] Vladimir Fedorovich, practical diplomacy is not 
your only and not even your first love. Many people know you 
from your books. 
  [Petrovskiy] Truly, I was right from the outset attracted 
not 
only and not so much to practical diplomatic work. "The History 
of Diplomacy," which, I recall, I read without putting it down 
almost, was published just after the war. An unknown world of 
negotiations, political battles, and striking personalities 
opened up before me--a young boy from Novosibirsk. Enrolling in 
the International Relations Institute, I knew full well even 
then that I would after graduation go into graduate work and 
would write my dissertation on the history of diplomacy. My work 
for my degree, which was devoted to the British diplomatic 
service, gained high marks, and I was recommended for graduate 
work without having to sit examinations. But this was the time 
of Khrushchev's reforms: To embark on graduate work at that time 
it was necessary to have spent two or three years in practical 
work. Thus I came to be in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 
1957. And I defended my dissertations both for my candidate's 
degree and doctorate while working in the Foreign Ministry. 
Working on my books, I studied the mechanisms of diplomacy and 
foreign policy and then switched to a study of the theory of 
international relations and the foreign policy thought of the 
United States. I subsequently wrote on such problems as 
disarmament, the European process, and international 
organizations. My latest book, which appeared in 1985, "Security 
in the Nuclear and Space Age," was devoted to the shaping of the 
new political thinking. 
  Words to the effect that there is nothing of substance in 
the 
"new political thinking concept" and that distinctions may be 
drawn only between correct and incorrect ways of thinking are to 
be heard at this time, incidentally. I cannot agree. Mankind is 
currently negotiating a change of one civilization paradigm for 
another, as was the case at the time of the transition from the 
ancient world to the Middle Ages and from the Middle Ages to the 
Renaissance. Thanks to scientific and technological progress, 
people feel themselves to be more than ever the inhabitants of 
one planet, the occupants of a common home. The new thinking is 
planetary thinking, when patriotism becomes inseparable from 
internationalism. And as far as the division of thinking into 
correct and incorrect is concerned, this is a model of the old 
way of thinking: Whoever thinks "not with us," thinks "against 
us." 
  [Denisova] In February 1992 you left the position of first 
deputy minister of foreign affairs of Russia and became deputy 
UN secretary general for policy, and in March 1993 you came 
simultaneously to head the United Nations' European Department. 
A year of work in New York and a year in Geneva--what has been 
achieved? 
  [Petrovskiy] I arrived at the United Nations in a period 
when, thanks to the end of the cold war, there had been a change 
not only in the international political environment but in the 
United Nations itself. The place of this organization in the 
changing world had to be conceptualized anew. So it was that the 
UN secretary general instructed me to take charge of work on 
preparation of his report "Agenda for Peace." This was a unique 
experiment in collective search for answers to the question of 
the role of the United Nations under the new conditions. The 
working group studied an enormous number of proposals concerning 
the renewal of the United Nations coming from both states and 
academic and other nongovernment institutions. I should mention 
with satisfaction that Russian political thought made a 
significant contribution, particularly to the elaboration of the 
concept of preventive and peacemaking diplomacy. 
  Aside from this, there was much practical work also. I was 
entrusted with negotiating a settlement of the Libyan crisis, 
took part in the elaboration of the concept and rules of 
procedure of the International Conference on the Former 
Yugoslavia, was in charge of the reorganization of the political 
machinery of the central headquarters of the United Nations, and 
was present at the birth of the first actions of preventive 
diplomacy. 
  After New York, I found myself in Geneva--the second center 
of activity of the United Nations, where the threads of the 
control of UN operations not only connected with the 
safeguarding of peace but also with socioeconomic development, a 
strengthening of democratic institutions, and the establishment 
of international standards in the sphere of science and 
technology are concentrated. Geneva has afforded enormous 
opportunities for the realization of the ideas which were 
contained in the report "Agenda for Peace." 
  A most important task is to use the unique multilateral 
negotiating mechanism available in Geneva--the Conference on 
Disarmament, whose secretariat I came to head last December--for 
the speediest preparation of an all-embracing treaty banning 
tests of nuclear weapons and to contribute to a settlement of 
conflicts and crises. 
  Another task is to provide for the interaction of the United 
Nations and European regional structures--the European Union, 
NATO, the Council of Europe, the European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development, and the Conference on Security 
and Cooperation in Europe. For the United Nations this is 
exceptionally important in a practical sense because in a period 
of global change numerous problems can be resolved only in close 
interaction with regional mechanisms. And the European regional 
structures, which have built up great political capital, could 
be both a help to the United Nations and a kind of good example 
for other regimes. 
  I believe that today, when a strengthening of the existing 
mechanisms and the formation of new mechanisms of regional 
interaction are required, it is Europe that could help in both 
word and deed. And for the development of regional cooperation 
in the geopolitical space of the former Union the experience of 
West Europe would be very useful. 
  [Denisova] What, briefly, is the essence of the reform of 
the 
United Nations and its European Department? 
  [Petrovskiy] We have outlined a reform of the UN European 
Department, the purpose of which is to make Geneva a second 
global center of the United Nations. 
  The plan of action provides, first, for a decentralization 
of 
management and the endowment of the European headquarters with 
greater freedom in organizational decisionmaking and, second, 
for the most efficient use possible of the unique multilateral 
mechanisms available in Geneva and the elimination of 
duplication in their work. Geneva will be the headquarters of 
the UN high commissioner for human rights, who has just been 
appointed. 
  I believe that at least one or two sessions of the Security 
Council could perfectly well be held here annually at foreign 
minister level. 
  It is important to observe that the activity of the European 
headquarters of the United Nations could be of great interest to 
Russia also. First, the path leading to Russia's integration in 
the system of the world economy lies via Geneva. Russia's 
membership of the GATT is of priority significance in this 
connection. This would not only complete Russia's representation 
in all the most important world economic structures but would 
also afford equal opportunities for an outlet onto the world 
market. Second, unique experience of learning in all spheres has 
been accumulated here. Today, when Russia is engaged in the 
formation of the legislative foundations of the new democracy 
and new economic structures, there is no need, I believe, to be 
reinventing the wheel, it is perfectly possible to make use of 
the recommendations of international organizations, with, of 
course, an adjustment for the "road conditions" of each specific 
country. 
  [Denisova] What do you like to do in your free time, do you 
have a hobby? 
  [Petrovskiy] My life has been such that for me work is both 
service and, in a sense, a hobby because diplomacy was and is 
for me a subject of both practical and academic interest. This 
is quite convenient since I do not have any free time in any 
case. I value contacts with my diplomat colleagues, with 
friends. I am, as before, interested in art. 
  We are currently preparing for the 50th anniversary of the 
United Nations and we would like to open the Palace of Nations, 
where the European Department of the United Nations is located, 
to the public. This is an architectural monument, a striking 
work of art deco. We would like also to show the public the 
archives of the League of Nations. These archives are rich not 
only politically but also artistically. We have in our 
storerooms works of Maurice Denis, Vlaminck, Kate Kohlwitz, and 
other outstanding artists of the first half of the 20th century. 
The collection of geographical maps is an inestimable treasure 
of the Palace of Nations. Maps are, after all, not only a plan 
of terrain but also a graphic expression of political 
consciousness. 
  [Denisova] The visit to Russia of the UN secretary general 
is 
scheduled for 1 April. What do you expect from this visit? 
  [Petrovskiy] Primarily a meaningful dialogue between the UN 
secretary general and the president of Russia. Questions 
connected with a settlement of the crisis situations will be at 
the center of attention. The United Nations is today 
contributing actively to the settlement of conflicts in the 
geopolitical space of the former Union--in Georgia and 
Tajikistan. For its part, Russia is actively helping in the 
search for diplomatic solutions in the Near East and taking part 
in UN peacekeeping operations in Bosnia-Hercegovina and in 
Croatia. But this is just one aspect of the visit. Questions of 
the use of the United Nations' socioeconomic possibilities for 
the accomplishment of the tasks that confront Russia will be 
discussed also. 

