Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by G. Potapenko: "Yu. Meshkov: `We Have Inherited </F>
a Mountain of Problems'"] 
  [Text] The first news conference by Yuriy Meshkov, the 
first Crimean president, was held in the session hall of the 
Supreme Soviet on 31 January and was attended by Crimean and 
foreign journalists. 
  Yuriy Meshkov began his news conference with a brief appeal 
to Crimean citizens thanking them for voting, saying: "At a 
time when society is in material and spiritual poverty, we have 
to deal with a mountain of inherited problems -- a collapsed 
economy, incompetent authorities, and a sharp increase in crime. 
A tremendously creative job is in front of us. Without your 
support, we will be unable to retain power. I am ready to 
cooperate with all political leaders of the Crimea, with 
representatives of all nationalities, and with every one who 
values peace and prosperity in the Crimea. The election results 
showed that the people of the Crimea are a single nation. The 
Crimea can and should become a bridge of friendship and 
cooperation between Ukraine and Russia." 
  One of the main questions at the conference was how the 
president plans to build this bridge. 
  "We will restore the destroyed relations with Russia and 
pursue normal economic cooperation with Ukraine." 
  Speaking on interethnic relations in the Crimea, he said: 
"The situation in the Crimea and hotspots of the former Soviet 
Union continue to be compared with a persistence that I do not 
understand, though they have nothing in common.... First of 
all, we have no such preconditions in the Crimea. We have 
nothing that could make us fear such developments. Such views 
are not supported within the Crimea. If the Ukrainian economy 
does not collapse and we are able to rescue ourselves, 
everything will be okay. At the same time, our stance on the 
Black Sea Fleet remains the same -- a single Black Sea Fleet, 
owned by Russia, is the key factor of stability in the Crimea." 
  Yuriy Meshkov stressed that his election victory does not 
mean that a period of mass purges will follow. He said that it 
would be irrational not to use the experience of the old guard. 
Of course, people who have compromised themselves and broken 
the law will have to leave their posts. 
  Speaking about relations with the Crimean Mejlis, Yu. 
Meshkov 
said: "You should not think that all Tatars in the Crimea 
represent a single monolithic movement. The Tatar movement 
contains several movements and trends. We are in close contact 
with some of them and coordinate our actions with their 
representatives. I know that many Crimean Tatars voted for us. 
That is enough to ensure peace and stability in the Crimea. A 
key task of our policy is to ensure the implementation of our 
citizens' rights. We admit that the human rights of the 
deported peoples were violated. The state must compensate them 
for their moral and material losses. The Republic of the Crimea 
must draw up a legal basis for the state's obligations toward 
the people whose rights were violated. It is quite another 
matter that our poor budget will not let us provide compensation 
for those losses. However, we are conducting talks with Russia, 
Ukraine, Uzbekistan, and other republics on this issue. I hope 
that the state will settle accounts with its citizens." 
  Yu. Meshkov emphasized that the political rights of the 
Crimean Tatars will be assured in accordance with their 
requirements, the demands of human rights, and international 
agreements. 

