Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Christopher Lockwood report: "Hurd Votes Row Threatens To </F>
Sink EC Treaty"] 
  [Text] Strasbourg -- Euro-MPs [Members of the European 
Parliament] from all parties threatened yesterday to block a 
treaty expanding the EC from 12 members to 16 if British demands 
to preserve its power to block directives are met. 
  Speaker after speaker at the Strasbourg parliament stated 
during a debate on the enlargement talks that it would be 
impossible for the treaty to be ratified by the 518-member 
chamber if the British position were adopted. 
  There was support for Britain from only one MEP, a Spaniard. 
  The problem arises because of British fears that the 
admission of Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden next year will 
dangerously dilute Britain's ability to block measures it 
disapproves of. 
  During two days of talks in Brussels this week, Mr Douglas 
Hurd, Foreign Secretary, told his European counterparts that 
Britain did not want the number of votes needed to block 
decisions increased when the Council of Ministers, the EC's 
decision-making body, gains in size. Britain now faces either a 
humiliating climb-down or the rancour it will cause by delaying 
the expansion of the EC. 
  Currently, two large countries and a small one can stall 
legislation by assembling a "blocking minority" of 23 votes out 
of a total of 76. Fifty-four votes out of a total of 76 are 
needed to approve an EC proposal in the present 12-member 
Council. 
  The number of votes are allocated to each country roughly 
according to population size, but small countries enjoy a 
disproportionate weighting. 
  Britain has 10 votes, or roughly one for each five million 
people; the new members will get a vote for roughly every three 
million. 
  Mr Hurd argues that, if the blocking minority is raised to 
27, it would be possible for countries with 41 percent of the 
EC's population to be outvoted. 
  Britain, with limited support from Spain, wants to keep the 
blocking minority at 23 after the enlargement. The remaining 
members, led by Belgium and the Netherlands, want it raised to 
27 to make it harder to veto majority decisions. 
  Herr Klaus Kinkel, the German Foreign Minister, opposed 
keeping the blocking minority at 23 for fear that the European 
Parliament would refuse to ratify the treaty. 
  "Britain has no chance of getting its position approved. It 
is a mystery why they have dug themselves into such a hole," a 
senior diplomat said. 
  Diplomats last night outlined a possible, though far from 
satisfactory, compromise, which would at least allow the 
enlargement procedure to go ahead. 
  It is a classic Euro-fudge. Under the compromise the 
blocking minority would be frozen at 23, in accordance with 
British wishes, pending the report of a high-level committee, to 
be established at June's EC summit in Corfu. 
  The committee would also prepare for institutional reform at 
an Inter-Govermental Conference in 1996. 
  The compromise would allow Britain to claim a degree of 
victory, although the row will merely be deferred for a year or 
so. 
  But it will be difficult to get through the European 
Parliament. There is also the strong possibilty that either the 
Belgian or Dutch parliaments would then reject the treaty. 
  The row, which is pitting Britain against its European 
partners to a degree rarely seen since the days of Mrs 
Thatcher's campaign for a budget rebate, will rumble on until 
ministers meet next Tuesday [15 March]. 
  That meeting will also attempt to resolve outstanding issues 
over Norway's membership. 

