BFN 

  [Text] New Delhi, April 20 (AFP) -- India has temporarily 
capped its ambitious Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile (IRBM) 
programme, apparently because of a fiscal crunch, a newspaper 
reported Wednesday. 
  The government has indefinitely postponed further trials of 
the "Agni" (Fire) missile, which has a range of 2,500 kilometers 
(1,560 miles), THE HINDUSTAN TIMES said. 
  The temporary capping "is being attributed to a financial 
cruch," it said, but added that the postponment was seen as a 
concession to American concerns about India's missile programme. 
  Indian officials were not available to comment on THE TIMES 
report. 
  The United States has been pressing India to stop 
development 
of the missile which can carry a nuclear or conventional warhead 
or put a payload weighing one tonne in orbit. 
  Washington says Agni, which forms part of India's Integrated 
Missile Development Programme launched [words indistinct] could 
lead to missile proliferation in the region. 
  India, which in 1974 carried out a nuclear test but claimed 
its nuclear programme was entirely peaceful, has described its 
missile programme as a "non-nuclear deterrent." 
  The newspaper said the Defence Research Development 
Organisation (DRDO) had sought some 17 million dollars to 
conduct three more Agni test launches but the government had not 
responded, citing a shortage of funds. 
  "Defence sources claimed that India was not going to abandon 
its strategic missile programme under American pressure, but 
admitted that some delays would now be inevitable," it said. 
  India's missle programme also envisages the development of 
an 
Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile with double the range of 
Agni. It has also developed an array of weapons systems 
including surface- to-air, surface-to-surface, anti-ship and 
anti-tank rockets. 
  THE TIMES added that India had meanwhile finalised a deal to 
buy 30 fourth generation MiG-29M fighter aircraft from Russia, 
apparently in response to a U.S. proposal to sell 38 F-16 jets 
to Pakistan. 
  "There is every possibility that India may start getting the 
MiG-29M even before the U.S. Senate gives the nod for the supply 
of F-16s to Pakistan, "it said. 
  The White House has asked the U.S. Congress for a one-time 
waiver of an amendment barring military sales to Pakistan 
because of its nuclear weapons programme to allow it deliver the 
F-16s. 
  THE TIMES described the MiG-29Ms as "highly sophisticated," 
with all-weather radar system. They are "rated better than the 
F-16s in most respects, except for their armament load 
capacity," it added. 
  India has fought three wars with Pakistan and one with 
China. 

