Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Helmut Loelhoeffel: "SPD Prefers To Rely on </F>
Experienced Politicians in European Elections; SPD Will Campaign 
Against Racism and Nationalism in June Election and Try To 
Appeal to Foreigners"] 
  [Text] Bonn -- Against the background of the national and 
regional elections later this year all the political parties are 
getting ready for the upcoming elections to the European 
Parliament on 12 June. The Alliance 90/Greens were first to 
decide on their slate of candidates. The FDP [Free Democratic 
Party] will name its slate this weekend, and on 25 January the 
SPD [Social Democratic Party of Germany] will hold its 
conference of delegates. 
  "We consider ourselves the advocates of German interests in 
Europe," the SPD call to the conference states. There are four 
issues on which the SPD proposes to focus both in terms of 
European policy and in the campaign for the 99 seats allotted to 
Germany: to create new jobs and social democracy; to maintain 
the living standard on our continent; to enhance protection 
against crime; and to safeguard the peace and to defend against 
the new nationalism and racism. The SPD hopes that these slogans 
which will appear probably in one form or another in the 
programs of the other parties will help it to retain at least 
the 36 seats it presently holds in the Strasbourg parliament. 
  Germany's Social Democrats are trying to enlist the public's 
support by stating that "with your vote you are saying yes to a 
strong, just, ecologically viable, and peaceful Europe." They 
are appealing not only to the indigenous population but in 
particular to 1.5 million citizens of foreign countries living 
in Germany who are able to vote for the first time ever. Polls 
have shown that support for the SPD among foreigners is greater 
than average. The campaign manifesto does not specifically 
address the roughly 1.5 million voters but the names of Wijsma 
Zimmermann, a Dutch woman, and Jannis Sakellariou, a Greek, 
appear on 36 of the safe seats the SPD expects to win. 
  The SPD believes its chances are good. To be sure, after 
winning 40.8 percent of the vote in the first European election 
in 1979, the party slipped to 37.4 percent five years later and 
stagnated at 37.3 percent in 1989; but in view of the fact that 
the party is unified on European policy it believes it will do 
better this time. Part of the reason for the SPD's strong 
showing in the first go-round was the fact that Willy Brandt 
himself appeared on the ballot as the top candidate. Katharina 
Focke, a female political leader of the time, occupied that 
position on the SPD slate in the second election and in the 
third election the party named Gerd Walter, a virtual unknown 
nationally, who had made a name for himself as a deputy in the 
European Parliament and subsequently became a minister in the 
cabinet of Schleswig-Holstein. This time around the top position 
on the ballot went to Klaus Haensch, an even more inconspicuous 
member of the party. 
  Haensch, 55, who was born in Silesia and now lives in 
Duesseldorf, is listed in the Bundestag directory as a 
publicist. A member of the SPD since 1964, Haensch worked as 
press spokesman in the North Rhine-Westphalian Science Ministry 
and has been a member of the European Parliament since 1979. 
From the start he has held important posts in the socialist 
caucus of which the German social democrats are a part and which 
was recently renamed the caucus of the Social Democratic Party 
of Europe (SPE). Haensch has been deputy chairman since 1989. 
  However unknown Haensch may be outside his home district of 
Mettmann, he is highly regarded and successful in Strasbourg, 
Luxembourg, and Brussels. He considers it an achievement that he 
got the SPE caucus "more rapidly than some others" to react to 
the changes in Germany "at a time when even the SPD itself had 
not yet begun to adapt to the new situation." He is also proud 
of the fact that he managed to obtain a consensus for the 
controversial increase in German seats in the European 
Parliament from the present 81 to 99 in the near future "in 
close cooperation with Reinhard Bocklet of the Christian Social 
Union (CSU)" who now holds the post of minister of agriculture 
in Bavaria. Haensch also claims "that I did my bit in getting 
the SPE caucus to agree to the Maastricht Treaty." Other German 
members of the European Parliament call Haensch "extremely 
goal-oriented and convincingly diligent," i.e. qualities which 
make up for his lack of charisma. The SPD leadership vainly 
looked for attractive top candidates. In the end, the party 
decided to put up "experienced people" rather than to offer the 
voters some media personality who might not deliver as expected 
later on. Haensch deplores the fact that "we no longer have 
exemplary European candidates such as Willy Brandt or Katharina 
Focke to offer but that is something we have to live with." 
  The truth of the matter is that the SPD representatives to 
the European parliament are perfectly presentable. They may be 
underestimated by the German media and go unnoticed back home 
but they are highly regarded wherever European policy is made. 
Those who are not running again include Hans Peters, the 
European parliament's vice president; Thomas von der Vring, the 
chairman of the budget committee; Klaus Wettig, a fiscal expert; 
South Africa expert Barbara Simons; Dieter Schinzel, a media and 
Arab world expert; Leyla Onur, a social affairs expert; and Karl 
Mihr, the chairman of the factory committee at the Kassel VW 
plant. The new SPD candidates--40 percent of the first 36 on the 
list are women--include Bundestag deputy Barbara Weiler from 
Fulda and Fritz Kuckelhorn, a metal workers union official from 
Cologne. 
  The SPD planners do not view this election as a "test" for 
the Bundestag election although Haensch thinks that "it will 
indicate a trend." Detlev Samland, a European Parliament deputy 
and a member of the SPD campaign committee, has been given the 
job of coordinating the European election with the other 
elections this year. The campaign which will be kicked off at 
the delegates conference in Bonn on 25 February will conclude 
with a rally in Duisburg in June and will cost less than 30 
million German marks. Twelve buses with small theater companies 
will be sent around the country for purposes of publicity and 
information, cultural presentations and discussions. TV spots 
have been recorded, a computer game has been produced; fan club 
soccer tournaments are scheduled; pamphlets and leaflets are 
being distributed, including a European pocket glossary which 
provides information on a whole range of topics such as exhaust 
gas emissions and fiscal intricacies. 
  Haensch admits that a great many SPD members feel that they 
are out of their depth in the campaign. To provide missing 
information, the party headquarters has been distributing 
briefing material based on the concept "fit for Europe." But 
Europe is a "difficult subject," Haensch says. "Part of every 
meeting always sounds like an adult education seminar." 

