BFN 

  [Text] Pretoria, 9 May (PL) -- Cuban President Fidel Castro 
reiterated to antiapartheid leader Nelson Mandela the Cuban 
Government's resolve to establish diplomatic relations with the 
South African state and to cooperate and support it in this new 
phase. 
  In a message released in Pretoria by the Caribbean 
delegation, Castro told the South African president-elect of the 
Cuban people's joy over the establishment of a multiracial and 
democratic government in South Africa. 
  The Cuban head of state said in brief statements to PRENSA 
LATINA he wishes Mandela peace, harmony, and unity in the great 
task he must fulfill as of tomorrow when, during a solemn 
ceremony, he takes the oath as president of South Africa. 
  Castro had earlier expressed joy at being in South Africa 
for 
Mandela's inauguration. The two men will meet for the first 
time in Pretoria tomorrow, during the solemn ceremony. 
  Castro added this is an important day: "It is an opportunity 
to experience an event of historic importance for the peoples of 
Cuba and the world," he said. 
  The Cuban president is one of 42 heads of state who have 
announced they would attend the event, which will also be 
attended by many well-known figures. 
  The Caribbean statesman arrived in Pretoria by highway from 
Johannesburg, where he arrived on Monday on a flight from Accra, 
where he spent a 12-hour technical stopover en route from 
Barbados. 
  Castro was welcomed in Ghana by his friend Ghanaian 
President 
Jerry John Rawlings, who within the past few hours also traveled 
to South Africa where the presidents of Nigeria, Angola, 
Zimbabwe, Sudan, and Palestine have already arrived. 
  A source close to the Cuban delegation disclosed Castro has 
already received several requests for interviews and meetings 
from heads of state and government, and from journalists who are 
in South Africa. 
  Among the earliest requests were those from the presidents 
of 
Sudan, Nigeria, the PLO, and South African television stations. 
  It is expected the period following Mandela's inauguration 
will be one of intense work for Castro, the source added. 
  The Cuban high-level delegation is lodged at the Arcadia 
Hotel and consists of Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina, Ricardo 
Alarcon, president of parliament, and Environment, Science, and 
Technology Minister Rosa Elena Simeon. 

