Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Margus Zakharov, general director of Labor </F>
Market Department, by Gratsian Olshak; date and place not given: 
"Is Unemployment on the Wane?"] 
  [Text] How did the year go in the labor market? 
According to some forecasts, unemployment in Estonia was 
supposed to have reached disastrous proportions by the end of 
the past year. Specific figures were cited: The number of 
unemployed could reach as high as 200,000. Fortunately, the 
predictions did not come true.... 
  General Director Margus Zakharov of the Labor Market 
Department answered our correspondent's questions. 
  [Zakharov] To tell you the truth, we also expected the 
unemployment curve to start creeping upward in November, but we 
were wrong. I hope this does not sound incompetent, but we still 
do not know why the anticipated rise did not occur. There were 
tendencies toward this. Last year there were almost twice as 
many graduates of academic institutions and training schools, 
and they might have been expected to remain jobless. Our 
strained relationship with our neighbors, especially Russia, 
also could have caused a rise in unemployment--and an extremely 
substantial one at that. Russia's harsh measures terminated the 
livelihood of the people who were buying goods there and selling 
them in Estonia and engaging in petty contraband across the 
Russian border. These people, however, had acquired the kind of 
skills and experience that are appreciated by the new generation 
of employers, and they were not left jobless either. 
  Today we can say that what we are experiencing is not mass 
unemployment, but a structural variety of unemployment. In other 
words, a certain segment of the population is not working, but 
the number of job vacancies is quite high. Sometimes employers 
complain that they cannot find the right people for these jobs. 
To meet job requirements, the people who are out of work have to 
undergo retraining and change their views and attitude toward 
work. 
  People in Tallinn, incidentally, have already realized that 
they are personally responsible for their employment status and 
that they have to learn and master new occupations. This process 
has also begun in Narva and Sillamae. After all, Ida-Virumaa was 
also responsible for the lower rate of unemployment in the 
republic as a whole. 

<FIG ID=FBIS-USR-020-28A>           Situation in Tallinn Labor Exchange by Months </FIG>





    [Olshak] Has the center of unemployment moved from 
northeastern Estonia to the south? 
  [Zakharov] Yes. The Estonian population of those regions, in 
contrast to the Russian-speaking residents of Ida-Virumaa, were 
not ready for this. The situation there today is quite 
stressful. People in Narva and Kohtla-Jarve knew they might lose 
their jobs and were emotionally prepared for this. Just a year 
ago, the resident of southern Estonia, on the other hand, was 
certain that he would still have his job even after others had 
lost theirs. The total number of unemployed people in Vorumaa 
today, however, is equivalent to more than 6 percent of the 
able-bodied adult population, and the figure is around 4 percent 
in the Polva and Valga districts. For the sake of comparison, 
the rate of unemployment in Narva is only around 1.5 percent. 
  [Olshak] But we have also heard other figures for Narva, and 
some have been absolutely unnerving.... 
  [Zakharov] I have to say this: I do not like it when people 
use unemployment statistics and play political games with human 
emotions in pursuit of their own goals. This is what happened in 
Narva and Ida-Virumaa. Unemployment was the stick with which 
politicians threatened the people. There is no question that 
things were difficult at the Krenholm factory and that many jobs 
were cut, but some people in Narva were actually fanning the 
flames: Everyone would be fired and no one would be paid any 
wages.... Meanwhile, the situation was even more critical at the 
"Dvigatel" plant, where there are, incidentally, just as many 
workers as at the Krenholm factory. Furthermore, the situation 
in Tallinn as a whole was no better than in Narva. People were 
being laid off from the shipyards and many other enterprises in 
addition to the "Dvigatel" plant. 
  People use different unemployment figures, but we should 
confine our discussion specifically to the people who are 
actively seeking jobs, are willing to begin work right away, and 
have applied for job placement services. If a person is actively 
seeking a position calling for his level of energy and 
knowledge, he is certain to be included in our statistics. Today 
there are 15,000 unemployed individuals in the republic--i.e., 
people collecting unemployment benefits--and another 18,000 who 
do not qualify for these benefits yet but have already asked for 
our help. 
  [Olshak] Exactly how many people came to you to find jobs in 
the past year? What kind of help did you give them? 
  [Zakharov] The Tallinn Labor Exchange received around 70,000 
requests for assistance, and some people applied more than once. 
We have a heavy workload. After all, ours is not the kind of 
exchange that buys or sells something.... We have to work with 
the individual to place him in the correct job--to look for a 
place where he might be able to find a permanent position or an 
opportunity for training or temporary work. A government decree 
passed in March stipulated that an individual who is assigned to 
a temporary position by the labor exchange is entitled to 
extended unemployed status. For the whole period of his 
temporary employment, he will collect benefits in addition to 
his earnings. Furthermore, we now have ways of stimulating 
hiring: We have money for training and a chance to subsidize the 
employer for half a year or a whole year if he cannot afford to 
pay the worker the minimum wage. 
  In any case, all of this resulted in the reduction of 
unemployment in the republic in the third and fourth quarters. 
There was a somewhat unexpected situation in the Tallinn Labor 
Exchange in September, when there were twice as many applicants 
as in August. Many people wearing leather jackets and sportswear 
came to the exchange to apply for an unemployment card. Quite 
frankly, we experienced a veritable onslaught. The reason was 
quite simple: Starting in September there was compensation for 
heating costs, and the unemployed were covered by a free medical 
plan. 
  [Olshak] Who is the typical unemployed person today, so to 
speak? Who has the least likelihood of finding a job: women, 
people with a higher education? 
  [Zakharov] Our studies indicate that the first cuts affected 
engineering and technical personnel, but now most of the 
unemployed are people without an education. If a person does not 
have a specialty, is not fluent in Estonian, and is uneducated, 
he will have difficulty finding work. Others having difficulty 
are people of pre-pension age--those who will be retiring in 
five years or sooner. Employers prefer young workers. In Tallinn 
these older individuals represented 25 percent of all of the 
unemployed in the second quarter of last year, the figure had 
already risen to 40 percent in the third quarter, and we still 
do not know what happened in the fourth. 
  [Olshak] What about the employers? Who are they? 
  [Zakharov] Last year it became clear that more than half of 
the employers are in the private sector. They are more likely to 
trust the labor exchange and make use of its services. 
Furthermore, competing firms are even willing to spend some 
money to find a good worker. State structures, on the other 
hand, are still hiring people either on someone's recommendation 
or on the basis of some other kind of affiliation. This practice 
is frequently counterproductive. 
  [Olshak] Are there really any state enterprises left that 
are 
hiring people instead of just letting them go? 
  [Zakharov] Yes, there are. Some examples are the railroad, 
the Port of Tallinn, and some large plants. We are happy about 
the recovery of the Baltic Shipbuilding Plant. It will be hiring 
around 100 people, but these will be specialists, and not just 
people with no particular profession. I hope that in this case 
we will be able to demonstrate our ability to act as good 
partners. We want to satisfy the plant's requirements, and we 
are willing to arrange for the instruction or training of the 
workers the plant needs. 
  [Olshak] Unemployment benefits now amount to 180 kroon. Do 
you expect an increase? 
  [Zakharov] That is a difficult question. Today these 
benefits 
and earnings from temporary jobs produce the same income as some 
permanent positions. Besides this, we must not forget that the 
amount of the benefits depends on the financial status of the 
state. 
  From the standpoint of national economic development, I feel 
that the main objective today is not higher unemployment 
benefits, but a larger training grant, so that the individual 
will not be "housebound," but will be able to travel, for 
instance, from his home in Kivioli to a training site in 
Kohtla-Jarve. This would be a good investment. 
  [Olshak] Here is the last question. What kind of year do you 
think 1994 will be in the labor market? 
  [Zakharov] It will be difficult, but not hopeless. 

