Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ribamar Oliveira and Paulo Sotero] </F>
  [Text] Washington -- Contrary to government expectations, 
IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus yesterday postponed 
announcing the approval of a standby agreement with Brazil. He 
said a decision would "probably" be made after the third stage 
of the FHC2 Plan [Fernando Henrique Cardoso's second plan], when 
the URV [real value unit] becomes the real. Until then, 
Camdessus proposed to Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso 
"close cooperation within an IMF monitoring program." 
  Even though he did not announce the standby agreement, 
Camdessus did everything possible to make clear his support for 
"Cardoso's efforts to stabilize the Brazilian economy." In a 
joint appearance with the minister, Camdessus expressed his 
inclination to support Brazil's economic plan and continue 
working with the Brazilian Government. 
  Stressing the importance of using "appropriate language," 
Camdessus read a communique in which he summarized what he 
called the country's "significant progress" in fighting 
inflation; a fiscal program that anticipates a zero operational 
deficit, a primary surplus of more than 4 percent of the GDP, 
the acceleration of the privatization program, strong monetary 
policies, and the conclusion of an agreement to restructure 
Brazil's debt with banks. 
  The doubt created by the communique is whether it will be 
enough to convince the U.S. Treasury Department to issue the 
bonds that will serve to consolidate the agreement with banks, 
which has already been signed, but which according to 
contractual conditions can only become effective if the Treasury 
issues the appropriate guarantee mechanisms. 
  During the afternoon Cardoso had a meeting with Treasury 
Under Secretary Lawrence Summers to discuss the issue. "I am 
sure we already have the formula to close an agreement with the 
banks," Cardoso said before the meeting. At the Treasury 
Camdessus' statements were considered "a very positive 
development." An official source said that the condition for 
the issuing of guarantees has always been "an adequate 
agreement" with the IMF. This might indicate a more flexible 
position on the part of the U.S. Government, which conditioned 
the issuing of the guarantee bonds to Brazil's signing of the 
standby agreement with the IMF. 
  The main difficulty with the IMF is the doubts of the 
experts 
who visited Brazil. The experts doubt that the fiscal 
adjustment will effectively achieve an operational balancing of 
public accounts with an appreciable drop in the inflation rate. 
The experts warned the government that when inflation drops 
there will be a substantial drop in revenues, and budget 
disbursements will increase. 
  Central Bank President Pedro Malan, Economic Policy 
Secretary 
Winston Fritsch, and BNDES [National Bank for Economic and 
Social Development] President Persio Arida are discussing with 
IMF experts several budget disbursement projections based on a 
monthly inflation rate close to zero. If we are to go by 
Camdessus' remarks, everything seems to indicate that the 
Brazilian mission has not yet convinced the IMF. 
  Camdessus said that the IMF will continue preparing the 
technical memorandum on the program, and will present a report 
to the executive board "as soon as possible." This will be 
serve, at the right time, as the basis for a letter of intent on 
a program to be implemented in the second half of 1994 and for a 
basic 1995 economic model. 

