BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ana Diaz] </F>
  [Text] Russia hopes shortly to renew a trilateral trade 
agreement with Venezuelan Petroleum, Inc. [Petroven] to supply 
oil to Cuba. Through this agreement Russia will supply up to 
70,000 barrels of crude oil per day to the European market, and 
Petroven will supply an equal amount to the Caribbean island. 
Under a similar agreement, which was suspended in 1992, Russia 
and Venezuela saved $1 per barrel in freight expenses. 
  Russia supplied Ural crude to the Ruhr Oel refinery system, 
a 
Veba Oel and Petroven company, in Germany, while Petroven 
supplied Cuba with reconstituted crude. Vitali Zeleakin, 
president of the Committee for Economic Reform of the Russian 
Federation Council, and Vladimir Turdenev, Russian Foreign 
Ministry director for Central and South America, said that only 
a few technical aspects remain to be resolved before deliveries 
to Europe and Cuba can resume. The two officials said that, far 
from reflecting ideological positions, this is basically a trade 
agreement beneficial to the two parties. Currently, Russia 
trades 2.5 million tons of oil for 1 million tons of Cuban sugar. 
  A delegation of Russian parliamentarians is visiting 
Venezuela this week. They have expressed the political desire of 
the federation of republics to strengthen bilateral relations in 
areas such as oil. Yesterday they held meetings with Energy and 
Mines Minister Erwin Arrieta and Petroven President Luis Giusti. 
  Another interesting Russian proposal regards their 
willingness to cooperate with OPEC. Russia is considering 
joining OPEC because it considers the organization an important 
agent in maintaining market stability. Moreover, the Russians 
offer the possibility of exchanging mining and petroleum 
technology with Venezuela. 
  Russia is of interest as an oil-producing country despite 
the 
sharp drop in its established production capacity of 12 million 
barrels per day in the 1970's to 7 million barrels per day at 
present, a volume which it wants to increase by opening the 
market to national and foreign private investors. 

