Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by German Chancellor Helmut Kohl with </F>
foreign and domestic correspondents in Bonn on 23 March -- live] 
  [Excerpts] [Kohl] Ladies and Gentlemen, let me start with a 
comment on the recent violence and the highway blockades by the 
Kurd extremists. The terrorism by these groups has taken on a 
new dimension. It is an unacceptable abuse of our hospitality 
that we, under no circumstances will or can accept. The 
perpetrators must be aware that they will have to expect tough 
punishments and also deportation. We will have to see whether 
the current law on foreigners offers a sufficient basis. If 
this is not the case, we will have to look at changes to the law 
as soon as possible. I think the talks that the federal 
interior minister is having today with his colleagues from the 
federal states will also bring progress on this. 
  Here in Germany the federal states are primarily responsible 
for public security and law and order. For this reason I want 
to appeal to the federal states here to do justice to their 
responsibility for peace within the country. I also want to 
offer the closest possible cooperation with the federal 
government. We will grant the federal states, if they wish it, 
all the support that is necessary. 
  Approximately 1.8 million Turkish citizens live in Germany, 
about 450,000 of them being Kurds and, according to our 
information, about 40,000 of these Kurds are PKK [Kurdistan 
Workers Party] sympathizers. For decades we have been living in 
peace with the great majority of our fellow Turkish citizens 
with good neighborly relations. Things have to stay this way. 
Precisely for this reason we have to protect ourselves from a 
violent minority and, if necessary, take severe measures against 
them. Anyone who plays down and tolerates the terrorism by 
foreign extremists, supports xenophobia and thus does the 
peaceful majority of our Turkish fellow citizens no favor. 
  We all want Germany to remain a foreigner-friendly country 
in 
the future. Our state based on the rule of law is obliged to 
protect the lives, the health, and the property of all the 
people living here. This applies to German citizens and to 
foreigners. This means our police officers have to provide a 
particularly difficult and frequently dangerous service. They 
must be aware that the large majority of the German population 
and the German Government support them in this service. I want 
to use this opportunity today to thank the police officers for 
the service they have provided. 
  I would now like to make a few remarks regarding the 
progress 
of the accession talks in the European Union. I regret that the 
European Union was yesterday unable to complete its accession 
negotiations with Austria, Sweden, Finland, and Norway. The 
foreign ministers will continue their talks next weekend. We 
Germans want to contribute everything we can to ensure that an 
acceptable conclusion is finally reached. This means that all 
those involved must demonstrate the will necessary to reach 
agreement. 
  During recent weeks we have been pressing for the northern 
expansion to include Norway, Finland, and Sweden -- just as was 
the case during the southern expansion when Spain and Portugal 
joined. It is entirely clear to us that the Scandinavian 
countries and Austria are just as much a part of Europe as the 
southern European states. It is already apparent that enormous 
progress has been made with regard to European integration 
during the last two years. 
  Within a short period of time, we have made substantial 
progress in terms of deepening and expanding the European Union 
through the Maastricht Treaty as well as the accession talks. 
This is in line with our basic goals and our interests -- not 
least in terms of European policy. This is the only way -- at 
least as far I am concerned -- that we will be able to ensure 
peace and freedom for our country and the continent as a whole 
in the future. There is no way we will be able to achieve this 
objective in the long-term through a superior form of free trade 
area. I want to say now that I will be advising you of our 
plans in good time and that the German presidency during the 
second half of the year will do everything it can to serve the 
objective I have mentioned. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, may I also say a few words about an 
issue that has concerned the German public and primarily also 
the French public over the last few weeks: The issue of my 
attendance or nonattendance at the celebrations marking the 50th 
anniversary of the landing of the Allies in Normandy. I would 
like to say one thing: I do not understand this discussion at 
all. At no time have I sought an invitation from any source or 
received such an invitation. I have at all times made it clear 
that, for myself, I would not accept such an invitation if it 
were to come. All reports to the contrary are pure invention. 
What surprises me somewhat is that -- just like 10 years ago in 
1984 -- such a discussion is being held again. There is no 
difference of opinion at all with the French Government and the 
French president over this matter. On Sunday [20 March], 
Francois Mitterrand made this clear in an interview with the AFP 
news agency, and I adhere to the view that German attendance at 
these celebrations is not appropriate. 
  I have in the meantime held intensive discussions with 
Mitterrand during our regular telephone calls on what we can do 
to stress again the close French-German friendship that has 
grown over the decades. We came to the conclusion that we would 
invite representatives of the younger generation -- youth 
groups, school classes, students -- to a festival of youth for 
French and German young people -- and also for young people from 
other countries -- in Heidelberg on 8 June to document once 
again our great friendship with a view to the future and not to 
the past, and also to celebrate our joint commitment to Europe. 
I am very grateful to State President Francois Mitterrand that 
he, for his part, emphasized this special gesture of solidarity. 
  In Heidelberg, we want, in particular, to express our joy at 
having succeeded over many years -- and I am also saying this on 
behalf of all other federal governments and all my predecessors 
-- in permanently establishing French-German friendship, without 
denying the experiences of history. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, on 31 August, after 50 years, the last 
Russian soldiers will leave German soil. That is 50 years after 
the first Soviet soldier walked on the territory of the German 
Reich. In September we will say farewell to our American, 
British, and French allies in Berlin. This is for us Germans, 
and, of course, for the Berliners especially, a particularly 
moving event. If we cast our minds back to 1948 for a moment 
everyone will understand that. The war ended three years before, 
and in a moment of serious danger the victors became our 
protectors, who courageously and successfully defended the 
freedom of West Berlin. The airlift was stronger than Stalin's 
attempts to cut the city off. When we look back to the years 
1959 and 1960, we also remember what our French, British, and 
American friends did for the German capital when Khrushchev made 
his ultimatum. 
  I have invited the American President, the British prime 
minister, and the French president to Berlin on 8 September for 
the formal leave-taking of the forces of the three powers in 
Berlin. Main points on the program will include a memorial 
ceremony for the Allied soldiers who died in the airlift for the 
freedom of Berlin, a ceremony in the Schauspielhaus [theater] 
with speeches by our guests, and at the end of the celebrations 
a great tattoo by the Bundeswehr in honor of our American, 
French, and British guests and of the American, French, and 
British soldiers. This will probably take place at the 
Brandenburg Gate. 
  The whole program is structured so that the Berlin 
population 
has the opportunity, in numbers as large as possible, to take 
part in these commemorations. The remaining soldiers from the 
former Soviet Union will leave Germany on 31 August to return to 
their home country. The return of the Russian troops to their 
homeland ends what was, up until the fall of the Wall, a painful 
chapter in the history of our two countries, and also Europe. 
Now we want to look to the future together and do everything to 
increase the depth of the good and friendly relations between 
Germany and Russia. My own personal wish is that the Russian 
soldiers return home with the feeling that they are now leaving 
a country of friends and partners. 
  I have invited President Yeltsin to come to Germany twice 
this year, first for an official visit in May -- the period from 
11-13 May has been agreed for this -- then for one day on 31 
August to attend the ceremony marking the departure of the 
Russian troops. The ceremony will take place in Weimar and 
Berlin. [passage omitted] The commemorations will then be 
continued throughout the day in Berlin with a wreath-laying 
ceremony at the memorial in Treptow involving Russian and German 
military guards of honor. Both President Yeltsin and I will 
address the Russian soldiers at this ceremony. 

