BFN 

  [Text] Seven ethnic groups involved in the recent conflict 
in the northern region have signed a cease-fire agreement in 
Accra. The agreement was signed under the auspices of the 
seven-member permanent government negotiating team. Newlove 
Mamata was at the signing ceremony: 
  [Begin recording] [Mamata] The seven-member permanent 
government negotiating team is chaired by Okumeni Dr. Obiri 
Yeboah, Omahene of Efutu Akwa Traditional Area. The first four 
groups to sign comprise leaders of the Konkomba, Nawuri, 
Nchumuri, and Basari ethnic groups, who form the minority 
faction in the conflict. The majority faction is comprised of 
the Dagbong or Dagomba, the Nanumba, and the Gonja ethnic groups. 
  By the terms of the agreement, the signatories shall observe 
and maintain an immediate, unconditional, and permanent 
cease-fire and disarm in the conflict areas. The agreement 
condemns and deplores the use of any form of violence to achieve 
any ethnic objective, while condemning atrocities committed on 
lives and property. According to the agreement, all sides will 
resolve to settle issues between them by due process of law. 
  The agreement also reaffirms the commitment of both sides to 
the unacceptability of acquiring land by force, to accept the 
principle of the inviolability of life, and condemns the pursuit 
of any sectarian or ethnic agenda that endangers the life and 
safety of other citizens. 
  All the leaders reaffirmed their commitment to peace, and 
promised to adhere to the terms of the agreement. 
  Okumeni Dr. Yeboah reminded both sides of their 
responsibilities under the agreement: 
  [Yeboah] Honorable delegates from the various ethnic groups, 
the permanent negotiation team thanks you very much for the 
support and the cooperation you have given us so far. As I said 
earlier on, your responsibility will be to disseminate the 
contents of the accord you've just signed to your people, in the 
towns and villages in your respective traditional areas, and 
ensure that the contents seep down properly to them. It is the 
wish of the negotiating team to also extend to you again our 
heart-felt thanks for the give-and- take attitude you have taken 
in this issue, and we hope that when we resume and tackle the 
main causes of the dispute, you will still continue to help us. 
  [Mamata] Leaders from both factions will reassemble in Accra 
on Monday, 27 June, to begin serious consultations in a bid to 
find a lasting solution to the conflict. [end recording] 

