Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, March 18 (KCNA) -- Comrade Kim Chong-il, 
supreme commander of the Korean People's Army, highly praised 
the feat of Hong Kyong-ae, a non-commissioned officer of the 
People's Army who died after saving her comrades while on her 
military duty, and recently took care that she was awarded the 
title of heroine of the Republic and her platoon was called 
"Hong Kyong-ae Platoon". 
  Last year, Comrade Kim Chong-il, upon hearing that Yu 
Kyong-nam, a soldier of the Korean People's Army, died after 
saving his comrades by covering a handgrenade on the point of 
explosion with his body, called him a "fine son of the country" 
and put him up as a hero of the Republic. 
  The self-sacrificing spirit of devoting oneself to the 
country and the people is highly displayed among KPA soldiers. 
In this course, many heroes and heroines have emerged. 
  In the 1990s when the Korean revolution has entered a new, 
higher stage of development, many heroes have been produced, 
including KPA officer Kim Kwang-chol and KPA soldiers Han 
Yong-chol and Yim Kwang-chol who laid down their youth for the 
country. 
  They stand like immortals under the deep loving care of 
Comrade Kim Chong-il. 
  Their busts were built at their alma maters and their 
schools, platoons and companies were named after them. 
  His loving care based on a high sense of obligation also 
reaches the heroic soldiers who passed away long ago. 
  Standing on the Chujak Peak of scenic Mt. Taesong in the 
suburbs of Pyongyang is a revolutionary martyrs cemetery with 
busts of anti-Japanese revolutionary forerunners who devoted 
their whole lives to the liberation of the country and the 
happiness of the people. 
  Saying the anti-Japanese revolutionary martyrs are all 
heroes 
and heroines, Comrade Kim Chong-il saw to it that the medal of 
the hero of the Republic was embossed in the centre of the 
wreath-laying stand of the cemetery, thus awarding them the 
title of hero which had not been conferred upon them in their 
lifetime. 
  Under such benevolence a patriotic martyrs cemetery was 
built 
in Sinmi-ri in the suburbs of Pyongyang to hand down to the 
posterity the exploits of the martyrs who devoted their whole 
lives to the cause of socialist construction and national 
reunification. 
  There are many places, industrial establishments, 
cooperative 
farms and schools bearing the names of heroes in different parts 
of the country, more than 100 units in all. They include Kim 
Chong-suk county (former Sinpa County) in Yanggang Province, a 
historical place associated with the revolutionary exploits of 
Comrade Kim Chong-suk, an indomitable communist revolutionary 
fighter, during the anti-Japanese revolutionary struggle, Kim 
Chaek City (former Songjin City) in North Hamgyong Province, the 
hometown of Comrade Kim Chaek, an anti-Japanese revolutionary 
fighter, the Yi Su-pok Chemical College in Sunchon and the Cho 
Ok-hui Cooperative Farm. 

