Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, March 7 (KCNA) -- Hwang Sang-chun, 
chairman of the State Environmental Commission of the DPRK, 
strongly urged the South Korean authorities to immediately stop 
nuclear waste dumping in the sea and take emergency measures to 
prevent nuclear leakage. 
  Speaking at a press conference here today, he told home and 
foreign reporters that the South Korean authorities dumped 
29,513 curies of liquid waste, 84,737 curies of gas waste and 
29,034 drums of solid waste in seven years from 1986 to 1992. 
  He ascribed their dumping of a large amount of nuclear waste 
in the sea to their anti-popular policy, the backwardness of the 
technological levels of atomic energy facilities and, 
especially, their clandestine promotion of nuclear arms 
development. 
  According to him, the authorities in South Korea have paid 
no 
heed to the health and lives of the population and environmental 
protection in constructing and running nuclear power stations, 
and failed to regularly check, repair and readjust machinery, 
while immersing themselves only in power production for 
money-making. Subsequently, there have been not infrequent 
leakages of radioactive substances due to breakdown, damages, 
etc. 
  It is no secret that the "Taedok research complex" in South 
Korea, has nuclear reprocessing facilities now operated under 
the name of "a research reactor". 
  The spent nuclear fuel from the reactors in South Korea is 
turned into plutonium through reprocessing facilities now 
concealed at the "Taedok research complex" and used to develop 
nuclear weapons. 
  He condemned dumping of nuclear waste into the sea by the 
South Korean puppets as a wanton violation of international 
accords, barbarism and anti-national, anti-human crimes to 
exterminate the nation and mankind. 
  He sternly warned that if the South Korean puppets continue 
dumping nuclear waste into the sea and accelerating the 
development of nuclear weapons, they will have to bear 
responsibility for the consequences arising therefrom and face 
strong denunciation at home and abroad. 
  Chairman Hwang Sang-chun and Yi Hak-sun, an expert of 
nuclear 
safety and radioactive protection, answered questions put by 
reporters. Exposing the scheme of the South Korean puppet 
clique to build a nuclear power plants in Kosong, South Korean 
Kangwon Province, they said that if the power plant is built at 
the place less than 10 kilometres from the Military Demarcation 
Line, nuclear polution will directly affect the northern half of 
the country. 

