BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow May 19 -- The nation-wide strike of air 
carriers is in the centre of attention of the Russian national 
newspapers on Thursday. 
  ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI say "the demands of the strikers are quite 
fair. The air code for which they have been clamouring for a 
long time sets forth the rules of the games in the aviation on 
which air transportation, the health of passengers and flight 
safety belong. This year Russia has had more major accidents 
than all the other countries of the world put together." 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA comments: "The systemless privatisation 
of aviation enterprises is leading to the disruption of the 
existing technological chains and gives rise to a new 
monopolism. There is no clear-cut division of functions between 
the airlines and the airports, security, radio navigation and 
communication services, etc. The financial position of most air 
transport enterprises and organisations is critical and 
unstable." 
  TRUD carried an interview with the leader of the pilots' 
union, Alexander Malinovsky, who said, "We demand not money but 
attention on the part of the government to the problems of the 
industry as a whole. The only profit-makers in the industry are 
the enterprises which fly abroad." Malinovsky stressed that "the 
aviators of the north and the far east are in the most critical 
situation despite the fact that airplanes and helicopters are 
the only means of transport in their regions". 
  KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA states that "The Russian pilots fly 
better than strike", as the organisation of their labour actions 
leaves much to be desired. 
  Most newspapers report extensively on the wednesday meeting 
with journalists of Vladimir Shumeyko, the speaker of the Upper 
Chamber of the Russian Parliament. PRAVDA quotes the speaker as 
saying that "in international affairs we should take guidance 
not from ideological cliches but from mutual benefit of 
countries concerned". "This applies to south africa and to 
cuba", the newspaper writes. In this connection, Shumeyko 
praised Fidel Castro's intellectual and political potential. 
Asked about his own political orientation, Shumeyko replies "I 
am a constitutional monarchist," PRAVDA reports. 
  KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA highlights Shumeyko's comment on Sergey 
Shakhray's resignation as the minister of nationalities and 
regional policy. "This will by no means affect the state of the 
inter-regional problems," Shumeyko said. "With Yegorov's coming 
to the office, the solution of these problems will probably 
switch from the theoretical phase to a phase of their practical 
resolution". 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA carries an article suggesting that the 
fate of Sergey Filatov as the presidential chief of staff has 
been decided. "he will leave the post in the next few days. His 
chance of retaining the post is negligible," the newspaper says. 
The newspaper cites a source in the president's staff as saying 
that a decree dismissing filatov has already been signed by the 
president, it remains to fill in the date and the outgoing 
number". 
  KRASNAYA ZVEZDA says that "peace accord on Abkhazia can 
spark 
off internal political clashes. Abkhazian liberation union 
leader Boris Kukubava has turned to the court with a request to 
institute criminal proceedings against Georgian leader Eduard 
Shevardnadze. His appeal says the parliament leader is 
incriminated under article 65 of the georgian criminal code for 
assisting the activity of another state. Russia is implied. If 
this happens, the conflict is abkhazia threatens to re-erupt 
with a new force". 
  ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI report that "the governor of Khabarovsk 
proposes the denunciation of an agreement with China". The 
reference is to the agreement on the settlement of the eastern 
stretch of the Russo-Chinese border signed on May 16, 1991. "The 
head of administration of the Khabarovsk territory is 
particularly concerned about articles 5 and 8, which draw the 
border line along navigable rivers and permit vessels of all 
kinds, including military, to sail without any hindrance close 
to the city of Khabarovsk", the newspaper says. 
  TRUD tells the readers about privileges enjoyed by the 
present staff of the Russian federal government. In an 
interview with the newspaper Valery Katunov, who is in charge of 
organizational and technical supplies to the staff, assures the 
readers that "privileges no longer exist". 

