BFN 

  [Text] Tunis, 6 June (PANA) -- OAU Secretary General Salim 
Ahmed Salim said Monday [6 June] in Tunis that the most crucial 
issue facing the organisation was how to stop the carnage in 
Rwanda and not which faction represented the country at the 
ministerial session. "We are meeting at a time to celebrate the 
victory of South Africa but also to stop the agony of the 
conflict in Rwanda and Africa as a whole," he told the 
correspondent of the PAN AFRICAN NEWS AGENCY (PANA) in Tunis. 
The situation in Rwanda, he said, would remain one of concern 
as long the parties to the conflict failed to agree on a 
ceasefire. "We are actively involved in getting Africans to 
contribute troops for peacekeeping and are quite satisfied with 
the response," [word indistinct] Salim. Apart from Ghana, 
Ethiopia and Senegal, he said, Congo and Nigeria had given firm 
commitments to contribute forces. He said some African 
countries which were unable to contribute troops had offered 
other help in resolving the crisis. Namibia, Salim said, had 
pledged 500,000 US dollars to assist UNAMIR [UN Assistant 
Mission in Rwanda] in the peacekeeping mission. "The African 
commitment and African readiness to do something is there," he 
said. The current ministerial session, he said, would focus on 
how to strengthen the organisation's capacity to manage and 
prevent conflicts but would also create conditions for what he 
called the "second liberation of the continent." 
  Speaking earlier at a press conference Salim said the 
peaceful elections in South Africa was a miracle, commending the 
spirit of reconciliation in which the elections were held and an 
all-race government installed. "South Africa has demonstrated 
something more: It has shown that notwithstanding the 
complexity of a situation, given national dialogue, leadership 
and foresight, it is possible to resolve the most intractable 
problem including that of Rwanda," he said. 
  Rwanda is represented at the current session by the foreign 
minister of the interim government, Jerome Bicamumpaka. The 
Rwanda Patriotic Front is represented by Bizimungu Pasteur, 
member of the front's executive committee and minister designate 
for internal affairs of the broadbased government put in place 
after the Arusha August 1993 accord. Rwanda's warring parties 
ended ceasefire talks last week without making progress towards 
a truce and with the front vowing to fight on. The OAU is 
supporting international efforts to bring to account the 
individual leaders responsible for the killings in the country. 
The carnage has claimed 500,000 lives in eight weeks. 

