Language: <F P=105> Vietnamese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] In its 17 December issue, NHAN DAN carries an 
appeal by Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet at a ceremony to launch a 
national vaccination campaign against polio and tetanus for 
chidren. The appeal says that the child vaccination work is a 
very important part of our activities for the protection and 
care of our people's health. 
  After reviewing vaccination activities in the past five 
years, the appeal continues: 
  On behalf of the government, I heartily welcome the 
governments at all levels, people in the entire country, 
ministries, and mass organizations -- especially the public 
health sector, the Vietnam Women's Union, and the Red Cross 
Society -- for their great efforts in carrying out this 
significant campaign. I thank all international organizations 
and foreign governments, especially UNICIEF and WHO, for their 
efficient assistance in this national program. 
  This campaign is not carried out on a large scale, but it 
also has a special importance to ensure good health for our 
young generations who will bear the responsibility of bringing 
beauty to our country and happiness to our people. In that 
meaning, the elimination of polio and tetanus in infants and the 
prevention of blindness in children should be carried out 
thoroughly with the best quality. 
  I urge the patriots in the entire country, especially 
mothers 
living in mountainous and isolated areas, to actively take part 
in this campaign by giving their children the full course of 
vaccination. [passage omitted] The government at all levels 
must heighten its responsibility in providing health care to the 
people and directly supervise this vaccination campaign. The 
public health sector is carrying the main responsibility in 
providing speciality equipment to ensure the success of this 
campaign with good quality and results. 
  I suggest that the Vietnam Women's Union, the Ho Chi Minh 
Communist Youth Union, the Red Cross Society, the Peasants 
Association, the Vietnam General Federation of Trade Unions, and 
other organizations actively encourage mothers to give 
vaccinations to their children. The mass media agencies will 
widely propagandize so that everybody can understand and 
enthusiastically partake in this campaign. I suggest that 
national and international organizations, especially UNICEF and 
WHO, continue providing assistance to the annual vaccination 
campaign for Vietnamese children's health and for Vietnamese 
people's happiness. 

