Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondents Aleksey Bulakov, Sergey </F>
Startsev, and Georgiy Shmelev] 
  [Text] Rome, 30 Nov -- "Russia will take the most resolute 
and possibly, tough steps to ensure that the issue of the 
inviolability of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty should be 
reflected in the final documents of the CSCE Council of Foreign 
Ministers session. We assess the `spread' of nuclear weapons as 
the biggest threat and as an unprecedented challenge to European 
security," Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev stated in a 
conversation with the ITAR-TASS corespondent at the end of the 
first day of the CSCE Council of Ministers session in Rome. In 
the minister's opinion, the participants in the meeting 
understand the danger of such a development. What we are saying 
about this problem by no means signifies some kind of "squabble 
between Russia and Ukraine," A. Kozyrev noted. It is a question 
of strict fulfillment of the international obligations taken 
upon ourselves. In this connection, the minister pointed to the 
position of the United States, Germany, and other countries 
which have called upon all the sides to strictly observe the 
clauses of the START-I treaty. 
  The importance of the current Foreign Ministers Council 
session will depend on how quickly and effectively it will be 
able to react to the new challenges and threats to security and 
stability in the continent, A.Kozyrev declared. He pointed out, 
in particular, that two years ago, the Russian side drew 
attention to the danger of aggressive nationalism and urged the 
strengthening of CSCE peacekeeping activities. Naturally, the 
brunt of the settling of conflicts in the former republics of 
the Soviet Union is being borne by Russia, he stressed. 
However, the CSCE can and must provide assistance with 
implementing these peacekeeping efforts. 
  In conclusion, the minister voiced the conviction that a 
considerable "advance in CSCE activities" would result from the 
current Foreign Ministers Council sitting, and that Russia's 
initiatives will be reflected in the final documents. 

