Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Andrzej Drzycimski, press spokesman for </F>
President Lech Walesa, by Piotr Swiac on the "Directly From the 
Belvedere" program; place and date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Swiac] Mr. Minister, since this is our first 
interview in the New Year, I would like to ask you to recap last 
year. President Lech Walesa is not satisfied with the year 1993. 
  [Drzycimski] Everyone has a kind of dissatisfaction because 
the development of democracy in Poland -- which by the way could 
be seen in this past year -- could have resulted in more 
achievements and in bringing about greater effects, the kind of 
effects whose impact the citizens of the country would feel 
directly; and I mean they would have to feel a very clear impact 
in a legislative sense, the kind of legislation which would 
allow the overcoming of some deadlocks, especially in the 
economic area, and which would allow moving on with issues that 
have been dragging for years now, beginning with the famous 
issue of the Treasury, and also of customs stamping 
[banderolowanie] and many other issues as well. These issues 
have been debated, deliberated on, and dealt with many times, 
but they subsequently dragged slowly either through Sejm 
commissions or during later Sejm debates, and so these issues 
required a push. And that kind of push was exactly what was 
missing. And that is precisely what the waste of time is about, 
that is .... 
  [Swiac, interrupting] But Mr. Minister, I am sorry to 
interrupt you like this, but many people accuse the president of 
having submitted relatively few legislative initiatives. 
  [Drzycimski] The president has focused on the main issues 
that constitute the state and its structures, he has focused 
mainly on the legal framework defining the political system of 
the country, including having submitted a few legislative 
proposals aimed at -- first of all -- the Electoral Laws, the 
constitutional system, that is the Small Constitution, a 
proposal for a constitutional framework for the country in the 
future -- these factors determine the political system's nature. 
Recently we also had the president submit a Rights and Freedoms 
Charter, he also submitted a proposal for making the 
Constitutional Tribunal independent -- all these determine and 
constitute a democratic and sovereign state with three clear 
pillars: The parliament, the executive authority, and the 
judiciary. 
  [Swiac] In that case, could one not have a grievance 
precisely against the president about his lack of efficiency? 
After all, efficiency is something that should be present at a 
post this high. 
  [Drzycimski] Well, I can you see you are going back to a 
constitutional dispute, a dispute on what Poland should be like: 
Should it be a democracy of a presidential-parliamentary type, 
or should it be one of a parliamentary-cabinet type? The 
president's view is that deciding in favor of one or the other 
option is a question of choice. But he also thinks that in this 
transitional period that we are in -- by the way, it is not just 
him but also many legal experts and politicians think that, too 
-- the executive authority should be strengthened to make it 
more effective and to render it able to make decisions faster. 
That is why the president is in favor of a 
presidential-parliamentary system, but he also says the issue 
remains open, and the decision is up to the nation, and we will 
certainly debate the Constitution. 
  [Swiac] December was the third anniversary of Lech Walesa's 
term as president, and on that occasion, former prime ministers 
of the Third Republic expressed their views on the president's 
term. There were some positive views expressed but there were 
also plenty of critical ones. Tadeusz Mazowiecki would like 
Lech Walesa to contribute to returning the presidency to its 
grand qualities, so as to prevent the person performing the 
state's supreme post from getting involved in immediate 
political maneuvers. 
  [Drzycimski] But you ignored here other views which were 
expressed as well. 
  [Swiac] Fine, let us take another statement. Former Prime 
Minister Jan Olszewski said: To me, President Lech Walesa is a 
major disappointment. 
  [Drzycimski] But you still left out some other statements. 
  [Swiac] I am sure there were also other kinds of views but I 
would like to hear you comment on what I cited. 
  [Drzycimski] You seem to be citing here only critical 
statements made on the presidency, and it is a good thing that 
we have them. It is not the case that a politician or even the 
state as a whole can function without any arguments. It is good 
that the president has been arousing such passionate debates 
since everyone has a right to think in his own mind, as it were, 
about what it is that he expects -- using his own judgment -- 
from the president. Not only we here in Poland have been making 
judgments, but also the world has been judging us, so let us 
look from the perspective of that broader kind of view. Our 
domestic, Polish view is important -- by all means -- in terms 
of our achievements and failures, and on this issue there are 
all kinds of things to be listed. But what is also important is 
the view of Poland from the perspective of our current position 
in Europe and the world. The time of peace, the time of 
political stabilization and of this kind of special treatment of 
Poland so to speak -- this is all over. And it is only thanks 
to Poland being so active, thanks to the president's initiatives 
and proposals finding their way not only to the desks 
[presumably of foreign politicians], but also contributing to 
the debate, I would even say they are a cause of this major 
debate on the future of Europe. 
  [Swiac] Mr. Minister, but let us go back to domestic issues. 
Would you not agree with me that during this past year the 
president's measures have not been perceived very well by 
society, and there are some results of research conducted by 
agencies which deal with that kind of work, to back it up? I 
think the views expressed by the press on the president have 
also been getting worse and worse. 
  [Drzycimski] The president has become a lightning-rod of his 
own kind. If something bad happens or if something 
inappropriate is going on -- who is to blame? Lech Walesa. 
Why? Because of this and that, and then the list goes on and 
on. But nobody pays attention to the fact that if the president 
was really responsible for all that is expected of him .... 
[pauses] He has not been given enough powers. That is why the 
president says: Let us establish some fundamentals and some 
principles which would be the state's pillars, or a fundamental 
plan. He has been saying that over and over again for years 
now. Every new governing team or coalition that takes over 
power says: Yes, that is correct. We can hear such views also 
in the case of this latest coalition. But once the time comes 
for implementing that in practice, these coalitions kind of take 
back what they had said. The mass media evaluate President Lech 
Walesa by judging from first looks, as it were, and they are not 
making an effort to look for a deeper kind of measure, while I 
think that.... 
  [Swiac, interrupting] Mr. Minister, perhaps this deeper kind 
of measure that you are talking about should be made more 
specific. One can conclude from what you are saying that there 
is no understanding, or that there is no transformation of the 
president's ideas into practical measures, while I think the 
mass media are an excellent means to accomplishing just that. 
  [Drzycimski] Yes. This very program here can serve as an 
example. After all, this television program which began last 
year, serves to familiarize society with what the president 
does. Of course one can debate whether the program's formula is 
good or bad, but from the letters that have been coming into the 
President's Office and to me personally, I perceive something 
different: Namely, it can be concluded from those letters that 
the program has been enjoying an ever-increasing social 
interest, and that is because in one way or another it shows 
those parts of what the president does which were absent from 
the media for two years. Only those aspects were present which 
were one-sided, so to speak: They were full of criticism and 
oftentimes also of a lot of sarcasm. What the president has been 
trying to convey -- that is the need to build a system -- was 
ignored. I also mean the need to establish a strategy not just 
for a year or two, not for the duration of a coalition or two, 
but the kind of measures with which we will enter the new 
century. 
  [Swiac] Mr. Minister, but I hope it is not your intention to 
accuse the mass media of bad faith? 
  [Drzycimski] No, no. 
  [Swiac] So in that case, where is the fundamental error? 
  [Drzycimski] I think it is in that .... [pauses] That is 
quite normal, it is quite a typical phenomenon; I think it 
occurs in every place like Poland where after a period of 
censorship -- which we all know existed before 1989 -- the mass 
media gained enormous freedom. There is an enormous freedom in 
Poland in that regard. But what is missing is what I would 
describe as the responsibility factor. There are more and more 
frequent cases of -- and I am saying that with satisfaction -- 
a sense of being responsible for the country, for what we have 
been doing, and for the fact that Poland's image is also being 
shaped by the mass media. 

