BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by E. Sterjevski: "Differentiation on Several </F>
Levels"] 
  [Text] Although it has been 10 days since the unofficial 
promotion of the Macedonian national democratic faction, the 
controversy surrounding the division within the VMRO-DPMNE 
[Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization-Democratic 
Movement for Macedonian National Unity] is still very much an 
issue. At first there were rumors that the faction was 
supported by a significant number of VMRO-DPMNE delegates, by a 
significant number of members of the Kisela Voda [district in 
Skopje] Communal Committee, and a part of delegates in the 
Skopje Assembly. On the other hand, they now say that the 
actual backing comes from two delegates, Tomislav Stefkovski and 
Stoile Stojkov, and a smaller number of their affiliates who are 
not members of the delegates' group. The causes of the division 
are even more contradictory. While some say personal interests 
and party careers are at stake, others see the "hand of the 
authorities" because the authorities are trying to shake the 
"most national party" exactly during the election period. The 
interesting thing is that, regardless of the causes, the 
VMRO-DPMNE members, even former ones, mutually infer each 
other's cooperation with the state security service. 
  Here is what the leader of the party Ljupco Georgievski, who 
has only recently become coordinator of the VMRO-DPMNE 
delegates' group, said 10 days after the sudden, or expected, 
"shock." 
  "It is obvious that the initial idea of splitting the party, 
which would have bad consequences, was not realized. Although 
the central committee, the communal committees, and the 
delegates' group spoke about the division, it was confined to 
the level of the delegates' group, that is, the level of two 
delegates. There are some who are affiliated with them, but it 
is just a number of delegates from Kisela Voda, and a few from 
the Town Assembly. They are affiliated due to family or 
neighboring relations, as is the case with the wife of Stoile 
Stojkov." 
  [Reporter] What is the essence of the division within the 
party, that is, among the most exposed representatives? 
  [Georgievski] From what I can see, it seems that they are 
ideologically blaming Dosta Dimovska for being a Bulgarian spy, 
Zmejkovski for being Serbian, and me for terrorism. The 
essence, first of all, lies in the struggle for career, for 
personnel changes within the party, which was put as an 
ultimatum to me, too. However, the struggle has not been 
motivated simply by personal ambitions. There are other motives 
as well. This morning I received information that there is 
total chaos within the state security service, that a new 
selection is under way with methods of greatest pressure being 
used. To be more precise, new purges are in progress, as well 
as hearings of all those from [Interior Minister] Frckovski's 
and Bogoeski's department who are suspected of giving 
information to the VMRO-DPMNE. There are mass hearings of 
nearly all the clerks. 
  [Reporter] Speaking about the state security service, we 
should mention the speculation regarding the growing influence 
of foreign services, particularly the Bulgarian secret service. 
There are unofficial rumors that the state security service has 
received information about the greater activities of its 
"colleague" from Bulgaria by using its exponents in Macedonia 
[The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] in the 
"image and work" of some public figures. Rumors are spread 
about the unusual intensification of the activities of the 
movement for cooperation and friendship between the Republic of 
Macedonia and the Republic of Bulgaria, whose most faithful 
members have been assigned concrete tasks. 
  [Georgievski] It is possible that there is such a reinforced 
activity of the Bulgarian service. Nevertheless it has nothing 
to do with the VMRO-DPMNE. Now we practically do not speak with 
the people from the movement, and this has been the case for a 
couple of years. We are unjustified associated with some things. 
  The practice within the VMRO-DPMNE was to solve internal 
problems leading to division by exclusions. That is how the 
VMRO-DP and VMRO-fatherland were formed. 
  The epilogue to the last events was the replacement of 
Tomislav Stefkovski from the position of coordinator of the 
VMRO-DPMNE delegates' group. "At this moment no other party 
measure has been applied except that Stefkovski was removed from 
the position of coordinator of the delegates' group. 
Nevertheless, we hear they are making attempts to create some 
parallel committees, youth organizations in the communes, 
organize conferences, and so on. That is not possible under the 
VMRO-DPMNE Statute. If that is true, the party will have to 
undertake other measures," Georgievski said. 
  The latter can (but need not) mean that there will be 
further 
developments within the party. In any case, as they say in the 
VMRO-DPMNE leadership, they are waiting for a meeting with 
President Kiro Gligorov to clarify things and explain certain 
documents. If it does not happen in 15 days, the public might 
hear about some new curiosities, this time "black on white." 

