BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Abandon Confrontation, Resume Negotiations"] </F>
  [Text] On 12 June, a spokesman for the British Foreign 
Office revealed to the press in Hong Kong that British Foreign 
Office Minister Alastair Goodlad would visit China in July. He 
said that the details of Goodlad's visit would be made public in 
late June and would not be revealed at the present stage. 
  Before the relevant diplomatic consultations had been 
completed, the British side became too impatient to wait any 
longer and disclosed this information. Moreover, it stressed 
that Goodlad would limit his discussions to Sino-British 
relations, including business cooperation and cooperation on 
international affairs, but would not talk about the Hong Kong 
issue. 
  People with a discerning eye could see that British 
businessmen were unhappy with the state of Sino-British 
relations, and some members in both chambers of the British 
Parliament have openly criticized the current China policy 
pursued by the British Government. All other industrial 
countries have attached great importance to the giant China 
market, have successively increased their economic and trade 
cooperation with China, and have been pursuing a friendly and 
cooperative diplomatic policy toward China. Even the United 
States, the leading Western country, has adjusted its policy on 
MFN and the human rights issue and has made efforts to expand 
its economic and trade exchanges and develop the China market. 
The exchange of visits by vice premiers and ministers was 
arranged; however, Britain does not have much bargaining power 
in its relations with China. 
  Britain has been pursuing a policy of confrontation. In 
particular, after Patten dished out the "three violation" 
political reform package in Hong Kong, Britain disregarded the 
"consultation and cooperation" principle stipulated in Annex II 
of the Sino-British Joint Declaration, broke the confidentiality 
principle regarding its diplomatic contacts, and violated the 
understanding that no unilateral action with effects extending 
beyond 1997 could be taken before agreement was reached through 
diplomatic channels. Patten also alleged that "secret diplomacy 
and agreement" were gone forever. The British side launched 
opinion and propaganda offensives launched and used television, 
radio, and newspapers to propagate Patten's scheme. They 
continued to act perversely and willfully and had no scruples 
about terminating the talks and making the political structure 
different from that designed by China for the post-1997 period. 
In pursuing this confrontational policy, the British 
authorities flagrantly played the "international card." They 
thought that, if other Western countries supported them, they 
might be able to intimidate China. The situation, however, did 
not develop as Britain expected. The Western industrial 
countries, including the United States, all attached importance 
to their own economic interests, and were not willing to be 
Britain's pawn. Thus, Britain's "international card" was not 
supported by other Western countries, and Britain found it 
difficult to continue to pursue the policy of isolating China by 
itself. This policy would only end up isolating Britain. 
  After Clinton announced that MFN would no longer be linked 
to 
human rights on 26 May, Britain found that the situation had 
become extremely unfavorable and it also hastily changed its 
position and tried to warm up its relations with China. It then 
decided to proceed from the low-level contacts at the vice 
minister level, but this was not a bad thing. 
  It was prudent not to announce the agenda beforehand and 
even 
to say that the visit will not be related to the Hong Kong 
issue. This may leave more leeway and may enable both sides to 
move onto the course of quiet diplomacy. In the past, megaphone 
diplomacy only played into the hands of some politicians and 
enabled them to put on political shows to serve their selfish 
calculations; such a practice was certainly detrimental to the 
resolution of problems. It only served to completely destroy 
the foundation for mutual trust and diplomatic cooperation. The 
Foreign Office is certainly the organ in the British Government 
that is in charge of relations with China. If Britain is 
sincerity about conducting a diplomatic dialogue with China and 
solving problems between the two countries through 
consultations, China is naturally willing to maintain contracts 
through diplomatic channels. The Joint Declaration explicitly 
stipulates the channels and forms of contacts between the 
Chinese and British Governments. So, if the British side is 
willing to follow the consultation channels specified in the 
Joint Declaration, China certainly welcomes this. 
  The first of these channels is the Sino-British Joint 
Liaison 
Group, and the second is diplomatic consultations between the 
two governments. Certain changes have indeed occurred, and both 
sides have become more willing to conduct consultations more 
positively. The discussions on the issues of military land, 
localization of laws, the court of final appeal, and the Special 
Administrative Region passports have all made certain progress. 
The holding of a Joint Liaison Group meeting on 21 June also 
showed that some issues had moved closer to resolution. The 
British side has now also adopted a more realistic attitude 
toward the airport financial issue. As the Chinese side did not 
raise any objections, it seems that an agreement will be reached 
soon. 
  Some press reports have pointed out that the controversy 
over the political structure has become a thing of the "past." 
If this reflects the opinion of the British side, then it will 
not help the thaw in Sino-British relations. The breakdown of 
the talks on the political structure was caused by the British 
side, and the consequences cannot be undone. The three-tier 
councils in Hong Kong must be reorganized in 1997. However, it 
seems that the British side is still trying to move even further 
away on the political structure issue. Some people are now 
calling for direct elections arrangements which deviate more 
radically from the Basic Law; some people are calling for 
revising more laws in Hong Kong; and some people are even trying 
to shake the executive-led government structure... All this 
shows that some people have never given up the confrontational 
policy. The breakdown of the talks on the political structure 
is indeed an event of the past, but the dispute over the 
political structure has not come to an end. The fundamental 
reason lies in the fact that the British side still refuses to 
give up its "three violation" position. Recently, some people 
in the British Hong Kong authorities continued to insist that 
China cannot reorganize the three-level council structure built 
up unilaterally by the British side. This proves that the 
dispute over the political structure has not yet come to an end. 
Moreover, these remarks in fact foreshadow the future 
development of the dispute. If the British side really wants to 
cooperate, it must improve its deeds and attitudes to 
demonstrate its sincerity. If a benign cooperation atmosphere 
can be created before Goodlad visits China, then he may not 
return home empty-handed after his trip in July. 

