Language: <F P=105> Armenian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Arpi Totoyan: "Rugged Industry of a Country at </F>
War"] 
  [Text] In its two years of existence, the Nagorno-Karabakh 
Republic [NKR] has been able to accomplish a feat as tough as 
its presence and successes on the battlefield by reviving a 
virtually devastated economy and making it meet the day-to-day 
needs of its fighting people. Such an assertion probably leads 
many people to draw comparisons with the situation in 
Armenia--or at least to enumerate the auxiliary factors. It is 
true that Armenia has played a major role in Karabakh's economic 
success. Also, there is a big difference in the population sizes 
of the two countries: After all the economy of 150,000 people is 
not the same as that of 3.5 million people. While those 
arguments are justified, there is one important point that seems 
to be the real cause of the difference between the two 
situations: the leadership of Karabakh has been more skillful in 
waging the war on the economic front by resorting to more 
radical measures. 
  These are the impressions one obtains from an interview by 
Maksim Hovhannisian, director of the NKR information and press 
agency, with NKR's deputy prime minister Zhirayr Poghosian. The 
interview was published in the 22 December 1993 issue of 
HAYASTANI HANRAPETUTYUN. The deputy prime minister is not 
unfamiliar to the Armenian community of Paris: he accompanied 
Rober Kocharian, chairman of the NKR State Committee for 
Defense, during his visit to France in October. 
  Poghosian describes the state of NKR's economy as follows: 
"Imagine a patient who begins to learn walking immediately after 
a major surgery." Citing figures about the "patient" he says: 
"The republic's more than 60 agricultural enterprises--that is 
nearly a third of our resources--had halted their activities. 
Scores of enterprises and production units had been knocked out 
as a result bombing. Industrial enterprises had completely 
stopped or operated at insignificant levels as a result of 
extremely inadequate means of delivery for raw materials and 
energy." For more tangible evidence, Poghosian cites figures 
from industry which clearly show that the sector, which suffered 
sharp declines from 1988 through 1992, began taking steps toward 
recovery in 1993. For example, the figures cited say the 
following about production of shoes: output declined from 
4,515,000 pairs in 1987 to 189,000 pairs in 1992, but 204,000 
pairs of shoes were produced in the first 7 months of 1993. The 
deputy prime minister says about the initial signs of recovery 
in 1993: "The liberation of Shushi and the opening of the Lachin 
corridor had a critical impact on the course of our struggle for 
survival. The blockade around us slackened somewhat. We started 
getting electrical power from Armenia and enough raw materials 
to utilize our production facilities." 
  There is another element which contributed as much as, if 
not 
more than, the material factor to the economic recovery and 
which accounts for not an insignificant portion of the 
difference between NKR and Armenia. In that regard the deputy 
prime minister's remarks are so rejoicing that they can be cause 
for envy: "The strictest discipline was introduced and all 
persons of any responsibility were mandated to be accountable. 
It became inadmissible to blame any failure on the war. We had 
to live and work in the impossible conditions of war." 
  While figures for the first 7 months of 1993 are quite 
modest 
compared to 1988, what is important is that "there is no 
industrial enterprise in the republic that is not operating." 
Stating that "our economy is definitely on its way to recovery," 
Poghosian enumerates the bases for that confidence. The first 
issue is, as it is not hard to guess, that of energy. Poghosian 
says that this problem should be at least partially resolved by 
the end of the year. He is referring to the hydroelectric power 
plant that has been installed on the Sarsang dam. The plant is 
expected to operate at full capacity, and the electricity it 
generates will be transmitted to Stepanakert, Shushi and other 
regions of the republic. The project was made possible by a loan 
of about 1 billion rubles from Armenia. This appropriate project 
is expected to have dual benefits: not only will NKR stop being 
a burden on Armenia for its energy supplies but also, if 
necessary, some electricity will be transmitted to Armenia. 
  The NKR deputy prime minister explains how this vital issue 
was resolved in war conditions: "In recent years large 
quantities of cargo which was destined for Karabakh and for 
which we had paid was piled up in the train station at Agdam. As 
is known, that cargo became loot for our neighbors. The cargo 
included generators, transmission cable and other materials 
which we used as necessary." 
  Poghosian has interesting remarks about the other important 
prerequisite for industrial production: the supply of raw 
materials. During the Soviet period, Karabakh, like all the 
other republics, oblasts and okrugs had an industrial production 
system that depended on other regions. In other words, no branch 
of industry was self-sufficient. In addition, local resources 
had not been explored. For example, significant reserves of 
clay, which can be used for the manufacture of bricks, tiles and 
terra cotta were completely overlooked. Reserves of construction 
stone and marble were also ignored. Now all these resources have 
begun to be used in the construction of civilian housing and 
roads and for army contracts. The information on this subject is 
complemented by the mention of the Artsakh program of the 
Armenia Fund. That program allocated 1.041 billion rubles to the 
repair of homes and the construction of roads and power 
transmission lines. The same program envisages rebuilding 
completely the highway linking Goris to Stepanakert in 1994. 
  These positive indications naturally do not mean that 
everything is in order and solved. NKR still has many problems 
that await solution and which are not less important or pressing 
than those mentioned above. The agricultural sector needs fuel, 
raw materials for canning, fertilizers and seeds, in particular 
for regions that produce grains. 
  The livestock industry is also in dire straits. Grape 
production has declined. Although grape production accounted for 
60 to 70 percent of Karabakh's income in the past, today only 
31,000 tonnes of grapes can be produced. The main reason is the 
war and the fact that the plains in the Martakert region, which 
produced 60 percent of the grape harvest, are still in enemy 
hands. 
  Asked how the NKR industry meets the needs of the army, 
Poghosian gives the following example in lieu of an answer: "A 
facility to repair tanks and military vehicles has been built in 
one of the factories. That facility meets the needs of the army. 
We must express our gratitude to all the specialists who were 
able to solve complex technical problems in an incredibly short 
time." 
  Despite all the severe hardships, the deputy prime 
minister's 
expectations for the future, together with the encouraging 
information he provides, offer grounds for optimism: "No matter 
what happens we must create an invincible economy: advanced, 
productive and independent." 

