Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] During an exclusive interview with PHUCHATKAN in 
Hanoi on 15 March, SRV Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam said 
that Prime Minister Chuan Likphai's visit to the SRV beginning 
today will further strengthen relations between Thailand and SRV 
in all aspects. He noted: "Relations between Thailand and 
Vietnam are currently the best they have been since the 
establishment of relations between the two countries." 
  The two countries will have to make joint efforts, however, 
to solve the remaining problem of fishing in overlapping 
territorial waters. The SRV foreign minister revealed that 
officials from all provinces concerned must also sit down 
together to work out a solution. He said: "The sea is still not 
calm in this area because foreign trawlers regularly encroach on 
our waters. I feel that this problem must be solved quickly and 
a new order must be worked out. We must join hands and trust 
each other in the name of our mutual interests." 
  Nguyen Manh Cam disclosed that the Vietnamese side has 
sought 
cooperation from the Thai side in tackling the sea dispute since 
July 1993, but the problem still persists and has led to the 
capture of illegal fishing trawlers. He said: "We have been 
waiting for a reply from the Thai side." 
  Nguyen Manh Cam said the two countries have already held two 
meetings on the problem of the overlapping area, and Vietnam is 
looking forward to the next meeting. The date and venue of this 
meeting have not been fixed. 
  He said: "Vietnam has some experience in this regard. We 
worked together with Malaysia to establish the joint development 
zone many years ago. The problem can be solved if the two sides 
have strong determination and good intentions toward each other. 
Both sides stand to profit. In fact, we should hold bilateral 
negotiations before inviting any third party to join." 
  Asked about cooperation between the two countries in the 
international arena, Nguyen Manh Cam replied that Vietnam, 
Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia are working together under the 
framework of the Mekong River Committee. A working group has 
been set up to draft a basic agreement. He said: "The working 
group has reached agreement on major principles. Only small 
issues are being discussed. We can solve the problems. Our 
policy is that we must respect the interests of all countries, 
particularly riparian states in the lower basin. Regional 
interests must also be considered. The amount of Mekong River 
water used by each country will certainly affect the others." 
  The foreign minister said his country has to rely on water 
from the Mekong River during the dry season to prevent the 
inflow of seawater into the southern delta region. 
  During the one-hour interview, the SRV foreign minister 
anticipated further improvement in relations and contacts 
between Thailand and Vietnam provided the two countries 
understand each other and work for their common interests. 
  Nguyen Manh Cam said: "We can view Vietnam and Thailand as 
economic competitors. Speaking optimistically, however, 
competition brings incentives for further economic development. 
It is good for all countries to compete rather than oppose each 
other. I believe that we should join hands in the interest of 
our countries." 

