Language: <F P=105> Swedish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Inger Atterstam: "200,000 To Be Vaccinated </F>
Against Diphtheria"] 
  [Text] An extensive program to vaccinate special risk 
groups in Sweden against diphtheria is being initiated by the 
appropriate Swedish authorities. In all, close to 200,000 Swedes 
are expected to be candidates for vaccination. 
  The reason for this action is a fast-growing diphtheria 
epidemic primarily in Russia, but also in the Baltic states. 
  "The development in Russia has caused us to analyze the 
situation regarding protection against diphtheria in Sweden and 
propose vaccination of specially exposed risk persons," says 
professor Hans Wigzell, head of the Institute for Protection 
Against Contagious Diseases in Solna. 
<H5>  Customs People and Police </H5>
  The groups being considered for vaccination are persons who 
come in contact with persons from Russia and the Baltic states. 
This involves customs, police and Coast Guard personnel, as well 
as employees at refugee centers, ferry personnel and persons who 
travel frequently in these countries, for example truck drivers. 
  Responsible for the package of measures, in addition to the 
Institute for Protection Against Contagious Diseases, are also 
the Social Administration and the Occupational Health 
Administration. 
  The diphtheria epidemic in Russia started in 1992 mainly in 
a 
few large Russian cities, and then spread to the entire country. 
In 1992, 3,897 cases of diphtheria were reported in Russia, and 
by October 1993, 9,923 cases, 2,756 of which were children. 
Three hundred deaths are known in Russia. 
<H5>  Lower Incidence </H5>
  In the Baltic states the incidence is still somewhat lower, 
but in 1993 between five and ten cases were recorded in these 
countries. 
  "It is an extremely worrying development in these 
countries," 
says Thomas Linglof, a physician at the epidemiology department 
of the Contagious Diseases Institute. He has visited the 
countries in question in order to study the development. 
  "A major problem is partly that access to vaccine is poor in 
these countries, and partly that people mistrust vaccination. It 
is mostly due to their fear of becoming infected from unclean 
syringes. 
  In Finland as well four cases of diphtheria occurred in 
1993, 
and that has led to the Finnish authorities to recommend that 
all persons over 40 should be vaccinated against diphtheria. 
  "There is no reason to do anything similar in Sweden," says 
Hans Wigzell. "Such a mass vaccination has more disadvantages 
than advantages; among other things, it implies a risk of side 
effects and becomes tremendously expensive." 
<H5>  Close Contacts </H5>
  The evaluation of the Contagious Diseases Institute is that 
Sweden does not face a threat of a diphtheria epidemic. 
  "But with the close contacts that exist between our 
countries, there is major risk that we could get a small number 
of cases," says Thomas Linglof. 
  Diphtheria is caused by a bacterium and can cause difficult, 
often lethal, throat infections as well as cardiac and nervous 
symptoms. 
  All Swedes born in 1955 and later have been vaccinated 
against diphtheria, while those persons who were born before 
vaccination was introduced have poorer protection against the 
disease. According to certain studies, as many as 80 percent of 
Swedes over 40 have no defense against diphtheria. 
<H5>  Outbreak Among Derelicts </H5>
  During 1984-86 a noted outbreak of diphtheria occurred among 
derelict alcoholics in Goteborg, resulting in, among other 
things, a large number of people being vaccinated. 
  "That time the diphtheria never spread outside the groups 
initially affected," says Hans Wigzell. "This shows that we 
nevertheless have good protection against diphtheria in Sweden 
and there is no reason for panic now either." 
  Persons who are to visit Russia or the Baltic states are 
advised to have themselves vaccinated against diphtheria, and 
health care personnel are called on to detect and carefully 
analyze all cases of unclear throat infections. 


