BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporters Zhang Sutang (1728 1372 1016) and Liu Siyang </F>
(0491 1835 2254)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 28 Jun (XINHUA) -- The Eighth National 
People's Congress [NPC] Standing Committee opened its eighth 
meeting at the Great Hall of the People this morning. 
  Chairman Qiao Shi presided over the meeting. 
  The meeting began by approving the current meeting's agenda 
suggested by the chairmanship conference. 
  In accordance with the agenda, Cai Cheng, Xiang Chunyi, and 
Wang Shuwen, vice chairmen of the NPC Law Committee, 
respectively made reports on the results of the Law Committee's 
examination of three draft laws, namely the Labor Law, the Law 
on Housing and Real Estate Management in Cities, and the NPC 
Standing Committee's decision on punishing crimes of violating 
copyright. Li Yining, vice chairman of the NPC Law Committee, 
and Gu Angran, chairman of the NPC Standing Committee's 
Legislative Affairs Commission, explained the progress in 
amending the Draft Securities Law and the Draft Arbitration Law 
respectively. 
  State Council Premier Li Peng submitted the State Council's 
motions requesting the current Standing Committee meeting 
examine two draft laws -- the Law on the People's Bank of China 
and the Auditing Law -- as well as another motion requesting 
approval for the Treaty on the Boundary System between China and 
Laos. Entrusted by the State Council, Vice Governor Zhou 
Zhengqing of the People's Bank of China, Auditor General Guo 
Zhenqian, and Vice Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu explained these 
three motions respectively. 
  Standing Committee members began group discussions in the 
afternoon. 
  Vice Chairmen Tian Jiyun, Wang Hanbin, Ni Zhifu, Chen Muhua, 
Fei Xiaotong, Sun Qimeng, Lei Jieqiong, Qin Jiwei, Li Ximing, 
Wang Bingqian, Pagbalha Geleg Namgyai, Wang Guangying, Cheng 
Siyuan, Lu Jiaxi, Buhe, Tomur Dawamat, Li Peiyao, and Wu 
Jieping; as well as Secretary General Cao Zhi attended the 
meeting. State councillor Ismail Amat, President Ren Jianxin of 
the Supreme People's Court, and Procurator General Zhang Siqing 
of the Supreme People's Procuratorate observed the meeting. 

