BFN 

  [Excerpt] Jakarta, KOMPAS -- The Government Regulation 
No:20 of 1994 was not aimed at selling Indonesia. The new 
deregulation package was issued because the government 
considered that the domestic investors would be unable to absorb 
all the domestic investments. Apart from this, there is an 
urgent need to boost the country's nongas exports, which could 
be accelerated through more investments. 
  This was stated by Saleh Affif, Coordinating Minister for 
Economics, Finance and Industry, and Development Supervision to 
newsmen at the Finance Ministry in Jakarta on Monday 6 June. 
Answering more questions on the deregulation, which was 
considered to provide too many opportunities to foreign 
investors, the minister said, "We do not intend to sell 
Indonesia. We have never done so." 
  According to Saleh Affif, the government had taken into 
consideration the domestic investors' inability to meet the huge 
demand for local investments. He said, "We also have a big 
workforce which should be absorbed into the various economic 
activities. This has all along been the focus of our attention." 
  Indonesia's direct foreign investments (FDI in English 
provided in parenthesis) is relatively small compared with other 
those of countries. Indonesia's total investments and the FDI 
are, comparatively, well below those of Singapore's. 
  Apart from this, Saleh Affif said Indonesia truly desires to 
boost its nongas exports, which could be done through more 
investments. 
  He said the government will launch a series of deregulations 
after the launch of the Government Regulation No:20/1994. 
Speaking after a meeting with other ministers, he said, "I 
attended a meeting with other ministers just now to discuss 
issues which we should embark upon during the next issuance of 
deregulation packages." 
  He said, "You will have to wait. The government will 
announce more deregulation packages soon with regard to the 
reduction of import tariffs and the deregulation of the List of 
Negative Investments, DNI." In other words, more economic 
sectors will be handed over to foreign investors. 
  Seizing the opportunity, Saleh Affif added that with the 
launch of the new deregulation package, Indonesia has advanced a 
step forward from its other leading competitors toward 
attracting more foreign investments. 
  The newsmen also asked Saleh Affif several questions in 
connection with the stability of the recently launched 
deregulation package. This was because Information Minister 
Harmoko disagreed with the notion of permitting foreign 
investors to enter the mass media sector. Besides, the 
Communications Department stated that it was not called to 
participate in the debate on the issues of Government Regulation 
No:20/1994. 
  The newsmen asked," Was there any coordination prior to the 
discussion on the deregulation which created the ongoing 
skepticism?". 
  Saleh Affif only smiled and said, "In fact, there was 
coordination." 
  He clarified that public views on opening the mass media to 
foreign investors were discussed during his meeting with a 
number of ministers. He said,"To avoid any misunderstanding, we 
have submitted the issue to Minister-State Secretary Murdiono 
for his decision." 
  Meanwhile, speaking after the opening of a training course 
on 
the utilization of resources for medium- and small-scale 
entrepreneurs in Ceper, central Java, Subiakto Tchakrawerdaya, 
Minister for Cooperatives and Development of Small Enterprises 
said the government will not allow the small enterprises to 
evaporate even though no limit on investments was imposed for 
foreign investors. This means that the government will plan 
several effective strategies to secure the position of the small 
enterprises. 
  Such strategies would be to find the best methods to create 
more sub-contracting activities for the small industries. 
Another method would be for the government to extend credit 
facilities with low interest rates and to provide market access 
and so on. 
  Subiakto said, "Please believe that the government has no 
intention whatsoever of doing away with the cooperatives and 
small enterprises by allowing foreign investors to participate 
in the various sectors. In fact, the government hoped that by 
announcing the Government Regulation No:20/1994, it would be 
able to assist the small enterprises to benefit through business 
opportunities." 
  Such a step could be undertaken by cooperatives and small 
enterprises through joint ventures with foreign investors in the 
public or other sectors. The small enterprises and cooperatives 
could then provide the manpower and raw materials while the 
foreign investors could could assist in extending their 
technological expertise, finance, and market access. [Passage 
omitted] 

