BFN 

  [Text] Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff has said that 
his office "has never intended to tell the United States how its 
judges should try its cases or how to evaluate evidence sent 
there. I have never said that the U.S. Justice Department is 
uncommonly charitable toward drug traffickers." 
  As for U.S. Justice Department officials, De Greiff pointed 
out he has never said that one of them "met clandestinely with a 
drug cartel chief, and I have never made similar charges against 
U.S. executive branch officials or a senator." 
  The prosecutor general argued that neither his review of a 
possible long-term drug legalization program nor his demand that 
industrialized nations--particularly the United States--make 
greater efforts in the fight against drugs was ever intended "to 
discredit U.S. officials, or to tell the U.S. attorney general 
how to enforce the law, much less intend to attribute slanderous 
remarks to her." 
  These statements are included in a 30 March letter De Greiff 
sent to President Cesar Gaviria to explain his position on 
remarks Gaviria made in an interview he granted to this 
newspaper. 
  When asked about whether the executive branch was completely 
independent with regard to drug trafficking in light of 
statements made by the U.S. drug czar and Attorney General Janet 
Reno, both of whom commented on how the Cali Cartel should be 
dealt with, the Colombian head of state replied as follows: 
  "We must understand that judicial cooperation is a very 
difficult process and that the two countries' judicial systems 
are different.... The U.S. Justice Department has significant 
differences with the Prosecutor General's Office. In the past, 
the executive branch also had differences of opinion, but I 
believe we are overcoming these now. Nevertheless, we cannot be 
surprised by this.'' 
  "The president is usually very careful when he issues an 
opinion with regard to U.S. drug trafficking policies. However, 
the Prosecutor General's Office does not always react in the 
same manner. If this happens here, then we must expect to 
receive criticism from over there." 
<H5>  Prosecutor General's Letter </H5>
  In response to President Gaviria's comments, De Greiff sent 
him the following letter: 
  In the 30 March issue of EL TIEMPO newspaper, you said you 
are careful when you comment on U.S. internal policies on 
fighting drug trafficking, but that the Prosecutor General's 
Office is not always careful. It is very clear to me that these 
remarks also insinuate that it is acceptable for U.S. officials 
to express their opinions on our ability to fight drug 
trafficking. 
  Let me tell you that the United States does not behave in 
this manner, because the Prosecutor General's Office--especially 
me--has never intended to tell the United States how its judges 
should try its cases or how to evaluate evidence sent there. I 
have never said that the U.S. Justice Department--much less its 
main representative--is uncommonly charitable toward drug 
traffickers. In addition, we have never claimed that this 
department met clandestinely with a drug cartel chief, and I 
have never made similar charges against U.S. executive branch 
officials or a senator. 
  It seems to me that all of this is very different from 
saying 
the way in which we are waging the war against drug trafficking 
has proven unsuccessful, that we should study the possibility of 
legalizing drugs in the long term to reduce drug traffickers' 
profits, and that drug-consuming countries (especially the 
United States) have failed to do enough to curtail drug 
consumption. In none of these statements, however, did I intend 
to discredit U.S. officials, or to tell the U.S. attorney 
general how to enforce the law, much less intend to attribute 
slanderous remarks to her. 
  So you see, there is a difference! [Algo va, pues, de Pedro 
a 
Pedro]. 
  [signed] Respectfully yours, Gustavo de Greiff 

