BFN 

  [Text] Chisinau BASAPRESS, 23/5/1994 -- The Draft Program 
on Governmental Activity for 1994-97, which was examined last 
week by the government, confirms Moldovan authorities' 
commitment to reforms. "To stop the decline and achieve an 
economic growth is our purpose," stated Premier Andrei Sangheli, 
adding that the program will lay special stress on social 
protection; that is, it will not sacrifice population's living 
standards in the name of reforms. On the other hand, the 
government says the program aims at "assuring a qualitative leap 
in the transition to a market economy." The program aims to 
create an economy with two sectors -- state and private -- which 
will have as foundation "the rational combination of state 
regulation and the creation of a favorable environment for 
developing market economy relations." An important part of the 
new government's strategy for 1994-95 is to transform all state 
enterprises into joint-stock companies with the state 
controlling a majority of shares of the strategically important 
enterprises to accelerate privatization. In 1994, about 1,600 
state enterprises will be privatized. It is clear that if 
privatization will be efficiently and swiftly carried out, the 
government will have to revise the reform program. According to 
some experts, a failure might aggravate the situation, thus 
destroying any chance to improve the Moldovan economy. Ion 
Gutu, chairman of the Governmental Commission for Economic 
Reforms, stated that "the start of the real privatization 
process which stagnated during recent months is an important 
task included in the Draft Program on Governmental activity for 
1994-97." This statement and government's haste to make 
decisions display Moldovan officials' intention to give reform 
another "speed." The government will have to face the realities 
that press upon the Moldovan economy. The aggravating financial 
blockage provoked by the unpaid salaries has discouraging 
effects. The statements made by the deputy head of the 
Gasification Department Mihai Lesnic that "Moldova's debts for 
natural gas supply from Russia stands at 257.7 billion rubles 
($163.6 million)" is quite a waning. According to the 5 May 
agreement signed between Moldova Vice Premier Valentin Cunev and 
the GAZPROM gas company in Moscow, Moldova has to pay its debts 
by 15 June. This seems to be implausible taking into account 
that only 8 percent of all debts have been paid to date. 
GAZPROM's stipulations that future supplies, beginning 1 June, 
must be paid in advance could have catastrophic consequences for 
an economy that cannot guarantee energy necessities. In the 
last months Moldova's debts toward Russian gas suppliers has 
increased by about $100 million. Meanwhile, the salary arrears 
tend to increase and exceeded in agriculture more than 90 
million lei despite the government's intention to liquidate all 
debts. In this situation, the government will have to deal more 
with the most stringent problems; otherwise, they might 
undermine the elaboration of long-term programs. 

