BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Du Yinghua (2629 5391 5478): "Unify Thinking, </F>
Enhance Understanding, and Maintain a Sustained and Good 
Economic Development Trend"] 
  [Text] This morning, the provincial government held a forum 
on banking work. Vice Governor Guo Shichang relayed the 
guidelines of a speech given by Zhu Rongji, member of the 
standing committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central 
Committee and vice premier of the State Council, at the forum on 
economic work of Hebei, Shandong, and Henan Provinces recently 
held in Zhengzhou. Governor Ye Liansong presided over the forum 
and devised plans for implementing the guidelines of Zhu 
Rongji's speech. 
  Attending today's forum were responsible comrades of the 
provincial Planning Commission, the provincial Economic and 
Trade Commission, the provincial-level departments in charge of 
comprehensive work, and various provincial, city (prefectural), 
and county (city) banking departments, a total of more than 800 
people. 
  This year is crucial for our country to conduct the package 
reform with breakthroughs in key areas. In line with the 
general principle of "seizing the opportunity, deepening reform, 
expanding opening up, promoting development, and maintaining 
stability," the provincial party committee and the provincial 
government have upheld the overall thinking of using reform to 
promote development and development to maintain stability. On 
the basis of achieving a fairly rapid national economic 
development throughout the province last year, we have continued 
to maintain a fairly good development trend. The agricultural 
development situation has been better than that of last year, 
industry has increased at a definite rate, fixed asset 
investments have declined after experiencing vast increases, the 
consumer goods market has been stable, foreign export trade has 
increased normally, financial revenues have increased fairly 
rapidly, the financial order has been fairly good, the savings 
deposits have increased by a large margin, the whole reform has 
been smoothly carried out, and the economic and social 
situations have been quite stable. 
  How to do a further and better job in banking work and how 
to 
support economic development under the new situation? The forum 
stressed: At present, the banking departments should 
conscientiously study the guidelines of Zhu Rongji's speech 
given at the economic work forum held in Zhengzhou, enhance 
understanding, unify thinking, place the work emphasis on 
grasping agricultural production and state-owned enterprises, 
properly handle the relations of reform, development, and 
stability, actively support economic work, and develop an 
excellent situation in our province. 
  The forum called on responsible comrades of banks at all 
levels to go down to the grass-roots units to conduct 
investigation and study, be eager to meet the needs for 
production, and help enterprises eliminate misgivings and 
difficulties. It is necessary to adopt practical and effective 
measures, issue funds in line with the state stipulations, step 
up efforts to issue the set amount of funds to enterprises in a 
timely manner, and make full use of the funds. 
  Banks should fully support enterprises whose products have 
markets, enjoy good sales, and yield efficiency, and whose 
payment for goods can be recovered. Banks should also grant 
loans to money-losing enterprises whose products can find a good 
market and can yield economic returns. Banking departments 
should maintain good coordination with the local economic 
departments, help enterprises readjust the product mix, promote 
the sales of stockpiled goods, and enable enterprises to end 
deficits and to extricate themselves from a difficult position. 
However, we must not support them to produce stockpiled goods. 
Enterprises running in the red for a long time and have no hope 
of ending deficits should realistically prepare for declaring 
bankruptcy in line with the law. 
  At present, the time for summer grain harvest is 
approaching. 
The forum called on all banks to try by every possible means to 
prepare for the purchase of summer grain and oil-bearing crops, 
give priority to guaranteeing funds for purchasing farm and 
sideline products, particularly grain, and make resolute efforts 
not to issue "IOU" slips. Meanwhile, all departments should 
strengthen management over the grain and oil-bearing crops 
markets and safeguard a normal order for purchase. Once when 
the "grain bags," and "vegetable baskets" are firmly grasped, 
the markets and the society will be stable. 
  In conclusion, Ye Liansong said earnestly: Banking 
departments have occupied a very important position in building 
the socialist modernization and an economically strong province, 
shouldering very heavy tasks. The broad masses of workers on 
the financial front have made outstanding contributions to our 
province's economic construction. The provincial party 
committee and government have pinned great hopes on them. It is 
hoped that all of you will unify thinking, deepen understanding, 
do your work well, and promote development. 

