BFN 

<F P=106> [Studio interview with Eduard Shevardnadze, Georgian head of </F>
state, chaired by Andrey Skryabin; from the "Live Dialogue" 
program; Shevardnadze participates from the Tbilisi studio -- 
live] 
  [Excerpts] [Skryabin] Good day, esteemed television 
viewers, today's TV hook-up in the Live Dialogue program links 
Tbilisi with the Ostankino studio. Eduard Amvrosiyevich 
Shevardnadze, Georgian head of state, is there in the Georgian 
capital. Good day, Eduard Amvrosiyevich! 
  [Shevardnadze] Good day! 
  [Skryabin] Taking part in our program today are Lyudmila 
Telen, MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI observer, and Givi Bakradze, Georgian 
television journalist, and I am Andrey Skryabin, Ostankino 
television observer. [passage omitted) 
  Permit me again to welcome Eduard Amvrosiyevich 
Shevardnadze, 
the head of state of the Republic of Georgia, and -- can you 
hear us, Tbilisi? It seems that we do not yet have 
communication with Tbilisi. [passage omitted] 
  [Bakradze, speaking from Tbilisi studio] Andrey 
Georgiyevich! 
  [Skryabin] Yes, I am here. 
  [Bakradze] We have had some problems with the sound. We are 
now informed that it is ready for use. 
  [Skryabin] Let us then get started immediately. In the six 
months that have elapsed since the time of our last meeting, 
Eduard Amvrosiyevich, there have been many changes. If you 
please, what is your assessment of the political and 
socio-economic situation in Georgia? 
  [Shevardnadze] Thank you very much. My greetings to you, 
Andrey Georgiyevich and Lyudmila Olegovna. We are already old 
partners. The political situation at the present stage in 
Georgia is complex, but since our last meeting I can confirm 
that it has to some extent been improving. At least the main 
threat that the country was facing, the threat of an unleashing 
of civil war -- and in effect we were on the verge of civil war 
-- has been removed. It is now possible to speak of some 
healthy trends in political life and a certain consolidation of 
Georgian society. It is possible to speak of some positive 
trends, including an improvement in the crime situation. There 
are also some other encouraging trends. However, as far as the 
economy is concerned -- and it impossible to divorce the economy 
from politics -- the economy remains in a state of profound 
crisis. We have had a severe winter and have remained in effect 
at a minimum level of fuel and energy resources. Industrial 
enterprises and agricultural organizations have not in effect 
been functioning. For this reason the social situation of 
people is very burdensome and in this respect it is possible to 
speak about great social tension, although despite the hunger, 
so to speak, and the cold, people are nevertheless showing 
understanding regarding the problems now being faced by our 
country. 
  [Skryabin] Thank you very much. Let us have your question, 
Givi. 
  [Bakradze] Eduard Amvrosiyevich, as far as I see it, my 
counterparts in Moscow are mostly interested in politics. I 
would say that we in Georgia are also interested in the economy. 
Recently we had strikes by rail workers and metro drivers. 
They were brought about, let us be frank, by the calamitous 
situation of people. It is at the present time practically 
impossible to buy anything with coupons. Other sections of the 
population, including the budget- funded workers, are in a 
similar position. Could you tell us, please, whether the state 
and the republic's leadership are planning any measures of 
social protection in the near future? 
  [Shevardnadze] One can speak of some measures, 
inconsiderable 
ones at ths stage, since the resources of the state are 
exhausted. It is true that an almost total devaluation of the 
coupon has taken place. Unfortunately, when we introduced these 
coupons, we stated at the time that it was a forced measure and 
that there was no other solution. In effect we had not through 
our own wish left the rouble zone. This was, so to speak, at 
the start of last year. Therefore one obviously cannot at 
present speak seriously about a sharp improvement in living 
standards. Therefore in respect these strikes by the rail 
workers and metro workers and in respect of the discussion in 
metallurgical labor collectives of the possible calling of a 
strike, I think that one cannot solve problems by striking. 
When we explain all this to the people, I must say that people 
are showing understanding and are starting to realize what the 
present-day state can provide and what it cannot. 
  Therefore, literally two or three days after our contacts 
with the railway and subway workers, the strikers went back to 
work and that enterprise is now operational. 
  [Skryabin] Thank you. Over to you. 
  [Telen] Mr. Shevardnadze, unfortunately we haven't had any 
communication with Tbilisi yet. Andrey Skryabin and I have 
spoken a lot about an understanding being signed recently on 
settling conflicts between Abkhazia and Georgia with the 
participation of Russia and the UN. This is really one of the 
most acute themes concerning people, not just in Georgia but in 
Russia and other CIS republics. In a Russian television 
interview you said that this was the result -- I'm not quoting 
it exactly of course, but the sense of it was this -- that this 
was the result of concessions both by the Abkhaz and Georgian 
sides. Tell me, please, where do the limits of possible 
concessions, and of compromises generally lie, for it is known, 
your political opponents have accused you already of making 
unilateral concessions to the Abkhaz side? 
  [Shevardnadze] There have been many reproaches and 
accusations. The debates in the parliament of Georgia during 
which literally all the theses and clauses of the agreement 
reached in Moscow were discussed were rather stormy. But we 
must be realists and, in the end, the members of parliament came 
to understand that there was no other solution. There are two 
ways of resolving the issue: either a military solution, which 
is unacceptable to us, to the Abkhaz people, and to the world 
community -- if you want to put things in a wider context, and 
for Russia, too, that would be the most undesirable option; but 
there is also the peaceful way -- it is difficult, complex, but 
the only true and right path. It seems to me that the 
understanding, the documents which were signed in Moscow, meet 
the interests of both sides, both the Abkhaz and the Georgian 
side to a certain extent. It's true that it's not ideal -- from 
the point of view of Georgia's state interests -- but one must 
bear in mind that it is just the first stage of a solution, a 
peaceful solution with the involvement, the mediation of Russia, 
the United Nations Organization and practically all members of 
the Security Council. It seems to me that if we, all those 
participating in that process of reconciliation continue to 
display enough will and persistence, then in the end, one will 
be able to speak of the establishment of peace in Abkhazia and 
in Georgia as a whole. 
  [Skryabin] Thank you. Eduard Amvrosiyevich, I have already 
received a large number of questions from television viewers. 
[passage omitted on towns and cities from which questions have 
come in] The gist of these questions is connected with quite a 
specific thing - connected with the Georgian-Abkhaz documents 
which were adopted - questions such as: Who will decide who can 
return? The present leadership of Abkhazia? A quadripartite 
commission? Who will decide this question? 
  [Shevardnadze] This is a key question of the settlement. I 
have to say that after these documents were signed in Moscow, a 
commission sat yesterday... [pauses] the day before 
yesterday... [pauses] no yesterday, on the problems of the 
return of refugees to Sochi, and an understanding was reached in 
principle that a special commission would be set up in which the 
parties to the conflict would participate -- the Georgian side; 
the Abkhaz side; and naturally, the Council of Europe 
commission; the Russian side; the United Nations Organization, 
in particular the Commission on Refugees will also participate, 
so -- the CSCE, representatives of the CSCE will be present as 
observers -- so that this quadripartite commission should draw 
up and determine the terms for an unconditional, safe and 
dignified return of the refugees. 
  There are some restrictions on a small number of people - we 
will probably work that out together -- but the main bulk should 
return. So, this commission now exists, and yesterday, the day 
before yesterday it set about real work. 
  [Telen] Mr. Shevardnadze, these documents mention 
peacekeeping forces to be used in settling the conflict. Could 
you tell us whether this means the use of the Russian contingent 
alone, or is it possible that other countries will be involved? 
  [Shevardnadze] There are various options. So far, at this 
stage, we've been discussing the question of using international 
peacekeeping forces. This means representatives from various 
countries' armed forces, naturally including Russia. What the 
proportion will be, whether the Russians will constitute 20, 30, 
or 50 percent, will probably be determined at a sitting of the 
Security Council. We would like Russia to participate very 
actively and, as it were, impressively in the peace process, 
with the necessary involvement of its armed forces, just as it 
participated in the talks. [passage omitted] 
  [Bakradze] I'd like to ask about the sorest point. Do you 
think, Eduard Amvrosiyevich, that it will be possible to restore 
a demographic status quo ante in Abkhazia? 
  [Shevardnadze] Well, it's probably hard to say right now. 
But when we said that the commission, the Security Council, the 
peacekeeping forces and naturally Russia too have to ensure safe 
and dignified return of the bulk of the refugees, naturally this 
meant that the demographic situation has to be restored. 
  [Bakradze] But isn't it the case that newcomers, fighters, 
mercenaries, are now living in the homes of the refugees? What 
will they do? Will they stay or will they go? After all, it's 
crucial. 
  [Shevardnadze] Well, I think that after all there aren't 
that 
many of them. At least the Abkhaz leadership has issued 
repeated statements to the effect that there are relatively few 
of them. That's the first point. The second point is that the 
documents we signed with Russia, both in Moscow and in Sochi -- 
we actually signed documents of that nature three times -- in 
principle they are still valid. Russia undertook certain 
responsibility to ensure that the fighters and those who had 
settled unlawfully would help both Abkhazia and Georgia, in the 
sense that they have to be driven out of Abkhazia. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Shevardnadze] This quadrilateral commission, which is to 
deal with the problems of the return of the refugees, will 
discuss all those specific problems. At present it is very hard 
to say what the decision will be regarding a particular family 
and a particular flat. But all these problems have to be 
resolved in the work of this commission. 
  [Telen] Eduard Amvrosiyevich, during our last "Live 
Dialogue" 
we discussed plans for a federal structure in Georgia, and we 
recalled that a draft constitution was being prepared. At the 
time you said it was too early to speak about a federal 
structure in Georgia, but the issue would be resolved in the 
process of drafting the constitution and in the subsequent 
nationwide referendum on this draft. I remember that you said 
then the text of the draft would be ready by December. Could 
you tell us how things stand now? Is the text of the 
constitution ready, or have some problems arisen that prevent it 
from being brought to a stage when it is ready in a preliminary 
form? 
  [Shevardnadze] In principle, as far as the draft 
constitution 
is concerned, the constitutional commission has prepared such a 
draft. But we are at present in no hurry to submit it to be 
examined in parliament, let alone to a referendum. This is 
because in the framework of the peace process -- I mean with 
regard to Abkhaz settlement, and there are also problems with 
the Tskhinvali zone, I mean the former South Ossetia region -- 
appropriate formats for conducting talks have been defined. 
  In particular, a special meeting of the working group will 
be held in Geneva on 19 April to deal with problems related to 
Abkhazia's political status, that is, this problem has been 
internationalized, too, in fact. The same process is likely to 
cover the problems of the Tskhinvali zone, the former South 
Ossetian autonomous oblast. So in my view it would not be very 
sensible to rush things now with adopting the constitution. The 
political status ought to be defined, in principle; I have in 
mind Abkhazian autonomy, or maybe there will be a different name 
for it, and only then should a comprehensive decision be adopted 
on the constitution, on the state and territorial structure of 
the Georgian State. [passage omitted] 
  [Skryabin] I have a question, too. I have here a document, a 
statement on measures for political settlement to the 
Georgian-Abkhazian conflict. Its Clause 6 says: Abkhazia has 
its own constitution and legislation and appropriate state 
symbols - an anthem, a coat of arms, and a flag. I wonder, it 
does not mention anywhere that Abkhazia is part of Georgia. 
Could it be that this wording in the statement lays down a 
future independent sovereign state of Abkhazia with the same 
rights as Georgia, as it were. Do you understand the question? 
  [Shevardnadze] Yes I do. I have been asked similar questions 
in the parliament and in public discussions of the document more 
than once. It should be borne in mind that this is an initial 
stage of political settlement, so all problems and issues, 
naturally, could not be included in the document. The most 
important thing here was to attain a certain degree of progress 
at the talks. Our delegations have agreed to put off the 
problems which are causing controversy and on which we have not 
yet come to full understanding; they will be discussed at the 
next stage. As regards our idea of Abkhazia's political status, 
I said at a meeting of the Security Council that the Georgian 
leadership and our state on the whole is prepared to solve this 
problem in accordance with the highest international and 
European standards. Maybe it will be an autonomy or have 
another name. 
  In essence, I stress, we will solve this problem and we will 
do all we can to resolve the problem, taking into account the 
most up-to-date European and international requirements. As 
regards territorial integrity, we did not insist now that 
Abkhazia is a part of the Georgian state, we did not insist on 
including this clause, this provision because, naturally, we 
imply that Abkhazia is a constituent part of the Georgian state. 
One should keep in mind that all the document which we signed 
in Moscow with Abkhazia's participation and in Sochi and the six 
or even seven resolutions by the Security Council which have 
been adopted recently state that Abkhazia is an integral part of 
the Georgian state. 
  I believe therefore that at the current stage there was no 
pressing need to stress this once again. We imply that there 
can be no other decision. 
  [Skryabin] Esteemed colleagues, if you don't mind, I think 
that the topic of Abkhazia has been pretty much exhausted. Let's 
move on to the topic of Russian-Georgian relations. In this 
respect I want to ask Eduard Amvrosiyevich what, in real terms, 
has changed in these relations since the signing of the major 
interstate treaty? 
  [Shevardnadze] At present it is probably difficult to speak 
of real changes inasmuch as not so much time has passed since 
the signing. What has changed is that the treaties have in fact 
been signed. That's the main thing, and at present we are not 
speaking of stagnation in our relations as it were. We are 
speaking of it being necessary to renew and to revive all that 
was best as it were and the traditions in the sphere of the 
economy, politics, culture, science and so on, in all spheres, 
which we built over the decades and centuries. 
  To be more specific, in principles such talks are already 
being conducted at governmental level. Many interim 
understandings, as it were, have been prepared, interim treaties 
and agreements in part of the economy by sector. Naturally we 
won't get an immediate return so to speak, but the main thing is 
that the contractual and legal basis already exists for the 
development of our relations, and for the construction of new 
relations between the two states, and that we have commenced 
practical work. 
  [Skryabin] It may be said that gradually the work ... 
  [Shevardnadze, interrupting] Work, gradual work is under 
way. 
  [Telen] Mr. Shevardnadze, I would like to return to the step 
taken by Georgia in joining the CIS. Several months have 
elapsed since that time. Tell us please, has this step 
justified the hopes, or do you have any dissatisfaction with 
Georgia's position in the CIS, and in general with the 
cooperation between republics within the framework of the CIS. 
  [Shevardnadze] Perhaps I will rephrase your question. It 
would probably be correct to put the question this way: are the 
hopes which we had, as it were, being justified? I think yes. 
  But if we have not immediately received a return, then I 
have 
to say that there really is a certain disappointment among the 
people, when people are in need, when people are starving so to 
speak, and much else, and naturally they want there to be a 
quick effect. So far we have not had such an effect, but one 
has to bear in mind that this very unification, the commonwealth 
itself, is not yet so firm, I would even say stable. 
  So we all, members of this commonwealth, have to make 
efforts 
to make it more effective - and for it influence the situation 
in all the states which joined this commonwealth more 
effectively and at a faster pace. 
  [Telen] And one further question directly linked with this. 
What is your attitude to the initiative of Nursultan Nazarbayev 
on creating a union of Eurasian states? 
  [Shevardnadze] You know, I am aware of many initiatives by 
President Nazarbayev. I was in Kazakhstan and we held very 
interesting and substantive talks. This was several months ago, 
and Nursultan Abishevich never mentioned this idea in principle. 
  I think that this is a very interesting idea which deserves 
attention. But at present it is on the level of an idea, and 
for this reason it is difficult to answer immediately as it 
were, without serious discussion, inasmuch as the idea in itself 
is progressive and interesting - the formation of a new Eurasian 
economic or even monetary space as it were and so on - all this 
is very promising. But for me to give a specific answer to 
these questions I think that dialogue is necessary, and a 
meeting is necessary with the author of this proposal and with 
other colleagues who are currently members of the Commonwealth 
if Independent States. 
  [Skryabin] Many thanks. Eduard Amvrosiyevich, may I ask 
another question which is perhaps not easy for you. Here it 
is. In your country, Georgia, the opposition consider you to be 
a person of a pro-Russian bent. In our country, in Russia, a 
certain section of Russian people feel that you are a person of 
a nationalist bent. Tell me, what sort of person do you consider 
yourself? 
  [Shevardnadze] Let me just add, in Russia many think I am 
pro-Western or something of that kind. I have always wanted to 
be a politician thinking in realistic terms. I want, and it is 
my dream, to build good, friendly, new relations with the great 
Russia. I have always looked for friends both in the West or in 
the East - a small country cannot exist otherwise; and the same 
is even more true of a leader of a small country such as 
Georgia. We must look for friends - look for them and find them 
all over the world. And naturally, we must seek them first and 
foremost among our close neighbors, we must seek friends in 
Russia and in other states. [passage omitted] 
  [Bakradze] Eduard Amvrosiyevich, during your visit to the 
United States you included in your itinerary a meeting with Ivan 
Rybkin, chairman of the State Duma of the Russian parliament. 
Was this a chance meeting or does this to a certain extent 
reflect your position with regard to the Russian parliament? 
  [Shevardnadze] You know, it was both accidental and 
deliberate - because Ivan Petrovich Rybkin was in Washington. 
It was at his initiative and he thought it necessary to have a 
meeting with me. I was very glad to speak to him because this 
conversation took place in an extremely constructive and warm 
atmosphere. I think we built quite a good foundation for 
cooperation between our parliaments. I had not known him before 
and he produced a very good and pleasant impression on me. This 
is the first point. And second, I would even say there was 
something symbolic in the fact that our meeting took place in 
Washington. Since you mentioned my visit, I know that reactions 
to it have not been unequivocal in some circles both in Russia 
and in Georgia. The theme of all my speeches and all the 
conversations I had there was this: that in the present 
conditions a revival or recurrence of the cold war was 
inadmissible, or of any kind of confrontation between the West 
and East, any confrontation between Russia and the United 
States. Ivan Petrovich Rybkin and I discussed this theme, and I 
also discussed this with the Administration and with President 
Clinton, I talked on this subject in my public addresses in the 
Congress and the Senate. 
  [Skryabin] Thank you. Eduard Amvrosiyevich, a propos your 
visit to the United States. We know that you paid considerable 
attention to the need for support by the West for democratic 
reforms in Russia. You had conversations on this topic. What 
conclusions did you draw from your talks with senators and 
congressmen? 
  [Shevardnadze] I spoke mainly about the need for support for 
Georgia, for democratic transformations inside Georgia. But 
since the subject of Russian-U.S. relations is very topical at 
the moment, perhaps the most important topic at the present 
stage, of course I said that the West should continue its 
current policy of supporting reforms and large-scale, 
deep-going, global transformations in Russia which your country 
has started now. And I must say that in this respect my 
comments have always been met with understanding by my U.S. 
partners and interlocutors. 

