CSO 

  [Text] If emphasis on the principle of resolving the Korean 
peninsula's nuclear issue through direct negotiations with the 
United States is excluded, then foreign-affairs-related portions 
of Kim Il-song's New Year's address contain no new content this 
year either. 
  Kim Il-song repeated the general policy direction of past 
years: On the premise that it would consistently realize its 
foreign policy of autonomy, peace, and amity, North Korea, based 
on the principle of independence, would actively work for 
solidarity with socialist and nonaligned countries and would 
also develop good, friendly relations with capitalist countries 
that respect its sovereignty. 
  The call for the establishment of a new international 
political and economic order -- based on the destruction of the 
outmoded international political and economic order and on 
equality, justice, and impartiality, and for the elucidation of 
efforts at mutual cooperation and development, based on the 
principle of collective self-reliance -- was in no way new. 
  However, that the principle and method of resolving the 
Korean peninsula's nuclear issue was especially highlighted is 
worthy of note. It provides us with a useful clue as to where 
the focus of North Korea's foreign policy will be placed. 
  First let us examine related content. Kim Il-song stressed 
that because the so-called North Korea nuclear problem is a 
product of the U.S.' stubborn pursuit of its anti-socialist, 
anti-republican schemes and because it was the U.S. that brought 
up suspicions of their nuclear development and that brought 
nuclear weapons to the Korean peninsula, threatening them, the 
Korean peninsula's nuclear issue must be resolved completely 
through "North Korean-U.S. talks." He made the somewhat hopeful 
observation and expectation that the nuclear issue could be 
equitably resolved if the joint declaration adopted by the U.S. 
and North Korea were implemented. 
  Of course, this statement by Kim Il-song on the essence of 
the Korean peninsula's nuclear issue, the method and principles 
of resolving it, is only a repetition of what North Korea has 
continually argued since the North Korea nuclear problem became 
an international issue in the late 1980s. However, the 
background of this statement was the result last year of two 
rounds of direct North Korea-U.S. talks and compromise proposals 
between the two parties for resolving the North Korea nuclear 
problem, which subsequently became deadlocked. The fact that 
this statement was made in circumstances where the beginning of 
a solution to the North Korea nuclear problem was seen once 
again is judged to contain tremendous significance which 
absolutely cannot be overlooked. 
<H5>  New Year's Address a Repetition of Past Position </H5>
  By significance, we mean it suggests that North Korea will 
continue to use the nuclear issue as a most important lever for 
landmark improvement of its relationship with the United States, 
and, furthermore, that the direction of its foreign policy will 
be focused on improvements related to its policy toward the 
United States. 
  To predict North Korea's foreign-policy direction for this 
year too, having its relationship with the United States as its 
main direction of attack, North Korea will concentrate on 
improving, restoring and developing its relations with its 
surrounding superpowers: Japan, China, and Russia. Furthermore, 
it appears that it will also continue its Asia-oriented 
diplomacy. It is predicted that North Korea will strengthen 
multilateral diplomacy at the same time, such as conducting 
active economic and commercial diplomacy. It is possible to 
infer these predictions from internal and external conditions, 
and from the realities facing North Korea, even though nothing 
was mentioned in the New Year's address. 
  North Korea has no choice but to make improving relations 
with the United States its foremost policy objective because 
whether it is able to improve relations with the United States 
is the most decisive variable controlling the success of its 
overall diplomatic plan. 
  As is commonly known, this is because improved relations 
with 
the United States cannot only restore considerably setbacks in 
its diplomatic competition with the South resulting from 
ROK-USSR and ROK-PRC rapprochement, but also stimulate the 
restoration and development of relations with China and Russia. 
Moreover, it is because it is a very important issue linked 
directly with the creation of an environment favorable for the 
satisfactory execution of commercial and economic diplomacy, 
such as attracting foreign capital and technology. Thus, North 
Korea has made plentiful use of its nuclear card, the only one 
it actually has and its most powerful negotiation lever. There 
is a high probability, it is judged, that North Korea has 
established the realization this year of normalized relations 
with the United States through this, as far as possible, as its 
highest-priority, foreign-policy objective. 
  It appears that North Korea's U.S. strategy and tactics 
related to this will have as their underlying tone a package 
settlement of normalization with the United States, but will 
also show the flexibility of providing for a staged approach, 
depending on conditions and circumstances. 
<H5>  Policy of Giving Priority to Normalization With the United </H5>
States 
  As background for this, given the fact that the United 
States 
has presented as conditions for a landmark improvement of its 
relations with North Korea, including normalization, the 
resolution of the nuclear issue, improvement of human-rights 
conditions within North Korea, the discontinuance of the 
overseas transfer of weapons and technology of mass destruction, 
and the renunciation of terrorism, we can mention the fact that 
the only choice North Korea has capable of causing the United 
States to relax other conditions, ultimately agreeing to 
normalization, is the continued use of its nuclear card. 
  This is also because, as a result of its stubborn insistence 
on a "package settlement," which appeared reckless, it was 
finally accepted, thus demonstrating the effectiveness of this 
approach. 
  In the second round of North Korea-U.S. talks, a decision 
was 
made -- on the assumption that North Korea-IAEA and North 
Korea-ROK talks and negotiations would be held and progress made 
-- on a staged solution: a third round of high-level talks would 
be opened and discussions held on the problems of a resolution 
to the nuclear issue and an improvement of U.S.-North Korea 
relations. Afterward, with the North Korea nuclear issue at an 
impasse due to its failure to meet preconditions, North Korea 
proposed a "package settlement" on 11 November 1993 through Vice 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Kang Sok-ju. Ultimately, it was able 
to solicit a new solution, called a "thorough and broad 
solution," from the ROK-U.S. summit talks on 23 November. 
  Afterward, the United States and North Korea, through many 
rounds of unofficial contact in New York, arrived at a 
compromise plan, announcing the reopening of North Korea-IAEA 
negotiations, the entrance into North Korea of the IAEA 
inspection team, and at the same time the suspension of Team 
Spirit exercises, and the opening of a third round of North 
Korea-U.S. talks. This demonstrates that the "package 
settlement" was in fact essential. 
  Based on this analysis and understanding, North Korea 
strictly distinguished between "continuity of safeguards" of the 
nuclear safeguard agreement and the issue of "full compliance" 
with the agreement, sticking to its existing position that the 
latter must be resolved in direct talks with the United States. 
It is clear that it will pursue a strategy of ultimately 
achieving normalized relations with the United States by 
concluding a package settlement of this issue and the so-called 
U.S. abandonment of its nuclear threat and hostile policy toward 
the North. 
<H5>  Predicted To Adopt a Staged-Normalization Policy </H5>
  However, in regard to going as far as normalization with the 
United States, because there are many obstructing factors, such 
as the problem of satisfying other preconditions presented by 
the United States, it appears that North Korea will have no 
choice but to adopt a staged method of approaching normalization. 
  After first obtaining a declaration of the suspension of 
Team 
Spirit exercises from the United States by allowing the IAEA 
inspection team to enter the North to ensure the continuity of 
safeguards of the nuclear safeguards agreement, North Korea will 
carry on negotiations in a third round of talks to see that the 
United States accepts, to the greatest extent possible, its 
demands concerning a package settlement. 
  At this stage, there is a high probability that North Korea 
will try a staged strategy. After first reaching an agreement to 
remove the embargo on exports to the North and on a U.S.-North 
Korea exchange of mutual liaison missions, it will show 
flexibility in accepting inspections of the two locations in 
question, the final resolution of full compliance of the nuclear 
safeguards agreement, and by responding to a certain extent to 
the various U.S. preconditions, it will achieve its ultimate 
goal, normalization. 
  If its strategy of improving relations with the United 
States 
gains considerable success, North Korea will put its interest in 
normalizing relations with Japan. Since unilaterally breaking 
off talks due to the "Yi Un-hye problem" in the Eighth 
Normalization Talks in November 1992, North Korea has 
consistently maintained a hard-line posture concerning the 
Japanese side's request that the talks be resumed, saying that 
it will never sit down to normalization talks as long as Japan 
has not abandoned its hostile policy toward the North. It has 
actually intensified its criticism of Japan. However, it is 
difficult to draw the hasty conclusion that North Korea will 
continue to stick to its hard-line posture of rejecting 
normalization negotiations this year too. This is because the 
mood for resuming negotiations is taking a turn for the better 
and because North Korea's own needs demand that it make progress 
as rapidly as possible in normalization discussions with Japan. 
<H5>  Normalizaton With Japan: A Means for an Economic </H5>
Breakthrough 
  Although North Korea broke off talks using the "Yi Un-hye 
problem" as a pretext, this was nothing more than a superficial 
reason. It is no exaggeration to say that the main reason was 
actually North Korea's dissatisfaction concerning Japan's taking 
a hard-line stance, such as adding more stringent demands 
concerning the North Korea nuclear problem as prerequisites for 
progress in normalization discussions. However, the nuclear 
issue is starting to be resolved and Japan too is showing a 
change in its posture, not insisting on linking the nuclear 
issue with normalization. Thus, one of the greatest obstructions 
is being cleared up. 
  Something else worthy of note is the fact that the new 
Japanese Government shows a greater intention to improve 
relations with the North than the Liberal Democratic Party 
government. The Japanese Socialist Party, which has strongly 
demanded early normalization of relations with North Korea, is 
the majority faction within the coalition cabinet, and Prime 
Minister Hosokawa himself, in his first speech in August of last 
year, was the first prime minister to characterize World War II 
as "aggressive behavior," and clearly expressed regret for the 
past, such as apologizing and expressing deep regret concerning 
past colonial rule. This too is helping in the creation of an 
environment favorable for the resumption of normalization talks. 
  Not only this, but Foreign Minister Hata showed a positive 
stance toward the resumption of normalization talks, such as 
demanding that the Socialist Party mission, which visited North 
Korea on 28 December 1993, convey to the North Korean side that 
the Japanese Government is always willing to talk with North 
Korea, that the prime minister's expression of apology 
concerning World War II also had North Korea in mind, and that 
it is willing to give economic aid to North Korea if the nuclear 
issue is resolved. 
  Moreover, with the approach of the 50th anniversary of the 
end of World War II, the Japanese Government is displaying 
considerable willingness to settle issues of the past with 
surrounding nations, saying Japan can no long be tied down by 
past history. 
  Furthermore, for North Korea too an early conclusion of 
normalization discussions with Japan is needed to meet the 
development costs of the free economic trade zones and for 
success in its policy of actively attracting the capital and 
technology of advanced countries. In the context of settling 
issues of the past, the Japanese Government is showing 
intentions to pay postwar reparations. Thus, the interests of 
both parties are drawing close. 
<H5>  Restoration of Relationship With China Due to National </H5>
Interests of Both Parties 
  The above change of circumstances was sufficient to 
stimulate 
a change in North Korea's attitude toward normalization talks. 
However, there is also the possibility that North Korea will 
watch a little longer the progress of its relationship with the 
United States and political developments within Japan, and that 
it will for the time being make good use of a waiting strategy 
to earn time for extracting large-scale concessions from Japan, 
rather than hastily agreeing to a resumption of normalization 
talks. North Korea will ultimately agree to resume normalization 
talks, however. The time for this will be the latter half of 
this year, at the latest. 
  It is predicted that North Korea will be more mercenary in 
its relationship with China. The relationship had become 
somewhat estranged after ROK-PRC normalization, but has been 
recovering since the second quarter of last year. Working to 
restore its relationship with Russia, which is as cold as ever, 
it will also be active in furthering relations with surrounding 
Asian countries, concerning which it made considerable efforts 
last year. 
  Concerning the need for North Korea to be more mercenary in 
its relationship with China, there is no room for further 
debate. Not only is this because it shares with China the 
highest joint objective of defending the socialist system, but 
it is also because in the nuclear issue, the greatest issue of 
the day, and in dealing with the issues of normalization with 
the United States and Japan, China is really its only strong 
backer. Moreover, China is North Korea's greatest trading 
partner and an important supplier of energy and foods, such as 
petroleum and grain. 
  Therefore, North Korea urgently needs the cooperation of 
China to resolve the nuclear issue and the issue of 
normalization with the United States and Japan, and to overcome 
its economic crisis. China also judges North Korea's diplomatic 
isolation and economic crisis not to be in its national 
interests. Because, facing a Pacific era, it also has designs to 
use North Korea as a bridgehead for making inroads into the 
Asian-Pacific region, it views restoring its relations with 
North Korea as rapidly as possible as being in its national 
interests. 
<H5>  Concentration on Commerical-Economic Diplomacy Predicted </H5>
  With the interest of both sides meeting, it is possible 
their 
relationship will develop further. The visit to China on January 
15th this year of Party Secretary and Supreme People's Assembly 
Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Hwang Chang-yop can be seen 
as a sign of this. 
  Interpretations of the purpose of Hwang's visit to China are 
diverse, but even the one fact that he is the highest-level 
official to visit China since ROK-PRC normalization is 
sufficient to read North Korea's intention to improve relations 
with China. This could develop into summit diplomacy of 
prime-minister-or-above level, depending on the results of his 
visit. Should this succeed, it is predicted that the 
relationship between the two will be restored, to a considerable 
extent, to the state it was in before ROK-PRC normalization. 
  Unlike China, North Korea's emotional resentment concerning 
ROK-USSR normalization continues as before. It is a fact that, 
because the CIS is already taking an understanding different 
from the former Soviet Union in all areas, diplomatic, economic, 
and military, North Korea is not showing any aggressiveness in 
improving relations with it, and Russia in particular. However, 
in the event there is progress in its relations with the United 
States and Japan, it appears that North Korea will gradually 
begin working to restore its relationship with Russia. It has 
continually neglected its cold relationship with Russia because, 
from an economic and military perspective, it is of no help. 
  For Russia too, there is a great probability it will judge a 
restoration of its relations with North Korea, from a purely 
economic and military standpoint, to be beneficial to its 
national interests. In a Russian Foreign Ministry report on 
trilateral trade recently obtained by the Korean Trade Promotion 
Corporation, the Russian Government explores the possibility of 
trilateral economic cooperation connecting the ROK and North 
Korea, and estimates that it will be able to play the role of 
mediator in trilateral cooperation. This supports the above 
conclusion. 
  Besides this, North Korea will continue Asia-oriented 
diplomacy, centered on Southeast Asian nations. Although 
obscured last year by diplomacy with the United States, the 
focus of its diplomacy has been the strengthening of its 
cooperative relationships with Southeast Asian countries. It was 
successful in securing bridgeheads for advancing into Southeast 
Asia in Cambodia, Thailand, Malaysia. With this as a 
springboard, North Korea will try to increase the pace of 
development in its relations with these countries in every area, 
political, economic, and military. 
  Meanwhile, together with improving relations with the United 
States, commercial and economic diplomacy are predicted to form 
the central axis of North Korean diplomacy. It is a well-known 
fact that North Korea has long given much weight to commercial 
and economic diplomacy. 
  The prediction that it will increase the pace of this is 
based on the fact that North Korean measures to attract foreign 
capital have now become full-scale. First of all, the 
introduction of foreign capital into the free economic trade 
zones at Najin and Sonbong is forecast to begin this year. 
Particularly in the 21st Session of the Sixth Party Congress, a 
policy putting trade first was selected as a new, revolutionary 
economic strategy. Since the announcement of the Foreign 
Investment Law in October 1992, great changes being carried out 
in North Korea's economic-development line, such as the 
continued enactment of foreign-investment-related laws, and the 
urgent need for a stable supply of food and energy are factors 
making a strengthening of commercial and economic diplomacy 
unavoidable. 
  Thus, it is thought that North Korea will concentrate on the 
multilateralization of its trade, introduction of foreign 
capital and technology, and sources for food and energy supply. 

