BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Jara V.: "Cocaine Riders Take Root in </F>
Paraguay"] 
  [Text] The seizure of two kilos of very pure cocaine by the 
antinarcotics police last week pales into insignificance when 
compared with the 60 small planes loaded with cocaine that 
depart daily from our territory for Brazil. 
  This comparison clearly establishes the great difference 
between the power of the police and that of the mafia 
organizations, which have taken root in our country, are a 
reality, and not even the police or the government can do 
anything against them. 
  It has been known for a long time--as prophesied by U.S. 
Embassy experts and even the police--that Paraguay is a point of 
transit for cocaine on its way to the great underground markets 
of the American continent and Europe. 
  It is known that there are clandestine airstrips in the 
hills 
of Amambay, Alto Parana, Canindeyu, and throughout the Chaco 
region. 
  The absence of insufficient action by the government has 
allowed the establishment in Paraguay of contacts for the 
Colombian and Bolivian mafia groups that make huge profits from 
cocaine. 
  This lack of action by the government, not just the current 
administration but also previous ones, has made Paraguay--in 
everybody's eyes--a great shelter for criminals and the center 
of large illegal negotiations. 
  The Brazilians now surprise us with concrete information 
that 
Colombian and Bolivian drug barons are using our territory to 
land, reload their illegal shipments, and calmly depart for the 
Brazilian markets. 
  At least 60 small planes depart from our country every day, 
carrying cocaine to Brazil. This is alarming. 
  Is it possible that this number of flights could occur 
without the knowledge of our authorities--be they the police, 
the National Directorate for Civilian Aviation, or even the 
Armed Forces themselves? We doubt it. 
  The concrete issue of all this is that the lack of 
government 
action has allowed traffickers to definitively take root in our 
country, turning it into a drug corridor. The appropriate 
measures were not taken in time; but not because they were 
unaware of the problem. 

