Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, March 25 (YONHAP) -- South Korean President 
Kim Yong-sam proposed Thursday [24 March] that his country, 
Japan and China work together to control environmental pollution 
and promote joint study of oriental medicine and other projects. 
  Kim made the proposal during a breakfast meeting at the 
guest 
house with Korean correspondents stationed here. 
  Declaring that Korea, Japan and China are the three most 
important nations in Asia, Kim said they must undertake joint 
study of their common culture based on Chinese characters. 
  As China is rapidly undergoing industrialization, Kim said 
the Yangtse River, which runs into the West Sea, is becoming 
more polluted and the three countries must tackle the problem 
immediately. The Chinese Government has already agreed to his 
proposal at the working-level, Kim said. 
  As for oriental medicine, Kim noted there were slight 
differences among the three countries but the basic principles 
remained the same. That is why they need to work together to 
develop the field further, he said. 
  Kim said he hopes to obtain agreement on these issues from 
Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and Chinese President 
Jiang Zemin during summit talks. 
  Referring to the North Korean nuclear issue, Kim said 
developing nuclear weapons is a difficult undertaking but 
Pyongyang is not giving it up. 
  Kim said that when the North Koreans walked out of the 
inter-Korean contact last Saturday, the threat that "Seoul will 
turn into a sea of fire if war breaks out" was not just a 
personal remark by the chief delegate. He said he believed the 
statement came from North Korea's leadership. 
  President Kim also said China, in principle, does not want 
to 
see North Korea develop nuclear weapons. Since the world's eye 
is on China, Beijing would not do anything that would isolate it 
internationally, Kim said. 
  As a result, Kim expressed his belief that China would not 
use its veto power at the U.N. Security Council. 
  On other topics, Kim said he has accepted Emperor Akihito's 
apology Wednesday evening for the unfortunate past, or the 
Japanese colonial rule of Korea. 
  "His (the emperor's) apology was very clear and frank," Kim 
said. 
  "From now on, (South Korea) should stop demanding something 
from Japan, shake off the fetters of the past and look to 
future-oriented relations," he said. 

