BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Salim 'Ali Dhiyab on news conference held by Dr. </F>
Jawad al-'Anani, minister of information and minister of state 
for cabinet affairs, with unidentified correspondents in Amman 
on 4 June] 
  [Text] [Dhiyab] Dr. Jawad al-'Anani, minister of 
information and minister of state for cabinet affairs, held a 
news conference today in which he elaborated on the issues and 
topics raised during today's cabinet meeting. He also spoke 
about the government's interest in improving employees' general 
performance and conditions. 
  [Begin Al-'Anani recording] His Majesty King Husayn conveyed 
to the Council of Ministers the message about the need to work 
to consolidate the domestic Jordanian front and to emphasize 
improving performance in all sectors, including the 
administrative sector. This is in order to provide citizens with 
the best services, encourage the private sector to play its 
investment role, and reduce all manifestations of red tape and 
administrative obstacles discouraging Jordanian, Arab, and world 
investment. Foreign investment must satisfy our requirements so 
that, God willing, Jordan will remain economically invincible. 
His Majesty King Husayn also continually reaffirms the basic 
fact that Jordanian citizens of various origins and descents are 
Jordanian nationals, equal in rights and duties, and that 
Jordanian ranks must always remain invincible and integrated. 
His majesty also reiterated that plurality in Jordanian society 
must be a source of unity and strength, rather than a source of 
fragmentation, God forbid. His majesty also stressed that at 
this particular critical stage, Jordan must basically depend on 
itself and its own resources, immunity, and capabilities so as 
to prevent any penetration, God forbid. The present stage is 
one requiring very delicate decisions. This is because we must 
always compare what is taking place with our objectives and 
aspirations. We do not give up our stands, but this does not 
mean that we will remain static and immobile if developments 
warrant otherwise. 
  In fact, among the most important things that discussions 
dealt with today were the current peace negotiations. We 
currently notice that the peace process has begun to take a new 
direction. Its important and strategic role in the peace 
process notwithstanding, Jordan cannot agree to lag much behind 
other tracks. At the same time, Jordan is not showing 
breathlessness and hastiness. Jordan does not want to find 
itself, God forbid, in a position forcing it to adopt positions 
that it does not at all accept for itself. Yet, while we will 
not let hastiness lead us to unacceptable stands, we must not 
agree that negotiations are delayed and problems solved on other 
tracks in a way that leaves Jordan alone, subject to pressure. 
Nor do we agree that we keep on soliloquizing until the 
Jordanian role becomes marginal in the peace process. 
  Therefore, regarding the peace process, Jordan will take the 
steps which will enable it to maintain the reins of the 
initiative with respect to Jordanian affairs. Among the most 
important issues in this regard is the tripartite 
Jordanian-U.S.-Israeli meeting which will begin in Washington on 
Monday [6 June]. The main objective of this meeting is to 
discuss the future of the negotiations. 
  As you know, Jordan signed a joint agenda with Israel on 14 
September 1993, immediately after the Palestinian-Israeli 
Declaration of Principles was signed. This was done out of 
Jordan's support for the Palestinian negotiating position at 
that time. 
  In fact, the agenda we obtained was good, in the full sense 
of the word, because it preserves both Jordan's basic rights and 
the comprehensive solution. The agenda also addresses all 
issues raised at the negotiations table. Thus, in the 
negotiating process, Jordan basically follows the agenda it 
signed at that time. 
  We know that Jordan has basic issues pertaining to the 
negotiating process. These issues are currently led by the 
issue of borders, or the so-called occupied Jordanian territory, 
and also the need to proceed toward regaining it. This is 
because the agenda specified the principle to which we can refer 
in order to regain the Jordanian territory. As you know, the 
terms of reference on defining this territory are the mandate 
agreement of 1922. Thus, there should be an agreement under 
which Israel will be committed to both returning the Jordanian 
territory and accepting the setting up of an expert committee 
which would demarcate these borders as they used to be according 
to the mandate agreement. 
  Moreover, Jordan must demand its rights to water. This is 
because, as you know, water is a Jordanian right. According to 
Israel, regardless of dividing the water, its size would not be 
sufficient for the future, so instead of discussing the rights 
to water let us talk about both increasing the water resources 
and the regional cooperation on them. 
  We, in Jordan, however, believe that both issues are very 
important, so we will not relinquish our rights to water. 
Hence, we should complete what the water, energy, and 
environment group in the bilateral negotiations began in terms 
of discussing the subsidiary agenda of this group, so we can 
take steps later to regain our full rights to water. 
  Now, if something takes place in Washington confirming that 
the Israeli side is more prepared to demarcate the Jordanian 
borders according to the mandate agreement, and if we find out 
that they are ready to seriously discuss returning water rights 
to Jordan, the following logical question would be posed: What 
will our position be on such a basic development, which Jordan 
has been pushing to achieve since the beginning of the peace 
process? A clear answer to this question is that Jordan will 
not stand idly by and defer the regaining of its rights to both 
the territory and water in return for procedures or some forms 
of arrangements to hold negotiations on this issue. 
  It is clear that we cannot demarcate the borders and specify 
our water shares in Washington D.C. Hence, there should be an 
arrangement to move the negotiating process to this region, so 
we can be close to the decisionmakers, and the committees can 
meet on site in order to define both the Jordanian territory and 
Jordan's water share, which we deserve within this context. 
  Jordan has an unshakable belief that any settlement must be 
inclusive. That a settlement must be inclusive is not just a 
demand or slogan as far as Jordan is concerned. It must 
translate into practical steps on the ground. We very much want 
to see progress on the Syrian track. Obviously, the Golan 
Heights are Syrian territory that must all be handed back to 
Syria. Any Israeli withdrawal in return for any reciprocal 
measures that Syria may take will be viewed by us as sufficient 
to direct the peace process toward the eventual return of 
Syria's rights in the Golan. We are also aware that Israeli 
officials have said that they have no designs on Lebanese 
territory. Here in Jordan, we are vigorously behind the demand 
that the Lebanese Government regain sovereignty over its 
territories. We stand for the Lebanese Government 
reestablishing sovereignty on all the country's territories. 
  You are aware that there have been developments on the 
Palestinian track, and that the Gaza-Jerich accord was signed. 
Despite obstacles here and there, the Palestinian side is moving 
forward. 
  Jordan is seeking to coordinate at the highest levels. His 
Majesty King Husayn has said that the word coordination is 
gradually losing its meaning. Coordination means that the Arab 
parties involved in the peace process should coordinate their 
moves before they work out any agreement with the other side. 
This has been our practice all along, sharing our information 
with brothers. However, the required level of coordination is 
lacking. As things stand now, we compare notes after rather 
than before agreements are worked out. 
  Jordan is concerned about Arab integration; it cannot afford 
to be overtaken by events and left behind, lest its hands become 
tied and its movement toward its objectives be hindered, not 
only in terms of Jordanian rights, but also in terms of Arab 
rights, in the sense that the peace process must be 
comprehensive and peace itself durable. We, therefore, do not 
rush into taking hasty steps. We will take steps when the time 
is right so Jordan's role remains clear. This is because, as 
you know, any peace settlement in the region excluding Jordan 
will be incomplete. We do not want the strategic advantages 
that Jordan has acquired to be squandered or used as a way to 
pressure Jordan when it finds itself, under the prevailing 
deplorable Arab state of affairs, forced to accept whatever 
proposals it is offered. Therefore, to solidify Jordan's 
internal front and to move forward from the realm of economics, 
lest economics, as well as the debts, God forbid, be used as a 
means of pressure on us, we must improve the investment climate 
and our administration of investment. We must band together and 
give hardworking people more spacious room. Workers must be 
allowed to play their basic role in building the Jordanian state 
so as to satisfy our aspirations and those of his majesty, the 
supreme commander. [end recording] 
  [Dhiyab] Replying to a question about the war raging in 
Yemen, and where Jordan stands on the conflict, the minister 
said Jordan recognizes the Yemeni legitimacy that was approved 
by all the Yemeni parties after it was endorsed by the official 
and public Yemeni institutions. Asked about pay raises for 
civil servants that have been the subject of much talk in the 
press recently, Dr. al-'Anani said the Cabinet set up a 
commission to study the matter. A report submitted by the 
commission is under review. The Cabinet will discuss the matter 
at later sessions, al-'Anani added. 

