CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Milan Milosevic and Dragoslav Grujic of the </F>
Documentation Center: "The Dunces' Corner"] 
  [Text] Vuk Draskovic: "I like Professor Avramovic, he 
drafted a rather interesting economic and monetary program, but 
the minister of police represents continuity and is the pivot in 
the country of Serbia. That is what the prime minister-designate 
has told us!" 
  Our public, tired of this performance, will perhaps discover 
that last week's session of the Assembly brought the Serbian 
parliament closer to the role which every parliament has: to 
suspect, abuse, and criticize the ministers. This suits the 
Serbian deputies better than the declamations we have heard up 
to now. 
  Dr. Miroslav Neskovic took as his point of departure that in 
selection of the government "there have been cases in which we 
have ministers and people in high-ranking posts with a 
pedestrian psychology and knowledge to match, people of doubtful 
morality, people whose behavior smacks of corruption and 
black-marketeering, avaricious people without scruples, people 
who have brought with them only scandal, investigation, and 
ridicule": "The consequences of installing ministers, chiefs, 
and coordinators like this are disastrous. An inefficient, 
undefined, and chaotized state of affairs in all areas: monetary 
policy, trade policy, tax policy, business policy, and health 
care policy." 
  Prime Minister-designate Marjanovic listened to those 
challenging salvos with a sour smile, refreshing himself from 
time to time with lemonade at the bar near the entrance or 
coolly chatting with the journalists in the corridor (which is 
unusual for prime ministers, who usually slip away into the 
elevator). Some of the ministers would put an arm around his 
waist as a sign of support (as Radulovic did when the VREME 
reporter was in the vicinity). 
<H5>  Public Vices </H5>
  Judging by the assessment it pronounced of him, the 
opposition would like to give him a term considerably longer 
than four years, in Mitrovica, not in Belgrade. Someone said 
from the speaker's stand in the parliament that Progres, of 
which he is the director, is a "typical state enterprise which 
has a state monopoly over imports of natural gas, immense state 
privileges, and secret funds," that "Marjanovic finally entered 
the administration and became president of the Partizan Society, 
which brings together the military elite, the business elite, 
the party elite, and the UDBA [State Security Administration] 
elite, by the same principle, which is that of being associated 
with UDBA" (Vesna Pesic)..., that the territory of the former 
Soviet Union, where Progres did its business, is not a market 
anyway, but a "speculative kind of realm." The deputies were 
amazingly well-prepared in asserting that people very close to 
the prime minister-designate are co-owners of a domestic 
quasi-private firm Progres Gas Trading, representing business 
taken away from the Serbian Petroleum Industry, that a villa is 
being built for him on Dedinje, that he has property estimated 
at 40 million dinars, that he financed the campaign of the SPS 
[Socialist Party of Serbia] and the rebellion against Yeltsin in 
order to return the Communists to the Kremlin (Aleksandar 
Cotric), that he based his campaign largely on discrediting the 
SPO [Serbian Renewal Movement] and accusations lodged against 
the humanitarian organization Spona [Link] (Aleksandra 
Jankovic); that the representative office of Progres in New 
York, which is called Interprogres, reregistered as a private 
firm under the same name at the expense of Progres and that this 
is the property of Mirko Marjanovic; and even that Mr. 
Marjanovic's secretary, Adrijana Jankovic, is employed in the 
Progres representative office in Frankfurt, although there are 
better-trained people for that job, that he sent the incompetent 
retired director of Trepca to Moscow. 
  A question was put as to the prime minister-designate's 
state 
of health, because he said that for reasons of health he 
traveled exclusively by Concorde planes between Paris and New 
York; he is reproached for having done business with Agrokomerc, 
for having done business with Senad Arslanagic of Progres 
Sarajevo, who had shady business dealings with the Swiss firm 
Tuson, that he did risky business by investing in the Zenica 
Foundry and Steel Mill just before the war, perhaps because of 
the prime minister's closeness to Branko Mikulic (Zoran 
Subotic), that he had deceived the knitwear mill in Batocina 
concerning goods exported to Russia (Slavoljub Filipovic). 
  Up to the point when this article went to press (Thursday 
afternoon), the Socialists had not taken the trouble to deny 
these assertions, perhaps because some of them were happy that 
the opposition "remembered" these figures. One exception was the 
intervention of Dusan Matkovic, who in reference to the 
"insinuations about the firm Progres" called for "light to be 
shed on the other side as well": "Let it be stated that in the 
last year and a half, in the worst time for supplying Serbia 
with gas, Progres worked to employ plant capacity in Serbia and 
to export Serbian goods to those markets from which the gas 
comes!" 
<H5>  Kidnappings, Copper, and Poaching </H5>
  The man who represents continuity, Police Minister 
Sokolovic, 
fared worse than Prime Minister-Designate Marjanovic. They 
called him Zoran (Jerotije) Sokolovic, they recommend that he 
not resign out of revenge because he resembles Nusic's heroes, 
and they remind the public that Police Minister Sokolovic's 
apartment has been broken into and robbed no less than three 
times, and the thieves have not been discovered. 
  The prime minister-designate praised him briefly, giving him 
credit for having guaranteed "a stable security situation under 
the extremely complicated conditions of being surrounded by war" 
and for what he had done to modernize the service. 
  The response he got was assertions that Mr. Sokolovic is a 
minister in whose police a number of abuses of official position 
have been committed, including one case in Jagodina where the 
police killed a retarded young Gypsy lad. Borivoje Borojevic 
said that the police had arrested 15 people because of a murder 
in Budva, that all of them "were bestially tortured, beaten, and 
sent to Montenegro, criminal proceedings were conducted against 
five, and they were all acquitted." 
  "He had the honor of celebrating when his subordinates in 
Belgrade beat a retired actress in the bread line...," Miodrag 
Brankov recalled. A few speakers put on his scoreboard the 
events of 1 June last year, when the police beat the opposition 
leader Vuk Draskovic and his wife Danica and a sizable number of 
other individuals. 
  It was stressed that our country has been utterly 
criminalized, as indicated by the statistics which the MUP 
[Ministry of Internal Affairs] and the police have themselves 
been reporting, that there is more and more crime, that in 
Belgrade alone there are 54 unsolved murders at the moment. 
  "I expected the minister in charge to have submitted his 
resignation on his own a long time ago..., what he is 
responsible for seems to be getting worse and worse. I do not 
precisely understand the logic--why this continuity is 
continuing.... I might cite the kidnapping in Strpci..., a 
number of things have happened," Dr. Zarko Korac said. 
  Milisav Petkovic asserted that 20 people were kidnapped from 
Zvornik alone and that he has information indicating that our 
police even took part in all of that. A man who was registered 
in the Military Department for 10 years, who is a citizen of the 
Republic of Serbia, was kidnapped and abducted, some information 
suggests that he is in a school in Derventa, where training was 
conducted for seven days. Then they made them sign statements 
that they are volunteers, Petkovic asserted, seeking aid from 
Marjanovic so that someone would not one day kidnap him as a man 
born in Knin. 
  The assertion was made several times that the police have 
been protecting criminals. One deputy said that no fewer than 
two-thirds of the firms have been giving bribes, that 
Sokolovic's son has been selling precious metals and that the 
father has a duty to say whether he is influencing the business 
of his son; that Jezda got away from him and that Dafina is 
laughing at him because he cannot do anything to her. 
  The Radicals supplied the information that the smuggling of 
a 
sizable quantity of weapons was discovered on 3 March on the 
highway between Nis and Pirot in a traffic accident, but the 
affair was covered up because it allegedly involved a former 
relative of the deputy minister of internal affairs. Assertions 
were made that police chiefs, Sokolovic's people, are the main 
poachers in the Morava Valley. Slavoljub Filipovic called 
attention to the datum that an arms cache had been found in 
Topola, but the police have been silent, that the "chief" in 
Jagodina had been selling stolen automobiles from Vukovar, that 
weapons permits are being distributed through connections.... On 
the assertion of Aleksandar Cotric, 34 Golf cars stolen from a 
factory near Sarajevo were sold on the territory of Loznica 
Opstina, driven to Serbia, where the top leadership in the 
opstina government and their friends bought the cars for the 
trifling price of about 5,000 marks. The opstina has four times 
requested information on this from the MUP and Mr. Sokolovic (on 
22 October, 5 November, 22 November, and 9 December 1993). It 
has not received a response to this day. 
<H5>  UDBA and the Merchants </H5>
  If vague epithets are neglected to the effect that this is 
not a government of ethnic unity, but a "government of mafioso 
unity," the other ministers fared somewhat better, and the 
government was described the way import-export firms were once 
described--"UDBA and the Merchants." Dusan Vlatkovic, candidate 
for finance minister who was previously governor of the National 
Bank, was called upon to provide an explanation to all the 
savings depositors who were deceived (Slobodan Vuksanovic). 
  The ministers coming from the Associated Left were welcomed 
with rejoicing--Who is composing the government, the president 
of the republic or his wife? One deputy even said of Dr. 
Leposava Milicevic that she had become a minister "only because 
she had taken Mrs. Mirjana Markovic's blood pressure." 
  "Mr. Andrija, the famous Andra, known as Eva Milosavljevic 
of 
Zagubice, former president of Zagubice Opstina, was the main 
organizer of the spree at the source of the Mlava in Zagubice 
(Zivorad Jeremic)." 
  It was said of Mr. Radovan Pankov that he helped to falsify 
the election in Krajina and was rewarded for that with a 
ministerial post; that he is well-known in Krajina not for 
having bound the Serbian people together, but for having bound 
the top leadership of the SPS and the State Security Service of 
Serbia with the Krajina State Security Service. ("I apologize 
for having been redundant when I said the top leadership of the 
SPS and the State Security Service of Serbia!" said Aleksandar 
Vucic). As for binding the people together, he is not a favorite 
at all.... 
  Several deputies reproached the future ministers and even 
the 
prime minister himself for their intention to remain the 
managers of their firms, which is prohibited in parliamentary 
systems in the West: "Half of the government consists of 
managers who have no intention of leaving their positions 
(Velimir Simonovic)." 
  "It is obvious that the post of director of the Belgrade 
import-export firm Progres is stronger than the post of prime 
minister of Serbia. Or, the post of director of the Belgrade 
commercial firm Centromarket, held up to now by Mr. Slobodan 
Radulovic, is stronger than the post of deputy prime minister of 
Serbia (Milovan Konstantinovic)." 
  "There are people in the government who are not men of 
principle--not only were they recommended earlier as members of 
the government, but they could not wait for their parties to 
take a position, and when they saw that their parties would take 
a position they did not like, they became members of the 
government. I simply do not trust such people (Miodrag Brankov)." 
  The reference was to two officials of the Democratic Party 
[DS] (Radulovic and Djukic), who became part of the government 
against the will of their party. Radulovic, it seems, is 
refusing to give up his mandate and is complicating relations 
with the Democratic Party and announcing an appeal of the 
expulsion decision. Djindjic has let it be known that he is 
still hesitating on whether the Democrats will vote for the 
government or against it, although a majority in his caucus were 
against voting "for" (the top leadership of the party was mostly 
in favor of supporting the government). Djindjic has met with 
Milosevic, but that new meeting did not yield a result. The 
president of the Democratic Party observed during the debate 
that a government of national unity had not come about, but that 
it would one day. That unity, according to him, cannot occur 
just by the Socialists taking a few ministers from some party 
(they could have taken several more, we have plenty of them!), 
but that the condition is discontinuation of what has been the 
policy up to now, on which there has to be an agreement in 
principle among the parties. 
<H5>  The Program </H5>
  Marjanovic's program, which is more a letter of intent, 
takes 
for granted a return to the sound dinar, balancing budget 
revenues and expenditures, and financial discipline. Many 
Socialists have been cheerfully repeating this as a general 
phrase, but they have not gone into the meaning of it. 
  Marjanovic says frankly that the foreign exchange reserves 
are larger than was assumed and are "sufficient if the program 
is carried out consistently," which means that he does not hide 
his intention to commit them somehow. 
  His government has the intention of extending the tax system 
over the gray economy. His message to the large firms is that 
they not wait for government subsidies. 
  He announced that the government would insist on the export 
orientation of the economy and on "resolute and wise opening up 
to the world." 
  He announced optimization and reduction of public 
expenditure, removal of social welfare policy from the business 
firm so that expenditures do not have to be made to maintain 
production in unprofitable firms. Although he stressed that at 
this point "it is not a question of laying off the unutilized 
and redundant workers," but of "respecting the fact that some of 
those who are not employed have their own capital, land," the 
Serbian Radicals and Kostunica's Democrats, and in a 
considerable number of discussions the deputies of the SPO as 
well, openly expressed doubts about the government's intentions, 
lodging the charge that it wants to lay off more than a million 
workers, but it is not going to chase managers who have private 
firms. 
  "This government is a government whose task is to squeeze 
that last drop from the organism of Serbia's state and people, 
which is already as dry as a bone," Vuk Draskovic said. 
  They described the program as "the system of the leech, only 
slightly updated, with the same purpose as the loan, Dafina and 
the like" (Mihajlo Svilar). 
  The Socialists did not answer this criticism of the 
government, whose point of departure was social demagogy, 
sensing that they themselves might soon be attacking Avramovic's 
"penzos." It turned out that they nevertheless have a hard time 
thinking about a radical break with wartime policy and the 
wartime economy. 
  When Vesna Pesic asked how the prime minister-designate 
intends to cover the deficit of $1.5 billion when we "have had 
occasion to hear President Milosevic say that Serbia should be 
militarily the most powerful state in the Balkans," there was 
the usual uproar and mention of Zimmermann and the U.S. 
Congress.... Paying no attention to that uproar, she continued: 
"I ask the question Why? What kind of plan is there for us to be 
the most powerful state in the Balkans, how many tanks and 
artillery guns (above Sarajevo) will we continue to pay for them 
so that they can sit there and fire on the civilian population!" 
"With what will the Serb defend himself, gentlemen, if not with 
a cannon?" was the response she received the next day from 
Belic, a deputy of the SPS, a farmer of whom Kostunica said in 
the last convocation that even that could be a deputy. Raka 
Radovic and Prof. Ratko Markovic, author of the constitution and 
a new minister, were "dying with laughter" all the while. 
  The day before the session the Socialists had a tumultuous 
"all-evening" and "all-morning" meeting of the caucus during 
which the prime minister- designate's list underwent essential 
changes. This indicates not only the "nervousness about 
personnel," but also, per usual, as we have seen in all previous 
attempts at reform, the main resistance to reform comes from the 
government apparatus itself. 
  "The atmosphere in Serbia in which this program is being 
carried out is unfortunately such that it cannot succeed. I 
believe that it will not be long before even the Socialists 
renounce both Avramovic and that program; I am afraid that the 
opposition will again stand behind their [the Socialists'] 
candidate, just as was the case with Cosic, just as was the case 
with Panic" (Borivoje Radic). 
  Not knowing exactly what to do with a program which is 
basically acceptable to it, the opposition took a fierce grasp 
of what was so obviously within its reach--it disputed the 
credibility of the people in power. In Serbia, that is not an 
issue without importance. 

