BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Wang Jinfu (3076 6855 4395)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 6 Jun (XINHUA) -- The CPC Central 
Committee's Central Commission on Politics and Law held a 
national teleconference in Beijing today to make further 
arrangements for vigorously cracking down on major and important 
cases of economic crime. Ren Jianxin, member of the CPC Central 
Committee Secretariat and secretary of the Central Commission on 
Politics and Law, called for intensifying attack on 
embezzlement, bribery, financial fraud, smuggling, and other 
serious economic crimes in the coming days. He particularly 
called for earnest efforts to investigate and try major and 
important cases to push forward the struggle against corruption. 
  Wei Jianxing, member of the CPC Central Committee Political 
Bureau and member of the Secretariat; Luo Gan, state councillor 
and secretary general of the State Council; Zhang Siqing, 
procurator general of the Supreme People's Procuratorate; Cao 
Qingze, minister of supervision; and Wang Deying, deputy 
secretary of the Central Discipline Inspection Commission, 
attended the conference. 
  According to a briefing, from January to April this year, 
more than 19,000 cases of various economic crimes were placed on 
file for investigation and prosecution by procuratorial organs 
in various parts of the country, of which 12,000 were cases of 
embezzlement and bribery and 6,173 were major cases involving 
more than 10,000 yuan. During the first quarter of this year, 
courts across the country accepted and heard 9,836 cases of 
economic crime, of which 2,591 were major cases involving more 
than 10,000 yuan. A total of 7,130 people were sentenced, of 
which 102 were sentenced to death or life imprisonment. Among 
those sentenced, one person was a vice-ministerial-level cadre, 
nine were department and bureau level cadres, and 35 were 
county-departmental-level cadres. 
  In summing up progress in investigating and trying major, 
important cases during the anticorruption struggle of the 
preceding period, Ren Jianxin said: Thanks to the tremendous 
amount of painstaking work by party committees, governments, 
discipline inspection and supervision departments, and judicial 
organs at various levels, the anticorruption struggle has 
achieved interim results and has halted the spread of corruption 
to some extent. However, our work in investigating and trying 
major, important cases of economic crime still has quite a long 
way to go to resolve the problems on hand, and it falls short of 
the call of the people and the demand of the party Central 
Committee and the State Council; there are still many problems 
to be resolved. He said the main problems are uneven 
development in the struggle; too many obstacles, slow progress, 
and weakness in case handling; and lack of toughness in 
attacking corruption. 
  Ren Jianxin pointed out that in the second half of this 
year, 
public security and procuratorial departments and people's 
courts must concentrate their efforts and focus on main points 
in speeding up investigation and trial of major and important 
cases of economic crime. He said: We must make embezzlement, 
bribery, financial fraud, smuggling, and other criminal cases 
our main focus of our investigation and trial. We must make 
leading party and government organs, judicial departments, 
administrative and law enforcement departments, and economic 
management departments our main focus in economic crime 
investigation. We must assign the most qualified personnel to 
do the job. We must be resolved to remove all obstacles and 
concentrate our efforts on investigating and trying those cases 
involving leading cadres at and above the county departmental 
level. We must publish, one after another, some of the major 
cases having nationwide impact, particularly important cases 
involving crimes committed by leading cadres, in order to 
increase the momentum and enhance their social effect. 
  Ren Jianxin stressed: Whether the work of investigating and 
trying major, important cases can sustain and produce results 
hinges on the leadership. Leading comrades of party committees, 
governments, and departments at all levels must further achieve 
unity in thinking; increase their awareness of the significance 
of investigating and trying major, important cases; enhance 
their sense of mission and urgency; and truly make the 
investigation and trial of major, important cases a major 
political task in the struggle against corruption. Leading 
comrades must earnestly strengthen their leadership over the 
work of investigating and trying major, important cases, 
vigorously support and assist public security and procuratorial 
departments and people's courts in overcoming resistance, 
removing interference, and enforcing the law honestly to achieve 
greater breakthroughs and progress in the struggle against 
corruption. 
  Ren Jianxin demanded: Public security and procuratorial 
departments and people's courts, discipline inspection and 
supervision departments, administrative and law enforcement 
departments, as well as other departments and units must perform 
their duties in accordance with the law, strengthen 
coordination, act in concert, improve case handling efficiency, 
increase case handling speed, and jointly carry out the work of 
strictly investigating and heavily punishing those involved in 
major, important cases. We must enforce strict discipline, 
remove interference, and investigate and affix the criminal 
responsibility of those party and government leaders and law and 
discipline enforcement personnel who pervert justice for a 
bribe, resort to fraud for personal gains, deliberately place 
obstacles and interfere in law enforcement, and shelter or 
connive with criminal elements. We must mobilize and rely on the 
masses, boldly report economic crimes and provide clues to 
vigorously assist judicial departments in gathering evidence and 
arresting and punishing criminal elements. We must ensure there 
are sufficient funds for handling cases, and we must provide 
necessary material conditions for investigating and trying 
major, important cases. 
  Zhang Siqing; Tao Siju, minister of public security; and Gao 
Changli, vice president of the Supreme People's Court, also 
spoke at the teleconference. 

