Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Orenburg - The necessary 25 per cent turnout was 
reported in the elections of candidates to representative 
bodies of power in 28 of 47 constituencies of the orenburg 
region. Chairman of the Regional Electoral Commission, Yuriy 
Andreyev, told ITAR-TASS that the necessary turnout will be 
reached in at least four other constituencies before polling 
stations close today. According to the law, two-thirds of 47 
candidates have to be elected to enable the regional legislative 
assembly to come into force. 
  Final results of the polls will be announced by 5 a.m March 
21. 
  Vologda - Only 6 out of 15 regional electoral commissions 
reported the necessary 25 per cent turnout in elections by 14:00 
p.m.today. Over 20 per cent of electors had cast their votes in 
the Vologda region by this time. The Regional Electoral 
Commission hopes that the necessary 25 per cent barrier will be 
reached by the time polling stations close today. 
  Perm - Reports from the Perm region say that a number of 
deputies' seats in the Perm regional assembly and local 
government will remain vacant. Only 22 out of 40 constituencies 
reported the necessary 25 per cent turnout in the polls. 
Chairman of the Regional Electoral Commission, Anatoliy 
Lebedev, told ITAR-TASS that by-elections which under the law 
can be held in twelve weeks, will require additional 
expenditures of no less than one billion roubles. 
  St.Petersburg - The turnout in elections to representative 
bodies of power in the Leningrad region is rather poor. Only 
10 per cent of registered electors had voted by noon today. 
Under the law, elections are recognised valid if no less than 
25 per cent of electors take part. 
  Omsk - Over 33 per cent of registered electors of the Omsk 
region had turned up at polling stations by 18:00 p.m. Sunday. 
The highest turnout was reported in rural regions. However, 
elections will be considered valid only in three Omsk districts. 
In the remaining four districts of the city the turnout was 
19-22 per cent. 
  Kirov - The necessary 25 per cent turnout had been reported 
by 16:00 p.m. only in the town of Kotelnichi of the Kirov 
region, while in all other towns the turnout fell short of the 
needed number. By 16:00, the turnout in the regional centre was 
20 per cent. 
  Kudymkar - Komi autonomous region - the turnout in elections 
in the Komi-Permyatsks autonomous region had reached the level 
of 27 per cent by 16:00 p.m. at two polling stations elections 
were attended by second secretary of the Finnish embassy in 
Russia, Maimu Henriksson, who was interested in social motives 
prompting electors to cast their votes in favour of a certain 
candidate. 

