Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> Interview with Dr. Mamduh Ahmad al-Biltaji, minister of </F>
tourism and civil aviation by Sa'id Shilsh; place and date not 
given] 
  [Excerpts] [Passage omitted] Dr. al-Biltaji explains the 
tourism crisis, his view of privatization in the tourism sector, 
the effect of terrorist incidents on investment in tourism, the 
new tourism promotion plan, and the way to encourage Egyptian 
tourism. 
  With the mentality of a PhD-level economist and a 
businessman 
who served as an information attache and the head of the 
Information Authority for 16 years during which he circled the 
globe, and with the objectivity for which he is known, Dr. 
al-Biltaji granted the following interview regarding tourism and 
tourism plans as we enter the new year. 
  [Shilsh] What is the total extent of the losses suffered by 
Egypt due to terrorism incidents? 
  [Al-Biltaji] Terrorist incidents have deepened the tourism 
crisis in Egypt. The number of tourists dropped from 3.2 million 
in 1992 to 2.2 million in 1993. The number of tourism nights 
fell from 20.5 million in 1992 to 13.7 million in 1993. Tourism 
revenues fell from $2.3 billion in 1992 to $1.1 billion in 1993. 
  [Shilsh] The tourism sector is now being privatized. What is 
your view on this subject and the extent of its effect on 
Egyptian tourism? 
  [Al-Biltaji] I believe that the policy of encouraging the 
private sector is a successful policy, and I intend to reinforce 
it. However, I believe that any sales must be subject to market 
mechanisms. I do not agree with the sale of all of the hotels at 
one time, because such a sale would be incompatible with market 
mechanisms. The sale must be subject to market mechanisms. This 
requires expansion of the ownership base and avoidance of a 
glut, because a glut would result in unrealistic development. 
Most countries that have attempted privatization began 
gradually, because flooding the market is not a sound policy. 
  [Shilsh] President Mubarak has recently devoted great 
attention to the tourism problem. He went personally to tourism 
areas following terrorist incidents against tourists that 
occurred in early 1993. What place does the tourism problem 
occupy in President Mubarak's mind? 
  [Al-Biltaji] Tourism is a major concern of President 
Mubarak. 
His going to the tourism areas gave a big boost to investors and 
employees in the tourism sector. Republic Decree No. 445 of 
1991, which pertains to support of tourist attractions and the 
Tourism Development Authority, has had a major effect in 
boosting investment activity in tourist areas. 
  [Shilsh] Have the recent terrorist incidents affected 
tourist 
investment activity? 
  [Al-Biltaji] Some effect has undoubtedly occurred. However, 
investments have begun to return. The amount spent on 
investments in the tourist sector from 1981 to 1991 totalled 6.4 
billion Egyptian pounds, of which the private sector accounted 
for 89 percent and Egyptian investments accounted for 54 percent. 
  The facilities provided by the state to investors have 
played 
a major role in encouraging investment activity, because 
investment in the tourist sector yields a quick return and 
enjoys a large number of tax exemptions. 
  [Shilsh] Some believe that the tourism crisis entails many 
factors, not just terrorist incidents and the Gulf war. What is 
your opinion? 
  [Al-Biltaji] I believe that the tourism crisis is structural 
and goes back to before the Gulf crisis and the terrorist 
incidents. The tourism crisis is structural. It is not a 
temporary disruption. What is happening is that the volume of 
tourism to Egypt is very low. It reached a peak in 1992, but 
Egypt's tourism revenues nonetheless reached the peak of 
despair. This volume (3.2 million tourists) represents only 0.64 
percent of the volume of world tourism. I attribute this to the 
fact that the collective consciousness, investors, the private 
sector, and the media--because of its legacy--have not realized 
the importance of tourism as a new industry. Also, while the 
supply has increased, demand has not increased, because we have 
not applied the principles of sound promotion, as other 
countries are doing. How much do you imagine the countries of 
the world allocate to promote tourism? They spent from 1 to 2 
percent of all tourism revenue for this purpose. We in Egypt 
have spent only $3 million, even though our income from tourism 
was $2.3 billion according to Central Bank estimates. If we 
subtract the time of the crisis and take 2 percent of tourism 
revenues as an average allocation, we should have spent $23 
million on promotion. If we look at what other countries have 
allocated for promotion, we find the following: Morocco, $21.3 
million annually; Turkey, $27.5 million; Greece, $15 million; 
Cyprus, $7.3 million; and France, 71.8 million. 
  [Shilsh] What then is the solution? How can you come up with 
the sums needed to promote tourism? 
  [Al-Biltaji] The solution is through the private tourism 
sector, the public treasury, and the Tourism Fund. 
  [Shilsh] Marketing requires a strong plan to yield rapid 
results. 
  [Al-Biltaji] A plan exists. It consists of invitations to 
visit Egypt, which have been extended to the key travel 
organizations, tourism companies, and the tourism trade media, 
as well as extensive public relations, because our problem is a 
lack of information. 
  [Shilsh] Who is managing the marketing campaign? 
  [Al-Biltaji] Let us begin with the traditional management, 
namely the 16 tourism promotion offices. We are now preparing a 
new plan to restructure these offices and to establish new 
offices near tourist attractions. The private sector also has a 
responsibility for making promotional efforts, and public 
relations firms should contract directly with foreign producers 
of information resources. [passage omitted] 
  [Shilsh] As 1994 begins, what is your view of the 
development 
of the tourism promotion program and the promotion of Egyptian 
tourism? 
  [Al-Biltaji] Our efforts consist of: promotional activity 
abroad based on a carefully thought-out professional plan to 
increase the demand for Egyptian tourism; the pursuit of an 
integrated tourism investment and development policy designed to 
increase the supply consistent with aspirations regarding a 
tourism revival in the future; the diversification of the 
Egyptian tourism product by arranging a series of regularly 
recurring cultural, musical, religious, archeological events 
throughout Egypt's key tourism governorates; efforts to promote 
these events as additional attractions; and the mounting of an 
intensive campaign to enhance domestic awareness of the 
importance of tourism as a source of jobs and income for the 
millions of Egyptians working in sectors related to tourism 
directly or indirectly. 
  [Shilsh] What can be added to current tourism promotion 
techniques and efforts? 
  [Al-Biltaji] Much can be added. For example, the creation of 
a calendar of annual festivals on the anniversaries of 
archeological finds of international interest, held at the site 
of the find; the creation of a calendar of musical festivals 
organized for tourism purposes; the creation of a calendar of 
different religious events; the creation of a calendar of 
athletic competitions, such as hunting competitions, car races, 
and yacht races; the organization of an international festival 
of Pharaonic sports; an allocation for important artistic and 
cultural sites and events held over the course of the year; an 
allocation for exhibitions of Egyptian agricultural and 
industrial products; an attempt to establish the dates of these 
exhibitions and to expand their scope so that they become an 
added tourist attraction; the organization of a yearly crafts 
fair in Egypt; the organization of a celebration of folk arts, 
perhaps at tourist sites in Upper Egypt, during which festivals 
of Egyptian folk songs, music, and dress would be held. 

