Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Ivo Grycz: "In NATO's Anteroom"] </F>
  [Text] Before the January meeting of the North Atlantic 
alliance, the countries of Central Europe, mutually among 
themselves, intensified their diplomatic activity in seeking 
alliance membership, unfortunately more in order to inform their 
partners of their own ideas of association and less to 
coordinate a joint approach by the Visegrad Four. 
  Its weakest member, Slovakia, naturally wants to lean on the 
power of the Visegrad Group, which does not fully correspond 
with the relatively closest foreign policy, that of the Czechs. 
President M. Kovac's visit was immediately significant for his 
Czech partner, V. Havel, for two reasons: to acquaint the Slovak 
side with the priorities of the Prague government, which it sees 
in the U.S. plan "Partnership for Peace," and to verify the 
German attitudes, which are somewhat different in questions of 
association and logically apply to the entire Central European 
area as a bloc. The Slovak president also clarified Poland's 
positive response to the French-German initiative, which 
promises to create a geopolitical giant from the Atlantic to the 
eastern borders of Poland. Undoubtedly, these offers to Poland 
also caused Czech diplomacy to look eastward from the Morava 
River and to gain an ally for the U.S. plan. 
  Despite the many compatible positions that he holds in 
common 
with M. Kovac, the Czech president, in keeping with the ideas of 
the Klaus Cabinet, makes it obviously clear that the Czechs are 
closer to the U.S. plan, which figures on individually arranged 
security guarantees for the states of Central and East Europe, 
of course with the quiet concurrence of Russia. The Partnership 
for Peace would make judgments according to the degree of 
economic and political maturity of the countries and to their 
observance of human rights. It is evident that the Czech 
Republic does not want to allow Germany hegemony over the 
Euro-Atlantic integration efforts, but, at the same time, it 
refused to identify itself with the "package without contents" 
of the Visegrad Group. One must add that this is particularly 
true because of the unresolved Slovak-Hungarian relations. 
  The Slovak foreign policy architecture sees the Visegrad 
Group as a possible intermediate step toward the European Union, 
but G. Jeszensky's cool attitude to the readmission agreement 
forces Slovakia to pin its hopes rather on Prague and on the 
Partnership for Peace, even though verbally our diplomatic 
policies still support the joint approach of the V 4 [Visegrad 
Group]. 
  In connection with an improvement in Czech-Slovak relations, 
which is promised by the creation of a goods and capital union 
between the two countries and a satisfactory solution to the 
question of moderation in the matter of foreigners, it is the 
Czech lands and Slovakia that have the greatest chance of 
becoming a model and a driving force for union in Central Europe. 
  It is true that everything will also depend on the Slovak 
domestic policies and the nonconfrontational diplomatic 
offensive that J. Moravcik has so far successfully conducted. It 
is also thanks to him that Slovakia is beginning to present 
itself to the world as a stabilizing element of Central European 
integration, which of course turns people's eyes to the 
Hungarian diplomacy, which is markedly more aggressive. It would 
be a mistake to attack the hesitant attitude of our southern 
neighbor on the question of the readmission agreement with 
Slovakia. When G. Jeszensky only calls for solidarity among the 
Central European nations and recognition of the Slovak-Hungarian 
borders appears unnecessary to him, the question comes up 
whether he is such a unionist that they do not want to see at 
all (Slovakia and Hungary could agree to even mutual recognition 
of the original boundaries) or that they do not want to see 
someplace else. However, Jeszensky's announcement must be 
understood as a preelection presentation by a party, and the 
reaction to it must be on a material basis. 
  Guaranteeing rights to minority nationalities is not such a 
problem for Slovakia as Hungarian diplomacy has presented it, 
and, also, economic and political relations with the Czech 
Republic, as well as model relations with foreigners whose 
concept was born in discussions between Presidents M. Kovac and 
V. Havel in Lany, put us in promising positions before the V 4 
meeting with President Clinton. 
  After the division of the federation without any conflicts 
and the hopefully developing union relationships, we can state 
that the two new Central European countries have been 
established as an important factor of European stability and 
integration. We should by now not be unaccepted strangers in the 
anteroom of NATO. 

