CSO 

    [Editorial Report] Several recent Polish newspaper items 
have described and commented on the rise of organized crime in 
Poland and its involvement in the international narcotics trade. 
<H5>  Criminal Gangs </H5>
  An editorial in the 28 April Warsaw daily POLSKA ZBROJNA 
complained of the increasing involvement of organized "gangs" in 
large-scale auto-theft, money-laundering, and drug-trafficking 
operations. The paper stated that these criminals, who are 
reportedly equipped with high-tech communications systems and 
fast cars that have no trouble in outrunning police cruisers, 
are able to use the profits from their criminal activities to 
thwart the criminal justice system: "Even if the police succeed 
in arresting a member of one of these gangs, highly qualified 
and generously paid lawyers get him out in 48 hours. Bail is 
paid immediately. The events described in the press every day 
confirm the rumors about corruption in the police department, 
the public prosecutor's office, and the courts." Frequent 
violent clashes between rival gangs have led the police to 
predict that "in the next few years, on the streets of our 
cities, one will be able to see scenes as depicted in the U.S. 
gangster films of the 1930's." 
<H5>  Polish "Mafia" </H5>
  A 19 May ZYCIE WARSZAWY article entitled "How a Mafia Is 
Born" noted that, while Polish authorities reject the use of the 
term "Mafia" for Polish gangs, there are "well-organized gangs" 
that control prostitution, extort protection money from 
legitimate businesses, smuggle drugs on a large scale, and have 
infiltrated the criminal justice system. According to the 
Warsaw daily, the three main gangs are named "Pruszkow," 
"Ozarow," and "Wolomind" after districts of the Polish capital. 
Increasingly violent "turf" wars are said to have included the 
use of military.weapons, including hand grenades. 
<H5>  Police Powers Limited </H5>
  Journalist Ireneusz Krzeminski has traced the rise of 
organized crime to the limitations placed on police authority 
and procedures since 1989 by successive democratic governments. 
Writing in the 8 May RZECZPOSP0LITA, Krzeminski asserted that 
the new restrictions have demoralized the police and made them 
reluctant to take action, while, at the same time, emboldening a 
criminal element used to the harsh repressive measures of the 
communist regime. 
<H5>  Russian Example </H5>
  An editorial in the 9 May ZYCIE WARSZAWY warned that the 
recent experience of Russia demonstrated the dangers inherent in 
unimpeded growth of organized crime: "We should see what the 
Mafia has done in Russia, where, in only the past few years, it 
has become one of the forces controlling the country. Now they 
are looking toward us as partners. In this context, we should 
look at the development of organized crime in our country." 
<H5>  Drug Smuggling </H5>
  Polish criminals have made their country the fourth-largest 
European producer of illegal amphetamines, behind the 
Netherlands, Great Britain, and Belgium, according to an article 
in the 9 May ZYCIE WARSZAWY. Polish amphetamines are reportedly 
destined primarily for the German and Scandinavian markets. The 
paper noted that Polish drug dealers had been arrested recently 
in Berlin for attempting to sell 10 kilograms of Polish-produced 
amphetamines, worth approximately 144,0O0 German marks. 
  The 27 April ZYCIE WARSZAWY reported that the largest single 
seizure of illegal drugs in the history of Britain was made on 
board a Polish freighter in the harbor of Liverpool. The ship, 
which was en route from Venezuela to Poland, contained 520 
kilograms of "very-high-quality" cocaine, hidden in glue cans. 
The cocaine was said to have been intended for distribution to 
West European markets via Poland. 

