CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mate Basic: "Col. Dragan Vikic Against Commander </F>
Tuto Naletilic"] 
  [Text] Archbishop Vinko Puljic, his assistant Bishop Petar 
Sudar, Police Colonel Dragan Vikic, Ivo Komsic, president of the 
HNV [Croatian National council], Col. Gen. Ante Roso, and 
Kresimir Zubak, president of the Croat-Muslim Federation, are 
men with different professional and political careers in the 
past and altogether different beliefs. But they are bound 
together by an extremely important feature they have in common: 
They are the most distinguished representatives of the new 
Croatian policy toward Bosnia-Herzegovina, through whose conduct 
they are to confirm that Croats sincerely desire to maintain the 
state of Bosnia-Herzegovina, without at the same time 
jeopardizing the most vital Croatian national interests in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The media have been saying in recent weeks that the signing 
of the Washington agreement was an expression of the continuity 
of Croatian policy toward Bosnia-Herzegovina and that there has 
been a radical departure from what until recently were the 
official views of Zagreb and Grude, which is more than clear. 
  The departure of Mate Boban, M.A., the top man in the 
Croatian republic of Herceg-Bosna, was symbolic of the change 
that occurred in most of the political elite of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina's Croats, which until recently advocated a 
division of Bosnia-Herzegovina and strove to settle the conflict 
with the Muslims by military means. 
  The Croat-Muslim agreement also thrust into the foreground 
certain Croats who until recently were either marked as 
"traitors to the Croatian cause" or were marginalized or had 
come into politics only quite recently. 
<H5>  Kresimir Zubak, the Most Important Representative of the </H5>
Interests of Croats in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
  What we wanted above all in choosing new representatives of 
the Croatian people in Bosnia was to sketch out the new currents 
in Croatian policy toward Bosnia-Herzegovina. Kresimir Zubak, 
who succeeds Mate Boban at the head of Herceg-Bosna Croats, is 
chairman of the presidential council of the Croat republic of 
Herceg-Bosna, a candidate for president of the future 
federation, and until recently the vice president of the HVO 
[Croatian Defense Council] of Herceg-Bosna, who says that it is 
not contrary to the Croatian interest even for the Serbs to join 
the federation. He was born 29 November 1947 in Doboj. A lawyer 
by profession, he at one time held the office of president of 
the basic court in Doboj. He has also been assistant secretary 
in the B-H Secretariat for Jurisprudence and General 
Administration, and he was justice minister in the government of 
Herceg-Bosna. When the Serbs attacked Usora, where the alliance 
with the Muslims was never in question at any time, Zubak went 
from Doboj to that small Croatian enclave, where he was in fact 
wounded as an HVO fighter. Zubak, who says that creation of the 
republic of Herceg-Bosna was necessary to organize the army and 
the government, turned up as the most important representative 
of the interests of Croats in Bosnia-Herzegovina in negotiations 
with the Muslims about creation of the Bosnian federation. 
<H5>  Ante Roso, Ardent Catholic and Defender of the Law </H5>
  Col. Gen. Ante Roso, chief of the general staff of the 
Croatian Defense Council, is the principal Croat military 
negotiator with the Muslims, who are represented by Gen. Rasim 
Delic of the B-H Army. An extremely impressive person, informed 
people say, his approach won over even the side that was an 
adversary until recently. A 42-year-old noncommissioned officer 
in the Foreign Legion, married to a French woman and the owner 
of a private firm in France, he had retired after 21 years in 
France's most elite military unit, but at the very outset of the 
Serbian aggression against Croatia he returned to the homeland. 
Having been a fighting man in the Legion's 2d Airborne Regiment, 
in Croatia he worked first as a military instructor, and then he 
commanded special units of the Croatian Army. 
  Roso has fought on all fronts in Croatia, and he has been 
fiercely attacked in the Muslim and Serbian media because of the 
defense of Croatian towns in Bosnia-Herzegovina he organized 
(both when they were being attacked by the Serbs and when they 
were being attacked by the Muslims). An ardent Catholic, he 
headed the first Croatian military delegation to the shrine of 
Our Lady of Lourdes. 
  When Gen. Slobodan Praljak was removed from the head of the 
Croatian Defense Council, Roso went to Herceg-Bosna from the 
Croatian Army. His arrival halted the Muslim offensive in 
central Bosnia, in areas where the HVO has experienced the 
greatest defeats. At the same time the peace negotiations began 
with the Muslims. 
  Gen. Roso also enjoys confidence in Herzegovina because of 
his firm decision to organize the HVO according to strict 
military rules and to halt the lawlessness which had prevailed 
until recently in that area. 
<H5>  Zeljko Glasnovic, Legionnaire From the Gulf War </H5>
  Professional Guards brigades of the HVO are also being 
organized under the command of Gen. Roso in Orasje, Vitez, 
Tomislavgrad, and Capljina. Brig. Zeljko Glasnovic, commander of 
the Ante Bruno Busic 1st Guards Brigade, housed in the Bozan 
Simovic Garrison in Capljina, is a 40-year-old Croat who was 
born in Zagreb, but his family moved to Canada when he was 
eight. One of the best-known members of the Foreign Legion, he 
returned to the homeland in 1991 to oppose the Serbian 
aggression. He spent five years in the Canadian army, he fought 
in Central America, and in the Legion, with the rank of a 
noncommissioned sergeant -- he also fought in the Gulf war. He 
speaks several foreign languages, he is an instructor of 
infantry warfare on all terrains, and he is an expert on 
armor-piercing weapons, mountain climbing and scout training, 
and antiguerrilla warfare. Like the other Legionnaires, 
Glasnovic trained members of special military forces in 
Kumrovec, and later he advocated the English type of discipline 
and the Israeli method of waging war in the Croatian armed 
forces. 
<H5>  Dragan Vikic, Living Legend of the Bosnian Resistance </H5>
  Col. Dragan Vikic, commander of the antiterrorist unit of 
the 
B-H MUP [Ministry of Internal Affairs], is a Croat from 
Sarajevo, the first man who came to the defense of the capital 
of Bosnia-Herzegovina; he became distinguished in the media when 
in April 1992, wearing a camouflage uniform and holding a rifle, 
he appeared on television to appeal to the citizens to oppose 
the Serbs with weapons. Even before that, when he and his men 
captured 1,500 rifles in Gorazde which were being transported by 
truck, supposedly to the garrison in Visoko, but actually for 
chetnik units in Croatia, the JNA [Yugoslav People's Army] 
decided to pursue Vikic and punish him. 
  This former Yugoslav judo champion and organizer of special 
police units in Bosnia-Herzegovina has served under three 
ministers of internal affairs during this war: Alija 
Delimustafic, who is said to have been working closely with Aca 
Vasiljevic, former chief of the JNA KOS [counterintelligence 
service], Jusuf Pusina, during whose tenure a warrant was issued 
for Delimustafic's arrest, and Bakir Alispahic, who is the 
minister at the moment. 
  Mladen "Tifa" Vojicic, who formerly was the vocalist for the 
group Belo Dugme, recorded a TV spot about Vikic, living legend 
of Bosnian resistance, at the height of the war. During the 
fiercest shelling of Sarajevo that spot echoed from loudspeakers 
in city streets in spite of the Serbian artillery from the hills. 
  As the leader of the effort to rid the city of snipers and 
the principal participant in the capture of the Holiday Inn, 
which snipers were using to kill people on the street, carried 
live over television, and a man whose entire family has spent 
the war in the Sarajevo settlement of Dobrinja, he has been the 
target of accusations not only by the Serbs, but also the Croats 
and Muslims. Because of the Muslim charges (among other things, 
they say that he was the one who allowed Bruno Stojic and Branko 
Kvesic, former security chiefs of Herceg-Bosna, to drive brand 
new all-terrain vehicles of the MUP to Herzegovina). Vikic, some 
say, is today under the command of Kemal Ademovic, who heads all 
the special police units of the B-H MUP and who was his deputy 
at the beginning of the war. In Herceg-Bosna they call Vikic an 
"Alija's Croat," and the well-informed in Herzegovina say that 
along with Sefer Halilovic he took part in the Muslim offensive 
against Dreznica, and that he was even wounded there. In spite 
of everything, today Col. Vikic is considered a promising police 
professional from the ranks of the Bosnian Croats. 
<H5>  Stjepan Siber, Future Military Attache or Pensioner </H5>
  Stjepan Siber is the most distinguished Croat in the ranks 
of 
the B-H Army. Siber is therefore hated among advocates of the 
"Herzegovina policy." At the outset of the Serbian aggression 
against Bosnia-Herzegovina, he and Jovan Divjak began to 
organize defense of the city and republic on the invitation of 
the legal authorities. This former officer of the JNA (he once 
served in Zagreb, birthplace of his son Boris, one of the stars 
of "Hit Parade of Surrealists"), and he also worked in the B-H 
Territorial Defense. From the outset of creation of the B-H Army 
to the present day Siber has supposedly been the second man in 
the B-H Army. Born in Brcko, with an apartment in the Sarajevo 
settlement of Grbavica (still under Serb occupation in a 
neighborhood predominantly inhabited by officers of the JNA), 
Siber obtained the rank of general in the B-H Army. Although 
followers of Izetbegovic's line never denied him credit for 
recruiting personnel trained in the JNA for the army that was 
being organized, Siber was not given a chance to break through 
to the top position in the Bosnian army (Jovan Divjak, Sefer 
Halilovic, and Rasim Delic succeeded one another in that post at 
the time). At the time of the conflict between the HVO and the 
B-H Army, the commanders of the HVO refused to negotiate with 
him: One reason was that he was "second-in-command," and the 
other that he was a Croat fighting on the side of the Muslims. 
Back when Rusmir Mahmutcehajic called for Muslims to withdraw 
from the HVO, Siber opposed him, asking whether that meant he 
also, as a Croat, should leave the B-H Army! 
  Well-informed people have two thoughts about Siber's future: 
Some say he will have the role of a military attache abroad, and 
others feel that he has a pension waiting for him. 
<H5>  Dr. Ivo Komsic, Integralist of Bosnia-Herzegovina </H5>
  Dr. Ivo Komsic, like Siber (in the army) and Vikic (in the 
police), is numbered among the integralists of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. This Croat from Kiseljak, full professor in 
the School of Political Science at Sarajevo University, was once 
executive secretary of the Central Committee of the League of 
Communists of Bosnia-Herzegovina. During the election Komsic 
emerged as vice president of the SDP [Socialist Democratic 
Party], which was headed by Nijaz Durakovic. Komsic later 
founded the Croatian Peasant Party [HSS] of B-H. He established 
himself as an opponent of the policy of the HDZ [Croatian 
Democratic Union] and the Herzegovina current, and, like the 
other Croats of Sarajevo -- whose most distinguished 
representative was Stjepan Kljuic -- he came to be referred to 
as an "Alija's Croat." This man, who is today chairman of the 
Croatian National Council and a member of the B-H Presidency, 
reached the pinnacle of politics in Bosnia-Herzegovina at the 
time of the preliminary negotiations concerning the Croat-Muslim 
agreement, says himself that "all the illegal institutions in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina that have sprung up during this war are 
ceasing to exist, and there exists only the integral Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina." 
<H5>  Vinko Puljic and Petar Sudar, Those Who Deserve the Most </H5>
Credit for the New Direction of Croatian Policy in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina 
  As far as church circles are concerned, many people believe 
that Monsignor Vinko Puljic, archbishop of Sarajevo, and Petar 
Sudar, his assistant, deserve the most credit for the new 
direction of Croatian policy in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Sudar was 
born in Neretvica, and he took his doctorate in theology in the 
Vatican. 
  Like Franjo Topic, president of the Croatian cultural 
society 
Napredak [Progress], Sudar's political commitment can best be 
seen through the work of that institution, which represents the 
typical "Sarajevo-Croatian view" towards resolution of the 
crisis of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Critics of Puljic's and Sudar's 
policy will say that their views of the nationality question is 
most evident in the activity of their Radio Station Vrhbosna, 
which at the beginning of the war was carrying the reports of 
Croatian Radio, and then, when the Croat-Muslim conflicts broke 
out, it suddenly renounced them. 
  Monsignor Vinko Puljic, archbishop of Sarajevo, head of one 
of the six Catholic archepiscopates on Croatian territory, is an 
outspoken advocate of integralism in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Puljic 
once said: ``The Serbs are backed by the Russians, the French, 
the English, and to some extent the Chinese; the Muslims are 
backed by the Islamic countries and the United States; but we 
Croats are backed only by the Holy [passage illegible] in 1945, 
as the 12th of 15 children in the family, in Prijecani, which is 
near Banja Luka. In 1961 he arrived at the Boys' Seminary on 
Salata in Zagreb. He studied theology in Djakovo, where in 1970 
he took orders to become a priest. He spent three years at this 
first pastoral post in Banja Luka. He spent five years (1973-78) 
in Ravska, which is near the Ljubija Mine, and then he was 
transferred to the post of priest in the Boys' Seminary in 
Zadar, where he remained for the next 10 years. In that year, 
1988, he was appointed parish priest in Nova Gradiska, and in 
1990 he became vice rector of the Sarajevo Seminary. In January 
1991 he succeeded Monsignor Ciril Kos in the post of archbishop 
of Sarajevo. 

