BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Vyacheslav Yelagin, section head at the Russian </F>
Federation Ministry of Foreign Affairs Department of Information 
and the Press, and Valentin Ovsyannikov, senior counselor: 
"Back to the Cold War. Former Presidential Security Adviser Z. 
Brzezinski Calls for This"] 
  [Text] It was noted long ago that certain retired 
politicians who were once at the helm of state power find it 
difficult to renounce stereotypical thinking. They interpret 
any new trends in world affairs with a sense of nostalgia for 
the old days. It seems that precisely this applies to the 
famous American political scientist Zbigniew Brzezinski, who 
published an article in the journal FOREIGN AFFAIRS entitled 
"Premature Partnership." It is devoted to the very topical 
issue of bilateral U.S. relations with the new democratic Russia. 
  Even a reader who is inexperienced in the nuances of 
diplomacy can realize that there is today no sensible 
alternative to partnership between our two countries. 
  But these sentiments are clearly not to everyone's liking, 
on 
both sides of the Atlantic. To all appearances, Zbigniew 
Brzezinski belongs to this category. In the aforementioned 
article, he criticizes not only the very idea of a Russian-U.S. 
partnership, but also in essence the B. Clinton administration's 
foreign policy concept with regard to Russia. In his opinion, 
U.S. relations with Russia are marked by "attractive idealistic 
optimism," are based on false premises, are oriented toward 
false goals, and have potential geopolitical consequences. The 
former presidential adviser is advising Washington not to do 
business with a country in which reforms are being impeded and 
"imperial impulses" are appearing within its political circles. 
This policy, he claims, is designed to integrate the post-Soviet 
area under Moscow's full diktat in the economic and military 
spheres, with the subsequent transformation of the new formation 
into a large and powerful state with a global sphere of 
influence. 
  Z. Brzezinski's unsubstantiated accusations of "bad 
behavior" 
against Russia are no accident. They are motivated by the fact 
that Russia, in spite of the difficulties it is going through, 
does not intend to relinquish great-power status. The American 
political scientist, whose opinion is reckoned with in the 
corridors of power, is simply getting upset because Russia like 
any other country has its own geopolitical interests and zones 
of primary focus. 
  Such conclusions seem more than strange, since Russia is not 
employing the tactics of intimidation or domination in any 
region of the world, nor is it encroaching on other states' 
independence. If Brzezinski analyzed carefully the Russian 
Federation's new military doctrine, he would satisfy himself 
that it is oriented exclusively toward defensive goals. 
  You find the same with regard to Russia's peacekeeping 
efforts in the CIS "hot spots." Its mission to mediate by 
separating the warring sides is deemed to be nothing more than a 
manifestation of expansionism. Moscow's measures to strengthen 
stability in the former USSR countries, for which its economic 
assistance exceeds by many times Western aid to Russia itself, 
are dismissed out of hand. Not to mention the fact that Russian 
servicemen take on the lion's share of the difficulties there, 
come under fire, and get killed. And this is called 
"expansionism"? 
  In his essay, Z. Brzezinski did not leave out 
Russian-Ukrainian relations. His verdict here is fairly blunt: 
Moscow is, he claims, intensifying economic and military 
pressure on Kiev with a view to destabilizing the situation in 
the republic and bringing it closer to Russia. These 
conclusions are entirely contrary to common sense. It would do 
him no harm to know that the Ukrainian leaders themselves are 
coming out in favor of creating an economic area or union with 
Russia. 
  Z. Brzezinski does not hide the fact that he is an active 
supporter of NATO's expansion. In his opinion the idea of NATO 
and Russia giving security guarantees to the countries of 
Central and Eastern Europe in effect means agreeing to the 
creation of a sphere of influence for Moscow with the prospect 
of its revival as a powerful Eurasian power. He sees an 
alternative to this in admitting the "Central European 
democracies" to NATO, which will prevent a "security vacuum" 
between Russia and NATO, that is it will signal the "Brzezinski 
model of security." 
  These inflammatory arguments are borrowed from the arsenal 
of 
either the bloc or the bipolar system of security, presupposing 
the presence if not of a real enemy then of an imaginary one. 
Passing this off as an axiom of today's European policy, in the 
context of the transformations which are taking place, is 
frankly dangerous. 

