Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature; by Andrey </F>
Pershin, Andrey Petrovsky, Vladimir Shishlin; edited by Boris 
Grishchenko] 
  [Text] Uzbek and Kazakh presidents Islam Karimov and 
Nursultan Nazarbayev signed an agreement in Tashkent Monday on 
the setting up of an economic union. 
  Karimov emphasized at a news conference that the agreement 
called for removal of customs offices on the boundary between 
the two countries, free movement of people, goods and services 
and creation of legislation for joint development of 
communication and transport lines. The existing customs treaty 
will be ineffective as of February 1, 1994. 
  According to Karimov, third countries may join the treaty. 
  The Uzbek president told journalists that the bilateral 
talks 
had culminated in signing agreements on a regional investment 
bank and an inter-state clearing bank and on settlements between 
the National Bank of Kazakhstan and the Central Bank of 
Uzbekistan. 
  By still another agreement, the $39 million debt Uzbekistan 
owed Kazakhstan at the end of 1993 will be regarded as a state 
credit to the Uzbek government. 
  Answering a question about the need in such a union, 
Nazarbayev said that Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan had always 
supported economic integration and disapproved of 
self-isolation. "This union became an urgent need as equal 
national currencies began to circulate," he said. He emphasized 
that the two presidents had agreed that their partnership should 
be equal without any dictate or hegemony. 
  Both presidents had a dim view of dual citizenship such as 
what Turkmenistan had recently introduced. Kariimov said: "I 
want the Russians living in Uzbekistan to believe that the 
republiic's Constitution provides equal opportunities and rights 
with the native population and all peoples living here." 
  For his part, Nazarbayev said that the Kazakh Constitution 
did not provide for dual citizenship and he as the president had 
to abide by the Constitution. 
  Nazarbayev formulated the watchword for today as To 
Prosperity through Unity and Karimov as Ethnic, Inter-Ethnic and 
Civic Accord. 
  Karimov and Nazarbayev left for Nukus, Uzbekistan, to attend 
the summit of five Central Asian countries which will discuss 
ways to safeguard the Aral Sea. 
  This meeting will take over from the Kzyl-Orda summit at 
which the leaders of Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, 
Turkmenistan and Tajkstan agreed on March 26, 1993 on joint 
action to rescue the Aral Sea and the surrounding areas. 
  Informed sources close to the Uzbek government told Interfax 
that the heads of Central Asian states would discuss in Nukus 
the introduction of national currencies. Unless these problems 
are resolved, experts believe, cooperation in the ecological or, 
for that matter, any other sphere, was impossible. 

