CSO 

<F P=106> [Article on interview with Bishop Samuel Ruiz by Cesar </F>
Romero; place and date not given] 
  [Text] He is the sort of man who seems more like a 
whirlwind than a hierarch of the Catholic Church. The strength 
of his convictions makes him something of a rock. While not 
overpowering, the pace of his conversation astounds the 
listener. Questionnaires or attempts to reply are of little use 
with him. He speaks on behalf of the people, as do those who 
know that they are enlightened. Samuel Ruiz, the bishop of the 
diocese of San Cristobal de las Casas, Chiapas, is a Christian 
who has been strong enough for decades to take the side of the 
poor, the exploited, and the suffering. From this perspective he 
explains what he vigorously calls "conclusive facts, not mere 
opinions." 
  "The current government is illegitimate; it does not have a 
justification from the people. Mistrust is widespread. Everyone 
is convinced: the system is bad, and the problem is not one 
individual. The problem is not the driver; it is the car, which 
by now is a wreck. PRI [Intitutional Revolutionary Party] is not 
the party of the masses; it is the party of imposition. Until 
the control that the State and its party have over electoral 
processes and mechanisms is ended, there will be no democracy in 
Mexico. If this barrier remains, there could be confrontations 
and tensions between political players outside institutional 
rules and accords during the 1994 political transition. 
  "Our way of life and system of production are oppressing us. 
The privatizations and the Free Trade Agreement are tools that 
capitalism needs to continue benefiting the strong, the 
powerful, both here and overseas. In response to the lack of 
land and unemployment, the government develops political 
controls because the poverty that the plundering of this social 
system produces is a threat to its policies. Thus, laws have to 
be amended and new crimes invented. This approach violates human 
rights. So we can see that the system under which we live 
intrinsically violates human rights. 
  "People are increasingly feeling the weight of high prices, 
unemployment, injustice, and growing poverty. The people are 
dissatisfied. There is malnutrition and disease caused by 
poverty. Wages are very low and are not enough for families to 
live on." 
  In the interview and the pastoral letter that he submitted 
to 
John Paul II, the 68-year old bishop elaborated on his previous 
interpretation of current conditions. As he stressed, "these are 
not opinions; they are facts, and the only ones who do not see 
them are those who refuse to." The forcefulness of his words 
notwithstanding, Ruiz Garcia is even more passionate about 
another issue. 
  [Romero] Don Samuel, what has become of the Church of the 
Poor? It seems that it has been unable to recover since the pope 
reprimanded your group in Puebla in 1979 with the remark that 
"you are priests, not political leaders." 
  [Ruiz] The day that the Church of the Poor is buried, the 
entire Church is buried. John XXIII said that the Church is a 
light, a light for all, and it will not be a Church for all 
unless it is for the poor. If it forgets them, it will be a 
foreign, dominating Church. [end of answer] 
  Hyperactive and unusually energetic, this husky gentleman of 
harsh gestures, little hair, and a kindly look (from behind his 
thick glasses) traveled from Chiapas to Yucatan to see the pope 
and, in passing, meet with the "many bishop brothers" who he 
says also have a strong commitment to the country's 
disadvantaged. At the end of a busy day he answered and 
criticized my questions. 
  [Romero] When the pope visited the last time, there were no 
diplomatic relations with the Holy See and legislation kept 
Churches in a sort of juridical state of sin. This time John 
Paul II will find an amended constitution and will be received 
as a head of state. How major are all these changes? 
  [Ruiz] Not that major. Deep down, little has changed. The 
State does not really recognize the Church. What there is is a 
mold that all must adapt to if they wish to earn the State's 
favor and recognition. What there is is a law designed mainly 
for tariff oversight, tax payments. Moreover, all of these 
changes are keyed to the FTA. 
  [Romero] Excuse me? 
  [Ruiz] Yes, the Free Trade Agreement. The Mexican 
Government's refusal to maintain relations with the Vatican, 
which has relations with the overwhelming majority of countries, 
put Mexico in an archaic position that was incompatible with the 
so-called modernization that the FTA represented. All of these 
measures are not a recognition of the Church (which is not to 
say that there have not been certain changes), because the 
Church does not need recognition to exist. We cannot deny, 
though, that there have been some significant accomplishments, 
such as acknowledgment of our right to run schools, which used 
to be clandestine. Before, they forced you to run a crooked 
operation. Perhaps, though, there are more advantages than under 
nonrecognition, perhaps.... 
  [Romero] Well then, have the changes been useful or not? 
  [Ruiz] I think so. They are not a bad thing. They are 
helping 
to cure the people's schizophrenia about the Church's real and 
official existence. 
  [Romero] It would seem that the world is caught between two 
opposing trends. On the one hand, fundamentalism is resurgent 
(in Jamaica the pope has already denounced "sectarian 
fundamentalism"); on the other, there is a trend toward 
globalization. What should the Church's role in this context be? 
  [Ruiz] There are really more trends than you are talking 
about, but you have to remember that the Church is not the 
parish priest, the bishop, or the pontiff. The Church is you; we 
are all part of it. The Church's function is to be the leaven of 
unity. It is a sort of watershed. The Church defines your stance 
towards life. And it is not just a present or a gift; it is also 
an effort...The Church seeks a new society, one of unity even 
with non-Christians. It calls for a life of charity, not 
selfishness as in today's society. The answer that it proposes 
is: no fulfillment is possible without the good of all. I am 
happy only if I make everyone happy. The only question that we 
will ask ourselves at the final judgment will be: If he was 
hungry, did I feed him? 
  Reliance on the poor represents the only potential for 
change. They are the ones who will have to transform the Church, 
the State, and all of society. Look, I see this all as if it 
were a soccer game. In the first half we are losing, but in the 
second half we are going to win. We have to win! 
  [Romero] Yours is a beautiful dream. How wonderful. 
  [Ruiz] No, we are living it. Such major changes are 
happening 
that at times they are hard to see. Just a while ago we were 
saying Mass in Latin with our backs to the people. Things 
change. For example, although we are seeing human rights being 
trampled terribly today, there is also a widespread awareness 
that this should not be happening. There is a widespread 
politicization in society today. There is repression, but there 
is also protest. People, the people have woken up. And changes 
will not take place in the world except as the result of 
pressure from those down below. [end of answer] 
  A small amber cross shines on the chest of the bishop of San 
Cristobal. A lifetime of work alongside the problems of 
Chiapas's poor has produced a powerful optimism ("Of course, 
because I am a Christian"). He says that ecumenism in Latin 
America will come not from theological confrontation but from a 
commitment to the continent's poor. "The religion is not that 
important (without lapsing into relativism), because suffering 
has no color, religion, or ideology." 
  According to Samuel Ruiz, the suggestion that he seemingly 
does not fit in with the Catholic Church that some of us know 
(high clergy who serve the powerful; charity as an excuse to 
sidestep the issue of justice; bishops and archbishops as a sort 
of decadent aristocracy) is "a tall tale by the press." "No, 
that is not the case. Each person reacts to the world in which 
he lives. My diocese, like others, is made up of poor, suffering 
people. This is why I and other bishops are with them." 
  He also rejects the adjective "progressive." "My Church is 
traditionalist-progressive." He explains: "A boy who was 
completely deaf taught me how to drive and used to say to me: 
`Look around you first; otherwise, don't drive off.' And that is 
the way it is: When I look around myself at realities in Latin 
America, I see poor people. That is why I am with them." 
  What Samuel Ruiz sees around him in Mexico is injustice, 
abuse, and suffering: "This State does not have a justification 
in the people." 
  [Romero] Does that mean that it is illegitimate? 
  [Ruiz] Yes. It does not have credibility. 
  [Romero] And what can you say about PRI? 
  [Ruiz] I do not say it; I see it. It is dependent on the 
government. As I say in the pastoral letter, in which I join my 
voice to that of the people: people are forced to vote for PRI. 
The electoral system is tainted at its source, because the State 
controls the processes to benefit its party. Until these 
practices change, there will be no democracy in Mexico. 
  [Romero] Don Samuel, I see that some of your arguments 
coincide with the basic arguments of the left (such as the 
regime's lack of credibility, the lack of democracy), especially 
with those of the PRD [Party of the Democratic Revolution].... 
  [Ruiz] I am with the people who are on foot; I am with the 
Gospel. Besides, I do not care what side I am on. I do not 
accept caricatures as a rightist or leftist; that is not for us 
Christians. But if you choose to see radicalism in what I am 
saying, then it is the radicalism of the poor. I feel that power 
must serve; otherwise, it dominates...Like Jesus, I am for the 
poor, even if it means throwing myself into an abyss. [end of 
answer] 
  By now it is close to midnight in a city that is making the 
final preparations for welcoming the pope. Only Samuel Ruiz 
seems not to be tired. He speaks of the letter that he hopes to 
hand personally to "Peter's heir." The burning word of the poor 
in his diocese, the same word of the poor all over Mexico. He is 
categorical in his views of Mexican politics, "which are the 
people's views, not mine." 
  [Romero] Aren't your criticisms unusual, especially now when 
there is so much support for the government? 
  [Ruiz] The problem is not one person. The problem is not the 
driver; it is the car, which by now is a wreck. 
  [Romero] Isn't there room for optimism here? 
  [Ruiz] Both things exist, more repression, exploitation, and 
killing, but also more awareness. That is always the case. Good 
and evil coexist. At times it seems that evil triumphs, that it 
is stronger than good, but God's heart is always inside just 
men. This is why there are irreversible gains in the world as 
well. There is already a very great awareness of the gradual 
process that is under way towards this fundamental conviction: 
either we change or all mankind rages. 

