BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with ANC National Chairman Thabo Mbeki </F>
in Johannesburg by David Frost in London on 24 Apr on the 
"Breakfast With Frost" program--recorded] 
  [Text] [Frost] Earlier this morning I spoke to Thabo Mbeki, 
the national chairman of the ANC [African National Congress) and 
I asked him if he felt the sense of joy that was shown by 
first-time voters at last night's Nelson Mandela rally -- joy 
not only at an ANC victory but joy at voting at all? 
  [Mbeki] Yes, I think so and I think you are right, the 
people 
want change. It's not really merely that people want particular 
parties, they want change, they want this capacity to vote, they 
want to see a new government, they want to see a new life. 
  [Frost] That's right, and in a sense, this is something that 
you've all waited for for 30 years. 
  [Mbeki] Yes indeed, it's taken quite a bit of time. But now 
that it's here we do want to conclude this process and indeed 
have this new government. 
  [Frost] Do you think, with all the hopes that will be piled 
high on this new government, do you think you can fulfill 
people's expectations? 
  [Mbeki] Yes, I think it is possible to begin very early 
after 
the elections to begin to meet those expectations. Clearly, we 
can't meet everything at the same time. But I think it is 
possible to begin to show change very quickly, with new houses, 
better schools, and things of this sort. I think it is possible 
to move pretty quickly. 
  [Frost] Your opponents are always talking about the number 
of 
communists in the ANC and so on. I mean, how many communists 
are there likely to be in the government, in an ANC government, 
and what does the word communist mean in South Africa? 
  [Mbeki] Well, David, I don't know. The question of the 
cabinet is a matter that will be, that will be in there, that 
is, in the hands, let me say, of our president. So he's looking 
at that question of who is going to be in that cabinet. I'm 
quite certain he'll be sensitive to all manner of factors and 
clearly you can't have a situation where you had a cabinet which 
was composed in a way that was contrary to the political opinion 
in the country. And in this particular instance, the South 
African instance, you had a communist party that has 
participated in the struggle against apartheid for decades, ever 
since it was formed. And among the majority of the people in 
the country you don't have this particular problem of communism, 
because people see communists as people with whom they served in 
jail, people who were killed, people who were executed because 
of the political struggle. But as I'm saying, that in the 
composition of the cabinet I'm quite sure that the cabinet that 
will emerge will reflect the fact that the majority party in the 
country is the ANC, and the next biggest I suppose might very 
well be the National Party. 
  [Frost] Right, now I was just thinking: Such people as were 
called communists in South Africa that I have met, 
were...[pauses] People in Europe, as you know, think of Russian 
communism. And, I mean, a lot of those so-called communists seem 
to me to be what we would call socialists. 
  [Mbeki] Yes, indeed. I think the positions as explained by 
members of the Communist Party here, are really rather different 
from what one had heard about, what was said, for instance, in 
the Soviet Union. 
  [Frost] Absolutely. Now, you've been in the center of events 
in the last two or three days and throughout the campaign in 
working out this deal, as it were, with General Viljoen. It is 
reported here that the election, [that you were] examining the 
prospects for a white homeland or volkstaat after the elections. 
Is that an accurate report of what you did? 
  [Mbeki] Yes, it is. We've been discussing the question with 
them and yesterday we signed an agreement which spells out how 
constitutionally the matter would be pursued and the votes will 
be counted in such a way as to measure the support for the 
notion of a volkstaat, of an Afrikaaner state. But we also 
agreed that whatever happens to it, it cannot be in violation of 
the principles of democracy, of nonracialism, of fundamental 
human rights. So it won't be merely a matter that there are so 
many Afrikaaners who have said we want a state and therefore 
such a state will be established. It would only be established 
if it is consistent with the rest of the constitution which 
provides for a nonracial democracy. 
  [Frost] I see, that's very clear and a real clarification. 
Does that mean that it would be a part of the new South Africa, 
or independent of the new South Africa? 
  [Mbeki] No, no, even they, when they have argued the 
argument, General Viljoen and the others, they have not argued 
for an independent state. They have argued for a part of the 
country where they would have some particular rights to express 
what they describe as Afrikaaner self-determination, but it 
would be part of South Africa. But, of course, this is a matter 
that must be agreed by this elected constitutional assembly. 
  [Frost] Understood. Tell me, to what do you attribute -- I 
breathed a sigh of relief, and I'm sure everybody did, when 
Chief Buthelezi was brought into the election at the last moment 
-- to what do you attribute that good news, that breakthrough? 
  [Mbeki] It was indeed good news. It's difficult to say but 
it seems that it was a combination of various factors -- that 
people from within the IFP [Inkatha Freedom Party] were pushing 
for participation; the offer that the ANC had made to the king 
to resolve the matter of the future of the Zulu king. It seems 
also to have made an impression because the king then wanted the 
elections to take place, because his future could only be 
guaranteed by the elected parties. I think matters of this sort 
and some of his oldest friends who seemed to have told him that 
he will end up in a wilderness if he didn't participate in the 
elections. [sentence as heard] I think it's an accumulation of 
those sorts of pressures. 
  [Frost] Well, we will doubtless lose the satellite in a 
moment, so I just wanted to thank you for being with us and 
covering so much ground this morning. And may I just wish you 
the elections and the freedom that you all dream of. 
  [Mbeki] Thank you very much, David. And come and join us 
when we install Nelson Mandela as president. 

