BFN 

<F P=106> ["Newsletter From China: "Atomic and Hydrogen Bomb </F>
Experiment Base in Qinghai To Be Demilitarized and Used as the 
Site for a Development Zone"] 
  [Text] China's first nuclear weapons research and 
development base is located along side the Qinghai Lake in 
Haiyan County of Qinghai Province. As China's first atomic bomb 
and first hydrogen bomb were successfully developed there, 
people call it the "two-bomb base." 
  On entering the "two-bomb base," what one sees first is a 
monument. The inscription, "China's First Nuclear Weapons 
Research and Development Base," was written by General Zhang 
Aiping. 
  The "two-bomb base" was built in 1958, and its formal name 
was the State-Owned 221 Plant. In those days, a number of 
nuclear specialists, under the direction of by Marshal Nie 
Rongzhen, gathered here to research and develop atomic and 
hydrogen bombs. During the six years between 1958, when the 
construction of the base started, and 1964, China succeeded in 
conducting an experiment with its first atomic bomb. Two years 
later, China succeeded in developing its first hydrogen bomb 
there. Over the past years, China has produced many atomic and 
hydrogen bombs at the base. 
  In those years, the "two-bomb base" was very mysterious. For 
the sake of keeping secrets, the "two-bomb base" was called the 
Qinghai Provincial Mining Zone by outsiders. The base was an 
independent "small society," and all activities of its personnel 
were carried out within the base. Even the dead had to be 
cremated inside the base, and their remains were not allowed to 
be removed. In 1987, the State Council gave its approval to 
closing down the base, and the personnel was pulled out one 
after another. 
  At present, the former site of the "two-bomb base" has 
become 
the seat of the Haibei Zang Nationality Autonomous Prefecture 
Government of Qinghai Province. Because of the enormous scale 
of the "two-bomb base," the transfer work has not been 
officially completed. Next month, the Beihai Autonomous 
Prefecture will officially sign a transfer contract with the 
China National Nuclear Industry Corporation. 
  In those years, the people of the Beihai Autonomous 
Prefecture, those of Haiyan County in particular, paid a 
tremendous price for the construction of the "two-bomb base." 
They vacated more than 1,100 sq. km (equivalent to the total 
area of Hong Kong, Kowloon, and the New Territories) of their 
best pasture land for the base. The prefecture still has no 
large industrial enterprises. 
  The fixed assets of the base at the time of its closure were 
over 100 million renminbi, after depreciation on the basis of 
their price in 1958. 
  A specialist maintains that a base of the same size could 
not 
be built for less than several billion yuan today. The amount 
of this "legacy" is quite enormous. It includes 560,000 sq. m 
of buildings inside plant premises, 330,000 sq. m of production 
buildings, more than 40 km of special railway lines which 
converge with the Qinghai- Tibet Railway Line, nearly 80 km of 
standard highways, 1,000 six-digit computer-controlled 
telephones, and one thermal power plant with an annual 
generating capacity of 110 million kwh. These facilities can be 
used with slight alterations. They have suddenly turned Haibei 
Autonomous Prefecture into an area with the most convenient 
transportation facilities, the most complete production and 
daily life facilities, and the best environment for investment 
among other prefectures and counties of Qinghai. 
  The Haibei Autonomous Prefecture Government has designated 
the former site of the "two-bomb base" as a "small zone for 
nationality economy development" and has formulated a series of 
preferential policies for investment. At present, the 
feasibility study on the Haibei Autonomous Metal Sodium Plant, 
the Electrolyte Aluminum Plant, the Soda Ash Plant, and the 
Caustic Soda Plant has been approved and put on record, and the 
construction of these projects will soon start on the former 
site of the "two-bomb base." Besides, the Haibei Autonomous 
Prefecture has also planned to build a series of other projects, 
including a power plant, an aluminum plant, a magnesium plant, 
and a carbonization plant. Most of these projects are 
Sino-foreign joint ventures, and the letters of intent for some 
of them have already been signed. 

