Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Russia's political future was discussed today at a 
meeting of the State Duma. Some of the fundamental questions 
which were raised again revealed a rather sharp divergence of 
views. 
  [Sergey Suntsov] It was only yesterday that the treaty was 
signed with Tatarstan on delimiting the powers of the center but 
today deputy Sergey Baburin introduced a proposal -- true, it 
was not passed -- to examine it at a session of the Duma since 
he saw in the treaty a threat to the territorial integrity of 
Russia. 
  [Begin Baburin recording] As a lawyer I cannot understand 
how 
necessary and justified it is to sign a treaty between a state 
as a whole and a part of that state. [end recording] 
  [Suntsov] Gennadiy Zyuganov, leader of the Communist Party, 
expressed the opinion, although cautiously -- for no one has yet 
read the treaty -- that he suspects a departure from federation 
toward confederation. Sergey Shakhray noted in this connection: 
  [Begin Shakhray recording] The new Constitution of the 
Russian Federation and the Federation Treaty created the legal 
and methodological opportunity for the treaty. [end recording] 
  [Suntsov] Shakhray stressed that the treaty puts an end to a 
dangerous intrastate conflict. It was the result of three years 
of talks and was backed up by 11 intergovernmental agreements 
and also by a mechanism for implementing it which take account 
of the specific features of the region. It seems that the 
treaty with Tatarstan will become a subject of discussion at 
parliamentary hearings. 
  The draft decision on the coverage of the Duma's activities 
in the mass media caused a storm of activity. The essence of 
Mikhail Poltoranin's speech was that the Duma cannot impose its 
programs on independent publications. The essence of the 
majority of the speeches came down to one thing: The mass media 
are carrying out a political instruction and have gone out of 
control. It was proposed that journalists should be ordered 
whom to interview and what to show. A representative of the 
Communist Party, for example, who sensibly assessed this as an 
impermissible attempt at applying pressure, ended with a doleful 
proposal: simply to remove the accreditation of the journalists 
of those publications which incorrectly cover the work of the 
Duma. It was decided by 21 March to prepare a law on coverage 
of the activity of state organs of power in the state-owned mass 
media. 
  The draft presidential decision on an amnesty in connection 
with the adoption of the new Constitution did not receive 
support from the deputies. As Aleksandr Yakovlev, the 
president's representative, noted, the amnesty would cover no 
more than 20,000 prisoners who were of no danger to society. 
Many speakers demanded that the amnesty for criminal cases 
should be linked with a political amnesty for the participants 
in the October events. Here is the opinion of Sergey Shakhray: 
  [Begin Shakhray recording] There are no political prisoners 
in Russia. In Russia there is a situation in which individual 
political leaders are accused of having committed criminal 
offenses. [end recording] 
  [Suntsov] He did not rule out that an amnesty was possible 
if 
a civil truce was concluded in the country without appeals for 
violence, taking acount of the crisis situation. Work on the 
question will be continued in the Duma's committees. 

