CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, Feb. 17 -- India has opposed the 
developed countries' move to link trade with environment, 
emphasising that GATT [General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade] 
or any other forum -- trade or otherwise -- should not be 
allowed to review national developmental priorities. 
  Addressing a round-table discussion on `Perspectives of 
developed countries: environment and trade' at Geneva on 
Thursday, the minister for environment and forests, Mr Kamal 
Nath, said, "let not plain protectionism be passed off as 
environmental concern." 
  The round-table talks have been organised by the United 
Nations Environment Programme in coordination with UNCTAD 
[expansion not given], environment ministers of 15 countries, 
including the United States, the UK, Brazil, Malaysia, Norway, 
Austria, Mexico, India, Japan, and China are participating. 
  Calling for a moratorium on linking trade with environment, 
"unless it clearly impinges on collective ecological security," 
Mr. Kamal Nath said the environmental action" is to flow out of 
free will in an atmosphere of shared global concern." 
  He reminded the participants of the Agenda-21 agreed at the 
Rio Summit to stress that "we have to assidiously strive to 
ensure that any decisions which attempt to bring in 
environmental considerations to modify trade relations conform 
rigorously to the Rio consensus." 
  Mr. Kamal Nath termed the efforts to put environmental 
barriers on trade as a kind of "green imperialism" and said that 
the whole idea of international eco-labelling based on processes 
amounted to legitimisation of extra-territorial interference. 
  "We agree that environmentally-harmful processes must be 
stopped and that overexploitation of non-renewable resources 
must be controlled, but the solution lies not in unilaterally 
banning trade but rather in transferring technology and offering 
prices to developing countries for such commodities which would 
not then necessitate their over-exploitation or jeopardise their 
developmental priorities," Mr. Kamal Nath told ministers of the 
leading countries. 
  He explained that while dumping the eco-labelling schemes in 
some western countries which give value only to 
environment-friendly chemical dyes, they ignore natural dyes 
completely even though they are equally, if not more, 
ecologically sound. "Thus, Asian countries which are major 
manufacturers and exporters of textiles cannot earn an eco-lable 
which should rightfully be theirs." 
  Rejecting the developed North's concept of forest 
conservation which entails locking-up developing countries' 
forests and leaving them untouched, Mr. Kamal Nath said: 
"Forests in India are a community resource. These communities 
use forests, by and large sustainably. This may not fit into the 
western idea of conservation, and yet we maintain that so long 
as the use is sustainable, it does mean conservation. This 
exemplifies the contention that ... environmental standard or 
specifications are country specific." 
  In case of trans-boundary environmental effects, Mr. Kamal 
Nath said the "affected nations have the right and duty to 
safeguard their vital concerns." Where there are cases of 
blatant trans-boundary effects, such matters should be dealt 
with by genuine multilateral mechanism, the minister added. 
  Talking of product standards, Mr. Kamal Nath said while 
harmonisation of product standards if necessary, it cannot be a 
single standard on a global basis. 
  Different countries have different ambient levels of 
pollution, different environmental assimilative capacities and 
different social and economic problems and objectives. "It would 
be necessary to harmonise standards in groups -- the groups 
could be product-wise or region-wise or, better still an 
innovative combination of both these." 

