Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Companies To Announce Their Targets </F>
for U.S.-Made Auto Parts"] 
  [Text] The industrial circles are very much alarmed by the 
U.S. Government's reviving of the Super 301 provision (which 
defines unfair trade practices and nations engaged in such 
practices, and sanctions against them). Yutaka Kume, chairman 
of the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association [JAMA], said, 
"We are deeply concerned about the reinstatement of this 
provision, which presumes retaliation." While demonstrating 
their displeasure, industries such as the automobile and auto 
parts industries, which are a subject of discussion at the 
Japanese-U.S. economic framework talks, have started taking 
actions voluntarily seeking a breakthrough in the situation. 
Auto Industry [subhead] 
  Because it is very likely that sanctions under the Super 301 
provision, if they are enacted, will apply to the automobile and 
auto parts sectors, the auto industry is wary about the United 
States' future moves. In following the Toyota Motors 
Corporation, on 4 March the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation 
revealed its auto parts purchase targets for 1995 and 
thereafter. The Nissan Motors Company and the Honda Motors 
Company are also expected to announce their plans for expanding 
imports, including purchases of auto parts, around or after 
mid-March. 
  However, except for Toyota, which opened a new factory in 
the 
United States coming into this year [as published], all 
companies are suffering from poor sales at home and abroad. 
Thus, it will be extremely difficult for them to substantially 
increase their purchases of auto parts in 1995 and thereafter. 
Given this situation, a major automaker said, "We are afraid 
that the United States will not be happy even if the companies 
present their purchase targets." 
  Meanwhile, concerning the possible implementation of the 
Super 301 provision, the auto industry believes that the 
possibility of auto parts being placed on the retaliation list 
is small, and it adds, "if high tariffs are placed on auto 
parts, it is the United States that will suffer." Thus, the 
industry believes that sanctions, if they are imposed, will be 
imposed only on finished vehicles. 
  Moreover, the United States' current complaints about 
Japan's 
poor record of importing finished vehicles are growing, and it 
charges that "Japan's sales system is closed." Given this 
situation, the JAMA is now thinking about acting as a mediator 
between the Big Three and domestic dealers. 
Electric Industry [subhead] 
  Sekimoto Tadashi, chairman of the Electric Industries 
Association of Japan, strongly reacted against the revival of 
the Super 301 provision, saying, "This presumes unilateral 
retaliation, and we regret this very much." The computer 
industry is particularly alarmed lest "the sanctions should be 
applied on supercomputers, because the United States is still 
dissatisfied with the government's procurement of 
supercomputers." 
  However, in biddings for supercomputers conducted under the 
1993 supplementary budget, Japanese manufacturers won some bids 
on the systems, which will have U.S.-made computers as 
components. In view of this, there are also those (among major 
manufacturers) who believe, "More of the systems incorporating 
U.S.-made products in them, as is required by the buyers, will 
come to win the biddings." 
Insurance Industry [subhead] 
  The nonlife insurance industry, which was regarded as one of 
the priority sectors during the failed Japanese-U.S. economic 
framework talks, intends to "promote an exchange of views with 
foreign- invested nonlife insurance companies, including U.S. 
firms, to remove their misunderstandings about the Japanese 
market" (according to a major nonlife insurance company). Since 
February, managers of Japan's major nonlife insurance companies 
and representatives of foreign-invested insurance companies in 
Japan have met to exchange views on the insurance system reform 
and other issues at the Japan and Foreign Nonlife Insurance 
Council. Such meetings will be held once a month or once every 
two months. 
Department Store Industry [subhead] 
  The government has decided to study measures to ease 
regulations governing the distribution system as one way to open 
up the market. Accordingly, the department store industry is 
different from other industries, which are in pain [over the 
revival of the Super 301 provision]. It instead is happy, and 
it says, "The import customs clearance procedures should be 
simplified to help expand imports, the high tariffs imposed on 
items such as candies and jams should be abolished, and the 
procedures for declaring the consumption tax imposed on imported 
goods should be simplified." 

