BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by the political editor] </F>
  [Text] Following the official Jordanian announcement 
linking the continuation of the negotiations with the end of the 
siege on the Port of al-'Aqabah, Jordanian-U.S. relations 
entered a transient state of tension similar to many episodes in 
the past, the most notable of which was the crisis in relations 
during the Gulf war. Such a state of relations is termed 
estrangement for the sake of rapprochement. Even if relations 
seem tense on the surface, they remain controlled in a state of 
harmony despite the fact that disputes sometimes allow for such 
tension!! 
  The question is: What happened and where did the real shake 
up in relations occur? And are there any new facts in the siege 
of al-'Aqabah or the negotiations? 
  In fact, there are new realities concerning those two 
issues. 
However, it is more important to note, however, that relations 
became tense following the Oslo agreement. The United States 
became dissatisfied with the performance of the Arab parties, 
especially Jordan, after the quick and dramatic step taken by 
the PLO, in which it surpassed everything that is normal in 
terms of making concessions. The Arab parties could no longer 
keep up with this step, except by announcing their final 
submission to the Israeli conditions. Moreover, they could no 
longer adopt an opposing stand, like what happened when dealing 
with [former Egyptian President] al-Sadat's signing of the Camp 
David agreement. The Arab parties taking direct part in the 
negotiating process are weak and separated, just like the other 
nonparticipating Arab parties. Any contribution by distant 
countries would be a negative contribution. This is what is 
happening with some Gulf and Arab Maghreb countries, which are 
taking normalization steps and are using the fact that the sole 
and legitimate representative [of the Palestinian people] signed 
the Oslo agreement with Israel as a justification!! 
  On the first day after the Oslo agreement, Jordan adopted a 
reserved stand, regardless of the seriousness of the agreement. 
This is because Jordan considered its role as an umbrella in the 
negotiations as no longer valid. This is especially true since 
the PLO began to hold direct negotiations and thus it no longer 
needed an umbrella. It may not even need the Madrid formula or 
any international formula, especially since the United States 
has achieved what it always called for in terms of the need to 
hold direct negotiations with Israel without U.S. mediation, 
which is exactly what Israel wants. 
  It is also known that the reserved Jordanian stand -- a 
stand 
which even rejected the Oslo agreement in the beginning -- 
turned 180 degrees and became a supportive one. It was clear 
from the beginning that this support for the Oslo agreement was 
compulsory and that Jordan had to take more than one step to 
cope with the course of Israeli-Palestinian contacts. Hence, 
many meetings and talks were held and many statements were made. 
These meetings did not satisfy Israel, which insisted on 
signing a separate peace treaty or agreement and was not 
satisfied with signing an agenda only. 
  Within the framework of exerting pressure on Jordan, Israel 
announced that Jordan would sign an agreement with Israel before 
the end of last year. Moreover, PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arafat 
announced more than once that the day of signing this agreement 
is approaching. He said on more than one occasion that this 
agreement was going to be signed last January. 
  'Arafat's remarks in this regard were based on Israeli and 
U.S. reports that King Husayn would sign a peace agreement 
during his U.S. visit in January 1994. 
  Jordan had received a U.S. letter in late 1993, stressing in 
the strongest possible terms the need to use the Jordanian 
monarch's Washington visit to sign a peace agreement at a 
meeting between the U.S. president, the Israeli prime minister, 
and the Jordanian monarch. Nonetheless, Jordan rejected the 
U.S. proposal. 
  When King Husayn visited the United States, he came under 
strong pressure from the U.S. Administration to sign a peace 
treaty with Israel. However, King Husayn reiterated his 
rejection of this proposal, and stressed his adherence to 
comprehensive peace, contending that this is the only guarantee 
for the success of the peace process. 
  The Jordanians thought that they had neutralized U.S. anger 
over this issue. Besides, the United States pretended to 
understand the rationale behind the Jordanian position. 
Nonetheless, the signals sent by Washington afterward reflected 
exasperation, and put greater pressure on Jordan to sign a 
unilateral peace treaty or take positions that would help untie 
the stalemated Israeli-PLO negotiations, particularly in the 
aftermath of the Hebron massacre. 
  Then came the visit to Saudi Arabia by King Husayn to 
perform 
the minor pilgrimage in the holy places there, and Saudi 
Arabia's failure to conduct itself properly, in line with even 
the most basic duties acknowledged in international relations. 
This development was a U.S. message addressed to Jordan. At 
any rate, it was the tightening of the siege clamped on the Port 
of al-'Aqabah that further aggravated the strained 
Jordanian-U.S. ties. 
  The incidents of intercepting and turning back 
al-'Aqabah-bound ships have increased dramatically. The most 
obvious position taken in this regard was the public threat made 
by a U.S. congressional delegation that visited Jordan in March. 
This delegation said that the siege clamped on the Port of 
al-'Aqabah will be aggravated if Jordan does not sign a 
unilateral peace treaty with Israel, adding that the signing of 
such a treaty would result in efforts to lift the siege. 
  The congressional delegation asserted that it would 
recommend 
the lifting of the al-'Aqabah siege, as well as aid to Jordan, 
if Jordan meets the U.S. demand of signing a treaty with Israel. 
Moreover, the United States was extremely dissatisfied with 
Jordan's refusal to host an economic conference scheduled to 
have convened in Amman on 10 April. The countries concerned 
with economic activities in the region, including Israel, were 
slated to participate in the meetings of this conference. 
  A carrot offered to Jordan in this regard was talk of a 
possible reconsideration of Jordan's debts by the United States 
and West European states. Nonetheless, there were no firm 
commitments in this regard. Jordan replied by saying that it 
could not host such a meeting in Amman at present. However, 
Jordan said that it would not object to hosting such a 
conference in late 1994 if the parties to the Middle East peace 
process manage to achieve a comprehensive peace agreement on all 
tracks of the negotiations, as expected. 
  In a nutshell, Jordan will remain faced with pressure and 
intimidation to weaken its position and impose unfair conditions 
on it in order to force it to sign a peace treaty with Israel 
and effect a premature normalization of ties. Jordan's recent 
announcement that it is linking its continued engagement in the 
negotiations to the lifting of the siege clamped on the Port of 
al- 'Aqabah may have achieved numerous objectives, the first 
among which is that U.S. efforts are currently focused on a 
return to the course of the negotiations enshrined in the Madrid 
formula. This keeps at bay any talk of a unilateral peace 
agreement. 
  The most important thing that experience has taught us is 
that submission to the United States always produces negative 
results. 

