Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, December 30 (BTA) -- The Ministry of the 
Interior tonight denied a story in the TEMPO magazine of Ankara, 
alleging that members of a Kurdish terrorist organization were 
based in Bulgaria. 
  "The Ministries of Bulgaria and Turkey have signed a 
cooperation agreement and exchange information on the combatting 
of terrorism," says a press release of the Interior Ministry 
received at BTA. It stresses that Bulgaria's special services 
have no information on the existence of such an organization in 
this country and have not exchanged information on the matter 
with Turkey. "What the magazine says about there being a link 
between a Kurdish terrorist organization and Iranian drug 
traffickers could be described only as a journalist's 
interpretation unsupported by facts and evidence," the press 
release also says. The story in TEMPO, commented in most big 
Bulgarian dailies today, says the Bulgarian special services 
have found out that PKK [Workers Party of Kurdistan] members 
have penetrated into Bulgaria after some West European countries 
outlawed them. The story alleges that the PKK was connected 
with one Iraqi and two Iranian drug runners, discovered in a 
recent police check in a Sofia flat, in which one policeman was 
killed. Indeed one police officer was killed on December 6, and 
another died from his wounds in hospital later on, but the 
Bulgarian police reported they had been shot by Iranian drug 
traffickers, shot dead by the police as they resisted arrest. 
  The Interior Ministry also stated it had no information on 
the existence of a Bulgarian-Greek ring which, according to 
ELLADHA SIMERA of Greece, illegally transfers foreign currency. 
Allegedly, it operates through gambling casinos in Bulgaria and 
is connected with senior government officials. "The Interior 
Ministries of Bulgaria and Greece have signed an agreement which 
includes exchange of operative information, so far, however, 
there has been neither information nor inquiries about the 
activities of such a group," says the ministry's press release. 

