BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Khun Sa by Prawit Rotchanaphruk, Bunloet </F>
Siakim, and Dom Suwana; place, date not given] 
  [Text] The Burmese have made some advance and they 
are now on the western side of the Salween River, how do you see 
the situation? 
  I'm not worried at all if the Burmese could have crossed 
(the 
river) they would have done it. It's not that they have taken 
pity on us, or that we are their brothers, the fact is that they 
can't. I sleep peacefully at night and actually I really want 
them to cross (the river) to our side if they can so I can shoot 
them myself. 
  You see, the Salween River doesn't belong to the Burmese, it 
belongs to us -- the Thai Yai. If Thais think about utilizing 
our four main rivers (Nam Salween, Nam Muang Phuek, Nam Muang 
Sat, Nam Muang Loi), the Thai brothers, the Thai millionaires 
and the Thais in the private sector should help Khun Sa a bit. 
Once we can stand up against the Burmese, we will drive them 
back to where they belong. And Thais can make use of the rivers. 
  /How much area of the Shan State is under MTA (Muang 
Tai Army or the Army of the Tai Nation) influence? 
  We have control over two-thirds of the Shan state. 
  How do you look at the proposed quadrangular economic 
sphere that includes Burma, China, Laos and Thailand? Who do 
you think will really benefit from it? 
  I don't think of it as an economic road, it's a strategic 
road for the Chinese only. The Chinese have spent many hours 
thinking of ways to outsmart the Burmese, Laotians and Thais. 
The Chinese want to build a bridge across the Salween River and 
build railways so they can send their troops down to Laos, 
Cambodia, Thailand, Shan state and Burma within 24 hours. It is 
not about the economy. 
  You have said that if the Thai government helps you, 
the MTA would surely defeat the SLORC (Burma's ruling State 
Order Restoration Council), can you elaborate? 
  I will push all the Burmese out of Shan state because they 
invaded us first, they also broke the Panglong treaty that 
recognized Shan independence. Because of all this, the MTA 
doesn't have to look for soldiers, men come willingly. These 
men voluntarily take arms to force the Burmese out. All we need 
are some arms and money. 
  The Burmese have only the rice and the sea to depend on, 
nothing else. All the rest of the natural resources that they 
are selling to foreigners belongs to us, the Thai Yai, so may I 
request everyone not to buy Burmese goods. Those goods actually 
belong to us, the Thai Yai. Once they get money, they buy guns 
to kill us. Thais and Tai (the other name for Thai Yai) are 
brothers. We share the same blood, the same King and Queen. If 
Shan gained independence, it would be another Tai state, and the 
name of His Majesty the King would be spread even further. 
Thais will trade with Tai, and the Thai economy will be even 
better. 
  Does this mean that once Shan gains independence, it 
will become part of Thailand? 
  No, not as such. 
  Besides other ethnic groups in Shan state, have you 
been negotiating with other armed minorities like Kayah, Karen 
or Mon about political and economic alliances? 
  I have delegated respective people to negotiate with the 
Karen and Kayah to come up with a draft constitution of the new 
confederation of states and to see if we can have an alliance of 
sort like the European Community. 
  Given the present situation, what are you most 
worried about? 
  There are only two things that worry me: money and arms, 
nothing more. 
  How do you view the combined income you derive from 
opium and heroin taxes that you collect and those from the sales 
of Shan's jade, ruby and sapphires in relation to the amount you 
spent to keep the MTA running? 
  That money is good for the purchase of our soldiers' boots 
only (laughs). 
  The United States government always tells all its 
allies that having any kind of relationship with Khun Sa is 
wrong. What do you think of your reputation as the King of 
Opium, the man who is responsible for the loss of millions of 
lives, especially in the United States, due to heroin? 
  The United States government sent someone to ask me about 
it. 
But I think they are crazy! And all they did was wrong. Now, 
they have realized that what they did in the past was wrong and 
they've started to talk with me. 
  What about the mass media? You are portrayed as an 
opium crook who causes millions of death. 
  The United States had also sent someone to ask me I told 
them 
that the killer is not me, but the US DEA. I do political work, 
I'm not an opium trader. 
  I collect (protection) taxes from traders, and this is the 
truth. And I also don't have to catch (the growers and traders). 
Who would I send them to? I just need the taxes to feed my 
soldiers. 
  Don't you think that your act alone is indirectly 
causing suffering? 
  That's up to what you think but I don't care. Americans 
trade drugs too, so do the British don't they? But I see no one 
making a big fuss over those people. I think some people made 
me a target to earn money. They know that I don't grow opium. 
  If there was anything that you could convey to the 
millions who are addicted to heroin and opium, what would it 
be? 
  First, I know that opium is not a good thing, it destroys 
one's health I quit growing opium in 1962, before anyone else. 
That year I initiated a tobacco plantation. I built 80 medical 
centres and 80 schools until the Burmese collaborated with the 
KMT (Kuomintang, the nationalist Chinese) and attacked us. Most 
medical units were destroyed but some schools still remain 
today. Local people can verify this. 
  If I met an addict, I would bring him in for rehabilitation. 
We have a rehabilitation centre here. I feel concern for four 
groups of people: the opium growers, the addicts, the traders 
and those who are jailed for narcotic related charges. I feel 
pity that drugs destroyed their families. 
  In 1977, the United States government sent Mr Josef Nellis 
to 
negotiate with me. I proposed to him a 6-year opium eradication 
scheme but the US refused. Since then, I don't know how many 
six year terms have repeated themselves but the amount of opium 
production in Shan and Burma were at 200 tonnes per year before 
British colonization. But since the inception of the DEA, the 
number has increased to over 4,000 tonnes. The money that the 
DEA put in became a good fertilizer for opium. What I would 
like to say is, "Don't make a big fuss over it." 
  If those who are after me say that Khun Sa is the undisputed 
Opium King, then why not come to get me? If you want to catch 
the main goon come and get the chief goon not those minute 
hooligans. But they don't so when can the crime be eradicated? 
  I made a proposition to the Thai government too. I wanted to 
tell them that it's not a big deal if we really want to 
eradicate opium but don't do it the DEA way. Or don't do it the 
UN's way because what they are doing now is like trimming a 
tree. They should come to me and uproot the tree. I really 
look forward to cooperating with all parties. If we have enough 
money to live and fight to attain independence we could 
eradicate all the opium fields in one day. The existing opium 
can be sold to any nation interested and it can be dumped 
wherever they wish. 

