BFN 

<F P=106> [Shanxi Provincial People's Procuratorate work report </F>
(summary) delivered by Shanxi Chief Procurator Zuo Xiang before 
the Second Session of the Eighth Provincial People's Congress on 
1 Mar 
  [Text] Deputies: 
  I will deliver to this session a report on the situation of 
procuratorial work in the province since the First Session of 
the Eighth Provincial People's Congress, and I ask for your 
examination. 
  First, the CPC's wise decision on the anticorruption 
drive was resolutely implemented, and the struggle against 
corruption and bribery launched extensively. 
  In 1993, especially after 21 August when General Secretary 
Jiang Zemin made the important speech on launching the struggle 
against corruption at the second plenary session of the Central 
Commission for Discipline Inspection, the procuratorial organs 
of various levels in our province followed the arrangements by 
the provincial party committee and the Supreme People's 
Procuratorate, and viewed investigation into economic crimes 
such as corruption and bribery--especially serious cases--as the 
highest priority in procuratorial work; they organized work 
carefully and concentrated strength to investigate a number of 
economic crimes, such as corruption and bribery, scored certain 
results, and developed the role of procuratorial organs in the 
anticorruption drive. In 1993, the procuratorial organs in the 
whole province opened files to investigate 1,987 cases of 
economic crimes, such as corruption and bribery, which involved 
2,282 persons, at present, 1,351 cases involving 1,571 persons 
have been closed, and 467 cases involving 543 persons have been 
handed over to law courts for prosecution. The retrieved stolen 
money and goods exceeded 30 million yuan. 
  --A number of big and serious cases were cracked. In 1993, 
the procuratorial organs in the whole province investigated 52 
cases for which files were opened, and these cases involved 53 
leading cadres at county and office levels, a 27 percent 
increase over 1992. Among these cases, four cases involved 
crimes committed by four cadres at the provincial department 
level. At the same time, new progress was made in the work of 
investigating big cases, each of which involved more than 10,000 
yuan. A total of 1,284 cases, each of which involved more than 
10,000 yuan, were probed and files were opened for them; this 
number accounted for 64 percent of all the cases for which files 
were opened, and showed a 48 percent increase over 1992. Among 
these cases, 936 cases involved 10,000-50,000 yuan, 179 cases 
50,000-100,000 yuan, 137 cases 100,000-500,000 yuan, 13 cases 
500,000 yuan to 1 million yuan, and 19 cases more than 1 million 
yuan. 
  --Relatively great progress was made in investigating 
economic crimes such as corruption and bribery in the "four 
major departments." In 1993, procuratorial organs in the whole 
province investigated 334 oepn-file cases of economic crimes, 
such as corruption and bribery, committed by personnel who 
worked in leading party and government, judicial, law 
enforcement and administrative, and economic management 
departments, and this number accounted for 16.8 percent of the 
total number of files opened. Among the cases, 95 cases were 
economic crimes committed within leading party and government 
departments. 
  --A number of cases of economic crimes such as tax evasion, 
refusal to pay tax, deception in tax payment, false trademarks, 
and so on, were handled. In 1993, procuratorial organs of 
various levels in the whole province actively participated in 
special campaigns such as "crackdown on counterfeit items" and 
rectification of taxation; they coordinated closely with 
relevant departments and forcefully cracked down on criminal 
activities which disrupted the taxation order, infringed upon 
the rights of consumers, and seriously hindered normal operation 
of market mechanisms. Procuratorial organs in the whole province 
opened files to investigate a total of 472 cases such as tax 
evasion and refusal to pay tax, among these cases, 34 cases 
involved more than 100,000 yuan each, while 104 cases involved 
counterfeit trademarks. Use of tricks to deceive the state in 
order to get reimbursement of export taxes is a new form of 
crime which has emerged after the country carried out reforms of 
the taxation and foreign trade systems in recent years. Last 
year, the procuratorial organs in the whole province opened 
files to investigate 18 cases of collaboration between criminal 
elements and some corrupt elements in customs, taxation, and 
foreign trade departments who deceived the country into giving 
reimbursements; a total of 11 million yuan was retrieved. 
  --A number of serious economic criminals who had been at 
large were arrested. Over the past three years, among the cases 
of economic crimes for which files were opened for investigation 
by the procuratorial organs in our province, there were 48 
criminals who were on the run, and among them an absolute 
majority carried huge sums of money. The procuratorial organs 
in the whole province adopted various measures to track them 
down, and now, 28 of them have been arrested, and a total of 2.5 
million yuan of economic losses to the state and collectives has 
been recovered. 
  In the course of launching the struggle against corruption 
and bribery, we made a special effort to grasp the following 
three areas: 
  First, we took decisive measures to swiftly change the 
situation in which the number of files opened for economic 
crimes in the whole province rapidly decreased. In the first 
two months of last year, due to the influence of various 
reasons, the procuratorial organs in the whole province opened 
only 77 files, a 60.3 percent decrease compared with the same 
period of 1992. Among the cases for which the files were 
opened, there were only 43 cases which involved more than 10,000 
yuan each, and this was a 39.4 percent decrease compared with 
the same period of last year. Among the 134 procuratorial 
organs in the whole province, 84 had no files opened for 
investigation into economic crimes. On the one hand, the 
phenomenon of corruption was spreading; on the other hand, the 
number of cases handled by us greatly decreased, and this was a 
very big gap. In light of this grim situation, the provincial 
procuratorate promptly reported the situation to the provincial 
party committee and the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and at 
the same time decisively adopted five measures: Carrying out 
investigations and surveys, thoroughly understanding the 
situation, and securing the initiative in guiding work; unifying 
understanding, overcoming fear of difficulties and slackened 
spirits; encouraging procurators of various levels to play the 
"locomotive" role; grasping weak links, classifying problems for 
guidance, solving actual problems during investigation of cases; 
and enforcing the law strictly, to ensure quality during the 
handling of cases. As a result, we relatively swiftly changed 
the passive situation in which the number of files opened for 
economic crimes in the province rapidly decreased. By the end 
of July, all the procuratorial organs which had not opened files 
before, did have open files, and the number of files, as well as 
the number of big and serious cases in the whole province, began 
to rise month after month. 
  Second, we promptly transmitted, studied, and implemented 
the 
CPC Central Committee's important instruction on fighting 
decadence, and deepened the struggle against corruption and 
bribery. Since 21 August 1993, the provincial procuratorate has 
held an emergency meeting of heads of sub- and city 
procuratorates, as well as a provincial conference on fighting 
corruption and bribery done by the procuratorial organs in the 
whole province, to examine and adopt a series of resolute and 
forceful measures to deepen the struggle against corruption and 
bribery. 1) The broad masses of procuratorial cadres and police 
were organized to seriously study General Secretary Jiang's 
important speech and to deeply understand its spiritual essence; 
the CPC Central Committee's instruction on fighting decadence 
was used to unify everybody's minds; the broad masses of 
procuratorial cadres and police were gievn an enhanced sense of 
mission, responsibility, and urgency; and the ideological 
foundation for profoundly launching the struggle against 
corruption and bribery was laid. 2) The strength of reporting 
work was substantiated and boosted, reporting phone calls were 
promptly announced to society, and reports made by the masses of 
people were seriously handled. 3) Handling more and big cases, 
and in particular serious cases, was viewed as the main 
criterion for judging the result in work against decadence. 
More importance was attached to preliminary investigations into 
big and serious cases and efforts to do so were stepped up, 
strength was rationally used and coordinated, and the method of 
congregating crack forces to fight a war of annihilation, to 
crack down on key cases was adopted. Last year, the provincial 
procuratorate directly transferred personnel from other units to 
open files to investigate 14 big and influential cases which 
involved 17 persons. 4) The procurators of various levels 
played an exemplary role and they took the lead in investigating 
big and serious cases on the one hand, and on the other hand, 
gave full play to the role of leading groups in overall combat; 
regarding decisions on important problems and the work in 
investigation into big and serious cases, they insisted on 
collective research and decisions to avoid and reduce mistakes. 
5) Leadership of upper-level procuratorates over lower-level 
procuratorates was further strengthened, and the provincial 
procuratorial system's ability to launch the struggle against 
corruption and bribery in terms of unified command and concerted 
effort was gradually improved. 6) Links with the discipline 
inspection commission, supervisory department, courts, and 
public security organs to exchange information and coordinate 
actions were strengthened. 7) Strict law enforcement was 
always insisted upon, crimes were strictly distinguished from 
acts which were not criminal, and relations between crackdown 
and protection were properly handled. In the process of 
handling cases, attention was paid to safeguarding the 
legitimate rights of enterprises and legal persons to obtain the 
social effects of cracking down on crimes, protectin reform, and 
promoting economic development. 
  Third, a number of big and serious cases were promptly 
announced, to encourage the masses and promote profound 
development of the struggle against corruption and bribery. 
When the procuratorial organs in the whole province were making 
relatively great progress in the struggle against corruption and 
bribery, the provincial procuratorate held a news conference on 
13 December 1993, to report on the progress of the struggle 
against corruption and bribery launched by the procuratorial 
organs in the whole province since 21 August, and revealed 20 
big and serious cases of corruption and bribery crimes; this 
caused strong responses in society, further aroused the 
enthusiasm among the masses of people for fighting against 
corrupt elements, and enhanced the confidence and determination 
among the procuratorial cadres and police to launch the struggle 
against corruption and bribery. 
<H5>  Second, serious criminal activities were severely cracked </H5>
down on, and political stability and social tranquility was 
safeguarded. 
  In 1993, the procuratorial organs in our province continued 
to view safeguarding political stability and social tranquility 
as an important duty, resolutely implemented the principle of 
"handling cases severely and swiftly," closely coordinated with 
the people's law courts and public security organs, harshly 
punished serious criminal elements who disrupted law and order, 
and diligently created a stable social environment for reform, 
opening up, and economic construction in the province. In 1993, 
the procuratorial organs in the whole province received requests 
from public security organs to arrest 15,965 persons, and after 
examination, approval was granted according to law to arrest 
13,795 persons; they also received requests from public security 
organs to prosecute 14,773 persons, and after examination, 
prosecuted 12,299 persons. In the area of severely cracking 
down on serious criminal activities, we mainly grasped the 
following three tasks: 
  --Actively participating in special struggles and solving 
acute problems of public order. Since last March, the 
procuratorial organs in the whole province actively participated 
in the special struggle for encroaching and annihilating 
"highway robbers" according to unified arrangements in the whole 
province, scoring certain results. By the end of last year, 
procuratorial organs received requests from public security 
organs to arrest 796 "highway robbers" in 265 cases, and 
permission was granted to arrest 728 of them in 246 cases, thus, 
the rampant criminal tendency of "highway robbery" was 
effectively checked. Since July, procuratorial organs in the 
whole province have enthusiastically joined the special struggle 
to rectify the law and order situation in rural areas and strike 
at hooligans and gangs. From July to September, procuratorial 
organs in the whole province arrested a total of 4,843 criminal 
elements of various kinds, and prosecuted 3,784 of them, 
obtaining good social effect. 
  --Key areas for crackdown were highlighted. Serious criminal 
activities which posed serious threat to law and order in the 
society and the people's lives and properties were severely 
punished. The procuratorial organs in the whole province always 
pointed the spearhead of struggle at seven kinds of serious 
criminal elements, namely murderers, robbers, rapists, culprits 
who used explosives, armed criminals, hooligans who caused 
nuisances, notorious thieves, and culprits who stole and 
destroyed facilities and materials for industrial and 
agricultural production, hitting particularly hard hooligans and 
gangs which collaborated with persons inside and outside the 
country, dominated a certain quarter, and had the nature of 
secret societies. When handling cases, the procuratorial organs 
of various levels upheld the principle of intervening in 
important criminal cases ahead of schedule and "clarifying basic 
facts and securing basic evidence," and grasped combat 
opportunities to quickly arrest and prosecute them, fully 
embodying the spirit of handling cases swiftly and giving harsh 
punishment. In 1993, the procuratorial organs in the whole 
province granted approval to arrest 4,827 serious criminal 
elements of these seven kinds, and prosecuted 3,775 of them. 
This has dealt a severe blow to the arrogance of serious 
criminal elements. 
  --While handling cases, organs actively participated in 
comprehensive rectification of public order. Procuratorial 
organs of various levels revealed crimes, educated the masses, 
and promoted legal system through appearing in courts to support 
prosecution. Last year, the procuratorial organs in the whole 
province sent personnel to courts to support prosecution of 
persons in 6,640 criminal cases, and issued 5,584 prosecution 
letters. Responding to problems existing in the units in which 
cases took place, they issued 1,253 "letters suggesting 
inspection and supervision." Regarding personnel who got 
prosecution waivers, public announcements were made. Regarding 
the situation of enforcement in the areas of exercising control 
over personnel, of stripping them of their political rights, of 
suspending penalties, of giving parole, and of allowing them to 
be bailed out for medical treatment, the procuratorial organs 
carried out frequent inspections and supervision. Many 
procuratorial organs carried out investigation and research into 
crime prevention measures, and publicized legal system. 
<H5>  Third, full play was given to the role of procuratorial </H5>
organs in enforcing law and discipline and, according to law, 
handling cases of infringement of citizens' democratic and 
personal rights, as well as cases of dereliction of duty. 
  In 1993, procuratorial organs in our province always put 
investigation of crimes such as "infringement of rights" and 
dereliction of duty in an important position within 
procuratorial work, and further strengthened work in enforcing 
law and discipline. Procuratorial organs in the whole province 
investigated 1,046 cases of "infringement of rights" and 
dereliction of duty for which files were opened, arrested 224 
culprits according to law, and instituted proceedings against 
337 persons. Through handling cases, procuratorial organs 
retrieved economic losses of 1.59 million yuan for the state and 
collectives. In the process of investigating crimes such as 
"infringement of rights" and dereliction of duty, we mainly 
grasped the following four tasks: 
  --The emphasis was on investigating crimes such as 
malpractice and favoritism, use of torture to extort 
confessions, and illegal detention which were committed by 
judicial, administrative, and law enforcement personnel, and 
which caused strong grievances among the masses. Procuratorial 
organs in the whole province opened files to investigate 206 
cases of these three kinds of crimes, and this figure accounted 
for 19.7 percent of the files opened for investigation into law 
and discipline enforcement units. For example, Ning Haide, 
chief of the public security bureau in Linyi County bent the law 
for private interests and practiced fraud; Shen Yugen, chief of 
the public security bureau in Xinzhou City harbored criminals 
who cheated others; their cases were promptly handled, and good 
social effects were obtained. 
  --Cases of responsibility for serious accidents were 
actively 
investigated. Our province is a base of energy and heavy and 
chemical industries, and coal production is the pillar industry 
supporting the economy in our province. However, because some 
localities did not pay attention to safe production, serious 
accidents continuously happened in the coal mines during recent 
years, causing not only deaths and injuries, but also great 
economic losses and adverse effects on the development of 
production. The procuratorial organs in the province always 
viewed investigation into cases of responsibility for serious 
accidents as an important task of enforcing law and discipline, 
and they opened files to investigate 442 cases of responsibility 
for serious accidents. 
  --Cases of negligence in commercial and trading activities 
were handled seriously. Procuratorial organs in the whole 
province opened files to investigate into 142 cases of this 
kind. These cases caused direct economic losses of 13.5 million 
yuan to the state and collectives. 
  --Cases of undermining elections were solemnly handled . In 
1993, the people's congresses of various levels in the whole 
province held elections because terms expired, and the 
procuratorial organs in our province paid earnest attention to 
this matter and, in pursuance of the law, investigated 14 cases 
of crimes which undermined elections, so as to safeguard smooth 
work in elections. 
<H5>  Fourth, law was strictly enforced, procuratorial </H5>
undertakings were thoroughly launched, and the function of legal 
supervision was strengthened. 
  Enforcing law strictly is the central link of legal system 
building. Strengthening legal supervision and promoting strict 
law enforcement is the basic duty entrusted by law to 
procuratorial organs. In 1993, adhering to the work principle 
of "enforcing law strictly and making strenuous efforts to 
handle cases," the procuratorial organs in our province firmly 
grasped the acute problem of not enforcing law strictly and 
firmly grasped typical cases, to launch legal supervision work. 
  --A key effort was made to correct the situation of 
"ineffective crackdown," and work seriously launched to 
supervise investigation and judgment. At the same time they 
severely cracked down on serious criminal activities, 
procuratorial organs in the whole province ceaselessly 
strengthened the sense of supervision and seriously fulfilled 
the duty of supervising investigation and judgment in various 
links such as examining requests and granting approvals for 
arrests, examining prosecutions, and appearing in courts to 
support the process of instituting proceedings. First, they 
supervised correction of issues such as not requesting arrests 
of those who should be arrested, substituting fines for jail 
terms, and so on. The procuratorial organs ordered the arrests 
of 169 various criminal elements who had not been arrested; they 
also reinstated proceedings against 95 criminal elements who had 
committed crimes and should have had their criminal 
responsibilities pursued, but were sent to 
education-through-labor camps or given only public order 
punishment or other forms of treatment. Second, they raised 
defense for 80 cases which truly had wrong judgments and 
verdicts, and among these cases 19 have now been closed, with 10 
persons in 10 cases getting corrected verdicts. Third, they 
issued 168 "notices on correcting lawbreaking deeds" aimed at 
the unlawful behavior in the course of investigation and 
judgment, and orally gave opinions 1,068 times concerning 
correction. 
  --Emphasizing the handling of cases of crimes in detention 
and reform-through-labor facilities and stressing correction of 
lawbreaking activities, procuratorial organs launched work in 
detention and reform-through-labor facilities. The 
procuratorial organs in the whole province brought to court 60 
cases involving 75 persons who had committed crimes again while 
under detention; and handled 72 cases, which involved 72 
persons, of complaints and appeals by the detained and their 
relatives and consequently, they opened files to investigate 12 
cases of crimes committed by 13 prison cadres and personnel. 
Responding to the situation of random charges collected by the 
detention and reform-through labor facilities when performing 
formalities for reduction of term, parole, and medical treatment 
outside jail, procuratorial organs carried out special 
investigations, and offered concrete procuratorial suggestions, 
enabling some problems to be promptly corrected. 
  --Emphasizing investigation into appeals against charges, 
procuratorial organs launched work in appeals against charges. 
Procuratorial organs in the whole province received 1,522 
visitors who had complaints, received 6,196 letters from the 
masses, investigated into 398 cases of appeals against charges, 
handled 33 cases of bigamy, and properly settled 47 cases of 
visits by groups of people, thus defusing possible 
intensification of conflicts. Procuratorial organs in the whole 
province actively launched activities of civilized reception, 
and 85 percent of the reception rooms charged with the duty of 
receiving complaints against charges have basically reached the 
standard of a civilized reception room prescribed by the Supreme 
People's Procuratorate. The reception rooms for receiving 
complaints against charges in Hejin County and Linfen City were 
granted the title of "civilized reception room" within the 
nationwide procuratorial system by the Supreme People's 
Procuratorate. 
  --Emphasizing the work in complaints against verdicts on 
civil and administrative cases, and the cases for which 
obviously unfair verdicts were given, procuratorial organs 
launched work aimed at civil and administrative cases. The 
procuratorial organs in the whole province accepted, according 
to law, 295 cases of complaints against verdicts on civil, 
economic, and administrative cases. After examination, 12 cases 
of complaints against charges were put forward, and the law 
courts agreed to retry them; at present two cases have obtained 
different verdicts. 
  --Emphasizing development of forensic verification and 
examination of documents, procuratorial organs launched 
technical work. They examined 3,356 cases of various kinds, 
inspected 884 on-the-spot scenes, and scrutinized 217 documents; 
among the cases, 34 had the original appraisals amended, and a 
total of 1,428 legal documents of various kinds was produced to 
provide scientific basis for determining the correct nature of 
cases being handled. 
<H5>  Fifth, strict principles for running procuratorial organs, </H5>
and strengthened building of procuratorial contingent were 
upheld. 
  In 1993, the procuratorial organs of various levels in our 
province continued to profoundly launch ideological and 
political work which had procuratorial characteristics; they 
insisted on building procuratorial organs according to law, 
upheld strict principles for building procuratorial organs, and 
further strengthened their own ideological, organizational, and 
styles building. 
  --Procuratorial organs were run on strict principles, and 
anticorruption work was strengthened within the procuratorial 
contingent itself. 
  Under the unified arrangement by the provincial 
procuratorate, cadres at and above office levels in the 
procuratorial organs in the whole province strictly used the 
"five instructions" given by the CPC Central Committee, the "10 
no's" announced by the provincial party committee and 
government, and "procuratorial personnel discipline," to carry 
out serious self-inspection and self-correction. Procuratorial 
organs in the whole province handled a total of five cases of 
violation of law and discipline by police, involving five 
persons, among whom two were pursued for their criminal 
responsibility. At the same time, according to the relevant 
regulations, the problem of random collection of fees by 
procuratorial organs and of procuratorial organs running 
companies, were sorted out and rectified. 
  --Local party committees were actively helped to do work in 
appointing new procurators as the terms of old procurators 
expired. Provincial, sub-, and city procuratorates took the 
initiative in coordinating with the provincial party committee 
and, according to the "four qualities" standard and the 
principle of having both integrity and ability, selected a 
number of young comrades who are comparatively mature 
politically and have higher educational attainment for positions 
in the leading groups of the procuratorial organs of various 
levels. Work in appointing new procurators as the terms of the 
old procurators expired was smoothly accomplished, thus enabling 
the old group to hand over duties to the new group. 
  --Activities in "struggling for excellence" were vigorously 
launched. Under the conditions that their duties were arduous 
and their tasks difficult, the broad masses of procuratorial 
cadres and police developed the revolutionary spirit of 
tenacious struggle and selfless dedication, and survived the 
exercises and tests in the struggle against corruption. A 
number of advanced collectives and staff, who would enforce law 
impartially and handle things honestly, has emerged. Last year, 
in the whole province, 43 procuratorial cadres and police and 19 
collectives were commended by the Supreme People's Procuratorate 
and the provincial party committee and government; and 66 
advanced collectives and 243 advanced staff were commended by 
the provincial procuratorate. 
  --Work was launched in educating and training procuratorial 
cadres in various styles and through various channels. The 
procuratorial organs in our province further strengthened 
education and used available resources to launch various kinds 
of short-term and on-the-job training. More than 500 
procuratorial cadres and police took part in self-study and 
examinations organized by the Law University, and more than 
1,300 procuratorial cadres and police took part in the 
second-phase certificate course on procuratorial studies. 
Procuratorial organs in the whole province organized 60 
training classes and forums of various types to train 1,800 
procuratorial cadres and police. The knowledge structure of the 
procuratorial contingent was further improved, and the 
professional quality of procuratorial cadres and police was 
upgraded. 

