BFN 

  [Excerpts] Crimes involving the use of firearms and 
explosives could be curbed by amending the law to introduce 
stiffer penalties for illegal possession and use of war weapons, 
Army Commander-in-Chief Wimon Wongwanit suggested yesterday. 
  Gen. Wimon said most military-type weapons used by criminals 
were not obtained from armed forces barracks but from Cambodia 
and Burma where there was still guerrilla warfare. 
  "The Ordnance Corps has stringent regulations controlling 
military supplies," Wimon said. "The law governing war weapons 
should be amended to allow for more severe punishment of 
offenders." 
  He said the military had done its utmost to stop the influx 
of war weaponry from neighbouring countries. 
  Wimon did not believe an explosion at a Phuket hotel 
yesterday was politically motivated, nor was it an act of 
terrorism. But the army chief did not say how he arrived at 
that conclusion. [passage omitted] 
  Prime Minister Chuan Likphai said he believed one of the 
most 
effective ways of dealing with the arms smuggling problem was 
for law enforcement officials to arrest major dealers in the 
illegal business and at the same time stem the flow of weapons 
from border countries. The prime minister also said lax control 
of weapons belonging to the armed forces contributed to the 
spread of war weapons. 
  Deputy Prime Minister Banyat Banthatthan said the government 
had already instructed law officers to crack down on war weapons 
and stem the influx of military supplies into the country as a 
priority. 
  Deputy Interior Minister Den Tomina said yesterday he had 
been told by an anonymous caller that there would be an 
explosion in Phuket tomorrow, when Den is scheduled to open a 
seminar attended by senior police officers from Asean countries. 
  "After receiving the phone call I notified the Phuket police 
chief. I was told by him that strict security is already in 
place. And that a bomb had exploded (yesterday), that's 
strange," Den said. 
  He disagreed with Wimon that harsher penalties for illegal 
use and possession of war weapons would help stem violent crime. 
Den said existing laws already provided for stiff penalties. 
The real problem was that the law was not efficiently and 
consistently enforced. 
  Deputy Foreign Minister Surin Phitsuwan said efforts to 
suppress the influx of military-type weapons had not been 
successful because the majority of people still did not realize 
the seriousness of the problem. Many people in rural areas 
possessed illegal or unregistered firearms and explosives, 
purportedly to protect themselves. 

