Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Daisan Kasei Co., Ltd. (Daisan Kasei), a maker of 
fatty acids and photosensitive materials, has developed a 
special coating material to be used for insulative and sealing 
films. The material is a poly-para-xylene-based resin that can 
be formed by the CVD (chemical vapor deposition) method into 
films thinner than epoxy resin films. European and the U.S. 
makers have already developed similar resins, which have been 
drawing attention in connection with the development of highly 
integrated printed circuit boards. However, Daisan Kasei's resin 
is said to have higher purity and better electrical 
characteristics than those resins. 
  Daisan Kasei has begun to sell the new resin under the trade 
name of ``diX.'' The resin diX consists of 
dichloro-para-cyclophane made from para-methyl benzyl trimethyl 
ammonium chlorite by chlorination and dimerization; para-methyl 
benzyl trimethyl ammonium chlorite is made from para-methyl 
benzyl chlorite, a herbicide raw material. 
  Dichloro-para-cyclophane-based coating materials made by 
European and U.S. makers are made by chlorinating 
para-cyclophane. In this case, the purity of 
dichloro-para-cyclophane does not approach 100 percent very 
closely because chlorine sometimes is not bonded 
stoichiometrically. In the production method developed by Daisan 
Kasei, the chlorination proceeds nearly stoichiometrically to 
yield dichloro-para-cyclophane with a purity of 99 percent, 
approximately 10 percent better than the products made by others. 
  Due to its high purity, the new resin has excellent 
insulating capability, heat resistance, and resistance to 
discoloration. Daisan Kasei has already filed applications for a 
patent in six countries, including Japan, the United States, and 
Europe. In addition, the material has already been confirmed to 
be in conformity with the U.S. military specifications. 
  Daisan Kasei has completed a 3-ton-per-year production 
facility in its Goi Plant (Ichihara City, Chiba Prefecture) with 
an investment of approximately &yen;100 million. The resin is 
priced at approximately &yen;200,000 per kg, which is comparable 
to similar products already on the market. In the next several 
years, Daisan Kasei plans to achieve an annual sale of 
&yen;400-500 million with the new resin and the CVD device. 
  Daisan Kasei is a company capitalized jointly, 50-50, by 
Chisso Corp. and Kishimoto Sangyo Co., Ltd. 

