Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Daniela Polizzi and Pier Luigi Todisco: "Where </F>
the Emir Buys"] 
  [Text] Arab finance: The Gulf countries' European 
offensive. In Italy, they already have a 7-percent stake in La 
Rinascente. In France, they are into Total and ELF. And in the 
center of London, Arab capital is creating a second City. 
  They ended 1993 triumphantly. In December, 1 percent of 
Total 
passed into the hands of the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority 
(ADIA). And in Italy, the Arab Banking Corporation (ABC) 
acquired a 7-percent stake in the La Rinascente group's capital 
shares. They did not stop with the new year. Only last week, 
Saudi businessman 'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Sulayman acquired a 
1-percent stake in the French petrochemical giant ELF, the 
privatization of which started last Tuesday [1 February], and 
thus enriched his already well-stocked portfolio, which includes 
2 percent of Accor and Club Med. 
  In sum, Arab financiers' interest in Europe is on the rise 
again. Attracted by the recession and the devaluation of the 
currencies of some European countries, investment companies, 
commercial banks, and businessmen have thrown themselves into 
the pursuit of profitable pieces of business. First among them 
is Nemir Kirdar, of Iraqi origin and former manager of Chase 
Manhattan of London, who today heads Investcorp, a powerful 
investment company employing 70 financiers, all recruited at 
top-drawer prices from Salomon Brothers, Goldman-Sachs, and 
Morgan Stanley. In the last five years, the company, which is 
quoted on the Bahrain Stock Exchange, has invested 8.8 trillion 
lire in holdings in Europe. In its most recent operation, last 
fall--and in keeping with its philosophy of always buying 
distressed companies in order to put them back on their feet and 
reap substantial capital gains--it acquired 50 percent of the 
capital shares of Italy's Gucci company. The remainder was 
already in Investcorp's portfolio. 
  The case that most symbolizes this strategy was the 
acquisition of the Saks Fifth Avenue chain of department stores 
in the United States. On the verge of bankruptcy, the chain was 
sold to Investcorp by Bat Industries for less than 200 billion 
lire in 1989, and sold again two years later for approximately 
double that price. In its 12 years of life, Investcorp's 
stockholders have injected approximately 2 trillion lire into 
its capital, which is divided among Saudi Arabia (25 percent), 
Bahrain (24.5 percent), Arab Emirates (11.5 percent), and Qatar 
and Oman (7.5 percent each). The rest is shared among its 
executives. These include notables such as Kuwait's former prime 
minister, 'Abd-al-Rahman 'Atiki. Much of its capital is invested 
in the luxury sector, in big names such as New York's Tiffany's 
jewelry store and Germany's haute couture house Mondi. Marketing 
is also one of the sectors of major interest to Cem Cesmig, 
general manager for Europe, as his recent acquisitions 
demonstrate: Camelot Music, the U.S. chain of music stores, and 
Great Britain's Sports &amp; Recreation and Circle K Corporation 
stores. 
  Stockholders are happy with Investcorp's performance. In 
1993, profits increased by 7.3 percent to 110 billion lire, and 
the return on its capital investments was 19.3 percent. Not all 
its deals, however, have had a happy ending. For example, the 
French company Chaumet, bought five years ago on the brink of 
collapse, continues to weigh down the financiers' portfolio with 
losses hovering around 180 billion lire a year. And the listing 
of the Swiss company Breguet on the stock market, planned for 
last fall, was cancelled owing to Breguet's financial 
difficulties. 
<H5>  The King's Friend </H5>
  Different but just as aggressive has been financier Rafic 
Hariri's expansion during these years. He chose on the one hand 
to build strong ties with the French banking system, and on the 
other to build a fortune, operating between France and England, 
in the real estate sector. 
  A native of Lebanon, where he was minister of foreign 
affairs 
and prime minister, Hariri works mostly on behalf of King Fahd 
of Saudi Arabia. Among other things, the king received a letter 
around the middle of January, signed by Italian Prime Minister 
Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, inviting him to participate, by way of 
investments, in the Italian privatization process. 
  Hariri has bought, for King Fahd, all of Europe's most 
famous 
hotels, from the Ritz to the Royal Monceau of Paris, to 
Brussels's Sheraton, to Montecarlo's Palace. All of these 
holdings, totaling 400,000 square meters, are controlled by the 
French real estate holding company Fradim, which in turn is 
controlled by the HPI financial intermediary. HPI also controls 
industrial holdings in French plastic packaging and oil products 
processing enterprises, for the account of Saudi Arabia. 
  Even more significant are Hariri's stock cross-links with 
Compagnie de Suez and Paribas (3 percent and 5 percent 
respectively). Together with Banque Indosuez, of which he is a 
director, Hariri controls the Banque Francaise de l'Orient, 
which is the operating arm for the development of Franco-Saudi 
interests in all the Far East countries. 
  "At any rate," Martin Glen of Lehman Brothers of London told 
IL MONDO, "the oil sector remains the Arab countries' only real 
strategic investment in Europe. Holdings in other sectors are, 
for the most part, strictly financial." In fact, among the 
privatizations recently launched by France, those selected by 
those countries' investors were precisely oil companies such as 
ELF and Total. In these operations, the principal players were 
private groups from the United Arab Emirates, which at this 
point in time have the most liquidity at their disposal. Abu 
Dhabi, through the ADIA, whose capital is approximately 260 
trillion lire, is the richest of them all. It controls three 
quarters of the 2.2 million barrels of oil extracted daily by 
the Federation of Emirates. In France, the ADIA, together with 
the Qatar government, has bought 40 percent of the Compagnie 
Petrochimique du Nord. And, again in France, the ADIA has 
founded Siparex, a financial holding and assets management 
intermediary. 
  Real estate represents another sector of interest but, in 
this case, to the Arab banks instead, and in particular the 
Lebanese banks, which at the European level are concentrated 
mostly in France. After the failure of several institutions that 
during the 1980s lived off the arms trade, a new generation of 
Lebanese banks is taking root in Paris. These include Banorab, 
Audi, Saradar, and Faransa, private banks that are prospering on 
financing the reconstruction of Beirut and Kuwait. "The Lebanese 
banks," Rashid Hossan, of London's Saudi Research Institute, 
told IL MONDO, "are now asserting themselves as the entire Arab 
world's financial reference point in Europe." The management of 
Arab fortunes abroad is becoming the new business of many Arab 
banks in the West. In London, observers connected with Morgan 
Stanley and Lehman Brothers speak of the birth of a kind of 
second financial center that is gradually taking place there. 
Shortly before Christmas, the Bahrain and Kuwait Bank, 
International Investors, and the Arab Banking Corporation opened 
private banking offices in the triangle that runs from Oxford 
Street to Hyde Park and up to Regent Street. "Huge quantities of 
money are pouring into London at this time," adds Martin Glen of 
Lehman Brothers, "from Bahrain builders, Qatar gas 
industrialists, and big importers in Dubai, a platform for 
trading with Iran. The Arab banks, too, want to profit from the 
fat commissions charged in this sector." 
<H5>  The Shaykh's Troubles </H5>
  Faced with the resurgence of activism on the part of the 
private operators, some big government-connected investors have 
brought their operations to a halt, so as to initiate a profound 
internal reorganization. There is, for example, the Kuwait 
Investment Office (KIO), the financial operating arm of Kuwaiti 
Shaykh Jaber Al-Sabah whose assets in the mid-1980s topped $100 
billion and now total less than half that amount. The Gulf war 
wounds are only partly responsible for their collapse. In recent 
years, KIO's managers have made several strategic blunders. 
  One was that of associating themselves in Spain with the 
unscrupulous Catalan financier Xavier de La Rosa, with whom, in 
1986, the Kuwaiti institution raided the Torras group, a 
conglomerate with interests mainly in the real estate, chemical, 
and paper industry sectors. In the six years that followed, the 
Torras group lost more than $4 billion (slightly less than 7 
trillion lire at the present rate of exchange), owing mainly to 
de La Rosa's turbid management of the company's funds. Another 
was the acquisition of 21.7 percent of British Petroleum [BP] 
for the account of the Kuwait Petroleum Company toward the end 
of the 1980s, in the hope of thus circumventing London's tax 
authorities (operations by government institutions are 
tax-exempt). The Kuwaitis were counting on reselling more than 
half of their share of BP free of any payment to the British 
Treasury. Three years ago the sale was completed. But the London 
government did not play ball, and, last September, took the case 
to court, impelling KIO to come to terms. Just last week, an 
agreement was outlined that will cost the Kuwaitis not less than 
1 trillion lire. 
  And in Germany, where Shaykh Al-Sabah's financiers hold 
substantial stakes in groups such as Daimler-Benz, Volkswagen, 
and Hoechst, they are having to cope with the serious crisis 
confronting Metallgesellschaft, the metallurgical company that 
in its 1992/93 financial year alone lost almost 2 trillion lire. 
KIO owns one fifth of Metallgesellschaft's capital stock. 
  In the wake of an intervention by Kuwait's parliament, many 
of those managing the shaykh's capital have rolled. And the two 
new men in charge, Yusuf al-Awadi for KIO and Ali Rashid al-Badr 
for Kuwait Investment Authority [KIA] (the first subordinate to 
the second), are now having to restructure the portfolio in 
depth. In keeping with the new course, the capital increase that 
has been decided on to save Metallgesellschaft will not be 
subscribed by KIA (which controls the Kuwaiti holding). This 
will have the effect of reducing KIA's stake in that company. 
<H5>  The Colonel's Tricks </H5>
  The holdings of Libyan investment institutions have also 
undergone a profound restructuring. But the reasons in this case 
are attributable mainly to circumstances over which the 
institutions have no control. The embargo against Libya decreed 
by the UN, in order to obtain Tripoli's compliance with UN 
resolutions relative to terrorism, entered into effect around 
the beginning of last December, after a long arm-wrestle with 
Colonel Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi that gave his financiers ample 
time to dilute Libyan holdings abroad or to hide them in tax 
havens, and so avoid the freeze that would result from the 
embargo. 
  Last October, for example, an Oilinvest increase of 
exclusively Italian capital reduced the Libyan holding to a 
minority level. Tripoli's international activities in the oil 
sector are all concentrated in Oilinvest which has total annual 
billings of over 11 trillion lire. The operation was subscribed 
entirely by the other partners, namely: the Novara-based Armani 
Brothers oil group, which now holds 13 percent; shipowner 
Corrado Montanari; Mario Busenti, managing director of the 
Rome-based SIRM [Italian Maritime Radio Company]; Veneto 
entrepreneur Pietro Triboldi; and four foreign operators of the 
sector. Each of the latter seven partners now holds 6 percent, 
bringing this coterie's total holdings to 55 percent of 
Oilinvest's capital. The remaining 45 percent continues held by 
Libya. 
  Still not content, Tripoli's financiers carried out a 
similar 
operation on Tamoil, Oilinvest's principal holding. Again, an 
Italian coterie led by Armani, Montanari, and Triboldi acquired 
a total of 55 percent of Tamoil's shares. The latter two also 
acquired, respectively, the Tamoil Transport and Chempetrol 
Overseas companies, both from the Tamoil group. In spite of its 
ups and downs, however, Tamoil is not abandoning the expansion 
of its core business, oil: It has entered the lists, together 
with the API [Italian Oil Company], to take over the Cameli 
activities in the oil sector. 
  Lafico, which controls all Libyan interests in non-oil 
sectors, with international activities put at around 35 trillion 
lire, has also reconfigured them to be able to continue doing 
business. In London, for example, it has formed the Security 
International Retail Trading company, in partnership with a 
local company. In Italy, Lafico owns some tens of minor 
holdings. In its most recent operation, in 1993, it acquired the 
Ermitage Hotel, on the Adriatic riviera at Pesaro. And in the 
rest of Europe it has holdings such as 33 percent of the 
Metropole Hotel chain and, at least up to the start of the 
sanctions, controlling stakes in several companies. But it has 
also divested itself of some, as in the case of Kaelble, in 
which it has reduced its holding from 93 percent to a minority 
level. 

