Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] Gentlemen: Israel continues to play southern 
Lebanon like a card in a game of extortion. Sometimes, it 
offers to bargain over its occupation of this part of Lebanese 
territory in return for imposing its terms on Lebanon. At other 
times, it meets the Lebanese rejection of its terms with 
occasional, unwarranted military escalations. Today's and 
recent threats by military and political Israeli leaders to 
launch a large-scale aggression against southern Lebanon on the 
pretext of retaliating for the acts of Lebanese resistance are 
no exception to this rule. The latest threats are linked to a 
katyusha rocket which Israel claims fell in northern Galilee. 
According to Israeli allegations, that incident constituted a 
violation of an implicit agreement that followed its aggression 
against southern Lebanon nearly six months ago. 
  We do not believe that there is any need to pause to refute 
Israel's allegations about the existence or nonexistence of 
implicit agreements or anything of the sort. However, in this 
regard, it is ironic that while Israel claims that it views the 
incident as a grave violation of an alleged implicit agreement, 
it pays no attention to the basic and existing violation of a 
resolution issued by the highest international legitimate 
institution condemning Israel's occupation of southern Lebanon 
and demanding an immediate end to this occasion. Specifically, 
this resolution is UN Security Council Resolution No. 425. The 
alleged katyusha rocket incident is now being blown out of 
proportion in a manner that heralds the possibility of having 
this incident turn into a pretext to launch a comprehensive 
aggression. This would follow the example of previous incidents 
which were used as pretexts for launching large-scale Israeli 
attacks against Lebanon. 
  Israel's motives behind exploding the situation in southern 
Lebanon are clear. After its apparent failure to politically 
circumvent the results of the Geneva summit--which brought about 
a Syrian-U.S. understanding that stresses the constants of 
peace--Israel is now resorting to military means, hoping it 
would be more effective in producing such a result. In other 
words, Israel wants a way out from the bottleneck into which it 
has been pushed after that summit and to evade the requirements 
that it has to meet in view of the continued negotiations in 
Washington, even at the level of chief delegates. Israel is 
also engaged in repeated attempts to shirk the Madrid formula 
and calls for secret negotiations and other known Israeli 
demands. 
  Therefore, the Israeli media's exaggeration of the katyusha 
incident speaks of serious aggressive intentions that threaten 
to torpedo not only the political achievements of the Geneva 
summit, but also the peace process as a whole. We do not 
believe that anyone in the world doubts Israel's responsibility 
for the current escalation in the south. This escalation is a 
result of its continued occupation of that part of the Lebanese 
territory and of its recent escalation of artillery and air 
strikes against various Lebanese villages and townships. The 
real danger does not lie in a katyusha rocket falling in 
northern Galilee, but in the continued occupation and the 
continued Israeli attacks on Lebanese lives and property. 
  If Israel really wishes to put an end to the bloody cycle of 
violence in southern Lebanon, this can be achieved through the 
current negotiations in Washington. These negotiations provide 
the best means to find a solution to the situation not only in 
the south, but also on all fronts of the Arab-Israeli conflict. 
This will be possible only if Israel decides to abide by the 
principles and bases without which no just, comprehensive peace 
can be established; namely, the land-for-peace principle and 
compliance with the resolutions of international legitimacy. 
  Military escalation cannot be curbed by threatening to blow 
up the situation and turn matters upside down, but by exploiting 
the chance provided by the Washington negotiations to establish 
peace. Whoever wants to see things explode evidently wants to 
bury the negotiations, irrespective of any empty talk about 
peace, and does not want peace to prevail in this turbulent and 
war-torn region. 

