BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Janina Paradowska: "Following President-SLD </F>
Battle: Fluctuations of Tension"] 
  [Text] Finales are always of the same nature as the 
battle itself. The president's battle with the Democratic Left 
Alliance [SLD]--I am saying that because it was SLD that was 
really the opponent and not the Sejm as such--was ugly, with the 
finale being not much prettier. 
  Difficult political issues should not be resolved at 
rallies, 
whereas Lech Walesa's meeting with the SLD Parliamentary Club 
was mainly just that, a rally. One must admit, by the way, that 
both sides felt quite good in each other's company, and they 
tried to equalize the level of both the questions and the 
answers. 
  In any event, the stakes at the meeting were not too high. 
The presidential idea of dissolving parliament made it possible 
to make up scenarios based on fantastic stories: "Consider 
yourselves dissolved," the president could say. "We absolutely 
do not consider ourselves dissolved," the members of parliament 
would most probably reply. What next? "Consider yourself 
recalled, President!" "I absolutely do not consider myself 
recalled, and I am staying on at the Belweder." At this point, 
the problem of the way of eviction could emerge--I mean both the 
eviction from the building on Wiejska Street [Sejm headquarters] 
and from the Belweder. The problem of eviction has so far not 
been successfully resolved in Poland, so, one way or another, 
there will be a deadlock. 
  The outcome of the exchange of blows at the top of power 
that 
went on for several days is not entirely clear. We do know that 
Minister [presidential aide] Lech Falandysz will have less spare 
time because he will resume attending sessions of the National 
Assembly's Constitutional Commission. SLD Sejm deputies are 
bound to withdraw a draft law intended to restrict presidential 
powers, even though, for the time being, they are trying to 
temporize and wait for Lech Walesa to make the first move. If 
there are supposed to be no changes in the Constitution, let 
there be no changes whatsoever. Most probably, a draft law on 
amending the law on the Constitutional Tribunal will fall victim 
to that--it was submitted on the president's initiative and 
envisages that the tribunal's verdicts shall be final. Quite 
unexpectedly, it is going to be Professor Andrzej Zoll, the 
tribunal's apolitical chairman, who will have to take upon 
himself the burden produced by the politicians. Zoll has been 
unsuccessfully calling for a second reading of the law for a 
long time. 
  The SLD will not appoint Dariusz Rosati deputy prime 
minister 
and finance minister, which was known a long time ago, but it 
will introduce its ministers into the so-called presidential 
ministries. Because decisions regarding specific people were 
made somewhere behind Waldemar Pawlak's back, this will 
definitely greatly improve the frame of mind of the prime 
minister and the Polish Peasant Party [PSL], and it will also 
greatly improve the process of building mutual confidence 
between the distrusting partners. 
  After the fight, the participants did not look happy. The 
first round--everybody knows there are more to come--ended in a 
draw, with a slight advantage for Aleksander Kwasniewski. The 
president announced he will stir up more conflicts, after which 
he left for Szczecin with the goal of building the Non-Party 
Bloc in Support of Reforms wing, which is supposed to be a 
pillar on the road to his reelection. But, for the moment, the 
wing is very weak indeed, while the way the president is trying 
to make efforts to be reelected seems just too unconventional, 
even for Lech Walesa. 
  One can, of course, ask: Did we really need all this? If 
the president was after creating a conviction among a wide 
audience that the new authorities are also predisposed to 
political brawls and to taking part in wars at the top, one must 
admit that he was largely successful in achieving the goal. The 
SLD took an amazingly easy-going position while going into this 
battle. I am not quite sure whether the cracks in the SLD's 
public image--which did emerge, there is no doubt about it--are 
really worth the posts of three under secretaries of state. I 
am also not sure whether, even if the PSL manages to score very 
good results in the self-governmental elections, that could 
compensate for the view that has been spreading more and more, 
that the prime minister just chooses too often not to have a 
view on important issues. After all, we live in times of having 
to make decisions--and not the easiest ones, either. 
  But one must admit that the period of increasing political 
disorder was utilized by some in an extraordinarily useful way. 
Take the foreign economic cooperation minister: While not 
involving himself in ambition-driven fights, he, assisted by his 
legal experts, searched peacefully for gaps in the legal system, 
with the goal of establishing quite an interesting holding with 
a substantial contribution of budget monies. So the minister 
succeeded in demonstrating to his colleagues completely new 
prospects and an unconventional way of performing one's duty. 
Up to now, ministers tended not to involve themselves in 
looking for gaps in the legal system. Not so long ago, Leszek 
Balcerowicz even faced the prospect of being brought in front of 
the State Tribunal for his failure to get rid of some gaps in 
time, which resulted in an alcohol affair. As can be seen, we 
are at a completely new stage of building capitalism, and 
Professor Balcerowicz should start taking lessons from his 
younger, cutting-edge colleagues. 
  So, looking at the recent events from a certain historical 
perspective, one must conclude that the old is fighting the new. 
In terms of the old, we have definitely preserved our 
attachment to wars at the top, while the new cannot be described 
by any clear-cut terms yet, even though the term "interest" is 
appearing somewhere in the background and the term's 
associations with the interests of the state are not yet 
completely clear. 
  Meanwhile, we have reached an electricity-generating factor 
of 20, and it looks like power was taken over by the miners 
guarding conveyor belts in brown coal mines. The war has moved 
from the top down. It may now turn prove ruthless than the 
games over who should nominate a minister. 

