BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jerzy Markowski: "NATO Parliament Members in </F>
MON; Minister Kolodziejczyk in Cross Fire of Questions"] 
  [Text] A group of NATO parliament members who 
arrived in our country at the invitation of Professor Longin 
Pastusiak, chairman of the standing Polish delegation to the 
North Atlantic Assembly [NAA], were received on 19 April by 
National Defense Minister Piotr Kolodziejczyk and Jerzy 
Milewski, secretary of State in the Ministry of National Defense 
[MON]. The group is headed by NAA Chairman Loic Bouvard and 
Jose Pereira, chairman of the NAA Committee for Central Europe 
and the former USSR. 
  The meeting, which lasted over an hour, turned into a "cross 
fire" of questions concerning the defense system and security of 
our country directed to Miniser Kolodziejczyk. They concerned 
such specific issues as the content of the presentation document 
pertaining to our participation in the "Partnership for Peace" 
program, the financial issues in Poland's integration with NATO, 
civilian control over the Armed Forces and the competence of the 
individual establishments and divisions in Poland responsible 
for security, changes in the budget of MON, our capabilities of 
increasing our participation in UN peacekeeping operations, and 
our opinion on the practical implementation of the "Partnership" 
program in joint exercises, trainings, and the education of 
Polish officers in Western military academies. 
  As has been shown, the range of the topics was quite broad. 
Minister Kolodziejczyk stated that the presentation document, 
which discusses our participation in the "Partnership" in 
detail, has been submitted to the Council of Ministers and that, 
once it is accepted, it will be officially forwarded to Brussels 
and Mons. It has a greater practical than political dimension, 
even though our interpretation of the democratic control over 
the Armed Forces has been included in the document, as well. 
Minister Kolodziejczyk also recalled that a parliamentary 
debate on the defense system is expected to be held in mid-May; 
the main topic discussed will be the separation of civilian 
supervision over the Army from its purely military structures of 
command. "During the debate, we want to stress," said Minister 
Kolodziejczyk, "that security, unfortunately, costs a lot; 
however, money invested in it is far less than the cost of war." 
  The minister admitted that there exists a real chance to 
strengthen the MON budget with the sums necessary to implement 
the "Partnership" and to modernize the Army's technology. As 
for civilian control over the Army, which was probably of 
greatest interest to the NATO parliament members, the minister 
stated that he expects the debate to result in new legal 
regulations in this regard; right now, in force are still the 
regulations issued in 1967, which give the defense minister not 
only administrative but also military powers. "In Poland we 
suffer from an overabundance of politicians who are competent in 
the issues of defense," added Piotr Kolodziejczyk. He 
illustrated this problem with the example of himself and 
emphasized that "this is a temporary state, which is bound to 
change." 
  The ministry's budget, which the guests asked about, is 
consistently decreasing. Since 1986, it has decreased by 60 
percent and right now amounts to 2.1 percent of the state 
budget. This information of the minister simply amazed the 
guests. They also scrupulously noted the words by P. 
Kolodziejczyk when he said that the West is absolutely closed to 
technical and technological cooperation in the area of the 
modernization of our Army. "If the condition of integration 
with the West is standardization, how can this condition be met 
if one is denied cooperation in this area?" the minister asked. 
  Military cooperation with our neighbors was also very highly 
evaluated: We are not running a race for NATO with them. We are 
interested in their integration with the organization as much as 
we are in our own. This was underscored by Minister Milewski, 
who also drew attention to the need to avoid the "gray zone" as 
soon as possible. This zone is becoming a natural temptation for 
Russia's expansion. As for our participation in peacekeeping 
missions, it was said that we have been a part of them for 
years, and it is not a matter of our willingness to increase our 
participation. It is, rather, a matter of cost. The UN is not 
famous for refunding incurred costs on time. It must be 
remembered that, because MON's budget is so small, it is 
difficult to credit such operations. 
  The NATO parliament members were obviously satisfied with 
the 
openness and substantiveness of the discussion in MON, which is 
of considerable importance in winning new supporters of the 
stand we have taken in our striving for integration with NATO. 

