Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Norway wants to increase Nordic cooperation on 
the agricultural problems faced in the EU [European Union] 
negotiations. Norwegian Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland 
had talks on this with Prime Minister Esko Aho in Helsinki 
today. In Brussels, the negotiations between Norway and the EU 
on agriculture and whaling are difficult. Markku Lehto reports 
on the Norwegian prime minister's visit to Helsinki. 
  [Lehto] The Norwegian prime minister was, above all, looking 
for a cooperative partner in Finland today to solve the 
agricultural problems in the EU membership negotiations, because 
during the final stages of the negotiations, agricultural 
problems proved to be difficult. To seek a partner here is 
natural because Norwegian and Finnish aims at the EU negotiating 
table are similar concerning questions of agriculture, Prime 
Minister Brundtland says. [passage omitted] 
  According to Brundtland, it is important for both countries 
to try and seek special EU status for agriculture in the north. 
According to Brundtland, cooperation between Norway and Finland 
could be established in the agricultural transitional period and 
the length of these transitional periods. Brundtland is to 
continue talks about these questions with Prime Minister Esko 
Aho in connection with the Winter Olympics in Lillehammer. 
[passage omitted] 
  It is clear that Brundtland's government cannot present any 
sort of results to the national referendum from the negotiations 
in Brussels. The prime minister herself is convinced that the 
final result of the negotiations is decisive. [passage omitted] 
  Brundtland says that it is necessary that people get answers 
to questions concerning their future and future rules. As long 
as there are unclear points on these matters, it will show as 
uncertainty and in a negative way in the opinion polls. 
Brundtland also says that Norway has caught up with the 
advantage that Finland and Sweden had when they started the EU 
negotiations earlier. She believes that the result of the 
negotiations will be reached together with Finland and Sweden by 
the beginning of March. 

