BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 30 KYODO -- Japan has told the 
International Whaling Commission (IWC) that it plans to begin 
next year catching some 100 minke whales in the northern Pacific 
for scientific research purposes, government sources said 
Saturday [30 April]. 
  Japan notified the plan to the IWC's scientific committee, 
which will meet in Mexico from 2 May, the sources said. 
  The program calls for catching 100 minke whales in waters 
south of the Kamchatka Peninsula in a three-month period from 
June to September 1995, to be followed by similar operations in 
the coming three to five years, the sources said. 
  An official of the Fishery Agency said Japan will reconsider 
the plan if the IWC adopts a resolution of opposition or urges 
Japan to have second thoughts. 
  The IWC is a 34-nation international forum for coordinating 
policies on whale conservation and consumption. The forum has 
adopted resolutions almost every year urging Japan and Norway to 
halt or rethink its research whaling. 
  The government sources said Japan decided to advance the 
latest plan as it needs to collect information on the number of 
minke whales in the waters and about their genes. 
  The Tokyo-based institute of cetacean research, commissioned 
by the Fisheies Agency, will oversee the research whaling 
conducted by Kyodo Senpaku, a private joint venture grouping 
various corporate whale catchers, they said. 
  Researchers aboard a fleet of whaling boats will investigate 
the length of minke whales, their gender, the ingredients in 
their stomachs, while analyzing their genes and the density of 
organic chlorinated chemicals accumulated in their bodies, they 
said. 
  The whale meat from the annual catches will be sold later 
for 
domestic commercial consumption, they said. 
  The convention governing the IWC authorizes research 
whaling, 
while keeping a ban on commercial whaling. The Japanese fleet 
has been catching an annual quota of 300 whales under the 
category of research whaling since 1987. 
  Many IWC member states and environmentalist groups have 
asked 
Japan and Norway to halt what they call research whaling, saying 
the two countries have been catching whales for commercial 
purposes under the pretext of scientific whaling. 
  Japan has asked for the IWC's authorization of its request 
to 
catch 50 minke whales a year in order to secure an international 
endorsement of its plan to resume its traditional coastal 
whaling. 
  However, its plea went nowhere in the face of opposition 
from 
opponents of whaling within the IWC. 
  An official of the Fishery Agency said, ``the government 
submitted its minke whaling plan to the IWC scientific committee 
as information of minke whale stocks in the north pacific is 
scarce.'' 
  ``Japan will continue to demand authorization of an annual 
catch of 50 minke whales for the sake of a resumption of coastal 
whaling as a separate request from the latest program for the 
north Pacific,'' he said. 
  Coastal whaling by Japan has been suspended since 1988, when 
Japan withdrew its protests against the IWC resolution to put a 
moratorium on commercial whaling. 
  A minke whale measures an average 8 to 9 meters, and weighs 
10 tons. Japan and Norway have argued that minke whale stocks 
have not been depleted as they have not been subjected to 
extensive catching in the past. 
  Japan has argued that its demand for an annual catch of 50 
minke whales is legitimate as its claim to coastal whaling by 
fishermen is essentially identical to those by the Inuit Eskimo 
Community in Alaska as well as other whaling communities. 
  Environmentalists have argued that the amount of whale meat 
available on the Japanese market is much greater than the amount 
of meat provided from research whaling. 
  ``Because whale meat becomes available as the result of 
research whaling, it provides a cover to whale meat provided by 
smuggling and poaching,'' said an official of the Japan branch 
of the World Wildlife Fund. 

