Language: <F P=105> Dari </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Dear listeners, with the passage of every day the 
need for the disarming of Karmal-Dostam-Golboddin's militia 
becomes more urgent. The BAKHTAR Information Agency political 
commentator writes: 
  The shameful past of the leaders of the conspirators against 
the Islamic state, and the savagery they inflicted on our nation 
over the previous 14 years and over the past one and half years, 
has made all heroic mojahedin of the country join in fighting 
against the lackeys of the aliens after the declaration of jihad 
and to eliminate the last pockets of Karmal-Dostam-Golboddin's 
lackey militia. National traitor Karmal, who has once again 
embarked on conspiracy and crime, is the most defamed element. 
He was an instrument in the hands of the Russian aggressors and 
became a tool for their invasion of our country. His puppet 
force was crushed under the feet of the mojahedin, and he has 
become a shameful figure in history. 
  Golboddin Hekmatyar has resorted to numerous coups and 
allied 
himself each time with an anti-national element. Over the one 
year and eight months since the Islamic revolution, he has 
washed the city of Kabul in blood many times, and each time has 
come up with various pretexts to satisfy his ill intentions. 
This time he has allied himself with national traitor Karmal 
and has revealed his features. 
  Abdorrashid Dostam, a lackey of the communists and the 
murderer of [words indistinct], has this time followed the 
instruction of national traitor Karmal and hatched a conspiracy 
[passage indistinct] 
  Karmal-Golboddin's defamed and anti-Islamic militia fire 
rockets and drop bombs on civilians and specific government 
installations in retaliation for their defeats. These acts, 
which are a product of their savage characteristics, have been 
used against our Muslim nation in the past as well. However, 
one thing is clear to all: The 14 years of aerial bombardment by 
the invaders made the mojahedin braver and increased the 
resistance of our Muslim people, and now again these 
bombardments have increased the anger of our people and 
consolidated the ranks of the mojahedin. 
  There is one more issue. Some people make efforts to 
lengthen the life of the conspirators by trying to arrange a 
cease-fire. Now that they are on the verge of definite 
elimination, any kind [word indistinct] of cease-fire will mean 
giving further opportunity to their remnants. Past experience 
also shows that Golboddin Hekmatyar was saved from certain 
defeat every time by his foreign supporters. 
  It is true that if matters could be resolved through peace, 
this would be better than fighting. But only the total 
elimination of Karmal-Dostam's militia and the resolute decision 
of Golboddin not to resume fighting can be acceptable to the 
mojahedin. All those who have lost their lives during the 
confrontation against this conspiracy and those who fight in the 
first line of the armed jihad ask all those who have intervened 
in this direction and all state and military office holders not 
to accept this cease-fire without the elimination of the 
Karmal-Dostam-Golboddin militia. The country must be cleansed 
of the dirt of the remnants of the national traitor Karmal in 
order that our faithful people can live a peaceful life. 

