Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The U.S. Department of Justice has announced that a 
Central Intelligence Agency officer, Aldrich Hazen Ames, and his 
wife Maria, have been accused of spying for the former Soviet 
Union and later Russia. 
  It's an established rule worldwide that secret services 
don't 
comment on such events. It would be logical to turn to the 
United States Government for clarification about Russia's 
involvement in the case. Yet the interest of the press and the 
public at large in such incidents is natural. 
  Radio Moscow's reporter has asked Oleg Kalugin, former 
general of the KGB, the State Security Committee of the former 
Soviet Union, how he sees this incident. Oleg Kalugin is a 
well-known personality in this country. He was an active member 
of the former Supreme Soviet. Oleg Kalugin says that when it 
comes to intelligence affairs, the general public may only guess. 
  [Begin Kalugin recording, in Russian with superimposed 
English translation] My opinion is based on TV and radio 
reports, including CNN, whose programs I often watch at home. 
Undoubtedly Mr. Ames is a man in the know, and I see his arrest 
both as a failure and a success of the United States 
counterintelligence, which has been able to unmask an 
experienced spy who held an important position in the American 
CIA. 
  But when I hear a demand by U.S. officials that Russian 
diplomats should be recalled, I think this is an overreaction. 
Russian intelligence officers have been arrested for spying for 
foreign countries more than once. In such a situation the 
Russian foreign ministry has never urged the Americans to recall 
their diplomats, unless they were caught redhanded. 
  I do believe the case has done big moral damage to the 
United 
States. However, I would prefer not to overdramatize the 
situation, and I don't think that Russian-American relations 
will worsen as a result of the incident. I think this episode 
is a legacy of the Cold War. That legacy is still with us and 
will be for some time. [end reocrding] 

