Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Dominique Garraud Report: "Defense: A White Paper </F>
Controlled by Mitterrand"] 
  [Text] The government's defense white paper for the years 
2010-2015 is coming up the home straight. Today, Francois 
Mitterrand will convene his second and last defense council 
which will include his prime minister, the foreign, defense and 
economy ministers, and France's main military leaders. At the 
same time, it was announced yesterday in the Official Journal 
that Edouard Balladur and Francois Leotard will on 23 February 
be presenting the document to the National Assembly defense 
committee and the Senate's foreign affairs committee, which have 
been specially convened for the event. This announcement 
appears to indicate that the white paper will suffer no setbacks 
due to cohabitation. 
  A demonstration of a consensus "a la francaise" on defense, 
this agreement is however the result of a compromise imposed by 
the president, especially on the central issue of the nuclear 
deterrent force. RPR [Rally for the Republic] deputy Jacques 
Baumel, the vice president of the National Assembly's defense 
committee, said that the white paper would be "the bastard child 
of cohabitation," and the facts would seem to support his 
statement. After being voluntarily excluded from the process of 
studying and drawing-up the paper which was assigned to some 100 
experts in military affairs, Francois Mitterrand carefully 
waited for the moment to make his mark. The general secretary 
of the Elysee, Hubert Vedrine, indirectly participated in the 
development of the document, keeping in close contact with 
Nicolas Bazire, Edouard Balladur's principle private secretary. 
The head of state had already met with the defense council on 8 
December to discuss the white paper. 
  Francois Mitterrand underlined this role of "guardian of the 
doctrine" firstly by banning the resumption of nuclear testing 
before the end of his presidential mandate, flying in the face 
of all political and military advice from the parliamentary 
majority. He then again stressed the role just before the NATO 
summit at the start of January in Brussels. In an interview 
with AFP on 9 January, the head of state reaffirmed not only his 
"hostility" to resuming nuclear testing but also described the 
future tools of the French nuclear deterrent force: "In 1992 I 
decided to provide our next-generation submarines with a new 
missile (...) in the knowledge that this missile could also be 
installed on the Albion platform." 
  In short, this concerns the continued and accelerated 
development of the M5 ballistic missile intended to succeed the 
M45 by the year 2000 on submarines, and to develop a land-based 
version, the MS5 to replace the current S3D's on the Albion 
platform. This option has once again been pulled apart by a 
number of military chiefs and certain members of the 
parliamentary majority who would rather quite simply shut Albion 
down and modernize and develop the airborne force currently 
equipped with mid-range missiles (ASMP). 
  Moreover, it is no coincidence the Francois Mitterrand 
omitted to mention the airborne force in his interview. For 
months now, he has been careful to avoid the so-called French 
"weak to strong" doctrine (at one time opposing the tens of 
thousands of Soviet warheads) from becoming a "strong to weak or 
mad" deterrent which implies the modernization of the French 
arsenal with miniature and "decapitating" charges that could be 
carried by combat aircraft. 
  With the backing of Edouard Balladur, who, it seems, is 
little inclined to follow the (essentially RPR) promoters of 
doctrinal change, the white paper should remain faithful to the 
initial doctrine, including the delivery of an "ultimate 
deterrent force." However, it will also stress the French desire 
to conclude a total nuclear test ban treaty. As for components 
of the nuclear force (air, sea, and submarine), it should 
advocate their reduction to two from three, although without 
specifying the one that would remain alongside the nuclear 
missile-launching submarines.... 
  These details will have to be provided in the military 
planning law for 1995-2000 which should be put before parliament 
next June. This plan must decide on the finances that will be 
earmarked over five years for the development of new weapons. 
No doubt that Francois Mitterrand will ensure that the M5 
program is not sacrificed. 
  The planning law will take its lead from the white paper, 
which describes the restructuring of the defense tool according 
to the evolution of the strategic situation. There are six 
possible scenarios: from a major crisis (that could require a 
nuclear response) to a crisis of sovereignty (in the French 
overseas departments and territories), and including regional 
crises. From this it should be possible to deduce the formats 
of the forces capable of intervening (quickly and far) and of 
managing several crises at once. These directions will ensure a 
certain autonomy for the conventional forces which, until now, 
have been completely separate from the nuclear deterrent option 
in the framework of an East-West conflict. The philosophy 
behind the white paper is therefore to be found in Francois 
Leotard's constantly repeated statement that he does not want to 
see France "lowering her guard." 
  The problem is how to finance these ambitions. Here, the 
outlook is gloomy, given the requirements of Edouard Balladur's 
five year law on public spending control. A little while ago, 
the chiefs of staff were mentioning 5 percent as a figure for 
the annual volume increase in military arms expenditure between 
1995 and 2000. According to the national arms delegation, a 
"scant 3 percent" is needed to maintain the programs already 
launched (the Rafale fighter, the Charles de Gaulle aircraft 
carrier, the Leclerc tank, the Tigre/Gerfaut and NH90 
helicopters, next-generation submarines, and ballistic missiles) 
for which the global cost would be around 574 billion French 
francs. The defense ministry has, for its part, envisaged 
scenarios based on 5 percent, 3 percent and 1 percent rises, and 
rises of even less that 1 percent. Francois Leotard today says 
that he "cannot do" with a rise of less than 1.5 percent. 
  That is the paradox: However smooth cohabitation was on the 
drafting of the white paper, a nice intergovernmental and 
intramajority dispute on the military planning law is to be 
expected. 

