Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Slobodan Kovacevic] </F>
  [Text] After his visits to Zagreb and Sarajevo, Yoshimo 
Akashi, special UN envoy and the newly appointed coordinator of 
UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces], accompanied by General 
Briquemont, is currently visiting Pale. Talks with the president 
and the vice president of the Srpska republic Radovan Karadzic 
and Nikola Koljevic, respectively, are under way. Slobodan 
Kovacevic reports: 
  [Kovacevic] The first meeting between the special envoy, Mr. 
Akashi, and the leaders of the Srpska republic was held, as we 
were told, in an atmosphere characterized by mutual 
understanding. All dilemmas and claims about Akashi allegedly 
not being able to arrive in Pale were clarified at the very 
beginning. 
  Mr. Akashi expressed concern about the current position of 
UNPROFOR in the former Bosnia-Herzegovina and the increasingly 
frequent attacks on the Blue Helmets. He also demanded greater 
guarantees from the Serbs for the transit of humanitarian 
convoys, as well as the free movement of civilians. He promised 
that UNPROFOR will do everything possible for Sarajevo airport 
to indeed be used for humanitarian purposes. 
  Radovan Karadzic, president of the Srpska republic, told 
Akashi and Briquemont that the Serbian side could accept 
Sarajevo being placed under the UN protectorate under certain 
conditions, provided that a cease-fire, that is, imminent peace, 
be established immediately. Karadzic also expressed assurances 
that such meetings with top UNPROFOR representatives will be 
more frequent so that the Serbian side and UNPROFOR establish 
trust, especially regarding Sarajevo airport. 
  Karadzic briefly told journalists that Akashi and Briquemont 
confirmed that Sarajevo airport will in the future indeed be 
used only for humanitarian purposes and for the needs of the 
United Nations. 
  Let us also say that a regular session of the assembly of 
the 
Srpska republic is also being held here in Pale. The agenda 
includes numerous issues regarding the internal organization of 
the Srpska republic. A particularly important discussion, and 
perhaps the adoption of a special document on the continuation 
of the peace negotiations in Geneva, is expected late in the 
afternoon. 

