BFN 

  [Text] Brasilia, 7 Jun (AE) -- The Chamber of Deputies 
tonight approved, through an agreement among party leaders, the 
new law punishing economic power abuse, the so-called antitrust 
law. After lengthy negotiations among party leaders, in which 
the government also participated, congressmen voted on the bill 
that had been waiting to be voted since April 1993. The bill 
now passes to the Senate. Senate President Humberto Lucena 
(PMDB-PE) [Brazilian Democratic Movement Party-Pernambuco] said 
that voting will take place next week. President Itamar Franco 
threatened to promulgate a provisional measure with the new 
legislation if Senate does not approve the bill by the end of 
this week. 
  Chamber of Deputies President Inocencio de Oliveira 
(PMDB-PE) 
did his best to ensure an accord among the parties to make 
voting feasible. The PPR [Progressive Renewal Party], however, 
opposed the bill and requested a postponement of the voting. 
Oliveira and PPR leader Marcelino Romano (SP) [Sao Paulo] 
quarreled during the plenary session when Oliveira prevented 
Romano from using the microphone. Oliveira then excused himself 
because he needed the presence of PPR deputies to be able to 
begin voting. 
  Romano pointed out an unconstitutional aspect of the bill, 
because it transforms the Administrative Council for Economic 
Defense (CADE) into a self-supported government organization in 
the same text as it defines a series of economic power abuse 
cases and punishment of people and companies that perpetrate 
them. In spite of this the bill was approved without 
modifications. The seven members of the CADE, including its 
president, will be appointed by the president of the Republic 
and, after their names are approved by the Senate, will have a 
two-year mandate. 
  The accord reached today between the government and the 
party 
leaders reduced the maximum fine to be applied to companies 
guilty of economic power abuse. Instead of paying of between 10 
and 50 percent fees of their gross profits, as contemplated in 
the original text, the fine was reduced to between 1 and 30 
percent, at the request of congressmen. The index for 
participation in the market, which defines market monopoly, was 
increased from 20 percent to 30 percent. The CADE can prevent 
the merging of companies that result in creation of oligopolies 
in the market. The CADE has 30 days to announce its decision in 
each case. The text states that preventive arrest of 
entrepreneurs responsible for economic power abuse can be 
requested as long as there evidence against them. This 
sanction, however, will only be applied to crimes against the 
economy order and no longer against the people's pockets, as 
previously contemplated. 
  Companies, including the state-owned ones, that do not 
respond to requests for data within a period of 15 days may be 
fined up to 10,000 Reference Fiscal Units (Ufir). The bill 
gives CADE more power to define what is an abusive price 
increase. This will allow the council to file several lawsuits 
that currently could not be filed. 

