BFN 

  [Text] Ulaanbaatar, April 28 (OANA-MONTSAME) -- The Prime 
Minister of Mongolia P. Jasray with his spouse has given a 
dinner at the state residence in honour of the Premier of the 
State Council of the People's Republic of China (PRC) Li Peng 
and his spouse Ju Lin staying in the country on an official 
visit. During the dinner the Prime Minister of Mongolia P. 
Jasray and his honoured guest Li Peng have exchanged speeches. 
  The Mongolian Prime Minister P. Jasray in his speech at the 
dinner welcomed on behalf of the state, government and himself 
the Premier of the State Council of PRC Li Peng and his spouse 
Ju Lin. He said that he has noted with satisfaction that over 
the last years due to the efforts of both the countries the 
bilateral relations are being intensified with strengthening its 
legal basis and cooperation being developed in all spheres. 
  The development of good neighbourly friendly relations and 
cooperation with the PRC has been and will be one of the 
priorities of the foreign policy of Mongolia. The deceased Zhou 
Enlai being the premier and prominent statesman of China paid an 
official visit to Mongolia in 1960 during which the Treaty on 
Friendship and Mutual Assistance between the two countries was 
signed. 
  34 years have been passed since that and now we with Mr Li 
Peng staying here on an official visit are going to sign a 
treaty on friendly relations and cooperation between Mongolia 
and the PRC which is to serve as the important political basic 
document for long term bilateral relations between the two 
countries. Moreover a number of agreements strengthening the 
legal basis of our relationship are to be signed as well. We 
have no doubts that the present visit by the premier of the 
State Council of China to the country which is the continuation 
of the traditional and being recently developed high-level and 
top meetings between Mongolia and China would be essential in 
the history of relationship of the two countries. 
  Nowadays Mongolia has chosen the path of democracy and is 
experiencing quite a lot of hardships in the transition to a new 
system of market relations. The prime minister expressed his 
confidence that the industrious labour and efforts exerted by 
the Mongolian people as well as the support and assistance by 
the world community would lead to a success. The prime minister 
of Mongolia stressed in this reference that he would like to 
express his gratitude to the Government of China, the Chinese 
people and personally Mr Li Peng for the respect of the choice 
of the Mongolian people, the humanitarian assistance and 
disinterested credits granted to support the efforts for 
overcoming the difficulties experienced by the country. 
  In his speech P. Jasray also greeted the progress of the 
policy of renovation being pursued with Chinese specific 
character by the PRC and directed at the development of the 
economy and raising the living standards of its people. The 
peaceful foreign policy of the PRC is an important factor in 
ensuring peace, stability and progress in the Asia-Pacific 
region as well as throughout the world said in conclusion the 
Mongolian Prime Minister P. Jasray. The premier of the State 
Council of the PRC Li Peng in his speech said that while during 
the 45 years passed since the establishment of diplomatic 
relations between China and Mongolia there was a time when the 
bilateral relations had been developed in a wrong way due to 
certain historical reasons he is pleased to note that over the 
last years the leaders of the two countries have been paying 
regularly mutual visits, the exchange of people of different 
walks has been expanded greatly, the mutual understanding and 
trust is being ever increasing and a remarkable progress is 
recorded to have been provided in all spheres of cooperation, 
contacts and ties which all is of great profit to both the 
countries and the peoples of those countries. 
  It was not easy to attain the present day's level of 
relationship between China and Mongolia and we have grounds to 
place value on it. 
  The treaty on friendship and mutual assistance concluded 34 
years ago during the visit to this country by the Premier Zhou 
Enlai was of importance in the cause of developing the 
relationship between the two countries. And now we are going to 
sign a new treaty on friendly relations and cooperation between 
China and Mongolia. I am sure that this treaty would open a new 
page in the history of relationship between China and Mongolia, 
giving an impetus to the further development of bilateral 
relations and opening more widening perspectives for friendship 
and cooperation. 
  The Government of China is attaching much significance to 
the 
relationship of China and Mongolia and will exert proper efforts 
together with the Government of Mongolia for developing the good 
neighbourly and friendly relations and cooperation for a 
long-term period orienting them up to the 21st century. 
  We respect the path of development chosen by the Mongolian 
people. We are sure and we would like to wish success in that 
the Mongolian people would be able to cope with the provisional 
difficulties and will attain the objectives of restoring its 
economy and flourishing of the country. 

