CSO 

<F P=106> [Review of 1993 Economy] </F>
  [Text] The Chinese economy continued its rapid growth in 
1993 with a projected GDP gain of about 13 percent for the 
entire year. Macroeconomic regulation and control was highly 
effective and economic disorder has begun to correct itself. 
Overall things were moving in the right direction. 
  -- Macroeconomic regulation and control has begun to pay 
off. 
The national economy continued its fast growth. 
  The year 1993 of dramatic change for the Chinese economy. A 
previously over-extended macroeconomic climate gradually gained 
some breathing room as it achieved a state of equilibrium. At 
the beginning of the year, everybody was overflowing with 
enthusiasm, jockeying for opportunities, scrambling for fast 
growth, and trying to get its projects off the ground. The scale 
of construction was over-stretched and the economy raced ahead; 
the GDP expanded 14.1 percent in the first quarter compared to 
the same period a year ago. All social reproduction sectors 
showed signs of strong growth. At the same time, there were 
signals of stress in the macroeconomic climate. The government 
budget was out of balance, as were banking, materials supply, 
and foreign exchange. There was anxiety in every quarter that 
the economy had become overheated. In the second quarter, the 
economy continued its feverish growth, propelled by the twin 
engine of high investment and an inflated money supply. It was a 
time when things were happening fast and big. All leading 
economic indicators shot up. Meanwhile, inflationary pressures 
intensified and market prices climbed 10 percent, a sign that we 
had entered the danger zone. There was a feeling in all quarters 
that the economy had deviated from the right track. 
  Since the beginning of the third quarter, the central 
government unveiled a string of emergency measures designed to 
tighten macroeconomic regulation and control, which soon were 
having some effects on economic life as demonstrated mainly in 
these three ways: 
  1) Economic disorder has been corrected somewhat. The 
macroeconomic climate achieved a measure of stability and 
speculation of all kinds was beginning to be dampened. To begin 
with, the financial order improved and the financial situation 
stabilized in the course of time. Savings deposits rose notably, 
indiscriminate inter-bank borrowing and fund-raising and the 
arbitrary establishment of financial institutions have been 
checked. Second, there were improvements on the budget and tax 
collection front. The drive to enhance revenue was making 
headway. Revenue grew 11.4 percent in the first 3 quarter 
compared to 1.4 percent in the first two quarters of the year. 
Third, the circulation order also improved; the prices of 
capital goods stabilized, with some actually drifting downward. 
At present the prices of steel used in construction have dropped 
to 3,050 yuan from 4,100 yuan per ton in June and the falling 
trend continues to hold. Fourth, the stock market, futures 
market, real estate market, and development zones were put under 
more regularized management. The number of development zones in 
the eight coastal provinces, regions, and municipalities fell 
from 1,200 to a little over 200. Real estate prices in the 
coastal areas dropped 20 percent or so. 
  2) The overheated economy began to cool off while continuing 
to grow at a brisk pace. Industry, which was expanding at the 
explosive rate of 30.2 percent in June, grew 25.2 percent in 
July, 23.4 percent in August, and a mere 19.1 percent in 
September. Second, the investment explosion has been brought 
under control. The scale of investment has now been reduced to 
11 billion yuan or so. Third, the market is stable but active. 
Total social commodity retail sales rose 23.8 percent and 21.6 
percent in August and September, respectively, down from 28.4 
percent and 26.5 percent, respectively, in June and July. The 
decline in sales was even more striking in the capital goods 
market. In the first half of the year, capital goods sales rose 
almost 50 percent. In the third quarter; however, sales were 
expanding at just 27.3 percent. Fourth, government spending was 
being held under check. Total government expenditures increased 
12.5 percent in the first half of the year and 1.3 percent 
between July and September, bringing the increase rate for the 
entire first three quarters to 7.3 percent. Fifth, the growth of 
the money supply slackened markedly, indicating a softening of 
latent inflationary pressures. The money supply was actually off 
by 19.2 billion yuan between July and September compared to the 
same period in the preceding year. 
  3) Reform and the open policy deepened steadily. First, 
reform was in full swing. The macroeconomic reform plan was 
under way across the nation. Market reform was making striking 
progress nationwide. The transformation of the enterprise 
operating mechanism has begun,. Market regulation is now playing 
a much bigger role. Institutional construction is being 
intensified. Second, the open policy is alive and well. The 
utilization of foreign capital is growing and more foreign firms 
are investing in China. Both exports and imports increased 
steadily, amounting to $129.5 billion in the first three 
quarters, up 17.7 percent from the same period a year ago. 
Momentum remained strong on the tourism front, with both the 
number of foreign tourists visiting China and the amount of 
foreign exchange earned up sharply. 
  -- But China still faces severe economic problems today, 
notably in these three areas: 
  1) Market prices continued to rise rapidly in 1993, the 
third 
year since reform began that the inflation rate topped 10 
percent. At the moment prices are still surging ahead even as 
economic growth is slackening. This is why: 
  a) Prices are a delayed indicator. The current surge in 
prices is a delayed and synergistic reflection of what happened 
earlier--the feverish growth of the economy, a liberal monetary 
policy, and bold, extensive steps in price reform. First, the 
price level is related to whether the economy is up or down. 
This happens in developed nations as well as developing ones. 
Every time the economy picks up steam, so does inflation. 
Turning to the money supply, the money supply narrowly defined 
(M1) increased more than 30 percent in 1988. Correspondingly, 
prices rose sharply also. In 1990, when M1 expanded less than 10 
percent, price increases also moderated. Beginning in 1992, as 
M1 started ballooning at 20 to 30 percent, peaking at 41 percent 
in April this year, price increases followed suit as well. By 
August the expansion of the money supply had slowed to 19.7 
percent, a trend which is expected to be reflected in the price 
level beginning in the second quarter of next year. As for the 
magnitude of reform, by late last year 90 percent of the prices 
of consumer goods, 80 percent of the prices of capital goods, 
and 95 percent or so of the prices of import and export 
commodities on the market were regulated by the market. 
Commodity price reform, it can be said, was basically completed. 
When reform is this far-reaching, it will inevitably have an 
impact on the price level at some point in the future. As price 
reform slows down, its delayed effects will also moderate, along 
with its pressure on market prices. 
  b) The current market price situation is inseparable from 
the 
structural differences in commodity price increases resulting 
from the differences between commodity consumption elasticity 
and consumption pattern. On the one hand, consumer goods differ 
in consumption elasticity and hence the magnitude of price 
increases. On the other hand, differences in the consumption 
pattern also impact prices. As incomes rise, the pattern of 
consumption goes upscale. Judging from the market these days, it 
is the prices of commodities at the upper end of the market, 
including novelty items and new-style and new-design products, 
such as name-brand color television sets and fashion, that have 
risen the most, mainly as a result of high-consumption by 
high-income groups. People get the feeling that prices are 
rising rapidly and substantially. The two factors mentioned 
above reflect both cost-driven increases and demand-led 
increases. 
  c) The substantial depreciation of the renminbi. Early in 
the 
year the renminbi was changing hands at the rate of about $1 to 
7 yuan. By June, it was $1 to 11 yuan. At the moment the 
exchange rate has stabilized at $1 to 8.8 yuan or so. 
Depreciation is one of the reasons behind the latest round of 
sharp price increases. With the costs of imports rising sharply, 
people lose confidence in the Chinese currency and the market 
becomes jittery, driving up prices. In short, price increases 
these days are the result of both normal and abnormal factors 
that call for careful detailed analysis. 
  2) The adverse effects of macroeconomic regulation and 
control are making themselves apparent, primarily in these four 
ways: 
  a) Enterprises are strapped for funds and the shortfall is 
substantial. Since last June enterprise deposits have been 
slipping month after month. Between June and July deposits fell 
73.3 billion yuan. By the end of August enterprise deposits had 
risen 4.1 percent, close to the danger point. 
  b) There was a dissociation between production and sales and 
more and more bills were not being paid on time. 
  c) More and more enterprises have stopped production in part 
or in whole. Not only are large- and medium-sized state 
enterprises operating under capacity, but a number of small 
enterprises also do not have enough orders to fill their books. 
The idling of production capacity is a problem common to both 
the processing industry and raw materials industry. 
  d) Declining profitability. Nationwide profits realized by 
state enterprises within the budget dropped 22.1 percent in 
August from the level a month ago and fell another 10 percent at 
least in September compared with August. The proportion of 
money-losing enterprises rebounded to 36.7 percent. 
  3) The imbalance in economic development remains pronounced 
and progress in structural adjustment has been less than obvious. 
  a) Unevenness in regional development widened further as 
east 
China continued to pull ahead significantly of central and 
western China in terms of production, construction, consumption, 
and income. In the first three quarters, the coastal region 
accounted for over 60 percent of the increase in production, 
construction, and consumption nationwide. 
  b) Different sectors of the economy continued to develop at 
a 
markedly uneven pace. Still mired in stagnation, agriculture 
remains proportionately out of balance with industry. In 
transportation, energy, and other major raw materials 
industries, demand continue to outstrip supply. The "bottleneck" 
industries continue to hamper national economic development. 
  c) The inequitable distribution of income between urban and 
rural households deteriorated. The incomes of rural households 
inched upward and the rural market was not yet a reality. In 
contrast, at a time when "eating off the big rice pot" is still 
with us, township residents "eat off two rice pots"--the state 
and the enterprise--and profit themselves at the expense of the 
public in a variety of imaginative ways. Their incomes continue 
to soar, widening the gap with their rural counterparts. 
  d) The imbalance in international payments worsened. On the 
one hand, exports grew only modestly while imports shot up, 
exacerbating the gap between exports and imports and giving 
China its first trade deficit since 1990. The deficit from 
January through September amounted to $7 billion and, barring 
any effective actions, the nation's trade deficit for the entire 
year will certainly be even bigger. 
  The variety of imbalances mentioned above leaves no doubt 
that irrationalities in the economic system and operating 
mechanism are still marked. Not only will these imbalances 
hobble economic development in a big way in the near future, but 
they are also a hidden danger that may destabilize the entire 
economy. If they are not adjusted in time but are allowed to 
grow unchecked, they may greatly jeopardize the sustained, 
rapid, and healthy development of the Chinese economy and 
undermine social stability. 
  Overall assessment: The national economy stabilized and 
cooled off in 1993. There was no sign, however, of a sharp 
deceleration as it continued to grow at a fast pace. The economy 
expanded 13 percent or so for the entire year, investment grew 
by more than 40 percent, and social commodity retail sales rose 
over 20 percent. Correspondingly, retail prices jumped more than 
10 percent, probably about 13 percent, and China may end the 
year with its international payments on the minus side. In a 
word, the overall pattern of economic development in 1993 can be 
summarized as the "double thirteen," that is, a growth rate of 
about 13 percent and an inflation rate also of 13 percent. 
  Looking ahead toward 1994, the national economy will 
continue 
to grow strongly because the four basic factors driving the 
Chinese economy will remain. First, a large population gives the 
national economy a necessary boost in the form of a huge 
domestic demand. Second, the imbalance between the different 
sectors of the economy and the relative backwardness of the 
basic industries and the infrastructure mean that there is an 
urgent need for accelerated construction, which is a powerful 
engine of economic development right now and will also create 
the conditions for continuous economic growth further down the 
road. Third, reform will continue to be a major boost to the 
economy during the transition from the old system to the new. 
Production potential suppressed under the old system will 
continue to be released for some time to come. Fourth, the 
fundamental national policy of opening to the outside world. By 
further integrating the Chinese economy into the international 
economy, we will be able to continue to import and assimilate 
advanced foreign technology and managerial experience and absorb 
institutional resources to make up for our shortcomings, thus 
enhancing the domestic economy's development capacity. The 
economy is projected to continue to grow at more than 10 percent 
in 1994, with market prices rising 10 percent or so as well. 

