Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Count-down Starts for Launching of </F>
`H-2' Rocket on 1 February"] 
  [Text] The launch date, 1 February, is nearing for the 
"H-2", Japan's first completely domestically-made large rocket. 
Japan has poured the best of its technologies into this program 
with the hope of joining the group of nations now leading the 
aerospace industry. Its performance is about to be tested. 
However, even if the test launch is successful, there remains 
the cost problem, which is much higher compared to European 
countries and the United States. The country's entry into the 
satellite launching market will not be easy. Moreover, the 
technology involved is an adventurous one that could be 
implicated in military use. As such, eyes of foreign nations 
are watchful. The future of Japan's rockets for space efforts 
does not look easy. 
<H5>  Tribulations </H5>
  The H-2 is a two-stage rocket. Its first-stage's main 
engine, the "LE-7," uses high technology that has only been 
practically applied in the United States in its Space Shuttle 
and in Russia in its Energia. As such, development of that 
engine has been painstaking. 
  In August 1991, a prototype engine exploded while underoing 
pressure resistance tests at a factory in Aichi Prefecture. The 
accident caused Japan's first casualties in its space 
development history. Masao Fukuda, chief of the Engine Team at 
the Guided-Propulsion System Manufacturing Plant in Nagoya of 
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, recalled: "It was indeed 
incredible." 
  An overnight investigation revealed that an alloy-made pipe 
had cracks in its joint. The joint had been made by applying 
six to seven welds, but it was found that in the course of 
repeated welding, the alloy's composition, made of 10 different 
metals, had changed, thus reducing its strength. 
  That problem was later resolved by changing the method of 
making the pipe. But the engine exploded in a combustion test 
again in June 1992. The cause, once again, was bad welding of a 
pipe. Cracks developed inside the joint where high pressure and 
heat are concentrated. Mitsubishi's Takasa Research Institute 
had to develop a robot that could travel inside the pipe, much 
like a gastric camera, and scrape off bruises from welding. 
  A senior official of the National Space Development Agency 
of 
Japan [NSDAJ] recalled: "A failure in the engine's development 
was unpermissable from the standpoint of time and money, but if 
we did not experience those explosion accidents at the time, 
irreparable troubles could have occurred in actual future 
launchings." 
  Kenji Seyama, director of the Space Development Division in 
the Science And Technology Agency, said: "If the European 
countries, the United States, and Russia are professionals in 
rocket development technology, Japan is a fresh graduate of 
technical school." 
<H5>  19 Billion Yen </H5>
  The launching cost of the first H-2 rocket will run about 19 
billion yen. It is much higher than that ($100 million or about 
11 billion yen) needed for the Arian Rocket which is the leader 
in the industry. The NSDAJ issues very strict instructions to 
manufacturers, telling them, for instance, how to put bolts on, 
what tools to use, and how tight they should be. Invisible 
parts are required to be checked with X-ray machines. 
  Inspections by NADAJ technicians are scrutinized by the 
agency. Tomio Nakano, chief of the NSDAJ's Nagoya Office, said: 
"The processes are almost like court trials. We become judges 
sometimes, but then sometimes defendents also." 
  Akio Suzuki, chief of the Space Technological Department 
of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries' Nagoya Aviation and Space System 
Manufacturing Plant, said if they were to collect all the 
specifications stipulating items to be checked, and the report 
papers covering the mistakes they found and recording the 
troubleshooting methods used, the pile of papers, "would become 
three or four meters high." 
  Like its cars and semiconductors, Japan's rocket technology 
gained reliability as a result of strict quality control and 
successful launches. However, some people are concerned about a 
possible decline in quality control. 
  Suzuki said: "People who were working at the forefront of 
development have been promoted. It is very difficult to hand 
over to young engineers technology which requires strict quality 
control." 
  Development costs are also a concern. Jairun Claudon [name 
as published], Asia and Pacific regional representative of 
Arianne Space Corporation, the European rocket launching 
company, said: "The Japanese have been perfectionist in their 
rocket development. They are too nervous." 
  Hiroshi Imamura, director of "Rocket System," a company 
formed in July 1990 to launch the H-2 rocket, also commented on 
quality control, saying: "A review of cost savings may be 
needed." 
<H5>  Anxiety </H5>
  In November last year, staff members of the National Space 
Development Agency of Japan [NASDA] were astonished to read a 
WASHINGTON POST they found using a database search. 
  The article pointed out the possibility that Japan might 
turn 
to nuclear weapons to meet the threat posed by the DPRK's 
nuclear development program. It said the H-2 rocket "can be 
used as a missile and is a good match for the intercontinental 
ballistic missile (ICBM)." 
  NASDA officials became nervous, saying: "This is a 
misunderstanding. Japan's rocket development is strictly for 
peaceful purposes. It is unthinkable that we would use the H-2 
rocket as a missile." 
  Anxiety among some in the United States notwithstanding, the 
H-2 rocket is equipped with apparatus which has weapons 
applications. 
  One item is the "gyroscope," which is a core part of an 
inertial guidance system. It is used to determine the current 
location and flight position of the rocket and to calculate the 
orbit needed to meet a target. Although the United States 
provided gyroscopes to Japan, for a long time it refused to 
reveal its internal workings because, it argued, high-level 
military technology was involved. 
  However, Japan has developed a new type of rocket gyroscope 
which uses laser beams to cope with rapid changes in rocket 
position. 
  The United States did not provide Japan with the technology 
needed for reentry from outer space, either. Thinking that 
reentry technology could be used in the development of an ICBM, 
it stipulated in an official document signed in 1969 on space 
development cooperation between Japan and the United States, 
that "reentry technology and other related technology are 
excluded." 
  The first H-2 rocket will carry an experimental reentry 
machine [jikkenki]. The purpose is to develop a Japanese 
version of a space shuttle which will be called "HOPE." 
  NASDA regulations and Diet resolutions make clear that 
Japan's space development is strictly for "peaceful purposes." 
However, it is certain that Japan will obtain through its own 
work, technology which was previously the exclusive preserve of 
major nuclear states. 

