Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 18 (XINHUA) -- The performing arts in 
China are at a crossroads at a time when a market economy taking 
shape in the country is offering them both opportunities and 
challenges. 
  Some members of the Eighth National Committee of the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) expressed 
their mixed feelings for the current cultural situation at the 
ongoing CPPCC session. 
  Since the government adopted a series of measures to support 
classic and traditional arts last year, classic and traditional 
arts have had a revival of sorts after withering for a period. 
  Sponsored by some enterprises, the China Opera Troupe 
recently staged performances in Guangzhou for the second time. 
Its first performance took place in Guangzhou 33 years ago. 
Wang Shiguang, director of the troupe, said its visit to the 
southern city marked the beginning of the troupe's normal 
operation. 
  Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and other big cities 
successfully staged New Year concerts. The number of 
performance programs of classic and traditional arts has 
increased remarkably. 
  In Shanghai, all specialized troupes have arranged their 
performance programs for the year. 
  The Guangzhou Philharmonic Orchestra has resumed its normal 
rehearsals and performances, while a new ballet is being 
organized there. 
  Some big companies have also sponsored classic and 
traditional arts. For instance, the Shanghai Stock Exchange has 
decided to donate 2.5 million yuan to the Central Philharmonic 
Orchestra. 
  But, noted writer Wu Zuguang said quite a number of 
companies 
seek promotion of their corporate images through donations and 
some companies even asked troupes to change their names after 
themselves. "It's shocking," he said. 
  Some members suggested that state adopt preferential 
policies 
to bankroll classic and traditional artistic institutions so as 
to create favorable conditions for the development of cultural 
undertakings. 
  CPPCC members from literary and art circles also suggested 
that China accelerate cultural legislation to promote cultural 
prosperity. 
  Famous writer Li Zhun said that policies governing 
literature 
and arts should meet the needs of the new era. "It is necessary 
to ban pornographic and obscene arts. What is more important, 
however, is to let literature and art prosper," he said. 
  Huang Shuqin, a woman director of the Shanghai Film Studio, 
said that reform and open policies have ushered in a diversified 
social structure, and the feelings of the public have changed 
too. "If our policy governing literature and art does not 
proceed from the reality, it is impossible for them to serve 
people in the era," she said. 
  On relations between classic and pop music, Professor Wu 
Zuqiang from the Central Conservatory of Music said that there 
is not an unsurmountable gap between classic and pop music. "We 
should support classic music and develop pop music as well," he 
said. 
  The influx of smuggled film tapes and compact disks has also 
caused concern among CPPCC members. They expressed their 
support for a government ban on smuggled film tapes and compact 
disks. 
  Famous film director Xie Jin stressed it is necessary to 
create a more relaxed environment for artists and encourage them 
to produce competitive films. 
  He said that artists should emancipate the mind and have a 
better understanding of the multiple social functions of 
literature and art rather than stressing its educational 
function only. 
  Wu Zuqiang said that upgrading the existing philharmonic 
orchestras and creating high-quality music products will be the 
key for the classic music to turn around. 

