BFN 

  [Text] President Geydar Aliyev has concluded his visit to 
the country's southwest. Our correspondent Ramiz Meshedihesenli 
reports: 
  [Begin Meshedihesenli recording] On the second day of the 
visit to the southeast region, on 10 April, Azerbaijani 
President Geydar Aliyev -- who was accompanied on his tour by 
Defense Minister Mamedrafi Mamedov; state advisers Gabil 
Guseyinli and Arif Rehimzade; AZERTAC director Vagif Rustemov; 
the chairman of the State Television and Radio Broadcasting 
Company, Babek Guseyinoglu; and other officials -- left for 
another hot spot on the front. 
  The land was under the treacherous enemy's occupation until 
the end of last year. After the call made by Azerbaijani 
President Geydar Aliyev, the brave youths threw themselves into 
the battle and forced the enemy to withdraw some considerable 
distance. Even now, they are waging a life and death battle to 
liberate our land. 
  The supreme commander familiarized himself closely with the 
troops' ability to use military hardware, their combat 
readiness, and defensive ability. The Azerbaijani Army's 
fighters in this sector assured the Republic's president that 
they will not withdraw one step in the face of the enemy and 
that now that they have gained experience they have the power 
and ability to oust the Armenians from the occupied land. 
  Aliyev was interested in our troops' social conditions, 
concerns, and problems. He awarded the rank of captain to a 
promoted soldier. With fighting taking place just a few 
kilometers away, the supreme commander gave advice to the troops. 
  Later, Aliyev and his entourage left for the fronts in 
Agdamskiy, Agdzhabedinskiy, and Khodzhavend Rayons. Just a 
month ago, the enemy was forced to withdraw some considerable 
distance thanks to the talent of the brave soldiers. Now our 
troops here can open fire and silence the enemy's firing 
positions. Here too, Supreme Commander Geydar Aliyev 
familiarized himself with the combat readiness of our troops. 
He said he was proud of these fighters who are ready to 
sacrifice their lives to clear our land of the Armenians. He 
donated watches to soldiers who killed many enemy soldiers. 
  Before leaving the hot spot, officers and soldiers asked 
that 
they be pictured with Supreme Commander Geydar Aliyev. 
  On the afternoon of 10 April, President Aliyev arrived in 
Bardinskiy Rayon. The people received our Republic's president 
with roses and flowers and applause. The representatives of the 
community gathered in front of the local administrative building 
and noted that we could extricate ourselves from the current 
critical situation and war conditions only with Aliyev's 
guidance. 
  In his sincere talks with the rayon's population and 
refugees' representatives, the president issued concrete 
instructions to government officials, ministers, and regional 
leaders on the solution of the problems raised. 
  Aliyev also addressed the Barda population. 
  Later a meeting was held with the participation of the 
leaders of the nearby rayons, law enforcement organs, and 
fighters. It was reiterated that the country cannot be 
extricated from its grave situation alone and that everyone must 
unite and fight the enemy on the front. 
  The speakers touched upon the difficulties being faced in 
connection with the military call-up and exchanged views on 
removing the obstacles before [words indistinct] workers. 
Instructions were issued to the rayon leaders on the refugees' 
problems. Azerbaijani President Aliyev summed up the meeting 
[end recording]. 

