Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kathmandu, Feb 9 (AFP) -- The governing Nepali 
Congress party president has been defeated in a Kathmandu 
by-election, while the party's candidate emerged victorious in 
Jhapa, officials said Wednesday. 
  The Nepal Communist Party-United Marxist and Leninist 
(NCP-UML) candidate Bidhya Bhandari received 43,319 votes 
against ruling party president Krishna Prasad Bhattarai's 41,490 
votes, bagging the coveted seat in the Nepalese lower house of 
parliament by the 1,829 votes. 
  The rightist National Democratic Party (NDP) candidate, Jog 
Mehar Shrestha gained 7,537 votes. 
  It was the third election defeat of Bhattarai's 50-year 
political career, a Nepali Congress party source said. 
  Bidhya Bhandari is the widow of former NCP-UML general 
secretary and parliamentarian, Madan Kumar Bhandari, who was 
killed in a jeep accident last May. 
  The by-elections, held under heavy security Monday in 
Kathmandu and Jhapa districts, were held to fill two seats in 
the lower house of parliament left vacant last year by the 
deaths of two communist parliamentarians. 
  In Jhapa, 390 kilometres, (243 miles) southeast of here, the 
Nepali Congress candidate, Krishna Prasad Shitaula won the seat 
with 16,194 votes. 
  Shitaula's closest rival, NCP-UML's Lila Udashi Khanal, 
polled 13,337 votes. National Democratic Party (NDP) candidate, 
Gopal Chandra Rajbanshi received 8,251 votes. 
  Political observers and student activists blame Prime 
Minister Girija Prasad Koirala for the defeat of party president 
Bhattarai. Had Koirala supported his party colleague during 
campaigning he might have won, they charged. 
  If Bhattarai had won the election, he would have become a 
viable alternative should Koirala resign from office. 
  Bhattarai's defeat could lead to a split in the country's 
largest democratic party. 
  At a time when opposition parties are demanding Koirala's 
resignation over his poor economic performance and inability to 
maintain law and order, a Bhattarai victory would have put 
Koirala in a very difficult position, a highly placed Nepali 
Congress party source said. 
  Altogether 24 candidates contested the election in 
Kathmandu, 
while in Jhapa, nine candidates filed their nomination papers. 
  The victors will serve a two and a half year term in the 
lower house. 

