Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Central Committee of the DPRK Red Cross Society 
released a statement on February 24 denouncing the recent scheme 
of the South Korean authorities to move Korean compatriots in 
Sakhalin, Russia, to South Korea in conspiracy with the Japanese 
Government. 
  The statement reads: 
  The South Korean authorities have recently been working 
insidiously in conspiracy with the Japanese Government to take 
Korean compatriots in Sakhalin, Russia, to South Korea. It has 
been learned that in mid-January, the South Korean authorities 
met with the delegations of the Japanese Foreign Ministry and 
Red Cross in Russia to open a deal to move Korean compatriots in 
Sakhalin, Russia, to South Korea. Under the name of "Site 
Inspection Delegation," they attempted to seize applicants to 
return and settle in South Korea. 
  The South Korean rulers, absurdly contending that the issue 
of Korean compatriots in Sakhalin, Russia had once been 
political, but is now a purely humanitarian issue, revealed 
their intention to settle this issue by receiving a small amount 
of money from the Japanese Government as traveling expenses for 
the Sakhalin residents. 
  As the whole world knows, the Korean compatriots came to 
this 
totally strange land of Sakhalin because they were forcibly 
brought there by Japanese imperialists during the illegal 
occupation of Korea under the outrageous "general mobilization 
order" and were driven like mules before being abandoned in 
Sakhalin. 
  Therefore, it is not a mere humanitarian problem but a 
serious political issue. How can the problem suddenly lose its 
political nature and change into a purely humanitarian problem, 
when the Japanese Government has neither officially apologized 
to the Korean people nor compensated for past crimes? 
  The attempt by the South Korean authorities to settle the 
issue of Korean compatriots in Sakhalin with a small amount of 
travel expenses by the criminals while ignoring the political 
nature of the issue is an absolutely intolerable crime not only 
in terms of our nation's dignity and interest but also from the 
lofty humanitarian point of view. 
  The Central Committee of the DPRK Red Cross Society brands 
this crafty and insidious scheme of South Korean rulers to move 
Korean compatriots living in Sakhalin to South Korea as a 
treacherous and hostile act selling the dignity and interest of 
the nation for a pittance, and as shameless political fraud 
cheating and fooling our compatriots, and resolutely denounce 
this by the name of the whole nation. 
  There are nearly 500,000 Koreans, who were forcibly taken to 
the Far East by the Japanese imperialists, and their descendants 
are scattered in Russia and in the former Soviet Union. 
Therefore, the problem of Koreans taken to the Far East by the 
Japanese imperialists is not a matter restricted to some 40,000 
Koreans residents in Sakhalin but a serious matter which can be 
solved only when the Japanese Government apologizes and 
compensates all Koreans who live in the former Soviet Union. 
  Our nation has the right according to international law to 
receive an apology and claim compensation from the Japanese 
Government for the national misfortune and sufferings 
experienced by all the Koreans overseas, not to speak of the 
500,000 Korean compatriots who reside throughout the former 
Soviet Union, for nearly one whole century. 
  This notwithstanding, the South Korean rulers are trying to 
settle the issue with Japan by deceiving a small percentage of 
Sakhalin-resident Koreans and ignoring and sacrificing the 
interest of the majority of Korean compatriots scattered in the 
former Soviet Union. This is merely a shallow trick motivated 
by sinister intentions. 
  The South Korean rulers, under a humanitarian mask, 
launched a deceptive "charity" offensive among the 
Sakhalin-resident Koreans motivated by the sinister intention to 
establish an antirepublic base in the Far East of Russia and to 
foster discord and confrontation within the nation by winning 
them over, thus perpetuating the division of the country. 
However, our compatriots in Sakhalin who aspire for the 
reconciliation and unity of the nation and long for the 
reunification of the fatherland are not ones to be deceived by 
the shallow tricks of the South Korean rulers. While the South 
Korean rulers had their stooges distribute a false list of 
Sakhalin compatriots who applied to move to South Korea, most 
compatriots said they had never applied, nor were aware of such 
a fact, and those who did apply, regretted having been deceived 
and withdrew and gave up the applications. This stern reality 
straightly indicates the foolishness and shamelessness of the 
scheme of the South Korean rulers to snatch the national 
conscience and dignity of compatriots in Sakhalin with a meagre 
amount of money. 
  As all overseas Koreans who visited South Korea have 
confirmed, South Korean society is a corrupt and ailing society 
where the rich get richer and the poor poorer, and where no 
political and economic guarantees are provided for the life of 
those who return from foreign countries. 
  We believe that all the Koreans in Russia and other areas of 
the former Soviet Union will rise up as one in the staunch 
struggle to reject the insidious and crafty moves of South 
Korean and Japanese authorities to bring them to South Korea and 
defend the dignity and interests of the nation. 
  Our nation will settle scores to the last for all the crimes 
committed by the Japanese imperialists in the past and will 
never pardon the traitors who are courting favor by selling the 
interests of the nation to Japan. 
  The South Korean rulers must act with discretion and 
immediately stop its antinational maneuvers to fool and cheat 
compatriots in Sakhalin by making them move away at a dirt-cheap 
price. 
  The Japanese authorities must earnestly apologize to the 
Korean people for all the crimes they committed, and provide 
acceptable compensation not only for Koreans in the former 
Soviet Union and overseas, as well as for our nation, and stop 
any act to block the reunification of Korea. 
  The South Korean and Japanese authorities must be mindful 
that if they persistently ignore our solemn warning to resort to 
base plots to move Sakhalin-resident Koreans to South Korea, 
they will by no means be able to evade the crime of insulting 
and abusing the noble humanitarian idea and will bring greater 
disgrace upon themselves in the eyes of the world. 
  [Dated] 24 February 1994, Pyongyang 

