BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Herve Gattegno and Corinne Lesnes: "Rwanda: The </F>
Black Box Mystery"] 
  [Text] It is a little metal box, hardly bigger than a 
pocketbook, riveted to an ocher, dented piece of sheet steel 
obviously torn from its original cabin. The sheet is covered 
with a number of partially erased stamps and inscriptions, and 
series of figures, sometimes preceded with "F50," as in "Falcon 
50." The box is 15 cm square and 4 cm thick. On one of its 
sides, a silver and blue plate -- marked "Litton" -- stands out 
against the black background. In the center is an electrical 
socket, sealed with red wax, connected up to a dozen or so 
colored wires to a pin plug that hangs free. 
  The aircraft of the late Rwandan President Juvenal 
Habyarimana, which crashed on 6 April in Kigali leading to his 
death and that of the president of Burundi and the 10 other 
passengers and crew members, did indeed have a "black box," 
irrespective of what has been claimed since, and this black box 
is now in Paris. Former Captain Paul Barril, the former 
commander of the GIGN (National Gendarmerie Intervention Unit), 
a one-time member of the famous "cell" of gendarmes at the 
Elysee [French presidential palace] and now the unofficial 
adviser to several black African and Middle Eastern heads of 
state, claims to have obtained the box in Kigali and says he 
will make it "available to the international authorities." 
  The existence of this flight recorder -- to use the 
technical 
term -- is stubbornly denied in official circles, but former 
Captain Barril showed it to a LE MONDE journalist on Thursday, 
23 June, in the offices of his company, named Secrets, in Avenue 
de la Grande Armee in the 17th district of Paris. 
  The former Army officer claims he has been to Rwanda twice 
since the presidential aircraft crashed, during April and at the 
beginning of May, to investigate, at the family's request, the 
circumstances surrounding the death of the Rwandan head of 
state, which no one still believes was an accident. Shortly 
after 2030 on Wednesday, 6 April, as it was preparing to land at 
Kigali airport's only runway, the Falcon 50 was hit in the rear 
by two rockets and crashed on the grounds of the presidential 
residence, which is near the airport. Paul Barril shows 
photographs taken by President Habyarimana's youngest son 
depicting the debris piled up on the lawn and the bloody bodies 
of the victims. They were published in the 28 April edition of 
the JEUNE AFRIQUE weekly. He also readily shows the photos he 
took on his two trips to Kigali, some of which show him next to 
a piece of artillery and standing in front of the French Embassy 
in Kigali, which has been deserted since the last French 
nationals left on the morning of 12 April. 
  Agathe Habyarimana, the president's widow who is exiled in 
France with her children, gave Barril "a mandate for 
investigation and research" on 6 May that lays down the 
conditions of his mission: "To make all investigations he 
considers useful to uncover the truth surrounding the attack," 
discover "the guilty parties and, in particular, those in 
command," and take "all necessary action with the insurers." A 
French lawyer, Helene Clamagirand, was moreover charged with 
drawing up a legal report and lodging "in the coming weeks" a 
murder charge with the International Court of Justice in the 
Hague. 
<H5>  `Everything Is OK' </H5>
  In addition to the famous black box -- and no one knows what 
its decryption, requiring special equipment, will reveal -- 
former Captain Barril has returned from his Rwandan visits with 
the Kigali airport control tower tapes: three large, 
Assmann-brand aluminum reels, each containing eight hours of 
tape. These should contain the last conversations between the 
presidential plane and the tower controllers on 6 April. He 
also has in his possession all the telexes received by the 
airport in the days leading up to the attack, the airport's 
"duty book," which contains the names of the three men who were 
on duty in the airport on 6 April, and the book of "transmission 
and radio navigation services," whose last entry, dated 5 April 
at 0742 (universal time), noted that "the recorder has again 
been unblocked" after a power cut and concluded: "Everything is 
OK." 
  In truth, the African findings of the former gendarme have 
been an open secret in the French Government for a number of 
weeks. The personal cabinet of Cooperation Minister Michel 
Roussin confirmed that "contacts" had been made with Paul 
Barril, but both parties claim with equal vigor to have started 
the initiative. For his part, the former captain told us that: 
"All the elements in my possession will be made available to 
the international authorities as soon as an inquiry is launched." 
  The initial effect of the intervention of the burdensome 
captain, whose adventurous profile is well-known but his motives 
less so, has been to show up the absence of any official 
procedure to identify the perpetrators of the attack on the 
Falcon, despite the declarations made the day after 6 April. 
Almost three months later, neither the United Nations, which 
was then responsible for security in Rwanda, nor Burundi, whose 
president, Cyprien Ntaryamira, also died in the plane crash, nor 
France itself, despite the loss of three French crew members, 
have yet launched any kind of inquiry. 
  Only an initiative by the families of the crew members could 
lead to the case being submitted to an examining magistrate by 
way of the same procedure that was used in 1989 after the attack 
on the UTA DC-10 over the Chad desert, whose case was submitted 
to Parisian Judge Jean-Louis Bruguiere. At the end of last 
week, a close collaborator of Mr. Roussin told us: "The 
families are free to bring a case to justice." Charged with 
defending the interests of the family of the Rwandan president, 
Mrs. Clamagirand makes no bones about the fact that she would 
like a number of other cases to be brought in association with 
hers to "break the rule of silence" surrounding a terrorist act 
without which Rwanda would probably not be the war-torn country 
it is today. 
  There are still the investigations being made by the Belgian 
military auditors attached to the Belgian Justice Ministry, 
which has been charged with establishing the causes not of the 
attack, but of the subsequent death of 12 Belgian Blue Helmets. 
Nobody knows what progress they have made with their 
investigation, but it would appear that the Brussels civil 
servants have modest resources and to date they have only 
focused on obtaining information on the circle of Hutu students 
in Belgium. They want to know who killed the soldiers and how. 
On 8 April, the Belgian Defense Ministry indicated that the 
soldiers had been "apprehended, led away, and executed" while 
they were trying to protect the fleeing Rwandan prime minister, 
Agathe Uwilingiyimana, who was murdered in Kigali during the 
massacres that began shortly after the aircraft exploded. On 
the same day, the United Nations stated that they had been 
killed after being disarmed by members of the Presidential Guard 
while they were on their way to the airport to investigate the 
circumstances surrounding the death of the president and his 
Burundian counterpart. On 15 April, a memo from the Rwandan 
foreign minister to all diplomatic missions in the world 
reported the arrest of "three suspects" from the "Belgian 
contingent" when they tried to "retrieve by force the black box 
from the wreck of the aircraft." 
<H5>  Mercenaries from Europe </H5>
  This succession of contradictory reports illustrates, as if 
it was necessary, the confusion that reigns in Rwanda and that 
prevents any hope of a rapid clarification of the circumstances 
surrounding the attack. All sides -- the Hutus in the 
presidential circle of supporters and guard, those in the 
regular army, and the Tutsis in the RPF [Rwandan Patriotic 
Front] -- have their own version of events, their own 
suspicions, and their own insinuations. Any verification on the 
ground is now impossible: The RPF has taken control of the 
airport zone, and many of the witnesses to the attack and the 
ensuing conflict have perished. Thus, the information published 
in the Belgian daily LE SOIR, whereby the Rwandan presidential 
plane was brought down by "two French soldiers" and which 
claimed to coincide "on a number of points, with the inquiry 
being carried out in Belgium by the military auditors," was met 
with denials, not just from the French Government, but also from 
the Belgian Government. In any event, the report substantiated 
a hypothesis floated by the intelligence services of both 
countries whereby the guilty parties are indeed "two white men," 
who could be mercenaries from Europe or South Africa. So who 
were they working for? 
  During May, the French secret services indicated that, at 
the 
end of last year, "an American company represented in Central 
Africa" had tried to recruit, through Belgian intermediaries, 
mercenaries skilled in handling antitank and antiaircraft 
missiles. Part of the recruiting is said to have been done in a 
hotel in the 17th district of Paris. According to the DGSE 
(General Directorate for External Security), the operation was 
to have taken some 15 or so men from Brussels to Nairobi and 
then to Uganda, from where they would infiltrate Rwanda "to sow 
the seeds of discontent in the regular Rwandan army." However, 
the attempt came to nothing. 
  An investigation into the supposed motives of each party 
does 
not add to any convictions. Did the RPF have any interest in 
killing a president who, although abhorred, was to bring it into 
government on 4 August in accordance with the Arusha agreements? 
As for the "hard core" supporters of the regime, who took their 
members from the presidential entourage itself, they could have 
been trying to prevent any reconciliation with the Tutsi 
minority, but the presence on board the Falcon of Colonel Elie 
Sagatwa, one of their leaders, considerably weakens this 
argument. As for France, it is hard to see what advantage it 
could have had from eliminating a regime it stands accused of 
having supported in favor of rebels who treat it openly as an 
enemy. 
  In any event, the fact that many witnesses confirm that 
fighting broke out almost the very moment the plane exploded 
leads us to think that this was an organized operation. 
However, here again, it appears impossible to know who really 
started hostilities. Jeanne, the eldest daughter of President 
Habyarimana, said: "The instant the plane crashed, we were 
opened fire upon. The shots were coming from the hills occupied 
by the RPF. During the night, we learned that the fighting was 
intensifying. First of all in Kigali, and then throughout the 
country." It has also been established that after the attack, 
the soldiers of the presidential guard carried out savage 
reprisals in the Rwandan capital against not only the Tutsi 
population, but also against the Hutu opposition, as if to 
better prove that the civil war ravaging the country could not 
be summed up as an ethnic conflict. While shots were ringing 
through the town, the official Rwandan army had a statement read 
on the national radio station calling for the people to support 
it in its struggle against the "criminals" and denouncing the 
exactions of angry soldiers following the assassination of the 
president. 
<H5>  Six Frenchmen Killed in Kigali </H5>
  It was at this time, too, that two French gendarmes -- 
Deputy 
Chiefs Rene Maier and Alain Didot -- and the latter's wife were 
killed. Members of the military aid mission to Rwanda since 
1993, the two noncommissioned officers and Mrs. Didot, shot and 
hacked to death by machetes, were summarily buried in the garden 
of their villa. That is where the Blue Helmets discovered them 
on 13 April. Their bodies were met in Le Bourget on 15 April by 
Defense Minister Francois Leotard and Cooperation Minister 
Michel Roussin. The latter's staff said that "their death was 
not linked to their job (one of them was a communications 
specialist -- LE MONDE editor's note), but to their residence 
and to the fact that they were said to be hiding Tutsis in their 
house." It must therefore be understood that the three French 
nationals were supposedly victims of Hutu militiamen or the 
presidential guard. Their house, however, was located in the 
Kanombe area, which was already under RPF control. The news of 
their death -- which was known to the French Embassy in Kigali 
by 8 April, as attested to by a memo sent to Paris by telex at 
1900 -- was only made public three days later. Curiously, the 
death certificate, dated 6 April, says that it was an 
"accidental death." 
  No less curious is the fact that the JOURNAL OFFICIEL of 14 
June, which published the appointment to the rank of "Knight of 
the Legion of Honor" for the three crew members of the Rwandan 
airplane -- the pilot, Jacquy Heraud, his copilot, Jean-Pierre 
Minaberry, and the mechanic, Jean-Michel Perrine -- put their 
date of death at 7 April, whereas the airplane crashed the night 
before, and without anyone knowing whether this was simply a 
transcription error. Recruited within the framework of the 
cooperation effort to fly the airplane offered by France to 
Rwanda in 1989, the three crew members, at least one of whom 
used to be with the GLAM [Ministerial Air Liaison Group], were 
rapidly hired by a rather shadowy Paris-based company, SATIF 
(Service and Assistance in French Industrial Technologies), 
which, according to its general manager, is a "company which 
provides services in the aeronautics and electronics sectors." 
It has contracts with, among others, the Cooperation Ministry 
"with the skill and discretion that this requires." Maintaining 
the Falcon 50 crews cost around 3 million French francs per 
year. Surely it would have been better to go through a 
"friendly" company, so that the cost would not be borne by 
French financiers. This hypothesis has been put forward by 
several sources, who suggest that in the past the company has 
already provided other discreet services on behalf of 
cooperation. 
  "We are not a company working unofficially for the 
Cooperation Ministry," the SATIF official told us, although he 
had not been asked if that was the case. Michel Roussin's staff 
admits that it has been in "financial contact" with the company, 
which seems to have been replaced by a limited liability company 
called ASI (Aeroservices International), which, although 
dissolved on 30 June 1992, still appears to be active, even 
though it has never met its legal obligation to submit its 
accounts to the Commercial Court. "We have nothing to hide," the 
same interlocutor explained. "Our customers are aware of 
everything we do, but we do not like people sticking their noses 
into our affairs. This is not the United States!" During the 
same interview, he assured us last week that the airplane did 
not have a black box. 
<H5>  Pilot's Last Words </H5>
  The Falcon 50 -- a symbol of France's preferred relations, 
which are now widely disputed -- was purchased second-hand and 
then given to President Habyarimana to replace an aging 
Caravelle under conditions which would have nothing to gain by 
being held up to the light. The negotiations were led by an 
eminent member of Francois Mitterrand's staff, assisted by a man 
from the "Elysee cell." The middleman chosen by the Rwandan 
head of state was Dr. Bele Calo, an African born in Belgium, who 
has had several brushes with the police for confidence trickery 
and fraud in the early eighties. Said to be close to the former 
Rwandan ambassador to France, Denis Magirimana, who was supposed 
to have been dismissed for embezzlement of public funds, this 
dubious figure is said to have left France for Uganda, and 
nothing further has been heard of him. 
  On 6 April, at around 2030, it was this airplane, carrying 
the Rwandan and Burundian heads of state, which crashed after 
being hit by two projectiles, most likely two Soviet-built SAM-7 
missiles. According to our information, the two missile 
launchers were found on the Masaka hill, from which the firing 
came, in the heart of the RPF zone, and are now said to be in 
the hands of the Rwandan defense minister. The airplane was 
carrying the two presidents from Dar es Salaam (Tanzania), where 
a summit on the situation in Burundi had just been held. 
Several heads of state from this part of Africa who had said 
that they would be participating in the meeting, ended up 
canceling. These included Marshall Mobutu, president of Zaire, 
with whom Juvenal Habyarimana and Cyprien Ntaryamira had dined 
the night before in Kinshasa, but who decided at the last minute 
not to go to Tanzania. 
  Since the Burundian president's airplane had broken down, 
Mr. 
Habyarimana suggested taking him home, in accordance with the 
African custom of "airplane taxis." Having left Dar es Salaam 
at 1850, the Falcon was supposed to touch down in Kigali in the 
early evening, and then go on to the Burundian capital of 
Bujumbura to drop off its passenger, and finally return to 
Kigali, where the airport was still being guarded by Belgian 
troops working under UNAMIR (UN Assistance Mission in Rwanda). 
  As it was approaching the runway, military sources say that 
the copilot's wife heard the final dialogue between the airplane 
and the control tower: Her husband had told her the frequency 
on which she could receive the airplane communications during 
the approach phase on an ordinary radio. 
  So, before losing contact and several minutes before the 
explosion, she is said to have heard the control tower ask the 
pilot several times about the presence on board the plane of the 
Burundian President Cyprien Ntaryamira. Are we to deduce from 
this that the latter was the target, that they wanted to kill 
two birds with one stone, or, on the contrary, that the 
conspirators were trying to spare him? An examination of the 
black box might be able to say. 
  There is another unanswered question: Is the death of the 
two French gendarmes at their villa in Kanombe, located exactly 
along the same axis as the Kigali runway, related to the attack? 
Did they witness it, and were they therefore silenced because 
of it? Even an official inquiry has little chance of 
determining that. 
  Many witnesses, both civilian and military, who have 
frequented the Rwandan capital since the beginning of the year, 
have said: "We had the feeling that something was brewing." 
One of President Habyarimana's nephews said that during a phone 
conversation one week before his death, he told his uncle that 
there were rumors of a coup. The reply was: "We know about 
it." The wife and children of the Rwandan leader recall a 
conversation on Easter Sunday -- three days before the tragedy 
-- with an African diplomat bearing a message from Paul Kagame, 
the military leader of the RPF: "You must know that he will do 
everything in his power to kill you, even if it means gambling 
his own life." 
  A few hours after his death, the presidential clan clearly 
pointed the finger at the RPF and its alleged accomplices. "The 
Rwandan Government will shortly launch an inquiry in order to 
shed some light on the responsibilities of the Belgian Blue 
Helmets suspected by Rwandan public opinion of being involved in 
the plot to assassinate the head of state," wrote the Rwandan 
Foreign Ministry in the above mentioned memo dated 15 April 
which it sent to its diplomatic missions abroad. Before 
indicating, more cautiously, in the same document that, while 
awaiting the expert report on the celebrated black box (which is 
today in the hands of former gendarme Paul Barril), "it would be 
risky to draw a definitive conclusion as to the perpetrators of 
the attack which took the life of President Habyarimana." 
Almost three months after the event, this is still -- 
unfortunately -- the accepted conclusion in the midst of the 
Rwandan chaos. 

