BFN 

<F P=106> [By Umer Farooq] </F>
  [Text] Islamabad -- The leader of the opposition, Mian 
Nawaz Sharif, has alleged that President Farooq Leghari received 
Rs. [rupees] 15 million from Mehran Bank for horse-trading both 
on the eve of general elections and the presidential election. 
  Nawaz Sharif levied the allegation at a press conference on 
Tuesday. He also produced the credit vouchers and the bank 
account numbers and the names of trading companies through which 
the payment was made to Farooq Leghari. At the press conference 
the bank pay order numbers and the photostat copies of Mehran 
Bank pay orders were also presented to the pressmen. "These are 
the unimpeachable evidence relating to Rs 15 millions taken out 
by President Farooq Leghari for horse-trading both on the eve of 
the general elections and the election of president of 
Pakistan", said Nawaz Sharif. 
  Earlier, the speaker, National Assembly, expunged the 
aspersions cast by the leader of the opposition on President 
Farooq Leghari on the floor of the House. The speaker told the 
leader of the opposition that under Article 248(b) of the Rules 
of Business of the National Assembly to aspersions on the person 
of the president could be made on the floor of National 
Assembly. [sentence as published] 
  However, the speaker received the documents of evidence 
produced by Nawaz Sharif in the House. Later, when in defiance 
of the ruling of the speaker Nawaz Sharif refused to sit down, 
the speaker suspended the proceedings of the assembly. 
  The leader of the opposition later addressed a press 
conference in the Parliament cafeteria and alleged that 
President Farooq Leghari had used his political clout for 
gaining financial benefits. "The conduct of President Farooq 
Leghari be a cause of insult to the whole nation", he said. 
  He alleged that a few days before the presidential elections 
Farooq Leghari obtained Rs. 7600,000 from Sharae Fetima Jinnah 
branch of Mehran Bank Ltd, situated in Lahore. Six pay orders, 
numbering 003994 to 003999 for Rs. 1,250,000 each and totalling 
Rs 7,500,000 were obtained from Mehran Bank Ltd, Sharae Fatima 
Jinnah, Nawaz Sharif said. 
  He said that all the six trading companies through which 
Farooq Leghari had received money are fake and were operated by 
the notorious Yunus Habib. He said that according to latest 
reports of FIA [Federal Investigative Agency] all the six 
accounts that were debited to issue the said pay orders are fake 
benami [account in someone else's name] accounts maintained by 
Yunus Habib to rob the Mehran Bank. Nawaz Sharif also produced 
a list of fake companies prepared by FIA, which includes the 
names of trading companies through which Farooq Leghari received 
the money. The names include Moosani Tradino (Account number 
8890-1), Rasco Enterprises (A/C No. 9954-1) International 
Traders (A/C No. 15237-1), Munir Corporation A/C No. 17787-1), 
Aziz International (A/C No. 177950-1) and Salim Corporation (A/C 
No. 17817-1). 
  All the six pay orders carry the following endorsement on 
their back in the handwriting of Sarder Farooq Leghari -- 
"Please deposit in my Current Account No. 12025-1", Nawaz Sharif 
said and added that the pay orders are signed by Sardar Farooq 
Leghari himself. He said that these pay orders were credited in 
A/C No. 1202501 of Sardar Farooq Leghari at Muslim Commercial 
Bank, Lahore on Sept. 25, 93 through branch transfer voucher. 
  Nawaz Sharif told the press conference that on Nov. 6, 1993, 
Rs 7,500,000 were again obtained by Sardar Farooq Leghari for 
use in the presidential election. A set of six dubious 
transactions was reenacted. Debit advices of Rs 125,000 each 
were raised on the Mehran head office in Karachi and a total 
credit of Rs. 7,500,000 given in the account of Sardar Farooq 
Leghari. This amount was gradually withdrawn, he added. 
  Nawaz Sharif termed the way Mehran Bank was [word 
indistinct] 
by Farooq Leghari the "most shameful" as that had no precedent 
in the history of Pakistan. "The people who cover up their 
crimes are not more clever than the people who expose it", he 
said. 
  He said the speaker had set a very bad precedent by not 
allowing the leader of the opposition to speak on the floor of 
the House. "If similarly the leader of the house is also not 
allowed to speak in National Assembly, than what will be the 
utility of the Assembly", he said. 
  Returning to the president, he said that after the 
disclosure 
of such financial corruption on the part of the president, he 
should waste no time in resigning from his post. "We demand his 
resignation", he said. In response to a query, he said that 
opposition would decide whether to move an impeachment motion 
against the president. 
  Levelling another allegation against the president, he said 
that it was now a matter of record that Farooq Leghari when he 
was an opposition member of parliament, was constantly 
conspiring with a serving general Lt-Gen Asad Durrani to 
overthrow the legal and democratically elected government of 
PML(N) [Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz)]. Because of this 
conspiracy, Lt. Gen. Asad Durrani was removed from service and 
retired, since this act was tantamount to undermining the army's 
discipline. "However, I wonder while one character of the plot 
was removed from service, the other character of the plot, 
Farooq Leghari was made the supreme commander of the armed 
forces," he said. 
  Enumerating other allegations against the president, he 
listed the following points: 1 -- Lavish [word indistinct] 
parties costing Rs. 6 millions. 2 -- He bought land worth Rs 
1.6 milion at [word indistinct] Dilana and when the site was 
declared to be the location of an airport, he promptly sold it 
to the Civil Aviation Authority for 25 millions. 3 -- He has 
transformed the President's House into a personal recreational 
place with the building of a riding track, a stable, a golf 
course, a shooting range etc. Rs 25 million has already been 
spent on the refurbishing of the president's house. 
  Nawaz Sharif also said that the way he has humiliated 
Pakistan by trying to convert a purely private visit to USA into 
an official one by using public money shows that he has 
absolutely no regard for the prestige of Pakistan and the 
protocol of the office of president. 
  He also alleged that the president had acted 
unconstitutionally in dislodging the government of Pir Sabir 
Shah in NWFP [North-West Frontier Province]. His act has 
weakened the federation. 

