BFN 

  [Text] Bonn (DDP/ADN) -- The German Government insists that 
human rights must be respected in Turkey. Foreign Minister 
Klaus Kinkel, speaking in a government statement in the 
Bundestag on Wednesday [13 April], said that friendly relations 
with Turkey remain "of great value" for Germany. It is, 
however, all the more important to continue the "critical" 
dialogue with the Turkish Government. Now it must be pointed 
out that the situation concerning human rights and the situation 
of the Kurdish population in Turkey are "not satisfactory." 
They have even worsened, he declared. 
  At the same time the foreign minister rejected the 
accusation 
that the German Government is allowing arms supplied by Germany 
to be used against the Kurdish civilian population. In all 
treaties, Turkey has undertaken to use these arms and other 
equipment exclusively for defense against armed attack. This 
stance was reaffirmed by Ankara most recently on 7 April, Kinkel 
added. Nevertheless the government has decided to postpone the 
dispatch of an arms consignment originally planned for 15 April 
until such time as an investigation has been completed into 
evidence to the contrary. This evidence, which was supplied by 
human rights groups, is being carefully examined in the Foreign 
Ministry, he asserted. 
  Kinkel emphasized that "as long as the accusations are not 
conclusively proved, the German Government has no reason to 
doubt the detailed assurances of allegiance to the treaties by a 
friendly, allied partner." Turkey has said that equipment from 
stocks of the National People's Army [of the former GDR] is 
indeed deployed in the Kurdish area but is only being used to 
secure the borders, particularly those with Iraq and Syria. 
Ankara has also pointed out that similar equipment has been 
supplied by Russia as well. 
  The foreign minister also made another emphatic appeal to 
all 
the Kurds living in Germany not to fight out their conflicts in 
the Federal Republic. Anyone who abuses the right to 
hospitality and commits a criminal offense has to "expect the 
full force of our laws, with criminal proceedings and 
extradition and deportation." Of course, every individual case 
will be examined to ascertain whether the person concerned would 
face the death penalty, torture, or any other treatment 
violating the law in Turkey, he said. 

