CSO 

<F P=106> [By reporter Mun Chong-u] </F>
  [Excerpts] [Passage omitted] Actually, the relationship 
between the Kim Yong-sam Administration and the press has been 
very amicable thus far. The press occasionally voiced objection 
to appointments of certain Cabinet ministers or presidential 
secretaries, but has seldom criticized the government's 
mistakes head-on. 
  However, the government has been very high-handed toward the 
press. Around last year's Newspaper Day on 7 April President 
Kim Yong-sam and Information Minister O In-hwan urged newspaper 
companies to disclose properties owned by journalists as well 
as each paper's circulation, stressing the need for the press to 
join in the reform movement. When the slot machine scandal 
broke out last May, government sources floated the rumor that 
the government "plans to conduct a full-fledged investigation 
of those journalists who have close ties with the slot machine 
operators." In June, a CHUNGANG ILBO reporter was taken into 
custody in connection with his report concerning then Defense 
Minister Kwon Yong-hae. In July, the Office of the Prime 
Minister issued a directive calling for each ministry to 
collect information on cases of erroneous press reports and 
take active countermeasures. The press put up with this kind of 
government "interference in its internal affairs" in the past. 
But recently, some "wrinkles" have begun to be noticed in the 
relationship between the press and the government. The press 
has launched a carpet-bombing of the government in connection 
with a series of outstanding issues, such as the diversion of 
operating funds of the Sangmudae project, the cases of 
premature electioneering, the issue of North Korea's nuclear 
facilities, and the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade talks. 
In addition, the press has heaped rebukes on President Kim 
Yong-sam's close aides by using all kinds of figures of speech 
such as "scandalous," "ignominious," and "unsightly." [passage 
omitted] 
  The government and the ruling party have nervously reacted 
to 
these rebukes. During his press conference on 31 March DLP 
Secretary General Mun Chong-su complained, "The only sectors 
that have not been reformed yet are the press and the religious 
community." Said General Secretary Mun: "Inchon Mayor Choe 
Ki-son and South Chungchong Provincial Governor Pak Tae-kwon 
are trying their best in their own ways, but the press seems to 
be mounting a political offensive against them. The press 
should show its inclination to reform by receiving normal tax 
inspections, for one thing." 
  In his congratulatory address to the 7 April Newspaper Day 
ceremony at which prizes were awarded to outstanding weekly 
papers, Vice Information Minister Yi Kyong-chae said: 
"Recently, press abuses have been the talk of the town. The 
press is dishonest in some respects, particularly in its 
operations as well as in reportage. It is self-contradictory 
for the press to call for justice while being corrupt itself." 
As concrete proof of its dishonesty, the vice minister cited 
these instances: refusal to disclose circulation; high-pressure 
advertising sales, tax evasion, and search for assets-based 
profits associated with news coverage. 
  During the 1 April meeting with a group of newspaper chief 
executives invited to the Blue House, President Kim Yong-sam 
briefed them on the results of his visit to Japan and China. 
Reportedly, the president took that opportunity to express his 
strong criticism of the press. 
  It is natural for the press to expose and criticize mistakes 
made by the government. The question, however, is whether the 
motives for criticism are pure or not. Some recent measures 
taken by the government against the press are indicative of the 
heightening tension between the government and the press. 
  The National Tax Administration on 15 March undertook a tax 
investigation of KYONGHYANG SINMUN, CHUNGANG ILBO, SEOUL 
SINMUN, HANGUK ILBO, and the Korean Broadcasting System (KBS). 
The National Tax Administration plans to conduct tax 
investigations of these four daily newspapers and the KBS for 
40 days by dispatching eight tax auditors to each of these 
companies. This is the first tax investigation of 
national-level news media in 15 years. According to reports, 
the auditors will conduct an extensive tax audit on 120 
categories, during which they will not receive even a single 
free meal from the newspaper companies being audited. The 
auditors made comments such as: "We did not know that newspaper 
companies have been managed like a hole-in- the-wall store"; or 
"Unexpectedly, there are so many questionable practices." 
Newspaper companies seem to find themselves in a very 
embarrassing position. 
  The investigations are scheduled to be finished by August. 
The press is extremely nervous about whether or not the 
National Tax Administration will make public the results. If 
they do, the press, which has remained a potential object of 
reform, is bound to experience a major impact. [passage omitted] 
  Meanwhile, on 14 March the Board of Audit and Inspection 
uncovered the expedient assistance given to reporters in 
foreign travel by some local education offices and ordered 
corrective measures. Thus the board called a halt to the 
practice of government agencies providing assistance to 
reporters in their trips. Naturally, newspaper companies are 
unhappy about all these measures. 
  All these examples indicate that the government might have 
some ulterior motive. So far the press has been on the 
defensive over the media policy pursued by the Administration. 
The press remained silent in a show of displeasure at the 
demand for disclosing journalists' properties. However, it 
partially accepted the requests for disclosing the circulation 
figures and taking holidays off. The press has tried hard in 
its own way to show its "posture of being a participant in the 
reform drive." [passage omitted] 
  No one is more seriously aware than the authorities that 
there is something ominous in the counteroffensive of the press 
against the government. By an odd coincidence, DLP Secretary 
General Mun and Vice Information Minister Yi simultaneously 
made their remarks about conducting investigations and stopping 
tax evasion. They made these remarks because they knew by 
intuition why the press was mounting a counteroffensive against 
the government. 
  LDP Secretary General Mun said that the press and the 
religious community are the only sectors in our society that 
have not been reformed. With the turmoil of the Chogyejong 
Buddhist sector as momentum, the wind of reform is blowing over 
the religious community, and this leaves the press as the only 
institution yet to be reformed. If it is the judgment of the 
authorities that the press is mounting organized resistance 
against the government's determination to carry out reform, 
they should resolutely deal with it. 
  However, in reality, the government position is simply 
noncommittal. Concluding that a paucity of public information 
on government measures that caused a lot of unfavorable reports 
about the reform movement, the DLP has organized a public 
information committee of former journalists. This could be 
taken as a gesture of reconciliation toward the press. In fact, 
while conducting tax investigations of newspaper companies, the 
government has left some room for compromise. For one thing, 
CHOSON ILBO and TONG-A ILBO--both recorded the largest profit 
margins of all newspapers--are not included in the list of 
companies subject to the first phase of investigation. 
  In private, a certain newspaper executive candidly said: "We 
are afraid that we might become a scapegoat in the power 
struggle between newspaper owners and the government." In 
other words, as soon as the government and the press compromise 
after their sharp confrontation, only the companies' middle 
management who led the criticism of the government would 
undeservedly suffer the consequences. 
  In fact, it is no exaggeration to say that government 
measures so far against the press have been nothing but 
rhetoric. Neither the assets disclosure nor the circulation 
disclosure figures has been successful. Only the owners of some 
local newspaper companies and phoney journalists have been 
taken into custody. The present government's press policy is not 
much different from the past authoritarian regimes. 
  If the authorities are correct in their judgment that the 
press is putting up an organized resistance against it, one 
should conclude that the press sees right through government 
motives in trying to reform the press. In other words, the real 
purpose of the press policy is not reform it, but to tame it. 
This is to say that if the press stands its ground, the 
government is bound to yield to some degree. [passage omitted] 

