Language: <F P=105> Swedish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Ylva Nilsson report: "Belfrage Showed Maps"] </F>
  [Text] Brussels -- Sweden's chief negotiator in the 
negotiations with the EU [European Union], Frank Belfrage, put 
on an exhibition of maps for the EU's representatives when they 
met for negotiations yesterday morning. 
  The maps were of Norrland and were intended to give an idea 
of how large and sparsely populated this part of the country is. 
  Sweden failed to complete any chapters in the negotiations 
at 
yesterday's meeting. 
  The chapter concerning indirect taxation was raised but here 
the negotiators still have the problem of how much spirits and 
tobacco Swedes will be allowed to take home with them after a 
trip abroad. Sweden wants to retain the current allowances for 
between three and seven years, with the possibility of extending 
this period. The EU is proposing allowances of an additional 
half liter of spirits, 5 liters of wine, and 15 liters of beer 
to apply for a shorter period. 
  "I believe that we can reach a compromise here. The most 
important thing for us is that we have the right to review 
(read: extend) the rules after the end of the transitional 
period," Belfrage said after the meeting. 
  Another problem is the duty on cigarettes where the direct 
introduction of the EU method would mean a hefty price increase 
for Swedish smokers. 
  According to Belfrage, this problem can be solved without 
any 
change in cigarette prices -- for example, through a reduction 
in purchase tax or a decrease in profits by tobacconists. 
(Swedish tobacconists make 17 percent per packet as against 8 
percent for EU tobacconists. 
  The Swedes have received some depressing responses to the 
additional checks against animal and plant diseases that they 
have demanded. The negotiators think that the concession the EU 
has made to the applicant nations in the field of environmental 
regulations (a revision of the EU's own rules) ought to be able 
to be made use of here. 
  Belfrage used the meeting to explain that the inhabitants of 
Norrland are a lot poorer than the GNP figures the Swedish 
negotiators have given to the EU might lead people to believe. 
  For the time being at least the EU negotiators had no 
comment 
to make. 

