CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Andrey Matlin: "Green Peas--the Bright Future of </F>
Machinebuilding? Paradoxes of Privatization"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Draw Swords! </H5>
  So what if we flopped in the triumphal building of 
communism? 
Now it looks as if we are building capitalism on one-sixth of 
terra firma strictly in accordance with "Das Kapital." 
  After all, only the ungrateful Germans are ignoring the 
advice of their compatriot. They are even conducting 
privatization unscientifically, not in a capitalist way. They 
take an enterprise in the East sector. They spend a lot of time 
on it, restructure, forecast its development, arrange for 
countless expert evaluations. And only then privatize. And even 
that is done by bid. 
  We do it differently. We charge like a cavalry through the 
pages of the "Short History of the VKP(B) [All-Union Communist 
(Bolshevik) Party]" and--onward to capitalization! 
  ...Some functionary up there, at the "top," probably grunted 
with satisfaction when he saw on his desk a report on the GShM 
[mining machine-building plant] plant. Let us face it--not too 
many of our enterprises choose the "capitalist" road when 
converting to joint-stock ownership--the first option of 
conversion. And here a whole plant does so! In the center of the 
Urals. A plant that builds mining machinery for "hard currency 
export" sectors. 
  One has to admire the GShM leadership's sacrifice, bordering 
on martyrdom. It was their director Davydov, of all people, who 
accomplished this change in psychology. He invited a 
progressive-thinking expert to the general meeting on the 
subject of choosing the stock-conversion option. He passionately 
lobbied for the first option. He courageously criticized the 
supporters of the "kolkhoz-mentality" second option, which the 
public favored until the very last moment. Nobody can doubt the 
altruism of his design: A little later the "pre-privatization" 
director resolutely stepped down to make room for the new choice 
of owners--the stockholders. 
  In short, it seems that everybody should be satisfied now. 
The GShM proletariat--with its consciousness. The former 
"administrators"--with their foresight and altruism in the name 
of progress. And the owners of the controlling share of 
stock--with a lucky purchase, right? 
<H5>  Reverse Coup </H5>
  What can one say about the plant's new "helmsmen"? Alas, 
almost nothing. They chosen to modestly remain in the shadows, 
do not accept congratulations, and refuse contact with the media. 
  All that is known is that at the auction (the lion's share 
of 
GShM stock was sent to the voucher auction to be sold to 
investors) two small companies decisively ruled the ball: the AO 
[joint-stock company] "Evolventa" and the TO [trade association] 
"Ark." Together they acquired more than one-third of the plant's 
stock, appraised at 17 million (??!!) rubles [R]. Then they took 
in as a founder the "Evoluta" company and combined their votes. 
Moreover, in some inexplicable way "Evoluta" received an 
additional 20-percent package--bringing the total to a 
controlling share--from the hands of the staff of the oblast 
committee for the administration of state property. 
  According to the rules, this structure could transfer the 
stock for voting to its representative. At the GShM they thought 
it would probably be someone from the plant or the committee. 
They were wrong. As the oblast committee staff explained to 
naive GShM workers: "The country has taken a course towards 
capitalization. So this is the way it is." 
  This is how, without a single shot or explosion, a coup took 
place at the GShM. A coup in reverse: Unlike 1917, this was a 
denationalization of property. 
  As in every coup, there was a "state of emergency" at the 
GShM--an emergency meeting of stockholders was called by the 
"Evoluta" management, using their rights and the trump card of a 
hefty bundle of stock--both theirs and state-owned. 
  The plant workers were about to convene their "constituent 
assembly": The plant's public organizations started writing a 
customary "agenda" for stockholders' meetings, with "reports" 
and "prospects." Contenders for the director's job, including 
the former director, began sweating on election programs and 
promises. None of this was needed, however. 
  As soon as the meeting opened, the owners of the controlling 
share--just like in 1917--asked straight out and firmly: Who is 
the provisional government here? And Mr. Davydov's job was taken 
by V. Oshmanov, the head of one of the now-combined companies; 
V. Chashchin, the head of another firm, took charge of the board 
of the newly baked GShM AO. Thus, the key posts were taken by 
"Evoluta" representatives. 
<H5>  Economizing on People... </H5>
  With the advent of the new GShM owners, innovation soon 
came. 
  First, the newly baked director put together a personal 
protection team. Plant workers looked with some apprehension on 
the muscular lads that began appearing at the plant. Then the 
personnel department learned to its surprise that a new, until 
then unheard-of, staff position had been established: deputy 
director for economics and labor. The people at GShM attempted 
to interpret this innovation in their favor: The new authority 
is giving a clear hint, they said, that from now on the plant's 
economics will be subordinated to the interests of the working 
man. 
  The new authority, however, had a somewhat different view of 
how to resolve "labor issues" at the plant. Since December the 
majority of plant personnel have been sent en masse on 
protracted leave, and a thick layer of undisturbed snow has 
settled near the gates. 
  Who was left? One can glean this from the sparse lines of 
the 
director's order: "My deputies, production department directors, 
and department and services directors remain on the job." Not 
all of them, however, only those "responsible for preparing the 
annual report." The payroll window is also practically closed, 
saving money for the plant. In principle, weeks-long leave was 
nothing new at neighboring state enterprises, too. The kicker, 
however, was that GShM personnel were not even receiving the 
two-thirds of the salary due them. 
  Trade union leader A. Kovshov, who also volunteered to 
participate in the resolution of "labor and economy" issues 
(began to protest against the new arbitrariness), quickly had 
his oxygen supply cut off: His trade union boss's pass was 
simply confiscated at the gate. 
  As a result, some workers went to look for a better deal at 
other enterprises; many others were simply fired under different 
pretexts and in violation of the law. The decision on the mass 
"discharge" strangely coincided in time with the protest sent to 
the enterprise administration by the Kirovskiy Rayon procuracy 
(in the course of checking the trade union committee chairman's 
complaint, the procuracy staff to their utter surprise 
discovered a host of glaring violations of the law). 
  It is good, of course, that we are coming back to market 
relations now instead of, for instance, serfdom. Every worker is 
at least absolutely free to change profession and place of work. 
As soon as he is told: You are free!--he just goes and changes. 
  What do we do about housing, though? 
  Like every self-respecting plant, GShM had its own "communal 
digs." The plant's housing department still remembers with 
pleasure how they held the first place in the rayon. 
  "Now one sometimes cannot help but laugh. Through tears," 
clarifies A. Shirgazin, housing and household services 
department chief. "The plant has a special machine with a lift 
basket: To knock icicles off the roof in the spring. Now it is 
kept locked up, and this time we had to turn to the fire 
department for equipment. We had some things issued from the 
warehouse--you will laugh, just some gloves--and got stopped at 
the gate like thieves; they say it is not permitted. We are now 
economizing. The new bosses have given me clear hints several 
times: Your department simply does not exist for us. This is 
obvious even without the hints: Not only are workers not paid, 
but money for municipal services is not forthcoming either. 
Organizations are sending us threatening ultimatums: We will 
turn off the water, elevators... And are gradually moving from 
words--warnings--to actions." 
<H5>  A Supermarket Plant </H5>
  In the advance issue of ZAKAMSKAYA STORONA the newspaper had 
a laudatory ode to privatization, which was still forthcoming at 
the time. The GShM was mentioned as an example of an entity 
ideal for navigating stormy market waters: flexible modifiable 
production; its own foundry and forge shop. Traditional 
customers are the rich pillars of domestic industry. They bring 
foreign currency to the country and are not living in poverty: 
gold prospectors, oil industry, potassium production. They 
cannot do without Perm. You want an oil drilling rig 
transported? Only GShM makes (or rather, used to make) 
transporting machines. And how do you reload potassium ore 
without Kama equipment? Also, no way. Or dig gold-containing ore? 
  In short, with such a potential of production and 
distribution--wow!--even in our times one can live well. Or can 
one? 
  One of the new director's first orders was to sell off in 
the 
shortest amount of time all the stockpiled reserves of 
production materials. 
  Deputy General Director L. Gubanov was told to sell R220-240 
million worth of boiler oil, dispose of R50 million worth of 
weighers kept in the warehouse, and get rid of R54 million worth 
of copper wire. All this was being sold off because of... "lack 
of means for purchasing production resources." 
  Such a bold sellout can hardly be explained by a lack of 
needed cash. This is true. There is a nonpayments crisis and 
such everywhere... But there also are foundry orders long paid 
for by the oil industry; there is another score of generous 
die-making proposals. And at the same time the foundry is idle. 
And then gets a strange order: sell off tonnes of liquid 
glass--a material in most acute shortage, without which no 
casting can be done. The foundry workers are not being paid 
wages and expect to be laid off. 
  Instead of trolleys with ingots one began to see in 
warehouses carts with cans of green peas, tomato paste, boxes 
containing television sets, furniture, plywood... The scale of 
the current production process at GShM can be seen again by 
reading the director's orders: "Upon arrival, sell R250 million 
worth of foodstuffs." 
  Previously unfamiliar words became a part of the plant's 
lexicon: "babki" [dough], "lemons" [R100,000]... 
  Well, of course, the financial sphere is very important. 
Really, really important! 
  But then perhaps the new owners, by imposing strict 
economizing on production and social services, by conducting 
bold multistep food-and-rug operations, are striving to 
accumulate financial potential, and will suddenly present the 
country with an abundance of mining machinery, which will take 
the domestic raw materials sector, and the oblast budget, 
straight into the stratosphere? 
  We do not know. We would like to have a heart-to-heart talk 
on this subject with director Oshmanov. Except that he 
absolutely refused. All we have is sparse food for thought: GShM 
recently tried to sell its own... rail station. 
  As is known, one cannot transport by truck even the smallest 
mining equipment of the kind the plant manufactured until 
recently. On the other hand, perhaps the new "industry captains" 
are secretly working on the development of pocket prime movers 
and mining microcombines? 
<H5>  Here We Are... </H5>
  If one is to believe the original sources, even God, after 
creating the world, was not above regularly sending his 
representatives to earth--to see whether everything was going on 
there in accordance with the divine design. 
  Could the oblast committee for the administration of 
property 
delegate its man to the meeting where it was being decided who 
would head this rather sizable plant? It could. His vote, with a 
sizable package of voting stock in hand, could be a decisive one. 
  They did not delegate anyone. Even out of curiosity. 
  Those sweet Germans! They conduct their restructuring. Spend 
time on scientists, solicit bids. Organize tenders, selecting 
reliable investors instead of fakes who are only out to skim off 
the cream. I wish we had their problems... 

