BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ron Ben-Yishay] </F>
  [Text] IDF [Israel Defense Forces] commanders in the Gaza 
Strip and Jericho are exhibiting hesitant optimism. Even after 
the 'Afula car bomb and its bloody consequences and even after 
the stabbings at the Kissufim roadblock and the shooting at the 
Ashdod Junction, they still believe that reasonable safety can 
be guaranteed for Jews who will live inside and on the border of 
the Palestinian self-rule areas. 
  "The defense system we have devised creates a physical 
barrier between Jews and Arabs, reducing friction to the minimum 
and hindering terrorist attacks. Even suicide attackers will 
have to exert themselves to succeed," said people who will have 
to turn this pledge into reality. These people also believe 
that after a brief adjustment period, the Palestinian police 
force will perform well and will be able to enforce order. 
  As the evacuation clamor intensifies, there is more 
extensive 
coordination with the local chapter of Fatah and there is a 
feeling among the personnel involved that this model exercise 
(launched in preparation for autonomy throughout the 
territories) stands a good chance. It is not a matter of a mere 
gut feeling. The intelligence materiel, as well as the 
periodical talks with Hamas [Islamic Resistance Movement] 
people, are grounds for the belief that the Islamic Movement 
will also join the arrangement eventually. 
  Moreover, local IDF commanders do not fear that 'Arafat's 
policemen/soldiers will be unable to exercise complete control 
over Hamas and the other rejectionist organizations. They 
believe that such a situation is quite likely during the first 
months after the evacuation, but claim that even if that 
happens, the safety of the Jewish settlements and residents on 
both sides of the Green Line can be safeguarded. The IDF and 
Israel Police redeployment and the security arrangements set 
down in the agreement with the Palestinians make that possible. 
Yet Israel will have to deploy more troops than planned around 
and inside the Strip and around Jericho and will have to bolster 
its intelligence setup. 
  The IDF is also prepared for the worst-case scenario in 
which 
'Arafat and his men either lose control or decide for some 
reason not to adhere to the agreement, for a scenario in which 
the Strip or the Jericho enclave become one big terrorist base. 
"Such an extreme development would mean that the agreement 
between us and the PLO has collapsed," a very senior officer 
says, "and if the agreement no longer exists, Israel will be 
free to act as its sees fit in the defense of the Jewish 
residents and settlements." In this context, "as it sees fit" 
does not necessarily mean the reoccupation of either the Strip 
or the Jericho enclave, although that, too, is possible. It 
means adjusting the measures and the intensity of the reaction 
to the situation in the field. 
  The agreement with the PLO (which has not been finalized and 
signed as yet) stipulates that three lateral roads from Israeli 
territory to the Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip will be 
controlled by the IDF -- not only the roads themselves but also 
several dozen meters (probably 30 meters on each side) on both 
sides of the roads. If the PLO police fail in preventing 
attacks against Israeli vehicles driving on these roads, Israel 
will consider itself free to expand the IDF-controlled territory 
on both sides of these roads to a point from which terrorists 
will be unable to harass people using the roads. Incidentally, 
joint Palestinian-Israeli patrols, under Israeli command, will 
move along these lateral roads, but the bulk of the security 
tasks will be assigned to IDF and Border Police patrols. 
  And another point: Although Gaza Strip residents will be 
allowed to travel to and from the West Bank, they will be 
confined to one or two roads, from which they will not be 
permitted to stray. 
  Another possibility was explored in simulation exercises 
held at the Southern Command before its recommendations on the 
arrangement with the Palestinians were submitted: How will the 
IDF react if Gaza terrorists acquire or improvise light mortars 
or katyushas and use them to fire at Israeli settlements from a 
distance? The proposed solution: Issue a warning and give the 
Palestinian police force a chance to tackle the problem by 
themselves. If 'Arafat's men are either unwilling or unable, 
the IDF (with the political echelons' approval) will not 
hesitate to send its own troops into the Palestinian self-rule 
territory and to take every necessary step. These troops will 
not have to remain there on a permanent basis. As in Lebanon, 
they will conduct their operation and leave the territory; stay 
for a short period and leave; or, in extreme cases, set up a 
permanent outpost. By the way, the undercover units in Gaza and 
in Judaea and Samaria will undergo changes, but the Duvdevan 
unit will continue to operate in Judaea and Samaria. 
  Almost every problem expected to arise during the 
implementation of the Gaza-Jericho agreement has a quite 
satisfactory military answer. The main problem is political: 
There is a danger that the experiment will fail for some 
reason, such as an inter-Palestinian bloodbath inside an area 
evacuated by Israel. There is hardly any doubt that in such an 
event, international public opinion will point an accusing 
finger at us, and we will be unable to do anything to stop the 
massacre. Or if Gaza or the Jericho enclave should become a 
terrorist hornet's nest, God forbid, and the IDF will have to 
reconquer the areas. In such an event, too, our statesmen will 
have to work overtime to counter criticism about Israel's having 
violated the agreement and fight demands for anti-Israel 
sanctions, which are certain to be raised at the United Nations. 
Hence, the Palestinian police force's failure is no less our 
problem than it is Chairman Abu-'Ammar's [Yasir 'Arafat]. 
  As already stated, the belief is that this force will 
eventually manage to become the sovereign force in the area. It 
is almost certain that should anything happen in Jericho or in 
the Gaza Strip, the PLO stands a good chance of more-or-less 
prevailing over Hamas and the other "refuseniks." The main 
problem the police force will face -- in the first months, at 
least -- will be the tension between the policemen from abroad 
and the veteran "intifadah fighters," who were part of the scene 
either in the area or in one Ansar or another throughout the 
years. And although they are on the same side, veteran Fatah 
men in the field will also find it difficult to accept an 
unfamiliar general from the Palestine Liberation Army [PLA], an 
army whose three brigades have yet to score an achievement. 
  And there is another problem. The PLA's police training is 
insufficient. It is unfamiliar with the terrain and has 
received no antiterror warfare training. It can be safely 
assumed that in the beginning, Hamas and Islamic Jihad 
youngsters will fool them quite easily. 'Arafat is aware of 
this problem and is therefore trying to man his police force 
with as many Fatah members as possible. The latter -- for 
example, members of the notorious Force 17 (responsible for the 
Nizzanim and Achille Lauro terrorist attacks) -- are better 
trained than the PLA troops. Yet an excessive number of Fatah 
representatives in the police force will create the impression 
that the force is not pan-Palestinian but rather a Fatah branch 
trying to promote -- under Israeli sponsorship -- the 
organization's political goals. 
  If all this is not enough, 'Arafat is appointing two or 
three persons to the same post at a time when a clear chain of 
command is vital. It is not clear why he is behaving this way. 
Perhaps he must appease his many touchy aides who are vital for 
his maintaining control over the organization, or perhaps this 
is a Machiavellian ploy aimed at having his appointees fight 
each other, thus weakening them. The one result, however, is 
incredible confusion. To date, the IDF does not know for sure 
who will be responsible for security in the Gaza Strip and in 
Jericho on 'Arafat's behalf. To be on the safe side, IDF 
officers are holding a dialogue with everybody -- that is, with 
all those who are already in the area. 
  Of all the childhood diseases (so it is hoped) of the 
Palestinian police force, the one that worries the IDF and the 
other security branches most of all is liaison and coordination. 
The joint patrols along previously demarcated roads are not 
such a big problem, because the Palestinian and Israeli 
commanders on the ground can communicate directly. If such a 
patrol is ambushed, for example, it is likely that all its 
members will return the fire. The experience of the recent past 
shows us that former enemies can find a common language, 
especially if they share a common interest. 
  The most difficult mission, however, will be to attain real 
security cooperation and prevent mistakes and regrettable 
mishaps while each side is maintaining its special overt and 
covert operations. For example: What will a Palestinian police 
force do if it recognizes an Israeli intelligence man in the 
area? Or what will soldiers manning an IDF post do if they 
identify Palestinian terrorists preparing for an attack in the 
Palestinian autonomy area, not far from them? 
  The solution proposed by the IDF is to set up coordination 
centers, each one made up of two operations rooms -- one Israeli 
and one Palestinian -- furnished with sophisticated 
communications equipment. These two operations rooms will be 
close to each other, thus enabling quick coordination 24 hours a 
day. This coordination will apply not only to IDF and Border 
Police forces vis-a-vis the Palestinian police force but also to 
the Shin Bet vis-a-vis the Palestinian internal security force. 
Overall security, on the Israeli side, will be in the hands of 
the local IDF commander. There will be two such centers in the 
Gaza Strip: one, located at the Erez checkpoint, for 
coordinating activity in the northern Gaza Strip; the other, in 
Nuriya in the Qatif Bloc near Khan Yunus, for coordinating 
operations in the southern part. In the Jericho enclave, there 
will be one joint operations room. The unfortunate incident in 
Jabalyah last week, in which six Fatah peace supporters were 
killed, apparently made the Palestinians grasp the advantages of 
the method proposed by Israel. 
  Another source for Israeli concern is the weapons -- mainly 
the ammunition -- which will be provided to the Palestinian 
police force. The Palestinians -- particularly those in the 
Gaza Strip -- already have a sizable amount of light weapons. 
There is no shortage of assault rifles, submachine guns, 
pistols, or grenades of all kinds for terrorist acts. The 
terrorists, however, do not have enough ammunition, explosives, 
and long-range weapons such as mortars, heavy machine guns, and 
RPG launchers. 
  Since the IDF will continue to be in charge of the external 
borders of the autonomy, it is likely that the terrorists will 
continue to find it difficult to bring in weapons and ammunition 
from the outside. But at least some of the weapons the 
terrorists lack will be found in the Palestinian police force's 
possession. 
  It will be almost impossible to prevent the transfer of at 
least some of the weapons to the opponents of the peace process. 
Some will probably find their way to the black market, and there 
will probably be a few Palestinian policemen who will decide to 
aid the rejectionist organizations. The IDF has no solution to 
this problem; this issue will rest with the Palestinian police 
commanders and 'Arafat's aides. Well-informed sources promise 
that the Palestinian police force will not have heavy weapons or 
armored vehicles with offensive capabilities. They will have, 
at most, light armored cars equipped with machine guns. 
  The Jewish sector also poses serious problems to the IDF. 
The defense of the settlements in the Gaza Strip will be 
accomplished via the method of enclosed defense. Every bloc of 
settlements will constitute an independently defended area with 
separate headquarters, observation and guard posts, a 
circumferential electronic fence, and security roads. The 
Palestinian police force will not be permitted to enter these 
areas or the roads passing through them. IDF roadblocks along 
these routes will make sure they do not cross. Such roadblocks, 
manned both by IDF soldiers and the Palestinian police, will be 
the locations most prone to attacks, as has already been proved 
by the incident at the Kissufim roadblock, in which a Jew was 
stabbed by his two workers. 
  Another focus for friction involves the Arab workers 
employed 
in the hothouses of the settlements in the Gaza Strip and Jordan 
Valley. Even if vehicle traffic to and from the Green Line is 
banned, such vehicles will still be able to reach the 
roadblocks. An incident similar to the 'Afula car-bomb attack 
can recur at the Erez checkpoint or Kissufim. 
  Israeli settlements bordering on the Gaza Strip will be 
defended by an electronic fence and a security road which will 
be completed in one year. Until then, the area adjacent to the 
Green Line will be prone to infiltrations for purposes of theft 
and terror attacks. 'Afula-style suicide terrorists can still 
enter Israel. It is advisable, therefore, to facilitate the 
erection of this fence. 
  Meanwhile, until the fence is finished, the IDF will provide 
a temporary answer by beefing up its forces along the 
international border. A bypass road is being built near the 
Jericho enclave to provide the Jordan Valley settlements free 
excess from the northern part of the valley to the south and 
from there to Jerusalem and the Dead Sea. According to security 
elements, every settlement in the Jordan Valley -- as opposed to 
the situation in the Strip -- will receive a special "security 
package" designed to meet its particular needs. 
  Fortunately, not many extremist Jewish elements reside 
around 
the Jericho enclave. In the Qatif Bloc and in the settlements 
in the northern part of the Strip, there are some potential 
troublemakers. Some say they number less than 20 people; others 
claim there are more than 30 such troublemakers. The IDF claims 
it makes no difference. The method of defense for the 
settlements and settlers traveling along the roads of the Gaza 
Strip guarantees an almost total separation between the local 
population and the Jewish population. The settlers are not 
supposed to have any contact with the Palestinian police force, 
unless a Jew decides to enter the autonomy area. IDF soldiers 
manning roadblocks will warn these Jews -- settlers or Israelis 
from within the Green Line coming to the Gaza Strip or Jericho 
for business purposes -- that the responsibility is theirs alone 
and will urge them to reconsider. If they identify professional 
Jewish troublemakers, they will probably not be allowed to enter 
the autonomy. 
  The 'Afula car-bomb attack proved again what we already 
know: 
There are no security means or peace arrangements that can stop 
a highly motivated suicide-murderer. The Gaza-Jericho First 
agreement, with its security arrangements, guarantees that the 
number of areas of friction between Israelis and Palestinians 
will be reduced, and this in itself is a significant 
contribution to the security of both sides. 

