BFN 

<F P=106> [By Foo Choy Peng] </F>
  [Text] China is confident it can hold the yuan at the 
current level of 8.6 to seven to the US dollar in the long term, 
says a senior official of the State Administration of Exchange 
Control (SAEC). 
  "We know foreign investors are concerned about the stability 
of the yuan. We're even more concerned because an unstable yuan 
has many implications for the economy," Yang Gonglin, director 
of the SAEC's policy and regulation department, said yesterday. 
  Speaking at a conference on China trade and investment, Mr 
Yang said it was China's intention to maintain the current level 
of the yuan to the dollar. 
  As part of the move towards full convertibility of the yuan, 
China unified its two-tier exchange rate system in January by 
pegging the yuan at 8.7 to the dollar, the level traded at the 
swap centres. It has since been trading comfortably within 
bank-based margins of 8.6 to seven. Foreign investors said the 
stability on the inter-bank foreign exchange system was more the 
result of support from the People's Bank of China and had little 
to do with market forces. But yesterday, Mr Yang maintained it 
was more a reflection of demand and supply than of the central 
bank's support. 
  Despite earlier worries that China might not have enough 
foreign reserves to stabilise the yuan, Mr Yang said the country 
had seen an increase in its foreign reserves since the currency 
reforms. Official figures, released last week, show that the 
state foreign currency reserves have risen U.S.$8 billion since 
the start of the year. And in April, the inflow of hard 
currency to the banks designated by the People's Bank to handle 
foreign exchange transactions exceeded selling by $3.14 billion. 
  There has been some upward pressure on the yuan recently as 
credit tightening by the banks has made it more difficult for 
companies to secure yuan to finance their operations. As a 
result, companies are selling foreign exchange earnings in 
return for yuan. 
  Trading in China's inter-bank foreign exchange system is 
limited to domestic enterprises, while overseas-funded 
enterprises continue to buy and sell foreign exchange at the 
swap centres. Observers said the inter-bank system was still 
not sophisticated enough and, if foreign enterprises were 
allowed to join it, as was originally planned, it would be 
inundated by the sheer volume of transactions. 
  Mr Yang said there was no timetable for the foreign 
enterprises. He said there were plans to expand the number of 
provincial centres later this year to link them to the national 
foreign exchange centre in Shanghai. Mr Yang said the reforms 
introduced in January were designed to achieve full 
convertibility of the yuan in the country's current account in 
the near term. 

