Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Studio interview with Economics Minister Aleksandr Shokhin </F>
by correspondent Matvey Ganapolskiy on 1 February; from the 
"Horse's Mouth" program -- live or recorded] 
  [Text] [Ganapolskiy] A strange thing has happened to our 
guest, a high-ranking state official and member of the new 
Russian cabinet. His close associates in the old cabinet 
refused to join the new one, whereas he did not. Since the new 
cabinet is already being accused of abandoning reforms, 
consequently today's interlocutor is abandoning reforms, too. 
He holds one of the most important fundamental posts, that of 
economics minister. 
  Aleksandr Nikolayevich Shokhin, frankly speaking, when I 
learned not just about your appointment but only about your 
agreement, why did you agree? You know perfectly well that you 
will come under fire and already have. Everybody is talking 
about this, and first of all Chernomyrdin. 
  [Shokhin] I would like to recall some words from my election 
speeches, maybe even spoken in this very studio, I do not 
remember now. I said that when excessive radicalism threatens 
reforms I become a conservative, and, on the contrary, when I 
see that reforms are in danger I become a reformer. It is true 
that the situation is now such that, although reforms are not 
quite in danger, we all indeed are going through a crucial time, 
and whether this course of reforms continues or not depends to a 
great degree on each individual who has stayed in the 
government. This is the first thing. 
  Second, I think that it is not that our colleagues in the 
previous government, Gaydar and Fedorov, left because they felt 
a turn in the government's course, but to a great degree it is 
precisely because they left that there is a certain danger of 
this turn taking place. I have to state with regret that these 
colleagues of mine -- and not only in the previous government 
but perhaps in two previous governments -- have also left 
because they became frightened, they were afraid to take 
responsibility, despite the fact that they were the architects 
of many decisions, architects of reforms, responsible at this 
difficult period of reforms when many consequences, including 
the negative consequences of reforms, are having their effect. 
  [Ganapolskiy] Gaydar and Fedorov were the prime movers of 
this engine. Now it seems that, since you have stayed, you are 
a kind of second fiddle, the reverse of the coin, you are 
secondary. 
  [Shokhin] You know, it is true that both Gaydar and Fedorov 
played leading parts in the economic reforms, although there is 
a nuance which goes unnoticed. For the first nine months of 
last year Fedorov regarded himself as the main reformer, but 
after Gaydar came they tried to share the laurels of chief 
reformer for the remaining four months, and many problems were 
caused precisely by the fact that there were two chief 
reformers. The finance minister was directly subordinated to 
the prime minister, and Gaydar, who returned in the government 
to take the post of the chief ideologue of reforms, was left 
without yjr main levers of influence on the economy. 
  Incidentally, the presidential decree on the reorganization 
of the federal bodies of power at the center gave Gaydar what he 
had not had in the last four months of last year. Namely, the 
decree gave him control over the finance minister, the 
privatization minister, and the minister for foreign economic 
ties with CIS countries. That is, the three vice premiers who 
for the last few months of last year were independent, and had 
direct access to the premier -- I refer to Fedorov, Chubays, and 
Shokhin. Under the new decree, in its first version, they 
became ordinary ministers subordinate to Gaydar. Frankly 
speaking, had Gaydar gone through that period without any 
dramatic political statements he would have become a real figure 
in charge of reforms. It seems that this was exactly what the 
president's plan was -- and maybe the premier's too. But Gaydar 
decided against taking this opportunity, among other things 
probably because it was becoming clear that he himself would be 
held chiefly accountable in this scenario. So he courteously -- 
I cannot really think of any other word -- ceded responsibility 
to Chernomyrdin. 
  [Ganapolskiy] All right, we've been talking about them but 
they are not here, and so we can't hear what they have to say in 
return, as I am sure they would. But now, Aleksandr 
Nikolayevich, let's turn to you, the economics minister. I 
remember you saying that, whereas before there were abrupt 
movements, what is being done now should rather resemble working 
with a scalpel. In other words, the work has to be done with 
caution. Nonetheless, Mr. Economics Minister, I am looking at 
you, and there are some kind of hopes pinned on you -- hopes of 
all those who are watching this program, and my hopes too. I 
would very much like to believe that you are about to say 
something, not something populist, like things we can only laugh 
at now, but something realistic. 
  [Shokhin] We do indeed have to work with a scalpel now, but 
this certainly does not mean that all the decisions made last 
year have to be carried out unquestioningly, without taking any 
new measures. What is the main thing we can do now? To my 
mind, the main thing is to introduce, as it were, market 
discipline, using all possible methods, including legislative 
and economic ones. Now we have no market discipline. Something 
quite interesting has happened here. All the economic entities 
have adapted to the mess we have -- that is, to non-payments, to 
the state not meeting its obligations. If the state does not 
meet its obligations, why should an enterprise do so, why should 
it pay taxes? So, the introduction of a strict system under 
market conditions, in which everybody meets his obligation, is 
most important. Perhaps there will be a need for a few unusual 
measures of an administrative nature for installing order here. 
  [Galapolskiy] What do you mean by unusual measures? I am 
expecting you to be saying something about taxes. To all 
appearances they will rise. 
  [Shokhin] I would not like us to tackle this question in the 
way this formula was expressed last year -- there is no other 
way of drafting a good budget apart from increasing taxes and 
cutting expenditure. 
  [Galapolskiy] So that means you know some kind of secret 
which hitherto was not known to anyone. What is it now? 
  [Shokhin] It is no secret. All these secrets long ago became 
open secrets. This is, first, increasing the sphere of tax by 
decreasing the burden of tax and by increasing the toughness, 
the discipline of tax payments, into the budget. 
  [Galapolskiy] How is this to be done? In our country we have 
a kind of new police; we have a tax service, and the Ministry of 
Finance is in operation. 
  [Shokhin] You asked me a question: how is it to be done? It 
can be done by means of tax reform. For many months now, even 
before the elections, I have spoken among other things about the 
fact that there is a need for more tax rights and financial 
resources to be transferred not only to the subjects of the 
Federation but also to the level of local self-government, to 
the level of the towns and villages, for as little resources as 
possible to be driven into the center. 
  We will hardly be able to achieve a replenishment of the 
treasury from such simple instruments, like increasing the rates 
of tax. Therefore, I would resolve at some moment, while 
maintaining the same tax rates, to embark on some broad 
concessions understandable to all, connected with stimulating 
investments and particular types of activity, specific types of 
activity, primarily connected with increasing production of 
output and services, and so on. 
  [Ganapolskiy] Is that your point of view or is it a proposal 
which was somehow discussed? 
  [Shokhin] These are not just my proposals. These are the 
proposals of the ministry. They cannot be solely considered the 
proposals of the Ministry of Economics. We are working closely 
with the Ministry of Finance, too. I do not think that the 
Ministry of Economics and the Ministry of Finance should be 
antagonists. One department lobbies for favorable credits. The 
Ministry of Economics is usually this kind of department. And 
the Ministry of Finance will stand guard over financial 
stabilization. 
  Unless we agree on ways of implementing credit policy and 
specific investment projects, there will be many cracks for 
pro-inflationary decisions to get through. There is a classic 
example on which we will probably concentrate our efforts. This 
is the notorious selective policy. Already this phrase has 
become a term of abuse for the government's opponents, who 
consider the selective policy a device by which the government 
will hand out money left and right. 
  But the most important thing for us now is not simply the 
distribution of money to certain restricted projects, but the 
way in which the projects are selected. Up to now money tended 
to go to plants, regions, industries, industrial ministries, and 
committees which selected the projects themselves. Naturally 
money often disappeared without trace. Our objective is to 
evaluate every project on a banking basis, on commercial 
criteria perhaps, to assess its effectiveness and the likely 
return. Only after these projects have been assessed by the 
same standards, after they have passed through the eye of this 
needle, will they qualify for financial support, bearing in mind 
that budget resources available for this purpose are 
exceptionally small. 
  [Ganapolskiy] I am very anxious that the primary aim of this 
program -- in the context of our meeting with you, the economics 
minister, at any rate -- should be to extol hope in our viewers. 
Although you are not new people -- you are all well known -- 
there has been a bit of a reshuffle and we are taking a further 
move toward common sense, toward a kind of logic. If a man like 
Mikhail Zadornov, not the satirical writer, although as chairman 
of the parliamentary committee on budget and finance you could 
say that Zadornov is a kind of satirical writer. But his 
remarks about economic reform are far from funny. He says it 
has no point in the immediate future and that a steep rise in 
inflation is inevitable. He was quite emphatic about it. If he 
can say this, what does it mean? Why am I asking this? Not 
because I want you to reject or confirm what he says. My point 
is this: Despite your good intentions, won't you be simply 
overwhelmed by the overall tendency which has now come about, by 
the turnabout in policy? 
  [Shokhin] The turnabout which has been sketched has been 
sketched by specific people. This is not a spontaneous protest 
by, say, the public or the regions, and so on. This is really a 
carefully planned political show. 
  [Ganapolskiy] Can you now give me any guarantee that you 
are not, by your presence in government, an element of a 
different political show, dictated by the need to leave a few 
figures associated with reform in the government, so as to avoid 
a great outcry and strikes? Once you are no longer needed... 
  [Shokhin, interrupting] Once the deed has been done? 
  [Ganapolskiy] Yes, I didn't want to be so explicit, once the 
deed has been done, they can shake your hand and say goodbye. 
  [Shokhin] I could of course suspect that such a scenario has 
also been written. However, to be frank, if this scenario 
suddenly turns out to be a reality, I will not allow myself to 
be exploited, of course. 
  [Ganapolskiy] All right. What do you think the ruble 
exchange rate will be by the end of the year, what is your 
figure? 
  [Shokhin] I believe the rate will grow in line with 
inflation, more or less, but I would not like to forecast the 
rate of inflation, so as not to stir up inflationary 
expectations. 
  [Ganapolskiy] Do you ask your wife for advice -- she is an 
economist -- on state matters? 
  [Shokhin] I do. 
  [Ganapolskiy] Have there been many failures in your life? 
  [Shokhin] All the failures I have had later turned into 
successes. 
  [Ganapolskiy] Do you expect an upsurge in strikes? Yes or 
no? 
  [Shokhin] There will be strikes. 
  [Ganapolskiy] What has to happen to force you to resign? One 
development. 
  [Shokhin] Only one development and I talked about it 
earlier: 
I have to find myself in a situation whereby I feel that I have 
no levers to influence the situation, and that I am not looked 
upon as a key figure in the cabinet. 
  [Ganapolskiy] Did you want to take this post or another one? 
  [Shokhin] Another one. 
  [Ganapolskiy] Which one? 
  [Shokhin] I wanted to retain the post I had been holding. 
  [Ganapolskiy] That of a vice premier. 
  [Shokhin] A vice premier in charge of foreign economic ties 
and the CIS. 
  [Ganapolskiy] Are you still on good terms with Gaydar? 
  [Shokhin] My relations with Gaydar were wrecked in December 
1992, when he was leaving the government for the first time. 
  [Ganapolskiy] Do you hope to solve some questions directly 
with Yeltsin, bypassing Chernomyrdin? 
  [Shokhin, sighing] Yes. 
  [Ganapolskiy] I understand. What sport do you go in for? 
  [Shokhin] Lately I have been playing tennis twice a week for 
at least two hours, on Sundays, and late in the evening during 
the week. 
  [Ganapolskiy] Here comes the final question. It is an 
abstract one but do try to answer. When shall we have a good 
life? 
  [Shokhin] Our forecasts indicate [Ganapolskiy laughing] 
sometime in 1996. 
  [Ganapolskiy] Our forecasts indeed! Well, that's the man -- 
Russia's economics minister. Just one quote to end with: After 
two years' work under Yeltsin and one year's work under 
Chernomyrdin, one can hardly suspect Shokhin or Chubays of 
political naivety. That's from the MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI 
newspaper. I would like to thank you, Aleksandr Nikolayevich, 
and you, dear viewers. See you in a week's time. 

