BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Miguel Ramirez from the EL COMERCIO Research </F>
Unit] 
  [Text] (Chachapoyas) -- Poppy sowing areas and small 
cultivation plots are multiplying dangerously in the mountain 
regions of Amazonas Department. The forces of order cannot 
reach these sites because of a lack of logistical support and 
financial resources. Opium is extracted from the poppy and then 
processed into morphine and heroin. 
  EL COMERCIO reporters have confirmed that they surveyed the 
zone for two weeks, and found one of these sowing areas no more 
than 50 meters long. 
  In these areas, also known as pits or nurseries, the poppy 
seeds are sown and then transplanted to the cultivation plots. 
One teaspoon of poppy seeds is sold for between $400 and $450, 
while 1 kg of opium latex is sold for between $1,000 and $1,500. 
  We found the sowing area in a region of Rodriguez Mendoza 
Province, after an 18-hour walk and after having climbed steep 
and rough mountains. We were accompanied by a group of "poppy 
growers" whom we convinced to let us take a few photographs. 
  In the region the poppies were sown between January and 
February. According to the poppy growers the plants were still 
small, and would not be ready for harvesting until they are five 
months old, or some time between June and July. 
<H5>  Lack of Resources Prevent Sending Patrols to Region </H5>
  The National Police provincial chiefs in Jaen, Bagua Chica, 
Utcubamba, Chachapoyas, and Rodriguez de Mendoza have large 
amounts of data on these sowing areas, but their facilities are 
precarious, they lack specialized personnel and, worse still, 
they have no money to finance operations in the field or to pay 
guides to take them to the plantations. 
  The situation of the contingents of the 5th Army Division of 
Jungle Infantry stationed at the El Milagro settlement is very 
similar. This division is commanded by General Vladimiro Lopez. 
  An antinarcotics police chief of the Second Region of the 
Peruvian National Police in Chiclayo, which is commanded by 
Carlos Rodriguez Hurtado and covers the Amazonas Department 
jurisdiction, told us that "we have trustworthy reports about 
these plantations, but in order to reach them we need resources, 
because this sort of operation can last weeks or even entire 
months." 
  It is not easy to reach the poppy sowing areas or 
plantations. They are never near villages or settlements, and 
never near roads, trails, or rivers. 
  They are in the middle of rough mountains that are difficult 
to climb. The poppy growers get there after walking for days 
under the pouring rain that falls in the region at this time of 
the year. 
  Police forces still cannot reach these places. For the time 
being, they limit themselves to collecting data obtained from 
peasants or friends who for various reasons come to the police 
and military barracks. 
  Thus the Chiclayo and Jaen police offices and, in 
particular, 
the Chachapoyas and Rodriguez de Mendoza offices received 
reports that in the latter province there are small poppy 
plantations in the settlements of Chirimoto, Limabamba, Omia, 
Huambo, Millpuc, Totora, and Rio Verde. 
  It was in one of those settlements that EL COMERCIO found 
the 
small poppy sowing areas. 
  Similar poppy sowing areas can be found at the settlements 
of 
Chirinos, La Colpa, and Nuevo Mundo (in San Ignacio), Naranjos, 
Molipampa, and Jumbilla (near Chachapoyas), and at Chontali (in 
Jaen). 
  It must be pointed out that these settlements are only 
mentioned as points of reference, because to reach the sowing 
areas and plantations one has to walk for days. It must also be 
emphasized that the forces of order are not in any condition to 
get there for lack of the necessary resources. 
  The police reports that are regularly sent to the Antidrugs 
Division (Dinandro), headquartered in Lima, state in their 
conclusions that "for lack of logistical material and financial 
resources, and due to unfavorable geological, geographic, and 
climatic factors, the forces of order cannot reach and destroy 
the coca and marijuana plantations nor the poppy plantations 
which, to a certain extent, are smaller (one of these reports 
was dated 5 April 1994, and was prepared by the Chachapoyas 
Provincial Police Station). 
  The reports conclude, more or less, as follows: "To 
neutralize and eradicate the drug trafficking activities in our 
jurisdiction, it is recommended that the command organize joint 
Peruvian Army- Peruvian National Police teams, duly comprised of 
specialized personnel for military-police operations and having 
air and ground support, to achieve positive results in the 
antidrug effort." 
<H5>  The Poppy Growers' Routes </H5>
  As a matter of fact, the logistical material of the police 
precincts is deplorable. The Chiclayo Antinarcotics Directorate 
office, for example, is located in the "Tupac Amaru" shantytown. 
It has no vehicles, and does not even have a telephone for its 
communications. 
  The same thing is true in Bagua, where the only truck the 
police have is out of order. At Rodriguez de Mendoza there is 
an old vehicle that is unsuitable for such rough terrain. 
  Those who are conducting investigations in the region have 
still not clearly established the poppy growers' modus operandi 
or the routes they use. They have indications, however, that 
the opium obtained at Rodriguez de Mendoza is leaving the region 
through rough trails that lead to San Martin, while the opium 
obtained at San Ignacio leaves the region through Huancabamba. 
  Opium leaving Rodriguez de Mendoza is also allegedly being 
taken to Utcubamba ([word indistinct] Grande), and then to 
Chiclayo. This was learned when Jorge Inga (33) was arrested 
last year with opium latex that had been given to him by another 
person in Utcubamba. 
  Peasants of the region have confirmed that these plantations 
are being encouraged by people coming from the east, i.e, from 
San Martin, across the Amazonas Department border. 
<H5>  Other Plantations Detected </H5>
  Interior Ministry sources and General Tomas Marki Montero, 
head of the Ayacucho Policial Military Command, have reported on 
several other plantations in addition to those detected by EL 
COMERCIO. 
  Poppy plantations were thus also detected in Nuevo 
Cajamarca, 
Roque, Sauce, Soritor, and Bambamarca, as well as in the 
Ayacucho jungle and on the Apurimac River banks. 

