CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yuriy Chirkov, DELOVOY MIR correspondent: </F>
``Financial Indulgences for Scientific-Technical Business''] 
  [Text] In Moscow, a resolution of the government of the 
Russian Federation -- in this case the initiator was the 
Ministry of Science and Technical Policy -- has established a 
fund for facilitating the development of small forms of 
enterprises in the scientific-technical sphere. Its task is 
making financial support available to small business, 
facilitating the development of the innovative infrastructure: 
small companies with an emphasis on science -- incubators of 
business, venture enterprises, engineering centers, industrial 
parks, TOO, companies introducing new scientific products and 
scientific production companies. Assistance will be received by 
those having patents, licenses and know-how, those who want to 
become producers of various specific types of goods production. 
  The fund is concerned with seeking people capable of putting 
competitive products into production. It is not enough, let's 
assume, to propose an apt design for a new type of ball point 
pen, it also is important to become a real owner of a business, 
a full-fledged businessman. 
  The fund is a noncommercial, nonprofit organization, but by 
no means is philanthropic. The inventors of perpetual motion 
machines must cough up payment for a preliminary expert 
evaluation -- 0.1% of the declared estimated cost of the 
project. The applicants for financial support undergo a rigorous 
three-step examination: finalize preparation of the application 
(presentation of a detailed business plan), undergo an expert 
evaluation and win out over competitors in a final competition. 
  For the time being the fund is small: 0.5% of the 
state 
appropriations for science, which is approximately 20 billion 
rubles. If an average of 100-200 million rubles is allocated to 
one scientific-technical project per year, in this case 
financial assistance can be received by only 100-200 competitors 
-- winner of grants. Really not many. because, according to some 
estimates, in order to implement all the scientific and 
technical ideas accumulating in Russia it would be necessary to 
spend several trillion rubles! 
  It is intended that the modesty of the fund budget be 
compensated for in different ways. First of all, the work is to 
be conducted in close collaboration with banking capital. Now 
the conditions for getting money at the bank are severe: 
250-280% interest is charged for a loan and the money is 
usually given not for a year, but only for three months. 
Inflation! Under such conditions for a goods producer, 
especially one arriving from science, the chance of surviving -- 
returning the money and getting a profit -- becomes virtually 
equal to zero. 
  In order to break free from these shackling conditions the 
fund proposes the following. Let's assume that 150 million 
rubles are necessary for a business, 50 million are provided by 
the bank at 300% interest and 100 million are provided by 
the 
bank without interest. Thus, after a year a company highly 
oriented on science should return a total of 200 million rubles 
to the bank. As we see, the conditions for the loan are 
extremely advantageous. The newly established company so- 
to-speak receives a monetary forgiveness of sins -- an unusual 
financial indulgence. 
  Well, and what are the reciprocal advantages from the 
fund-bank alliance? There are several of them. The most 
important thing for the bank is that it receives more than its 
interest. For the bank, now after the careful preliminary expert 
evaluations made by the fund, there is a considerable decrease 
in the probability of subsidizing a future bankruptcy. The fund 
also comes out ahead. First of all, it schools yesterday's 
researchers, for the first time setting out on the slippery 
uneven path of business, to the market, to its severe laws. 
Second, the fund can employ well-organized banking mechanisms 
for recovering sums from organizations which either do not live 
up to the stipulated conditions or are not playing an entirely 
honest game, for example, are taking the money for scientific 
purposes and diverting it for other purposes, trading in 
consumer's goods. 
  The fund has a mutually advantageous link other than with 
banks. Such an organization (Ivan Bortnik, doctor of technical 
sciences, academician of the Russian Engineering Academy, became 
its general director) is striving to establish a partnership 
also with the leaders of regions of the Russian Federation. We 
saw that the fund does not have that much money. It certainly 
does not suffice for the whole of Russia. But it is necessary to 
support all the far reaches of our vast country. The regions 
must create a system of advantageous conditions, a favorable 
climate, for innovative activity by their citizens -- future 
goods producers (knock off taxes, not take payment for power, 
etc.). And at the same time define the range of goods and items 
for which they have an extreme need. The task of the fund, 
moreover, is to assist in establishing companies capable of 
rapid satisfying regional markets with all their needs. 
  Meanwhile, the fund already has received several hundred 
interesting applications. The personnel of the fund (they are 
few in number, only several tens of specialists plus an 
Observing Council, consisting of seven persons, representatives 
of the principal ministries and the Russian Academy of 
Sciences), appointed by the government, are acting efficiently 
and decisively. The funding of companies, winners of competitive 
awards, will not be opened every year, but quarterly. And the 
first funding will begin on 1 July. 
  Contact telephone 926-77-51. 

