CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Sukhov, consul general of Russia in </F>
Strasbourg: "No Fundamental Objections. The Adoption of the New 
Constitution and Free Elections Have Removed Barriers to 
Russia's Acceptance into the Council of Europe"] 
  [Text] On 5 May the Council of Europe--this unique 
organization that guards human rights--will have been in 
existence for 45 years. Today it claims 32 states as members. 
How do things stand with Russia? This was related to a 
correspondent of the Russian News Agency Novosti under the 
European Council, Vladimir Katin, at the request of the editors 
of NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA by the general consul of Russia in 
Strasbourg, Vladimir Sukhov, who has been charged with the task 
of maintaining regular contacts and promoting the development of 
cooperation with the Council of Europe. 
  Russia submitted an application for admission to the Council 
of Europe in May 1992. Until recently its consideration had been 
postponed under the pretext that Russia had not yet "come up" to 
the standards of the Council of Europe, which revolve around 
principles of democracy, pluralism, and supremacy of the law. 
The adoption of the new Russian Constitution and free democratic 
elections to the Federal Assembly on a multiparty basis, as is 
generally recognized, removed this formal obstacle. 
  At the same time the results of the elections of 12 December 
1993 are disquieting to democratic forces, and the events that 
followed them are generating many questions in the Council of 
Europe regarding maintaining the course toward reforms and the 
prospects for political stabilization within Russia. It seems 
that Strasbourg is still taking a wait-and-see position, 
explaining this by a desire to see the direction in which the 
situation in our country will develop from here on. 
  The process of preparation will take a certain amount of 
time. The decision concerning acceptance into the organization 
is made by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe 
(PACE) on the basis of the conclusions of a number of its 
commissions concerning whether law and order within the 
candidate country meets the basic principles and criteria of the 
Council of Europe. In turn, this presupposes a large amount of 
work on the part of experts and individuals making reports to 
the PACE in cooperation with the Russians, which can take 
months. I am convinced that all the objective preconditions for 
Russia's full-fledged membership are in place. The process of 
Russia's entry into the Council of Europe will proceed more 
rapidly, the more rapidly we develop healthy tendencies toward a 
shift from domestic political confrontation and struggle for 
power to national accord and creative work to bring the country 
out of its economic and social crisis and construct a solid 
legislative base for a rule-of-law state. And this is necessary 
not so much for the Council of Europe as for Russian society, 
which is weary from uncertainty and the pressures of the 
transition period. Then a fresh wind will dispel the "fog of 
doubts" that has now gathered in the Council of Europe 
concerning Russia. 
  Another point that is of no small significance: A good deal 
will depend on how balanced and convincing we are in 
demonstrating Russia's resolve to become a full-fledged member 
of the Council of Europe. Deputies of the Federal Assembly, who 
have been "especially invited" to join the Russian delegation in 
the PACE, will be called upon to play an appreciable role on 
this plane. The tactic of lodging protests about the 
prolongation of the process of accepting Russia into the Council 
of Europe, which the delegation from the former Supreme Soviet 
became involved in, and attempts to shift domestic disputes to 
the PACE arena produced no advantage for Russia. It is much more 
important and effective for our deputies to engage actively in 
calm and regular work for clarifying to their PACE colleagues in 
a well argued way the difficulties and regular processes taking 
place in Russia as well as the priorities of the Russian foreign 
policy, including satisfying its indisputable national interests. 
  As far as I know, practically nobody in the Council of 
Europe 
has any fundamental objections to Russia's entry into the 
organization. Differences of opinion pertain to specific time 
periods for admission having to do with the factors mentioned 
above. 
  It should be kept in mind that our full-fledged membership 
is 
in the interests not only of Russia but also of the Council of 
Europe. The latter has now set for itself the task of becoming 
an all-European organization capable of joining the West and the 
posttotalitarian East of the continent into a unified whole. It 
would hardly be feasible to undertake such a large-scale task 
without Russia's participation. 
  Acceptance into the Council of Europe will have great 
symbolic significance for Russia since this way it will be 
recognized by the international community as a state that has 
made an irrevocable choice in favor of democracy and respect for 
human rights. 
  On the practical plane Russia, which has already been 
cooperating dynamically with the Council of Europe in recent 
years, will not only gain broad access to rich developments and 
programs for organization in the area of human rights, the 
legal, humanitarian, and socioeconomic areas, culture, 
education, information, and ecology, but will also be able to 
participate effectively in the formation of European policy in 
these areas. For example, the Council of Europe is now 
developing a document intended to protect the rights of ethnic 
minorities. The question is extremely crucial for Russia from 
the standpoint of protecting the interests of the 
Russian-speaking population in nearby foreign countries. The 
experience of the Council of Europe and its expert potential 
will help us to improve Russian legislation, reform the judicial 
and penitentiary systems, etc. 
  Membership in the Council of Europe places certain 
obligations on us as well, which will encourage the activity of 
Russian legislators to lay a foundation for a rule-of-law state. 

