Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Oscar Vargas Romero] </F>
  [Text] Demetrio Limoniel Chavez Penaherrera, alias 
Vaticano, the most powerful Peruvian international drug 
trafficking kingpin, was protected by Huallaga Front's 
top-ranking military commanders for four years. He even used 
Colombian Air Force planes for his illegal and criminal 
business. It was reported that he transported 3,000 kg of drugs 
on each flight on the Campanilla-Cali route. 
  Chavez Penaherrera became a sort of king in Upper Huallaga's 
northeast jungles. He could even afford an army of hired foreign 
gunmen to fight off an attempt by the Maoist Shining Path to 
take control -- at machinegun point and with dynamite -- of the 
transportation of cocaine paste to Colombia 
  But the Shining Path, when confronted with Chavez 
Penaherrera's paramilitary forces, withdrew and contented itself 
with protection quotas on drug shipments from roads in 
coca-producing areas as well as from clandestine airstrips. 
  These explosive revelations were made on 6 February by 
former 
DEA agent Augusto del Rio during an extensive interview with 
journalist Alfredo Barnechea during the Channel 9 program 
"Live." An important panel of narcoterrorism experts also 
participated in the interview. 
  The interview was recorded 24 hours earlier for security 
reasons involving the former DEA agent. The program included a 
large portion of the first testimony given by Chavez Penaherrera 
to National Anti- Narcotics Directorate (Dinandro) investigators 
at 1120 on 25 January. 
  In the most important part of his declaration, Del Rio shook 
the panel when he named Generals Alberto Arciniegas Huby and 
Eduardo Bellido Mora, former Huallaga Front commanders, as 
"Vaticano" protectors. 
  Using direct language, Del Rio said Bellido forced the 
abortion of the operation code-named "Campanazo" that was 
designed to capture Chavez Penaherrera. 
  "I participated in a 45-day intelligence project. The 
operation was conceived on 6 February 1992 but implemented on 3 
March 1993. We thought we were going to hit them hard but 
everyone in Campanilla had been alerted. We thought we would 
seize between 2,500 and 3,000 kg of drug, but we were only able 
to seize 500 kg of cocaine paste. All this indicates that 
'Vaticano' was able to manipulate and give orders, but always 
under Army protection," Del Rio said without hesitating. He also 
said "Vaticano" paid his protectors between $400,000 and 
$500,000 [numbers as published] for each flight. 
  During his testimony at Dinandro, "Vaticano" contradicted 
President Alberto Fujimori's assertions that his capture was due 
to the direct work of the National Intelligence Service, which 
carried out an operation that lasted three months and included 
following a former beauty queen (Lucila Boggiano, Mrs. World). 
  Chavez Penaherrera said: "I was visiting a friend at his 
home in Cali and I was arrested because I did not carry any 
identification with me. The operation was carried out by 
Colombian Fiscal Police. When I gave them my name, when they 
learned of my name, they checked it with a list of petitions in 
Maynas, Loreto. That is why they took me to Peru." 
  The drug trafficker said no Peruvian woman, least of all a 
beauty queen, had been involved in the operation that ended with 
his detention in Cali. 
  "Vaticano" said, however, that he met Alexis Janeth Ramirez 
Perdomo, a Colombian Intercontinental de Aviacion airline flight 
attendant, when he made a trip from Bogota to Cali. 
  When learning of this, television program reporters called 
the Colombian airline offices in Cali in order to find out the 
whereabouts of Alexis Janeth, but the answer was negative. 
  "We do not have her registered here," a voice answered at 
the 
other end of the telephone line. 
  Participating in the interview were congressman Julio Castro 
Gomez, former Dincote chief PNP [Peruvian National Police] 
General John Caro, CARETAS director Enrique Zileri, and 
political analysts Carlos Tapia and Federico Prieto Celli. 
  Julio Castro Gomez, a CCD [Democratic Constituent Congress] 
Supervision Committee member, revealed that at present there are 
350 military chiefs involved in drug trafficking violations in 
Huallaga Valley, the world's main source of raw material for the 
manufacture of cocaine. 
  The legislator said the officers are under investigation for 
alleged crimes committed since 1980. 
  Castro Gomez mentioned figures released in 1991 by a former 
Central Reserve Bank president saying that drug trafficking 
moves around $1.2 billion annually, that is, more than $3 
million per day. 
  "This means that drugs' corrupting power is very important 
and it would be naive not to accept that civilian or military 
authorities, particularly officials operating in emergency 
zones, might be involved in the dirty trade," Castro Gomez said, 
adding that the officers involved in drug trafficking must by 
tried by ordinary courts and not by military courts, where 
crimes are covered up because of a false esprit de corps. 
  Former Dincote chief John Caro paid homage to the honest 
military men who fought and continue to fight this scourge. 
  In order to stress his remarks, Caro mentioned the names of 
officers Mayatoshi and Taboada [not further identified], who, 
according to him, "are examples of personal dedication and 
defense of the institutions for which they patriotically work." 
  Nevertheless, John Caro expressed his dissatisfaction by 
stating that the good name of the Armed Forces and the police 
has been tarnished since many of them are tempted and ensnared 
by the corruptive power of drug traffickers who handle huge sums 
of money and are protected by hirelings. 
  With a characteristic Loreto accent, the former DEA agent 
openly accused with names and details the high-ranking military 
officers who protected Chavez Penaherrera, who has been 
arraigned on treason charges and today will be sentenced to life 
imprisonment by a faceless military court. 
  At the beginning of his deposition, Augusto del Rio 
acknowledged that Peruvian drug traffickers have now become 
actively involved in the industry. They not only buy coca from 
peasants and soak it but also have ventured into processing 
cocaine in keen competition with Colombian cartels. 
  He then reported that "Vaticano," whom he trailed in several 
operations to capture him, gained a foothold in the 
international drug business in 1989 when he had his own landing 
strip built in the village of Campanilla. 
  Del Rio claimed that at that time, having signed contracts 
with the other "firms" (other powerful drug traffickers), 
"Vaticano" rented that airstrip for $5,000 per flight. 
  He added that "when he arrived at Campanilla in 1989, Chavez 
Penaherrera was no longer 'Loco Lemonier' but 'Vaticano.' Or in 
other words, he was already a drug kingpin who rubbed shoulders 
with Colombians and he had entered the big business, in which he 
succeeded thanks to his good fortune and, consequently, he 
amassed a fortune." 
  Del Rio also pointed out that by personal endeavor, 
"Vaticano" gained a foothold in the Colombian market and 
directly contacted the mafias there. This, he assured, cost 
"Vaticano" his head, as the notorious Cali cartel had a lot to 
do with his capture. 
  He further stated: "The Colombians were jealous because he 
had reached the top. Moreover, the Cali cartel had been dealt a 
severe blow with Pablo Escobar's death." Del Rio's remarks 
caused a great impact in political circles, especially military 
ones. 
  To that effect, the most revealing reports are that three 
Army captains protected "Vaticano" in exchange for large sums of 
money and that a major called "Otorongo" came especially from 
Tarapoto to Campanilla to act as link to collect the protection 
money that finally ended up in the hands of the former Huallaga 
Counter Subversive Front commander, Gen. Eduardo Bellido Mora. 
  At this point, Bernechea asked him whether he had evidence 
to 
support his statement. 
  The former DEA agent said he had participated in several 
operations in the last few years in which a total of 3,000 kg of 
drug were seized and that "I have seen with my own eyes" how 
high- ranking military officers are implicated in the protection 
of drug traffickers, especially "Vaticano." 
  He said: "Let us start with Gen. Arciniegas and finish with 
Gen. Bellido. I need only show you a photograph in which you 
could see them there. But hirelings registered everybody who 
came to the landing strips so it was impossible to take 
photographs. Those who were found in possession of a camera 
were killed." 
  When giving details about how shipments to Colombia were 
made 
under the protection of Army soldiers and officers, del Rio 
noted that at that time, all movements were timed with a 
chronometer. 
  Light aircraft, for example, stayed between 8 and 10 minutes 
on airstrips for loading shipments, which were not registered 
since "agreements between firms are to the point and highly 
respected; therefore, there is no need to check them." 
  With regard to shipments made by "Vaticano," del Rio 
commented that his hirelings controlled landing strips when 
light airplanes landed and took off, while Army patrols were in 
charge of watching the cars that transported the shipment along 
highways and roads. 
  He explained that shipments were made Monday to Saturday in 
light aircraft, the number of which ranged between four and six 
per day, and flights were scheduled from 0900 to 1700. 
  Del Rio disclosed: "I saw -- on two or three occasions -- 
that Colombian Air Force planes were used. They took off 
transporting 3,000 kg of cocaine paste in each plane at around 
1700." He noted that the type of aircraft was similar to the 
one used by the DEA in its operations. 

