BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS diplomatic correspondents Dmitriy Gorokhov and </F>
Yuriy Kozlov] 
  [Text] Moscow June 17 TASS -- Russia cannot afford not to 
hold the peace-making operation in Abkhazia, a zone historically 
close to it and an area of its major and comprehensive 
interests, Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev told the 
State Duma deputies here today. One cannot abandon peoples 
Russia lived with in one state in the recent past, he added. 
  Preparations for the Commonwealth peace-making operation, 
whose core will be Russian servicemen, have begun. This will be 
done on request of the Georgian Government and the Abkhazian 
leadership. The operation will aim to prevent new clashes, 
ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid and peaceful life in the 
area. 
  The peace-making mission in Abkhazia is absolutely lawful, 
said the minister. Russia does not need any additional powers 
or "legitimization". An appeal of the sides, including the 
legitimate government of the sovereign state, and a decision of 
the Russian constitutional bodies, including the president and 
the Federation Council, are enough. 
  Kozyrev hopes that the Russian parliament's upper chamber to 
re- consider the issue in the immediate future will view the 
problem in the light of Russian state interests. One should not 
forget that there is no vacuum in such situations, if Russia 
refuses to play its geo-political role, there will be others 
wishing to bring order in "our common home", said Kozyrev. 
  Speaking of the Crimean situation, the minister noted that 
this region is not an international hotbed and the Russian 
leadership is working to prevent aggravation of the Crimean 
situation. The minister is sure that the people of the Crimea, 
a sovereign republic within Ukraine, the Ukrainian people and 
the people of Russia will solve all the problems calmly and 
peacefully in a democratic way. It is very important that 
extremists pushing the peoples towards fratricide do not involve 
in the situation. 
  As for the fate of the Russian Black Sea Fleet, Kozyrev 
reminded deputies of negotiations Russia is holding with 
Ukraine. "They are very specific and detailed. A regular round 
of the negotiations has just finished and the impression is more 
inspiring than it was before. Certain quantitative parameters 
have been found, and the sides are closer to an understanding 
that Sevastopol should be the Russian naval base," said Kozyrev. 
  It seems that the negotiations will be completed or any 
final 
decisions will be taken after the Ukrainian elections. Russia, 
naturally, "will respect the choice of the Ukrainian people and 
keep business-like mutually beneficial and fraternal relations 
with any leadership to be elected," said Andrey Kozyrev. 

