BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Petur Bochukov: "Corridor -- Yes! But It </F>
Depends on Its Purpose"] 
  [Text] It is honorable to act according to your principles 
when you are poor and depend on others, when you are in debt and 
cannot make ends meet, and when the pressure from outside is too 
strong. When you are considered honorable you also gain the 
esteem of the others, even when moral values deteriorate. 
  The Bulgarian position on the noninterference of Balkan 
states in the Yugoslav conflict, repeatedly expressed, is 
supported by all parliamentary and extraparliamentary forces in 
Bulgaria. This is an honorable position that not only 
corresponds to our national interests, but also makes a clear 
and significant contribution to limiting the war in Bosnia and 
seeking a peaceful solution through negotiations and mutual 
concessions on the part of the sides to the conflict, and the 
European and world forces that stand behind them. Bulgaria also 
followed a principled position during the Gulf War, sacrificing 
$1.5 billion that Baghdad owed us. We did not receive any 
compensation. Bulgaria acted on the basis of principles, and 
also took into consideration the requirements of the 
international community on the issue of sanctions against the 
rest of Yugoslavia. As a result we lost and continue to lose 
billions of dollars at a time when our economy faces collapse. 
Again, we received no compensation. 
  Now we are subjected to a new pressure. We are required to 
agree to a corridor through which Turkish "Blue Helmets" will 
pass on their way to Bosnia. It was explained to us -- as 
Belgian Foreign Minister Willy Claes did during his recent visit 
to Bulgaria -- that the "Blue Helmets" in question are under the 
aegis of the UN and that we must free ourselves of our fears and 
complexes. A Turkish delegation led by Turkish Parliament 
Speaker Husamettin Cindoruk had a similar mission. It insisted 
on changing the Bulgarian position on this issue, which is so 
sensitive against the background of the situation in our region. 
We do not know whether the delegation returned to Ankara with 
high hopes. At present Turkish Prime Minister Tansu Ciller is 
visiting Washington where she needs Clinton's support for her 
new economic program and for sending the Turkish "Blue Helmets" 
to Bosnia. Let us recall that she herself visited Bosnia, 
together with Benazir Bhutto, to express the Islamic world's 
support of the Bosnia Muslims. Let us also recall that the 
decision of the UN Security Council on including Turkish "Blue 
Helmets" among the UN peace troops also was adopted under the 
strong and continuous pressure of the United States and Turkey. 
Finally, let us remember that the Islam fundamentalists of the 
Welfare Party registered brilliant successes at last month's 
municipal elections and now the mayors of Istanbul, Ankara, and 
many other Turkish cities belong to this party. 
  It is logical that Turkey's next step, in which Islam plays 
such an important role, should be aimed at strengthening its 
military presence to the east of Edirne. This could be achieved 
most easily by establishing a presence in Bosnia. For this a 
corridor through Bulgaria is necessary. The United States 
already has begun relevant psychological conditioning. At a 
meeting with Deputy Foreign Minister Todor Churov, U.S. 
Ambassador William Montgomery requested a transit corridor for a 
one-time transportation of UN military and other equipment. It 
is intended for a new contingent of U.S. "Blue Helmets" in 
Macedonia, who will be transported by air. The equipment will 
be transported to Bulgaria by train from the Netherlands, 
through Germany, Austria, Hungary, and Romania. The one-time 
use of a transit corridor for UN needs does not contradict our 
legislation and conforms to our commitments based on Article 43 
of the UN Charter. In addition, sending an additional 
contingent of 200 "Blue Helmets" to Macedonia is in the interest 
of all Balkan states, because it is a preventive measure against 
the spread of the Bosnia conflict. 
  It is natural for Bulgaria to provide a transit corridor for 
UN military equipment. However, our leaders must first answer 
the following question: Why was this equipment not transported 
by air, as was the case with the first contingent of 300 U.S. 
"Blue Helmets" in Macedonia, and is the present U.S. request not 
a prologue to a request for a corridor for the transportation of 
Turkish "Blue Helmets" through Bulgaria's territory or by air? 
If the answer to this question is negative, the Bulgarian 
Government could agree to providing the transit corridor 
requested by Ambassador Montgomery. 
  The Americans cannot and do not want to understand our 
sensitivity and justified concern regarding the Turkish military 
presence in the Balkans. Perhaps this is so because their 
colonial ruler came from a different continent, or perhaps their 
current strategic interests are related to the expansion of 
their most loyal ally in the vast space between China and the 
Adriatic? Regardless of what their motives are, they contradict 
Bulgarian interests. Therefore, despite the fact that we are in 
the midst of a crisis and encounter grave difficulties, we have 
no other choice except to behave in a worthy manner, defend our 
independence and sovereignty, and sustain our principled 
position. Every retreat from this position is tantamount to 
treason. 

