BFN 

  [Text] Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella stressed that the UK 
obstructs the relationship with the national government when it 
expresses doubts about Argentina's attitude concerning military 
re-equipment. 
  The minister asked the U.S. Government to intercede with the 
UK in a gesture of political trust, to improve relations between 
the two countries. 
  Nevertheless, Di Tella made it clear that trade relations 
with the UK are excellent. But he stressed: We are in a very 
bad mood over the embargo imposed on Argentina concerning the 
re-equipment of its Armed Forces. 
  The Argentine foreign minister also confirmed the decision 
to 
remove the mines installed in the Malvinas Islands during the 
1982 military conflict. 
  Here is a report from (Gaston Sulage): 
  [Begin recording] [(Sulage)] Thank you very much. Today, 
Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella opened a round of talks at San 
Martin Palace between Argentine Foreign Ministry and U.S. State 
Department officials with a broad agenda, basically including 
issues linked to bilateral and regional security. 
  Foreign Minister Di Tella addressed Thomas McNamara, U.S. 
State Department acting principal secretary for 
political-military affairs [title as heard], and U.S. Ambassador 
to Argentina James Cheek. Here are Di Tella's remarks: 
  [Di Tella] Have we managed to transmit the image of a 
peaceful and cooperative Argentina to the world only to a 
certain extent, as there is a country that is your and our ally 
that doubts this image, namely the UK. 
  This is a very important issue for us. The UK not only 
blocks material equipment like spare parts for a Rolls-Royce 
turbine or airplanes, an issue that was discussed and for which 
we are very grateful for the final decision you made, but 
obstructs in a different way by expressing doubts about the 
Argentine Republic. And the UK is a key country in the Western 
alliance. 
  I actually believe the UK does not harbor any doubts. It 
(?depends) on a disabling bureaucracy. It is hard to find a 
bureaucrat who changes his or her opinion and takes the 
initiative of saying dismissed [preceding word in English] on an 
issue that has been dragging on for 12 years. 
  Nevertheless, this is a problem that bothers us a lot, not a 
bit, but a lot. And I believe you can do a lot -- not a bit -- 
to end it. 
  I believe you have made a great effort concerning the 
Skyhawk 
issue. We appreciate your effort, not only as a material 
gesture, but as a political gesture of trust, which actually is 
what really counts. 
  We believe that the UK is allowing this issue to fade away. 
It has its own internal lobbies [preceding word in English] and 
does not want to appear one day saying: We have discontinued 
the embargo. 
  Nevertheless, the embargo really puts us in a bad mood, in 
an 
extremely bad mood. Either the embargo is really justified or 
else it involves people who read the newspapers every 10 years, 
as there has been an overwhelming wealth of data here. Those 
who do not want to acknowledge this overwhelming wealth of data 
on a new Argentina at the international level are not aware of 
what is happening in Argentina. 
  [(Sulage)] Di Tella also made it clear that the relationship 
between Argentina and the UK is ambivalent because it is 
surprisingly perfect commercially and culturally. 
  This was a report by (Gaston Sulage) over Radio Nacional. 
[end recording] 

