Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Lew Elias] </F>
  [Text] Mmabatho March 10 SAPA -- More than 200 
Bophuthatswana police, some armed and in uniform, gathered 
outside the South African Embassy in Mmabatho on Thursday [10 
March] afternoon to demand the homeland's re-incorporation into 
South Africa. The police no longer wanted "to act against or 
kill our brothers". 
  "We are being used as weapons in a political game that we no 
longer want to play," said one of the disgruntled policemen who 
declined to be named for fear of recriminations. 
  Their demands include that all citizens of Bophuthatswana be 
allowed to engage in free political activity; that they be able 
to participate in the forthcoming elections; that they be 
awarded a 50 per cent pay increment; that their pension fund 
contributions be paid out; and that Bophuthatswana be 
re-incorporated into South Africa. 
  Other demands include the re-opening of the Bophuthatswana 
Broadcasting Corporation, the re-instatement of broadcasting 
staff fired on Wednesday and total press freedom in the homeland. 
  Police spokesman and [words indistinct] told SAPA: "We can 
no 
longer be the enemies of our people." He said police were being 
used for political gain and the present wave of unrest had led 
to policemen in lower echelons coming under fire for actions 
taken over the past two days. 
  "We are suffering, our families are suffering, our houses 
are 
being burnt and valuable property is being destroyed," he said. 
  The handing over of the memorandum was watched by agroup of 
six senior police officers, none below the rank of major. This 
could well signal the collapse of control of Bophuthatswana by 
the police. 
  The police have acted against strikers in the civil service, 
the parastatal Bophuthatswana broadcasting corporation, students 
at the university of the Bophuthatswana and militant youths. 
  In an interview with SAPA on Wednesday, South African 
Ambassador Tjaart van der Walt said: "The feelings being 
witnessed on the streets are just the tip of the iceberg and the 
need for re-incorporation runs much deeper than is obvious to 
the casual observer". 
  Mr van der Walt confirmed to SAPA on Thursday the memorandum 
had been handed over and would be addressed. He said he would 
inform Pretoria of the development. 

