BFN 

<F P=106> [Quotation marks as received] </F>
  [Text] Tripoli, Al Maa [May] 21, JAMAHIRIYAH NEWS AGENCY -- 
The leader of the revolution sent the following letter to the 
African militant Nelson Mandela, the laureat of al-Qadhdhafi 
international prize for human rights, on the occasion of the 
victory of the people of South Africa: 
  "To His Excellency Nelson Mandela, the president of the 
Republic of South Africa, greetings, words are unable to express 
this historic victory of a people who fought injustice, 
falsification, tyranny, murder, torture, humiliation and disdain 
for 300 years. But this people did not capitulate or recognize 
under torture that the land of blacks belonged to whites paying 
for that with blood and tears which resulted at the end in the 
declaration of freedom and independence of the people of South 
Africa. On this historic occasion, we must stand solemnly in 
tribute and respect for the martyrs of Soweto, martyr Steve Biko 
and Mahatma Ghandi whose name was linked to the cause of the 
South African people. Also revolutionaries everywhere and all 
peoples confronting [word indistinct] colonialism respectfully 
salute hero Nelson Mandela, the [words indistinct] immensely 
patient man. The struggle and victory of our people in south of 
black Africa draws the historic way for the struggle and 
expected victory for our people in usurped Palestine. Nothing 
muddled the clear skies of South Africa lit with candles of the 
bodies of the victims of racism and lamps run with the blood 
spilled for freedom and cleaned with the tears of millions who 
were tortured for the sake of their right to live in their 
homeland except the presence of the racist terrorist Zionist 
delegation which befouled purified South Africa. It seems that 
the Zionists were so guilt ridden that they allowed themselves 
to attend the delight of people during their celebration of 
victory over international racism. Did the Zionist forget their 
unholy alliance with the Pretoria regime and their support for 
it against you "and the exchange of expertise in torture and 
racism?". Weren't the Israelis the natural ally of the racist 
regime of South Africa. Didn't the Israelis take part with 
whites in tens of years of genocide and torture against blacks. 
Glory for you personally and your great people and martyrs 
[word indistinct] on the collapsing Zionist racism and white 
racism. Yours brotherly, Mu'ammar al- Qadhdhafi [no closing 
quotation mark as received]. 

