Language: <F P=105> Burmese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt, chairman of the Work 
Committee for Development of Border Regions and National Races 
and secretary-1 of the State Law and Order Restoration Council 
[SLORC], ministers and their entourage who had been visiting 
Mandalay left in a military plane on 21 March afternoon and 
arrived in Myitkyina, Kachin State, at 1420. Lt. Gen. Khin 
Nyunt and his entourage were accompanied by Major General Aye 
Kyaw, chairman of Northern Shan State Law and Order Restoration 
Council and commander. [passage omitted] 
  Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt and his entourage then proceeded to the 
Northern Military Command Headquarters where he met with KIO 
[Kachin Independence Organization] leaders U Lumung Tu Jai, U 
Gawri Zau Saing, Dr. La Ja, U Zau Phan, and U Hkun Maw. They 
discussed regional development projects in Kachin State. 
[passage omitted] 
  Speaking at the meeting, Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt recalled that 
when he made the peace overture, he explained that as long as 
there is armed conflict within the state, development would fall 
behind. But, when armed conflict ended and peace prevailed, the 
government would work hand in hand with local people to 
accelerate development in Kachin State. Responding to this 
overture, the KIO, which understood the goodwill of the 
government, returned to the legal fold and the whole of Kachin 
State has now become peaceful. He said we therefore have to 
strive for more development projects in the state. 
  He said not only people in Kachin State, but everyone in 
Myanmar [Burma] is happy to have peace there. He said the 
general public have praised and acknowledged the cooperation 
between the government and the KIO based on mutual 
understanding. He said if the remaining armed organizations in 
the jungles make similar efforts, the people can expect and wish 
for peace and development for the entire Union. He said these 
expectations and wishes should be recognized. 
  Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt explained that SLORC has prioritized 
development projects in the states depending on the annual state 
budget. He said it has been learned that the commander and the 
KIO had made preliminary coordination on the implementation of 
development projects in Kachin State. He said he and the 
ministers and departmental authorities had come here in order to 
provide the necessary assistance to implement these priority 
projects. He said good roads and communications, education, and 
health, and economic development are crucial to a region's 
development. He explained that agriculture and livestock 
breeding and dam and irrigation projects are crucial for 
economic development. 
  He added that Kachin State has many beautiful scenary. He 
cited the Myitson [confluence of Mae Hka and Mali Kha Rivers and 
the source of the Irrawaddy River] area and Indawgyi, which 
could be turned into international tourist spots to contribute 
to regional development. He said efforts should be made to 
develop small-scale private industries and that the government 
and the people are already cooperating in developing 
hydroelectric power projects to provide energy for these 
industries. He then called for discussions on the 
implementation of priority projects to enable the accelerated 
development of Kachin State and the people to enjoy the fruits 
of peace as quickly as possible. 
  Next, Kachin national leader, U Lumung Tu Jai spoke on the 
construction of new roads and bridges, the renovation of old 
roads and bridges, the location and development of sources of 
hydroelectric power, the expanded cultivation of sugarcane, the 
construction of dams, the development of new land, and the 
organization and education of local people to promote public 
participation. 
  Next, Commander Maj. Gen. Saw Lwin spoke on the construction 
and the renovation of Myitkyina-Shwe Road, Bhamo-Myitkyina Road, 
Putao-Myitkyina Road, Myitkyina-Tanai-Lido Road, 
Mogaung-Kamaing-Hpakan Road, Hopong-Mong Tawng Road, the 
construction and renovation of bridges, the resettlement of 
destroyed villagers, education, health, the expansion of 
hydroelectric power plants, and the provision of sugarcane for 
the Namti sugar mill. Next, the ministers, chairman of the 
Northern Shan State Law and Order Restoration Council, and 
departmental officials gave an explanation on development 
projects for border regions and national races in Kachin State. 
This included health; education; transport; the construction of 
a television relay station; the construction, renovation, and 
the expansion of roads and bridges; post, telegraph and 
telephone; agriculture and irrigation; and livestock breeding 
projects. 
  Next, in response to the discussion at the meeting, Lt. Gen. 
Khin Nyunt noted that ministers and departmental officials had 
explained the assistance programs based on the submissions of 
the national leaders for development of Kachin State. [passage 
omitted] He said based on the discussions today, efforts will 
be made for accelerated development of roads and communications, 
education, health, hydroelectric power, transportation, 
agriclture, and livestock breeding. He then urged the local 
people to join in helping the efforts of departmental 
authorities and the KIO. [passage omitted] 
  The secretary-1 and his entourage returned to Yangon 
[Rangoon] from Myitkyina this evening. 

