Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA special correspondent Yuriy </F>
Kozlovskiy under the rubric "Crime Report": "A Selection of 
Poison. Is the Decision of the Former Parliament To Abolish 
Criminal Liability for Drug Use Legitimate?"] 
  [Text] Moscow Oblast--The key went into the lock, the 
lock clicked, and I found myself in a ward of a psychiatric 
hospital. Yet another key, another dry and quiet click, and the 
door closed securely behind me. If I wanted to understand even a 
little of what went on behind this closed door for two months, I 
had to stay calm and be patient for at least one day. 
  Here was a 17-year-old guy from a vocational technical 
school 
who was a roommate of mine. A 30-year-old physician, a 
cardiologist--a former physician, of course--was on another bed, 
next to a barred window. A third patient lay on a made-up bed 
next to the door. He had a most unique tattoo on his completely 
bared chest from which it would be immediately clear to a 
slammer specialist what this man has done time for and for how 
long. 
  All of these people were drug addicts with a history. I was 
"planted" there by the editorial office to write about how they 
had ended up there and how they feel in the "loony bin." 
  Why did the newspaper need this particular crime report? The 
words "drug business" are used with increasing frequency in 
presentations by lawyers and employees of the prosecutor's 
offices and the militia. Some 1.5 million Russians use narcotics 
permanently. Specialists project that this number will double in 
five to six years. The prospects are dismal, especially if we 
take into account the fact that in the last 10 years 
narcotics-related crime has increased by a factor of three. 
  So far, our situation has been different from that in the 
region of the so-called "golden triangle" (Burma, Laos, 
Vietnam). The domestic drug business is not yet on a par with 
the Medellin cartel from South America. However, there is enough 
reason to worry because on issues of crime we frequently also 
find ourselves "ahead of the entire planet." 
  What influenced my roommates in deciding "to get hooked," 
join the "sniffers," or pop "pills" and do "grass?" The 
30-year-old cardiologist injected himself with promedol while 
still a student. Why? His colleague from the institute had 
promised unheard-of bliss. Then he injected himself another 
time, and rolled downhill. He could no longer do without two 
injections a day. Meanwhile, life went on. He graduated from the 
institute and got married. However, on learning that her husband 
was a drug addict, his wife took their 1-year-old daughter along 
and left. His father got sick.... 
  The guy from the vocational technical school painted a 
generally familiar picture. Up to 20 boys got together, poured a 
solvent into plastic bags and, putting in their heads, inhaled 
for several hours until they were spaced out. None of the 
passers-by who are scared of our present-day life and who saw 
them sitting on stairways or in the hallways of homes got 
outraged, tried to stop them, or reported them to the militia. 
  The befuddled youths who inhaled poison engaged in wild 
carnage right there, in front of the houses. Their confused 
minds did not understand that they were beating to death their 
own best friend.... 
  The third one, with tattoos, looked askance at the newcomer. 
He just did not want to acknowledge me as a drug addict who was 
brought in for compulsory treatment. Likewise, I was not 
particularly eager to converse, having learned from the 
physicians the biographic details about this man who had 
repeatedly partaken of the "coziness" of prison bunk beds. After 
committing a serious crime, he was saved from the "highest 
measure" by just one factor--the state of narcotic intoxication 
in which he committed robbery and murder. 
  Finally, he started talking too. I figured out only one 
thing 
from the unintelligible stream of verbiage: he does not intend 
to get off drugs. He will fake having "kicked the habit," get 
out of hospital captivity, and shoot up right away. 
  I looked at him and thought that it would be nice to put, in 
this or another room of the psychiatric hospital, the deputies 
of the former parliament who adopted the decision to cancel 
criminal liability for drug use. I recalled a conversation with 
N. Osipov, the deputy chief of the administration for illegal 
drug trafficking of the Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs. 
  Nikolay Nikolayevich was indignant: "We consulted even the 
relevant services of the United Nations on this issue. Nobody 
told us that punishing a person for using drugs amounts to an 
encroachment on his personal freedom or an infringement of human 
rights. Yet for some reason they have been persistently trying 
to deprive us of a very serious device for the prevention of 
drug addiction." 
  Meanwhile, an atmosphere of confidence prevailed in the cell 
room. As one of their own, I was already being told about a boy 
who is prepared to commit contract murder for a glass of hashish 
or marijuana. They whispered about a group of drug addicts who 
raped an 8-year-old girl. They discussed news coming in from the 
outside about the apprehension of either drug pushers or 
procurers from whom more than a quintal of "grass" was 
confiscated. 
  As I listened to these revelations, I once again recalled 
our 
conversation at the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Russia. 
  "If it goes on like this and they turn a blind eye to the 
reality of the drug business, I will not be surprised if they 
officially begin to offer an extensive selection of drugs for 
dessert in restaurants and cafes." Of course, Colonel N. Osipov 
was exaggerating. However, in Saratov, for example, they easily 
showed me places where poison for the soul and the body could be 
purchased without a problem. 
  Personally, I know something else, too. If you want to buy 
more "supplies," you make tracks for Saransk. If you need 
cheaper merchandise, you slip through to Almaty. 
  One in five uncovered groups dealing in drugs had 
excellently 
established interregional connections. Some groups numbered up 
to 50 members. It is only our inviolable Union that has fallen 
apart. The criminal commonwealth has only grown stronger. Here, 
"international obligations" are met precisely and on time. Some 
supply raw materials, others process them, still others sell 
them or find room to store them. 
  N. Osipov believes that "for now, we are being saved by two 
circumstances. Domestic drug addicts have not been spoiled, they 
use the simplest types of drugs, and frequently surrogates.'' 
  "The second aspect is like this. Major operators have not 
yet 
been drawn into the Russian drug trade. For now, 30-40 percent 
of drug addicts procure the poison themselves. As it were, wild 
hemp occupies more than 1 million hectares." 
  I asked Osipov: "So, it turns out that it is not too late 
yet? And there is no reason for them to intimidate the common 
citizens with the gloomy figure of a narcotics trafficker?" 
  Osipov said: "No. As the saying goes, the process has gotten 
underway here, too...." 
  Had my roommates known what kind of information I had, their 
jaws would perhaps have dropped as they listened. After all, I 
was aware of quite specific cases, rather than criminal 
gossip--the case of a dangerous repeat offender setting up an 
underground laboratory for drug production, for example. 
  The operation in St. Petersburg was even more successful. A 
highly skilled company got together there which was headed by a 
research associate of an institute on the banks of the Neva. 
They manufactured a synthetic drug of such potency that it is 
now being talked about not only on the banks of the Neva. 
  However, there was no reason for me to share this knowledge, 
nor was there any time. A nurse came and let me out. 

