Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [DESCO Special Report No 32: "Political Violence in Peru </F>
Today," issued by Peru's Center for Development Studies and 
Promotion (DESCO)] 
  [Text] During the month of December, political violence 
generated 58 subversive attacks causing the deaths of 34 
persons. The attacks increased by 22 in comparison with the 
November figure but, fortunately, the death toll declined by 
eight. Of the total victims, 16 belonged to the civilian sector, 
12 were presumed subversives, four were members of the Police 
Forces [FFPP], and two were from the Armed Forces [FFAA]. 
  December was marked by two commemorative dates, which were 
the occasions of heightened Shining Path [SL] activity. The 
first was another birthday of Abimael Guzman, followed by the 
SL's promised celebration of the centennial of Mao Tse-tung's 
birth. They occurred at the beginning and end of the month, 
respectively. 
  Lima again ranked first insofar as attacks were concerned. A 
total of 37 acts of political violence (64 percent) were 
committed in the capital: that is, 17 more acts than in the 
previous month. 
  A day before Abimael Guzman's birthday, the SL's caused a 
minor blackout in the capital and in other zones of the country, 
sabotaging part of the Mantaro interconnected system for this 
purpose. In conjunction with the blackout, the subversives 
detonated some explosives in at least three Lima districts. 
  Ranking second for attacks was the Northern regional 
committee, with 10 subversive acts (17 percent). The number of 
attacks rose by seven compared with the previous month's figure. 
Three of these acts involved confrontations between the forces 
of order and the subversive columns. Two of these clashes 
occurred in the Chavin region, and the third in Sanchez Carrion 
Province, in the La Libertad sierra region. 
  The Central regional committee ranked third, with five 
attacks (9 percent): the same number of acts of political 
violence as during November. Two of these incidents involved 
assaults upon vehicles on highways, another was a confrontation, 
the fourth was sabotage against high voltage towers, and the 
last, a selective assassination. 
  Fourth place for attacks was tied between the Jungle and 
Southern regions, each of which had two acts (3 percent). In the 
Jungle the attacks declined by six, and in the South they 
increased by two. 
  Last place for attacks was taken by the Principal region, 
with one subversive act involving sabotage against electric 
power facilities. 
  As for victims, the Lima regional committee also ranked 
first, with 17 persons killed (50 percent). Two of these deaths 
were selective assassinations of popular leaders: one, a member 
of the Huayacan patrols, and the other, a general secretary of a 
human settlement in Chorrillos. 
  However, the incident with the most bloodshed occurred 
during 
the attack on the Bank of the Nation branch in El Agustino, in 
which three policemen, five civilians, and one subversive were 
killed. 
  Ranking second for victims was the Northern regional 
committee, with eight (24 percent). Five of these deaths were 
Shining Path casualties in a confrontation with a police patrol 
in Mariscal Luzuriaga Province. In an invasion, the subversives 
assassinated a lieutenant governor as well. 
  The Central regional committee ranked third, with seven 
victims (20 percent). Six of these deaths occurred during a 
confrontation between an Army patrol and an MRTA [Tupac Amaru 
Revolutionary Movement] group in La Merced. Five subversives and 
one soldier were killed in the clash. 
  The Jungle region ranked last, with two deaths (6 percent). 
One of the incidents was the subversives' assassination of the 
wife of a municipal councilman from Amarilis, and the other was 
the death of a member of the police at the hands of an MRTA 
group. 
<H5>  Terrorist Attacks By Region: December 1993 (in Percent) </H5>

  -  Lima: 65 
  -  Northern: 18 
  -  Central: 9 
  -  Jungle: 4 
  -  Southern: 4 
  -  Principal: 2 

<H5>    Victims By Region: December 1993 (in Percent) </H5>

  -  Lima:50 
  -  Northern: 24 
  -  Central: 21 
  -  Jungle: 6 



  Victims and Attacks By Regions in December 

Regions      Victims                                              Attacks 

             FFAA    FFPP    Civilians    Subversives    Total 

Lima         0       3       12           2              17       37 

Northern     1       0       2            5              8        10 

Southern     0       0       0            0              0        2 

Jungle       0       1       1            0              2        2 

Principal    0       0       0            0              0        1 

Central      1       0       1            5              7        5 

Total        2       4       16           12             34       58 



