BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 3 (CNS) -- Chinese Vice Premier, Mr. 
Zou Jiahua, speaking at a conference on price inspection 
nationwide, stressed that the curbing of inflation and 
price-hike was a matter of prime importance in the country and a 
long-term policy to be adhered to by the government in the 
future. 
  Mr. Zou held that stability of prices was an important 
condition for social and economic stability in the country. 
Despite of the weakened growth of prices in recent times, the 
controlling of inflation and the stabilizing of market and 
prices at present remained an important task for properly 
handling of relationships between reform, development and 
stability. 
  Talking on how to deal with the relationship between the 
intensifying of price reform and the strengthening of 
administration over prices, the vice premier refuted the concept 
that the price reform was but to leave prices open, and as long 
as prices were freed, the reform in this sector was completed 
and there was no need for the government to impose price 
control. He expounded that the price reform was to transform 
the old price-formulating mechanism to one with the market force 
as its core, to streamline the price system to one able to 
reasonably dispose resources and to change the traditional price 
management system to one for controlling and regulating prices 
in which the government only played an indirect role. In order 
to realize this goal, measures of regulating, opening and 
controlling prices should be adopted simultaneously. Mr. Zou 
added that, even if the price reform was completed, the state 
would still administer prices in various forms of commodities 
which were monopolized by the state and of service businesses. 
Such practice had been very popular actually in many developed 
countries where market economy has been in operation. 
  In order to give more impetus to the campaign of the price 
inspection in the country, the working group in charge of the 
inspection campaign under the State Council would in mid-June 
again go to various provinces, autonomous regions and 
municipalities to supervise and guide this work and carry out 
the plan drawn up at the conference. 

