Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Otto Sarkis: "Ceara's Collor"; introductory </F>
paragraph in boldface as published] 
  [Text] Fortaleza--Ciro Gomes is copying the good and 
bad points of the "maharaja hunter" [Fernando Collor]. And he, 
too, wants to capture the presidency. 
  Since taking office as governor of Ceara, the country's 
third-poorest state, attorney Ciro Gomes (PSDB [Brazilian Social 
Democracy Party]), 36, has spent 263 days away from his 
domain--meaning that he has been absent an average of two days a 
week. He has made 101 trips, seven of them abroad. During his 
1,059 days as governor, Ciro Gomes has reduced the infant 
mortality rate by 32 percent to its current level of 32 deaths 
per 1,000 and won awards from UNICEF for his program for 
training sanitary agents. Since taking office on 15 March 1991, 
he has been ranked as Brazil's most popular governor in polls by 
the IBOPE [Brazilian Public Opinion and Statistics Institute]. 
Recently, however, the Ciro Gomes administration has been 
infected by cholera. 
  Data published by the National Health Foundation (FNS) show 
Ceara to be the state with the most cholera cases. The governor 
has been no less choleric in the political area. "Congress has 
grown rotten," was his opening shot. In his first interview 
following a two-week stay in Japan and Taiwan, Ciro attacked the 
Left and the Right when he was questioned about the presidential 
succession. "No one should be deceived by the alliance between 
the PSDB and the PMDB [Brazilian Democratic Movement Party]," he 
said. "The PMDB is a machine dominated by former Governor 
Orestes Quercia and former President Jose Sarney, and I am going 
to stay away from anyplace where those people are." The governor 
also hit hard at the Left. "I feel that Lula and the PT [Workers 
Party] are incapable of governing Brazil," he said. "The Office 
of President of the Republic is not the place for 
apprenticeship." 
  Ciro's interview was published on the same day that the 
amendment establishing the Emergency Social Fund was passed, and 
it caused Minister of Finance Fernando Henrique Cardoso to meet 
with the PMDB's top leadership for nearly two hours. The meeting 
was inspired by Para Governor Jader Barbalho. "Today's 
newspapers report attacks directed against us by the former 
Arena [National Renewal Alliance] member, underling to the 
dictatorship, and current governor of Ceara," Jader wrote in a 
letter, dated Wednesday, 2 February, in which he called for 
steps to be taken by party president Luiz Henrique. PSDB 
deputies became the target of jokes by their colleagues, who 
tried to detect in them the odor of the rotten Congress. 
  "Instead of speaking cholerically, the governor ought to be 
taking care of cholera in his state," was the criticism from Sao 
Paulo Governor Luiz Antonio Fleury (PMDB). "Everything indicates 
that he wants to be a candidate by causing Fernando Henrique's 
failure," Fleury said. "I think that shot was fired from 
Carandiru," retorted Ciro Gomes, making a pun on the name of the 
penitentiary in Sao Paulo where 111 prisoners were massacred. 
During the first 31 days of 1994, about 7,000 cholera cases were 
reported in Ceara, 85 percent of them in Fortaleza. That state 
alone has accounted for 90 percent of all cholera cases in the 
country. "Cholera is a disease caused by poverty and lack of 
sanitation," explains FNS president Alvaro Machado. 
  In Brasilia and among advisers to the probable presidential 
candidates, Ciro Gomes's statements have increased the suspicion 
that his plan to leave the government for a period of study at 
Harvard University in the United States is nothing but talk. "He 
is a candidate," says a PSDB leader with ties to Senator Mario 
Covas. "We have already had Collor I, and now here comes Collor 
II," is the ironic comment by Luiz Carlos Santos (PMDB, Sao 
Paulo), government leader in the Chamber of Deputies. And 
economist Edmar Bacha, special adviser to the minister of 
finance, said at one meeting: "With a friend like Ciro, Fernando 
doesn't need any enemies." 
  But the festival of attacks on the PSDB's possible allies in 
a presidential campaign must not be regarded as a foolish 
political move by the governor. It is a strategic necessity for 
anyone needing to make room for himself in the presidential 
race. In distancing himself from all the political bosses, Ciro 
is trying to come across as a politician who is different. "I am 
not building my candidacy because I am not part of the old 
crooked politics," Ciro said in an interview with CBN radio on 
Thursday the 3d. 
  Everyday routine in the Ceara state administration proves, 
however, that he is very much like other governors. On the 
pretext of preserving a mangrove swamp, Ciro Gomes established 
the 600-hectare Coco Park. In that region he built the best 
roads in Fortaleza--providing access to the Iguatemi Shopping 
Center owned by the family of the PSDB's president, Tasso 
Jereissati. The matter of the cholera outbreak exemplifies the 
gap between talk and practice. The state took first place in the 
country [in number of cholera cases] in March 1993. The 
ineffectiveness of the PSDB administration can be judged from a 
report by the Ministry of Health. "It needs to be emphasized 
that in the 10 months since it took first place, [cholera] cases 
have risen from 21.89 per 100,000 population to 335.38 per 
100,000, an increase of approximately 1,500 percent," says the 
report. 
  That jump in the number of cases at the start of this year 
had an even more perverse cause: the Workers Canal, the most 
sparkling achievement of Ciro Gomes's administration. Built in 
105 days by 11 construction firms and 5,000 workers, it cost $48 
million and was supposed to prevent water rationing in 
Fortaleza, whose 2 million residents were suffering their third 
year of drought. When the canal water arrived, it was brackish, 
and the rationing system of 48 hours with water and 48 hours 
without continued despite the rain that had started falling, and 
most of the capital's 700,000 shantytown dwellers began using 
water from creeks or ponds--making the cholera outbreak 
uncontrollable. 
  Since October, moved by the government's ineffectiveness in 
the social area, the Catholic Church has been announcing 
decreasing support for the state administration. A communique 
distributed by the CNBB [National Conference of Brazilian 
Bishops] criticized neoliberalism. With the authorization of 
Archbishop Aloisio Lorscheider of Fortaleza, Ciro Gomes's 
administration was criticized. "According to that logic, people 
do not count; the important thing is money and wealth," the 
document says. "That has also been the logic behind the Ceara 
administration's thinking on economic growth. Although official 
propaganda camouflages reality, the development plan adopted by 
the elites and business leaders of our state is radically 
strengthening neoliberalism by accelerating the concentration of 
income and, consequently, pronounced social inequalities." 
  The figures concerning a sick population forced the Ceara 
governor to undertake a desperate offensive to preserve the 
image built during his 35 months as governor and his 94 trips 
around Brazil. ISTOE was the target of that strategy on 
Thursday. At the governor's palace in Fortaleza, Gomes began a 
three-hour interview by suggesting that ISTOE was in the 
"perhaps involuntary" service "of the PMDB and Orestes Quercia." 
The reporter, according to Ciro's logic of persecution, had 
traveled to Ceara to refute the critical remarks he had made 
about Quercia two days earlier. But not even Ciro could believe 
what he was saying: his adviser Egidio Serpa had already 
announced that part of the attack on Quercia was a preventive 
measure in preparation for a "possible negative report" by our 
magazine. Unfortunately for Ciro's argument, the reporter had 
arrived in Fortaleza before the governor turned his ire on the 
former president of the PMDB. 
  Ciro Gomes is married, has three children, lives in a rented 
house, and drives a 1982 Parati. He renounced his pension as a 
state deputy and lives on a salary of about $4,000. One of his 
brothers is a deputy, another is a chef de cabinet, and one of 
his sisters is married to the manager of the video firm that 
produces the government's publicity films. "The firm is hired by 
the agencies, which win their contracts in public bidding," says 
Sergio Pires, the official in charge of that area. As governor, 
Gomes is a typical example of a politician whose finances as an 
individual are much more transparent than his finances as a 
legal entity. To avoid giving fuel to his opponents, he 
dissuaded a brother from buying a house with financing from a 
state-owned bank. On the other hand, he is unable to say how 
much his administration has spent on publicity. "I don't know," 
he told ISTOE. "With all this inflation, I can't figure it out." 
  Within the Ceara administration, however, the cost of roads 
and other public works is reported down to the penny. It is 
reported, but not published. State Deputy Eudoro Santana (PSB 
[Brazilian Socialist Party]) has submitted two bills requiring 
the administration to publish a monthly statement of the state's 
accounts. The first bill was passed by the Legislative Assembly 
and vetoed by the governor. The second bill failed to win a 
majority. Unless the administration takes the initiative and 
makes its accounts transparent, the PSDB's spending on publicity 
is about to become a matter for the courts. The public 
prosecutor of the republic, Oscar da Costa Filho, has told ISTOE 
that this week he will begin a public civil action charging Ciro 
Gomes with personal promotion in publicity paid for out of 
public funds. 
  The governor says his lengthy interviews in official 
publications regarding his administration's achievements are 
necessary in order to break the boycott by Green Seas TV, which 
is the Globo Network's local affiliate but which is controlled 
by a political opponent of the PSDB group: businessman Edson 
Queiroz Filho, the brother-in-law of Tasso Jereissati. The 
family feud between Edson Queiroz and Tasso has led to some of 
the most low-down fights in Ceara politics. The governor accused 
the businessman of belonging to a degenerate family. The 
response was an article published as a paid advertisement in 
several of the country's newspapers and depicting Gomes as a 
pregnant sow. 
  A factor in Ciro Gomes's favor if he decides to run for 
president is his excellent relations with the owners and editors 
of Brazil's major publications. In an interview with the 
magazine IMPRENSA that was published in January, for example, he 
said he had direct access to the president of the Globo 
Organizations, Roberto Marinho. The two men have met with each 
other five times. "One `Globo Reporter' is worth more than 100 
PSDB or PT conventions," Ciro says. In 1989, that rapprochement 
with Globo was an essential element in helping Collor become 
known as the "maharaja hunter." The next 18-hour soap opera will 
be recorded in Ceara. 
<H5>  Case of the Pregnant Sow </H5>
  About 30 piglets entered the election campaign in Ceara last 
Christmas. Arriving in cages like those used to carry pets on 
aircraft, the "suckling pigs," as they are called in Ceara, were 
distributed to the first echelon of Ciro Gomes's administration 
on the evening of 24 December. A card signed by a mysterious 
"Fraternity of the Pregnant Sow" accompanied the "present." Days 
earlier, over 100,000 stickers had been distributed around the 
state. They showed the governor as a pregnant sow offering her 
teats to greedy assistant piglets. 
  Commenting on the episode in the local press, Ciro Gomes, 
faithful to his strategy of trying to turn the opposition's 
attacks against it, sought once again to turn the attack to his 
own advantage. The governor said in an interview that the 
fraternity in question was a support organization set up by 
humorous friends. The effects of that comparison on the 
governor's popularity are not yet known. 
  The story began with a debate on the "Commotion" program on 
Sao Paulo's Culture TV early in December. When one of the 
interviewees questioned the similarities between his political 
style and that of the adventurer Fernando Collor, Ciro said he 
preferred being compared to a pregnant young sow. According to 
the governor, the phrase is part of a popular saying in his 
native Sobral: "You can compare me to a pregnant sow because if 
I produce a litter, I'll give you one of the piglets," Ciro said. 
  Swinish remarks aside, the governor of Ceara's profile has 
visible similarities with that of the now-rejected former 
president who was thrown out of office because of corruption. 
Both men began their political careers in the PDS [Democratic 
Social Party] under the military governments and with jobs given 
to them by their fathers. Whereas Senator Arnon de Mello made 
his rebel son the mayor of Maceio, the former mayor of Sobral, 
Euclides Ferreira Gomes, rewarded his newly graduated son in 
1982 by making him the municipal attorney. 
  From there, as a member of the PDS, Ciro ran for state 
deputy, was elected second alternate, and took over the seat. 
According to the governor, his membership in the PDS was "a 
matter of circumstances," since there was no room in the PMDB. 
Once in the Legislative Assembly, Ciro made sure that his 
father, mother, and one brother were given positions of trust in 
Gonzaga Mota's administration. When Gonzaga had a falling out 
with political bosses Adauto Bezerra, Virgilio Tavora, and Cesar 
Cals, the Ferreira Gomes family--which was part of the Cals 
clique--lost its three jobs in the administration. 

