Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Ryzhov, chief of the Russian Agency for </F>
International Cooperation and Development administration for the 
development of free economic zones, investment programs, and 
resources: "Free Economic Zones: When Will They Start 
Operating?"] 
  [Text] Some 14 free economic zones [FEZ's] have now been 
established in Russia. Most of them were announced in 
1990-1991. It was then that 12 FEZ's appeared at once. Most of 
them covered the territories of entire oblasts, such as Chita, 
Kemerovo, Kaliningrad, Sakhalin, and others, but none of them, 
even such a promising zone as "Nakhodka," is actually in 
operation, and there are objective reasons for this. 
  For instance, when preferential economic and legal status 
was 
granted to territories that in many cases are bigger than some 
European countries, the state's actual economic potential was 
not taken into account. World experience was also ignored. It 
shows that countries spend $20-70 million per square kilometer 
of FEZ to provide all the facilities. The state's greatest 
outlay is at the initial stage, the establishment of the 
production infrastructure, in which the foreign investor avoids 
investing. The "Dauria" FEZ in Chita Oblast alone covers an 
area of more than 431,000 square km. Moreover, in such 
"superzones" it is virtually impossible to ensure proper 
monitoring of the implementation of the special customs and 
currency rules. And these are key elements of the FEZ economic 
mechanism. No wonder, then, that in the course of further 
changes to the existing legislation on the zones the main 
concessions, including tax concessions, were abolished. 
  So the FEZ question remains open: Formally they exist, but 
in practice they do not operate. In our view, the lack of a 
realistic idea of the purpose and potential of the FEZ's and of 
a cogent blueprint and program for their creation were largely 
responsible for this. Many regions thought, indeed in some 
cases believe even now that the zones are a kind of panacea, 
particularly in the socioeconomic sphere. In fact, they are 
just one factor in the development and functioning of the market 
mechanism. Their main role is to boost foreign economic 
activity and expand export production by bringing in foreign and 
Russian investments, advanced technology, equipment, and 
managerial experience. Only after they have been formed and 
developed, which will take years, can the zones have a 
modernizing effect on the local economy. 
  And, as world experience shows, the crucial factors in 
successful FEZ development are a convenient and advantageous 
economic and geographic position, the presence of the requisite 
production, transport, and business infrastructure and manpower 
reserves in the region, and favorable opportunities for 
conducting foreign economic activities. It is also extremely 
important that foreign investors should be interested in 
investing capital in this particular region. 
  Of course, as was mentioned before, you have to weigh up 
very 
carefully how big the FEZ should be. For instance, the world's 
first and one of the most efficiently operating export 
production zones is in the vicinity of Shannon International 
Airport in Ireland. Originally it occupied 10 hectares. Or 
take the "Masan" FEZ in South Korea. It occupies less than one 
square kilometer, yet it provides export products worth around 
$2 billion per year. Foreign experts recommend limiting the size 
of FEZ's to 140-160 hectares, at least at the initial stage. 
  Of course, there is also the experience of the relatively 
large Chinese special economic zone, but it is highly specific 
and has not spread elsewhere either in China itself or in the 
world as a whole. The socioeconomic conditions in the PRC were 
different from those in Russia. One very important purpose 
behind the creation of these zones was to "test" the market 
management mechanisms for subsequent introduction into the 
planned socialist economy. The fact that they were orientated 
toward political as well as economic results is also of 
considerable importance. Their very location was obviously 
geared to the businessmen of Hong Kong, Macao, and Taiwan. It 
is no accident that the bulk of foreign investments in them 
comes from foreign businessmen of Chinese extraction, primarily 
from Hong Kong. 
  It is indicative that export production in these zones is, 
as 
a rule, low-technology. The proportion of products for export 
is not great enough either. At the same time, wide use is made 
of imported raw materials. The FEZ's did not obtain a positive 
balance of payments until 1990; that is, 10 years and more after 
they were founded. 
  Certainly the Chinese example shows many clearly positive 
results, but we are talking here only about choosing the most 
effective way forward. Incidentally, the compact economic and 
technical development zones created in a number of "open" PRC 
coastal cities, similar to the "classic" export production 
zones, have demonstrated a much greater ability to actively 
involve foreign capital in the retooling of industry. 
  So what kind of future lies in store for the Russian FEZ's? 
It depends to a crucial degree on the creation of a strong and 
stable legislative base. There already is a draft law on FEZ's. 
It was sent by the Russian president to the former Supreme 
Soviet as long ago as last March, but it was not examined. Now 
it will be adopted by the Russian Federation Federal Assembly. 
  The draft law, prepared with international practice in mind, 
contains new conceptual approaches to the formation of FEZ's. 
In the first place, it is proposed that they should be compact, 
no more than a few square kilometers in size. This kind of area 
can be equipped without creating too great a financial burden 
and within an acceptable timeframe, proper customs and financial 
control can be arranged, and the requisite infrastructure can be 
fully established. Indeed, tax concessions will not go to 
entire oblasts but will extend only to small zones. The plan is 
to equip them in the manner of industrial parks. The range of 
preferences is to be made pretty wide and, we hope, attractive 
to foreign businessmen. At any rate, it will not differ 
significantly from the more or less standard range. 
  The FEZ's will be divided into two types: export production 
zones (production type) and unbonded zones (warehousing type). 
Incidentally, the latter have now been given the go-ahead with 
the publication of the Russian Federation Customs Code, and the 
drafts are now being worked out. 
  International practice indicates the advisability of FEZ 
specialization. There are around 400 warehouse-type zones and 
more than 300 export production zones in the world at the 
moment. Most of the former operate in industrially developed 
states. There are around 130 in Europe and more than 180 in the 
United States. 
  Export production zones are more popular in developing 
countries. At the beginning of the nineties there were more 
than 300 operating, over 100 were in the process of being 
organized, and 50 and more were at the planning and preparation 
stage. More than three million people are employed in them (in 
1990 it was two million). Of course, there is far less need for 
them in the developed countries, since they already have a 
full-fledged market and major high-technology export potential. 
  As for the future Russian export zones, it is envisaged that 
they will be obliged to supply at least 50 percent of their 
products for export. If a FEZ resident fails to accomplish this 
task he could lose his license. At the same time, there are 
plans for a flexible system of incentives for producers of 
export goods. The size of the concessions will depend on the 
volume of exports, the degree of processing, the standard of the 
technology used, the proportion of local raw materials and 
supplies, and so on. 
  In order to create the FEZ's, the draft law provides for the 
allocation of funds from the federal budget (including tax 
concessions), budget loans, part of the money obtained in the 
course of privatization, and also the use of the budgets of the 
regions where they are being formed. 
  In this connection it is important to bear in mind that the 
proposed future redistribution of the powers of the center and 
the regions, in particular in the budget sphere, will obviously 
also make significant adjustments to the process of financing 
and developing FEZ's. Local authorities will have to tackle 
many problems indpendently and ensure, in particular, that the 
zones are not turned into economic enclaves, isolated from the 
national economy, but are closely linked to the corresponding 
region and use its resources, raw materials, components, and so 
on. There has been a very marked desire of late on the part of 
private Russian investors to get involved in the formation of 
the zones. Given the current budget deficit, this is a 
perfectly possible extra source. 
  Nonetheless, the formation of zones is primarily a state 
issue. So the preparation of a state program for their creation 
is envisaged. Obviously it will be worthwhile having a proper 
competition among preselected drafts and, at first, a limited 
number of FEZ's, primarily for export production. Otherwise we 
will continue to have the "zone mania" which has gripped many 
regions of Russia in the past couple of years, and the 
government, as in the past, will be inundated with ill-conceived 
and often totally unacceptable proposals on opening FEZ's. 
  It is equally important to identify the federal management 
organ responsible for coordinating all the work. These 
functions used to be performed by the Russian Agency for 
International Cooperation and Development, although not 
entirely. Recently the agency, together with the Russian 
Federation Customs Committee, was instructed to organization 
unbonded zones, but the problem basically remains. 
  This has been a brief account of the past and immediate 
future of the creation of FEZ's in Russia, but if you glance 
further into the future, the example of the developed countries 
shows that export production zones sooner or later lose their 
significance for them. Russia is just at the start of this 
road, but when production facilities in our FEZ's develop and 
attain maturity it will be sensible to buy them from foreign 
partners, as the South Koreans have already started to do in the 
case of highly efficient enterprises in the "Masan" zone, but 
unbonded zones are traditionally an effective means of boosting 
the foreign trade of both developed and developing states and 
they remain effective. 
  The creation of FEZ's here, as in many other regions of the 
world, could be an effective means of attracting foreign 
investments and a catalyst for the development of foreign 
economic relations and the economy of the country as a whole, 
but to achieve this the policy behind their formation must be 
well thought-out and consistent. 

