Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, Feb. 7 (AFP) -- The outlawed Moslem 
fundamentalist group Jama'ah al-Islamiyah on Monday issued a 
"final warning" for foreigners to leave Egypt. 
  "We have to warn them first so that our religion is innocent 
of the blood which will flow," the group said in a statement 
sent to AFP. 
  It said the killing of a police general in the southern town 
of Asyut Sunday was "the final warning to tourists and investors 
to leave the country." 
  Tourists and investors would be the main targets as a way of 
pressuring the "fascist" government of President Husni Mubarak, 
the group said in a second statement. 
  "The Jama'ah implores all embassies, consulates and 
businessmen to advise their citizens and kin, be they tourists, 
or Arab or Western investors, to leave the country immediately." 
  The group, which wants to turn Egypt into an Iranian-style 
Islamic republic, has frightened away many potential 
holidaymakers, costing the government billions of dollars in 
lost revenue. 
  "He who helps a regime which fights Islam, tortures its 
sons, 
abuses its women and hangs its young will suffer the same 
punishment as tyrants," it said. 
  Suspected Moslem militants on Sunday shot dead police 
general 
Omar Mustafa as he left his house in Asyut. He was the second 
police general to be killed in four days in the town, a hotbed 
of Islamic militancy. 
  On Wednesday, another officer was killed in similar 
circumstances. 
  Jama'ah al-Islamiyah warned foreign investors and tourists 
to 
leave the country last Wednesday hours after a police raid in 
Cairo in which seven militants were killed. The group warned it 
would retaliate against the "massacre" by police. 
  Sunday's attack in Asyut brought to 297 the number of people 
killed since the Moslem militants launched a violent campaign to 
overthrow the secular government of President Husni Mubarak in 
March 1992. 
  The fundamentalists have targeted policemen, senior 
government officials, foreign tourists and Coptic Christians. 
More than half of the 107 policemen were killed in Asyut. 

