BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Siege on al-'Aqabah Intolerable; We will not </F>
Submit to Pressures"] 
  [Text] Since it has become very clear that the U.S. siege 
on Jordan is both a political and economic siege, it is now 
Jordan's right, as His Majesty King Husayn said in an interview 
with Japanese Television yesterday, to adopt a decisive and just 
stand on this siege. 
  Since the U.S. Administration is practicing such economic 
and 
trade pressures and harassments on Jordan to force it to sign a 
unilateral agreement along with a declaration of principles, to 
normalize relations, and to lift the boycott of Israel--things 
that are harder for Jordan to do than anything else--then Jordan 
will have to freeze or suspend its active role in the peace 
negotiations. 
  The U.S. demands, which, in principle, are Israeli demands, 
totally contradict the constants of the principled Jordanian 
stand. 
  Jordan will not relinquish the constants of its principled 
stand, which, as His Majesty King Husayn said, is represented by 
seeking to realize a future in which a just and comprehensive 
peace prevails and in which the coming generations can exist 
under security, peace, and stability. 
  Jordan is committed to achieving a comprehensive solution on 
all tracks. It will not accept a unilateral agreement with 
Israel. 
  Jordan will not agree to sign a declaration of principles 
before finding solutions to the issues of borders, waters, 
refugees, and evacuees, as well as the issue of holy Jerusalem. 
  In his television interview, his majesty warned that issues 
concerning the siege of al-'Aqabah have reached an intolerable 
situation--one which we are trying to rectify. We are also 
trying to show the world that if this situation constitutes 
pressure, then we will not submit to such pressures. 
  Moreover, Jordan believes that the Arab League alone can 
discuss the issue of lifting the boycott of Israel, which is 
seeking normalization. 
  Since Jordan is committed to Arab League resolutions, it 
cannot respond to the demands of the U.S. Administration. 
Jordan will not accept to split the unified Arab position or 
parting from it even if this is to appease the U.S. 
Administration. 
  Jordan is beginning to interpret the unjust siege imposed on 
it as a hostile and vindictive measure that is totally 
unjustified. 
  However, Jordan, as the U.S. Administration itself knows and 
as His Majesty King Husayn said, will not submit to such 
pressures no matter how harsh they are. Moreover, Jordan will 
not at all accept blackmail. 
  Therefore, it linked the continuation of its active, 
effective, and influential role in the peace process to lifting 
the unjust siege on the Port of al-'Aqabah, removing the harm 
caused to its economy and trade, and stopping the serious losses 
it is suffering. 
  This Jordanian stand has many political meanings and 
dimensions which the U.S. Administration realizes before anyone 
else. This is especially so since Jordan, as the Austrian 
president said, is a basic pillar of the peace process. The 
collapse of this pillar will inevitably lead to the total 
collapse of the U.S.-initiated peace process. 

