Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ibeth Vega G.] </F>
  [Text] Yesterday, after the government alliance broke up, 
President Guillermo Endara proceeded to dismiss several Molirena 
[Nationalist Liberal Republican Movement] members from his 
government. He fired the San Miguelito mayor as well as the 
governors of Panama and Cocle. 
  Yesterday afternoon, Endara himself confirmed the 
appointment 
of John Hoger as San Miguelito mayor replacing Ruben Dario 
Campos. Daphne Guinard de Clement replaces Irlena Brown as 
Panama governor and Lindberg Ramos replaces Generoso Carles as 
Cocle governor. The former Cocle governor is nephew to Molirena 
presidential candidate Ruben Dario Carles. 
  The first changes in the Endara administration took place 
two 
days after the government alliance broke up as a result of not 
reaching an agreement aimed at forming a presidential slate 
during negotiations. 
  Endara stated the changes in his government are positive, 
but 
more than anything else, these changes are aimed at providing 
more benefits to the needy. 
  Yesterday afternoon, former Governor Irlina Brown was 
interviewed by LA PRENSA over the telephone and she indicated 
she had not yet received any calls notifying her of the 
presidencial decision. Brown added: "I think it is totally 
ridiculous that I found out from the media. I have been here all 
day and I have not received any direct or official notification 
yet." 
  According to Brown, party leaders have instructed Molirena 
members to remain in their positions until told to do otherwise; 
"however, it is unfortunate we are returning to former times, 
especially after we fought so hard." 
  On the other hand, Solidarity Party President Samuel Lewis 
Galindo sent Endara a letter yesterday calling on him to prevent 
the vacancies resulting from Molirena resignations from becoming 
political booty. "We urge you to appoint people to those 
positions who are not involved in politics or who will guarantee 
respect for the public employees' stability so the sad practice 
of distributing political quotas to satisfy the insatiable does 
not continue," the note added. 
  Meanwhile, Endara said he has been conducting consultations 
and thinking about possible cabinet changes. He added the 
government crisis resulting from the dismissal of Molirena 
members "will not weaken my government, although I will have to 
make some adjustments because it will have internal 
repercussions. I am thinking about possible changes. They will 
be announced once I make a decision." 
  Endara deplored the break up of the government alliance, 
adding that Molirena's decision to break off the negotiations 
was "silly." 

