BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Bozena Kriznik: "Behind the Political Stage: </F>
Talks With Eight Directors"] 
  [Text] Ljubljana, 15 April -- A recent visit of Iranian 
Foreign Minister Velayati in Slovenia was not of a purely 
political nature as one could have concluded from the 
composition of the Iranian delegation and sparse information 
from the official diplomacy. Namely, the Iranian guest responded 
to the invitation of Minister for Economic Activity Dr. Maks 
Tajnikar to attend a ceremonial dinner in Brdo. Among the guests 
were also the directors of the eight Slovene companies who are 
the biggest exporters to this Asian country. In the talks that 
lasted approximately three hours they exchanged opinions on the 
most topical issues, also discussing the settlement of debts, 
and examining possibilities for further cooperation. 
  Minister Tajnikar first presented the economic situation in 
Slovenia to the Iranian guests and in this way demonstrated that 
our economy is going through a phase of revival, that we have a 
developed technology, balanced foreign and domestic trade -- 
proof that we are a serious economic partner. A joint 
appearance on foreign markets, for example, would be to mutual 
advantage while Iran would probably also find it interesting to 
break through into Europe via Slovenia. We could use good 
political relations for the strengthening of the economic ties. 
  A group of businessmen (consisting of Dr. Joze Duhovnik from 
Litostroj, Aljosa Ivancic from Iskra Ponti, Dr. Mirko Opara from 
Smelt, Bojan Mavko from Iskra Sistemi, Maksimiljan Senica from 
TAM, Andrej Kokalj from the Slovene Ironworks, Dr. Alenka Brvar 
from Iskra Elektrooptika, and a representative of Iskra Tel) had 
the opportunity to present their problems and views on 
cooperation directly to the foreign minister and his entourage. 
They discussed concrete deals, new initiatives prepared by the 
Slovene companies, the degree of viability of various contracts, 
and also the Iranian debt of approximately $19 million. They 
redefined some issues. The Iranians showed particular interest 
in the transfer of technology (Iskra, Slovene Ironworks, TAM). 
They also agreed that the Iranian ambassador will visit 
individual companies to agree on concrete deals. 
  'Ali Akbar Velayati was told that the Slovene economic 
delegation will visit Sarajevo shortly and, on that occasion, 
meet with the top Bosnia-Herzegovina officials and economic 
representatives. In Brdo they, thus, also discussed how Iran 
and Slovenia could participate in the reconstruction of Bosnia 
-- which is a great interest of Slovenia's. They also spoke 
about the idea according to which companies from Slovenia and 
Iran would participate in cooperation deals while Iran would 
also finance some of the projects of this kind. The aid would, 
therefore, not go directly, but through some of our companies. 
Minister Tajnikar will inform the Bosnian leadership of this 
offer. 
  Discussing the Iranian payment problems -- this issue was 
raised first by the director of Litostroj -- Veleyati said that, 
a week ago, their central bank passed a decision to resolve the 
payment problems in the shortest possible time. It seems that 
payment problems are not as critical as to threaten the economic 
cooperation between the two economies. It does not hopelessly 
involve poor payment record of the Iranian side, but objective 
circumstances that can be understood, and delayed payments. 
Also, Iran is striving to improve its payments' discipline. It 
is important that Slovenia has a market and certain privileges 
from it; Iran is primarily interesting for us because of oil 
(which we do not buy from the state, which demands to high a 
price, but on the free market). 
  The companies whose directors met in Brdo are among the top 
10 Iranian partners and exporters and their deals amount to 
several million dollars annually. 

