Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, Mar 30, BNS -- Estonia was the last of the 
Baltic states to conclude a framework agreement on defense 
cooperation with Denmark. 
  Danish Defense Minister Hans Haekkerup and his Estonian 
counterpart Indrek Kannik signed the treaty today. 
  The framework agreement outlines the principles of 
cooperation between the Estonian and the Danish Defense 
Ministries and military structures as well as the relations 
between military and civilian authorities, foresees 
establishment of civilian control over military structures, and 
provides for exchange of information and consultations on 
peacekeeping issues and military budgeting, as well as for 
environmental cooperation to eliminate damage to nature caused 
by the military. The agreement allows the two countries to 
conclude additional bilateral agreements on military cooperation. 
  Kannik noted at the press conference after the signing that 
this is Estonia's first treaty on defense cooperation. 
  The Danish defense minister stated that his country attaches 
great importance to the treaty in the hope that it "becomes a 
vital step on Estonia's road to NATO membership." 
  Haekkerup met during his visit with Prime Minister Mart 
Laar, 
Kannik, Foreign Minister Juri Luik, Parliament Speaker Ulo 
Nugis, and members of the parliamentary National Defense 
Commission. 
  The meetings covered a wide range of issues including the 
development of the Baltic peacekeeping battalion and Denmark's 
assistance in it, as well as Estonian-Russian relations and the 
situation in Europe. 
  Haekkerup said at the press conference that the matter at 
issue at present is, not the threat of Russia's military 
aggression, but its political power. "We stick to our position 
that Russian troops must leave Estonia," the Danish defense 
minister said. "Their presence in Kaliningrad is another matter, 
since that territory belongs to the sovereign Russia, although I 
think Russia has at present more troops stationed there than 
necessary for the defense of the region." 
  Kannik said the Danish defense minister affirmed his 
negative 
attitude toward Russia's concept of the "near abroad" and 
whatever division of spheres of influence in Europe. 
  "Denmark has done its utmost for Estonia, and Estonia is 
very 
grateful to Denmark for its support," the Estonian defense 
minister said. 
  Haekkerup yesterday presented the Estonian Defense Forces 
with an inspection cutter donated by the Danish Royal Navy. 
  Today, the Danish defense minister delivered a speech on the 
subject of "Denmark, Estonia and European security" at the 
Foreign Ministry. 
  Haekkerup leaves Estonia in the afternoon. 

