BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jedrzej Bielecki: "Third East-West Conference -- </F>
Declaration of Business; Supporters and Opponents"] 
  [Text] "Today's meeting will go down in the history of 
international economic relations because never before has it 
been acknowledged so openly that it is, first of all, private 
companies that are responsible for the economic development of a 
given country and for the creation of new jobs, and that 
governments can only help in achieving this," said U.S. Commerce 
Secretary Ronald H. Brown at the end of the Third East-West 
Conference of the Ministers of Economy, Industry, and Trade of 
the G-7 and E-10 states. 
  "The Warsaw Declaration of East-West Business," approved at 
the conference by private entrepreneurs of the G-7 and E-10 
states, lists the conditions for quick economic development in 
the former socialist countries and their integration into the 
global economy. The document draws attention, among other 
aspects, to the need to persuade people in those states which 
are implementing reforms to acknowledge the role of foreign 
investments, which, because of the lack of the countries' own 
capital, are often the only possibility for transferring 
technologies and maintaining the competitiveness of companies. 
  Businessmen believe that liberalizing the rules of capital 
traffic might considerably accelerate the integration of the 
countries of this region into the global economy. According to 
them, international financial establishments should pay greater 
attention to the special needs of private companies and should 
more frequently employ venture capital [two preceding words in 
English] methods. The businessmen also stated that despite 
differences which exist right now, the countries of Central-East 
Europe should strive to make trade rules more uniform, which is 
particularly important now -- in a situation when regional 
economic alliances are being established all over the world. 
  One of the enthusiasts of the declaration is R. Brown, who 
said that it is the best road to the integration of Central-East 
Europe with the rest of the world. A similar view was also 
expressed by Aleksandr Shokhin, Russian deputy prime minister 
and economy minister, who, however, expressed his disappointment 
over the approach of the G-7 group toward his country to date. 
Up to now the richest countries of the world have invested $2.6 
billion in the Russian Federation, whereas, according to A. 
Shokhin, this country is able to "absorb" $50 billion to $70 
billion a year. The Russian deputy prime minister pointed out 
that every year Russia loses $3 billion because of barriers to 
Russian exports imposed by well- developed states. According to 
him, the lack of orders for Russian military equipment is 
special proof of this. 
  Many reservations to the ideas contained in the declaration 
were voiced by Czech Economy and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy, 
for whom the differences among the E-10 states are too great, 
and so it is not possible to carry out a joint economic policy 
toward them. He also warned against admitting foreign investors 
indiscriminately: they frequently take advantage of what is best 
in a given country, but do not give anything in return. Also 
Jean-Pierre Landau, chairman of the French delegation, drew 
attention to the fact that one cannot indiscriminately accept 
the remarks included in the declaration because governments have 
priorities different from those of economic milieus. 
  The greatest doubts concerning the possibilities of reaching 
the goals of the Warsaw Declaration were expressed by the 
representatives of the former Soviet republics, for whom almost 
the only possibility of attracting foreign capital is the offer 
of privatizing the economy. Uladzimir V. Radkevich, Belarusian 
foreign economic relations minister, said bluntly that since 
last year's East-West Conference in Tokyo, his government had 
looked more optimistically on possibilities for cooperating with 
the West and made a strategic decision concerning the 
integration of the Belarusian economy with Russia. Out of the 
offers of participation in 10 pilotage projects presented in 
Tokyo, not even one was answered. The next meeting -- the 
Fourth Conference of G-7 and E-10 countries -- will be held next 
year in Washington. Aside from the participants which have been 
taking part in the conferences to date, Slovenia will also 
participate -- as an observer. 
  During the conference, Warsaw was visited by Trevor Manuel, 
newly appointed trade minister of the Republic of South Africa. 
He was assured by the G-7 states that the future economic 
development of the Republic of South Africa would be supported 
by them. The United States decided to allocate $600 million for 
that purpose; Great Britain -- 150 pounds; Japan and Germany -- 
"substantial sums of money." 

