BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Arkadiy Zheludkov: "After Murder at Missile </F>
Complex"] 
  [Excerpts] In its issue no. 57 for 26 March IZVESTIYA 
reported a tragedy in a strategic missile regiment: Private 
Alik Oshurbekov, who had gone on duty to guard the ICBM complex, 
killed guard chief Lieutenant Garkusha and his fellow soldier 
Private Shuktovev, and seriously wounded two more servicemen -- 
Oleg Kozub and Vasiliy Kopylov. To find out how this strange 
story ended and what conclusions were drawn after a soldier had 
contrived to capture a nuclear missile complex, our 
correspondent flew to Altay. [passage omitted] 
  There is no need now to recall the details of the incident 
-- 
that is the belief of the military prosecutor's office in Altay. 
A little later Mikhail Tolkachev, deputy military prosecutor, 
admits that the missile division is not subordinate in any way 
to the local military prosecutor's office! I do not know how 
far this is the case and how far it is an attempt to protect 
military honor. The fact is that the district military 
prosecutor's office investigators never tried to study the 
circumstances of the case. And since the tragic evening the 
Federal Counterintelligence Service, which (as the KGB) used to 
have strict control over missile units, has not once interfered 
in the case, at least officially. 
  Yet it is not difficult to penetrate to the territory of the 
missile unit in the settlement of Sibirskiy (the missile 
division headquarters): At the checkpoint you can say severely 
to the guard: "I'm in a hurry, I have come to see Major X." 
And the guard will lazily admit you to the division compound. 
Getting through to the military township territory is even 
simpler. And division officers who are witnesses say that, 
apart from the above-mentioned shooting incident it has recently 
become customary for the missile division units to be cut off 
from the power supply -- for failing to settle accounts for 
electricity. In that time damage which cannot be compared with 
any other catastrophes could have been inflicted on the country 
-- the missile tracking complexes were virtually immobilized for 
a long time.... 
<H5>  Failure of U.S. Investigation of Tragedy </H5>
  The missile division headquarters in Sibirskiy appeared to 
the U.S. military government inspectors in all its glory: The 
Russian command was obliged to report within a day to the U.S. 
Government any conflict in the compound of any strategic missile 
unit. And suddenly the Americans learned of the danger of a 
nuclear explosion not from their Russian counterparts in the 
treaty but from the Russian mass media -- the newspapers 
ALTAYSKAYA PRAVDA and IZVESTIYA and the INTERFAX news agency. 
The Americans needed just four hours in all at the missile 
division headquarters to understand that Russia is not a country 
where one can learn the reason for a conflict and predict 
methods of preventing similar incidents. 
  On the Barnaul airfield runway the leader of the U.S. 
military delegation merely shrugged when your IZVESTIYA 
correspondent asked him what he thinks of the incident. The 
point is that not only did the Americans not see Oshurbekov but 
they failed to understand from the division investigation 
materials why the soldier opened fire. "This fact gives you the 
right to hope that in the very near future Russia will learn of 
the capture of a U.S. nuclear missile complex only from the mass 
media," was more or less the interpretation of the U.S. 
delegation's mood by the interpreter, the only military 
specialist dressed in the uniform of the U.S. Navy -- all the 
others were in civilian clothing. 
  The Americans flew off without having gotten an answer to 
questions about the safety of Russian nuclear missile complexes. 
Yet only three years ago their military specialists highly 
assessed the Soviet "SS" missile pods [bloki]. Unfortunately, as 
the Americans noted, the U.S. Government can now no longer be 
sure of its Russian partners. 
<H5>  Secrets Again </H5>
  The incident in March at the ICBM missile unit became known 
in Altay Kray only thanks to the efforts of Oleg Loginov, an 
ALTAYSKAYA PRAVDA correspondent, and the IZVESTIYA item. 
Following these reports questions rained down on both editorial 
offices: "How do you know that the explosion of the missile fuel 
tank was dangerous to the surrounding population?" IZVESTIYA 
received the following complaint from a retired colonel, one of 
the creators of modern missiles which took over from the "SS" 
missiles in Altay Kray: "The 12 systems for protecting a 
warhead are a military secret," the military engineer said. 
"Our missiles are absolutely safe and will not blow up even if 
a mad soldier sets fire to them." 
  I shall answer as follows. No one has ever tried to set fire 
to ICBM's but on the day of the shooting at the security 
positions near Bayunovskiye Klyuchi the situation was very close 
to a combat one -- the missile troops guard service regulations 
say that shots in the direction of missiles are forbidden even 
if enemy scouting and sabotage groups appear. To this day the 
majority of the missile troops division officers have heard 
nothing about the capture of a strategic missiles guard combat 
vehicle by a rank and file soldier. Many officers thought that 
this incident was a joke put about by the vigilant first 
department.... 
  The chaste silence of Colonel Vladimir Parmenov, commander 
of 
the Siberian missile troops division, was described by a 
Japanese correspondent who found out the truth over the 
telephone as an act of compiling a report for the public press. 
"Of course," said the naive Japanese journalist. "The military 
must be answerable to the civilian population for a threat to 
the country's security?" 
  And only the counterintelligence officer who informed me of 
the state of affairs from the missile division told me that 
Private Oshurbekov "must have gone mad." That is the only way 
the missile division command could explain one soldier's 
unpunished capture of the ICBM position. 
<H5>  "Hero" Safely Hidden Away </H5>
  When I visited the Sibirskiy settlement Private Oshurbekov 
was not there -- his trail was lost somewhere during the 
investigation. It is known that by the time the Americans flew 
in the notorious soldier had been detained for psychiatric 
examination. And it was hinted to me at the division 
headquarters that long before the U.S. Government delegation 
arrived Alik Oshurbekov had committed suicide -- at the 
guardhouse. [passage omitted] 
  According to the information I acquired in Barnaul, at the 
time of my trip the ill-starred soldier was in the Kazan special 
regime clinic for the detention of mentally ill citizens who 
have committed particularly dangerous crimes. Whether the 
soldier's placing in a psychiatric clinic was justified, time 
will show: Psychiatric specialists say that such patients in 
Altay Kray have always had one path -- Kazan, Omsk, or 
Altayskaya Berezovska -- and a person's trail is lost there. 
But was it so necessary to draft into military service a young 
man "unable to control his actions at moments of anger," as Alik 
Oshurbekov was described by one of his former commanders, this 
conclusion stemming from draftee Alik Oshurbekov's personal file. 
  Where is the guarantee that one day soon another psychopath, 
better informed than Oshurbekov of the potential of nuclear 
missiles, will not capture another complex and blackmail us with 
the threat of nuclear catastrophe? Let us hope that the missile 
units command will help IZVESTIYA readers to get an answer to 
the mysteries of Private Oshurbekov's case. 

