Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Marisol Marin] </F>
  [Text] Cienfuegos, Cuba, 20 Feb (EFE) -- Cuban Foreign 
Minister Roberto Robaina, 38, seems firmly determined to break 
ministry traditions with the use of his own style that sometimes 
surprises others, but which, he says, obeys the need to launch a 
"diplomatic offensive." 
  At the end of a tour of Cuban central provinces, Robaina 
explained to a group of newsmen that "Cuba is not just Havana; 
we must show the world what the rest of the country is, and for 
that, we must wage diplomacy in accordance with our times." 
  For the second time since he was appointed minister, a 
little 
less than 1 year ago, this time, Roberto Robaina invited the 
diplomatic corps accredited in the island to go on a three-day 
tour through Villa Clara, Sancti Spiritus, and Cienfuegos 
Provinces. With the minister leading them, the ambassadors 
visited everything from a military industrial plant to a mule 
breeding farm, peasant communities, child care centers, an 
agricultural school, an imposing raw sugar storage center, among 
other things. 
  Robaina insists that all of this is necessary because 
"Cuba's 
image abroad is frequently distorted, and that is why we must 
show the world the truth of our situation." In this manner, the 
ambassadors learned that the Armed Forces has not only reduced 
its expenses but it is using part of the military industry for 
civilian purposes in order to make some business and obtain 
benefits. 
  At the "Comandante Ernesto Guevara" military enterprise in 
Villa Clara Province, General Luis Perez Rospide explained that 
this factory not only produces conventional armament and 
cartridges, but also kitchen equipment for tourist installations 
as well as plows and wagons for farmers' use. The general 
emphasized that this industry is open to foreign investment and, 
of course, to the possibility of forming a mixed association for 
obtaining technology, market, and capital. "What I need are 
clients," said the general, "and we are willing to manufacture 
any product here which is within our possibilities and which is 
good business." 
  The diplomats were then taken to a peasant community in the 
Escambray mountain range where they received a long explanation 
of what the Turquino Plan for mountain agriculture is, which -- 
according to the people in charge of this program -- has 
obtained "great results" and prevented migration from the 
mountains to the cities. Obviously, the speakers were always 
local authorities who occasionally made some criticized the 
inefficient work of past times when Cuba was closely linked to 
the former USSR, and they always concluded with some statement 
along the lines that "we will get ahead." 
  In Cienfuegos, one of the most beautiful and developed 
cities 
of the island thanks to the established industrial capacity, 
even though many industries remain idle, the diplomatic corps 
specifically asked about the fate of the Electronuclear Plant, 
the construction of which was halted a little over 18 months ago 
due to a lack of resources from both Russia as well as Cuba. 
Manuel Menendez Castellanos, party secretary in the province 
said "that plant is a plum," after explaining that there are "at 
least 30 countries" interested in that installation because "it 
has been proven to be well built and in excellent condition." 
Menendez went on to say "the problem is that a large investment 
must be made and the negotiations are very complex," but he did 
not explain which the countries have been contacted. 
  The tour not only included visits and explanations, but also 
nights for dancing in which the ambassadors danced up a storm. 
Even the foreign minister showed he could move to the rhythm of 
salsa music like any other Cuban. His demonstration was brief, 
but sufficient. "Believe it or not, these things ease tensions 
and relations," a Robaina adviser told the newsmen. 
  At the end of this tour, some said it was worthwhile 
because, 
in general, the chiefs of diplomatic missions are too secluded 
in Havana while others, a few of them, thought it was a waste of 
time. 

