BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Robyn Chalmers] </F>
  [Text] Durban -- SA [South Africa] should establish a 
reconstruction and development bond to swiftly secure an inflow 
of billions of investment dollars, SA ambassador to the US Harry 
Schwarz said yesterday. 
  He said there would be no flood of US investment into the 
economy or the JSE [Johannesburg Stock Exchange] until SA had 
shown a solid record of growth and stability. 
  But there was burgeoning demand in the US for "socially 
desirable" investments. 
  An RDP [Reconstruction Development Programme] bond--which 
has 
been mooted by government--would provide an ideal channel for 
such funds, Schwarz told the SA Property Owners' Association 
convention. "One fund management institution I spoke to, with 
R500bn [rand] under its management, indicated that R25bn of 
these funds had been marked for socially desirable investments. 
  "I wish I had an SA electrification or housing bond which I 
could market to US investors. I am confident it would attract a 
lot of interest." 
  Trade and Industry Minister Trevor Manuel has said that 
government was considering establishing an RDP bond. The bond 
would not form part of the RDP fund, which currently stands at 
R2.5bn. It is thought that the fund will get about R3bn in 
foreign aid over the next two years. Schwarz said it was 
imperative that foreign exchange controls be scrapped to 
encourage investment. "There will always be a reason not to 
bite the bullet, but if we are going to get the economy right we 
cannot artificially keep funds in SA. The rand must find its 
correct level based on criteria other than political." 
  Overseas investors might prefer entering SA at a discount. 
But on reflection they realised that the vagaries of local 
share and bond prices, and the political and economic situation, 
were enough to handle without a two-tier currency. 
  Schwarz said SA also had to contend with strong opinions in 
the US cabinet that SA should not receive foreign aid. "There 
is a belief that SA doesn't need aid as it is rich, there are 
communists in the government and if aid is forwarded, the US 
should receive mineral or other rights in return." 
  However this view was held by only some members of the 
Clinton administration, which was generally extremely supportive 
of SA's process of democratisation and the economy's 
reconstruction. 
  Rand Merchant Bank executive director Rudolf Gouws said he 
was pleased government had not created an RDP bond. A bond 
formed specifically to raise funds for the RDP would confuse the 
issue. It was clear from the Budget that the RDP was not viewed 
as an "add on", and the diversion of money to fund the RDP meant 
government expenditure was unlikely to soar. 

