Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 12 Jan (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE)--China 
experienced a fairly sharp price fluctuation around the New 
Year. Does this increase in prices for grain, oil, foods and 
home electric appliances, coming as it did on the eve of the 
initiation of this year's reforms, signal, that this year, or in 
the future, it is not going to be peaceful or that reforms has 
been too swift and drastic? 
  A commentary by a correspondent in ZHONGGUO GAIGE BAO [CHINA 
REFORM POST], which put out its inaugural issue only today, 
entitled "Prices go up and down, reforms continue to forge 
ahead," held that the recent round of price hikes, especially 
prices for grains, oil, and home appliances, which topped the 
hikes, were not caused by a shortage of goods or demand 
exceeding supply or a problem that might affect the overall 
situation, and therefore was not a new round of inflation. 
  The commentary says: Rising and falling prices affect 
thousands of households and everyone has his opinion. But it 
would be a little too much to view the recent round of price 
hike as a prelude to the kind of buying panic witnessed in 1988. 
  From the overall economic situation perspective, the buying 
panic five years ago was triggered by a serious unbalance 
between total supply and total demand. This was not the case in 
the latest price hike, which was rather a man-made local 
fluctuation. 
  Last year, China's economy grew at a high-speed rate of 13 
percent, with its GNP topping 3,000 billion yuan, winning praise 
around the world. Macro-regulation and control last summer and 
autumn removed some unhealthy elements, or lessened their harm, 
in our economic life. Annual total national economic supply of 
goods, including some capital goods which had been undersupplied 
in the first half of last year, were bigger than total demand--a 
sharp contrast to 1988. Last year, China's gross grain output 
hit a record high at 456 million tonnes. The state had full 
grain reserves, and demand equaled supply. After 15 years of 
construction, China's production capacity of major home electric 
appliances far outruns their demand. The worries of the 
manufacturers who make color televisions, refrigerators, washing 
machines, hi-fi machines, and air conditioners are sluggish 
sales and inventory backlogs, resulting in underproduction and 
idle equipment, rather than big demand or panic buying. This 
explains why prices for home electric appliances fell last 
autumn, causing worry among manufacturers and dealers, until the 
market improved toward the end of the year, prices recovered, 
and times became better for them. 
  The commentary pointed out: The yearend price hikes on the 
mainland were touched off by many different factors: 
  Grain price increases began sharply in the south and moved 
northward moderately. This was reflected in: Peasants' 
reluctance to sell grain in their they had, purchases by 
individual grain dealers at high prices, and state-owned grain 
stores held off selling grain in anticipation of higher prices. 
Sensing the trend, some residents joined the ranks of the 
buyers. With last year's bumper harvests, was it not strange 
that peasants were unwilling to sell their grains? No, it was 
not strange. Following the national rural work conference last 
October, there came the news that the state was going to raise 
the grain procurement price by a relatively great margin. The 
peasants heard the news--and which one of them did not want to 
wait for a better sale price? Some peasants turned themselves 
around to head home when they learned the news on their way to 
sell their grains. 
  Prices for home electric appliances reversed the falls and 
rose because of the misunderstanding of the consumption tax. As 
soon as word came out that there would be tax changes and that 
the state was going to levy consumption taxes beginning with the 
new year, the abrupt price rise in 1988, of color televisions 
came to mind. Who does not want to insure against inflation if 
he has money? Many only realized the consumption tax did not 
affect the price until after they had already bought home 
electric appliances. 
  But this applies not only to home electric appliances. Even 
the sharp fall of stocks was ultimately caused by noneconomic 
factors. It was mainly caused by stories about the state 
planning to tax individual income earned from stocks and the 
securities commission's severe restrictions on allocating and 
giving shares, which increased the number of sellers and drove 
off buyers. Eventually this led to a 200 point fall on the 
Shanghai stock market. Later people recovered their senses, the 
shares index climbed back, and the market returned to normal. 
  The commentary says, inflation may be demand-pulled or 
cost-pushed. The latest round of price hikes was neither the 
former nor latter, but was caused by insufficient advanced 
publicity explaining the forthcoming reformist measures, and as 
it was, strictly speaking, not inflation. Although for now 
prices remain high and the threat of inflation still exists, 
this is not the same as inflation. 
  Lastly, the correspondent's commentary observed: The latest 
round of "price hike turmoil" has taught us that in the future, 
adjustment actions by the state on economic life inevitably 
cause widespread social concern and reactions. This is not 
strange, because reforms, in the end, are adjustments of 
interest relationships. It would indeed be strange for people 
not to react to something which concerns their immediate 
interests. For concerned government departments, since the 
structure is breaking new ground, the whole structure is moving 
ahead with breakthroughs in selected areas, and since the 
planned economy is moving rapidly toward a market economy, they 
have to review and look anew at some of the past methods, 
customary and well-tried though they are. They must pursue 
scientific, effective macroregulation and control, prevent 
excessive price rises, gradually learn to handle the market 
economy with a genuine market approach, and try as much as 
possible to avoid handling the market economy with a planning 
economy approach. 

