BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, May 27 (YONHAP) -- Rep. Sin Ki-ha was elected 
the Democratic Party's [DP] floor leader at the National 
Assembly Friday in an upset over incumbent Kim Tae-sik, 
heralding further discord between the party's main and 
non-mainstream factions. 
  At a meeting of 96 DP lawmakers, Sin, 53, a third-term 
representative, defeated Kim Tae-sik and established a 
non-mainstream foothold in the party leadership dominated by 
mainstreamers. 
  Although Sin reportedly captured one of the three main party 
posts on the strength of his personality rather than factional 
considerations, his election could emerge as a major factor in 
the fight for party control at the national convention next year. 
  Kim Tae-sik had been backed for another two-year term as the 
party's whip in the unicameral legislature by Chairman Yi 
Ki-taek and followers of retired Chairman Kim Tae-chung, who is 
still a powerful force within the party. 
  With Sin's election, the top leaders of the main opposition 
party find themselves in an awkward position as they must 
conduct parliamentary business through a non-mainstreamer. 
  Reps. Kim Sang-hyon, Chong Tae-chol and other leaders of the 
non-mainstream faction, criticizing the policies of the 
mainstreamers, had been demanding that the party hold an early 
national convention and undertake reform. 
  The party's Supreme Council is its policy-making body and 
the 
floor leader simply carries out the policy crafted by the 
nine-member council. Some analysts, therefore, warn that too 
much significance should not be placed on the floor leader's 
role. 
  Nevertheless, Sin's election is an ominous sign for Chairman 
Yi Ki-taek, who has already been having difficulty controlling 
the Supreme Council, many of whose members do not see eye-to-eye 
with Yi on major issues. 
  On top of that, Yi will now have to work with a 
parliamentary 
whip who is from the opposing faction. 
  In any event, speculation abounded in the wake of the 
election Friday afternoon as to what worked in favor of Sin, 
considered a definite underdog even hours before the vote. 
  Some said several DP lawmakers must have felt it was 
undesirable for one person -- in this case, Rep. Kim Tae-sik -- 
to monopolize the floor leader's job, regarded as the most 
"glamorous" of the top party posts and as such coveted by many. 
  There must have been quite a few "sympathy votes" for Sin, 
who had not held any top posts until now even though he has been 
elected to the assembly three times, they said. 
  The mainstream faction, on the other hand, may have been 
overconfident of Kim Tae-sik's re-election since Kim Tae-chung 
followers, or the Tongyodong faction, far outnumber the 
non-mainstreamers. 
  Many Tongyodong faction members obviously crossed the line 
and voted for Sin as their leaders failed to exercise sufficient 
discipline, according to independent observers. 
  They note that Sin, who is from Kwangju, the Democratic 
Party's power base, had been working hard to win the election 
among his high school and university alumni. 
  They also point out that Sin visited Kim Tae-chung Thursday 
night and appealed to him to remain neutral in the election. 
  Whatever the reason that Sin was catapulted into the floor 
leadership, each DP faction is certain to tighten control over 
its members and work to entice more outsiders into the group. 
  As a consequence, intraparty discord and factional fighting 
will intensify as the DP marches toward next year's momentous 
national convention that will decide who is to lead the main 
opposition party. 

