BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Aureliano Biancarelli] </F>
  [Text] Latin American representatives fear drug trafficking 
groups may be behind the international campaign to decriminalize 
and legalize narcotics. 
  "They use well-known international personalities to promote 
legalization," said lawyer Rodolfo Vielmann, 55, general 
coordinator of the Drug Prevention Council of Guatemala. 
  The concern with the decriminalization of drugs was 
expressed 
on 13 May in Sao Paulo during the last day of a meeting of Latin 
American drug prevention experts. 
  The forum was sponsored by the UN International Drug Control 
Program (UNDEP) and 40 experts from 17 countries participated. 
  Some participants suggested holding another UN meeting to 
exclusively discuss the subject of decriminalization. 
  Vielmann said some members of the U.S. Health Department 
defend the idea. In Colombia, some court sentences have 
considered the use of drugs a personal matter and an individual 
right. 
  "The court decisions of some countries worry us," said one 
participant who did not want to be identified. "Traffickers 
kill," he added. 
  Psychologist Jose Luis Harb, 34, the Bolivian Social 
Prevention under secretary, said the preaching in favor of 
decriminalization in Colombia is worrisome. He said that 
Bolivia is a drug producing country and this makes it different 
from the rest. "In my country cocaine base is very cheap and 
traffickers are interested in the foreign market. To 
decriminalize narcotics does not help at all." 
  Luis Carlos Zamora Reys, 37, the head of the Colombian 
National Narcotics Directorate, said that legislation in his 
country only tolerates drug addicts and worries with their 
recovery. 
  Sao Paulo First Lady Ika Fleury said: "The idea of 
decriminalizing narcotics is globally flourishing," adding: "If 
badly conducted, it will have serious consequences." She 
participated in the UNDEP closing ceremony as president of the 
Sao Paulo Solidarity and Social Fund. 
  Giovanni Quaglia, 43, UNDEP director in Brazil, said the 
legalization of drugs "is no solution, it is beginning to be 
defended because society believes all other measures have 
failed." He said that what is happening in some Latin American 
countries is a trend to decriminalize consumers and those who 
carry small amounts. 

