BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yi Nam-chu, deputy director of the Institute </F>
of Korean Affairs affiliated with the General Association of 
Korean Residents in Japan, Chongnyon, by International News 
reporter Bungo Osawa; place and date not given; first paragraph 
is MAINICHI SHIMBUN introduction] 
  [Text] We asked Mr. Yi Nam-chu, deputy director of the 
Institute of Korean Affairs, a research institute affiliated 
with the General Association of Korean Residents in Japan 
(pro-DPRK or pro-North Korea), to talk about the DPRK's 
suspected development of nuclear arms from the North Korean 
point of view. Yi is a second generation North Korean immigrant 
residing in Japan. He specializes in contemporary Korean 
affairs. 
  [Osawa] How do you look at the present situation of the 
nuclear issue? 
  [Yi] Based on the agreement between North Korea and the 
United States, the DPRK accepted nuclear inspections adequate to 
"maintain the continuity of security measures," but not the 
regular and special inspections. The fact that the United 
States and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
disregarded this agreement, asked for full inspections, and 
submitted the issue to the UN Security Council is an act of 
betrayal. There is no basic disagreement between North Korea 
and the United States on the solution of the problem. The 
change in U.S. approach, and the confusion arising from this is 
probably due to an internal conflict within the U.S. Government. 
  [Osawa] How do you think the nuclear issue can be resolved 
in the end? 
  [Yi] The root cause of the nuclear issue is that the United 
States, which deploys nuclear weapons in South Korea, 
perpetuates a policy of nuclear blackmail and hostility against 
the DPRK. Therefore, there is no other way but to resolve the 
issue through dialogue and negotiations with the United States. 
The two countries have basically agreed on the solution, and 
solutions to issues between North and South Korea have been 
agreed upon during the meeting of the prime ministers of both 
sides. The framework is there. The reason for the failure to 
reach a solution is that there is mutual lack of trust. The 
only thing to do is for both sides to exert simultaneous efforts 
to solve the problems one by one. 
  [Osawa] Is there any possibility that North Korea may resort 
to military action on this issue? 
  [Yi] In principle, North Korea favors dialogue. It should 
be clear to anyone that the economic and military superiority of 
the United States, South Korea, and Japan is overwhelming. By 
common sense, it is impossible that North Korea will start an 
attack against such opponents. We hope the DPRK's peaceful 
stance, as evidenced in its 1987 proposal to the United States 
and South Korea to hold multilateral disarmament consultations 
(negotiations), would also be noted. 
  [Osawa] Secretary Kim Chong-il's succession is a hot issue 
at present. Do you think his taking over will affect the 
nuclear policy? 
  [Yi] The secretary assists the president in all affairs, and 
he exercises direct leadership over the party and the state. 
The two men are inseparable. Our nuclear policy is peace and 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. We have remained 
consistent and stood firm on our approach to the nuclear issue. 
That is the way for a small nation to survive. The DPRK thinks 
that "if you make one concession to the United States, it will 
ask for two, and you end up being left with nothing." That is 
why it stands firm on its principles in the nuclear issue. 

