BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on drug seizures and arrests related to drug trafficking 
monitored through 9 June. 
<H5>  Argentina </H5>
  The Special Antinarcotics Unit arrested four drug 
traffickers 
and seized nine kg of very pure cocaine during two separate 
operations in the city of Tartagal and in the regions of Cabeza 
de Buey and El Quebral, Salta Province. (Buenos Aires NOTICIAS 
ARGENTINAS in Spanish 2111 GMT 6 Jun 94) 
  Personnel from the Federal Police Dangerous Drug Division 
dismantled an important international gang of drug traffickers 
closely linked to the Cali cartel. They arrested more than 20 
people, and seized 120 kg of cocaine, during 30 operations 
conducted on 8 June in many areas of the Federal Capital, 
greater Buenos Aires, Mar del Plata, Zarate, Jujuy, and Salta. 
Colombian Jose Padilla Echeverry, leader of the gang, was the 
only trafficker who was identified. He is reportedly a member 
of the "Grajales family," which is known for its connection with 
the Cali cartel, which has branches in Bolivia and Argentina. 
(Buenos Aires NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS in Spanish 2221 GMT 8 Jun 94) 
<H5>  Bolivia </H5>
  The Special Antinarcotics Force this past weekend seized 20 
jerry cans, containing chemical precursors to be used to process 
cocaine, in Chapare. The forces also arrested Juana Solis de 
Vilca. (La Paz Television Nacional Network in Spanish 0100 GMT 
8 Jun 94) 
<H5>  Brazil </H5>
  On 1 June the Bolivian Willy Almendor Avelar, 50, and 
Brazilian citizen Edemir Correia Reis, 43, were arrested with 
4.5 kg of cocaine in Cabo Frio. The police reported they were 
about to distribute the drugs in the Lixao and Beira Mar 
shantytowns in Duque de Caxias District, Rio de Janeiro State. 
(Rio de Janeiro O GLOBO in Portuguese 2 Jun 94 p 14) 
  On 7 June the Federal Police arrested British citizen Davina 
Rose Ngozi Agbajoh at the Dois de Julho Airport in Salvador, 
Bahia State. She was about to board a plane for Moscow with 1.6 
kg of cocaine. (Sao Paulo FOLHA DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 8 Jun 
94 Section 3 p 3) 
<H5>  Chile </H5>
  OS-7 Carabineros arrested the Bolivians Juve Plata Marquez 
and Lander Nava Perez and seized 17.6 kg of cocaine 
hydrochloride during the control of a provincial bus in Arica. 
They told the police that they had bought the drugs in Oruro, 
Bolivia on the orders of Chilean citizen Alicia Marin Rodriguez. 
(Santiago EL MERCURIO in Spanish 26 May 94 p C11) 
  On 26 May the Investigative Police Antinarcotics Division 
arrested Raul Barahona, 44, and Daniel Monroy, 24, in Quilpe, in 
the Fifth Region. They were members of a gang of international 
drug traffickers operating in Chile and Sweden. (Santiago LA 
TERCERA DE LA HORA in Spanish 28 May 94 p 36) 
  On 4 June the police arrested Bolivian citizen Maria 
Requerin 
with 12 kg of cocaine valued at $850,000. She had been arrested 
in Chile in 1989 and expelled from the country on charges of 
drug trafficking. The Investigative Police reported that she 
had entered Chile on many occasions with false identity papers 
from Bolivia, Brazil, Uruguay, and Argentina, where she sold the 
drugs. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 0201 GMT 5 Jun 94) 
<H5>  Peru </H5>
  Self-Defense Committee leaders have reported that police 
personnel from the police station in Cayumba and employees of 
the National Coca Enterprise are bartering confiscated drugs and 
chemicals with drug traffickers from Lima and Huanuco. They 
told the chief of the Military and Political Command that 
National Police personnel in Cayumba, 31 km from Tingo Maria, 
are the main obstacle to maintaining peace in the township. 
(Lima LA REPUBLICA in Spanish 21 May 94 p 22) 
  On 19 May Army soldiers destroyed two clandestine landing 
strips in Upper Huallaga. The Defense Ministry reported that 
the operations were carried out in the townships of Union and 
Vainilla, Bellavista District, San Martin Department. (Lima EL 
COMERCIO in Spanish 22 May 94 p A1) 
  The Antidrug Division, Dinandro, reported that gangs of drug 
traffickers supplying cocaine to Lima and Callao are currently 
using microwave ovens to dry cocaine hydrochloride. They obtain 
300 grams of drugs per hour from each oven. The use of the 
microwave ovens was discovered six months ago during the raid of 
a mobile laboratory in Chosica. (Lima EXPRESO in Spanish 23 May 
94 p A11) 
  Army patrols destroyed a clandestine landing strip and five 
cocaine paste maceration pits in the Palestina zone of La Mar 
Province, Ayacucho Department. (Lima EXPRESO in Spanish 24 May 
94 p A8) 
  Air Force fighters intercepted two Colombian light airplanes 
being flown by drug traffickers. The crew managed to burn them 
before fleeing. The incident occurred near the township of Boca 
de Apua, Padre Abad Province, 82 km from Pucallpa, Ucayali. 
(Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 25 May) 
  Police personnel arrested Peruvian drug trafficker Edgard 
Delgado Solis, 28, during the raid of a house in the La Loma 
neighborhood of the township of Yurimaguas, in Tarapoto 
Province. (Lima LA REPUBLICA in Spanish 28 May 94 p 31) 
  Army and Peruvian Air Force, FAP, personnel destroyed eight 
clandestine landing strips as part of the antinarcotics 
operations conducted in various zones of San Martin, Pucallpa, 
and Cerro de Pasco, in Oxapampa Province. The forces also mined 
nearly two km of the Marginal Highway, which is used as a 
landing strip by drug traffickers in the village of Gavilan. 
The landing strip located in the village of Yecra was the 
largest ever detected by the Army intelligence service. (Lima 
EL COMERCIO in Spanish 28 May 94 p A14) 
  Personnel from the police station in Cayumba, 35 km from 
Tingo Maria, seized 6.5 kg of cocaine paste and arrested Oscar 
Rodriguez Pena, 38. The drugs were concealed inside a wooden 
bed. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 28 May 94 p A12) 
  Dinandro agents reported that chemical suppliers had 
provided 
approximately 1,000 metric tons of sulphuric acid in the past 
six months to "firms" of drug traffickers. They discovered that 
the suppliers of the "firms" in Upper Huallaga, Palmapampa, and 
Upper Amazonas used all kinds of documents from defunct mining 
companies in order to obtain the chemicals. They reported that 
chemicals designed for Cajamarca miners were sent to cocaine 
paste laboratories owned by Colombian "firms" in Upper Amazonas. 
Sulphuric acid earmarked for the Ancash mines was sold to the 
mafia in Upper Huallaga, and Palmapampa. (Lima EXPRESO in 
Spanish 28 May 94 p A4) 
  On 28 May Pisco Police personnel arrested Justo Caceres 
Ortega, 32, and Cesar Cueva Cuinkuira, 27, when they tried to 
take 7.5 kg of cocaine paste to Lima in their car. (Lima 
EXPRESO in Spanish 29 May 94 p A21) 
  The FAP has intercepted 30 light airplanes owned by drug 
traffickers, most of them with Colombian licenses, and has 
seized 3,600 kg of cocaine paste and more than $1.2 million 
during its operations in Huallaga and other coca growing areas 
over the past two years. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 31 May 94 
p A5) 
  The Peruvian Antidrug Police seized four metric tons of 
sulphuric acid used to process cocaine paste, and arrested 11 
people, during an operation conducted over the past few days in 
the city of Huancayo, capital of Junin Department, 315 km east 
of Lima. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 0405 GMT 8 Jun 94) 
  The Huancayo Antidrug Division destroyed two poppy 
plantations in San Pedro de Coris District, Churcapampa, 
Huancavelica Province. Those responsible for these plantations 
are Hipolito Cuadros Quinteros, Emilio Velarde Quispe, who 
managed to escape, and Felix Basilio Sarmiento. (Lima EXPRESO 
in Spanish 1 Jun 94 p A4) 
  National Counterterrorism Directorate personnel arrested 
drug 
trafficker Miguel Zamora, 35, in Lima in the past few days. He 
is the chief of a "firm" of Peruvian drug traffickers who gave 
money to the Shining Path organization to finance its terrorist 
activities. (Lima EXPRESO in Spanish 2 Jun 94 p A6) 

