Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following review of the 10 February 
issue of Cairo AL-USRAH AL-`ARABIYAH summarizes articles that 
are Islamic in nature. 
<H5>  National Dialogue Conditions Given </H5>
  Engineer Abu-al-'Ula Madi Abu-al-'Ula, moderator of the 
professional associations Coordinating Committee, has reportedly 
affirmed that the Muslim Brothers must be able to represent 
themselves at the national dialogue conference due to be held in 
April. He said that the associations that belong to the Islamic 
trend will participate in the national dialogue. Meanwhile, a 
recommendation from the professional associations' fifth annual 
conference on the national dialogue has reportedly stipulated 
that all political forces, such as other national parties and 
trends, must participate in the dialogue and that participation 
should not be limited to political parties alone, because they 
do not represent all the political forces in Egypt. 
  Demands from the conference included: guarantees of fair 
elections and amendments to the Constitution or a new 
constitution within the context of preserving the "nation's 
identity," direct elections for president of the republic, the 
restoration of the Committee of al-Azhar's senior ulema, the 
setting up an Islamic market to counter world economic blocs, 
and the rejection of the Middle East market suggested by Israel. 
It was also recommended that: the Egyptian Government adhere to 
a political policy committed to Islam, the government's 
political decision making both internally and abroad be 
independent of the new world order, the Palestinian issue be 
regarded as an Islamic cause, and that the Arab boycott of 
Israel continue. The conference also called for: confrontation 
of "attempts" to separate southern Sudan from the north, 
abrogation of treaties signed with countries that "persecute 
their Muslim citizens," and denying that there is a threat to 
Sudan from neighboring Islamic countries Libya and Iran. 
<H5>  Anti-Islam Campaign in Italy Claimed </H5>
  The Egyptian community in Italy has reportedly denounced the 
"malicious campaign against Islam" launched by an Italian mayor. 
The mayor, in a television interview, allegedly launched a 
"malicious attack on Islam, the Koran, and the Prophet, accusing 
Islam of being against coexistence with other religions." The 
Islamic community denounced this "aggression" and [said] that 
Arab and Islamic embassies and Islamic personalities have been 
requested to complain about that mayor. 
<H5>  Minister Attacks Extremists </H5>
  Education Minister Dr. Husayn Kamil Baha'-al-Din reportedly 
remarked at the International Book Fair that most of the experts 
at the Egyptian Education Curricula Development Center are 
Americans, who may include American Jews, but that they entered 
Egypt as U.S. citizens. The minister noted that it is 
unimportant whether an expert is a Jew or not. The education 
minister "launched a fierce attack on the Islamists who had 
exposed the methods used in developing the curricula and 
obliterating the Islamic identity from the curricula." The 
minister reportedly threatened to kick "all those who are 
extremists" out of the education system and to transfer them to 
administrative jobs. 
<H5>  Book Fair Described as "Attack on Islam" </H5>
  The Cairo International Book Fair was noted to have ended 
with a "blatant attack by secularists on Islam and the Muslims 
through its books and periodicals." The Books Committee 
reportedly displayed books banned by "judicial decrees, reports 
from al-Azhar, and the State Prosecutor." It was also noted: 
"What is strange is that the committee chairman insisted on 
displaying obscene and prohibited books under the guise of 
freedom of thought and enlightenment." The "Islamic role was 
downplayed" in the fair's seminars and the fair's guests "were 
full of hatred and abused Islam and defamed its shari'ah, 
especially the wearing of the veil and religiousness, and 
accused the Islamists of extremism and terrorism." Jamal 
al-Ghitani was quoted, saying: "The danger to Egyptian culture 
is not from abroad; it emanates from the present Islamic trend, 
which must be uprooted." ROSE AL-YUSUF writer 'Abd-al-Sattar 
al-Tawilah reportedly raised the serious point that Egypt will 
not be "religious and will forever remain secular." Prominent 
writer Muhammad Hasanayn Haykal was also cited as acknowledging 
that the Islamic trend is "popular everywhere" and that this 
confirms the success of its propagation. 
<H5>  Muslim Marital Relations Treated </H5>
  Writer Dr. Ahmad al-Majdub discussed husband-wife relations 
and criticized divorced Muslm women who blame their "backward" 
husbands for the divorce in an article entitled "What Are They 
Plotting for the Muslim Family?" He said: "Secular and 
communist men do not waste the chances of the women who fail in 
their marital life, not because of Islam's divorce system but 
because of their claim to be liberal and conduct that runs 
against values and traditions." He also said that he has often 
asked such women what religion has to do with the failure of 
their family life, telling them: "Disputes broke out between you 
and your husband because of reasons that, from your point of 
view, make it hard to continue the marriage, such as your 
insistence on having male friends with whom you deal as if you 
were male or as if they were female. When your husbands 
protest, you revolt against them and accuse them of being 
reactionary, inflexible, backward, suspicious, and unconfident." 
<H5>  Can Islam and Development Coexist? </H5>
  The National Planning Institute's fifth seminar on "the 
international and regional challenges that will face the Arab 
world in the next century" reportedly ended last week with its 
most heated of the seminar's five sessions in which Dr. Mustafa 
al-Faqi, head of the Diplomatic Institute in Cairo, gave a 
lecture on the "Islamic culture and its failure to bring about a 
minimum measure of development" and demanded that Arab 
constitutions apply "secularism" to confront the impending 
challenges in the 21st Century "by excluding Islamic tenets and 
sanctities [al- muqaddasat]" from these debates. At one point, 
Al-Faqi said that Islam is the "historic event that led to 
Egypt's Arabism" and that, had it not been for Islam, 
civilization would not have emerged. Al-Faqi reportedly 
transformed the hall's gloomy atmosphere when he said: "I do 
not hold the Koran unless I sense a danger. For example, when I 
am flying in an airplane and feel it shaking, I hurry to open 
the Koran to the al-Waqi'ah chapter, because I cannot fool 
myself." 
  Dr. al-Faqi admitted that religion in Egypt and the Arab 
world is "seasonal" and is like the weather, running cold and 
hot, calm and then stormy, leading to "extremism and terrorism," 
which is what we are suffering now. He also said: "Islam is 
like a historical myth that we use to explain the unknown and it 
no longer has the required role in our life and problems." 
  Dr. Milad Hanna, an Egyptian Christian college professor, 
was 
cited as saying that Egyptians -- both Muslims and Copts -- must 
unite to confront the "impending challenges, because they are 
more dangerous than those of any other stage." He added that 
Pope Shinudah memorizes the Koran and that al-Azhar's shaykh 
knows a great deal about the Bible. Hanna reportedly blamed al- 
Azhar's shaykh for not memorizing the Bible, saying: "Muslims 
cannot face such challenges on their own. What would happen if 
the Muslim and the Copts cooperated and the so-called faith was 
abrogated? For we are facing an industrial, economic war, not 
an ideological or an interdenominational war." 
  The conference reportedly concluded as usual with 
resolutions 
and recommendations, but with the remaining questions: "Is it 
possible to have development without political and religious 
factors having a role in it?" "Is religion, as Dr. al-Faqi 
indicates, no longer fit for modern life and the serious changes 
it is experiencing?" It is also asked: If communism has 
collapsed at the hands of its people and capitalism is "fighting 
its fiercest battles for survival now that it is plagued with a 
moral breakup and chaos, why does Islam have no chance to have 
its say?" "Does shari'ah hamper progress and advancement?" 
<H5>  Islamic Education Discussed </H5>
  Muhammad Mahdi 'Akif, chairman of the Islamic Educational 
Society, was interviewed, saying that the society's main goal is 
to examine educational issues from an "Islamic perspective that 
believes in God as the Lord, in Islam as our religion, and in 
the Holy Koran as a system and constitution." Proceeding from 
this premise, he added, we are trying to deal with ideas that 
deviate from such an approach. He said that an Islamic school 
should focus on preparing "faithful generations who have a sound 
understanding of Islam and act accordingly." He noted: "What 
makes me suspicious of the general secondary education law is 
that the Education Ministry's philosophy is based on relegating 
the Islamic educational philosophy in favor of an ambiguous 
philosophy aimed at eventually absorbing the Islamic identity 
into the education curricula." He pointed out that the 
Education Ministry's policy to cut down on the number of books 
is not out of concern for the students but is intended as a 
pretext for deleting Islamic history and "everything related to 
values and virtue." He said that the latest judicial verdict in 
favor of the girls of al-Hilmiyah School is an "honorable" stand 
for the Egyptian judiciary and a "slap" to the "enemies of Islam 
and democracy," noting that every girl is free to wear a veil if 
she pleases. He concluded, saying that university students are 
the leaders of tomorrow and that caring for and preparing them 
is "an Islamic, national duty." 
<H5>  Muslim Propriety Stressed </H5>
  Major General Dr. Fawzi Tayil, in an article entitled "The 
Nation's Security," cited Koranic verses and the Prophet's 
sayings that urge men and women to "protect their honor and 
reputation." He noted in detail the proper code of conduct 
among family members, Islamic rules to punish adulterers, the 
need to avoid all suspicious behavior, and the duty of jihad "in 
the cause of God and in defense of religion and to ward off 
sedition." 
<H5>  More Rules for National Dialogue </H5>
  Dr. al-Sayyid 'Abd-al-Sattar discussed at length the "bases" 
for a proposed national dialogue in an article entitled "The 
Dialogue's Priorities and Ways of Handling It." He noted that 
on more than one occasion Egypt has defined its overall 
direction and clearly chosen an Islamic approach through several 
"referendums." The "clearest evidence" of that, he said, is the 
victory of the candidates from the Islamic trend in local 
elections. 
  He added that the principles of the national dialogue should 
include work within the context of the "broad Islamic 
legitimacy," which will impart to the dialogue the 
characteristics of a "sound nationalism." He said that the 
dialogue should address political issues such as the assumption 
of power, relations between the ruler and people, parliament; 
and al-Azhar, social issues such women and their role, and the 
roles of mosques and schools, and Egypt's "Arab and Islamic 
affiliation." He concluded, saying that all members of the 
Egyptian nation, regardless of their inclination, and primarily 
the Muslim Brothers, other Islamic organizations, and Orthodox 
and other Christians, should take part in the dialogue. 
<H5>  Students Reject Anti-Islamic Literature </H5>
  The president of the Cairo University Students Union has 
reportedly affirmed that the students denounce the campaign 
against al-Azhar launched by "mercenary writers" because 
al-Azhar played its "legitimate historic Egyptian, Arab, and 
Islamic duty to ward off destructive ideas that harm the 
religious Egyptian people's ethics and faith." The students' 
spokesman repudiated publication in "one of the yellow magazines 
of faith-destroying articles and obscene pictures" on the 
pretext of freedom of expression, which has turned into freedom 
to "attack Islam." 

