Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Petr Pravda: "Difficult Conditions Await the </F>
Czech Soldiers in Bosnia"] 
  [Text] A situation that no Czech soldiers have endured 
since World War II awaits the mechanized company from the Czech 
UN Protection Forces (UNPROFOR) battalion, which should transfer 
in the next few days from Croatian Krajina to Bosnia, in the 
enclaves of Zepce and nearby Zavidovic. 
  Some 120 of our men, along with French and Jordanian 
UNPROFOR 
units, should monitor the situation in currently the most tense 
region of Bosnia, a region in which, to date, there have been no 
international observers or UN troops. The most ferocious 
battles of recent times in Bosnia have been waged some 25 
kilometers away in Maglaj, which is completely surrounded by the 
Serbs. The Serbs have not permitted any humanitarian convoy to 
enter the town for several months. 
  Zepce is a Croatian-Muslim enclave some 60 kilometers north 
of Sarajevo, which, during the first stages of the war in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, linked Central Bosnia, controlled by the 
Bosnian Sarajevan Government, to the regions of Maglaj and 
Tesanj in the northern part of the former Yugoslav republic. 
  During the course of the war, however, the Serbs succeeded 
in 
cutting a corridor through to Maglaj near the strategically 
located Zepce, and so the 100,000-strong mainly Muslim enclave 
was left completely isolated. 
  The situation is made even more complicated by the fact 
that, 
in Zepce and the surrounding area, everyone has been fighting, 
with intermissions, against everyone else, and expedient 
alliances have been formed. The Muslims, for example, claim 
that the Croatian armed forces allied themselves with the Serbs 
in an offensive against Maglaj. 
  The situation in Zepce itself and the immediate vicinity 
became calm only after the declaration of a cease-fire and the 
start of peace talks between the Croatians and the Bosnian 
Government a few weeks ago. 
  The Serbs, however, are very concerned about a 
Croatian-Muslim alliance and are now making an even greater push 
against nearby Maglaj. People are continuing to live there in 
catastrophic conditions and are virtually entirely dependent on 
the aid dropped to them from aircraft. 
  Just how difficult the conditions in Zepce and the 
surrounding area are is borne out by the information fog that 
prevails around the situation in this region, among other things. 
  UN officials have been unable for several days to provide a 
reliable report on recent developments in the strategic 
situation in Zepce because they have no precise information. 
The UNPROFOR spokesman in Zagreb has merely said that there has 
been no fighting in Zepce, but he has confirmed that the 
situation in the region is very complex. The Czech Defense 
Ministry has been virtually unable to provide any information. 
  The Secretariat of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees 
(UNHCR) in Zagreb, which is responsible for the humanitarian 
convoys to the besieged Bosnian enclaves, stated this week that 
the last aid convoy reached Zepce sometime in the middle of 
February. However, it was only one-third of what this enclave 
actually needs. UNHCR has no permanent staff in Zepce or Maglaj 
and no information about the current situation. 
  The Czech blue berets have, according to Defense Minister 
Baudys, a peaceful mission and should not be involved in the 
battles in the region. They should monitor the situation on the 
front line, which, however, is constantly changing, uphold the 
peace agreement between the warring sides, protect the civilian 
population, and help the humanitarian convoys to get through. 
  Nevertheless, it is extremely likely that our company, just 
like other international units, will be confronted by more than 
one dangerous situation and will not avoid coming into direct 
conflict with the warring sides. 

