Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Pan Jianxin (3238 1696 2450), deputy director of </F>
Shanghai Prices Bureau: "Shanghai Combines Price Reform With 
Curbing Inflation"] 
  [Excerpt] Reform, the open policy, and economic 
construction have continued to flourish in Shanghai since the 
beginning of the year. In the new era price departments at all 
levels in the municipality have grasped the opportunity to push 
ahead in the direction of developing a socialist market economy. 
They have continued to introduce price reform energetically but 
steadily after considering the ability of all quarters in 
society to cope with it, and worked hard to hold down the 
overall price level in the interest of social and economic 
stability. Their actions have helped Shanghai function even more 
effectively as a mega-city diffusing technology to its 
surrounding areas and a leader in reform and openness and better 
serve economic development in the Chang Jiang valley and the 
entire nation. 
  1. Price Work in Shanghai Since Beginning of Year 
  1) Grasping the opportunity and pushing ahead with price 
reform energetically but steadily. 
  The year 1993 is a critical year in Shanghai's three-year 
transformation in economic development, reform, openness, and 
urban development. It is also the last year of the municipal 
government's three-year drive to "basically sort out prices." 
Shouldering the heavy responsibility of pushing ahead with price 
reform and holding down the overall price level are price 
departments. Under the correct leadership and unified planning 
by the municipal CPC committee and municipal government, 
Shanghai has continued to make new progress on the price reform 
front since the beginning of this year, working hard to 
facilitate the transformation of the price mechanism even as it 
adjusts prices structurally. To begin with, two major price 
reforms were introduced in the first half of the year in 
accordance with the appropriate central regulations, namely 
decontrolling the buying and selling prices of oil and grain and 
adjusting the charges of some public utilities. Because of the 
effort of all quarters, because the municipal CPC committee and 
municipal government made it a priority, and particularly 
because related measures such as tapping market supply and 
offering workers' subsidies were carried through, things have 
largely been normal since the reform measures were introduced. 
Their smooth implementation is a boost to the economy. They will 
also help Shanghai better fulfill its comprehensive urban 
functions and contribute to the improvement of the investment 
climate and the living environment for the public. Second, even 
as it made structural price adjustments, Shanghai has devoted 
itself to replacing the old price formation mechanism and old 
price management system with a new price formation mechanism and 
new price management system. It has further decentralized price 
management power, restricted the scope of price setting by the 
state, and increased the share of prices regulated by the 
market, all revolving around the two core missions of developing 
Pudong and transforming the enterprise operating mechanism. At 
present the city controls 12 kinds (categories) of commodity 
prices and fees, down 90 percent from 1991. In the first half of 
this year, 91 percent of all agricultural by-products procured 
in the entire municipality had market-regulated prices. In the 
same period, market-regulated prices accounted for 74 percent of 
the sales revenues of all enterprises in the city that turned 
out elements of production and practiced independent accounting 
and 96 percent of all social commodity retail sales. The demand 
put forward by the municipal government -- basically sorting out 
the price system in Shanghai and letting the market set the 
prices of the bulk of commodities within three years or so, 
starting in 1991, while maintaining social and economic 
stability -- has tentatively been met. Third, by taking strong 
and timely steps to resolve price conflicts in the first half of 
the year, when there were personnel turnover in the people's 
congress, the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference 
[CPPCC], and the municipal government, when the East Asian Games 
took place, and when the business tax rate was revised, we 
managed to ward off price fluctuations on the market and a sharp 
rise in the overall price level, thereby creating a good social 
and economic climate for the staging of large-scale events. The 
three-way relations among prices, wages, and output were 
essentially in a state of equilibrium in the first half of the 
year. Between January and June revenues from the sale of the 
budgeted output of local industrial enterprises owned by the 
whole people rose 27 percent over the same period last year 
while the workers' average monthly wages increased 24.7 percent, 
up 6.3 percentage points after adjusting for the rise in living 
costs, thereby meeting the basic demand that output increase 
faster than wages and wages increase faster than prices. 
  2) Taking vigorous measures and working hard to hold down 
the 
overall price level. 
  Inflationary pressures intensified in the first half of this 
year because of structural price adjustments and a tightening of 
the macroeconomic climate. Starting from a high level, the price 
index climbed month after month, up 13.8 percent in January over 
the corresponding period a year ago; 15.5 percent in February; 
16.4 percent in March; 17.1 percent in April; 19.8 percent in 
May; and 19.5 percent in June. In all the retail price index 
rose 15.5 percent in January through June over the corresponding 
period last year. During the same period, the workers' cost of 
living index jumped 17.3 percent. According to a preliminary 
analysis of the main reasons behind the rise in commodity 
prices, one important explanation is the quickening pace of 
price reform affecting major nonstaple foodstuff in the city in 
the past two years. Of the overall rise of 15.5 percent in the 
retail price index in the first half of the year, about 4 
percentage points could be attributed to structural price 
adjustments. Another reason is that by raising energy costs, 
transportation charges, and the costs of other basic materials 
and by adjusting tax rates, interest rates, and exchange rates, 
the central government has boosted production and operating 
costs. In June, for instance, the overall price level of raw 
materials, fuels, and power in the entire municipality rose 34.5 
percent compared to the corresponding period last year, thereby 
pushing up the prices of daily industrial goods rather 
significantly. Increases in the prices of apparel, shoes, 
furniture, washing machines, bicycles, and refrigerators raised 
the retail price index by 3.2 percentage points in the first 
half of the year. Furthermore, growing urbanization in recent 
years has pushed back vegetable growing bases from the inner 
suburbs to the outlying suburbs, which means longer 
transportation routes. In addition, the growers have to pay more 
for land, gas, water, electricity, and wages. As it becomes 
increasingly expensive to operate vegetable markets in urban 
areas, the prices of some vegetables and other non-staple food 
also go up. Third, the rise in retail prices was in part driven 
by the brisk demand for some investment goods and consumer 
goods. The expansion of the scale of fixed assets investment has 
caused the shortages of some capital goods (such as building 
materials), driving up retail prices. As the city is further 
opened up to the outside world and with the urban infrastructure 
developing apace, the urban floating population keeps rising, 
which translates into a stronger demand and higher prices for 
some agricultural products and articles of daily use. Fourth, 
the improvement in living standards and changes in consumption 
patterns have led to higher consumption of mid- priced or 
upscale clothing, furniture, domestic electrical appliances, 
gold jewelry, building and furnishing materials, and fresh fruit 
and vegetables, all commodities with relatively high costs. Some 
of these commodities are in short supply, which explains why 
their prices remain at persistently elevated levels. And then 
there is a growing tendency on the part of the public to 
purchase nonstaple food at the country market, which too helps 
nudge up the retail price index. In June, for instance, township 
residents purchased 72.8 percent, 65.7 percent, and 60.2 percent 
of all fresh vegetables, aquatic products, and fruit consumed, 
respectively, at the country market, up 15.3, 5.7, and 21.3 
percentage points, respectively, from late 1992. 
  Taking aim at the excessive rise in the overall price level, 
the municipality has taken the following measures in a major 
push to curb inflation and ensure the successful implementation 
of structural price adjustments and basic livelihood for vast 
numbers of citizens. 
  1) Determined correctly how intensive price reform should be 
by considering the ability of all three parties -- the state, 
enterprises, and households -- to cope with it. As far as the 
content of price reform is concerned, all the municipality did 
this year was to adjust the two sets of prices which were 
particularly distorted, namely the prices of grain and oil and 
the charges of urban public utilities. As for timing, reform 
that was originally slated for implementation in the first 
quarter was rescheduled to be phased in during the second and 
third quarters. Turning to the extent of price adjustments, 
increases in the price of gas for civilian use and the prices of 
public transportation monthly tickets were scaled back. 
  2) Offered workers appropriate subsidies in an earnest 
effort 
to ensure basic livelihood for the general citizenry. After 
conducting repeated studies and soliciting opinions from the 
people's congress, CPPCC, and other interested parties, the 
municipal CPC committee and municipal government worked out 
workers' price subsidy standards. They have also announced the 
minimum income level for urban workers and a minimum guaranteed 
livelihood for urban residents for this year. A worker whose 
income falls below the minimum income level and residents whose 
living expenses are lower than the minimum guaranteed livelihood 
would be given a subsidy to close the gap. A price compensation 
system was introduced under the basic pension fund system to 
benefit retirees. Moreover, a policy was drawn up to aid 
enterprises with an excessive burden. 
  3) A reserve system was created for individual commodities 
to 
ensure their availability on the market. For each of the 15 
commodities which are daily necessities to the public, namely 
grain, cooking oil, salt, sugar, soy sauce, vinegar, pork, eggs, 
toilet paper, soap, laundry 2etergent, matches, T-shirts, vests, 
and mosquito-repellent incense, a reserve system was created so 
that there is an adequate supply in the warehouses to meet any 
sudden market demand. 
  4) The municipality has set up a staple and nonstaple food 
production and market risk fund in order to round out the lineup 
of regulatory and control tools. In June and July for instance, 
thunderstorms, high temperatures, and other climatic conditions 
led to reduced vegetable output and soaring prices. In response 
the municipal government decided to put an additional 2 million 
yuan into the 20-million yuan risk fund to find new supplies and 
hold down market prices. 
  5) Step up price management and curb chain reactions. It has 
worked hard to stabilize the prices of staple and non-staple 
food, including grain, oil, pork, and eggs, with the state 
commercial sector fulfilling its role as the primary channel and 
stabilizer of market prices. Among the commodity prices and fees 
that have been decontrolled, 23 are for daily consumer goods 
inseparable from the daily lives of the people, including soap, 
laundry detergent, toilet paper, and sugar, and fees for 
haircutting and bathing. The government has set up a price 
increase reporting system applicable to those prices and fees. 
For 10 categories of upscale sensitive commodities, such as 
color television sets, video cameras, refrigerators, washing 
machines, and automobiles, the government has set up a price 
increase filing system. As for other deregulated commodities, 
the price department is to work out negotiated prices in 
conjunction with the department in charge of the industry and by 
working through the price association of the industry concerned. 
When there is coordination, prices will not skyrocket. 
  6) The government has cracked down hard on the unjustifiable 
collection of fees and tightened price supervision and 
inspection. A number of service fees has been the subject of 
most public complaints, such as the service charges for using a 
public toilet, bicycle stand, or public telephone. In those 
areas, new fee-setting standards have been developed. The 
restaurant industry and entertainment business were told to 
display their prices clearly. In conjunction with the 
introduction of price reform measures, an intensified general 
price inspection was launched in an earnest effort to prevent 
people from raising prices covertly, jacking up prices, 
collecting fees at will, and charging exorbitant prices. 
  7) The government has promptly formulated a price policy in 
conjunction with the unveiling of the revised business tax rate. 
In a written regulation, the municipal government demanded that 
after the state revised the business tax rate, operating 
enterprises must absorb on their own the extra tax burden. 
Enterprises are not allowed to raise the selling prices of 
profitable commodities arbitrarily. Regarding the handful of 
commodities whose prices do need to be adjusted, the margin of 
increase must not exceed the increase in the business tax rate 
so as to prevent commodity prices from rising across the board. 
  8) To stabilize all-embracing projects in outlying counties, 
they have been given preferential treatment and support when it 
comes to prices. Beginning this year, the key pig farms and 
chicken farms in the outlying outskirts are supplied with water 
and electricity at favorable prices to help lower the costs of 
the livestock industry and stabilize the prices of nonstaple 
food. 
  Because of unified thinking, meticulous organization, and 
solid work, and because the measures were carried through, a 
variety of price reform measures have been introduced 
successfully in Shanghai this year. Supply is normal on the 
market, prices are basically stable, and there is a high level 
of public confidence. [passage omitted] 

