BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Peter Scherer: "Illegal Dealing in Nuclear </F>
Material Soaring"] 
  [Text] Wiesbaden -- The Hesse Office of Criminal 
Investigations (LKA) has reported a "marked increase" in illegal 
trafficking of radioactive material. The office said yesterday 
that three incidents of nuclear crimes were registered in 1991, 
while the number increased to nine in 1992, and rocketed to 30 
in 1993. From January 1992 to the end of February 1993, almost 
200 incidents from all over Germany were reported to the Federal 
Office for Criminal Investigations. 
  According to German security authorities, the nuclear crimes 
scene is dominated by Russians, Poles, and Czechs. The material 
comes from national installations in East Europe and is smuggled 
to Germany from there, evading existing security systems. 
  Quite frequently, the hot material is smuggled to Germany 
via 
the Baltic states, Poland, and southeastern European countries. 
The LKA said that due to economic difficulties in the East, the 
FRG is "particularly attractive." Yet, the efforts of the 
nuclear dealers to make profitable deals in Germany usually fail 
because there is no illegal market for ultimate consumers of 
radioactive material -- at least according to information 
available so far. Nevertheless, the LKA fears that radioactive 
substances will continue to be available in Germany. 
  According to information made available to DIE WELT, 
smugglers use military installations of Russian troops stationed 
in the former GDR as intermediate stores for substances like 
uranium-238. The material, of which 40 kilograms were recently 
offered in Germany's black market, is said to have come from 
Siberia on military transport aircraft. DIE WELT has a drawing 
of the special container in which the dealers are said to have 
taken uranium to customers in Hamburg. 
  The German mediator and transporter of the Russian-Polish 
nuclear cartel is an engineer from Saxony who claims to have 
access to the Russian uranium stockpile. The man also offers 
specially treated, and thus radioactive, mercury products for 
antiradar coatings of items such as tanks or reconnaissance 
satellites, which makes them unrecognizable to radar imaging. 
Price per kilo: 50,000 marks. Photocopies of the Russian 
original certificates have also been made available to DIE WELT. 
  In 1993, the Hesse LKA carried out investigations on 92 
suspects, 65 of whom were foreigners -- mainly East Europeans. 
In several cases indications of organized crime emerged during 
these investigations, the Hesse LKA said. Several uranium 
pellets and 500 grams of osmium-186 have been seized. There 
have been some cases of dealers offering nuclear substances 
fraudulently, the LKA said. 
  The Hesse investigators have also found that nonradioactive 
substances, such as scandium, europium, cobalt, osmium, and red 
mercury are "increasingly" appearing in the illegal markets. 
Police assure that so far no radioactive substances that are 
suitable for producing arms have been seized. Nevertheless, 
smuggling and dealing in nuclear material involves considerable 
danger, both for the smugglers and for the population, because 
improper handling of the material can cause most severe 
radiation damage. 

