Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Mongolian Press Review"] </F>
  [Text] Ulaanbaatar, February 2 (OANA-MONTSAME) -- The 
newspaper "ARDYN ERH" publishes an information about the 
gathering of commanders and leadership of the frontier units of 
the country. At the meeting heard and discussed was a report on 
strengthening discipline and order of personnel of the frontier 
troops. During the meeting there was an exchange of views on 
other urgent problems. 
  The newspaper carries an interview of its correspondent with 
the director of the recently founded Institute of Administration 
and Management Development T. Adiya. He notes that the 
institute, being subordinate to the government, will train state 
service men and managers, raise their qualification, carry out 
research works in the sphere of state government and management. 
  The newspaper publishes an interview of the vice premier C. 
Purebdorj. He notes that the European Union within the 
framework of the programme "Tasis" has decided to grant Mongolia 
8 mln [million] ECU for realization of definite projects. C. 
Purebdorj notes that the commission on external relations and 
security of the Europarliament has adopted the resolution on 
exchange of delegations with the State Great Hural of Mongolia, 
discussed the issues of granting the most favoured nation's term 
in import of Mongolian goods. 
  C. Purebdorj in his interview notes that in summer the 
current year supposed is an arrival in Mongolia of the 
representatives of NATO and the NATO member countries to 
exchange views on Mongolia's national security issues. 
  The newspaper publishes a material of the head of the group 
of Mongolian travellers P. Batzorig. He tells about the walking 
tour through Siberia, Alaska up to Seattle. 
  The government newspaper "DZASGIYN GADZRYN MEDEE" informs 
about the decision of the council under the Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture on awarding the honorary titles and premium to the 
best cattlebreeders, agriculturists of Mongolia. Such titles 
and the premium will be given annually on the eve of the 
traditional Mongolian New Year according to the lunar calendar. 
  The newspaper informs about the meeting organized by the 
Chancellery of the President on problems of state regulation 
under conditions of market relations. 
  As the newspaper informs, in the Mongolian capital signed 
was 
an agreement between the governments of Mongolia, Russia and 
China on demarcation of borders between the three countries. 
  The newspaper informs about granting by the U.S. Government 
7 
mln dollars as an assistance to energy sector of Mongolia. As a 
whole, since September 1992 the usa has granted more than 27 mln 
dollars to support power industry of Mongolia. 
  These means are directed to the purchase of spare parts for 
electric power stations and mining enterprises. 
  As the newspaper informs, elections of a president of the 
National Olympic Committee of Mongolia will be conducted in 
February 4. The newspaper writes about history of international 
Olympic Games. 

