Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by R.C.B.: "Fraud on the Nation"] </F>
  [Text] Former Karnataka Chief Minister S. Bangarappa has 
accused the Prime Minister of lacking in scruples. If the PM 
lacks in scruples, and a congressman should know, the Government 
headed by him cannot have any. So when Pranab Mukherjee, 
Commerce Minister, says that because of the latest GATT accord 
climaxing the 7-year Uruguay Round our exports will increase by 
US$1.5 billion to 2 billion annually, one has to take the 
statement with a pinch of salt. Similarly when he says that 
India would benefit more from the expansion of world trade 
through the Uruguay Round agreement than by pursuing "any 
alternative course of action," the minister is only trying to 
hide beneath general terms the fraud the Government has played 
on the nation. 
  The government had assured the political parties that it 
would discuss the matter with them before taking a decision on 
the Government's position on the Dunkel Proposals. The 
Government had also promised to have a thorough discussion on 
the subject in Parliament. The Government has failed to keep its 
promise; instead it has quietly shown the green signal to a new 
trade regime imposed by USA, World Bank and International 
Monetary Fund. 
  Of course a formal signing and ratification of the Agreement 
will take some time. But that is just a formality. The fact is 
that the Government has caved in before the imperialist pressure 
and has virtually mortgaged its economic initiative in trade and 
trade-related fields, farming and medicines, patents and 
processes. 
  On its own admission, the Government was not in favour of 
inclusion of Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights in the 
scope of the Uruguay Round. However, it had to go along with the 
rest of the world community. To say the truth this so-called 
`world community' is represented by USA, the WB, IMF and a few 
western countries supporting USA. The latter has successfully 
sorted out its trading interests with them and they together 
have pushed the developing countries into the GATT fire. 
  Again the Government has conceded that they were unhappy 
with 
the extension of the textile quota regime by importing countries 
for another 10 years and unsatisfactory annual rate of 
enhancement of the import quotas; yet it has claimed that the 
commitment to finally phase out the quota regime after 10 years 
"is a positive gain" for textile exporting countries! 
  Shri Rao talked of `concessions' gained by the sustained 
efforts made by India and a few other countries without which 
the contents of the GATT agreement would have been much worse. 
The PM thus indirectly conceded that the GATT agreement is not 
all that good. But what the PM did not say is that the 
`concessions' will have only a cosmetic effect; there is no 
basic change in the Dunkel Proposals which have been accepted 
finally. 
  On the question of farm products the Government's beetle 
refrain has been that the upper limit of subsidies prescribed is 
far higher than the level of subsidies in India. The Dunkel 
Proposals on agriculture are not confined to subsidies. They 
extend to many other aspects of farm products, including 
compulsory imports. The farmers are up in arms against the 
proposals on account of the effect they will have on the total 
farming scene. 
  But even if one believes what Shri Rao and Shri Mukherjee 
contend, the quiet manner in which the Government has agreed to 
the Uruguay Round without getting the approval of Parliament on 
a matter so vital to our economic system indicates that the 
Government's credentials in this regard are not impeccable. 

