BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, April 6 (YONHAP) -- Opposition Democratic 
Party [DP] Chairman Yi Ki-taek urged President Kim Yong-sam 
Wednesday to make resolute decisions on a series of recent 
incidents that he claimed have precipitated a national crisis. 
  Speaking at a press conference, Yi singled out four 
"suspicious affairs" including the violent power struggle at the 
Chogye Buddhist order, modifications in the Uruguay Round trade 
pact and a wavering government policy on the North Korean 
nuclear issue. 
  The current national crisis precipitated by these affairs 
was 
caused by "the absence of governing ability" and "the dogmatic 
ruling style" of the president, Yi declared. 
  He alleged that "political authorities" were behind the 
recent clash at the Chogye Buddhist order involving the 
re-election of its executive chief. 
  Obviously trying to make political hay out of the religious 
incident, Yi claimed "this is a grave problem that calls into 
question the basic morality" of the Kim administration. 
  In addition, he cited other serious incidents including 
alleged irregularities in the process of moving the site of 
Sangmu University, electioneering before the legally allowed 
period, and suspicion over possible police surveillance of 
former DP chairman Kim Tae-chung. 
  Doubts over these allegations must be cleared up, Yi 
insisted. 
  Meanwhile the spokesman for the ruling Democratic Liberal 
Party, Ha Sun-pong, issued a statement refuting Yi's charges. 
"The Democratic Party is trying to confuse the people by making 
political issues out of national and international difficulties 
the nation is facing." 
  "Chairman Yi should stop making irresponsible and 
instigative 
remarks," ha said. 
  Yi said that after a gang of goons had been brought in to 
beat up demonstrators demanding the resignation of Chogye chief 
executive the Rev. So Ui-hyon, police only arrested the 
demonstrators and not the ruffians. 
  This, he said, proves that political authorities are 
involved 
in the incident. 
  As for irregularities at Sangmu University, Yi said that 
according to his party's investigation, some 22.7 billion won 
had been raised for a slush fund and the money "flowed into" 
ruling Democratic Liberal Party coffers during the presidential 
election campaign. 
  Commenting on changes in the government's execution plans 
for 
the Uruguay Round agreement, Yi said the administration had 
caved in to pressure from the United States and other countries 
and made several concessions. 
  "This is a deceitful action on the part of the government," 
Yi declared. "It is unacceptable under any excuses." 
  The Democratic Party will stage outdoor rallies in order to 
condemn the government for its "lax attitude" and incompetence, 
Yi vowed. 
  With regard to the illegal electioneering allegedly 
committed 
by the mayor of Inchon and the governor of South Chungchong 
Province, two of the president's close associates, Yi accused 
the government of not punishing them. 
  Yi also demanded that the government fire Home Affairs 
Minister Choe Hyong-u for such incidents as the suspected police 
surveillance of Kim Tae-chung. 

