BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with National Alliance leader Gianfranco Fini by </F>
Mino Fuccillo in Rome; date not given: "Bossi Is Playing 
Occhetto's Game" -- first paragraph is LA REPUBBLICA 
introduction] 
  [Text] "And then we threaten to hold new elections....": 
The sentence passes along the telephone line between Milan and 
Rome and unites [Forza Italia leader] Berlusconi and [National 
Alliance leader] Fini. The two men have reached an agreement, 
and together have decided to run the risk. They will say to 
[Northern League Secretary] Bossi that they are ready to win 
back his votes, votes that Bossi is using to sabotage the united 
right-wing government. They are walking on a razor's edge 
because a dividing Right that is unable to govern and returns 
Italy to the polls is an ugly sight, and is a Right that is 
taking on water. The only way, however, to deal with the real 
"traitor" is today to use the stick, or at least brandish it. 
The two men understood each other, and shortly afterwards 
Berlusconi publicly broke off negotiations with the League, 
while Fini announced: "It is a good thing. If Bossi does not 
agree to enter government he will have to answer to the 
electorate." 
  [Fuccillo] Are you serious, Deputy Fini, or are these just 
words? 
  [Fini] If our government is to be born, it must be a true 
government, and one that lasts a long time and that is not being 
blackmailed. Otherwise it would be better if it were not born 
at all. I do not want a government which Bossi can oust the 
first time it does something that he does not like, such as, 
perhaps, the first law that grants aid to the south. As things 
stand today, Bossi is giving no guarantees in this respect. 
  [Fuccillo] Does Berlusconi agree? 
  [Fini] Berlusconi is concerned and I am angry. There are two 
reasons for this, the same reasons. Bossi has spoken of a 
danger for democracy if Berlusconi became prime minister. Not 
even Achille Occhetto [secretary of the Democratic Party of 
the Left, PDS] has put it quite as frankly. I expect that 
Occhetto will be sending Bossi a bottle of champagne for the 
favor he has done him. There is something even worse, however. 
Bossi says that he made an electoral pact to then cast off his 
allies. He could do the same thing tomorrow with an agreement 
on forming a government. In the light of this, even new 
elections are preferable. 
  [Fuccillo] So we will again vote to obtain what? 
  [Fini] The League would disappear. The electorate that 
yesterday gave the majority to the Right was quite able to vote 
for a three-way government, with Forza Italia, the National 
Alliance, and the League. Tomorrow, it will know full well who 
is to blame for the lost months and who should be punished. 
  [Fuccillo] It would, however, present a sorry picture of the 
Right to the country, and it would justify what Occhetto said 
when he spoke of "an agreement between bands" for winning power 
without any agreement on how to govern Italy. 
  [Fini] Occhetto should instead be careful not to commit 
political suicide by playing Bossi's game. He should send him 
his bottle of champagne and stop there. 
  [Fuccillo] Speroni of the League has given you a kind of 
ultimatum of 24 hours to say yes to the federalists or there 
will be no government. 
  [Fini] Speroni does not count for anything. These are 
scarcely serious threats. Anyway, to what should we be saying 
yes or no? 
  [Fuccillo] Federalism. 
  [Fini] If federalism is what the League proposed in the 
bicameral committee, then they already have their answer -- a 
resounding no. If federalism means that the wealthy regions 
hold on to their money and do not give a damn about anything 
else, the answer is no and again no. National unity is not just 
about a tricolored flag, and solidarity does not mean charity. 
Lombardy taxes to be spent just on Lombardy? First we must fix 
how much each Italian -- I repeat, Italian -- owes the country. 
Then we can move on to regional autonomy. I hear things that 
make me shudder, such as permanent bargaining between the 
regions and the state. What happens if a region refuses one 
day? Do we send in the Army? I hear things that do not make 
sense, such as putting in writing what the state is entitled to, 
with the rest going to the regions or cantons. This reverses 
the Constitution which, quite rightly, stipulates the opposite 
by listing what the regions are entitled to, with the rest going 
to the state. In short, the Constitution is not a mixed bag. 
It must keep the state on its feet and not encourage 
dissolution. 
  [Fuccillo] That is one of Bossi's sayings. 
  [Fini] As long as he understands that parliament implements 
institutional reforms, and they cannot be used as blackmail. As 
long as he understands that the electorate has given him a 
mandate to govern, and not for anything else. As long as he 
realizes that there are other and more important things to do, 
like getting the economy moving again and not wasting this 
opportunity for leaving the crisis. 
  [Fuccillo] Tell the truth: You and Berlusconi are counting 
on the fact that, if Bossi goes, many of his deputies will drop 
him to remain in government. 
  [Fini] That could also happen, but it would not be enough to 
form a government. Where would Bossi go? Would he go into 
government with the Left that approves of his federalism? Would 
the Left, out of loathing for Berlusconi, accept to commit 
political suicide by forming a government against the will of 
the electorate? The figures say that the only possible 
government is a government of the Right, otherwise we will vote 
again. 
  [Fuccillo] But what does Bossi want: to keep Berlusconi out 
of the prime minister's residence? Or to keep you out of the 
government? 
  [Fini] I think that he just wants his federalism, which 
means 
what is written in the Fontida [League rally venue] manifesto: 
"Immediate federalism or a split." They want federalism in the 
ministries. Then the rest is clear, with Bossi's intended short 
circuit -- a subversive movement in a government that has gone 
sour. 
  [Fuccillo] You, on the other hand, remain absolutely 
indifferent. Bossi is indignant because Letta, a manager of 
[Berlusconi's company] Fininvest is participating in the 
negotiations for government. You appear unruffled by this. 
Speroni says that Berlusconi is dealing with everything as if 
it were the board of directors of his company. Is the League 
lying, or is it fine with you to play housemaid just to be part 
of the government? 
  [Fini] If I was itching to get into government, I would not 
have said anything, not even to Bossi. I have seen Berlusconi 
and heard what he has to say. The initial problem was and still 
is Bossi. Then, if and when people start to talk about 
government programs, my job will begin. 
  [Fuccillo] Come on now, deputy, everything that Forza Italia 
says is fine with you. 
  [Fini] Look, I know I do not want to hear people talk about 
inflation, how it punishes the poor. I have never seen a 
wealthy man who was afraid of inflation, and I have never seen a 
family living on one and a half million a month surviving 
inflation. I do not want to hear the national institute of 
social security talking about dismantling. Pensions are just 
different types of salaries, not handouts. I do not want to 
hear [League ideologue] Miglio talking about cutting jobs in the 
public administration. What does he want to do, privatize the 
state? I say, on the other hand, that we must separate social 
security from aid. I say that not everything that is public is 
wasteful and not everything that is private is wonderful. I say 
that a citizen has the right to choose his pension and private 
insurance plans, but that the state must also consider those who 
cannot choose. 
  [Fuccillo] So you curse the Forza Italia liberals? 
  [Fini] Let them curse me, we will see if they too curse at 
the negotiating table when I am there. I will not accept the 
dog-eat-dog attitude. 
  [Fuccillo] Not even to bring the heirs of fascism into 
government after half a century in the wilderness, as you call 
it? On this subject, what effect does the phrase "the fascists 
in government" have on you? 
  [Fini] No effect at all, and no feeling of revenge. It is 
simply an effect of democracy as the sole and irreplaceable 
principle. It is entering the government, it is not seizing 
power. That is the rule of democracy. Anyway, there is no 
continuous link between the AN and the fascist party. 
  [Fuccillo] So what you said about Mussolini being a great 
statesman was a slip? 
  [Fini] It was not a political judgment nor was it an 
historical judgment. It is not a political program, nor is it a 
sentence. I know I am being constantly watched from that point 
of view, but I would like to be judged on real actions. 
  [Fuccillo] Will you not feel that you have revenge, if only 
historical revenge, by sending one of your men to the 
celebrations of the liberation of Rome? 
  [Fini] If I were to feel that kind of thing I would think 
less of myself. 
  [Fuccillo] I will read to you the words of an AN deputy: 
"Coca Cola and theft are products of American culture. Enough 
of facetious interpretations, the boys who fought for the social 
republic did so because they did not want to endorse those who 
had gone back on agreements. They did so for the love of their 
country." The speaker is Rositani, and tomorrow he will be 
supervising the RAI [state broadcasting company]. Is this not 
the revenge of fascism? 
  [Fini] These are empty, foolish words. Rositani is not a 
silly man and therefore I prefer to think that the journalist 
who reported it was distracted or confused. 
  [Fuccillo] What about people like [movie director] 
Zeffirelli 
who announce: "A clean sweep of the `reds' who have fought over 
the pope?" 
  [Fini] Imagine what a waste of time it would be to go into 
government just to fire someone. I would like to bring an end 
to this silly talk of cleansing, fascists, etc. I would like to 
discuss and debate with the Left the telecommunications system 
or high-speed networks. I would like to work hard at giving 
this country a government, not work up a sweat running along 
behind Bossi's mistakes. I am not looking for nor am I dreaming 
of revenge over history. I want the government that the 
electorate asked for. And if one election is not enough, then we 
will have to have two. 

