BFN 

  [Text] On 29 April, State Councillor Li Guixian inspected 
Tianjin and also heard the work reports of the departments 
concerned in Tianjin. Municipal Leading Comrades Gao Dezhan, 
Zhang Lichang, Li Shenglin, Fang Fengyou, and Zhang Guanwen and 
responsible persons of the departments concerned respectively 
accompanied Li Guixian to conduct the inspections and hear the 
reports. 
  During his stay in Tianjin, Li Guixian inspected labor 
service markets, heard the reports on the situation of the 
municipal skilled personnel exchange and service center and on 
preparations for building the north China skilled personnel 
market, and visited the north China skilled personnel market 
whose construction is being prepared. Li Guixian pointed out: 
Skilled personnel markets must well be developed and 
standardized. It is necessary to build labor and skilled 
personnel exchange centers, to create fine conditions under 
which both employment units and laborers can select each other 
and the laborers can compete with one another equally, and to 
promote a reasonable distribution and flow of laborers. Skilled 
personnel markets must not only possess the basic functions for 
recommending skilled persons, acting as go-between, and 
promoting exchange but also set up an overall social service 
system where exchange, development, information distribution, 
and social guarantee are merged into an organic whole. It is 
necessary to set up a set of regulations and systems suitable to 
this system. For instance, there must be strict regulations on 
employment, dismissal, on-the-job injuries, diseases, and 
old-aged insurance. Laborer service markets and skilled 
personnel exchange markets should undoubtedly provide convenient 
conditions for both employment units and job seekers in the 
course of transition from the planned economy to the market 
economy as well as in the aspects of laborer employment and job 
selections. Trouble will be created in the future if there are 
no strict demarcation lines. 
  During staying in Tianjin, Li Guixian also heard the reports 
on reforming the wage system and the organizational system, and 
also set forth specific requirements. 
  On the morning of 30 April, accompanied by the municipal 
leading comrades, Li Guixian arrived at the Tianjin steel tube 
company by car. They heard the reports made by the company 
responsible persons on steel tube production and marketing 
situation, implementation of the shareholding system, products 
on outside-the-border markets, and the project for directly 
returning to iron. After that, Li Guixian also zestfully 
visited the steel works, rolling tube plant, and tube processing 
plant; carefully watched the steel tube production process; and 
fully affirmed the achievements made by the company in such a 
short period of time. Li Guixian and his party left Tianjin on 
3 May. 

