BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Henriikka Karttunen, Veijo Sahiluoma: "EU </F>
Membership Would Boost Finland's Gateway Position"] 
  [Text] Finland's position as one of the gateway regions 
would become stronger with a European Union [EU] membership. 
That is the conclusion of a recent report in which the Gateway 
Commission analyzes Finland's opportunities to offer various 
services to foreign enterprises. The commission, headed by 
State Secretary Timo Relander, submitted its report to Foreign 
Trade Minister Pertti Salolainen on Thursday [2 June]. 
  Minister Salolainen stressed that the decision to join the 
EU 
and purposeful investment programs will be decisive for the 
future. To be outside the EU would, according to Salolainen, 
weaken Finland's position as a gateway: "The geoecostrategic 
position of our country has changed, but the geographical 
realities remain. It is clear that we would not be able to pay 
attention to Europe's growing markets as efficiently," 
Salolainen commented. "Neither is it reasonable to consider 
Finland as the only two-way gate to the East. Our intention is 
to stay as competitive as possible by offering nearness, 
know-how, and trustworthiness," Salolainen added. 
  The Gateway action program defines the following three roles 
for Finland: traffic center, business activity center, and an 
Arctic center focusing on Russia's northwest region. There is a 
population of 40 million within a 24-hour freight radius of 
Finland. The report concludes that bold investments in the 
development of infrastructure, logistics, and marketing are of 
primary importance in order to reach these markets: "Russia 
exported 165 million tonnes in 1992. Only 5 million of this 
went through Finland. Considering that the volume of Russia's 
exports is expected to grow by 100 million tonnes, we have the 
opportunity of getting a reasonable share of this shipped via 
our country," State Secretary Timo Relander said. 
  But Russian exports are not the only area to arouse future 
hopes. Britain, Germany, and the United States are the main 
targets of a campaign to attract investments to Finland, whose 
theme is "Finland in the heart of the new northern Europe." 
"Our problem was that foreign companies are completely unaware 
of Finland's potential as a direct investment target. Its 
remoteness and small markets have not attracted interest. 
Finland's population would have to be at least 10 times larger. 
But Finland has moved from its geographical outer fringe to the 
center of a new northern Europe due to the changes in its 
environment," Invest in Finland Bureau chief Nils-Christian Berg 
said. 
  On a map showing a circle containing the Nordic and Baltic 
countries plus northwest Russia, Finland is right in the center 
of that circle: "The center of gravity has moved east. The 
Nordic countries have a population of 23 million, the Baltic 
region has 8 million, and northwest Russia 44 million. Finland 
occupies a highly strategic position in the center of this 
area," Berg added. 
  He thinks the Baltic countries and Russia will, in spite of 
the risks, draw the attention of international companies, which 
are particularly interested in fast growing large-volume 
markets. Finland is not the only country to have discovered the 
St. Petersburg region. 
  "In addition, this region offers all the required resources 
of energy, minerals, and forest-based raw materials. Finland is 
the nearest developed region, right next door to these new 
markets. It offers completely new opportunities as an 
investment target. Solutions can be found in the form of 
joint-venture enterprises focusing on the Russian markets," Berg 
added. 
  This potential is becoming obvious to the Finns, but only 
few 
foreign investors have recognized it so far. The message is now 
being marketed, especially in Britain, Germany, and the United 
States. 
  The Invest in Finland Bureau operates under the Trade and 
Industry Ministry. It was founded a couple of years ago, but 
gained full operational speed a little over a year ago. The 
bureau employs a staff of six. 
  "We try to approach the foreign businesses in each country 
systematically, through the intermediary of experts. We work in 
direct cooperation with partners, not via public campaigns," 
Berg commented, but he warned against expecting fast results: 
"The preparation of investment projects takes at least three, 
most often five, years longer than their physical 
implementation. We are not publicizing projects; information 
about these is up to the companies," Berg said, adding that a 
number of projects have already been activated and that some of 
these are progressing rapidly. 
  Berg views the Genencor investment, worth over 100 million 
markkas, as a positive surprise. Another project in progress is 
the forthcoming transfer of an international consumer goods 
giant's East Europe headquarters from Vienna to Helsinki. This 
move will include production facilities. 
  "Finland is an interesting investment target. We organized 
an investment seminar together with Merrill Lynch at the end of 
April. The report released by Merrill Lynch was directly 
complimentary to Finland. Last year a similar seminar was 
arranged together with Goldman Sachs and First Boston. The 
results have shown in the form of a increase in foreign 
investments in Finnish securities," Berg added. 
  Companies presented to investors in cooperation with Merrill 
Lynch were Repola, Valmet, Outokumpu, Metra, Instrumentarium, 
and Kemira. 

