Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Nairobi 18 Jan (KNA) -- Africa should strive to 
strengthen its media network in order to integrate itself in 
matters pertaining to development, the minister for information 
and broadcasting, Mr Johnstone Makau, has said. He said there 
was need for an African media network with an African perception 
which could gather and disseminate information without bias. Mr 
Makau said that the western media agencies had a tendency of 
highlighting calamities, conflicts and poverty. 
  The minister said this today when he received the Malawian 
minister for information, broadcasting and tourism, Professor 
D.S.J. Mkandawire, who paid him a courtesy call in the office. 
He said that with the strengthening of the existing African 
media network African countries will be abe to learn from one 
another and be improved of what is taking place in various 
countries. 
  The minister said western media agencies always approached 
African events and incidents from the "European approach" and 
hence the need to finance and develop the pan-African news 
agency-PANA. He said there was exaggeration and distortion of 
news by the western media who expected African countries to 
achieve what they have managed to achieve in their 200 years of 
independence. 
  Mr Makau told the local journalists that they had an 
obligation to inform the public objectively and avoid "yellow 
journalism", adding that they should be patriotic to their 
country. Mr Makau told the Malawian minister that Kenya had 
over 54 publications which included dailies and weekly 
magazines, some of which cropped up during the transitional 
period to democracy. He said that the Kenya Broadcasting 
Corporation radio station was able to reach 85 percent of the 
population while 40 percent were able to receive television. 
  Professor Mkandawire said that in Malawi there was a cry for 
professional journalistic skills particularly during this period 
where the country [is] undergoing political changes. He said 
there was freedom of expression in Malawi as his government 
never interfered with the operation fo the press. 
  Those who attended the meeting included the acting Malawian 
ambassador to Kenya, Mr Maweya Phiri, and the permanent 
secretary in the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Mr 
David Andere. 

