BFN 

<F P=106> ["Excerpts of the Zhejiang Provincial People's Procuratorate </F>
Work Report Delivered by Ge Shengping, chief procurator of the 
Zhejiang Provincial People's Procuratorate, at the Second 
Session of the Eighth Zhejiang Provincial People's Congress on 2 
March"] 
  [Text] In 1993, procuratorial organs in the province, 
under the leadership of the provincial CPC committee, various 
levels of party committees, and the Supreme People's 
Procuratorate, and under the supervision of various levels of 
people's congresses and their standing committees, persisted in 
treating the economic construction as the central task; 
implemented the policy of "promoting the reform and opening up 
with one hand and cracking down on serious crimes with the other 
and of placing equal emphasis on both"; took an overall view of 
the procuratorate work through strict enforcement of the law and 
working hard at cases; stressed handling of major and important 
cases; strengthened supervision over law enforcement; achieved 
new progress in the procuratorate work; and brought into play 
the functions and roles of the procuratorial organs in 
maintaining political and social stability, promoting the reform 
and opening up, and developing the economy. 
<H5>  I. Give Particular Emphasis to Investigate Into and Handle </H5>
Major and Important Economic Crimes, Including Corruption and 
Bribery Cases 
  The process of establishing a socialist market economic 
system has effectively brought about economic development. 
However, because of new systems replacing the old ones and 
because of a lack of complementary legal systems and management 
measures, economic crimes, including corruption and bribery 
cases, tend to grow; this tendency has even infiltrated into the 
political domain. Because of various reasons, the number of 
economic crime cases, including corruption and bribery cases, 
reported by the masses and placed on file by the procuratorial 
organs for investigation registered a sharp drop at one time in 
the first half of 1993. This caused great dissatisfaction among 
the broad mass of the cadres and the masses. From the second 
half of the year, particularly following the important decision 
adopted by the CPC Central Committee in August on enhancing the 
anticorruption struggle, the province's procuratorial organs 
conscientiously implemented the CPC Central Committee's 
decision; relied closely on party leadership and the masses' 
support; concentrated energy on investigating into and handling 
major and important cases; stepped up efforts to crack down on 
economic crimes, including corruption and bribery cases, by 
adopting a resolute attitude and a down-to-earth work style and 
by paying close attention to case-handling quality. Following 
are the initial results of the anticorruption struggle: 
<H5>  Major and Important Cases That Have Been Put on File for </H5>
Investigation and Handling Increase Markedly 
  In 1993, economic crime cases, including corruption and 
bribery cases, that were placed on file for investigation and 
handling totalled 1,958, of which 1,219 were major and important 
cases, or 62.3 percent of the cases that were placed on file for 
investigation and handling, representing an increase of 18.6 
percent over 1992; particularly serious cases involving over 
100,000 yuan topped 152, doubling those in the previous year. 
The proportion of major and important cases and the number of 
particularly serious cases set all-time records. Major and 
important cases that were placed on file for investigation and 
handling after August in 1993 were 699, or 57.3 percent of all 
the major and important cases that were placed on file for 
investigation and handling in that year, up 1.43 fold as 
compared with the same period in 1992. Thanks to stepped-up 
efforts on case- investigation, the province's procuratorial 
organs helped the state and collectives recover 65.74 million 
yuan in economic losses. 
<H5>  Remarkable Progress was Reported in Investigating Criminal </H5>
Cases, Including Corruption and Bribery Cases, Involving 
Personnel Working at Party and Government Organs, Judicial 
Departments, Administrative and Law Enforcement Departments, and 
Economic Management Departments 
  A total of 366 persons who worked at the afore-mentioned 
organs and departments were put on file for investigation and 
handling for involvement in economic crimes ranging from 
corruption to bribe-taking, accounting for 16.3 percent of the 
total number of cases which were placed on file for 
investigation and handling; 156 were involved in major cases 
amounting over 10,000 yuan, including 56 party and government 
personnel, 23 judicial personnel, 17 administrative law 
enforcement personnel, and 60 financial personnel; 99 were 
cadres at department and section level and nine were cadres 
working at county governments at departmental level or above. 
<H5>  A Number of Major Criminal Cases That Seriously Disrupted </H5>
Socialist Market Economy's Order Received Timely Investigation 
and Handling 
  Coordinating with the decision of the CPC Central Committee 
to strengthen macroeconomic regulation and control, various 
levels of procuratorial organs placed on file for investigation 
and handling according to the law a number of criminal cases 
including corruption, bribery, embezzlement cases that were 
exposed during the rectification of the financial order, of 
which 60 were particularly serious cases, up 62.2 percent from 
the previous year. To ensure legitimate and fair competition, 
various levels of procuratorial organs also stepped up efforts 
to crack down on such crimes as trademark infringement, tax 
evasion, and refusal to pay taxes; 108 cases were placed on file 
for investigation into the crime of trademark infringement, an 
increase of 10.2 percent over the previous year; 235 
tax-invasion and refusal-to-pay taxes cases, of which 183 were 
particularly serious ones, were also placed on file for 
investigation and handling. 
<H5>  The Masses' Enthusiasm for Informing on Economic Crimes Was </H5>
Further Encouraged and Mobilized 
  The number of cases in which the masses reported on economic 
crimes rose sharply, particularly following the decision adopted 
by the CPC Central Committee in August to strengthen the 
anticorruption drive. By the end of 1993, the province's 
procuratorial organs accepted and handled 15,292 cases reported 
by the masses, of which 9,013 gave clues to corruption and 
bribery cases, up 31.9 percent and 35.4 percent, respectively, 
from the previous year. This produced a shattering effect on 
some economic criminals. The province saw 84 economic criminals 
involved in corruption and bribery cases surrendering themselves 
to procuratorial organs. 
  Procuratorial organs in the province stressed the following 
in investigation into and handling corruption: 
  1. Stepped Up Leadership and Make Constant Efforts To 
Achieve a Common Understanding 
  In this regard, redoubled efforts were made to settle two 
questions: First, we enhanced our confidence and resolve in 
executing the drive. Under the new situation, procuratorial 
organs have encountered many new circumstances and new problems 
in punishing such economic crimes as embezzlement and bribery. 
For a while early last year, a few procuratorial units and 
cadres balked at punishing economic crimes like embezzlement and 
bribery for fear of difficulty. The provincial procuratorate 
took quick action in March and April by sending personnel to 
carry out an extensive investigation and analysis of the new 
circumstances and problems at the grass-roots level and to 
formulate measures to deal with them. A provincial antibribery 
work conference in May particularly addressed the aforementioned 
problems in regard to understanding. It guided the cadres to 
acquire a clearer understanding of the situation, plucked up 
their spirit, and enhanced their resolve to energetically 
prosecute cases, serious and important cases in particular. 
Second, we clearly defined the guiding principles for our work. 
In line with the policy decision of the CPC Central Committee 
on stepping up the anticorruption drive, the provincial 
procuratorate convened a forum of chief procurators and held a 
telephone conference on the investigations and prosecution of 
major economic crimes involving embezzlement and bribery. The 
two meetings educated and guided cadres to enhance their 
awareness of overall interests; to enhance their resolve to 
uphold the party's basic line; to serve unswervingly the central 
task of economic construction; to strictly enforce the law and 
aggressively prosecute crimes -- serious and importance cases in 
particular -- as their primary task and principal means in 
serving economic construction. The meeting called for firmly 
implementing the principle of "being firm, meticulous, and 
accurate," stepping up investigations and research, drawing a 
clear distinction between what constitutes a criminal offense 
and what does not, emphasizing accuracy in prosecuting cases, 
and heeding the social effect of the cases prosecuted. The 
meetings also outlined the work policy of "prosecuting crimes 
aggressively, giving priority to major cases, strictly enforcing 
the law, and ensuring quality." As a result, the broad ranks of 
procuratorial cadres enhanced their understanding of the 
importance and urgency of punishing graft, bribery, and other 
economic crimes; heightened their sense of responsibility and 
mission; and brought their enthusiasm and initiative into better 
play. 
<H5>  2. Concentrated Efforts on the Investigation and Prosecution </H5>
of Major Cases 
  The principal measures implemented in this regard are as 
follows: 1) chief procurators take personal charge in 
prosecuting cases. A division of responsibilities was 
instituted among the chief and two deputy chief procurators of 
the provincial procuratorate and they all took personal charge 
of major cases that had an impact provincewide. Localities also 
implemented a similar system whereby the chief or deputy chief 
procurators were required to take personal charge of major 
cases. Over the past year, chief procurators at all levels in 
the province personally took part in the investigation and 
prosecution of 635 major cases. 2) Lists of major cases were 
compiled by phases and procurators were assigned to handle them. 
The province stepped up supervision and guidance over 
prosecutions and redoubled efforts in investigation and 
prosecution. The provincial procuratorate drew up three such 
lists comprising 115 major cases of embezzlement and bribery. 
By the end of last year, investigations were completed in 103 
of the cases on the lists and court proceedings were started in 
72. 3) Crime investigative efforts were redoubled. Special 
attention was paid to uncovering cases -- serious and major 
violations in particular -- involving party and government 
organs through the investigation of ordinary cases. 4) Efforts 
were stepped up in capturing criminals at large. The province 
stepped up efforts in investigating cases involving people who 
absconded with money after committing a crime, promptly 
arresting more than 30 such criminals, of whom nine were guilty 
of embezzling or taking bribes amounting to over 100,000 yuan. 
5) Instituted a system of responsibility and incentives for the 
investigation of major cases. Chief procurators at all levels 
are required to take personal responsibility for the 
investigation of major cases in their respective jurisdictions 
or localities; the procuratorate at the lower level is required 
to answer to the procuratorate at the next higher level and the 
latter is required to provide, on its own initiative, guidance 
and assistance when the lower level encounters difficulties in 
its work. The provincial procuratorate promulgated "Regulations 
on Awarding and Commending Collectives or Individuals With 
Meritorious Services in Cracking Major Cases of Embezzlement and 
Bribery." Collectives or individuals with excellent services in 
investigating and prosecuting major cases were commended and 
rewarded in a timely fashion. 
<H5>  3. Encouraged People To Report on Crimes </H5>
  At the fifth anniversary of the establishment of corruption 
investigation and crime hunting centers, procuratorial organs in 
the province launched a propaganda month on crime reporting and 
mounted a well-organized publicity campaign. Meanwhile, efforts 
were stepped up in sieving tips received to better utilize the 
information and to speed up investigations of major offenses. 
Thanks to such tips, 455 major cases were placed on file for 
investigation. Information provided by the masses was crucial 
for the successful prosecution of most of the nine major cases 
in Zhejiang involving cadres at the section level or higher. 
Procuratorates also took great care in protecting the 
legitimate rights and interests of the informants and the 
persons they informed against; they prosecuted 14 cases 
involving retaliation against informants and 13 cases of false 
charges against innocent people. 
  4. Depended on Party Committees' Strengthened 
Leadership and Supervision of People's Congresses and Closely 
Cooperated and Coordinated With Departments Concerned 
  Anticorruption struggle must be guided under the strong 
leadership of party committees. Procuratorial organs at all 
levels frequently asked for instructions from and reported to 
party committees. With the help from party committees at all 
levels, procuratorial organs unified awareness, eliminated the 
barriers and interferences encountered while prosecuting cases, 
and resolved such practical difficulties as lack of funds for 
prosecuting cases. People's congresses and their standing 
committees at all levels attached great importance to the 
anticorruption struggle. Procuratorial organs received 
supervision and support from the people's congresses. The 
provincial procuratorate invited some deputies to the national 
or provincial people's congresses to attend forums and heard 
people's deputies' views on the anticorruption struggle. In 
September, the provincial procuratorate made a special report on 
law enforcement and supervision over such economic crimes as 
embezzlement and bribery to the standing committee of the 
provincial people's congress. In the second half of the year, 
procuratorial organs in various localities launched a campaign 
to vigorously receive people's congresses' appraisal opinions on 
judicial organs and started a large-scale inspection of law 
enforcement. Focused on the problems discovered in the 
self-inspections and opinions solicited from the people's 
congresses, procuratorial organs conscientiously rectified and 
reformed themselves. The chief procurator personally supervised 
and prosecuted cases which had received most attention from the 
people's congresses. Procuratorial organs at all levels 
strengthened contacts, communicated, coordinated, and cooperated 
with the discipline inspection, supervision, and other judicial 
organs to unify their strength. 
<H5>  5. Strictly Enforce the Law and Ensure the Quality of Cases </H5>
Prosecuted 
  Procuratorial organs conscientiously carried out the 
Constitution and laws and strictly prosecuted cases according to 
law. Adhering to the principle of prosecuting cases resolutely, 
carefully, and correctly, we decisively and accurately punished 
criminals. At the same time, we paid attention to formulating 
methods and strategies and made contributions to economic 
development by seriously prosecuting cases. Procuratorial 
organs adhered to the principles, faced up to difficult work, 
eliminated interferences and barriers, and prosecuted cases 
without fail. Moreover, we did a careful and solid job in 
prosecuting cases. While deciding on verdicts, we insisted on 
making judgments on the basis of facts according to law. As to 
observing laws and policies, we strictly followed laws and 
implemented reform policies. With regard to new situations and 
problems arising in the law enforcement process, we stressed the 
need of studies and investigations and carefully dealt with 
these problems. Procuratorial organs firmly cracked down on 
crimes of various kinds, enthusiastically supported new things 
coming up in reform, guarded development of productive forces, 
and protected the initiative of the broad masses of cadres and 
people. 
  II. We Insisted on Severely and Swiftly Cracking Down 
on Grave Crimes To Preserve Social Stability 
  Procuratorial organs across the province insisted on 
regarding severely clamping down on serious crimes as important 
work for maintaining social stability and for ensuring that 
reform, opening up, and modernization drive were carried out 
smoothly. They faithfully implemented the policy of severely 
and swiftly punishing criminals according to law and 
unrelentingly clamped down on all kinds of serious crimes. Last 
year, 27,330 criminals were referred to procuratorial organs by 
public security organs, of which 24,109 were arrested according 
to law; and 27,126 criminals were indicted, of whom 22,943 were 
prosecuted. Arrested and prosecuted criminals in 1993 were 
respectively 21.1 percent and 14.6 percent more than the 
previous year. 
<H5>  1. We Insisted on Stepping in Early and on Swiftly Arresting </H5>
and Indicting Felony Criminals Caught in Action 
  We swiftly responded to felony crimes involving man 
slaughtering, robbery, raping, hooliganism, and explosions, and 
cases involving use of violence. We stepped in such cases early 
and swiftly arrested and indicted criminals according to law. 
Last year, procuratorial organs began early to handle 3,310 
exceptionally grave criminal cases and a number of felony 
criminals who were caught in action and those who had bad 
influence on society were severely and swiftly punished. 
<H5>  2. We Actively Took Part in the "Three Crackdowns and One </H5>
Prohibition" Struggle 
  In compliance with the resolution adopted by the Fourth 
Meeting of the Eighth Provincial People's Congress Standing 
Committee on resolutely cracking down on grave crimes, and 
following the work plan for carrying out the "Three Crackdowns 
and One Prohibition" struggle -- which centers on clamping down 
on crimes committed by groups of criminals -- which was laid 
down by the Provincial Committee For Comprehensive Management of 
Public Security, the Provincial Procuratorate issued a circular 
in a timely manner setting out specific guidelines for all 
procuratorates to take part in the struggle. Following the 
unified planning of the local party committee and a 
procuratorate at a higher level, procuratorates across the 
province took swift actions and actively threw themselves into 
the struggle. In carrying out their work, all procuratorates 
placed importance on conducting investigations and on looking 
into the real situations; focused on dealing with key problems; 
and strictly enforced the policy and laws. On cases submitted 
for examination to decide whether those involved should be 
arrested and indicted, procuratorial workers worked overtime to 
do their work and ensured that their work was done quickly and 
accurately. During the first and second battles of the 
struggle, a total of 18,137 criminals who had committed various 
crimes were arrested, of whom 16,815 were indicted, thereby 
ensuring that the struggle would be carried out properly. 
<H5>  3. We Stepped Up Crackdown on Smuggling, Illegal Exiting the </H5>
Country by Boat, and Other Crimes 
  Last year, 32 smugglers, of whom 13 were grave criminals, 
were arrested and indicted. In view of the fact that illegally 
exiting the country by boat is quite a serious problem in some 
localities, and according to the guidelines of the provincial 
meeting on fighting illegally exiting the country by boat, 
relevant procuratorates, in conjunction with local public 
security organs, ensured that such crimes were duly dealt with. 
A deputy chief procurator of the provincial procuratorate who 
was in charge of illegal exit led a team to Lishui County and 
Qingtian County to conduct investigations and to provide 
guidance on work in this regard. 
  4. We Took Active Part in Comprehensive Management 
of Public Security 
  Conscientiously implementing the policy of combining stern 
punishment with leniency, cracking down on a small number of 
criminals, and saving the majority of offenders through 
reeducation, procuratorial organs throughout the province 
resolutely gave swift, stern punishments to both principal and 
habitual criminals, and paid attention to saving first 
offenders, casual offenders, and juvenile delinquents who had 
committed misdemeanors through reeducation. Giving play to 
their role of making procuratorial suggestions, they made 386 
procuratorial suggestions to help the units at which criminal 
cases had occurred consolidate situation, make corrections, plug 
loopholes, improve systems, and prevent crimes. They visited 
criminals absolved from prosecution more often to step up test 
and judgment of the latter, helped with the implementation of 
supervision and reeducation measures, and promoted obedience of 
the laws and confession to crimes by those absolved from 
prosecution. In accordance with the party committees' 
centralized plan, they closely coordinated with relevant 
departments to properly handle contingencies, to deal a swift, 
heavy blow to heinous criminals in accordance with the laws, and 
to step up the propaganda of and education in the legal system 
among the masses, thereby eliminating destabilizing factors in 
good time and maintaining social stability. 
<H5>  III. We Conscientiously Investigated and Dealt With Crminal </H5>
Cases of "Infringement on Others' Rights" and Dereliction of 
Duty, and Protected Citizens' Legitimate Rights and Interests, 
as Well as National Interests 
  Procuratorial organs throughout the province earnestly 
treated the investigation and handling of such criminal cases as 
"infringement on others' rights" and dereliction of duty as an 
important aspect of and measure for intensifying the 
anticorruption drive and for cementing the flesh-and-blood ties 
between the party and the masses. They practically attached 
importance to the task. A total of 2,393 various law-breaking 
and discipline violations were handled in the whole province. 
Among them 427 cases were placed on file for investigation; 64 
of them were specially big criminal cases. Procuratorial organs 
throughout the province retrieved economic losses worth more 
than 2.71 million yuan for the state and collectives through 
their handling of cases. 
  1. We Focused on Investigating and Handling Criminal 
Cases Involving Law-Enforcement Personnel 
  We put on file and investigated 16 criminal cases involving 
20 judicial and administrative law-enforcement personnel who 
perverted the law by taking bribes, conducted fraudulent 
practices out of personal considerations, and extorted 
confessions by torture. Among these cases, seven were committed 
by nine law-enforcement personnel who conducted fraudulent 
practices out of personal considerations, representing the 
largest number in recent years. 
<H5>  2. We Attached Importance to Investigating and Handling </H5>
Criminal Cases Involving "Rights-Infringement" and Dereliction 
of Duty, Committed in the Process of Conducting Economic Activity 
  Provincewide, we put on file and investigated 50 criminal 
cases involving illegal detentions in the process of carrying 
out business and trade activities; 146 major cases involving 
incidents arising from negligence during the process of 
production, operation, and construction; and 48 criminal cases 
involving dereliction of duty. Forty-four of the above cases 
were of serious or major proportions. When investigating and 
handling the above criminal cases, procuratorial organs focused 
on analyzing the root causes of crimes, on summing up 
experiences, on making suggestions about prevention, and on 
helping relevant units and departments heighten their guard. 
<H5>  3. We Actively Investigated and Handled Crimes of Disrupting </H5>
Elections, Thus Ensuring the Smooth Progress of End-Of-Term 
Elections 
  During last year's end-of-term elections for people's 
congress deputies, procuratorial organs throughout the province 
regarded efforts to enhance procuratorial functions and ensure 
the smooth progress of end-of-term elections as their major 
political tasks, took the initiative to strengthen their 
contacts with relevant departments, kept themselves abreast of 
crimes committed to disrupt elections in violation of the law, 
and put on file and investigated according to law cases 
involving actions which constituted crimes. As regards ordinary 
cases involving law violations, procuratorial organs promptly 
passed them to relevant departments for further handling after 
conducting thorough investigations. Provincewide, procuratorial 
organs accepted, heard, and conducted initial investigations 
into 77 cases involving disruptions of elections, and put on 
file and investigated 16 of these criminal cases. 
<H5>  IV. We Strengthened Supervision Over Law Enforcement and </H5>
Safeguarded the Socialist Legal System 
  Safeguarding the unified and correct enforcement of state 
legislation is an important function of procuratorial organs. 
Since 1993, procuratorial organs throughout the province have 
satisfied the requirements imposed on the legal system by the 
socialist market economic system; earnestly observed the 
principle by which we ensure that "there are laws to abide by, 
that laws already enacted are observed and enforced to the 
letter, and that violators are brought to justice"; and focused 
on strengthening the legal supervision of law-enforcement 
activities through various procuratorial undertakings. 
  In our legal supervision over investigative activities 
launched by investigative organs, we exercised supervision by 
tracking the actual situation in which arrests of criminals were 
approved and made, and using this as our breakthrough point, 
focused on tightening procuratorial supervision over such issues 
as failure to investigate an offense. We submitted to public 
security organs a total of 343 suggestions for correcting 
violations of the law, arrested an additional 198 criminals 
according to law, indicted an additional 199 people, and decided 
against arresting 1,734 people and indicting 71 others. As a 
matter of checks and balances, we also tightened supervision 
over cases under investigation by procuratorial organs. 
Following investigations and inspections made by criminal 
investigative departments, we arrested and indicted five more 
people involved in criminal cases pertaining to economic 
activity, law, and discipline, and rejected requests to arrest 
25 people and indict 11 others. 
  In exercising legal supervision over judicial activities 
carried out by judicial organs, we focused on strengthening our 
efforts to contest cases according to law. In criminal trials, 
we focused on supervising and contesting cases where guilty 
persons were judged innocent, serious offenses were given light 
sentences, and minor offenses were given heavy sentences. In 
all, we contested 87 cases in court. In civil, economic, and 
administrative trials, we focused on supervising and contesting 
cases where mistakes were actually made in handing down verdicts 
and rulings. We handled 297 such cases, investigated and put on 
file 54 of them, and contested four cases in court. We 
suggested to the courts that the verdicts in 25 cases be 
amended, leading the courts to amend the verdicts in three cases. 
  In exercising legal supervision over prison management and 
labor reform activities conducted by prison management and labor 
reform organs, we focused on strengthening procuratorial 
supervision over the arbitrary collection of fees from people 
under prison management and from their families; the use of 
money to buy one's way out of punishment; prison management and 
labor reform personnel who demanded and took bribes, conducted 
fraudulent practices out of personal considerations, and 
released criminals without authorization while carrying out 
procedures to mitigate sentences, to release criminals on 
parole, and to recommend criminals for medical treatment outside 
the prison; and prison management and labor reform personnel who 
physically punished and tortured criminals. We submitted 4,781 
suggestions to prison management and labor reform departments 
about correcting law-violating actions, and curbed and corrected 
the arbitrary practice of collecting fees. We also corrected 
the practice of holding 676 criminals beyond their detention 
periods, and took corrective actions against 407 people who 
violated the law when handling criminals outside the prison. We 
also put on file and investigated 15 criminal cases involving 
prison management and labor reform personnel who practiced graft 
and bribery and physically punished and tortured criminals. We 
approved the arrest of and indicted, according to law, 138 
repeat offenders who underwent "reform-through-labor and 
rehabilitation-through- labor," and promptly took strong 
measures against people who reverted to criminal activities 
after having undergone prison supervision. 
  In our procuratorial work regarding accusations and appeals, 
we focused on strengthening our efforts to reexamine criminal 
appeals cases. We handled 443 cases of appeals against 
procuratorial organs' decisions rejecting certain lawsuits, 
refusing to put certain cases on file, turning down requests for 
arrests, and dropping certain cases. Among them, we reexamined 
373 cases in which appeals were filed against decisions 
rejecting lawsuits, and amended our original decisions in 52 
cases. We also handled 500 appeals against court decisions and 
rulings on criminal cases. We substantially enhanced our 
functions of serving as an internal restrictive factor and an 
external supervisory force in procuratorial work concerning 
accusations and appeals. 
<H5>  V. We Built Up the Procuratorial Ranks and Promoted Strict </H5>
Law Enforcement 
  Procuratorial organs throughout the province further built 
up 
their ranks by simultaneously improving their professional work 
and bolstering their ranks. Although they bore heavy 
responsibilities, faced many difficulties and hardships, and 
were subject to relatively heavy pressures from all quarters, 
most procuratorial cadres withstood the trials of market economy 
and strenuous work, consistently maintained high morale, stuck 
to principle, impartially enforced laws, happily made 
contributions, and displayed a good mental attitude. A group of 
advanced collectives and individuals emerged from among these 
procuratorial cadres, thus ensuring and promoting progress in 
law enforcement by procuratorial organs. We focused on three 
aspects: 
<H5>  1. We Strengthened Leading Bodies at All Levels </H5>
  Across the province last year, seven cities and 
procuratorial 
branches and 87 grass-roots procuratorates held end-of-term 
elections for procurators general. The provincial procuratorate 
and various city procuratorates and procuratorial branches 
actively coordinated with party committees in earnestly 
selecting, assessing, and grooming candidates for procurators 
general, moving in concert with people's congresses to ensure 
that the end-of-term elections were held properly. For a 
certain period of time after the end-of-term elections, we 
concentrated on improving leading procuratorial bodies under the 
provincial party committee's unified plans. With the change of 
terms, leading procuratorial bodies at all levels were 
strengthened. 
  2. We Made Efforts To Ensure Honesty of 
Procuratorates Themselves in Performing Official Duties 
  The people's procuratorates are important function 
departments in the anticorruption campaign. However, those 
organizations themselves are also important departments to be 
examined in the anticorruption campaign, and so it is especially 
important to ensure their own honesty in performing official 
duties. The people's procuratorates at various levels should 
have a high sense of political responsibility and consciously 
and seriously take actions to prevent their own corruption. In 
the first half of last year, stress was laid on improving 
discipline and work style of cadres. In the second half of last 
year, people's procuratorates in the whole province considered 
the prevention of corruption of themselves as an important part 
in implementing the arrangements of the central authorities in 
fighting against corruption. The provincial people's 
procuratorate put forward specific opinions on how to strengthen 
people's procuratorates' own anticorruption struggle and 
formulated 10 measures to promote honesty in performing official 
duties. Leading cadres at and above department level were 
organized to check and examine themselves according to the 
requirements for self-discipline set by the central authorities, 
the provincial party committee, and the provincial people's 
procuratorate. The situation of wanton collection of fees by 
some procuratorates at the basic level was stopped. The 13 
cases of violation of discipline by procuratorial cadres were 
seriously handled one by one, and those who were involved in 
three serious cases were punished according to the Criminal Law. 
The provincial people's procuratorate also distributed a 
circular to various units to draw lessons from those cases and 
educate the broad masses of cadres. 
<H5>  3. We Strengthened Training on Professional Knowledge </H5>
  While promoting education on procuratorial work through 
television university and study for procurator's certificate, we 
strengthened professional trainining for all cadres. The 
provincial people's procuratorate held several short-term 
training classes for procuratorial cadres on hearing complaints 
and petitions and on civil administration. The provincial 
people's procuratorate also held competition in debates by 
public prosecutors and unfolded activities of evaluating 
outstanding public prosecutors for three times. Various local 
procuratorates also adopted various ways and forms to raise 
cadres' professional quality and ability. 
  Although people's procuratorates in the province made new 
achievements over the past year, there are still many problems 
and shortcomings. They mainly include the following: 1) 
Various people's procuratorates have made certain achievements 
in the anticorruption struggle; however, there is still quite a 
large gap between those achievements and the expections and 
demands of the party and people. The people's procuratorates 
are not strong enough in discovering and exposing crimes, 
especially major cases. 2) Legal supervision over execution of 
court judgments by law enforcement units is still a weak link. 
There are the problems of using fines to replace imprisonment 
or passing light sentences on serious crimes, and supervision 
over legal work is not effective in some localities. 3) Funds 
for handling legal cases are inadequate, and office facilities 
and equipment to handle criminal cases are simple and backward. 
Some improvements have been made with the support of 
governments at various levels, but funds and facilities still 
cannot meet the need of the situation and procuratorial tasks. 
4) The provincial people's procuratorate is still not strong 
enough in guiding the handling of various legal cases, 
especially major cases. We must look squarely at those problems 
and shortcomings, and seriously solve them in our future work. 
  We must continue to maintain the good trend in developing 
the 
national economy this year. The year 1994 is also a crucial 
year in promoting reform. The overall requirement of this year 
is to seize the opportunity, deepen reform, open up wider, 
promote development, and maintain stability. The people's 
procuratorates must be subordinate to and serve this overall 
requirement. The guiding ideology and main tasks of 
procuratorial work in the whole province are: Under the 
guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics and the party's basic line, we 
should implement the guidelines of the 14th CPC National 
Congress and the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee, adhere to the policy of "doing two types of work at 
the same time and attach equal importance to both," further 
emancipate our minds, seek truth from facts, enforce law in a 
strict manner, make greater and concentrated efforts to 
investigate and handle major and serious cases, crack down on 
various criminal activities, protect citizens' lawful rights, 
and make new contributions to accelerating the establishment of 
a socialist market economic structure, ensuring the sustained, 
rapid, and healthy development of the national economy, 
safeguarding social and political stability and promoting an 
all-round improvement of the society. We should lay stress on 
doing well the following tasks: 
  -- We Must Continue To Concentrate Our Efforts on 
Prosecuting Major and Important Cases, Especially Important 
Cases, So as To Deepen the Anticorruption Struggle 
  The struggle against corruption, bribery, and other decadent 
phenomena is a protracted mission. The cases that have been 
exposed show that corruption, bribery, and other economic crimes 
remain serious. We must never overestimate our success and 
underestimate the seriousness and the menace of these crimes, as 
well as the importance of deepening the struggle. In accordance 
with the consolidated plans drawn up by the Central Committee 
and the provincial party committee, procuratorial organs must 
carry out the policy of promoting material progress and 
socialist ethics at the same time, persist in waging a 
protracted struggle against crimes, work earnestly, and make 
constant efforts to deepen the struggle. This year's 
anticorruption struggle should focus on concentrating our 
efforts on prosecuting major and important cases, especially 
important cases involving leading cadres. Efforts should be 
made to achieve new breakthroughs. Criminal cases -- especially 
major and important cases -- taking place within leading party 
and government organs, judicial departments, law enforcing 
departments, and economic departments must be firmly handled 
according to law as soon as they are discovered. Meanwhile, in 
accordance with the policy that we must act firmly but 
cautiously and aim at the right targets, we must improve the 
quality of prosecution and make sure that cases are properly 
prosecuted so that our operations will yield even better 
political, economic, and social results. 
<H5>  -- We Must Uphold the "Crackdown" Principle and Come Down </H5>
Hard on Serious Crimes 
  We must be more politically sensitive and harshly and 
efficiently crack down on all types of serious crimes according 
to law. We must take active part in comprehensive management of 
public security, correctly handle the contradictions among the 
people, promptly eliminate factors that cause instability, and 
work hard to create a stable social environment facilitating 
reform, opening up, and economic construction. To ensure 
political stability, we must also intensify procuratorial 
operations to ensure state security and firmly strike at 
counterrevolutionary crimes as well as infiltration and 
subversive and sabotaging activities launched by hostile forces 
inside and outside Zhejiang. 
<H5>  -- We Must Continue To Intensify Supervision Over Law </H5>
Enforcement 
  We must attach special importance to prosecuting crimes 
committed by judicial personnel and law enforcers who abuse 
their authority for personal gains, accept bribes and bend the 
law, commit graft, and fail to enforce law strictly. We must 
dare to uphold principle and exercise legal supervision over law 
enforcing authorities' lawless conduct. To intensify 
supervision over law enforcement, procuratorial organs must be 
strong enough to accept challenge. To do an even better job in 
enforcing law in a civil manner, procuratorial organs must be 
strict in handling lawless conduct appearing in the prosecution 
of criminal cases. 
<H5>  -- We Must Exert Great Efforts in Building a Contingent of </H5>
Procuratorial Personnel 
  Procuratorial cadres must earnestly study Volume 3 of the 
"Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping," arm our minds with Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics so as to further heighten our awareness and 
firmness in implementing the party's basic line and in serving 
economic construction. Procuratorial cadres must strive to 
improve our political awareness and professional competence, and 
continue to intensify the anticorruption efforts among ourselves 
so that procuratorial operations can be expedited with the 
establishment of a contingent of procuratorial personnel who are 
politically strong, professionally keen, tough in work style, 
and strict in discipline. 

