Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Geneva, 1 March (PL) -- Today Cuba rejected the 
report by a special rapporteur on the human rights situation in 
Cuba, because it argues that it is the result of U.S. pressures 
and does not reflect the country's true situation. 
  Jose Perez Novoa, Cuban ambassador to the Human Rights 
Commission [CDH], said in an interview with PRENSA LATINA that 
he considers inadmissible the negotiation of an anti-Cuban draft 
resolution, which is being promoted by the U.S. delegation and 
which will be submitted for a vote next week. The week of 7 
March will be the last of six during which this organization 
will meet. 
  Regarding the resolution, Perez Novoa said that his 
delegation is not troubled by the ghost of a presumed resolution 
against Cuba. He stated that it does not bother Cuba at all. 
  In this regard, he said with irony: "Perhaps it will take 
them more time to generate support for their resolution than for 
us to try to defeat it." 
  Perez Novoa noted that the idea of a special rapporteur came 
up as a result of the U.S. vendetta against Cuba, but even 
during his presentation of the report, he had to admit the 
absence of missing persons, tortures, murders, or armed groups 
in Cuba. 
  Perez Novoa regretted that the current U.S. administration 
has kept its traditional harassment position only because it 
cannot concede that Cuba has achieved a social, economic, and 
political program such as the one it has currently, despite U.S. 
hostility. 
  Because of all this, he pointed out: "We have not come here 
on the defensive and we do not feel as though we are spiritually 
or mentally sitting on the accused bench" and our actions are 
reflected in the overall CDH program, within which at least 10 
projects have been promoted or negotiated. 
  Perez Novoa emphasized that Cuba has expressed and 
reiterated 
historically its willingness to discuss its differences with the 
United States on equal sovereign conditions and without any 
strings attached, but they are the ones that deny this offer and 
reject having normal relations and discussing differences. 
  He asserted: "An example that obstinacy remains is this 
false and manipulative human rights policy, and this is why they 
seek a new resolution." 
  Perez Novoa explained that despite U.S. pressures, Cuba 
maintains a wide, open, and transparent cooperation with the 
human rights system and rapporteurs. 
  In this regard, he mentioned how, encouraged and subsidized 
by the United States, the rapporteurs receive complaints, which 
are sometimes presented to the government without any proof or 
legality. The government, in turn, has answered them without any 
doubt or fear because we have nothing to hide. 
  He added that such cooperation is valid for all countries 
without any discrimination, selectivity, or political 
imposition. He indicated that Cuba is willing to cooperate, has 
done it, is doing it, and will continue doing it. 
  Perez Novoa mentioned the time in 1988 when Cuba invited a 
CDH delegation for a visit, and met with whoever it pleased, 
made a report, which in 1989 was presented and discussed 
publicly with the media, nongovernmental organizations, and 
observers during three sessions. 
  He stated that the report was analyzed as no other has been 
in the current CDH session, and no evidence was found to justify 
that Cuba was assigned a rapporteur. 
  Perez Novoa argued that the only thing Cubans have always 
rejected and will reject in their history is that something is 
imposed upon them. He stressed that Cubans are an open, warm, 
affectionate, compassionate people, but they will never accept 
those who seek to impose their power upon them. 

