BFN 

<F P=106> [By Amjad Mu'alla] </F>
  [Excerpts] Amman--Talal Sat'an al-Hasan, minister of state 
for foreign affairs, has asserted that Jordan will not yield to 
threats and pressures regardless of their form and source. 
Replying to the recent Israeli threats against Jordan, al-Hasan 
said: "We are astonished at the statements made by the Israeli 
prime minister, and assert that Jordan will not yield to threats 
and pressures." 
  In an open dialogue with the Arab Youths Forum held at the 
Amman Chamber of Industry yesterday afternoon, al-Hasan added 
that the Israeli threats were discussed at the highest levels 
over the past two days, and the Council of Ministers also 
discussed them in yesterday's session and followed up all 
statements made by the Israeli side. He said that Jordan is 
proud of its record of fighting all forms and sources of 
terrorism. We in Jordan have been victims of international 
terrorism, he noted. 
  Al-Hasan added: With regard to what was said about Hamas and 
other parties, Jordan's position is clear, which is that Jordan 
recognizes the PLO as the sole legitimate representative of the 
Palestinian people. He said that Israel is responsible for what 
happened in Hebron, and that all that has happened recently in 
terms of escalated violence was a result of the Hebron massacre, 
in which 50 worshipers fell victim and more than 300 others were 
wounded. 
  Asked about Jordan's participation as an observer in the 
meetings of the Water and Refugees Committee which will begin in 
Oman today as part of the multilateral negotiations, as well as 
linking this participation to Jordan's suspension of 
participation in the peace process until the siege of al-'Aqabah 
is lifted, al-Hasan said: Our participation in these 
negotiations came in this way to prove the Jordanian credibility 
about commitment to the peace process. He added that this 
position was taken despite what we said about the siege of 
al-'Aqabah and despite what His Majesty King Husayn said to the 
ambassadors of the five permanent Security Council member states. 
  Al-Hasan asserted that we preferred not to boycott the 
negotiations but to reduce the level of representation in them 
and be content with an observer status in the Water Committee 
until something new develops with regard to the siege of 
al-'Aqabah. 
  Al-Hasan detailed the bases and principles of Jordan's 
foreign policy during this meeting which was organized by the 
Arab Youths Forum and attended by the Foreign Ministry's 
secretary general and several senior Foreign Ministry officials. 
The dialogue was moderated by 'Abdallah Kan'an, member of the 
Board of Trustees of the Arab Youths Forum. The meeting was 
also attended by many Forum members and heads of branches in 
various governorates of the Kingdom. 
  Al-Hasan said that in coordination with Arab states, Jordan 
is interested in and committed to the negotiations [with Israel] 
to arrive at a just, comprehensive solution to the Middle East 
crisis. He said that for the Hashemite leader, finding a 
solution to this crisis is a top priority. This is because, he 
noted, the holy city [Jerusalem] has a special status in the 
hearts of Arabs and Muslims. He stressed that no solution is 
considered fair and comprehensive unless Jerusalem is included. 
  He added that Jerusalem is one of the delayed issues, but 
Jordan has left no occasion without asserting that the city's 
Arab, Islamic identity must be restored. 
  Responding to a question on the Jordanian-Palestinian 
coordination, the minister said that Jordan is interested in 
serious, effective coordination with all concerned Arab parties, 
especially the Palestinians. He said that coordination must 
take place before and after any decision is made. He stressed 
Jordan's rejection of superficial coordination that is intended 
only to convey information. 
  He stressed that Jordan respects and supports the 
independent 
Palestinian decisionmaking by the PLO, in its capacity as the 
sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. 
  Responding to a question on Jordanian-U.S. contacts on the 
question of the Port of al-'Aqbah, al-Hasan said that contacts 
are continuing, but so far there is no U.S. response. [passage 
omitted] 
  He added: Jordan supported Iraq and its people when they 
defended the eastern flank of the Arab nation. Jordan also 
offered Iraq the assistance and facilities which enabled it to 
defend the Arab nation and confront the aggression. Jordan 
still opposes any attempt to undermine the national integrity of 
the Iraqi territory. Jordan urged the international community to 
end the suffering of the Iraqi people resulting from the 
blockade imposed on them. During the Gulf crisis, our 
principled stand was misunderstood. We do not support that the 
territory of any state be occupied by another state. We reject 
the use of force to settle differences. Therefore, after the 
Gulf crisis we sought to clarify the reality of our stand and to 
restore our relations with some Gulf states to their past amity 
and solidarity. Our efforts have been successful. Some Gulf 
states understood our position. Our relations with them have 
returned to normal. However, other states do not seem to be 
willing to open a dialogue, understand matters as they are, or 
to forget the past and revive solidarity. [passage omitted] 
  Responding to a question on the relationship between the 
recent Israeli threats and Jordan's demands that al-'Aqabah 
siege be lifted, the minister said that Jordan rejects the 
continuation of this siege, and that it insists on linking its 
return to the negotiations to having the siege lifted. 
  He stressed that Jordan does not fear the Israeli threats, 
and that its demand that the siege be lifted is a strategic 
demand, not a maneuver or a tactic. 
  The minister stressed that Jordan rejects the inspection of 
al-'Aqbah-bound by foreign forces at the port's jetties. 
  He said that ship inspections must either be a pure 
Jordanian 
responsibility or that of a civilian neutral side. 

