Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hiroyoshi Ono, SANDE MAINICHI reporter] </F>
  [Text] Ichiro Ozawa and Ryutaro Hashimoto have become 
the undisputed leaders of the political world. The two have 
begun a "confrontation" outside of the Diet also. One has 
published the book Blueprint for Building a New 
Japan, and the other has published a policy book on 
Vision of Japan. Which of these books will prove to 
be a plus for Japan's immediate future? We asked Sophia 
University Professor Kuniko Iguchi (international politics) to 
act as the referee. 
  [Iguchi] In the past, policy has been announced in the form 
of the party platform or the party's stereotyped ideological 
stance. However, with the appearance of these books in easily 
readable and accessible form for everyone, pricewise, I believe 
that a new format has been presented for policy debate in Japan 
in the post-Cold War era. Also, because both books were prepared 
for critique when they were published, I would like to evaluate 
them as a courageous first step, hoping that it will develop 
into a new trend. 
  (Shinseito representative director) Ozawa's Blueprint 
for Building a New Japan (Kodansha) was published in May 
1993 and is a best seller with over 600,000 copies sold. Also, 
in late November (LDP Policy Research Council chairman) 
Hashimoto made public his Vision of Japan (KK 
Bestsellers) with 100,000 copies already sold, proving a good 
matchup. 
  [Ono] Leaving an overall evaluation of the "Ozawa-Hashimoto" 
contest until later, we asked Professor Iguchi to analyze the 
individual policies. There is a wide divergence between their 
views concerning the "foreign affairs stance." 
  "One of my beliefs regarding foreign affairs is to maintain 
a 
close alliance with the United States" (from Ozawa's book - 
hereafter referred to by the symbol *). 
  "As long as the United States continues to be a Pacific 
nation, Japan has no intention of shaking the axis of U.S.-Japan 
relations. However, when the United States has forgotten its 
face as a Pacific nation, we will be forced to change U.S.-Japan 
relations whether we like it or not" (from Hashimoto's book - 
hereafter referred to by the symbol **). 
  [Iguchi] The above quotes show a considerable disparateness. 
Ozawa's quote represents a pro-American line, while Hashimoto's 
quote leaves a little distance. Rather than being an out-and-out 
pro-American line, I believe his point is to stress the 
Asia-Pacific framework as central. 
  There is a somewhat over-conceptualized aspect in Ozawa, and 
I believe that, in the case of a "normal nation," he sees the 
United States as a normal nation. However, it is the United 
States that is a special nation and, if we say that all the 
other nations are not normal nations unless they play military 
roles and are armed like the United States, the world would 
become extremely unstable. Therefore, I believe that the 
majority of the world's nations probably wish to become 
Japan-style states, that is, "lightly armed economic states." 
Today, with the Cold War ended, I believe that they support a 
style like Japan. 
  Also, Ozawa looks only at the classic U.S.-Japan relations, 
so that there is a lack of plane expansion. A nation that has no 
local support has no persuasive power on the international 
stage. Therefore, support in Asia is a prerequisite, and it can 
be argued that Japan must have support in Asia in order to 
protect its national interests in U.S.-Japan relations. 
  On the other hand, Hashimoto says: "U.S.-Japan relations are 
certainly important, but they are not something that must be 
protected by relinquishing sovereignty." However, in modern 
times when economic interdependence has increased, the concept 
of sovereignty has changed. Intervention in internal affairs and 
sovereignty were strongly stressed among the 19th century-type 
military states. However, with growing interdependence, a nation 
is impacted greatly by the economic trends in the other nations. 
Therefore, any nation would argue over these trends. 
  Consequently, in terms of economic management, I believe 
that 
it is contrary to the long-term national interest if the 
formation of a common base is hindered by bringing up the 
concept of sovereignty, and we should consider this point. This 
is a stereotyped way of expression, is it not? 
  Also, U.S.-Japan relations are decisively important and must 
absolutely not be broken. It is also true for the United States. 
However, there are many more options on the U.S. side to 
undermine them, such as the EC and Russia. There is only the 
United States for Japan. Therefore, depending on the situation, 
Japan must often compromise. If there is dissatisfaction with 
the situation and a notion to align itself with another region, 
such as the Asia-Pacific region, it is an extremely naive notion. 
<H5>  Expectations Toward a Japan-Style National Existence </H5>
  An Asia-Pacific region without the United States cannot be a 
substitute for the United States from Japan's standpoint. 
Japan's economy cannot stand up by trading only with the nations 
of Asia. An Asia-Pacific sphere including the United States must 
be reinforced, and the notion that only the United States and 
Europe, that is, the EC, will suffice in the world must be 
defeated. 
  In terms of foreign affairs, severe demands are made of both 
leaders. 
  What about "national security and the problem of the 
constitution" which in reality faces the issue of international 
contribution? 
  (Ozawa's book) "What is meant by a `normal nation?' It means 
to perform what is considered to be natural conduct in the 
international society under the nation's own responsibility. 
This is particularly true regarding national security." 
  (Hashimoto's book) "My position is not to align with the 
so-called `interpretative constitutional theory.' However, I am 
one who believes that we should engage in PKO [UN peacekeeping 
operations] activities." 
  Ozawa contends that three paragraphs should be added to 
Article 9, Paragraph 2, of the Constitution, and that an article 
should be inserted to ensure that the activities of the 
Self-Defense Forces as a UN standby force or under UN comand are 
not hindered. He also theorizes that this can be adequately met 
by changing the interpretation of the present Constitution. On 
the other hand, I read in Hashimoto's writings his position 
that, while he does not rule out PKF [peacekeeping forces], 
enough can be done within the present limitations. 
  When the United States is called a "normal nation," there is 
an aspect of treating the United States in an absolute light. In 
a sense, it symbolizes the world outlook of Japan's 
conservatives. It is a world outlook of Japan as a small nation. 
As for a normal nation, that is, the United States, Japan would 
like to approach as close as possible to the United States, the 
normal nation. 
  For example, it is said that Japan will militarize if it 
becomes a member of the UN Security Council. Conversely, it is 
inconceivable that the Security Council will play an economic 
role with Japan's entry. The debate does not develop to the 
point where Japan is considered a player in the creation of any 
global aspects. 
  There is some sense of limitation in the idea of aiming 
toward a normal nation like the United States. For the majority 
of nations, aiming toward a Japan-style existence is more 
persuasive. It is more realistically attainable, and I believe 
that we should expect more from such a concept. 
  In addition, the concept of a UN standby force mentioned by 
Ozawa is an unrealistic proposal. 
  As to how the United States is coping with security and 
regional disputes in the post-Cold War era, there are two policy 
directions. 
  One is a desire to win political legitimacy through the use 
of the UN Security Council. However, regarding the other, it 
does not wish to use the United Nations for military purposes. 
In other words, the United Nations does not have any war 
expertise, so the United States cannot put the lives of its own 
soldiers under UN command. Therefore, the United States will 
probably not accept what Ozawa calls a UN standby force. I 
believe that a responsible nation does not think of entrusting 
(its military forces) as a UN standby force. 
  [Ono] Ozawa's book attracted so much attention that the U.S. 
Government reportedly had it totally translated immediately 
after its publication. However, according to Professor Iguchi's 
analysis, within the limits of the "security" theme, the 
thinking of both men remains within the framework of Japanese 
thinking, and there is probably an aspect that is unacceptable 
internationally. 
  [Iguchi] In terms of domestic issues, both men show a strong 
tendency to evolve their pet theories on the problems of 
"welfare" and "independence." 
  (Ozawa's book) "First, the people must be freed from their 
incubator. 
  "Naturally, self-responsibility is thus demanded of the 
people. However, I believe that it is what should be expected. 
Where there is no self-responsibility, free choice does not 
exist." 
  (Hashimoto's book) "My father, who was a politician, spoke 
frankly to his sons about the importance of social security and 
welfare administration from his own experiences, and he coped 
with them. He himself was physically handicapped." 
<H5>  The People's Evaluation of "the Shape of Japan as a Nation" </H5>
  Here, too, the difference in stances between the two is 
apparent. Ozawa's position is that one must look after onself, 
and that it is the same in the case of individuals as well as 
nations. Hashimoto shows a very deep concern for the weak. I 
believe that it is based on special emotions about his own home 
environment. 
  I believe that Ozawa's desire to seek what he calls 
"self-responsibility" from companies and organizations will be 
the trend in the future era of deregulation. 
  However, it is linked to the question of why the state 
exists. While there are such classical roles as defense and the 
law-governed state, I believe that there is an additional desire 
for the state to serve as a haven for the weak. 
  In effect, in ordinary times, everyone can be independent as 
citizens and assume self-responsibility. However, there are 
cases where people are burdened with extreme risks, or become 
suddenly physically handicapped one day, or are faced with a 
major natural disaster. In such cases, I believe that they wish 
to depend on the state. In that sense, Hashimoto's viewpoint 
concerning the weak and welfare will draw empathy. 
Simultaneously, it does not conflict with Ozawa's theory either. 
I believe that both can be considered in tandem. 
  Now for the overall evaluation of the books by the two. 
  Unfortunately, Hashimoto does not touch upon the aspects 
that 
relate to the real political trend, such as how to wrest 
administrative power. 
  In this respect, Hashimoto's close associate comments that 
"the point of his book is centered on Hashimoto's thoughts and 
experiences. It is difficult to write about the moving trend of 
the times." 
  [Ono] On the other hand, Ozawa indicates the "new shape of 
Japan's politics" in his book, and, albeit in a subtle way, it 
is taking shape within real politics. Although Professor Iguchi 
did not rate the two books as either superior or inferior, the 
evaluation of the two books will ultimately depend on how the 
people visualize the "shape of Japan as a nation." 

