BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dimitur Ludzhev, "leader of the New Policy </F>
Center," by Milko Nedyalkov; place and date not given; "The One 
Who Lies Is Capable of Organizing a Putsch"] 
  [Text] [Nedyalkov] Mr. Ludzhev, are you disturbed by the 
article in a Sofia weekly, according to which you serve foreign 
national interests? 
  [Ludzhev] The article is a total fabrication and it is a 
part of the election campaign aimed against the New Policy 
Center and myself. I do not want to insult the press, but it 
appears that Petyo Bluskov is everyone's servant. Willingly or 
unwillingly, he has now joined a game Andrey Lukanov and his 
friends are waging against President Zhelev and other political 
figures who do not obey the staffs of Positano Street 
[headquarters of the Bulgarian Socialist Party-BSP] and Rakovski 
Street [headquarters of the Union of Democratic Forces-SDS]. 
Everything in the article is fabricated. For example, it is 
claimed that the pictures were made on 15 September 1991. This 
is impossible, because Mr. Montgomery and his family left 
Bulgaria in May of the same year, and in September he was not in 
Sofia at all, thus no pictures could have been made. Most 
probably, the pictures were made before Dr. Zhelev's visit to 
the United States in 1990, when as his adviser I coordinated 
with the U.S. Embassy the text of the future joint documents. 
  [Nedyalkov] The same weekly compares you to Zhirinovskiy and 
identifies you as a supporter of Zhelev's thesis on the 
transition to democracy through a dictatorship. 
  [Ludzhev] Bulgaria needs a strong government; however, one 
could not speak about a dictatorship under the existing 
conditions. We developed activity throughout the country, effect 
relations between our clubs and the center, support the 
introduction of a new election system and holding early 
elections, and submitted a new elections law to the parliament. 
Those are democratic actions which have nothing to do with a 
dictatorship. It is rather the person who lies who could 
organize a putsch and establish a dictatorship. 
  [Nedyalkov] How do you view the statements of the president 
on restoring the old parliamentary majority? Do you see a place 
for yourself in that majority? 
  [Ludzhev] During our meeting with the president we expressed 
the categorical opinion that there is no place for the old 
majority in this parliament. We even view his position on this 
matter as his contribution to preserving the bipolar model in 
our political scene. Furthermore, the same persons whose 
presence in the state structures we eliminated with great 
difficulties in 1992, still rule the SDS. On the other hand it 
is a total illusion to think that the New Policy Center could 
form a new cabinet. 
  [Nedyalkov] If we head toward new elections would you accept 
the old proposal of the president to head a caretaker cabinet? 
  [Ludzhev] I will not accept the proposal to head a caretaker 
cabinet. Indeed, there is no such offer on the part of the 
president. In the past a statement of his by which he wanted to 
support me was interpreted as a proposal to form a caretaker 
cabinet. In fact this was a doubtful service under the 
conditions that existed at that time in the SDS parliamentary 
faction. 
  [Nedyalkov] Will the deputies of the center support an 
eventual no-confidence vote in the cabinet proposed by the SDS? 
  [Ludzhev] First, I doubt very much that the SDS 
parliamentary faction will propose a no-confidence vote. 
Second, our center expressed its clear position already one 
month ago, namely, that this cabinet has exhausted its 
possibilities and should resign. Afterward, the script is clear: 
Adopting a new elections bill and early elections. If the SDS 
proposes a no-confidence vote we will not support the cabinet, 
but will also not support the SDS. The reshuffling of the 
cabinet, about which people talk now, can be approved in the 
parliament only through the votes of the BSP and the SDS. It is 
my opinion that the two political forces are not interested in 
new elections, and especially not in the adoption of a new 
elections bill which guarantees the participation of clear 
professionals in the future management of the country. Changing 
our system now means replacing the deputies, including myself. 

