Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 10 Jan (PL) -- Cubans must improve the 
practice of being the main authors in making decisions on 
specific problems in each place, without waiting for the experts 
to voice their opinions, Ricardo Alarcon said today. 
  The president of the National Assembly of the People's 
Government [Cuban parliament] made the appeal during the 
inauguration of the "I Have an Opinion" information program 
broadcast by Radio Progreso. 
  During the program, a panel of newsmen interviewed the 
legislator on the repercussions in society of topics of key 
interest for the people that were discussed during the most 
recent parliamentary session. Newsmen were particularly 
concerned about the topic having to do with sound internal 
finances. 
  Alarcon insisted there are no reasons why the Cuban people 
should be so concerned waiting for the debates of the assembly, 
because -- he said -- the Cuban parliament follows a system in 
which the people decide and they are the main agents of the 
revolutionary process. 
  He denied that one could remove various influences on the 
actions of the legislative bodies in other societies and by 
virtue of this criteria -- he says -- there are those who tend 
to think that certain important decisions are adopted from 
outside, from above, restricting the role of the citizens to 
that of waiting. 
  In the case of Cuba, we have to get used to developing, not 
a 
theory, but the practice that in a socialist society the people 
should be the main actors in all decisionmaking processes and 
not be a passive object on which action is taken. 
  In other countries, the experts discuss such topics as the 
financial situation, the governments approve it with the support 
of experts, and if there is any negotiation, it is done with the 
powers of that state, with the wealthy people, but in our case 
everything stems from the people, Alarcon emphasized. 
  He added that the regular sessions of the National Assembly 
in December were directed exclusively at initiating a group 
reflection on the topic, precisely to help strengthen awareness 
on topics that are not easy to resolve. 
  In Cuba, he said, we could not have faced the problems 
without a real group action. The first step is for all 
legislators to analyze it. It is naive to believe that we can 
wave a magic wand to resolve the complex, serious, and delicate 
problems that we face. 
  The solutions depend on us, he said. He noted that many 
measures are within the reach of any Cuban at his work post, 
which is why we must adopt them in each working place, aside 
from the decisions of a national nature. 
  The president of the Cuban parliament insisted that after 
the 
analysis made during the last period of sessions, debates 
followed on how to find solutions to the economic imbalances, 
without harming the majority, as would occur with the remedies 
applied in other countries for similar financial crises. 
  We must try to save socialism by preserving the achievements 
of society with a political and realistic view, not 
technocratic, attempting to create a growing awareness of topics 
such as costs, inefficiency, management of resources, 
profitability, and other aspects of Cuba's economic reality, he 
concluded. 
(endall) 102128 lo/mp/fliss/eb sfcu1001.04e 10/2315z jan 

