BFN 

<F P=106> [By Marie Joannidis] </F>
  [Text] Paris, April 12 (AFP) -- France and Belgium are 
considering a rapid pull-out of their troops from Rwanda, once 
foreigners have been evacuated, leaving the United Nations and 
African countries to try to restore peace in the East African 
country. 
  The evacuation of 600 French nationals from Rwanda was 
nearly 
completed Monday [11 April], and French officials said French 
paratroopers sent there at the weekend would pull out very 
quickly, possibly starting on Tuesday. 
  In Paris, Foreign Ministry deputy spokeswoman Catherine 
Colonna stressed that the French paratroopers' mission was 
"purely humanitarian" and aimed only at evacuating foreign 
nationals. 
  Meanwhile in Brussels, Belgian Prime Minister Jean-Luc 
Dehaene told a parliamentary committee Monday that his 
government was considering withdrawing the 450 Belgian UN 
peacekeeping troops from Rwanda, where ethnic warfare between 
the majority Hutu and minority Tutsi tribes has left thousands 
dead. 
  Belgium sent the troops to its former colony last year to 
uphold a peace agreement signed in Arusha, Tanzania, between the 
Hutu-dominated government and the mainly Tutsi rebels of the 
Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF). 
  The Belgian troops have been stationed there, along with 
Ghanaians and Bangladeshi troops, within the framework of the 
United Nations Assistance Mission in Rwanda [MINUAR]. 
  Earlier Monday, French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe called 
for a "relaunch of the process of dialogue" between the warring 
parties. 
  Speaking on French radio, Juppe said France would "do its 
utmost" in cooperation with Rwanda's neighbours, the 
Organisation of African Unity (OAU) and the United Nations to 
find a political solution to the conflict. 
  On Sunday, French Development Aid Minister Michel Roussin 
said it was up to "the United Nations to assume its 
responsibilities," adding that French forces would not "get 
mixed up" in the Rwandan fighting. 
  Belgium Foreign Minister Willy Claes is to meet UN Secretary 
General Butrus Butrus-Ghali in Geneva soon to discuss Belgium's 
role in peacekeeping forces. 
  "All will depend on what happens to the Arusha agreements," 
said Dehaene. 
  "If the Arusha agreements are abandoned, the problem will 
have to be addressed by the United Nations itself, because the 
peacekeeping troops were sent to Rwanda within the framework of 
the agreements." 
  "If there is still a will to apply the agreements, we must 
question the general role of peacekeeping troops and whether our 
own role in the mission is appropriate," he added. 
  Claes, for his part, suggested that the current MINUAR 
mandate was "too limited," adding that the United Nations should 
take up the matter. 
  French officials privately confess it would be too dangerous 
to leave French troops in Kigali where they might end up being 
drawn into the fighting. 
  In the past the RPF has accused France of siding with 
Rwandan 
government forces, notably when it stationed troops in the 
country between 1990 and 1993. 
  Belgium, on the other hand, is viewed by the Hutus as 
pro-Tutsi and believes that too rapid a French withdrawal might 
leave its own forces exposed, informed sources said. 
  Ten Belgian soldiers were killed Thursday by the Rwandan 
presidential guard, and at least three Belgian civilians have 
been reported killed in the fighting. 
  Both France and Belgium have also called on the United 
States 
to use its influence with the RPF and its Ugandan backers. 
  However observers here doubt whether the United Nations, 
which is already heavily engaged in peacekeeping operations 
elsewhere in the world, has the means for yet another 
intervention. 
  "All the more so as there will be fewer and fewer foreign 
witnesses to bear witness to the tragedy" unfolding in Rwanda, 
one observer predicted. 
  As for Africa, it lacks both the political and financial 
clout to deal with the problem. 
  "We have created a mechanism for the prevention of conflicts 
but its principle is stomped by lack of means," Senegalese 
President Abdou Diouf said here Monday. "We must be helped by 
countries which have the means to do it," he added. 

