Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Roatan, Islas de la Bahia--Cesar Augusto Somoza, 
spokesman for the Public Security Force, reported yesterday that 
a total of 21 kilos of cocaine, several rocks of crack, and a 
small amount of marijuana were seized over the weekend from the 
Manhatan boutique in this city. 
  The operation, carried out by antinarcotics police, resulted 
in the arrest of Jose Aristides Flores Najera, from whom the 
cocaine was seized, and his accomplice Jose Francisco Moreno 
Reyes. In Oak Ridge, in this jurisdiction, Samuel Liver and 
Edilberto Diaz del Cid were arrested after one was found with 
four ounces of marijuana and the other with a piece of crack. 
  Police also seized a boat owned by Najera, and an AK-47 
rifle 
with the necessary ammunition from Gilbert James Brook. 
  As a result of the police raid on the boutique, owned by 
Najera, additional arrests for possession of marijuana and crack 
were made. These included Helen Bush, Valentin Alvarez Amaya, 
and July Martinez Randy. 
  Somoza indicated that the cocaine that was seized is quite 
"respectable," considering that the price ranges from $25,000 to 
$30,000 per kilo. He added, however, that it is difficult to run 
police operations in this department because it requires a great 
deal of air, land, and naval resources to conduct proper patrols. 
  Following a number of complaints by citizens on the island 
and by Deputy Julio Galindo of this department that drug 
trafficking is a normal occurrence on the islands, Somoza 
explained that it takes a long time to investigate, seize drugs, 
and arrest those involved. 
  In this regard, he revealed that continued efforts will be 
made in Islas de la Bahia, vigilance will be stepped up, and the 
police force will be strengthened. 
  The police spokesman noted that many of the drugs coming to 
Islas de la Bahia are on their way to the United States, 
although some of them stay there and are consumed inside the 
country. 
  He also denied that the operation was the result of the 
constant complaints lodged by Deputy Galindo, since "the 
antinarcotics police work 365 days a year and 24 hours a day." 
  In this connection, he explained that for the past three 
months, police have been working hard to find the cocaine that 
was just seized, and there are no indications that police agents 
have received any money from drug traffickers in this area. 
  One of the persons arrested, Zenon Valentin Alvarez Amaya, 
originally from Tela, Atlantida, stated that the drugs had been 
placed in his bag without his knowledge by Denis Lino Avila, 
acting on orders from Dionisio Alvarez, who manufactures 
balconies and works in Agua Azul. 
  Francisco Moreno alleged that he had come in voluntarily 
because the police had arrested his wife, Katya Matute Moreno, 
who is being held in Guanaja. He said that he has no ties to 
drug traffickers. 
  Flores Najera, from whom 17 kilos of cocaine was seized, 
insisted that he had no middleman, and this is the first time he 
has been involved in this business. He reported that he traded 
the drug for shellfish with people in Puerto Cabezas, who would 
go out and sell it there, and said that he intended to 
distribute the drug over the next five or six months. 
  Najera, who works in the fishing industry, stated that 
sometimes "stuff can be found floating around" at sea, and that 
is how people can pick up a few kilos. 
  He denied having any connection to the police in drug 
dealing, which had been alleged by some residents of Islas de la 
Bahia. 
  The owner of the boutique stated that many people from 
Jamaica, Colombia, and Nicaragua commonly traffic in drugs on 
the high seas, and that this is another way of getting drugs. 
  All of the arrestees have been in custody since Friday, and 
will be remanded to the appropriate courts so that their cases 
can be investigated. 

