Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on drug-related crimes, investigations, trials, 
sentencings, and other activities in the PRC monitored by Hong 
Kong Bureau during the period 1-14 February 1994. The source 
and mode of processing are given in parentheses at the end of 
each entry. 
<H6>  CENTRAL </H6>
  In 1993 public security forces and border guards in Yunnan 
and Guangxi took effective actions to crack down on firearms and 
drug trafficking and smuggling. In the whole year, the public 
security organs and border guards in these two provinces cracked 
324 firearms trafficking cases, seizing 374 pieces of military 
firearms. They also cracked 961 drug trafficking cases, seizing 
812.3 kg of opium and 762.5 kg of heroin. The actions totally 
destroyed 136 criminal gangs. 
  The public security organs and border guard units in these 
two provinces transferred some 500 people from commanding organs 
to replenish the troops on active duty. The border inspection 
stations were on duty 24 hours a day, and strictly examined the 
vehicles and personnel moving to the interior mainland. 
  On the afternoon of 22 December 1993, the border security 
checkpoint in Mukang of Dehong Autonomous Prefecture discovered 
46.5 kg of heroin divided among three vehicles moving through 
the border to the interior area. 
  In order to mobilize the masses, the public security and 
border guard forces in Yunnan and Guangxi also dispatched a 
large number of police officers to border villages to publicize 
the government's policy on capturing smuggled drugs and firearms 
and to build up the police-civilian security network. According 
to Yunnan's incomplete statistics, in 1993 the masses provided 
148 pieces of information for the public security organs and 
assisted the police force in 193 actions. (Summary) (Beijing 
RENMIN RIBAO in Chinese 1 Feb 94 p 3) 
<H6>  PROVINCIAL </H6>
<H5>  Fujian </H5>
  In 1993, Fujian's public security organs cracked a total of 
62 drug-related cases, captured over 220 drug traffickers, and 
seized 57.2 kg of drugs, as well as over 1.5 million yuan in 
profits from drug deals. 
  Over recent years, drug-trafficking rings and lawbreakers 
outside China have opened secret sea smuggling routes into 
Fujian. Driven by high profits, some wrongdoers inside China 
are willing to risk their lives and engage in drug trafficking. 
Since the beginning of this year public security organs of all 
prefectures, cities, and major counties have stepped up efforts 
in deploying antidrug police forces and setting up special 
investigation organs for cracking drug-related cases, while 
leaders of public security organs at all levels have attached 
great importance to such investigations. 
  From May to June 1993, public security organs across the 
province carried out a joint operation and cracked six 
"ice"-manufacturing dens set up by Taiwan drug dealers in 
Fuzhou, Putian, Quanzhou, and Zhangzhou. On 8 May, the Quanzhou 
public security organs cracked a drug-trafficking ring involving 
drug dealers and lawbreakers from Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the 
mainland, and seized 36 kg of drugs and heroin. Meanwhile, 
public security organs in all localities have made great efforts 
to trace drug sources of drug addicts, and successfully smashed 
a number of secret dens which "used drug trafficking to finance 
drug taking." (Summary) (Fuzhou FUJIAN RIBAO in Chinese 23 Jan 
94 p 7) 
<H5>  Guizhou </H5>
  The provincial political and legal affairs committee held a 
news briefing on 31 January at which it announced that in 
January 1994, a total of 2,020 fugitives were captured and 335 
criminal cases were cracked across the province. 
  The public security organs of Guiyang City and Liupanshui 
City smashed three drug trafficking syndicates and seized more 
than 3.9 kg of heroin. 
  The Guiyang City Railroad Public Security Department also 
captured two fugitives who escaped after murdering two 
accounting clerks in Guiyang on 8 January. (Summary) (Guiyang 
Guizhou People's Radio Network in Mandarin 2300 GMT 31 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Shanxi </H5>
  Police in Changzhi City, Shanxi Province have cracked a 
major 
drug-trafficking case, seizing 325 kg of caffeine and putting 
two drug dealers under arrest. 
  The two convicts, who disguised drugs as chicken feed, 
confessed that they had trafficked drugs five times since the 
beginning of 1993. At present, the case is under further 
investigation. (Summary) (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in 
Chinese 0903 GMT 11 Feb 94) 

