Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Umnov: "The Bomb for the Poor"; first </F>
two paragraphs are introductory paragraphs] 
  [Text] In 1973 Soviet scientists sharply intensified their 
work on bacteriological weapons which Western politicians have 
called "the atom bomb for poor states." 
  To this day Western experts fear that Russia may have 
preserved its biological-weapons potential. 
  Such apprehensions are voiced despite the fact that Boris 
Yeltsin more than a year and a half ago issued a decree banning 
such work. In addition, several visits to our biological 
facilities by foreign experts, did not uncover anything 
resembling a Soviet bacteriological programme. 
  What is more, mistrust is infectious, and today we begin to 
suspect, along with the Americans, that the "bomb for the poor" 
may surface in Saddam Hussein's Iraq or in China. 
  It is indeed impossible to answer these questions once and 
for all. 
<H5>  100 Tons of Potassium Cyanide in a Bottle </H5>
  The production of a biological bomb does not require 
expensive equipment. It is enough to have a small laboratory, 
such as any medical college has, and hermetically sealed boxes 
in order to build up within a short time a "biomass" necessary 
for several shells. 
  In view of their destructive power poor states should lose 
all interest in superexpensive nuclear weapons. The Soviet 
Union, for instance, had to dismantle and remove from combat 
duty between two and three thousand warheads whose guaranteed 
service life ended and to manufacture as many new ones. Add to 
this the cost of personnel and maintenance work... Isn't it 
cheaper to withdraw from the "nuclear club" and receive a round 
sum for disarmament from the United States? 
  This sum would be hardly enough to buy and conceal in a 
closed town a costly nuclear physicist familiar with atomic 
technology, but its small fraction would be sufficient to find a 
specialist versed in the technology of building up a "biological 
product" and assembling and filling biological munitions. I know 
several cases where scientists, who had taken part in the "5th 
problem," as it was called, came to American laboratories and 
began to work there without a single unclassified publication to 
their credit. The situation now is such that many military 
biologists go in search of work. 
  The "bomb for the poor," a jar with the plague hidden in a 
refrigerator, or another "asymmetric version" inspires no less 
confidence than a nuclear arsenal costing billions and therefore 
calls into question the expediency of preserving on Earth 
weapons of mass destruction as a deterrence factor. 
  MN File: "...A couple of glasses with 
bacteria are comparable in destructive force to 5 tons of a 
nerve gas or 100 tons of potassium cyanide. They do not require 
for storage spacious warehouses that can be detected with the 
help of satellites." Pravda, April 11, 
1989 
<H5>  Biological Weapons as a Primemover of Progress </H5>
  Our century has produced the idea that scientific and 
technological progress is mainly advanced by military research. 
One can already hear it said in Russia that trade in arms can 
become the country's second money earner after raw materials. 
For some reason, however, no one has calculated the cost of a 
single bacteriological programme. 
  In view of the USSR's lag in the sphere of molecular 
biology, 
genetics, and gene engineering, the CPSU Central Committee and 
the Council of Ministers passed a decision in 1973 on the 
accelerated development of these branches of biology and the 
application of their achievements in the national economy. Such 
is the official version which, as it often happens, is only a 
half-truth. 
  It is a fact that the 1948 session of the Lenin All-Union 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences wreaked such havoc on Soviet 
genetics, that many biologists could not recover from the shock 
until recently. By the beginning of the 70s Western scientists 
began gene-engineering work with DNA and were able actively to 
influence the genome and obtained changed forms of bacteria and 
viruses, while Soviet microbiologists continued to work in the 
same old way. 
  It was at that time that a group of well-known scientists 
("civilian" scholars of world renown, some of whom are still 
working) appealed to Brezhnev pointing out that progress in the 
military sphere was impossible without the use of biological 
achievements. As a result the General Secretary personally 
adopted the necessary decision but almost simultaneously signed 
a convention banning such work. 
  Bacteriological weapons are thus probably the only type of 
new arms whose development was conducted at the initiative of 
civilian scientists, which is, in my view, most deplorable. 
These people must have understood that biology was doomed 
without employing the funds and facilities of the 
military-industrial complex. Private interests were also 
involved: many biologists became academicians, state prize 
winners, heroes of socialist labour and were given honoured 
places in the Academy of Sciences. 
  As a result the Soviet Union could have begun within a few 
months large-scale production of bacteriological weapons (which 
was never started, therefore there were no stocks of them and 
there was consequently no problem of destruction, as different 
from nuclear and chemical weapons). But the main thing is that 
the money that was officially invested in biology was aimlessly 
wasted. 
  MN File: In 1946 work on the bacteriological 
bomb began within the system of the USSR Ministry of 
Defence. 
  In 1972 the USSR signed the convention banning 
biological weapons. 
  In 1973 the USSR Council of Ministers placed the 
development of biological weapons under the civilian "cover" of 
the Main Department of Microbiological Industry. 
  In 1975 the convention entered into force. 
  In 1982-83 studies of dangerous pathogens began in 
Koltsovo, Obolensk, Chekhov and Leningrad. 
  In April 1992 this work was prohibited on Russian 
territory by a presidential decree. 
<H5>  A Bomb for `Peaceful Purposes' </H5>
  After Yeltsin's decree the military bacteriological 
programme 
had to be converted. Although a year and a half is hardly 
enough, let us try to sum up some results. 
  The successes of some basic research (which was certainly 
conducted even within the military programme) will probably 
finally be used for peaceful purposes. As for applied research, 
most of it will have to be forgotten because of its destructive 
purpose. 
  During the 20 years of its existence the system ate up money 
that could be better invested in biology, pharmaceuticals and 
medicine and did not produce anything principally new. Meanwhile 
whole institutes of the Pushchino biological centre of the 
Academy of Sciences are being closed for lack of funds. The 
country's pharmaceutical industry is going to pieces. What is 
more, ties between biologists have been broken, and virologists 
and geneticians of the Biopreparat Association often have no 
idea of what their colleagues from the Ministry of Defence work 
on. Military biologists have been left without money and hopes 
for the future. 
  It may be recalled that, while physics is known to have 
prevailed in the 20th century, most experts call biology the 
science of the 21st century. But Russian biology can hardly be 
expected to live that long. 

