BFN 

  [Text] The Czech Republic's budget shows a surplus of 4.9 
billion Czech korunas at the end of the first three months of 
1994. This was announced by Ivan Kocarnik, deputy prime minister 
and minister of finance, today. Ales Hermanek has more details. 
  [Hermanek] According to Minister Kocarnik, the size of the 
surplus gives no cause for exaggerated optimism. 
  [Begin Kocarnik recording] The surplus is given by the fact 
that expenditures in the first three months of 1994 are lower 
than should be for the corresponding part of 1994 budget 
expenses. Let us say that three months represent roughly 25 
percent, even though this is not true in absolute figures. 
Still, taking this 25 percent as the basis, budget expenditures 
amounted to 22 percent of the envisaged annual expenditures, and 
the revenue represents 23.4 percent of the envisaged annual 
revenue. I am therefore very cautious when assessing these 
results because the revenue side of the budget remained below 
the one-quarter of annual revenue. [end recording] 
  [Hermanek] The lower-than-planned revenue was caused mainly 
by low VAT [value-added tax] collection. According to Minister 
Kocarnik, this was caused by higher business expenses at the end 
of last year and the subsequent application of a reduced tax in 
this year. [sentence as heard] 
  Another cause for the high budget surplus is the surplus in 
clearing payments with Slovakia amounting to 2.1 billion 
korunas. However, this figure keeps going down. It was still 
double the present figure some three months ago. 
  Kocarnik was, however, very optimistic in his assessment of 
the GDP development for last year and this year. 
  [Begin Kocarnik recording] I think that the key issue is 
that 
economic performance is stabilizing and that we have good reason 
to expect that economic growth has begun in the first three 
months. Of course, this can also be attributed to the fact that 
the first three months of last year were especially bad. We 
expect that, in comparison with the first three months of last 
year, the GDP for the first three months of 1994 will be higher 
by 5-6 percent. [end recording] 

