BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Special Commentary on China's Economy" column by </F>
Yu Guangyuan (0060 0342 6678): "On the Meaning of `Development 
Is Unconditional Logic' -- A Philosophical Principle, as Well as 
a Fundamental Guideline for Economic Work"] 
  [Text] Two years ago, Deng Xiaoping inspected Wuchang, 
Shenzhen, Zhuhai, Shanghai, and other places, making many 
speeches during the trip. These speeches have an important 
historic role to play in our country's socialist modernization. 
Over the past two years, our country's rapid economic 
development has drawn widespread attention in the world, and the 
people in our country are delighted and encouraged, and have 
enhanced their confidence in our country's bright future. 
Although these speeches two years ago have been studied by 
people many times, a review of the past can help us to 
understand the present, and I think that we must always review 
them and deepen our understanding of them. 
  These speeches were quickly organized into a document 
entitled "Key Points of Speeches Made in Wuchang, Shenzhen, 
Zhuhai, and Shanghai," for the broad masses of cadres in our 
country to study. Volume 3 of the Selected Works of Deng 
Xiaoping, which was published in October 1993, included 
this document. The first part of the document said that "we 
must liberate productive forces through reform," the second part 
said that a "market economy does not equal capitalism," and the 
third part mainly talked about economic development problems. I 
believe that everyone will remember the important expositions 
mentioned in these three parts: "grasp the opportunity to 
develop ourselves, and the crux is to develop the economy"; "the 
places that can develop should not be blocked from so doing, and 
the places with conditions must try their best to develop 
faster"; "low speed means standstill, or even retrogression"; 
"our country's economic development must try hard to climb to a 
new stage every several years"; "Guangdong must climb to several 
new stages, and try hard to catch up with the four small dragons 
of Asia in 20 years"; "we must pay attention to the stable and 
harmonious development of the economy, but stability and harmony 
are also relative, not absolute, and only development is 
unconditional logic" [fa zhan cai shi ying dao li 4099 1455 2088 
2508 4289 6670 3810 -- usually translated as "development is the 
last word"]. The saying that "development is unconditional 
logic" comes from here. The original remark by Deng Xiaoping 
was "only development is unconditional logic," a total of seven 
characters. When people cite this remark, they omit the word 
"only" for the sake of convenience, so it becomes "development 
is unconditional logic," a total of six characters, and this is 
also the way I say it in this article. For me, the purpose in 
writing this article is to review this portion of the speeches, 
and to ponder the meaning of his remark: "Development is 
unconditional logic." 
  After Jiang Zemin twice cited "development is unconditional 
logic" at the economic work meeting of 10 provinces and regions 
in central, south, and southwest China on 27 September 1993, 
this famous remark by Deng Xiaoping has begun to be cited 
frequently by people over the past three or four months. To my 
knowledge, many articles have been written on this remark, but I 
notice that discussions on it are still inadequate, and 
expositions are not full, thorough, and comprehensive. I myself 
have carried out only a preliminary study of it. I think that 
there is earnest need for our country's academic circles 
(including myself, of course) to deepen our understanding of 
this issue. 
  I think that the argument that "development is unconditional 
logic," which was proposed by Deng Xiaoping, is a philosophical 
principle, as well as a fundamental guideline for the current 
economic work in our country. That is to say, as a 
philosophical principle, it is one that has great guiding 
significance to our country's economic work, and as a guideline 
for economic work, it is one characterized by profound 
philosophical reasoning. 
  Although this remark by Deng Xiaoping was not made during a 
discussion of philosophical topics, what it said was indeed a 
fundamental principle of materialist dialectics. We all know 
that dialectics is about a science of "general development," but 
when Deng Xiaoping phrased it in such a way, it became his 
innovation. Therefore I think that regarding this remark by Deng 
Xiaoping, we must first view it as a philosophical proposition 
when we begin discussing it. 
  Deng Xiaoping's innovation was that he added the word 
"unconditional" in front of "logic." I think the word "logic" 
used here means objective law, which does not change according 
to man's will, as well as a principle that should be 
subjectively followed by the people. The argument that 
"development is unconditional logic," as an objective law that 
does not change according to man's will, means that things 
always develop themselves in an uncompromising manner, and that 
is to say, they cannot be stopped in any case. They can be 
stopped at a certain point of time, but cannot be stopped 
forever. There might be such a historical process: A certain 
force consciously or unconsciously stops the development of 
things. In such times, "development is unconditional logic" 
begins to function, and whoever would block this objective law 
will have his behavior punished by this law, and life will be 
made difficult for people. Things develop eventually and win 
victories. This is what we mean by unconditional when it is 
viewed as an objective law. As a principle to be followed 
subjectively, we mean that we must voluntarily view the 
promotion of development as the highest principle, and let all 
other things obey this principle. The purpose of reform is 
development, the purpose of opening up is development, the 
purpose of running operations and management well is 
development, the purpose of attaching importance to education 
and to science and technology is development, the purpose of 
paying attention to stability and harmony is development, and 
even the purpose of our upholding the basic system of socialism 
is development. 
  Everyone knows that unconditional and conditional are 
"antonyms." Whether it is viewed as an objective law or action 
guideline, when a certain logic is unconditional, it is because 
other logic is conditional. Conditional logic [ruan dao li 6516 
6670 3810] means something less than unconditional logic. 
Conditional logic is still logic, not nonlogic. For example, 
we need sustained, stable, and rapid economic development, so 
stability is a condition here. Of course, the development of a 
country or a region requires concerted efforts by various 
quarters, as well as certain kind of balance, but the argument 
for stability, harmony, and balance must obey the argument for 
development, and we must realize the principle that -- as 
dialectics points out -- balance is relative, imbalance is 
absolute. We must attach importance to balance, for it is the 
opportunity for development. However, we cannot have absolute 
balance during development. We must not expect development 
characterized by absolute balance. If we view absolute balance 
as the guiding principle for work, this will block development. 
That is to say, when balance, harmony, and similar logic are 
overemphasized or stressed unduly, they will block economic 
development. Regarding the relationship between unconditional 
and conditional logic, we should have the following 
understanding: The conditional logic that obeys unconditional 
logic, meaning the conditional logic that conforms to 
unconditional logic -- is real logic, while the conditional 
logic that confronts unconditional logic -- meaning conditional 
logic that does not conform to unconditional logic -- is not 
real logic. 
  We must affirm both unconditional logic and that conditional 
logic which falls into the category of real logic. Which of 
these two should we often discuss and stress? The unconditional 
logic, of course. Therefore Deng Xiaoping stressed that 
"development must not be blocked" and that "low speed even means 
retrogression." This does not mean that we should not talk 
about the conditional logic which falls into the category of 
real logic, but we must refrain from talking to the extent that 
it becomes a logic that no longer falls into the category of 
real logic. By the same token, a conditional logic can change 
from one that is real logic into one which is not real logic. 
It all depends on how far we go in talking about the logic, and 
whether we talk about it appropriately. I think we should 
proceed from using the argument that "development is 
unconditional logic," to examine the situation of discussions on 
conditional logic in real life, and to study whether such 
discussions have surpassed the boundary of real logic. Only 
when we can often carry out examinations of this kind, can we 
truly respect the objective law that "development is 
unconditional logic," and truly do public things according to 
the principle that "development is unconditional logic." 
  There is some conditional logic that sometimes is viewed by 
people as very hard, or as unconditional logic, but it still 
belongs to the category of conditional logic. For example, on 
the problem of the ownership system, "public" has been viewed as 
highly unconditional logic. Before the Third Plenary Session of 
the 11th CPC Central Committee, almost without exception, "one 
big, two public" was considered highly unconditional logic. 
Many people once thought that since we practiced socialism, it 
was righteous to emphasize "public," and therefore "one big, two 
public" was highly unconditional logic and could not be a kind 
of conditional logic. (What I am saying is that it was the 
actual situation in those days, and I am not saying that in that 
time someone actually said "one big, two public is unconditional 
logic." Regarding the term "conditional logic," I do not know 
if I am the first one to use it here.) We also must admit that 
even now, this kind of thinking still functions in the heads of 
some people, and perhaps quite a number of people. Today, some 
people still obstinately view "one big, two public" as 
unconditional logic, and even more people do not understand how 
to view it properly. In fact, even if it is an ownership system 
that suits the productive forces' need for development, it is 
itself a condition for development. It is only a means, and 
development is the end, and as a logic, it cannot be more 
unconditional than development. 
  Of course, the argument that "development is unconditional 
logic," as an objective law that will not change according to 
man's will, will implement itself in an uncompromising way. 
When people try to block it, it will mete out punishment, and 
the force blocking it cannot be more undonditional. The final 
result still will be development. For example, in more than 20 
years before the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, the "one big, two public" logic, as subjective 
guiding thought, once prevailed over the unconditional logic of 
development. During the Cultural Revolution, some people even 
said they "prefer socialist weeds to capitalist seedlings." 
Hence, we were severely punished. The big disaster led to the 
great awakening, which led to great development. As a result, we 
have the reform and opening up since the Third Plenary Session 
of the 11th CPC Central Committee, as well as the great 
development over the past 15 years. As an objective law, 
development, indeed, is unconditional logic. The twists and 
turns in the history of our country tell us that if we do not do 
things according to the subjective guiding principle of 
"development as unconditional logic," then this unconditional 
logic -- as an objective law -- will force us to pay a price 
when it implements itself in an uncompromising manner, and the 
price can even be a heavy one. This situation is one that 
cannot be avoided. Now, however, we have learned serious 
practical lessons over a long period of time, and we have a 
higher awareness. Deng Xiaoping has already summed up things in 
his famous remark that "development is unconditional logic," and 
I think that even if there are some fluctuations, we have reason 
to hope that we no longer have to pay a great price, and to hope 
that our country's economy can develop smoothly. 
  Development must take place in a certain space and at a 
certain point of time. By space we mean region. Different 
regions have different situations, and thus different conditions 
for development. By time we mean a period of time, and different 
periods of time have different situations, and thus different 
opportunities for development. Regarding the space and time for 
development, Deng Xiaoping attached adequate importance to them 
when he said that "development is unconditional logic." When he 
said "grasp the opportunity to develop ourselves," he referred 
to the issue of period; when he said "the places with conditions 
should try their best to develop faster," he referred to the 
issue of region. In China, the current period of time should be 
considered a very good period of time for economic development, 
and the whole of mainland China should be considered the best 
region for economic development. The reform our country is 
carrying out is for the purpose of removing obstacles to 
development and of creating very good systemic conditions. The 
developed countries in the world walk ahead of us in terms of 
economy and culture, so when we adopt the open-door policy, we 
may borrow whatever achievements we want, and this is a very 
good condition for development. With such basic conditions, we 
are completely able to achieve the kind of rapid and long-term 
development that is difficult for other countries and regions to 
achieve. Under these circumstances, I think it is very 
important for us to study and learn from the argument that 
"development is unconditional logic." 

