CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Natalya Lakiza-Sachuk, candidate of economic </F>
sciences, under the rubric "Front-Page Topic"; abbreviated 
version of an article published in the magazine of the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine POLITYKA I CHAS No. 4 and released 
concurrently: "Will We Go the Way of the Dinosaur?"] 
  [Text] The demographic development of Ukraine is one 
of the components of its national security, just like in any 
other state. It is precisely such development that determines 
the quantitative and qualitative parameters of the population, 
its ability to ensure the regular operation of society, the 
preservation of its defense capability at the proper level, and 
the laying of a foundation for further upward movement. 
  In present-day Ukraine, the demographic situation is 
shaped by key factors such as the new geopolitical situation, 
social strains, an economic depression, and a decline in the 
standard of living. 
<H5>  A Group Portrait With a Beggar's Sack </H5>
  An analysis of the current demographic situation, as well as 
its dynamics in recent years indicates that along with economic 
and political problems, Ukraine has come face to face with a 
major demographic crisis. Unlike the economic and political 
crises, the demographic crisis has greater inertia, is lengthier 
in terms of time, and is hard to manage. This may have 
far-reaching unfavorable consequences. 
  Compared to the main indicators of the natural movement of 
the population in the world--levels of the birth rate, death 
rate, and natural increment of the population--Ukraine has 
tended to get increasingly worse rankings. In terms of the level 
of its birth rate (10.8 per 1,000 inhabitants) it ranks last 
among the former republics of the USSR; in terms of the death 
rate of the population (12.3 per 1,000 inhabitants), it ranks 
second among the developed countries of the world; in terms of 
infant mortality (14 percent), it ranks 17th among all countries 
of the world, and on the indicator of the average life 
expectancy of the population, it is 47th in the world. 
  For regular reproduction of the population--in the 
socioeconomic conditions of developed countries, that is--the 
minimally expanded reproduction of the population requires that 
each woman give birth to 2.2-2.4 children in her lifetime. In 
1992, this level in Ukraine came to 1.8 (in the cities, 1.5) 
children. The refraining of families from having the second or 
third child has been observed under the conditions of a lack of 
certainty in the coming day and unfavorable sociopolitical and 
economic prospects. 
  Only the use of family planning measures, to be sure as 
uncivilized as abortions, may be considered to be a progressive 
aspect of this process of restricting births. Abortions have 
consequences so unfavorable as to call into doubt the very 
survival of the people. 
  The number of marriages has dropped recently, and the number 
of divorces has gone up. For the most part, marriages that have 
existed for less than five years are those that are dissolved. 
Every year, more than 150,000 children are left without one of 
the parents as a result of divorces. 
  A reduction in the average size of the family in both urban 
and rural areas has also become a leading tendency in the 
transformation of families in recent decades. 
  In recent years, the absolute and relative indicators of the 
death rate of the population have been steadily growing in 
Ukraine. Compared to 1990, the death rate in 1993 increased by 
15 percent. An increase in elderly individuals in the population 
is a determining factor in this. Their proportion in Ukraine 
came to 21.9 percent in 1992. 
  The so-called "surplus death rate" of men, which has been 
registered in all developed countries in recent decades, has 
greatly influenced the growth of the general death rate 
coefficient. 
  In the 1970's and 1980's, a stable downward trend in deaths 
due to diseases of the cardiovascular system, the respiratory 
organs, stomach ulcers, and liver diseases was registered in 
Ukraine, whereas in the first half of 1993, compared to the same 
period of 1992, we can find a growth in the number of deaths for 
almost all of the reasons. In all of this, for example, the 
growth in deaths from infectious and parasitic diseases is in 
itself shameful for a civilized country. The death rate from 
tuberculosis, which is on the rise in Ukraine, exceeds 
corresponding levels, for example, in neighboring Poland, by two 
to nine times. 
  Among the reasons for the growth of the death rate that are 
relatively new for the population of Ukraine, the reasons that 
dominate, to our mind, are due to factors of social strains. The 
number of persons killed increased in 1992 compared to 1991 (by 
28 percent), as well as the number of persons who died of 
alcohol poisoning (by 21 percent) and suicides (by 10 percent). 
  The dying-off of the most vulnerable groups of the 
population--the elderly, women, and children--is on the rise. 
  The health of the population is one of the prerequisites for 
shaping the level, structure, and quality of the reproduction of 
the population. A paradoxical picture has emerged in the course 
of researching changes in this factor. As a result of 
improvements in the prevention and treatment of disease, as well 
as the accomplishments in reducing the death rate of the 
population, the proportion of chronic and degenerative diseases 
has increased, which on the whole worsened the general health 
condition of the population. 
  The total incidence of disease in Ukraine is one of the 
highest among the republics of the former Soviet Union, and so 
is the incidence of social diseases. Thus, Ukraine ranks second 
in the above group of countries in terms of the prevalence of 
alcoholism and drug addiction. The abuse of tobacco products 
also gives rise to concern. 
<H5>  Attention: The Genetic Pool! </H5>
  Losses to the genetic pool of the population of Ukraine are 
a 
factor in the deterioration of the base for the subsequent 
reproduction of the population. Negative changes in the genetic 
pool are becoming more conspicuous, which may result in the 
qualitative degeneration of the Ukrainian people. The genocide 
of the Ukrainian people in Soviet times was manifested in the 
planned destruction of the best educated and professionally 
trained segment of the population of Ukraine, its intelligentsia 
and rural working people, in the course of political repression 
in the 1930's-1950's and the famines of the 1920's and 1930's. 
The great loss of the population during World War II, as well as 
the organized resettlement of Ukrainians, dealt appreciable 
blows. At present, we are witnessing a "brain drain" to foreign 
countries. All of this has harmed, and continues to harm the 
Ukrainian nation, in many cases irreparably. 
  An analysis of the current situation indicates the 
following: 
In conjunction with the deterioration of the external social and 
natural environment, individuals whose physical health is good 
retain the real ability to survive and leave behind their 
progeny. Therefore, the factor of physical development is coming 
to prevail over intellectual development. 
  Data on a trend toward considerable deterioration in the 
health of present-day children and adolescents is an indirect 
qualitative confirmation of this hypothesis (since no statistics 
on genetic diseases are collected in Ukraine). When coming to 
school, only one in eight to 10 children is healthy, and when 
graduating from school--only one in 20. Therefore, we can 
already assume at present what qualitative characteristics they 
are going to pass on to their children. 
  In addition, the technologically induced global pollution of 
the atmosphere, soil, and water in most oblasts of Ukraine has 
been causing frequent mutation damage to genes that, in the long 
term, tends to grow exponentially. 
  Unfortunately, the Chernobyl disaster has had considerable 
influence on the deterioration of the current demographic 
situation and prospects for the reproduction of the population 
of Ukraine. As a result of the accident, the course of 
demographic processes has been disrupted, and the manifestation 
of unfavorable tendencies in these processes accelerated. On the 
whole, 1.5 million residents of Ukraine, including over 90,000 
children, were among individuals afflicted by the Chernobyl 
disaster as of the end of 1992. 
  State programs for the resettlement of residents from the 
territories contaminated as a result of the accident are not 
being carried out. The number of resettled persons has barely 
exceeded 10 percent of the planned number. 
<H5>  "Harmony" of Poverty and Richness </H5>
  The speed with which a majority of the citizens of Ukraine 
are being reduced to poverty and the reality of prospects for 
mass unemployment against the background of decay in the system 
of social protection may cause powerful explosions of popular 
discontent. 
  Such problems give grounds for concern about prospects for 
the development of the entire multinational population residing 
in the territory of Ukraine. However, problems of the existence 
and reproduction of the titular population of the state, the 
Ukrainians, cause particular concern. 
  For a long time, the number of residents of Ukraine who were 
registered by census as Ukrainians was artificially reduced, 
whereas the number of individuals of non-Ukrainian nationality 
increased. Being of Ukrainian ancestry of long duration, a 
majority of those who called themselves Russians at census time 
did so under the pressure of existing social circumstances, in 
order to accommodate public opinion afflicted with chauvinism. 
Thus, between the last censuses of 1970 and 1989, the proportion 
of Ukrainians fell by 2.5 percent, and the proportion of those 
calling themselves Russians increased by almost 3 percent. 
  Simultaneously with a decrease in the number of individuals 
who identified themselves as Ukrainians, a decrease occurred in 
the proportion of the population that called Ukrainian its 
native language. Meanwhile, as is known, language affiliation 
shapes many aspects of ethnic mentality. 
  In this manner, objective conditions for the existence of 
the 
Ukrainian population were eliminated, and the sphere of its 
national self-awareness and self-reproduction was artificially 
restricted. 
  While a shortage of highly skilled cadres in Ukraine is 
comprehensive, a particular shortage of specialist-Ukrainians is 
felt. Of each 1,000 Jews, 358 have a college education, 
Russians--158, and Ukrainians--only 85, that is, two to four 
times fewer. This gap is particularly apparent in rural areas 
where it comes to a factor of six. At the same time, the poor 
representation of Ukrainians in spheres that are associated with 
intellectual work and their considerable preponderance in areas 
where manual work is needed are noteworthy in the course of the 
analysis of spheres of activity. 
<H5>  Demography and Security </H5>
  As we analyze the current status and prospects for the 
development of the ethnic breakdown of the population of 
Ukraine, it is necessary to stress that various ethnic groups 
reproduce their numbers in different ways--they have different 
natality, mortality, life expectancy indicators, and so on. This 
may influence substantially the strength of particular ethnic 
groups in the country and mutual relations between them. Thus, 
current statistics indicate higher birth rate indicators among 
the Russian and Moldovan population than among the Ukrainians 
and the particular preponderance of reproductive indicators of 
the representatives of Caucasian and Central Asian countries 
(former republics of the USSR) whose migration to Ukraine has 
been extremely intensive recently. 
  The influx to Ukraine of individuals of nonindigenous ethnic 
groups holding radically different religious, ethnic, and 
ethical views has intensified, which increases the likelihood of 
the development of additional social strains. Historic justice 
is being restored with regard to the nations subjected to 
reprisals that previously resided in the territory of Ukraine 
itself: The Crimean Tatars, the Krymchaks, and so on are 
returning to the locations of their permanent residence. In 
conjunction with this, open or hidden confrontations between the 
local and newly arriving populations may develop at the 
locations to which these nations return, as well as in locations 
densely settled by refugees and forced migrants. 
  At the same time, manifestations of the ethnic 
self-awareness 
of Ukrainians are perceived by a certain segment of the 
representatives of non-Ukrainian nationalities as a chauvinistic 
and nationalistic position. In particular, this is the case with 
the language. However, these attacks are groundless. We can 
state that, say, Russians always had a greater number of schools 
with instruction in the Russian language and Russian-language 
printed publications. 
  The revival of national culture and religion is underway 
among the rest of the national minorities. Under the 
circumstances, the issue of the revival and development of the 
Ukrainian ethnic entity that accounts for three-quarters of the 
entire population should also become one of the leading 
directions of the state ethnic policy of Ukraine. 
  The consequences of the demographic crisis that Ukraine is 
now going through are far-reaching and diverse in nature. The 
quantity and quality of the ethnic Ukrainian population suffers 
losses that in combination affect the overall prospects for the 
stable and secure development of the state. 
  As the developmental experience of some countries indicates, 
the implementation of a particular demographic policy can bring 
to power or topple governments, divide societies, and serve as 
an indicator of the development of democracy in them. Therefore, 
it becomes necessary to distinguish and thoroughly study a 
special block of demographic factors and processes of the stable 
and secure development of the country. 
  In the environment of independent development, the 
aforementioned signs of a demographic crisis that is mounting in 
our country give grounds to state that survival at any price, 
including in the demographic sense, rather than development is 
the main national interest on which the strategy and tactics of 
the policy of national security of Ukraine should draw. After 
all, without the preservation and survival of the Ukrainian 
nation, of which the national population is the nucleus, it will 
become impossible to build the Ukrainian state, and ensuring its 
national security will have no future. 

