SUMMARY 
                               The Japanese Government appears to have responded to a variety of 
tough signals from the United States over the past few weeks, 
including the visit of Treasury Secretary Bentsen, by digging in 
its heels on key issues in the Japan-U.S. framework talks, 
especially the setting of objective criteria.  Japanese business 
groups are pressuring Tokyo to maintain this hard line, and the 
Japanese media have generally supported the government's 
negotiating posture on the issue of objective criteria.  In view 
of the continued stalemate in the talks, some members of the 
Japanese bureaucracy may hope to take advantage of the political 
confusion following the defeat of the political reform bill in 
the upper house of the Diet to delay concluding the negotiations 
beyond the original deadline of the Il February summit between 
President Clinton and Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa. 
                         END SUMMARY 

   Japanese political leaders appear to have responded to a recent 
series of comments by U.S. officials, including Undersecretary of 
State Joan Spero, criticizing Japan's hard-line stance in the 
framework talks by signaling that they fully back the negotiating 
strategy for the talks formulated by the Japanese bureaucracy. 
   -- Prime Minister Hosokawa appeared to signal his support for the 
hard-line strategy when he reportedly told a group of key 
Japanese business leaders on 12 January that he would tell 
President Clinton during their upcoming summit that he "could not 
accept" numerical targets to measure Japanese import performance 
"for the private sector."  According to 12 January Kyodo and 13 
January Asahi Shimbun reports, the prime minister also indicated 
that he would appeal to GATT if the United States imposes 
sanctions on Japan. 
   -- Similarly, on 18 January, Minister of International Trade and 
Industry Hiroshi Kumagai reportedly defended the stance taken at 
the talks by bureaucrats in his ministry, denying that they were 
"impeding the negotiations" as charged by U.S. officials (Kyodo, 
18 January).  In an interview in the 23 January Asahi Shimbun, 
Kumagai also firmly signaled his support for the current Japanese 
negotiating strategy, stating that Japan "cannot accept numerical 
targets."  He also categorically denied any difference of opinion 
between himself and the bureaucracy on framework strategy, 
commenting that "if the United States thinks that there are 
differences in views between myself and my administrative staff, 
then that is a misunderstanding." 

   Members of the Japanese bureaucracy also appear to have dug in 
their heels further in response to the U.S. comments.  According 
to a 20 January Kyodo report, an unnamed senior Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs (MOFA) official described reported U.S. criticism 
of Japanese bureaucrats as "improper" and warned that it would 
"serve only as a negative factor in the talks."  Some Japanese 
press reporting also suggests that elements of the bureaucracy 
may be seeking to circumvent parts of the U.S. Government that 
they perceive to be inflexible by appealing to others they 
believe may be more sympathetic to Japan's  position.  For 
example, the 16 January Nihon Keizai Shimbun reported that 
Japanese government officials, frustrated by the tough stance of 
the U.S. Trade Representative's office in the framework 
negotiations, were trying to contact the head of the National 
Economic Council, Robert E. Rubin.  According to the paper, 
Japanese officials believe Mr. Rubin is less wedded to the 
concept of imposing objective criteria to measure Japan's trade 
performance than USTR. 
   Reaction to Bentsen Visit 
   While official Japanese Government reaction to Secretary 
Bentsen's 23 January visit has so far been limited, those 
officials who have been observed to comment on the Secretary's 
remarks have responded negatively.  According to a 24 January 
Kyodo report, Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata described the 
Secretary's warning that the United States might have to 
reexamine the framework talks if a satisfactory agreement is not 
reached before 11 February as having been "premature." 
Similarly, Kyodo also reported that Vice Foreign Minister 
Kunihiko Saito characterized the Secretary's comments as 
"untimely" and "unconstructive" because the talks are still in 
progress. 

   Pressure from Private Sector 
   One source of pressure on Tokyo to continue to take a hard line 
in the talks appears to be the continued opposition of Japanese 
business to objective criteria.  Over the past week, a number of 
organizations have been reported to have issued or be planning to 
issue public statements opposing objective criteria and other 
U.S. trade practices. 
   -- According to the 19 January Mainichi Shimbun, on 18 January 
the Communications Industry Association of Japan (CIAJ)--an 
organization made up of communications equipment manufacturers- 
-submitted statements on the framework talks to MITI and the 
Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications calling on the 
government to oppose the establishment of objective criteria in 
the telecommunications field.  The statements also reportedly 
pressed the government not to give in to U.S. demands that 
equipment purchased by Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) be 
covered in the framework talks. 
   -- According to a 2O January Kyodo report, the Marine and Fire 
Insurance Association of Japan issued a statement opposing the 
use of objective criteria to measure the openness of the Japanese 
insurance market, warning that even if the Japanese Government 
agrees to them, "they cannot be attained." 
   -- Similarly, on 2O January, Yutaka Kume, Chairman of the Japan 
Automobile Manufacturers Association (JAMA), reportedly told news 
organizations that he was opposed to any settlement of the 
automobile and auto parts sector of the framework talks that 
involved setting voluntary targets for imports by Japanese 
industry.  According to a 2O January Kyodo report, Kume 
reportedly warned that the United States might interpret such 
targets as firm commitments, as he claimed it did with targets 
for purchases of U.S.-made auto parts set during former President 
Bush's trip to Tokyo in January 1992. 

   -- According to the 25 January Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Japan's 
leading business organization, the Keidanren, is drawing up plans 
to issue a statement calling on U.S. and European governments to 
prevent the emergence of protectionism and avoid the use of 
sanctions in trade disputes.  According to the paper, Keidanren's 
move has been prompted in part by concerns that the United States 
may revive the use of the Super 301 provision of the 1988 Omnibus 
Trade Act. 
   Press View of Talks 
   There also appears to be little significant pressure from the 
media for Japan to take a more flexible stance on some of the key 
sticking points in the talks, especially objective criteria. 
Newspaper editorials published both before and after Secretary 
Bentsen's visit to Tokyo strongly supported the Japanese 
Government in its opposition to objective criteria.   For 
example, an editorial in the 17 January edition of the business- 
oriented Nihon Keizai Shimbun criticized the U.S. demand for 
setting objective criteria, claiming that it was opposed by "all 
major U.S. economists."  The paper called on the Washington to 
focus more on "long-term" than "immediate" results.  A 26 January 
editorial in the same paper warned that President Clinton's 
emphasis on "trade results" might "undermine the relations of the 
G-2 (Japan and the United States)."  Similarly, the 25 January 
Yomiuri Shimbun supported the Japanese Government's position on 
objective criteria, commenting that the setting of targets "is a 
matter to be judged independently by enterprises.  Governments 
should not interfere in the matter."  Like Nihon Keizai Shimbun, 
Yomiuri Shimbun also cited the opposition of leading U.S. 
economists to the concept of targets. 

   Media commentary relating to the talks has not been totally 
hostile to U.S. objectives in the talks, however.  Most 
editorials have urged the Japanese Government to take steps to 
open Japanese markets and to take measures to stimulate the 
Japanese economy.   The 17 January Nihon Keizai Shimbun editorial 
called on the government not to "just keep saying 'no"' and "come 
up with concrete proposals to open markets which will not lead to 
managed trade."  The 26 January editorial in the same paper 
called on the government to present the U.S. with "concrete steps 
to open the Japanese market in individual sectors" and to 
"speedily undertake stimulus measures centering on income tax 
reductions to pull Japan out of its prolonged recession," which 
would, it argued, help reduce Japan's current account surplus. 
The 25 January Yomiuri Shimbun editorial called on the government 
to "avert a showdown" between Japan and the United States by 
quickly passing economic stimulus measures and adopting a 
"transparent tender system" for both public works projects and 
government procurement. 
   Impact of Political Confusion 
   Some Japanese bureaucrats involved in the framework talks may be 
hoping to use the political confusion following the defeat of the 
political reform bill in the upper house of the Diet to delay any 
concessions in the framework talks.  Even before the defeat of 
the political reform bill, there appear to have been voices 
within the bureaucracy calling for postponement of the final 
agreement in the talks as a means of gaining leverage against the 
United States.  The 19 January Mainichi Shimbun, for example, 
quoted an unnamed senior MITI official as warning that a final 
accord might have to be postponed until the G-7 Summit if the 
United States refused to concede on the issue of objective 
criteria.  The 24 January edition of the same paper reported that 
some officials in MITI and JAMA are urging that the negotiations 
be extended until July because the United States has shown no 
indication of making concessions.  On 25 January, Mainichi 
Shimbun also reported that in the wake of the defeat of the 
political reform bill, many Japanese Government officials favored 
delaying the summit between President Clinton and Prime Minister 
Hosokawa--and hence, the conclusion of the trade talks.  The 
paper quoted an unnamed senior MITI official as arguing that with 
the government in turmoil and seemingly unable to draw up 
economic stimulus measures, the summit would become 
meaningless . 

   Outlook 
   The preoccupation of the Japanese Government with the fate of the 
political reform bill and the survival of Prime Minister 
Hosokawa's cabinet will almost certainly prevent senior political 
leaders from devoting much attention to framework talks.  If a 
revised political reform bill fails to pass the Diet by the end 
of the current session on 29 January, the political situation is 
likely to become even more fluid, and the prospects for 
involvement of political leaders in the framework talks even less 
likely.  This will leave the formulation of policy toward the 
talks firmly in the hands of various ministry officials who favor 
a hard-line approach.  Any concessions offered are therefore 
likely to be largely cosmetic in nature, designed to provide a 
face-saving way of concluding the negotiations by the 11 February 
deadline. 
   (AUTHOR:  BOUNDS.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
ASIA DIVISION ANALYSIS TEAM, (7O3)-733-6534.) 
EAG/BIETZ/ch 27/0224z Jan 

