BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Dr. Klaus Zeitler: "The Republikaners' 10 </F>
Political Commandments"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  First Commandment: Enough of the Debt Economy! </H5>
  No more tax increases on wages and salaries! Only stringent 
economies, the abolition of subsidies, drastic reductions in 
assistance to foreign countries and to asylum-seekers and 
economic refugees whose status has not been recognized as well 
as in assistance to the over 2 million foreign recipients of 
unemployment and social benefits will help in this respect! 
<H5>  Second Commandment: The State as a Self-Service Shop Is No </H5>
Longer Affordable! 
  There are over 400 ministers, state secretaries, minister 
presidents, as well as 3,000 deputies at the European, federal, 
and 16 laender levels. That is too many. The decay starts at 
the top; that is why economies have to be introduced at the top 
first. The sinfully expensive EU [European Union] bureaucracy 
must be trimmed. The Bundestag and the laender parliaments must 
be reduced in size, the number of laender must be reduced from 
16 to 10, and the number of deputies and ministers must be 
reduced by a third. 
<H5>  Third Commandment: The Immediate Adoption of an </H5>
Anticorruption Law! 
  All instances of bribe taking and other forms of abuse of 
office for personal gain on the part of members of federal and 
laender governments and deputies must be punishable to the same 
extent as in the case of public servants. There should be no 
guarantees of future jobs for politicians who neglect their 
duties. 
<H5>  Fourth Commandment: The State Should Set a Good Example </H5>
  In the wake of mass layoffs, drastic economies in the 
government apparatus at the federal and laender levels are 
overdue. With the transfer to Berlin, it should be possible to 
close down as many as four ministries, merge many federal 
agencies, and making considerable personnel savings. 
  Following the example of Baden-Wuerttemberg, the salaries 
paid to Landtag deputies could be greatly reduced in all the 
laender by abolishing the full-time status of deputies. Landtag 
membership on a part-time basis would save money as early 
retirement benefits would be lower and it would also ensure that 
deputies are more independent and have more varied experience. 
<H5>  Fifth Commandment: All Savings Should Be Used To Combat </H5>
Crime and Create Jobs! 
  Rationalization and savings on superfluous bureaucracy and 
savings of at least 10 percent over a parliamentary term of 
office to reduce debt following the example of the U.S. 
Government are feasible. This requires a cost-benefit analysis 
of every job and of superfluous subsidies. 
  State services must be contracted to private companies to a 
greater degree, economic criteria should be applied to budgets 
based on personal responsibility and oriented toward success 
instead of state-controlled bookkeeping. 
  The money saved in this way should be used to create jobs 
for 
German employees and combat crime. 
<H5>  Sixth Commandment: More Justice in the Economy and the </H5>
Distribution of Wealth! 
  What is needed instead of unjust capitalism and inefficient 
eastern socialism is a more democratic economy in which 
employees are participants through investment wages and joint 
ownership of assets. Five percent of all Germans own 90 percent 
of productive capital. According to the Protestant Church's 
memorandum "Common Welfare and Personal Profit", 2 percent of 
Germany's top wage earners own as much as the remaining 98 
percent of the population. That is unjust! That is why we need 
new ways in which workers can acquire economic and investment 
assets. 
<H5>  Seventh Commandment: Commbating Mass Unemployment! </H5>
  The problem of mass unemployment cannot be separated from 
the 
issue of mass immigration. The uncontrolled influx of over 2.5 
million foreigners from outside the EU has created competitive 
pressures on the German labor market at the expense of the 
German employee. 
  That is why the there must be an immediate stop to the 
employment of foreigners from East Europe at low wage rates that 
are socially unacceptable. 
  Foreign employees from outside the EU who have come to 
Germany since 1989 (the opening of the Berlin Wall) and have 
been receiving unemployment benefit/support or social assistance 
for over a year should be immediately sent back to their home 
countries! For humanitarian reasons, on their return, they 
could receive reintegration assistance, paid for by Germany, 
over a limited period of time, and that would then be deducted 
from development aid. 
  According to the Republikaner work ethic, there is no work 
that is fundamentally unacceptable. The abuse of unemployment 
and social assistance should be countered with incentives, 
community work in return for appropriate compensation. 
<H5>  Eighth Commandment: Germany's Future as a Center for </H5>
Business and Employment Must Be Ensured! 
  Free world trade cannot be pursued at the expense of German 
labor! That is why German companies along with their employees 
must develop new technical processes and competitive products 
for the world market. 
  This is the only in which Germany's future as a center of 
employment can be secured! Any form of social and ecological 
dumping at the expense of German employees in the form of 
imports from third countries with starvation wages and child 
labor is to be stopped using measures imposed by the state. 
  Pressure for lower wages through the manipulation of 
exchange 
rates in Asia, the East Bloc, and restricted access to markets 
in the United States, Japan, and third countries must be 
consistently fought. 
  German jobs must be protected through compensatory payments, 
export and import assistance, and antidumping measures so that 
world trade is not hampered by impermissible restrictions on 
trade. 
<H5>  Ninth Commandment: There Has To Be a Stop to the Ecological </H5>
Destruction of Our Environment 
  To reduce the growing threat to our lives from environmental 
damage, a transition to a socioecological economy is essential. 
In this regard, free market procedures to promote environmental 
protection, combined with tax incentives, are more effective 
than costly, bureaucratic intervention, which also involves 
imposing a further tax burden on citizens. 
  Short-term economic interests do not justify environmentally 
harmful intervention with respect to private property. The 
basis for responsibility under environmental legislation is the 
principle of payment by the polluter. 
<H5>  Tenth Commandment: "He Who Does Not Uphold His Right as a </H5>
German Relinquishes That Right" 
  The Republikaner actively support the fundamental principles 
of liberal democracy. 
  As German patriots, we support the German nation. We want a 
Europe of diversity, not one of Brussels uniformity. We 
consider the right of peoples to self-determination to be 
inalienable, we do not want a multicultural society, but a 
German nation that can freely determine foreign and domestic 
conditions, which is what the sovereign German people want. 

