CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sirje Niitra: "Agricultural Exports To Russia </F>
Coming to a Stop"] 
  [Text] 
  Due to the fact that, as of March 15, Russia imposed 
customs tariffs on the three Baltic states that are considerably 
higher than those for all other European countries, the export 
of agricultural products to Russia has come to a virtual halt, 
as producers and processors of these products are looking for a 
way out. 
  Gathered for a meeting at the Ministry of Agriculture 
yesterday were representatives of district governments, the 
Farmers' Union, producers associations, meat and dairy 
industries, and other persons linked to the export of 
agricultural products, to discuss the situation that has emerged 
and to come up with measures for overcoming it. 
<H5>  Scattering of Producers Hampers Trade </H5>
  Agriculture Minister Jaan Leetsar said that, considering the 
conditions imposed on us by Russia, producers of agricultural 
products must orient themselves, more than ever before, to the 
Western market where fluctuations are never that steep. 
  "There are enough foreign companies willing to make 
long-term 
agreements, but it is the scattering of producers that holds 
things back, making it difficult to come up with a decent volume 
for such an agreement," the minister said. He complained that 
Estonia's market is not too well supplied with domestic butter, 
milk or meat, and that the situation has deteriorated since the 
beginning of the year. 
  Mati Rillo, executive director of the Rakvere meat packing 
plant, saw things in a less negative light. He said that the 
plant has marketed most of its production in Estonia, and that 
its export portion is very small. "Making things worse, however, 
is the fact that price increases for animal supplies and hence 
also, the cost of production, coincided with the increase in 
customs tariffs," the director remarked. The only way out, as 
seen by Rillo, would be reducing customs fees by means of 
international negotiations, and forming a uniform exporting 
organization. 
  Same was offered by Lembit Kivisild, director of the Tallinn 
meat packing plant, who further opined that the relative share 
of Baltic states on the Russian market is too small to have an 
effect on the prices there. "Nevertheless, Russia's market is 
important to us, and we have to deal with it. At this time, I 
cannot see a team capable of forming an exporting organization," 
Kivisild explained. In his estimation, the price of Estonian 
pork is too high for the Western market, and would have to be 
reduced. 
<H5>  Butter Exports Hampered By Estonian Laws </H5>
  Speaking of difficulties relating to the export of butter 
Tarmo Teder, director of Tartu's Refrigeration Plant, said that 
a hampering effect comes from Estonia's own laws. Thus, the 
plant could send out the production of several dairy processors, 
but cannot buy it up because of the sales tax. "We simply do not 
have the money for sales tax--seven to nine million--to tie up 
for a month-and-a-half, even though the taxation office would 
reimburse it later," Teder explained. 
  Udo Puust, director of Tallinn's Refrigeration Plant, 
demanded that import tariffs be levelled on food items being 
imported that are filling up the plant right now. Thus, he 
thought, that cutting out imported ice cream, for example, would 
immediately increase the consumption of milk and cream. In the 
near future, he added, a large quantity of butter will be going 
to Kazakhstan from the Tallinn Refrigeration Plant. 

