BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Release"] </F>
  [Text] Visiting Sweden's Prime Minister Carl Bildt on 
Wednesday pledged aid to nuclear fuel removal from a former 
Soviet nuclear training base at Paldiski in north west Estonia 
saying obstacles to be passed in order to start with the process 
were of political, not technical nature. 
  "We have some possibilities of helping," Bild told the press 
after visiting the reactors together with his Estonian 
counterpart. Bildt said that prospective aid included both 
technical and social assistance referring to aid to residents 
who might want to leave Paldiski. He did not, however, specify 
the amount of resources Sweden was willing to allocate for that 
purpose. 
  Estonian Prime Minister Mart Laar also said that technically 
everything was ready for the removal and Russia only had to pass 
a decision on starting dismantling of the reactors. 
  "Technically, everything is ready and we could see that with 
our own eyes," Laar said while adding that the date remained 
uncertain as even the head of the Russian training centre in 
Paldiski, Admiral Aleksandr Olkhovikov, could not tell the exact 
date. 
  Bildt expressed hope that dismantling would be started 
within 
a couple of weeks adding that, fortunately, his fears on high 
radiation near to reactors had proved groundless. 
  On answering the question on Russian military pensioners, 
the 
issue where Latvia made concessions to Russia, Bildt said he had 
discussed it at his meeting with Russian Foreign Minister Andrey 
Kozyrev in St. Petersburg in early May saying Latvia and 
Estonia were completely different and that Estonia could not 
copy Latvia. 
  "... any agreement that must be reached must be reached 
within the framework of Estonian legislation," Bild said. 
  Talking on prospective troop pullout, Bildt said: "That will 
be a very important day to Europe, because the Russians will be 
leaving Germany, they will be leaving Latvia and, of course, 
they must leave Estonia as well." 
  Bildt also met President Lennart Meri expressing his 
country's support to unconditional troop pullout by August 31 
deadline. Foreign Minister Juri Luik also attended the meeting. 

