Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] About 80 miles east of central Tokyo, there is a 
research and testing facility for radio wave and light wave 
equipment called the Iioka No. 2 Branch Institute. The town 
where the institute is located, Iioka, is the setting for the 
story ``Tenpo Suiko Ten'' and is also known as the birthplace of 
Sukegoro Iioka. The town, which adjoins Choshi City (Chiba 
Prefecture) in the west, and faces the Pacific Ocean in the 
southeast, is sometimes called the ``Pacific Straits of Dover'' 
because of the scenic beauty of Osakabe Point. 
  The Iioka branch was opened in December 1964. At that time, 
it was being looked upon as one of the possible sites for doing 
research on VHF long-range radar. This site was especially 
chosen from among a number of other sites throughout Japan that 
were also being considered. It was deemed to be the best place 
to do research and testing on radio wave propagation because 
there were no obstructions around such as mountains to block 
radio wave transmission, and also because the coast was nearby 
and afforded good visibility. 
  Organizationally, it was started as the first research 
institute and at the time had a research lab (1st) called the 
Radio Physics Research Lab that was mainly charged with testing 
and research on radio materials. Subsequently, in July 1987, 
with the reorganization of the TRDI, this facility became the 
new second research institute called the Optical and Electronic 
Research Institute, and the name of the research lab was changed 
to the Electromagnetic Characteristics Research Lab. It has a 
small but elite staff made up of eight researchers and four 
administrative personnel (FY93). 
  The research being done here mainly has to do with 
reflection, radiation, and propagation characteristics of radio 
waves and optical waves. In 1993, the research projects included: 
  (1) Research on shortwave band characteristics 
  (2) Research on milliwave band characteristics 
  (3) Research on microwave band scattering characteristics 
  (4) Research on light wave band characteristics 
  Other research projects in which it had cooperation in 
testing from other departments included: 
  (1) Imaging radar 
  (2) Laser focusing test equipment 
  The research being done at the Iioka branch can be 
categorized under one of the following four major areas, namely, 
shortwave band characteristics, microwave band characteristics, 
light wave band characteristics, and milliwave band 
characteristics. 
  The research on shortwave band characteristics employs the 
property of short waves for propagation along the surface of the 
ocean. The results of this research should find applications in 
the radio equipment used aboard ships of the future. 
  The research on microwave band characteristics involves 
trying to perfect an accurate way of measuring radar cross 
sections (RCS) which are becoming increasingly important in the 
work being done to make planes and ships more stealthy. In 
conventional RCS measurement, a 1:1 monostatic system was used 
in which the transmitter and receiver were together, but this is 
being changed to a bistatic system in which the receiver is 
installed at some distance from the transmitter for purposes of 
stealth. As part of that research, an experiment is being 
conducted with a device that measures the properties of 
microwave reflection. In this experiment, reflection data is 
gathered while the angle of a mock-up stealth missile is changed. 
  With respect to research on milliwave band characteristics, 
milliwaves holds a lot of promise in the area of defense 
communication, so scientists have selected three frequencies, 
namely, 30 GHz, 60 GHz, and 90 GHz, and are trying to gather 
data pertaining to the damping characteristics of various 
atmospheric phenomena in order to further add to the amount of 
basic data already available on reflection and propagation 
characteristics. The research also involves prototyping a new 
device for assessing milliwave reflection and radiation 
measurements. Using two towers inside the center, scientists are 
testing transmission and reception. 
  However, when we look at these tests, we find that it may be 
true that measuring milliwaves is a time-consuming job because 
as Mr. Takefuji, the director of the center, has said, ``it 
takes a very long time because data cannot be gathered on 
milliwave propagation unless it rains,'' and the chance of rain 
during the year is only 10%-20%. 
  In the research on light wave band characteristics, 
scientists have found that the characteristics of a laser beam 
deteriorates when the laser beam passes through the atmosphere, 
that is, it is affected by atmospheric fluctuations, so the aim 
of this research is to gather data on atmospheric propagation 
characteristics with regards to laser beams, and perfect a 
technique for reducing the effect that atmospheric fluctuations 
have on laser beam propagation. 
  When we look at present growth of electronic-related 
technologies, it is not just the radio wave band technologies 
but also the light wave band technologies that stand out, so the 
future is looking brighter and brighter for TRDI's advanced 
technology manufacturers. (23 June 1993) 

