BFN 

  [Text] Alarming rumors are spreading throughout the 
Crepublic faster than radiation. Namely, radiation is the 
reason for civil unrest. Therefore, our correspondent Anatol 
Awcharenka has phoned the Halowhydramet [State 
Hydrometeorological Committee]. [begin recording] 
  Awcharenka: Good day, Ivan Ivanavich 
[Matveyenka]! The Studio of Information Programs of the 
republican radio has resolved to address you to get the most 
competent information, since you are the head of the Republican 
Center for Radiation Control and Environmental Monitoring. The 
point is that our studio has received hundreds of telephone 
calls this morning -- perhaps, you have received them, too -- 
asking what has happened at the Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant. 
Is there some emergency situation? 
  Matveyenka, in Russian: We also have received such 
calls. The Halowhydramet is monitoring the radiation level 
continually throughout the entire territory of the Republic. 
Measurements of the gamma irradiation rate are being taken at 
53 control points everyday. In the 100-kilometer zone of the 
nuclear power stations, located on the territory of Belarus, 
measurements are being taken every three hours. There are no 
changes in the radiation level in the entire Republic. 
  Awcharenka: Have you phoned the Ignalina Nuclear 
Power Plant? 
  Matveyenka: We phoned the Ignalina plant as early 
as yesterday. The radiation level around the nuclear plant is 
normal. The nuclear plant has not been in operation for about a 
month now. However, civil unrest has apparently risen due to the 
fact that the Staff of Civilian Defense... 
  Awcharenka, interrupting: Republican Staff? 
  Matveyenka:... the Oblast Staff of the Civilian 
Defense conducted exercises in Myadel Rayon and has determined 
in exercise conditions [dal vvodnyye] that the radiation level 
at Naroch [river] is above normal. 
  Awcharenka: And hence the panic among our 
population? 
  Matveyenka: Yes, well, the Staff of Civilian 
Defense perfected the actions of these organizations for iodine 
preventative treatment [pauses]... the actions of those bodies 
concerned with these questions. Therefore, such a panic arouse. 
Such a panic, an alarm, arises frequently. However, 
fortunately, all this does not correspond to the existing rumors. 
  Awcharenka: Apparently, Ivan Ivanavich, this has 
happened because these exercises were not planned [pauses]... 
  Matveyenka: Absolutely right. These exercises 
were not planned. However, they cannot be planned beforehand. 
If all these exercises are announced beforehand, then they will 
not be exercises. Therefore, all these questions [pauses]... 
apparently, the radio should give information about the holding 
of such exercises, in all the services. 
  Awcharenka: Ivan Ivanavich, we have been informed 
by our listeners, who phoned in the morning, that children are 
not allowed to go to kindergartens, that schools changed their 
schedules -- the school summer holidays will begin earlier. 
What can you say about that? 
  Matveyenka: I want to [word indistinct] assure 
them that the radiation level is normal in the entire territory 
of the Republic. I have information before me on the computer 
that at 0900 [0600 GMT] this morning there were 14 
microroentgens per hour in Minsk... 
  Awcharenka, interrupting: Let us review the norm. 
  Matveyenka: Naturally. Before the Chernobyl 
events, the gamma irradiation rate on the territory was 10-20 
(?microroentgens) per hour. Therefore, everything is within the 
normal limits. And, throughout the territory of Belarus, I can 
read [pauses]... in the region of Braslav -- 11 microroentgens, 
in Slutsk -- 16 microroentgens, in Marina Gorka -- 11 
microroentgen. Everything is within the normal limits. 
  Awcharenka: Thank you for such competent 
information. I will remind our listeners that we have phoned 
Ivan Ivanavich Matveyenka, head of the Republican Center of 
Radiation Control and Environmental Monitoring. [end recording] 

