BFN 

  [Excerpt] We are going to repeat the communique sent to 
YSKL by the Salvadoran Revolutionary Front [FRS], which has 
issued death threats against former guerrilla commanders Ana 
Guadalupe Martinez, Joaquin Villalobos, and Eduardo Sancho. We 
will read the text of the communique and then we will have the 
reaction of former guerrilla commander Joaquin Villalobos about 
the FRS death threats. 
  This is the text of the communique: In view of the FMLN 
[Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front] actions in the 
Legislative Assembly, the FRS states: 
  1. The attitude of the deputies of the ERP [Peoples 
Revitalizing Expression] and the National Resistance in selling 
out to ARENA [Nationalist Republican Alliance] in the first vote 
in the Legislative Assembly is a dishonorable action of high 
treason. 
  2. We praise the truly revolutionary attitude of the 
Communist Party, the Revolutionary Party of Central American 
Workers [PRTC], and the Peoples Liberation Forces [FPL] for 
refusing to share the Legislative Assembly's Board of Directors 
with the party of the death squads. It would be dishonorable 
and corrupt for any leader to try to sit on that board. 
  3. We believe the attitude adopted by these gentlemen at 
this 
time and all the repercussions of their treasons, such as the 
case of the El Espino farm, the purge of the Armed Forces, their 
rejection and insults against Marxism-Leninism and revolutionary 
ideas, are very grave offenses against the revolution and the 
unity of the revolutionary forces. 
  4. It is hoped that the FMLN leadership will adopt an 
exemplary revolutionary position and will punish this grave 
transgression in its ranks with the quick and final expulsion of 
the ERP and National Resistance leaders. If this is not done and 
the issue is treated lightly, revolutionary ranks would be 
corrupted and it would be guilty of complicity. 
  In view of the above, the FRS decrees the death penalty is 
applicable to the members of the leadership of the National 
Resistance and the Peoples Revolutionary Army, now called the 
ERP, led by Joaquin Villalobos, Eduardo Sancho, Ana Guadalupe 
Martinez, and the rest of the traitors. We announce that we 
have already ordered our commando units to execute the orders 
against all the ERP and National Resistance leaders. 
  [Signed] FRS, 5 May 1994 
  We have former commander Joaquin Villalobos on the line to 
give us his opinion about the death sentences issued by the FRS 
because of the position adopted by the ERP and the National 
Resistance on Sunday, when the Legislative Assembly Board of 
Directors was elected. The two groups supported the ruling 
ARENA in these elections. Good evening commander, go ahead: 
  [Villalobos] I have just learned of this. I can tell you 
that this is the result of the encouragement of fanatical 
positions. We have been insisting to other companeros that to 
use the word traitor, to make moral judgments, to polarize the 
situation as they have been doing, or to employ the type of 
attacks they have been employing would open the doors to a 
situation in which this type of thing would occur. 
  I do not know whether this comes from the left or the right. 
From wherever it comes, it is evidently something that has taken 
shape or is the result of political positions and the way in 
which the debate has been turned by the companeros of the FPL, 
PRTC, and the Communist Party. This is a very irrational and 
rash position of confrontation that runs counter to dialogue. 
All media have reported this as a very aggressive, 
confrontational, enraged, and angry position. Everyone saw the 
upside-down photographs, with the cross on the top, and the 
pamphlets decrying the traitors. For me, this threat is a 
logical consequence. Nevertheless, I tell you that we are not 
worried. [passage omitted] 

