Language: <F P=105> Macedonian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by B. Burnazovski: "Serbian Priests Expelled From </F>
Macedonia"] 
  [Text] Kumanovo, 17 January -- The Democratic Party of 
Serbs and the Association of Serbs and Montenegrins in Macedonia 
are persistently calling upon the Serbian Orthodox Church [SOC] 
to send Serbian priests to Macedonia for religious ceremonies in 
villages inhabited by Serbs and in Macedonian Orthodox churches. 
They are doing this illegally and persistently for almost any 
important religious holiday, or when there is a festival in 
which God's blessing is needed. Thus, recently, at the New 
Year, there were two priests of the SOC in the Kumanovo villages 
of Umin Dol, Novo Selo, Staro Nagoricane, Cetirce, Dolno 
Konjare, Matejce, and Tromegja. They were Nenad Tasic, a SOC 
priest from Bosilegrad and a FRY citizen, and Srecko Cvetkovic, 
a priest from Suva Reka, who was also a FRY citizen staying 
temporarily in Tetovo. 
  After their activities had been discovered, both were taken 
before the district magistrate, who pronounced the appropriate 
sentences. Tasic, for promoting national and religious hatred 
and intolerance among the citizens of miscellaneous 
nationalities, was expelled from Macedonia. Cvetkovic, for 
abusing his profession and for being an illegal alien, was 
banned from any activities in Macedonia for a year. Moreover, 
they both had to pay fines of 1,156 denars. 
  It was not the first time that Tasic had been to Macedonia, 
because "at the request of the Serbian people and believers of 
the Serbian Orthodox Church" he had been in these Kumanovo 
villages in December "to serve his people with the religious 
ceremonies for St. Nicholas's Day and Christmas," as was noted 
in a public information release by the "Regional Church Board of 
the SOC in Kumanovo." He was also expelled from Macedonia for 
being there illegally. Before that, last October, the Vranje 
Bishop Pahomie was refused entry at the Macedonian-Serbian 
border, after he had wanted to attend the celebrations of the 
Battle of Kumanovo of 1913 without the knowledge of the 
Macedonian Orthodox Church. 
  However, there have been a number of indications that not 
only the religious rights of the Serbs in Macedonia are 
involved. The release in which the believers reacted to the 
first expulsion of Tasic was signed by the Regional Board of the 
SOC in Kumanovo, which shows that it [the board] had been 
established, and it was signed by Nenad Domovic, president of 
the Regional Board of the Democratic Party of the Serbs in the 
region of Kumanovo and Pcinja, with the seal of the Local Board 
of the Association of Serbs and Montenegrins in Macedonia. The 
next release, a reaction to the sentences to the two priests, 
was not given to the Macedonian mass media, but only in 
Belgrade. Therefore, the conclusion is that those who are 
reacting prefer their voices to be heard in Serbia, so that they 
can show the alleged danger in which Serbs are living in 
Macedonia. 

