Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by E.K., E.Cz., and K.Gr.: "There Is Still Deadlock </F>
in Rosati Issue; There Were No Talks With President"] 
  [Text] "Meetings will be held, but the decision is final," 
said Lech Walesa on Wednesday [30 March], when asked whether he 
will hold more talks with the coalition on the nomination of 
Dariusz Rosati. "Certain things have already been said and 
written. You want to have a serious president, do you not?" he 
asked at a meeting with the journalists of SLOWO--DZIENNIK 
KATOLICKI. "Unless the coalition presents a new candidate, I 
will propose someone," said Walesa and laughed. 
  "Do the people of communism still think that this is a 
Politburo decision? Now, they are still behaving as if this 
were a decision by the Politburo. Nothing is going to scare or 
change me--only the elections," he said. 
  "Why, would they like me to chicken out?" he asked. He 
stated that the president cannot be "forced to sign any 
documents simply because the coalition has decided so." 
  Despite the coalition leaders' hopes to meet the president 
soon, such a meeting was not held on Wednesday. Zbigniew 
Siemiatkowski gave assurances, however, that the coalition will 
make efforts to hold such a meeting with the president, during 
which the leaders will try to win Lech Walesa over to the 
candidacy of Dariusz Rosati for deputy prime minister and 
finance minister. It is hardly possible for the meeting to be 
held before Easter because, on Wednesday afternoon, Aleksander 
Kwasniewski and Jozef Oleksy flew off to Moscow for an official 
parliamentary visit. The visit will last until Friday. 
  Before leaving for Moscow, Kwasniewski reiterated that 
Dariusz Rosati had not changed his mind. He is still the 
candidate of the coalition, and he will not withdraw until the 
coalition thinks it necessary. He added, however: "It is not 
known what will happen tomorrow." 
  "The main person to participate in these talks should be 
Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak, who put forward this candidacy. 
However, I have also said I would like to take part in the 
talks," he said. 
  Jozef Oleksy said that the president's decision was legal 
and 
in conformity with his powers. Even though the Small 
Constitution only vaguely defines the procedure for forming the 
government by the president, similarly inexact provisions could 
be found in almost all democratic constitutions. However, 
"hardly any European president thinks of using such powers." 
  "I am trying to soothe the tempers of politicians. However, 
the situations that we are witnessing should not be occurring," 
said Oleksy. 

