Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Chong Pyong-chin] </F>
  [Text] The government decided on 12 March to indefinitely 
postpone the third round of U.S.-DPRK talks and resume the Team 
Spirit exercise sometime next month in view of the fact that the 
exchange of South-North special envoys will not take place 
before 21 March, the deadline set between the United States and 
North Korea. The ROK and the United States decided to provide a 
new joint countermeasure regarding this matter. 
  A government official revealed on 12 March: "The South-North 
working-level contact to discuss the exchange of special envoys 
was once again postponed until 16 March. Therefore, it seems 
difficult for the exchange of special envoys to take place 
before 21 March, the date slated for the third round of 
U.S.-DPRK high-level talks. The ROK and the United States 
jointly believe that the North Korean side unilaterally 
invalidated the agreement reached with the United States." 
  This official added: "It was already decided at the 11 March 
ROK-U.S. working-level strategic meeting that if the exchange of 
special envoys does not take place before 21 March, the third 
round of U.S.-DPRK high-level talks will be indefinitely 
postponed and the Team Spirit exercise will be resumed as soon 
as possible. Since the Team Spirit exercise was suspended under 
these conditions, the ROK and the United States have no problems 
in resuming the Team Spirit exercise sometime next month." 
  U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Robert Gallucci, who 
participated in the ROK-U.S. working-level strategic meeting as 
the chief delegate, confirmed such an agreement reached between 
the ROK and the United States in a news conference on 12 March 
and said: "If the ROK and the United States determine it is 
necessary to resume the Team Spirit exercise, we are fully 
prepared to carry it out at any time. The ROK and the United 
States have already provided measures for all possible matters 
that may arise if the exchange of South-North special envoys 
does not take place." 
  Assistant Secretary of State Robert Gallucci also said: "The 
United States and North Korea agreed last month that four 
matters--the smooth inspection of North Korea's nuclear 
facilities by the International Atomic Energy Agency's [IAEA] 
inspection team; the realization of the exchange of South-North 
special envoys; the suspension of the Team Spirit exercise; and 
the holding of the third round of U.S.-DPRK high-level 
talks--must be carried out in a package deal. Even if the 
IAEA's inspection of North Korea's nuclear facilities were to be 
carried out smoothly, the agreement between the United States 
and North Korea would be meaningless if the exchange of 
South-North special envoys did not take place." 

