Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The new discipline and ethics code that has been 
approved empowers the National Police to enforce the most severe 
penalties for violations of the law and the guiding principles 
of the institution. 
  The new statute provides stiff penalties for those who 
engage 
in service-related wrongdoing or who violate police regulations; 
they range from a 30-day suspension without pay to immediate 
dismissal in severe cases. 
  The director general of the police will order dismissals 
after a disciplinary proceeding in which charges will be lodged 
against the defendants, who will then respond to them by 
submitting evidence during the first three days after they are 
formulated. 
  The investigations, which are subject to motions of 
reconsideration and appeal by defendants, may not last longer 
than 30 days, at which time a penalty must be decided on. 
  "This is the toughest statute in the history of the National 
Police. What we are seeking is to preserve discipline and ethics 
in our institution," said the director of police, General 
Octavio Vargas Silva. 
  The statute also provides for fines of up to 15 days' pay 
for 
police personnel who commit service-related infractions or 
violate the disciplinary code. 
  The statute describes what constitute orders from superiors 
and how they are to be carried out and leaves open the 
possibility that subordinates need not comply with such orders 
if they should lead to a punishable act. 
  The new regulations establish procedures for obtaining 
leaves, indicating that they may not exceed five days for police 
personnel. 
<H5>  Anticorruption Measures </H5>
<H3>  Punitive Measures and Incentives 
The following penalties will apply: </H3>

  -  Written reprimand, that is to say, disapproval of the 
implicated party's conduct, entered into the service record. 
  -  A 
fine of up to 15 days basic pay 
  -  Suspension for up to 30 days 
without pay 
  -  Dismissal or termination of employment contract 

    The following incentives will apply: 

  -  Private commendations 
  -  Public commendations 
  -  Monetary 
rewards 
  -  Prizes for the best student 
  -  Honorable 
mentions 
  -  Medals 
  -  Decorations 

<H5>    Violations of the Statute </H5>
  The following are the chief violations of regulations: 

  -  The wearing of improper or nonregulation clothing, 
decorations, medals, or uniforms 
  -  Failure to report on time for 
duty without a valid excuse or reporting for duty under the 
influence of alcohol or drugs. 
  -  Once an incident involving a 
severe breach of the peace has become known, failure to report 
there within the allotted travel time 
  -  Absence without permission 
or just cause from the scene of an incident or from a duty 
post 
  -  Avoidance of service without just cause 
  -  Driving police 
vehicles, piloting police water- or aircraft, or operating 
official equipment or machinery without the proper license or 
authorization 
  -  Violating provisions of the criminal code or the 
Statute for the Control and Sale of Arms, Ammunition, and 
Explosives. 
  -  Giving rise to justified complaints by citizens 
owing to negligent or arbitrary conduct on and off duty. 
  -  Causing 
harm to individuals or property through the excessive use of 
firearms or force 
  -  Impeding or denying assistance to 
investigations by the Attorney General's Office, the National 
Police Commissioner, or any other authority 
  -  Demanding gifts to 
perform a duty 

<H5>    Disciplinary Action </H5>

  -  Disciplinary action is obligatory, formal, and 
indivisible. Once an investigation has begun, it must conclude 
with a declaration of guilt, a writ of prohibition, acquittal, 
or a cessation of proceedings. 
  -  If at the close of the 
proceedings the accused is sacked, this information will be 
entered into his service record. 
  -  All investigations must be 
reported to the Attorney General's Office for the National 
Police, to the Commissioner, and to the Assistant Director 
General. 
  -  Proceedings will be declared closed only when the act 
never took place, the accused did not commit it, the act does 
not qualify as a violation, or disciplinary action cannot begin 
or continue. 
  -  The statement of charges must contain legal 
particulars, a list of the acts under investigation, evidence, 
legal provisions violated, the time period for defense evidence, 
and information for the accused concerning his right to see the 
report and the evidence gathered. 

<H5>    Suspension and Dismissal </H5>

  -  A temporary disciplinary suspension without pay may last 
up to 60 days when the violation being investigated tarnishes 
the prestige of the police. 
  -  No appeal may be made against the 
suspension, and the assistant director of human resources must 
be notified immediately so that the proper formalities can be 
performed. 
  -  The individual under investigation will be reinstated 
automatically in his post and will be entitled to pay if the 
proceedings are closed or if he is acquitted. 
  -  He may also 
request his pay if the 60-day suspension runs out before the 
investigation has been completed. In this case the amount of pay 
will be determined in the final judgment. 
  -  In the event that the 
penalty is a fine, the full amount will be deducted from the 
appropriate amount of pay to be disbursed at the close of the 
suspension. 
  -  The suspended individual will be dismissed if he is 
guilty of the violation. The penalty of dismissal will be 
effective as of the date of the disciplinary suspension ordered 
as a precautionary measure. 
  -  Investigations must be completed 
within a period not to exceed 30 days. 

