Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by reporters Chen Zujia [7115 4371 3946] and Zhu </F>
Jingruo [2612 4552 5387]] 
  [Text] On 15 December 1991, the Qinshan nuclear power 
plant sent a surge of power into the East China grid; and the 
commercial operations of the No. 1 unit of the Guangdong Daya 
nuclear power plant also began at the close of this year, and it 
will be delivering power to Guangdong and Hong Kong well into 
the future. 
  As China welcomes the arrival of nuclear power, this energy 
source is already supplying one-sixth of all of the electricity 
used in the world. In 1992, 424 nuclear power reactors were 
operating in various countries throughout the world. 
<H3>  1. Nuclear Power: The Key to Solving the Problems of 
Development </H3>
  In the 1960s and 1970s, as China was shipping its northern 
coal resources to the south, nuclear power was growing sharply 
in Europe and America. In over 30 years, the U.S. built more 
than 100 nuclear power reactors and became the leading nuclear 
power country in the world. France made it a national policy to 
solve its energy shortage by developing nuclear power, and in 
only 17 years, since 1973, the ratio of nuclear power rose from 
4 percent to 72 percent, and cheap reliable nuclear power has 
become the pillar of the French economy. Today, one-third of all 
of the electric power used in the energy-poor countries of the 
European Economic Community comes from nuclear power. In short, 
the fact is that the developed countries of Europe and America 
know there can be no entry into the 21st century without nuclear 
power. 
  In the 1980s, the center of world economic growth moved to 
the Asian-Pacific area and the nations of the Pacific rim, and 
the nuclear accidents at Three Mile Island in the U.S. and at 
Chernobyl in the Soviet Union cast a cloud over the idea that 
nuclear power was the key to economic development. 
  Nuclear technology forces in Europe, America, and Japan are 
collaborating in applied research on a new reactor that is 
safer, cleaner, more economical, and consumes nuclear materials 
more completely -- the fast breeder reactor. Advanced nations 
have increased their research on nuclear fusion which could 
provide mankind with an inexhaustible supply of energy. 
  There can be no doubt that nuclear energy will be an 
important source of energy in the 21st century. Countries that 
do not gain access to nuclear energy will not join the ranks of 
advanced countries in the future world. 
<H3>  2. Nuclear Power: The Antigen for Prevention of Economic 
Difficulties on the Southeast Coast </H3>
  The energy shortage has become the "bottleneck" to China's 
economic development. The energy pinch is most strongly felt 
along the southeast coast, which is also feeling the effects of 
transportation pressures and environmental pollution, and the 
dislocated energy structure is the root cause of it all. 
  China's coal resources are mainly concentrated in Shanxi, 
Shaanxi, and western Inner Mongolia, 70 percent of the 
hydropower resources are in the southwest, and 80 percent of the 
electricity in the southeast is produced from coal. Northern 
coal is shipped south and western coal is shipped east. Coal for 
electric power accounts for 46 percent of the freight shipped on 
the Beijing-Shanghai and Beijing-Guangdong rail lines, 30 
percent of the freight on the Huangjin waterway, and 26 percent 
of the freight on the highways. And that still does not satisfy 
the demand. In Jiangsu Province, there have been shutdowns of 
over 40 percent of the power generators because coal supplies 
were used up. 
  While coal provides the power for economic development, it 
also is the cause of transportation and environmental problems. 
One 1,000MW thermal power plant discharges tens of thousands of 
tons of harmful gases containing sulfur dioxide and nitrogen 
oxides into the atmosphere every year, and more than 100 
kilograms of such carcinogens as mercury and cadmium. 
  How then to extricate the southeast coastal economic zones 
from the grip of energy, transportation and environmental 
problems? If, as with a single surgical stroke to cure three 
ailments, there were a single energy resource, which with a 
singular investment could heal all afflictions, wouldn't that be 
more ideal? Let those who would send hydropower over extreme 
distances behold the light of nuclear power. 
  It is easy to see the advantages of nuclear power over coal 
power. A 1,000 MW pressurized-water reactor needs only 30 tons 
of fuel a year, which is 1 one-hundred-thousandth that of a 
thermal power plant of the same scale. Pollution from a safely 
operated nuclear power plant is negligible, its radiation 
discharge being less than a coal power plant of the same scale. 
  In 1970, having heard reports on the situation in Shanghai, 
Premier Zhou Enlai said that the solution to Shanghai's energy 
shortage is nuclear power. Nuclear power has been the antidote 
for many energy deficient places in the world that have 
concentrated populations and rapid industrial growth, and there 
is little doubt it will be good medicine for the southeast 
coastal areas. 
<H5>  3. Nuclear Power: Not Easy for China </H5>
  Although the advantages of nuclear power are obvious; 
  Although China has plenty of uranium to support nuclear 
power; 
  Although through the process of developing nuclear weapons, 
the uranium mining industry grew well, uranium isotopes were 
separated, nuclear fuel elements were produced as planned, 
reactors were built and spent fuel was processed, all of which 
rounds out a complete nuclear industry system; 
  Although China has a force of nuclear industry specialists 
tens of thousands strong with decades of hard experience and 
training; 
  Although China's basic industries are well developed and can 
meet the requirements for developing nuclear power; 
  Nuclear power is, nonetheless, in an infantile stage in 
China. 
  By the end of September, the Qinshan nuclear power plant had 
generated a total of 1.7 billion kWh of electric power. Adding 
the power generated by the two 900MW units of the Daya Bay 
plant, as of late 1993 and mid-1994, nuclear power provides only 
1 percent of the total output of electricity in China. 
  China was late on the scene, and missed out on the biggest 
opportunity for development. On 28 February 1990, Qian Sanqiang, 
Li Jue, Jiang Shengjie, and Wang Ganchang submitted a statement 
to Jiang Zemin and Li Peng calling for the early establishment 
of mid- and long-term plans for China's nuclear power 
development, and expressed the sincere concern and interests 
that the four distinguished elder scientists and leaders have 
for their country and their people. On 30 April, Premier Li Peng 
responded to them by letter saying, "On 15 March the State 
Council Nuclear Power Leadership Group Plenary Session 
determined that nuclear power would be included in the National 
Economic Plan." 
  The coastal provinces of Fujian, Zhejiang, Jiangsu, 
Shandong, 
Liaoning, and Hainan, and the inland provinces of Sichuan, 
Jiangsu, and Hunan have all expressed their desire to build 
nuclear power stations, and the strategic goal for the country 
today is to speed up development, and get into the race. In 
August 1993, the China National Nuclear Industry Corporation 
assembled the talent and facilities in its nuclear engineering, 
design, prospecting, construction, facilities acquisition and 
technical services fields to form the China International 
Nuclear Engineering Group Enterprise, to gain some ground in 
opening up a nuclear power market. 
  There are, however, some obstacles to moving forward just 
yet 
because the role of nuclear power in China's economic 
development is not fully recognized by the policy makers, there 
is no unified leadership among national nuclear power 
departments, and the lack of guaranteed funding sources is a 
hindrance to scientific research and construction. 
  Nuclear power construction requires early investment and its 
success depends heavily on safety and financial guarantees. The 
two other nuclear power plants now tabled for construction are 
the Guangdong and Bohai Bay plant in Liaoning are thoroughly 
planned from the safety standpoint, but whether firm funding 
will be assured is another matter. 
  The development of nuclear power is a complex system of 
engineering because of its particular requirements for 
end-to-end facilities research and production, supplying nuclear 
fuel, processing depleted fuels, processing the "three wastes," 
and the selection and release of power plant sites; and the 
engineering process demands a high degree of unified leadership 
and decisive action. Without it, the application of nuclear 
power to the economic bottleneck will not realize its maximum 
advantage, and only that will fulfill the dreams of the nuclear 
workforce, slake the country's thirst for electric power, and 
brighten the hearts of the people. China needs the light and 
heat of nuclear power to break the bottleneck. 

