BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi by Mario </F>
Pendinelli; place and date not given: "Jews Our Elder Brothers"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [Pendinelli] From the day you 
decided to enter politics you have gone from triumph to triumph. 
So are there no regrets? 
  [Berlusconi] I have had, and still have, some regrets. The 
greatest was caused to me by the mistrust shown by some Jews 
toward my government. For me relations with Israel are of more 
than diplomatic importance. As you know, I am a Catholic and, 
many people may not know, I am still capable of being moved. I 
still hold in my heart the words that Pope John Paul II 
addressed the Jews during his visit to Rabbi of Rome Professor 
Elio Toaff: He called them "our elder brothers." The memory of 
the Holocaust weighs on the conscience of the whole of Europe. 
  We must banish forever all forms of anti-Semitism and 
racism. 
We must explain to children that Israel is not only a crucial 
stronghold of peace in the Middle East, but also a symbol of 
struggle against and resistance to fanaticism and barbarism. My 
government regards Israel's security and development as 
essential. This is an issue that must be taken up by all the 
Western democracies, especially those of Europe, since Israel is 
ideologically part of Europe. 
  [Pendinelli] With regard to Europe, some people say that 
your 
foreign minister, Antonio Martino, is a member of the 
"Euroskeptics" club. 
  [Berlusconi] That is nonsense. Antonio's father was one of 
the men who helped to build Europe. Euroskepticism resulted 
from the errors of the old class of European leaders. People 
have attached to the idea of Europe a merely economic, sometimes 
even unrealistic, significance. We need to proceed once more 
from the principle of ideological and political unity, without 
reducing it to an exaggerated and elitist dream. Nor must 
people dream of building an isolationist Europe, hostile or 
indifferent to its vital relations with the U.S.. In this 
regard [German] Chancellor Kohl's success in the European 
elections will certainly yield fruit. His government in Germany, 
like ours in Italy, represents a factor of stability and the 
basis for imparting a new boost to Europe. 
  [Pendinelli] You maintain good relations with Kohl, but your 
relations with the present leaders of our own Popular Party seem 
very bad. You have been accused of trying to conduct a takeover 
campaign within its ranks, and also of having promoted, through 
your television networks, a culture of egoism, consumerism, and 
personal success. Is this too a source of regret for you? 
  [Berlusconi] Some of them do presume a monopoly on 
solidarity 
and every other Christian value. Others still talk about 
capitalism as a sin requiring atonement and fail to realize that 
the market economy is not an ideology but the most effective 
means of organizing production. It is up to us to ensure that 
this means producing widespread wealth, lower unemployment, and 
efficient services. In order to do this it is necessary to cut 
wastage, to eliminate the patronage system, and to make people 
feel responsible for themselves. 
  Anyone who really identifies with Christian humanism cannot 
fail to know that his first duty is to combat the most flagrant 
injustice of our time -- unemployment. And this struggle is 
linked to another -- that of defending the family as the vital 
unit of society and of the development of democracy. I want to 
state clearly that I share the pope's anxieties: There is no 
real democracy without a defense of the family. This is Forza 
Italia's stance. 
  As you can see, this is as far as can be imagined from the 
unprincipled consumerism that we in fact oppose. And if some 
members of the Popular Party have not yet realized this, their 
voters do. 
  But we are not plannning any takeovers. What we want, 
rather, is a calm dialogue. And we are waiting to see how the 
Popular Party meets the challenge of its congress. 
  [Pendinelli] Let us move on to another possible cause for 
regret -- the constant sarcasm of [League Secretary] Bossi, who 
still accuses you of recycling the "old." 
  [Berlusconi] If by the "old" Bossi means the old system of 
party domination, associationism, state control, he is entirely 
mistaken. We are the force that is making the crucial 
contribution to demolishing all this. And the League ministers 
are making an intelligent and loyal contribution to this task. 
If, however, by the "old" Bossi means the roots of the great 
culture of liberal democracy and Christian humanism with which 
we identify, he is making a serious mistake, because those roots 
are neither old nor new, but eternal. 
  [Pendinelli] Do you think that the controversy over the 
fascist threat in Italy is over now? 
  [Berlusconi] I hope so. But there is something that I would 
like to add to that. I think that what has died is so-called 
antifascist unity, a term that in political jargon was intended 
to ennoble associationism. Antifascism is not dead, however, 
because it is one aspect of the struggle against every form of 
totalitarianism, so it cannot and must not die. 
  [Pendinelli] We have not discussed the most talked-about and 
delicate issue: you and television. 
  [Berlusconi] Actually I no longer concern myself with 
Fininvest. And soon I hope to succeed in separating, formally 
too, my political future from the future of the business that I 
created. I have embarked on a new career, a difficult but 
exciting task. I believe that I have offered the Italian people 
the chance to extricate themselves from a future without freedom 
or prosperity which seemed predetermined. They have rewarded me 
with their trust. I am sure that I will show that I deserve it. 

