Language: <F P=105> Bulgarian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed commentary: "Unnecessary and Stupid"] </F>
  [Text] The interior minister's order to expel Zhirinovskiy 
is unnecessary and stupid and leaves open the question of who 
were the real people behind it. It also indicates a loss of 
nerve. 
  It is unnecessary because Zhirinovskiy was leaving anyway 
within the 24-hour deadline. So why did they not expel him when 
he arrived on Sunday? 
  It is stupid because, as was proved way back in the days of 
totalitarianism, it is in principle foolish to react to words 
with persecution. 
  It is clear that Zhirinovskiy went too far with his call for 
the replacement of the Bulgarian president. It is also clear 
that the press reacted sharply. However, no newspaper (except 
one privatized trade union paper) and no institution demanded 
the expulsion of this party leader, who won the largest number 
of votes in the Russian elections. 
  In contrast to the interior minister, the press reacted 
neither to the first tipoff nor to anyone's suggestion. 
  If it is necessary to expel everyone who permits himself to 
make insulting statements about the president, then Minister 
Mikhaylov should expel (to where?) Edvin Sugarev and all those 
who burned portraits and books of Zhelev during Sugarev's hunger 
strike. 
  Furthermore, why was [U.S. Ambassador] Montgomery not 
declared a persona non grata? In the final analysis, the 
Russian declared his dislike of a single figure, whereas the 
American criticized the Bulgarian Constitution. 
  One should either combat Zhirinovskiy's statement by the 
force of argument or swallow what he said, as the president did 
in the case of Montgomery. Surely both cases constitute 
interference in the country's internal affairs? 
  When nervous reactions of condemnation invade politics, we 
are no longer talking of politics, but of a wrestling mat, which 
is very sad when one remembers that Bulgaria is no longer a 
world force in wrestling. 

