Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The panel to reorganize and reform the operations 
of the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation, NNPC, was 
inaugurated today by the head of state, General Sani Abacha. 
State House correspondent Oje Ogbonaya Oje reports that the 
panel has four months to carry out its assignment: 
  [Begin recording] [Oje] Inaugurating the 10-man panel, Gen. 
Abacha said that the effort was part of the renewed 
determination of government to restore the confidence of the 
people in the operations of public institutions and agencies. He 
said that the organization of strategic institutions was a 
priority to his administration as contained in his maiden 
broadcast to the nation. The head of state expressed deep 
concern over the situation in the NNPC. He said in the past 10 
years the problem in the organization had risen to a situation 
when an average Nigerian legitimately wonder and complain as to 
why the country's earnings had not been reflected in the 
provision of social amenities to raise the people the people's 
standard of living. The head of state said that since the 
petroleum industry remained a major source of government income, 
all appropriate measures would be used to sanitize the NNPC and 
ensure discipline and prudence in the management of its 
operations. Gen. Abacha then outlined the assignment of the 
10-man panel: 
  [Abacha] To examine thoroughly the present structure, 
organization, and functions of the NNPC and make appropriate 
recommendations for improvement, and where deemed necessary, 
total overhaul; to scrutinize all payments of 1 million naira 
and above made by NNPC in the past three years to ascertain that 
the payments were made in accordance with laid down procedures, 
and where any of the payments were made under a contract that 
all such payments were in conformity with the terms of the 
contract; to identify all recipients of any regular or 
irregular, improper payments or proper, and the amounts 
involved, and suggest for effective and speedy restitution; to 
make recommendations for the improvement of payment procedures 
to prevent future occurrences of irregular and improper 
payments; to examine all major projects currently being executed 
by the NNPC with a view to ascertaining the relevance of each of 
those projects to the operations of the corporation and the 
development needs of the Nigerian economy -- for each such 
project, the panel should identify all amounts already expended 
and outstanding commitments due on the project [and]; to comment 
and recommend on any matter considered relevant to the NNPC 
(?with) particular regard to the smooth, efficient, and prudent 
operation of the corporation. 
  [Oje] The head of state urged the panel to carry out its 
assignment with all seriousness and sincerity of purpose. 
  Responding, the chairman of the panel, retired Major General 
Emmanuel (Adesoye) gave assurance that the panel was ready to 
carry out its duties. Maj. Gen. (Adesoye) however expressed 
reservation over the four-month deadline given to the panel to 
submit its report. All the members of the panel were present at 
the inauguration. [end recording] 

