Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Focus" by Shiro Yoneyama: "Hosokawa Gradually Losing </F>
Control of Coalition Government"] 
  [Text] Tokyo, March 2 KYODO -- For the second time in a 
month, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa has held a news 
conference to apologize for tactical mistakes -- one about an 
abortive national welfare tax and now about his plan to 
reshuffle his cabinet. 
  An apologetic Hosokawa said at a news conference that he 
will 
keep Chief Cabinet Secretary Masayoshi Takemura, the top 
government spokesman, for the time being for the sake of the 
seven-party coalition which drove the Liberal Democratic Party 
[LDP] from power last summer. 
  Barely one month ago, Hosokawa, a descendant of a samurai 
warlord in southern Japan, caused a political commotion by 
proposing a 7 percent national welfare tax to replace the 
current 3 percent consumption tax. 
  The plan took the entire nation by surprise, and among those 
who were not consulted in advance was Takemura, leader of 
Sakigake [Harbinger], an LDP splinter group and coalition member. 
  The tax and cabinet change fiascoes, along with his 
allegedly 
nonchalant way of politicking, have driven Hosokawa's popularity 
ratings down from over 70 percent to the 50 percent range in 
recent newspaper polls. 
  With controversial political reform bills nearing their 
final 
parliamentary approval, Hosokawa is gradually tilting toward 
Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] co-leader Ichiro Ozawa, the 
coalition's chief backroom strategist and protege of disgraced 
LDP kingmaker Shin Kanemaru. 
  And Takemura's Sakigake, the Social Democratic Party and the 
Democratic Socialist Party are alarmed by the emerging alliance 
of Ozawa's Shinseito and the Soka Gakkai [Buddhist sect]-backed 
Komeito [Clean Government Party]. 
  Hosokawa told reporters Wednesday [2 March] night he is 
giving up the idea of a cabinet change to maintain unity within 
the coalition. 
  But LDP President Yohei Kono blasted the Hosokawa government 
for losing control of itself and engaging in power politics at 
the expense of the economic and trade issues confronting Japan. 
  Once close allies with the aim of overhauling Japanese 
politics, Hosokawa and Takemura, former prefectural governors, 
have parted ways in substance if not in style on the road to 
achieving their grand objective. 
  Under Hosokawa's failed attempt to change his cabinet, the 
government's key three economic ministers would have gone. 
  They are Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii for involvement in 
a 
money scandal, International Trade and Industry Minister Hiroshi 
Kumagai for a squabble over the dismissal of a senior ministry 
official, and Economic Planning Agency chief Manae Kubota for 
her allegedly poor grasp of statistics. 
  One result of the latest episode and similar ill-prepared 
scenarios in the Hosokawa cabinet is that politics in Japan 
remains fluid. And that is not good news for the rest of the 
world. 

