BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by President Nelson Mandela at the Presidency in </F>
Pretoria; introduction by First Deputy President Thabo Mbeki-- 
live; broadcast in progress] 
  [Text] [Mbeki]...and because he is young, he lacks 
discipline. Deputy President de Klerk and myself have formed a 
disciplinary subcommittee, and in order to cover my back, he is 
going to chair the subcommittee. 
  Ladies and gentlemen, we as South Africans -- and I think, 
indeed, the world -- are very proud to have a person such as 
Nelson Mandela. [applause] I think it is true that among 
ourselves as South Africans, and among the peoples of the world, 
regardless of our political beliefs, of our differences in other 
ways, I think we all see ourselves reflected in his glory, and 
it is a glory that arises from his humility. It is a glory that 
arises from his sense of forgiveness. It is glory that arises 
from his sensitivity to human suffering. It is a glory that 
arises from his commitment to principle. Ladies and gentlemen, 
Nelson Mandela. [applause] 
  [Mandela] Many forces have influenced the history of our 
country, as they have done in the history of other countries. 
The workers, traditional leaders, and tribesmen from the 
countryside, educationists, economists, businessmen, religious 
leaders, all have played a role in our history. 
  But for one or two moments I want to talk about two forces 
which have been of particular relevance in the history of our 
country. We are aware of the type of government we have had 
since 1912 which relied on brute force and coercion. The many 
decades of that coercion only served to produce the Mbekis, the 
Sisulus, the Joe Slovos, the Brahm Fishers, the Dadoos, the 
Nickers, the Trevor Manuels, and they have become national 
heroes today, and some of them are now holding cabinet posts. 
They prevailed after a lot of bitterness had been created, and 
it is as a result of that policy that deep wounds have been 
created in our country. Coercion, brute force, impatience, the 
inability to sit down with your countrymen and to talk had the 
hand in another force, that of compassion, that of love and 
loyalty to your country, that of ignoring what is negative in a 
human being and concentrating on that which is good. Through 
dialogue, through persuasion, we have been able to bring South 
Africa out of that era of darkness, bitterness, pessimism, to a 
moment where the entire world has joined us to come and 
celebrate. 
  That is a lesson, not just for this day. It is a lesson on 
which we can build for the future. Perhaps it was fortunate 
that we had this era, because we are now able to appreciate the 
sacrifices that have been made by the Sisulus and the Mbekis and 
the others. We now know the caliber of the men and women of 
South Africa. South Africa is rich, and not only in natural 
wealth and gold, it is rich in the caliber of its men and women. 
We appreciate that and we have come to appreciate more because 
of the struggle that they have put forward. 
  But there is another aspect from the opposite direction. 
Among those who have been produced by apartheid there have been 
men and women with a vision who realized that human beings are 
human beings. I spent so many years in prison -- you will be 
surprised to know the friendships, the strong friendships which 
were built between black prisoners and white warders. It was 
difficult for the policy makers to persecute us as they wanted 
because we became friends with the warders in our passage. It 
is through them that we could be persecuted, and the firm 
friendships we formed were itself a protection. 
  I don't know whether my friends are here. I invited three of 
the warders who looked after me to attend these celebrations. I 
invited them...I invited them to come--or rather, I asked the 
committee that is arranging to invite them to come, because I 
wanted them to share in the joys that have emanated 
spontaneously around this day, because in a way they also 
contributed to it. 
  Then, of course, there is my friend Mr. de Klerk. He 
had...he was one of those who gave us a hard time. The late Dr. 
Danie Craven, the chairman of the South African Rugby Board, and 
Dr. Luyt, the chairman, I think, of the Southern Transvaal Rugby 
Board, they went to Harare to see the ANC, because they realized 
that South African rugby could not go back to international 
sport without going through the ANC. They knew that the key to 
international rugby was ANC. They did a good thing. It was good 
for them, they had foresight. They suppressed all their 
prejudices and realized that this is the organization that would 
help them. When they came back they were chastised by Mr. de 
Klerk for having had discussions with a terrorist organization. 
Now I mention this as a measure of the change here undergone, 
the personal courage, the vision, the honesty, the integrity 
with which he came to examine the situation in South Africa and 
used his enormous power as the head of the government to bring 
about reforms. 
  So we have forgotten the past. We must know the past so that 
when we work together now in a government of national unity we 
must know precisely what we have come through, what we should 
avoid. 
  We said a lot of unkind things about one another during the 
election [laughter], but we have fought the election. We have 
had a good fight. Now it is the time for us to put together the 
broken pieces of our country and to ensure that our people speak 
with one voice. We feel that because of the many years of 
discussions we have had before I was released from jail -- I had 
meetings with them. [sentence as heard] We discussed the 
situation together, and then during these four years, we have 
exchanged on a wide variety of very sensitive issues. When our 
own teams could not agree, we sat down together and exchanged 
views. I took him into confidence about some of the problems 
that I had. He took me in confidence about the problems that he 
had, and we worked as a team behind the scenes, [applause] and 
we were able to keep together at one time 26 political parties 
with different backgrounds, pulling in different directions. 
  Today is the result of that other force in our country -- 
that of persuasion, that of discussing, that of dialogue, that 
of love and loyalty to our common fatherland. Now in the days 
to come, this is the force on which we are going to rely. We 
are still going to have many problems because when Mr. de Klerk 
talks about a democracy sometimes he doesn't mean the same thing 
which I understand about democracy. [laughter] And when our own 
people, when we talk about a government of national unity, which 
now must fight for reconciliation, for nation building, they 
don't understand the same thing which he understands. Sometimes 
we don't understand the same thing which I understand. 
[laughter] So the government of national unity has to face all 
these problems. But I have no doubt that we have men and women 
in this country from all sections of the population who will 
rise to the challenge. 
  There are many Americans here. Perhaps let me repeat what I 
have said in their absence, because this comes from an American 
who is alive today. And those who have been with me in the 
meetings I have addressed must plug their ears because they will 
be bored to hear this again. Some American has said a person 
who does what all others can do, is an ordinary person. A 
person who does what no other person can do, is exceptional. 
But a person who does what no other person has ever done, is a 
national asset, is a genius, is an institution. 
  South Africa today wants men and women who strive to do what 
no other person has done. We require this for our country. It 
is your wish -- everyone of you -- that when your last days on 
earth come, we should be able to say: Here lies the man or 
woman who has done his or her duty on earth; and if you strive 
to do what no other person has done, we will be able to say: 
Here lies a person who did his duty on earth. I thank you. 

