BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with kwaZulu Chief Minister Buthelezi in Ulundi, </F>
ANC's Jacob Zuma in the Durban studio, and TEC official Mac 
Maharaj in the Johannesburg studio by announcer Max du Preez -- 
live] 
  [Text] [Du Preez] Chief Minister, can we kick off with you 
immediately. Your deputy leader in Transvaal, Mr. Humphrey 
Ndlovu, said today that this declaration is the start of the 
civil war in South Africa... 
  [Buthelezi] The what? 
  [Du Preez] ...is the start of the civil war in South Africa, 
we are not going to tolerate this state of emergency. Now that 
comes shortly after your statement that the struggle between 
your party and the ANC is now to the finish. Are these 
statements not highly dangerous and grossly irresponsible? 
  [Buthelezi] No, the statement is not aggressive, the 
statement is merely the facts of the matter, but right from 
Codesa [Convention for a Democratic South Africa] the ANC did 
not want the king of the Zulus and the kwaZulu government 
represented at Codesa. And there are many other things where we 
were sort of elbowed out of things, you know, in the multiparty 
talks, with the approval of the ANC. Because many times it was 
stated that it was immaterial whether we were there or not, and 
that the train would move whether we were present or not, and 
this was said not only by the president of the ANC but also by 
Mr. Ramaphosa the secretary general. So therefore, there has 
been this struggle, this attitude towards kwaZulu, this 
aggression, against the people of kwaZulu by the ANC. So I 
mean, then, the killing of our people I said means that, it 
means that they want this to be a fight to the finish. 
  [Du Preez] The statement I just read.... 
  [Buthelezi, interrupting] People are trying to distort that 
by saying that I mean that I'm now going to fight with the ANC 
to the finish. But the fight is on already. Thousands of Zulu 
people have been killed, even in the East Rand. 
  [Du Preez] Mr. Buthelezi, what do you think of the statement 
that this declaration of a state of emergency is the start of 
civil war in South Africa? 
  [Buthelezi] Well, I did not even hear Mr. Ndlovu say so, and 
I don't even understand that statement. 
  [Du Preez] Do you agree with it? 
  [Buthelezi] I don't even understand it. How can I agree with 
what I don't understand? I don't understand what Mr. Ndlovu 
meant when he said that. 
  [Du Preez] Can I read you some more of what he said, 
according to SAPA. He said this meant that IFP [Inkatha Freedom 
Party] supporters would continue to go about their daily lives, 
and would ignore curfews. If the security forces attempted to 
stop them, they will get what they are looking for, unquote. 
And, asked whether this meant that IFP supporters would fight, 
he said: Of course, if we have to. And then they asked him 
would the civil war only rage in Natal, he said: I'm not going 
anywhere; you will see it with your own eyes. This is dangerous 
stuff, Mr. Buthelezi. 
  [Buthelezi] Well, but you must understand, a person who is 
traumatized by the slaughter of our people, the Shell House 
slaughter of our people, the Shell House massacre was really a 
traumatic thing. I don't necessarily approve of that statement 
personally, but you must understand that Mr. Ndlovu was there 
and he saw those people, and it's only a few days ago that this 
happened. 
  [Du Preez] Can I stay with you and ask you...the state 
president was not prepared to tell us what you said to him on 
the phone when he told you about the state of emergency. What 
did you tell him? 
  [Buthelezi] Who? 
  [Du Preez] What did you tell the state president on the 
phone 
when he told you about the state of emergency? 
  [Buthelezi] Well, I told him that as far as we are 
concerned, 
you know, the TEC and ANC is one thing, because, from the 
management committee right up to every council of the TEC, the 
majority of the people are either ANC or members of the 
Patriotic Front, which is aligned to the ANC. Some of them are 
candidates in the elections or in the lists of the ANC, both 
national and regional. So therefore, he said that he did this 
on his own initiative. But I said that the perception wouldn't 
be that he does it on his own initiative, in so far as many 
spokespersons of the ANC have threatened us by saying that 
they're going clamp on kwaZulu. Mr. Ramaphosa has said so. Mr. 
Joe Slovo said: Two down, one to go. Mr. Maharaj himself and 
many others have threatened us in this way. I have documented 
evidence to the fact that the state president has been under 
pressure from them to do exactly what he did today. 
  [Du Preez] Can I quickly go to Mr. Zuma in Durban. Mr. Zuma, 
what is your reaction to the statements from Chief Buthelezi and 
Mr. Ndlovu and others? 
  [Zuma] Well, it is clear that the tension is very high, 
politically, in our country. I think we are welcoming the state 
of emergency because the situation, particularly here in Natal, 
has been very volatile. I think the chief minister is correct 
that the fight between the IFP members and the ANC has been on. 
As we are talking now, there are people who are not in their 
houses at kwaMashu, who are refugees. There are people who have 
died. Just last night, people were killed who were called into 
a peaceful meeting and yet that was a trap. 
  You are, therefore, dealing with a situation that people are 
dying everyday. The question that has been always there has 
been: At what point shall we have people stop from killing one 
another? Even if we had political differences, it didn't seem 
clear that this was possible. Therefore, the state president, 
who had the responsibility for the security of the citizens of 
this country at the end of the day, I think has a responsibility 
to ensure that we are all protected. 
  As I'm talking to you, my own homestead has been burned down 
just last week. Now you dealing with a situation therefore, 
wherein you don't know what is going to happen tomorrow. You do 
need extraordinary measures to ensure that the security 
situation is stabilized, so that political campaigning goes on. 
We have an important agreement between ourselves, that is the 
IFP and the ANC, that much as we differ, in terms of whether 
there should be an election or not, but our members should be 
free to express themselves, either for elections, or for not 
participating in the elections, but the problem is, there is 
violence going on. 
  [Du Preez] Mr. Zuma, can I cut you short there and just ask 
Mr. Maharaj: Mr. Mandela this afternoon in his press conference 
said the regulations would mean confining the kwaZulu Police to 
barracks and the fact that Chief Buthelezi would not be the 
minister of police any more, are those.... 
  [Maharaj, interrupting] Max, from the point of view of the 
Transitional Executive Council, let me say this, it's subcouncil 
on law and order has been involved in drafting the regulations. 
Those regulations still center on allowing political activity 
to take place. Secondly, there is a lot of evidence of many 
aspects of the problem of violence in Natal and political 
activity. One of the matters that is of concern has been the 
role of certain individuals in the kwaZulu Police. The chief 
minister is well aware of them. He has seen them documented. 
They have been referred to in commission reports, in court 
records. Nothing has been done about it, and they have actually 
prevented free political activity. There are allegations of 
their participation in hit squad activity, and alternatively of 
their failure to take due and proper steps regarding the 
investigation of criminal activity. 
  [Du Preez] Mr. Maharaj, these fears about the state of 
emergency, especially on the side of kwaZulu people and IFP 
people. Are they real fears? 
  [Maharaj] Yes, I think they are real fears -- concerns -- 
because the state of emergency has a particular history in our 
country, and therefore this state of emergency must be 
understood in the context that the state president has 
explained. Relating to your earlier question, I must say that 
the South African Defense Force is being deployed and will be 
effectively in control of law and order. The consequences of 
that depends on the level of cooperation they receive from the 
kwaZulu minister and his police force. I believe the responses 
so far have not been heartening, and therefore one must realize 
that what is being done in securing free political activity and 
the electoral process depends to a considerable degree on the 
type of cooperation that we receive. One would imagine that he 
would cooperate. 
  [Du Preez] Can we quickly ask Chief Buthelezi on this point, 
are you going to....[pauses] You are the minister of law and 
order in kwaZulu. Are you prepared to cooperate, or is this 
going to escalate? 
  [Buthelezi] In fact, the remarks that are made by Mr. 
Maharaj 
are typical Marxist propaganda because Mr. Maharaj should know 
that the commissioner of police of kwaZulu is appointed by the 
minister of law and order of South Africa, and we operate with 
the South African Police. Most of the kwaZulu Police stations 
in kwaZulu are actually run by the South African Police because 
the kwaZulu Police is a small force. We don't have enough 
personnel, and therefore we cooperate with the South African 
Police. And now to come and ask me now will I cooperate with 
the police is nonsense because, in fact, we do cooperate. My 
police is run by an officer of the South African Police. 
  [Du Preez] Mr. Maharaj, it sounds like a positive answer. He 
will cooperate under the state of emergency. 
  [Buthelezi] I am cooperating now. To say that I am making a 
pledge to Mr. Maharaj now -- I don't need to make any pledge to 
Mr. Maharaj because we do work hand in glove with the South 
African Police. 
  [Maharaj] I don't expect the chief minister to make a 
commitment to me, but there is a clear record that even the 
Wallace Commission said with regards to one of his top police 
officers that his conduct was entirely unacceptable in a police 
officer. He described his conduct in another paragraph as 
bizarre and entirely inappropriate. That police officer 
remained in his position. 
  [Buthelezi] I mean, you Mr. Maharaj, you're not as white as 
driven snow. I mean, for instance, you refused to allow after 
the slaughter of our people at Shell House -- you refused to 
allow police to search Shell House. Now you should be talking 
as if you are as white as driven snow. It's that individual who 
was blamed. I mean, it's actually the transgressions of that 
individual. 
  [Maharaj] With due respect to the chief minister, he's not 
answering the problem that I'm posing. He is the chief minister 
of the police. There are allegations and findings made by a 
commission about senior offices of his police force, not General 
During. They remain in the police, and in order to cooperate, 
something has to be done about this police officer. 
  [Buthelezi] The remaining in the police force...in fact it 
was myself, as minister of police, who said to Gen. During that 
the allegations about hit squads should actually be 
investigated. It was actually done by myself. And of course, 
the general, when he came to give evidence there...I mean, he 
did give evidence, and you are talking this as if the person 
concerned was actually convicted. Those people that were 
mentioned in that hit squad were actually charged, and they were 
actually suspended from the police. 
  [Maharaj] Clearly the chief minister is not addressing the 
question that I posed. The Wallace Commission did not refer to 
Gen. During. It referred to a high officer still serving in the 
kwaZulu Police. 
  [Buthelezi] Who is he? 
  [Maharaj] If you want me to name him in public I will. 
  [Buthelezi] Yes, because I don't know what you are talking 
about. But I'm not prepared to be stickling actually about 
transgressions of one officer. I don't even approve of any 
transgressions in the police force. 
  [Maharaj] It's a matter of public record that the Wallace 
Commission said this about Brigadier (?Mather). 
  [Buthelezi] Well, you say that he is not fit to be in the 
police? 
  [Maharaj] I don't say. The Wallace Commission said that his 
conduct was bizarre and was entirely inappropriate and entirely 
unacceptable in a police officer. 
  [Buthelezi] Well, I find that, you know, it's a question of 
the pot calling the kettle black, because, as you know, the 
Douglas Commission and other commissions have said that very 
high ranking members of the executive of the ANC were involved 
in torturing people, murdering people in their own camps, their 
own members. But I don't now indulge in guilt by association, 
by saying that all members of the National Executive of the ANC 
are the same. 
  [Du Preez] Can I quickly bring us back to the topic. And I'm 
asking Mr. Maharaj quickly to tell us, can we, as Lester asked 
the state president--let's define this a little bit-- can we 
really have an election with a state of emergency. What about 
abuses of human rights? 
  [Maharaj] Yes, I believe that we can because we have drafted 
the legislation in such a way that it ensures the right of free 
political activity. I believe that those who see an 
inconsistency are failing to address the central problem of 
violence and the lack of safety to people's lives and their 
right to exercise the vote. Now I believe that this can be 
affected, with cooperation it should be affected within days, 
without cooperation it can be effected with a little longer 
time. With that scenario, I do not underestimate the problems 
that we face. And I think that those problems will have to be 
overcome, they need the empowerment of the security forces to be 
able to carry out their task. In the normal legislation the 
South African Defense Force have no powers of search, entry, and 
even arrest or seizure. 
  [Du Preez] Can I go to Mr. Zuma quickly and ask him, Mr. 
Zuma, do you think the state of emergency is going to bring us 
more peace in Natal now, and what do you think the likelihood is 
of peaceful elections in three weeks' time? 
  [Zuma] I certainly believe that the state of emergency will 
contain the level of violence which was clearly beginning to 
escalate. I think we'll be in a position to continue with 
political campaigning of any view, and that we will have 
elections, and people will feel protected, that they could go 
and vote without their lives being in danger. And I believe 
that therefore, with all of us, understanding the intentions of 
that we should be in a position to say as believers in 
democracy, we should allow people to make their free choice in 
the process leading up to the elections. And I also believe 
that the processes that are going on in terms of trying to 
negotiate the peaceful resolutions of the problems, the 
political problems and constitutional problems, should go on and 
be supported, because if we can, in the process, in the face of 
the state of emergency as well, manage to reach agreement, that 
will go a long way to solve our problems. 
  [Du Preez] Mr. Zuma, can I switch to Chief Buthelezi, and 
ask 
the chief, the meeting that was planned between yourself, the 
king, Mr. Mandela, and Mr. de Klerk. Will that happen next 
week, or are the rumors true that you're trying to get out of 
that completely? 
  [Buthelezi] Well, I told the state president that, in fact, 
it's embarrassing for both His Majesty, the king, with whom I 
had a conversation on the telephone from Durban today, for the 
state president to actually declare a state of emergency prior 
to a meeting like that. I said that, therefore, he must 
understand that is a lot of misconceptions about that. 
  But to go back, I mean to the state of emergency, as far as 
I'm concerned, you know, I think an analogy can be drawn to what 
is being done. Because our people were killed just on Monday, 
brutally, while they were just, you know, peacefully marching, 
and therefore what's being done is really comparable to someone 
holding a woman for someone to rape that woman, it amounts to 
that to us. And it's not justified because violence is taking 
place in many parts, even in the PWV [Pretoria, Witwatersrand, 
Vereeniging] area itself, in the East Rand. Why is a state of 
emergency not declared there. 
  I mean after all, in 1990, the ANC, SACP, and COSATU 
[Congress of South African Trade Unions] actually brought this 
country to a standstill because they were urging or pressurizing 
Mr. de Klerk to actually dismantle kwaZulu and to disband and 
disarm police. This is just a continuation of that vendetta, 
because as I said earlier, for TEC one reads ANC in this case. 
It is true that I do want peace, too. I do agree with most of 
what Mr. Zuma says, and, incidentally, I would like Mr. Zuma to 
say that I was saddened by the fact that your homestead was 
burned because I don't approve of such methods, because in as 
much I wouldn't like anybody to burn my own home. I'm very 
sorry about that. 
  [Du Preez] Mr. Buthelezi, thank you very much for ending on 
a 
positive note slightly. Unfortunately, the time has caught up 
with us. Thank you, gentlemen for your time. Good night from 
us. 

