Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By John Colmey] </F>
  [Text] One day last week, 1,000 copies of the first 
edition of the China Labour Bulletin were smuggled from Hong 
Kong to Beijing. They were also carried to factories across the 
mainland from Guangzhou to Shanghai to Wuhan. They will be 
photocopied and faxed and quietly passed from person to person 
until thousands of workers have learned about the strike at 
Shanghai's first Taiwan-funded department store on January 7, 
the 550 million yuan (about HK$488 million) claim in back wages 
owed to miners in Heilongjiang, the pitiful compensation paid to 
families of the 84 people killed in the fire at the Hong 
Kong-owned Zhili toy factory in Shenzhen, and about the need for 
free trade unions. Eventually, a copy will fall into the hands 
of the Ministry of Public Security whose officers will pore over 
every word. They are going to be upset when they read it. But 
they will be positively incensed when they learn the author is 
someone they know and fear -- exiled labour activist Han 
Dongfang. 
  Anywhere else, Mr. Han's 20-page monthly publication would 
not even be noticed. The word "democracy" is not even 
mentioned. There are no calls for the overthrow of the regime, 
peaceful or otherwise, or even talk of opposing the Chinese 
Government. Most of the text is taken from official government 
sources. 
  But China is in the throes of a potentially violent 
succession. Paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, whose economic 
reforms have produced some of the fastest economic growth in 
history, is ailing and his conservative opponents are already 
preparing an offensive. In the midst of it all, labour unrest 
among the country's 300 million workers is rocketing. As Mao 
Zedong once said, a spark can inflame the whole plain. Mr. Han 
could become that spark. 
  "The Government forced me to do this," Mr. Han said in his 
studio apartment on Lamma island where he produced the bulletin, 
"because they won't let me go back to China." 
  Until Mr. Han was expelled it would have been an 
exaggeration 
to call the young, uneducated, former railway worker from 
Beijing the "Lech Walesa of China". But now that does not seem 
so far-fetched. Mr. Han met privately with United States 
President Bill Clinton last year and has testified before Senate 
hearings to decide whether the U.S. should extend China's Most 
Favoured Nation (MFN) trading status. The 155 members of the 
International Federation of Free Trade Unions, who gave Mr. Han 
the laptop computer he used to produce the bulletin, have 
adopted him as their favourite son. 
  And that was also before CNN, the BBC and most of the 
world's 
newspapers ran lead stories about Mr. Han's arrest in a 
Guangzhou hotel room last August and his subsequent expulsion 
from China for "issuing anti-Government speeches" to 
international audiences. "Originally, his scope of activity on 
the mainland was limited because people were afraid to identify 
with him," said Lee Cheuk- yan, president of Hong Kong's 
Confederation of Trade Unions. "But after Beijing threw him 
out, he has become very important in world politics and famous 
within China. President Clinton was right to meet him." 
  Mr. Han was in the headlines again last week when the 
Ministry of Public Security began rounding up labour and 
democracy activists across the mainland, including Mr. Han's 
lawyer and friend, Zhou Guoqiang. The two men spoke on the 
telephone just before his arrest, as they have done a couple of 
times a week over the past months. Journalists, analysts and 
human rights activists all looked to Mr. Han for answers. Is 
this the beginning of conservative offensive? Is it a message 
to the U.S. to stop meddling in China's internal affairs? 
  "I tend to agree with Han Dongfang," Chinese University law 
professor Michael Davies said. "Things are getting out of 
control on the labour front and they wanted to send a message to 
them. As we get closer to the MFN vote, the Government can 
throw tidbits to the U.S. by releasing them. But you have to 
look toward labour unrest." 
  Mr. Han gave a similar message to U.S. Under Secretary of 
State for Human Rights, John Shattuck, when the two met in Hong 
Kong last Saturday. "I told him the MFN issue is closely 
related to labour relations in China," Mr. Han said. 
  "Workers are treated like slaves and labour unrest is 
increasing. U.S. businessmen are investing in a very vulnerable 
investment environment," Mr. Han told Mr. Shattuck. "He told me 
that, based on his visit, he had not seen progress or anything 
that would justify passing MFN. He said without any future 
improvement, it would lead to very significant consequences." 
  Mr. Han left for the United States on Thursday. Although it 
is likely there will be more requests for interviews awaiting 
his arrival, his reasons for visiting are nonpolitical. "I'm 
going to the U.S. to visit my family," he said. "I hope to 
persuade them to come to Hong Kong." 
  It has been several months since he last saw his wife, Chen 
Jingyun and his 15-month-old son Linfeng, now living in New York 
where his son was born. It would have been difficult to bring 
them here before now. Since Governor Chris Patten intervened to 
allow the labour leader to stay in Hong Kong -- much to the 
chagrin of China -- Mr. Han has moved six times. He did not 
have a job and had to depend on donations from friends and 
labour unions to get by. The Christian Industrial Committee, and 
its director, legislator Lau Chin-shek, gave him his present job 
as editor of the China Labour Bulletin. That led to an 
employment visa to stay in the territory. The committee is part 
of the Hong Kong Christian Council. 
  Like many of China's dissidents who took part in the 
Tiananmen Square protests in 1989 and managed to live through 
prison afterwards, Mr. Han, 30, is mature for his age. A quiet, 
friendly man with a quick sense of humour and almost majestic 
demeanour, he lives alone in his small $3,500-a-month studio on 
Lamma, just up the hill from the Yung Shue Wan ferry terminal. 
A small balcony overlooks the sea. Papers and books are strewn 
around the floor and dirty clothes are piled on one of two 
chairs. 
  There is a no-smoking sign on the door, a reminder of the 
tuberculosis that he contracted in prison. U.S. pressure, and 
China's fear he would die in prison, eventually led authorities 
to release him on medical grounds and allow him to travel to the 
U.S. for treatment, provided free of charge by Columbia 
University's College of Physicians and Surgeons and its doctors. 
Although surgeons had to remove a quarter of his left lung, he 
says the disease is in remission. When Mr. Han is not writing, 
or calling his contacts in China -- "he's always on the phone," 
says a friend -- he takes walks in Lamma's hills, remembering 
harsher times and people, such as the prison doctor who tortured 
him with acupuncture needles. "At least he said he was a 
doctor," he says, laughing, then adds ruefully, "I still feel 
the numbness in my legs." 
  Mr. Han never set out to be an international labour leader, 
but he admits he was always "active". He was born into a poor 
family in an impoverished farming village of 2,000 people, 
called Nanweiquan, about 700 kilometres from Beijing. His 
father, who still lives there, was a peasant on a collective 
farm, his mother, who died in 1988, was a babysitter. She left 
her husband for Beijing while she was still young and, except 
for a few years when they returned during the Cultural 
Revolution, Mr. Han grew up in Beijing. "We were part of the 
great proletariat," he says of his family. "We were very poor." 
  Mr. Han had his first run-in with authority when he joined 
the army, on his mother's advice, in 1980 when he was 16. 
Although he failed in his studies, he was a good soldier and 
became a squad leader. He fired his first verbal salvo at the 
state when he stood up at a troop-reviewing ceremony. "My men's 
main problem is food," he announced as officers began to cringe. 
"The officers are stealing a third of our food allowance. This 
is in direct contravention of Chairman Mao's line that officers 
and men are equal and must share both sufferings and good 
times." The next day, his superior commander tore up his 
application for the Communist Party. 
  And yet, two years later, he was accepted in the prestigious 
Communist Youth League. "People always thought I was a good 
boy," he says. "They were wrong." He says he applied to be a 
party member "because I thought communism was a worthy ideal". 
But by then he was working for the railway as an electrical 
repairman on a refrigerator car, and gradually became 
disenchanted with the state as an employer. He stopped going to 
Youth League meetings and in 1986 withdrew his membership over 
the objections of the leadership. "They wanted to make me a 
member of the propaganda committee." 
  The event that put him firmly on the road to becoming what 
China sees as a counter-revolutionary happened in 1988 when his 
mother was dying. At the time, Mr. Han was traveling most of 
the year and asked for a one-month shift in Beijing to be near 
his mother. His unit leader, who had marked him as trouble, 
refused but eventually agreed if he would give up one month's 
pay. "I went to the union and they told me they couldn't do 
anything because they worked for the same leader," he says. Mr. 
Han went to the next highest leader and was again told no. 
  "I started screaming at him and almost punched him in the 
nose," he says. "I told him, since my mother was dying anyway, 
I would take it to the congress of employees (an annual meeting 
of all the railway workers). After that he let me take the 
Beijing shift. 
  "I learned then I had to count on myself. Before that, I 
trusted my leaders and, to a lesser extent, the union. After 
that, I knew I had to take a stand and be uncompromising in my 
stance," he said. "Being meek and mild would get me nowhere. I 
had to fight." 
  Mr. Han got his chance a year later on April 16 when he went 
to Tiananmen Square with his wife, and listened to the student 
speeches. "The feelings didn't come from the students but from 
myself. I had seen enough injustice in my own life and all 
around me and grew up in such poverty. Finally all my thoughts 
and feelings unfolded. I thought this country has very serious 
problems," he remembers. "All the grievances and the injustices 
that had been accumulating over the years had reached a point of 
explosion. I couldn't imagine what would happen." 
  What happened next, both in Tiananmen Square and to Mr. Han, 
is well documented in the book Black Hands of 
Beijing, by Robin Munro, the head of Asia Watch in Hong 
Kong, and George Black. After eventually joining the Beijing 
Autonomous Federation of Workers, within one month Mr. Han 
became well known for his speeches trying to unite the students 
and the workers. After the June 4 crackdown, he went into 
hiding but eventually turned himself in when his picture 
appeared on television as one of the three most wanted workers' 
leaders. After 22 months in jail without trial, he was 
eventually released when it appeared he was about to die. A 
year later he went to the U.S. for treatment. 
  Mr. Han's rise to the world stage is at least partly due to 
increasing labour unrest and to Beijing's desperation to keep a 
lid on it. According to Hong Kong-based French sinologist 
Jean-Phillipe Beja, Beijing has to contend with two different 
groups of labourers. The first are the estimated 120 million 
urban dwellers who have official status as workers. Most of 
them labour in the factories and survive on the "iron rice bowl" 
-- guaranteed pay and benefits for government employees -- or 
used to. They fall under the leaky umbrella of the state union, 
the All China Federation of Trade Organisations. 
  The second and larger group is the roughly 180 million 
workers in the special economic zones, private companies and 
rural cottage industries -- "the artisans of the so-called 
Chinese miracle," Mr. Beja says. "These are the peasants and 
farmers on the move, who have no official status and are not 
considered workers. People usually talk about them at Lunar New 
Year and then forget about them. These are also the people who 
died in the Zhili toy factory and the Taiwan-funded Gaofu 
Textiles factory in Fuzhou." 
  The Chinese Government's biggest worry, however, has been 
how 
to keep urban labourers happy in the state enterprises, most of 
which are bleeding money. The recurring problem has been how to 
close them down when there is no safety net for the laid-off 
workers. Beijing's solution to keeping them content was to 
implement what Mr. Beja calls the "half lay-off". If you have a 
couple, the man might continue working in the factory while the 
wife was allowed to open a small business, such as a restaurant, 
but she would still receive 70 per cent of her pay. 
  "The Government encouraged this as a cushion for 
inflation," Mr. Beja says. "This worked for a while. But then 
last year Beijing began to print money to cover its debt. Then 
they didn't have enough to pay the workers." 
  Mao's army suddenly found they were being asked to work 
longer shifts with less and less to show for it. The China 
Labour Bulletin gives an example of a union investigation into 
wages among mining, forestry and textile industries in 
Heilongjiang. They found that employees in 10 cities were owed 
2.66 billion yuan. About 70 per cent had received their cheques 
three to six months late, and even then wages had failed to keep 
up with inflation. Benefits had also been cut. 
  "In theory, when a worker pays a medical bill he goes to the 
factory to be repaid," Mr. Han says. "Now when he goes to the 
unit leader, the leader says the factory doesn't have any money." 
  Mr. Beja said some union representatives at first tried to 
defend labour rights, but found themselves in an increasingly 
awkward position because they also worked for the state. 
"Eventually they had to take a stand against the workers," he 
says. "Management even tried to get money for them, but they 
just couldn't do it. They had to take a stand too." Mr. Beja 
says this has caused a huge dilemma for the leadership. 
Reformers argue that the answer is to introduce shock therapy 
as was done in Poland and Russia. Conservatives say that the 
workers will revolt. And anyway, they argue, surely the party 
is supposed to represent the labourers. As a result, nothing is 
being done. "The Government is in a very embarrassing situation. 
  But the sanctioned proletariat has it easy compared to the 
peasants in the cottage industries, who earn about half the pay 
of the state employees. "A Chinese worker in a private factory 
earns about US$20 a month," Mr. Han says. "Prisoners make US$1 
a month. It's not that different." 
  Unofficial workers are badly exploited and often work in 
terrible conditions. "Those people really depend on the open 
market economy," Mr. Beja says. "No one looks out for their 
interests." Although the Government says there are laws in place 
to protect workers, you would never know it by visiting a 
Chinese factory. 
  For example, it is against the law to have what is known as 
three-in-one factories, where the plant, warehouse and sleeping 
quarters are connected. However, you find them all along the 
southeast coast, and many belong to Hong Kong companies, 
including the Zhili factory where 84 people burned to death when 
they found themselves locked in their dormitory. 
  The dilemma facing Beijing is that China's greatest 
attraction is its cheap and unregulated labour force. But 
workers are getting tired of waiting for the benefits of the 
reforms to trickle down. Last year, the number of strikes and 
walkouts began to increase. The Government's response was to 
crack down. 
  According to an Asia Watch report on political dissidents, 
released last month, the number arrested in 1993 was the highest 
since the post-Tiananmen roundup. Outside of Tibet, arrests of 
labourers began to race ahead of political dissidents. "Workers 
were given the stiffest sentences," Mr. Munro says. "The 
Government is vigilant about a solidarity-type movement." 
  According to Mr. Han: "These problems have always been 
there, but have become more visible and worse under Deng's 
reforms. Before, only the state had the power to exploit 
workers. But with the reforms, entrepreneurs and foreign 
investors also have that freedom. It's like frosting on the 
snow." Under normal circumstances, he says, workers could 
complain to an independent union. "But in China, the union is 
paid by the state," he says. 
  He says China has never understood the role of unions in 
releasing pressure on labour tensions. In 1947 there were two 
unions. One belonged to the nationalists, who used the unions 
to maintain power, the other belonged to the communists, who 
used the unions to take the power away. "They don't understand 
that unions don't have to threaten the state. But the 
Government is confused about its role. In most cases it used to 
be the employer, but it is not any longer. If it understands 
its role is to mediate, it can remove itself from this mess. If 
not, the Communist Party will destroy itself." 
  That is where Mr. Han comes in. He says if things keep going 
like they are, the result could be a "violent explosion". If 
the Government faces an economic crisis, they may have to 
further undercut the well-being of the workers. That could lead 
to a mass uprising in the streets, in which no individual or 
group will be responsible. "We don't want to see it happen. 
Because another uprising will lead to suppression, which means 
violence, brutality and chaos. And that won't lead us anywhere." 
  Mr. Han believes the only answer is for the Government to 
introduce free trade unions. 
  That is what he hopes to make workers realise with his 
bulletin. Unlike other activists, he says, he will never suggest 
that anyone oppose the Government. "Everything must be done 
within the law." However, that is what Mr. Han told his 
interrogators in 1989 to no avail. As he wrote in his appeal 
upon his parole: "I am here repeating what I have said many 
times. As a Chinese citizen, the constitution gave me the right 
to associate with others and speak my mind." 
  Of course his bulletin should also be protected by this 
"constitutional right" but, if he were allowed back into China, 
he would almost certainly be arrested. 
  Perhaps what is most astonishing is that Mr. Han is still 
trying to go back. Before his lawyer was picked up last week, 
he was in the process of filing yet another appeal against his 
expulsion. While most people will say he is crazy, Mr. Beja says 
he represents the attitude of younger workers: "They are 
threatened by the reforms and they have absolutely no way to 
protect themselves. If there is a market economy, everyone is 
against you." As to Mr. Han's wish to return, Mr. Beja says: 
"He thinks that to make things advance, you need to sacrifice. 
Some people just don't care." 
  "I won't give up my determination to go home," Mr. Han says. 
"Maybe they will put me in prison, maybe even kill me. But I 
don't want to be the first Chinese to be thrown out of his own 
country. If I stop, they will kick the others out one by one." 

