Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by XINHUA correspondent Lou Wanghao (2869 2598 </F>
4110) and XINHUA reporters Zheng Qingdong (6774 1987 2639) and 
Liu Haimin (0491 3189 3046): "Xinjiang's Three Chairmen Discuss 
Unity"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 19 Mar (XINHUA) -- "The Han Nationality 
cannot live apart from minority nationalities, and minority 
nationalities cannot be separated from the Han nationality." 
  "The greater the unity among various nationalities, the more 
secure reform and development. Xinjiang attests to this point." 
  Xinjiang deputies Ismail Amat, Tomur Dawamat, and Abulaiti 
Abudurexiti made these remarks when they met together at the 
ongoing National People's Congress [NPC] session. Their 
discussion invariably reverted to the topic of strengthening 
unity among various nationalities. 
  Ismail Amat, currently state councilor and minister in 
charge 
of the State Nationalities Affairs Commission, was formerly 
chairman of the Sixth Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Regional 
Government. Tomur Dawamat, currently vice chairman of the 
Eighth NPC Standing Committee, was formerly chairman of the 
Seventh Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Regional Government. Abulaiti 
Abudurexiti was recently elected as chairman of the Eighth 
Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Regional Government. They are good 
friends and native-born Uygur cadres, who have devoted 
themselves to Xinjiang's social construction. When they got 
together during the current session, they talked about 
Xinjiang's past, present, and future, particularly dwelling on 
the importance of strengthening unity among various 
nationalities, which is the cornerstone of national stability 
and unity. 
  Ismail Amat said: "Premier Li Peng's Government Work Report 
got it right and struck a chord with people of various 
nationalities. The report was especially on target regarding the 
question of unity and stability." 
  Tomur Dawamat and Abulaiti Abudurrexiti nodded in agreement 
and said: "Tuohela, tuohela (Uygur for `that is right')." 
  The three men found time to get together during a break from 
the deliberation of the Government Work Report by the Xinjiang 
delegation. Ismail Amat said insightfully: "Ours is a united, 
multinational country. Strengthening unity among various 
nationalities serves the fundamental interests and reflects the 
common aspirations of people of various nationalities across the 
country. Xinjiang is a multinational region where the task of 
promoting unity among various nationalities is vitally 
important. Practice has proved this truth. When our task of 
promoting unity was successful, our society would enjoy 
stability and our economy would develop rapidly." 
  Tomur Dawamat added: "Unity among various nationalities in 
Xinjiang has stood the test and is firmly founded." He made a 
gesture and said: "Since reform and opening up, Xinjiang's 
economy has been on an upswing, with the agricultural sector 
reaping bumper harvests for 16 consecutive years and the people 
enjoying ever-improving living standards. What did we rely on? 
The party Central Committee's correct leadership aside, a very 
important factor has been unity among people of various 
nationalities, without which Xinjiang would not have found 
itself in a favorable situation characterized by prosperity. 
Today, people of various nationalities in Xinjiang are 
increasingly aware that the Han nationality cannot live apart 
from minority nationalities, and that minority nationalities 
cannot be separated from the Han nationality." 
  Abulaiti Abudurexiti, who is attending the session as a 
nonvoting delegate, worked at the grass-roots level for many 
years after graduation from university. He grew soulful when 
discussing this matter. He said: "Unity among people of 
various nationalities is the prerequisite and guarantee for 
national stability and development. Without unity, there would 
be no rallying power and we would not be able to accomplish the 
tasks entrusted to us by history. Xinjiang's development in 
recent years testifies to this point." 
  Ismail Amat said in a ringing and forceful voice: "While 
people of various nationalities should show unity, there is a 
greater need for leading cadres of various nationalities to lead 
the way in promoting unity. This is an important aspect of our 
work." 
  "Tuohela!" 
  "Tuohela!" 
  The other two leaders nodded their approval. 
  These are sincere words that reflect true feelings; they 
also 
convey the wishes of 16 million people of various nationalities 
in Xinjiang. 

