Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Riga, January 31 (LETA) -- Friday [28 January] the 
Secretary of the Saeima [parliament], Imants Daudiss, the 
Foreign Minister, Georgs Andrejevs, and the Deputy Chairman of 
the faction "Latvia's Way", Indulis Berzins, met with the 
deputies of the National Assembly of France. 
  According to the Saeima press service Andrejevs, giving a 
review on a current political situation in Latvia, described the 
"Latvia's Way" faction as centristic being criticized both by 
rightists and leftists. He was also quoted as saying that "we 
are not confronting with the opposition on the Latvian past but 
still there are differences of opinions concerning current and 
future problems." Andrejevs indicated the presence of the 
foreign military forces, migrants entering after the World War 
Two and complicated economic situation in Latvia as the factors 
threatening Latvia's independence. 
  Those who have not lived here, said Andrejevs, are not 
easily 
aware of the situation in Latvia. "We are constantly given 
instructions how to solve our problems, which are probably 
standard for European democracy, but in today's Latvia may lead 
to common destabilization." Andrejevs pointed out the most 
extensive influx of migrants was until 1970. The fact makes 
unacceptable quotas fixing on the basis of the number of years 
spent in Latvia, as the CSCE experts have proposed. 
  Russia failed to fulfill the resolution by the last Supreme 
Council of Latvia on the troops withdrawal from Riga by the end 
of 1992, and from Latvia by the end of 1993. The Russian forces 
stationed currently in Latvia threaten not only Latvian but also 
Lithuanian independence, said the minister. 
  Indulis Berzins said the democratic forces in Russia did not 
work out a new conception for its foreign policy, causing a 
return to the doctrine of empire. The Russian troops in Latvia 
have a negative effect on the interior political situation in 
Latvia. "We want to be secure today while the "Partnership for 
Peace" proposed by the United States provides security for 
distant future," said Berzins. 

