Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow March 26 (ITAR-TASS) -- The ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI 
newspaper front-pages an article by Sergey Yushenkov, chairman 
of the State Duma (lower house of the Russian parliament) 
committee on defence, beginning with the following words: 
"Partnership for Peace Is Part of a General Security System". 
  According to Yushenkov, legislators made two conclusions at 
parliamentary hearings. "If Russia joins the `Partnership' 
programme, it should put forth several conditions which would 
ease possible negative consequences, and this programme "should 
be regarded only as part for establishing a more general 
security system taking into account new realities of the 
post-cold war era". 
  The newspaper singles out a statement by Leonid Smirnyagin, 
a 
member of the presidential council, saying that "time for 
explanation of relations between legislative and executive 
powers has ended". 
  The country needs a memorandum on civil accord not for the 
sake of the document itself but for "paving the way for creative 
work, correcting mistakes of the past and for marching forward", 
Smirgnyagin stresses. 
  The KRASNAYA ZVEZDA newspaper carries an interview with 
State 
Duma speaker Ivan Rybkin, underlining his words that "Russia 
remains a power, and many will seek to rest on its shoulder in 
future". 
  Noting that the inclusion of Russia in the European security 
system is not to everybody's liking, he calls for not making 
haste and fuss with this issue. "The same is true of `the 
Partnership for Progress' [as received] programme," he adds. 
  "Russia is not an ordinary participant in international 
process. Consequently, this circumstance should be reflected in 
the conditions of the offered partnership," he stresses. 
  Casting a short retrospective glance into the recent past of 
Russian leader Boris Yeltsin, the KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA newspaper 
states that many foreign and Russian news agencies now try to 
find out whether the former first secretary of the Sverdlovsk 
regional committee of the Soviet Communist Party had any chronic 
ailments. 
  In this connection, the newspaper writes: "Since the time 
Yeltsin took the path of war against the state-communist machine 
and up to this time, the present Russian president is, as 
specialists claim, in a chronic psychotraumatic situation. 
  "It is necessary for him to pep up himself with various 
tranquilisers, which is, after all, recommended to many people 
at his age." The newspaper quotes Yeltsin's wife as saying that 
the president "feels quite well. There is no need for 
speculating on his health". 
  The TRUD daily prints statements by several specialists and 
civil aviation pilots concerning the recent crash of an A-310 
aerobus in Mezhdurechensk. They concur in the opinion that this 
tragedy is only a link in the chain of troubles plaguing 
Aeroflot's utterly destroyed system. 
  The newspaper notes that the crash "can be the last drop 
exhausting the government's patience. It looks like that 
government decisions may follow in the near future. Apart from 
reorganisation of Aeroflot, they will trigger off reshuffling 
its entire structure". 
  The NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA newspaper prints an article by 
prominent journalist Gleb Pavlovskiy, the author of notorious 
version no.1 on an alleged state coup in russia. According to 
Pavlovskiy, the version is "a routine compilation of open 
information from news agencies, including, of course, city 
rumours". 
  It is pointed out in the article's subtitle that "the author 
of the scandalous document believes that anybody but he inspired 
the political hysteria in the upper echelon". 
  The SOVETSKAYA ROSSIYA daily singles out a statement by 
political parties and movements from the Orenburg region and the 
Volga area that "American troops have nothing to do on our soil". 
  This document was prompted by the fact that a tactical 
exercise is scheduled for this July at the Totskiy 
testing-ground in the Orenburg region with the participation of 
U.S. and Russian troops. 
  The PRAVDA newspaper features an article outlining theses of 
the Russian Communist Party central committee for drafting its 
programme under the headline "new socialism for Russia". 
  "The crisis of Soviet society," the article says, "was 
largely preconditioned by the crisis of the communist party of 
the Soviet Union which was the ruling party for decades". 

