BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, April 11 (TANJUG) -- Official of the 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Peter 
Kessler said in Zagreb on Monday that several civilians had been 
hit by snipers in Gorazde overnight, which would mean that Serbs 
have rifles such as the world has never seen, since the nearest 
Serb positions are located 5 km from Gorazde. 
  Kessler, true, did not openly say which side the snipers 
belonged to, but said that all this happened after the NATO air 
strike on Serbs who are surrounding this Muslim enclave in 
eastern Bosnia. He was evidently relying on the intelligence of 
those who hear his statement immediately to conclude that the 
snipers were Serb snipers firing from Serb super rifles. 
  The Serb positions nearest to Gorazde are located at least 5 
km to the south, outside Vitkovici. It therefore follows that 
Serbs have rifles of so far unknown make, because the most 
effective fire-arms currently known to man can hit targets at a 
distance of 3 km at the most. 
  If Serbs did not open sniper fire from Vitkovici, then, for 
instance, they could have done so from their positions in 
Kovaci, 6 km north of Gorazde, or, why not, from Uhotica Hill, 
only 10 km southwest of the town. 
  Perhaps it will even be "discovered" that Bosnian Serbs have 
invented rifles which military experts throughout the world did 
not even dream existed, or perhaps Kessler's statement is aimed 
at preparing the media and providing justification for new 
attacks by NATO -- U.S. warplanes, in fact. 
  Since the U.S. and the U.N. still have not reached final 
agreement on what was the exact reason for bombing Serb 
positions in Bosnia, it could be gathered that the field was now 
being prepared for new attacks, in which event the contradictory 
explanations about the first attack would be quickly forgotten. 
  While British media are carrying a statement by a member of 
British special units within the U.N. Protection Force 
(UNPROFOR) in Gorazde, who reported by radiotelephone that the 
U.N. staff had been in danger from the local population, 
Washington keeps repeating that the U.S. planes launched attacks 
following a request from the U.N. staff in Gorazde for 
protection. 
  After all this, it is really not clear why Bosnian Serbs 
were 
bombed on Sunday and Monday, but it is possible that the 
make-believe Serb snipers could provide a suitable excuse for 
NATO's repeated military siding with the Bosnian Muslims. 

