Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 7 Jan (PL) -- The Revolutionary Armed Forces 
(FAR) of Cuba is focusing on resource savings and economic 
efficiency, according to reports issued and opinions expressed 
by FAR command staff. 
  Our military chiefs must manage economic information. They 
must know the price of sweet potatoes (domestic tuber) as well 
as the price of a bullet, FAR Minister Army General Raul Castro 
said during a visit to military installations yesterday. 
  The local media's report on the visit highlighted the 
defense 
minister's interest in reinforcing the troops' combat capability 
and their participation in economic activities geared mainly 
toward increasing food production. 
  Gen. Raul Castro himself recently explained to members of 
the 
Communist Party of Cuba's Central Committee, of which he is 
second secretary, the efforts made by the FAR to increase 
training levels despite a major expense reduction. 
  On that occasion he detailed how the Cuban military had 
greatly increased its food supplies by producing its own food 
and how it had even rendered important services to the country's 
economy, primarily through a special corps called Youth Labor 
Army (EJT). 
  Although the traditional U.S. hostility against the Cuban 
revolution forces the FAR to use great discretion in its 
expenditures, last year the armed institution reduced its budget 
by 600 million pesos -- equivalent to dollars at the official 
exchange rate, according to official reports issued last week. 
  Cuba is going through an adverse economic situation 
following 
the collapse of socialism in the former Soviet Union and the 
East European countries as the island conducted 85 percent of 
its foreign trade under equal conditions with those areas. 
  Those nations, especially the former USSR, were the FAR's 
main suppliers of weapons, ammunition, and other articles. 
  Despite the situation, FAR sent thousands of its members to 
perform agriculture tasks in the fertile plains south of Havana 
last summer. Also, approximately 6,000 EJT soldiers have been 
permanently assigned to tend crops in that same region since 
last October. 

