BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature; compiled by </F>
Nikolay Zherebtsov, Andrey Petrovskiy, edited by Vladimir 
Shishlin] 
  [Text] Akbar Turajonzoda, a co-chairman of the Islamic 
Renaissance Movement, said that the talks between the government 
and opposition held in Tehran had failed to produce a single 
joint document thus far. Talks on a cease-fire are still 
underway while the agenda has not been discussed, he said. 
  In an Interfax interview he expressed doubt that a mutually 
acceptable formula could be found before the talks ended. 
Turajonzoda emphasized, however, that if an agreement were 
signed, the opposition would observe a ceasefire inside the 
Republic as well as on the border. He made it clear that the 
official Dushanbe had also to abide by the agreement and 
compliance with it had to be supervised by observers from the UN 
and other international organizations. 
  Turajonzoda denied that the Tajik opposition had a hand in 
terrorist activities against Russian servicemen. He emphasized 
that Russia was the main guarantor of Tajikistan's security and 
the country's ally. 
  He thought that the acts of terror against Russian 
servicemen 
in Tajikistan had been engineered by those who wanted to drag 
Russia into the mire of civil war in Tajikistan and opposed a 
political settlement there. 
  Lieutenant General Aleksandr Bespalov, deputy commander of 
Russian border guards, told INTERFAX that the acts of terror 
against his men had been committed on direct orders from the 
Tajik government-in-exile. He believed that the most dangerous 
acts of terror (the latest of them occurred on 24 June when 
unknown gunmen fired at a bus carrying border guards officers in 
Dushanbe) had been perpetrated by the Black Islam group known 
for its fanaticism and callous cruelty. 
  Bespalov said that on the orders from the leaders of the 
Tajik opposition and the commander-in-chief of its militias 
Rezvon units of fighters had been concentrating on the 
Tajik-Afghan border, poised for an attack on Shuroabad, Darvaza 
and Bakhorak. 
  According to intelligence reports, the opposition leaders 
ordered moving Badakhshan front units, in which Iranian, 
Pakistani and Saudi mercenaries serve, from deep in Afghanistan 
to border areas. A field hospital has been deployed in the 
Afghan town of Chah-e Ab for Tajik opposition fighters and 
mercenaries. Its staff was recruited in Islamic states. 
  Bespalov thought that this was evidence of Tajik opposition 
leaders' intention to escalate the fighting. He said that those 
who obstructed the peace process on the border and inside the 
country would bear the responsibility for it. 

