CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Bill Reynolds: "Moravcik Traveled Back Roads to </F>
the Top"] 
  [Text] Bratislava--The qualities that people most often 
attribute to Jozef Moravcik are not the ones that usually rocket 
a person to leadership. 
  The most frequent description of Slovakia's new prime 
minister is that of the quintessential diplomat: handsome, 
suave, even-tempered and, above all, cautious. Those who have 
dealt with him are quick to add that he is personally and 
professionally honest and not noticeably ambitious. 
  Yet, in private, some of Moravcik's associates complain that 
his moderate personality has made him only moderately effective. 
  The word "slow" is often applied in characterizations of his 
six-month stint as the last foreign minister of Czechoslovakia. 
During his 11 months as the independent Slovakia's foreign 
minister, he was frequently criticized for bad management skills. 
  Moravcik's leading role in the rebellion within the Movement 
for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS)--a rebellion that triggered the 
fall of former Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar--has only added to 
the mystery surrounding him. Previously, he was not considered a 
political heavyweight, nor was he seen as someone willing to 
stick out his political neck. 
  Now the fate of Slovakia over the next six months--some say 
the health of democracy in the country for the next 
generation--is in the hands of the 49-year-old former communist, 
former law professor, former revolutionary and former Meciar 
aide. 
  The political and economic chaos in the country is such that 
few dare to predict whether Moravcik is equal to the task. But 
most observers say it should be only a matter of weeks before it 
becomes clear whether he has a chance to be successful or not. 
  The government Moravcik now heads contains no less than five 
political parties, ranging in ideology from the former communist 
Party of the Democratic Left (SDL) to the fiscally and socially 
conservative Christian Democratic Movement (KDH). While keeping 
this potentially fractious coalition united, he will also have 
to hold the unpredictable Meciar at bay in the run-up to 
national elections Sept. 30 and Oct. 1. 
  Egon Lansky, former Czechoslovak deputy foreign minister, 
said Moravcik's better qualities will serve him well. 
  "I remember my first encounters with him," said Lansky. "He 
would frankly say to me, `Tell me about this and that because I 
don't understand it--I have no experience in this field.' That 
was one of his positive sides." 
  Moravcik represented "the better face of Meciarism," said 
Lansky. 
  The ability Moravcik has shown through the years to rise 
from 
relative obscurity to prominent positions can be explained by 
his instinct for promoting his career as well as his genuine 
nationalism, said Lansky. 
  The new leader's supporters in parliament tend to place 
their 
faith in his reputation as a centrist and a consensus builder, 
as well as his history of being a tough negotiator. He may 
succeed mainly because others need him to succeed. In the days 
following the Moravcik appointment, expressions of hope that 
those qualities would keep the coalition together were almost 
universal. 
  Moravcik studied law in Bratislava and Prague. He became a 
law lecturer at Comenius University in Bratislava in 1972, and 
he was dean of the law faculty in 1990-91. In the late 1980s, he 
was a founding member of a younger and more progressive wing of 
the Slovak Communist Party. 
  In November 1989, he quit the party and became a member of 
Public Against Violence (VPN), the Slovak sister of the Czech 
revolutionary movement Civic Forum (OF). He filled a vacant VPN 
seat in the Slovak parliament in January 1991, and when the 
movement split that spring, he became a founding member of HZDS. 
  He was elected to the Czechoslovak federal parliament in 
June 
1992. The following month, he was a surprise choice for 
Czechoslovak foreign minister. Upon the death of the federation 
Jan. 1, 1993, he became a legislative adviser to Meciar. When 
Foreign Minister Milan Knazko was fired in March 1993 after a 
long-running feud with Meciar, Moravcik replaced him. 
  Rumors that he had fallen into disfavor with the 
increasingly 
autocratic Meciar emerged last October after the prime minister 
fired widely respected Ambassador to Austria Rudolf Filkus. 
  Consistent with his non-confrontational style, Moravcik 
refused to support Filkus' removal but stopped short of openly 
condemning the decision. Observers of Slovak politics were not 
surprised when Moravcik and Deputy Prime Minister Roman Kovac 
formed the Alternative of Political Realism faction within HZDS 
in February. 
  The alternative faction called for Meciar's removal and the 
formation of a broad-based coalition of non-partisan experts. 
For this, Moravcik and Kovac were expelled from HZDS and forced 
from the government. 
  Less than a month later, President Michal Kovac called on 
Moravcik to form a new government in order to reverse Slovakia's 
economic decline and increasing international isolation, and to 
put an end to the roughshod tactics of Meciar. 

