Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Allwyn Fernandes: "Move for Social Audit of Mass </F>
Media"] 
  [Text] Bombay, January 13--Dr N. Bhaskar Rao, convener of 
the Union communications ministry's social audit panel, plans to 
set up a similar group for the mass media, mainly with the help 
of teachers from across the country. 
  Mr Kushwant Singh, noted journalist, and Mr. B.G. Deshmukh, 
former Union cabinet secretary, who are members of the telecom 
panel, are also involved in the new project. They hope to set up 
the mass media panel by April. 
  "I find school principals and teachers around the country 
are 
alarmed at how they are losing control over children, but the 
government is a helpless spectator to the bombardment from the 
skies of satellite TV programmes. 
  "Newspapers everywhere are going in for television and you 
are going to see media conglomerates. There is, therefore, great 
need for professional monitoring and analysis of the media 
scene, keeping the social aspect in mind," Dr Rao, who is 
chairman of the Centre for Media Studies, Delhi, said. 
  Last week, the British Government signalled its intention to 
allow the creation of large British media conglomerates, 
combining newspaper/publishing companies with 
TV/telecommunications groups capable of competing with European 
and American giants. 
  The aim of the review of cross-media ownership rules is to 
ensure the survival of domestic TV production companies and 
strengthen them in their "assault" on rapidly expanding "global 
media markets." The BBC chief has already started talking of the 
BBC as "an empire without frontiers." 
  But the review has raised basic concerns about plural 
sources 
of information in a democracy and about protecting 
readers/viewers. Dr Rao's panel hopes to examine these issues, 
promote debate and suggest policy because the government seems 
to be a "helpless spectator," as he put it. 
  His comments about women and teachers being most concerned 
about the impact of TV is borne out by what is happening in 
Bombay. At least three schools in one Bombay suburb alone have 
been looking for counsellors recently because teachers are 
unable to tackle the problems students now face. 
  In one school where the principal got the parents-teachers 
association involved in the proposal, there was stiff resistance 
from the men who felt that parents would not co-operate "because 
no one wants to discuss family problems with an outsider." 
  It was the women present who asserted themselves, overruled 
the men and passed the proposal because, as one of them put it, 
"it is we who bear the brunt of what is happening, not the men 
who are too busy at work." 
  Dr Rao said he was looking for volunteers in different parts 
of the country not connected with advertising to be involved 
with the panel on an honorary basis. Technology was changing 
social behaviour. Children were making crank calls or using the 
telephone to call sex and astrology services advertised on Star 
TV, out of curiosity, not realising these were international 
calls. 
  In one girls' school in a middle-class suburb here, tenth 
standard children are being encouraged by their peers to have a 
"boyfriend." Those who say their parents will not allow them are 
told, "Don't worry, we'll get you a telephone friend." Those who 
do not have a phone at home find the telecom centres that have 
spouted out everywhere convenient to call their "telefriends." 
Parents are alarmed because "we do not even know who is at the 
other end of the line." 
  Dr Rao said he first toyed with the idea of a mass media 
panel seven years ago when he set up a national council of TV 
viewers in 18 towns. Most of the panel members were women and 
teachers because he had found they were the most worried about 
the impact of mass media on the younger generation. 
  "I also find that most people are quick to agree in private 
conversation about the problems likely to be caused on children 
by TV viewing. But they hesitate to say so in public because 
they are afraid of being dubbed backward or conservative by 
their peer groups. They are waiting for someone to take the 
initiative," he said. 
  The national council of TV viewers did not pick up, probably 
because at that time people had not realised the impact TV would 
have on the minds of young viewers. But now that satellite TV 
was a part of the media scene, the panel was an idea whose time 
had arrived, he felt. 
  Newspapers everywhere were carrying stories of children 
picking up ideas to commit crime from TV serials. In Bombay, a 
boy had killed his grandfather. There was a similar incident in 
Calcutta, while in Delhi on New York's eve, youths abducted a 
woman and tried to rape her. Only timely action by the public 
and the police had saved her. 
  Dr Rao said he was inspired to set up the mass media social 
audit panel because of his experience in the telecom panel over 
the past 18 months. The telecom social audit panel was the first 
of its kind in the country and was set up to bring about greater 
responsiveness in the operations of the telecom and postal 
services. 
  The panel, headed by the former chief justice, Mr P.N. 
Bhagwati, has made several recommendations on postal and 
telecommunication services, involving operational and policy 
changes, aimed at making the subscriber the focal point and 
prime concern of the system. 
  Many of the suggestions made in the four reports submitted 
so 
far have been accepted by the communications ministry. These 
include giving the subscriber a rebate for the period the 
telephone is dead, and using the software in electronic 
exchanges to allow a user who had not paid the bill to receive 
calls, but not make them. 
  "New technology has come in many areas, but the rules have 
not changed to keep pace with it. The same thing is happening in 
mass media. Technology is overtaking us. We shall have to 
develop a methodology of social audit of mass media to monitor 
the role, impact and the way it is used," says Dr Rao. 


