Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Markus Lesch report: "In The Throes of Crime"] </F>
  [Text] International crime is gaining increasing control 
over Germany's eastern neighbors. Organized crime is 
establishing itself in Poland and the Czech Republic along its 
path to Western markets, with Germany as the objective. The 
eastern laender can feel this already. 
  "In those countries, organized crime wants to earn its fare 
to come to Germany, so to speak, and is establishing permanent 
infrastructures there," said Saxony's Interior Minister Heinz 
Eggert at an international conference on internal security in 
Dresden. 
  "Western European crime is quickly spreading to the East," 
warned the president of the Czech Criminal Police Colonel Jan 
Vaculik. The most significant organized crime rings in the 
Czech Republic are groups of people from the Russophone area. 
"These groups are virtually impossible to overcome. They 
enforce silence with brutal methods, similar to those used by 
the Mafia in relation to the Omerta," Vaculik explained. 
  Contacts between this "Russo-Mafia" and Italian groups have 
been documented. Crime bosses from Naples and Moscow have 
already met in Prague in order to organize the smuggling of 
cocaine. The strongest Italian group is the notorious Camorra 
from Naples. Vaculik: "We have information that the Camorra 
wants to expand even further, to Russia and Estonia." 
  The third organized crime group consists of the Chinese 
"Flying Dragons and `K-14' from New York, who extort protection 
money and deal in transfers of human cargo from the Far East to 
Germany and Western Europe. 
  Warnings signals are also coming from Poland, especially 
regarding drugs. "Poland has become a laboratory for synthetic 
drugs," says Janusz Wolny of the Polish Interior Ministry. "In 
addition, there are increasing quantities of cocaine from South 
America, heroin from the Near, Middle, and Far East, and 
marijuana from Africa." The quantity of drugs seized in 1993 
was double the 1992 figure. 
  The brutality of the criminal elements is growing at an 
alarming rate. In 1993, in fights alone, there were 185 heavy 
offenses, including 56 homicides, 31 kidnappings, and 38 attacks 
with firearms or grenades. 
  Even in Dresden, a hand grenade blew up in front of a police 
precinct. "The violence is going to get even bigger because of 
the involvement of criminal groups from CIS and the Czech 
Republic on the prostitution scene," warns Peter Raisch, 
president of the Saxon Criminal Office. 
  The Mafia lawyer Teresa Principato from Palermo confirmed 
the 
growing interest of Italian crime groups in East Europe and the 
German market. "Eastern Germany is a favorite place for money 
laundering," she said. "The police forces of the different 
laender appreciate the importance of international cooperation 
to fight crime. Now is the time for politics to follow suit," 
said Italy's best-known Mafia expert. 

