Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 26 (XINHUA) -- Increasing farmers' 
income and farm produce supply are the most important jobs of 
China's rural work in 1994, Minister of Agriculture Liu Jiang 
said here today. 
  Speaking at the ministry's meeting, Liu said the ministry 
will do its utmost to raise farmers' income and ensure a supply 
of farm produce to meet domestic demands. 
  He said that the efforts will contribute to the country's 
efforts to control inflation and maintain sustainable, rapid and 
healthy economic development. 
  In China, the situation in agricultural production is 
considered vital to the country's economy and everyday life of 
its people, since no other country could provide the enormous 
amount of farm produce China needs. 
  Also listed on the ministry's agenda for this year are the 
promotion of the country's rural and township enterprises and 
deepening of rural reform, such as extension of farmland 
contract tenure and promotion of rural share-holding systems, a 
new business management form popular in China's rural areas. 
  The ministry also vowed to coordinate with other government 
departments to ensure that the central government's rural 
policies are implemented, including the government's decision to 
finance the 550 counties selected by the government as key 
market-oriented grain and cotton production centers. 
  According to sources from the ministry, total acreage under 
agricultural crops throughout China is expected to increase this 
year over last year. But the amount of farmland used for grain 
production is estimated at less than the state plan, mainly 
because less wheat was sown over the previous year. 
  However, total rape-growing areas have been increased by a 
big margin over those of last year and a bumper harvest is in 
sight. 
  The areas sown in cotton in China's major cotton-producing 
regions also exceeded acreage for the previous year, sources 
from the ministry said. 

