BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Wajdi al-'Aridi] </F>
  [Text] The country's militias, having been forced to lay 
down their weapons, remained for some time in possession of 
their own media publications, through which they aired their 
news and expressed their positions. 
  With the ban on newscasts and political programs of private 
televisions and radios, the country's parties and political 
organizations are scrambling to revive their old newspapers. 
The move is gathering momentum, with every party busily making 
preparations and looking into the financial side of its press 
endeavor. 
  According to a prominent source of the Progressive Socialist 
Party [PSP], the PSP will soon be publishing a weekly magazine, 
AL-ANBA'. Preparations have been underway since PSP leader 
Walid Junblatt ordered the closure of the party's radio, the 
Voice of the Mountain. AL-ANBA', to be managed by 'Izzat Safi, 
will have political and miscellaneous news reports, mainly 
expressing the PSP line. 
  A similar development is taking place in the Phalangist 
Party. Its political bureau, having passed a decision to resume 
publication of AL-'AMAL newspaper in the near future, is taking 
steps in that direction. Prior to the newscast ban, the 
Phalangist Party had begun tentative transmission of the Voice 
of Lebanon Television, but plans to launch the service have 
since gone by the boards. The party's Voice of Lebanon radio is 
still on the air, abiding by the newscast ban. 
  The Syrian Social Nationalist Party [SSNP] is taking action 
to revive its newspaper AL-BINA', whose publication was 
discontinued two years ago. 
  The Lebanese Communist Party [LCP] has no plans to augment 
its media facilities. In addition to the Voice of the People 
radio, the LCP has a new television station, although it sold a 
large portion of its shares to businessman Tahsin al-Khayyat. 
It is still publishing its magazine AL-NIDA', which used to be 
a weekly but is now daily. Financial considerations have forced 
the LCP to sell part of its media empire. 
  The Amal Movement has no plans to expand its media. It 
currently has a weekly newspaper, AMAL. 
  Hizballah already boasts an impressive assortment of media 
facilities, including al-Manar Television, al-Nur Radio, and the 
weekly newspaper AL-'AHD. 
  The media of the disbanded Lebanese Forces media are up for 
grabs. One eager bidder for the "loot" is the Phalangist Party. 
The latter is suing the Lebanese Forces for control of the 
Lebanese Broadcasting Corporation, a television station which 
the Phalangist Party claims it owns. The weekly magazine 
AL-MASIRAH, originally published by the Lebanese Forces, still 
appears but prudently avoids any political row with the 
Government. 
  Sources at the National Liberal Party rule out a revival of 
the party magazine AL-AHRAR for financial reasons. The party 
has no other media facility. 

