BFN 

  [Text] Prague, April 25 (CTK) -- The Privatization 
Ministry will not allow the National Property Fund (FNM) to 
liquidate any of the companies designated for the second coupon 
privatization wave before the wave has been completed, Deputy 
Privatization Minister Roman Ceska told CTK today. He admitted 
that some companies will probably go bankrupt when the wave has 
been completed. 
  "The ministry wants to keep the companies at least until two 
months after the shares have been issued to coupon holders, so 
that the new owners would get a chance to take a stance on the 
situation," Ceska said. 
  The FNM's Executive Committee decided on April 18 to propose 
the liquidation of Zemedelske Stavby of Zatec and that it be 
excluded from the list of companies designated for the second 
wave. FNM's Chairman Tomas Jezek said Friday [22 April] that a 
similar fate was awaiting other companies earmarked for the 
second wave. 
  Ceska admitted today that the list of companies designated 
for the second wave includes also "bad companies where 
bankruptcy is being considered." He added that the Privatization 
Ministry had no signs that some of the companies were "bankrupt" 
before their inclusion in the second wave was set. Analyses of 
some companies only indicated a decrease in their capital stock. 
  Ceska rejected Jezek's idea that a company proposed for 
liquidation would be excluded from the list for the second wave 
and the points returned to investors, saying it was unfeasible. 
The commission which stipulates the prices of companies for 
individual rounds has no means with which to return points which 
have already been invested. 
  Ceska is convinced that liquidation of a company after the 
end of the second wave does not necessarily mean a loss for the 
investors. "A liquidation does not mean that a shareholder 
cannot acquire anything at all. There may be left over capital 
which at a certain price rate can be more interesting than 
shares of the best companies," Ceska said. 
  Jezek said on Friday that one of the reasons why the FNM 
wanted to speed up liquidating bad companies was "unfairness" to 
investors. When liquidating a company, creditors are satisfied 
first and the remainder is what is left when the company's 
obligations have been settled, he said. 

