BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 8 (XINHUA) -- Visiting Maltese Prime 
Minister Eddie Fenech Adami today expressed "a sense of 
satisfaction" with his meetings with Chinese leaders to exchange 
views on fruitful Malta-China ties over the past 20 years. 
  He held a press conference here today before his departure 
for Xian, capital of Shaanxi Province, in the company of Shi 
Guangsheng, chairman of the Chinese Government Reception 
Committee and vice- minister of foreign trade and economic 
cooperation. 
  The prime minister said that, while in Beijing, he had a 
very 
cordial meeting with Chinese President Jiang Zemin. 
  He said that, during his talks with Chinese Premier Li Peng, 
they reviewed and discussed the international situation and 
Malta-China relations. 
  He added that the two sides agreed that there exist 
"prospects and possibilities of furthering bilateral 
cooperation." 
  The prime minister said that yesterday the two governments 
signed a memorandum of understanding on the establishment of 
aviation links. He said he hoped and believed that the two 
governments would conclude an air service agreement soon. 
  He said that during the visit Maltese Deputy Prime Minister 
and Minister of Foreign Affairs Guido de Marco and his Chinese 
counterpart Qian Qichen "had a long and very interesting 
exchange of views on the international situation." 
  This meeting has proved that there are many opportunities 
for 
political cooperation in the international field, he said. 
  He said he was convinced that his visit will "bring about a 
very positive enhancement" of bilateral cooperation. 
  Adami said that the fourth world conference on women to be 
held in Beijing next year will be a very important meeting. 
  He said that he explained to the host the situation in Malta 
and steps that the Maltese Government has taken over the past 
few years, including amendment of the constitution, which now 
provides for the exclusion of any form of discrimination. 
  On his impressions of his China visit, Adami said that since 
his first visit to China in 1978, tremendous achievements have 
been made in China's economic growth. 
  "China is very much on the move in its economic affairs," he 
said, adding: "in terms of GDP, it is very impressive." 

