Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Doreen Cheung in Beijing] </F>
  [Text] Britain's acceptance that all borrowings incurred 
in building the airport and its associated rail link would be 
counted as Government debt was clinched in secret talks between 
Sir Percy Cradock and Lu Ping in the summer of 1991, Beijing 
revealed yesterday. Mr Lu, director of the State Council's Hong 
Kong and Macao Affairs Office (HKMAO), disclosed the "diplomatic 
understanding" during a meeting of the Preliminary Working 
Committee (PWC) in Beijing yesterday. 
  A member of the airport sub-committee of the PWC Sir 
Sze-yuen 
Chung, quoted Mr Lu as saying it was made clear in discussions 
with Sir Percy that all debt would be government debt for the 
purposes of discussing how much liability would be left for the 
Special Administrative Region government after 1997. According 
to Mr Lu, the ceiling of $5 billion in borrowing -- as 
stipulated in the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on the 
airport projects -- covered the loans required for the airport 
and its rail link. 
  Mr Lu's claims were rejected by the Government last night as 
legislators urged both sides to release details of all 
negotiations to shed light on the dispute over airport financing 
which was holding up the project. 
  A government spokesman said: "Throughout the (airport) 
negotiations (on the MOU), a distinction was made between 
borrowings by the Hong Kong Government and borrowings by the 
MTRC and PAA. 
  "The MOU limit of $5 billion refers to Hong Kong Government 
borrowings and not to borrowings by the MTRC and PAA." 
  Meeting Point's Zachary Wong Wai-yin said: "We have so much 
hearsay information, I urge both governments to disclose the 
documents and let the truth speak." United Democrats legislator 
Albert Chan Wai-yip said Britain should explain whether Sir 
Percy had struck such a deal as Mr Lu suggested. "Britain will 
need to clarify as to when and where the agreement was made, as 
well as whether Sir Percy was acting in a capacity to make such 
an agreement," he said. 
  Sir Percy, who went to Beijing on behalf of the British 
Prime 
Minister John Major, was said to have initiated the secret deal 
on the airport with Mr Lu on June 30, 1991. On July 2, however, 
the then Governor, Sir David Wilson (now Lord Wilson) denied 
that any deal was reached. Two days later, China and Britain 
announced the MOU. 
  Sir Percy in recent years has been highly critical of the 
British Government, in particular Governor Chris Patten, over 
the handling of China affairs. Instead of accepting secret 
diplomacy as Sir Percy advocated, Mr Patten had adopted a more 
open approach in dealing with China which resulted in his 
constantly confronting Beijing on a wide range of transitional 
issues. 
  According to Sir Sze Yuen, Mr Lu said at that time it was 
clear the Airport Authority (now the Airpor Corporation) would 
be part of the Government but unclear who would build the 
railway. Mr Lu told PWC members that China gave Britain full 
discretion for it to build the railway -- either by itself or by 
a statutory body. 
  But under the MOU, any government borrowing excess of $5 
billion required Chinese consent. 
  Sir Sze-yuen quoted Mr Lu as saying that the airport related 
contracts and franchises straddling 1997 mentioned in the MOU 
should be those in the "diplomatic understanding" agreed with 
Sir Percy. "They have nothing to do with the Basic Law," Mr Lu 
reportedly said. He said although any laws that are not in 
breach of the Basic Law will remain valid after 1997, "someone 
is trying to mislead the public" by saying that those contracts 
and franchises were governed by the Basic Law. It was clearly 
stated in the MOU that contracts and franchises straddling 1997 
must have Chinese consent if they are to be valid after 1997, Mr 
Lu said. 
  The same will apply to the Airport Corporation Bill which 
was 
provided in the MOU as a corporation to be formed under the 
authorisation of the British Government, he added. 
  The MOU requires the British side to seek prior approval 
from 
Beijing on any major airport-related franchises and contracts 
that straddle 1997. 
  On the Chinese opposition against granting the sale of 62 
hectares of land along the railway in one go, Mr Lu has said the 
two sides have already agreed to let the Sino-British Land 
Commission grant the land on an annual basis. China has 
promised to grant approval of the 62 hectares before 1997, Mr Lu 
reportedly said, but that the exact amount of land granted each 
year would depend on market demand. 
  Sir Sze-yuen sidestepped a question on whether Mr Lu 
indicated China has submitted its own counter-proposals, saying 
only that "China does not have the same resources as the Hong 
Kong Government." He argued that under the MOU the British side 
should take the initiative to submit proposals while the Chinese 
side should say yes or no to it. "How can you ask the HKMAO to 
work out any proposal given its small establishment?" he queried. 
  Despite Mr Lu's clarification to the PWC members, they had 
not discussed feasible financial arrangements, Sir Sze-yuen said. 

