Language: <F P=105>Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Gojko Marinkovic: "Signatures From Foggy </F>
Karadjordjevo"] 
  [Text] We cannot remember the last time when [Croatian 
President] Franjo Tudjman was so cheery, excited, joyful, 
euphoric, and even somewhat melancholic, as he was last 
Wednesday, when in Geneva the declaration on the gradual 
normalization of the relations between the republic of Croatia 
and the FRY was signed. The return to the same state as 16 
months ago, when a similar, but even more precise, agreement 
between Tudjman and [the then President of FRY] Dobrica Cosic 
was signed, has been assessed by the Croatian president as the 
most important document after the UN Security Council's 
Resolution 871. He also thinks that [Serbian Foreign Minister] 
Vladislav Jovanovic's signature in Milosevic's presence is 
actually the recognition of the sovereign Croatia, which opens 
possibilities for the inclusion of the UN Protection Areas 
[UNPAs] in the constitutional-legal system of Croatia in a 
peaceful way, and also that it is an enormous success of the 
Croatian policy that has improved the Croatian image in the 
world. 
  On hearing the news, most Croatian citizens felt surprised 
and confused, to put it mildly, and many of them wondered: What 
is that supposed to mean? The first TV opinion surveys, 
although probably well edited in favor of the president's 
policy, showed that people are already fed up with such and 
similar documents, because that was already the 77th meeting of 
the international community. In addition to such skepticism, 
and the usual answer "well, so far they have signed many 
documents," one could notice a certain relief, and desire that 
the war be finally brought to an end soon. So, as far as 
citizens are concerned, the support was quite spiritless and 
lethargic, but it cannot be said that Tudjman did not get it. 
<H5>  The Tide of Disagreements From the Opposition </H5>
  The entire tide of disagreements, criticisms, and remarks 
have, therefore, been delivered by the opposition parties. The 
most vociferous, but also the most categorical, has been Drazen 
Budisa, chairman of the strongest opposition party, the Croatian 
Social Liberal Party [HSLS]: "There is no justification for a 
policy that seeks an ally in the aggressor, while seeking an 
enemy in the other victim of the aggression. In that sense, we 
think that a priority of the Croatian state should be the 
accomplishment of an agreement with the political leadership of 
Bosnian-Herzegovinian Muslims, while this declaration will make 
the accomplishment of that agreement difficult. The relations 
with the FRY can become normal again only when the FRY 
recognizes the Croatian state within its internationally 
recognized borders, which is not done by this document," Budisa 
claims. 
  Slavko Mestrovic, secretary of the Croatian People's Party, 
welcomes the deceleration in the case if it leads toward a just 
peace, the reintegration of the occupied Croatian territories, 
the return of the refugees to their homes, and the cessation of 
the war. ``Croatia has very unpleasant experiences with 
Milosevic's regime. Some initiatives not only failed to bring 
about the expected improvements, but also helped Milosevic to 
recover and regain strength precisely at the moments when he was 
in the most difficult situation. He adroitly used those 
initiatives to preserve the regime in Serbia, as well as to 
improve the image of himself and Serbia in international public 
opinion. I am afraid that the same thing will happen now, 
because I firmly believe that Milosevic has not given up the 
platform of a greater Serbia. On the contrary, he cannot go 
back any more, since he has burnt all his bridges. He knows 
that a tribunal awaits him, to try him as a war criminal. 
  "Although the declaration does not mention 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, it may mean a certain political pressure 
aimed at forcing a settlement of the crisis in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina," Mestrovic explains his party's attitude. 
<H5>  Who Will Be Eating Grass? </H5>
  However, the Social-Democratic Party of Croatia [SDP] 
believes that, through this document, and above all by the 
announced opening of the governmental offices of the two states, 
the so-called FRY is de facto recognized, while, on the Croatian 
part, the initiative has been made for the sanctions to be 
lifted, being so far the only form of international pressure 
that has been put on the regime that actually carried out the 
aggression against Croatia, as well as against other neighboring 
countries, the regime that has been defined by the whole world 
as fascist, the regime in which human rights are brazenly 
ignored. 
  The Croatian signature on the document has actually 
strengthened and stabilized that regime. The SDP also raises a 
series of questions regarding the reported positive experiences 
in the joint efforts to speed up the peace process in former 
Yugoslavia, which is the basic goal of the declaration. "When 
did Milosevic make a peace-making move, when and where did he 
ever give up the concept of greater Serbia? When did he 
recognize Croatia in its internationally recognized borders? 
Did he not, only a month ago, organize elections on the 
territory of the state with which he has just signed the 
declaration? Is he not supporting the aggression these days 
against the Croatian enclaves in Bosnia- Herzegovina? When 
these questions receive answers we shall be happy to open, not 
only government offices in neighboring Serbia, but many other 
offices. At this moment, we cannot accept any legitimization of 
those who evidently committed the crime, while never doing 
anything to dissociate themselves from those crimes," the SPD 
officials say, stating their attitude. 
  The Croatian Peasants' Party [HSS] thinks that the 77th 
meeting in Geneva with Milosevic the Balkan Conqueror is neither 
the last, nor the first meeting, in the context of the Croatian 
triumphalism on one hand, and Byzantine maneuvers on the other. 
"We are afraid that the document is a piece of paper without 
guarantees. It is about Milosevic's policy that aims at finally 
contouring greater Serbia, for which he and his subjects are 
ready to eat grass [as published], and finally, it is about all 
the games regarding the possible lifting of the sanctions. Of 
course, an important factor is also the pressure by the 
international community that the issue of Bosnia should finally 
be settled, that is, it's partition. However, any agreement 
without the accord of the third party -- this time it is Muslims 
-- leaves Bosnia to play its role of the land of death, where 
the war continues, to the disadvantage of the Croatian people as 
well," the HSS reacts to the agreement. 
<H5>  Zagreb-Knin-Belgrade </H5>
  The reactions of other parties have been similar, but it is 
discernible in these quoted statements that one dilemma 
dominates in the majority of the criticisms, which is: Is the 
Croatian Government allowed to negotiate with war criminals and 
the regime that attacked Croatian territory? Milosevic is 
simply not to be trusted, while Tudjman is customarily 
reproached that he is actually rescuing Milosevic, while this 
time those accusations are going so far that Tudjman is being 
accused of pushing the lifting of the sanctions against Serbia. 
The other two crucial questions have to do with 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. True, Minister Jovanovic did state that the 
reintegration of Krajina into Croatia should be discussed at the 
Zagreb-Knin level, meaning that the issue of Krajina is an 
internal affair of Croatia, but have the Krajina presidential 
elections not been carried out precisely in Belgrade recently? 
True, in Croatia there are few statements expressing whether 
Milan Martic, who, in the second round, almost beat the already 
elected Milan Babic, would be more convenient than somebody 
else, but everybody knows that Martic is Milosevic's protegee, 
and that he, with his attitudes, perfectly fits in with the 
concept of greater Serbia, that is, the union of all Serbian 
states. Besides, the Serbian state-run television also 
considers Krajina to be a Serbian territory, so, for instance, 
in TV weather forecasts Krajina is regularly shown on the chart 
as a part of Yugoslavia, while Zadar is a part of Krajina. 
Still, there are people who think that Martic's win is good for 
Croatia, because he, being Milosevic's direct vassal, must be 
obedient. Nevertheless, in any case, Serbian official policy 
has not so far by a single move shown that Tudjman is right in 
claiming that the Geneva declaration is the first step toward 
the reintegration of Krajina, which is a primary thing for him, 
because, in a certain way, he has given up Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
contenting himself with something that has never been questioned. 

<H5>    Croatia Has Recognized the Serbian Republic </H5>
  Not only the Croatian opposition, but also many foreign 
media 
houses, and even diplomats, have assessed that the 
Croato-Serbian agreement constitutes a pressure on Muslims, so 
that Zvonko Lerotic, the president's personal adviser, states 
that "the Muslims are thereby forced to make similar agreements 
with Croats and Serbs, because it is suicide to wage war with 
two states that are about to find a common language." By this 
statement, Lerotic has almost confirmed the speculations that 
the agreement is about a military alliance of Croats and Serbs. 
Such theories, which are not alone in the international press, 
find support in another agreement that was also signed in Geneva 
-- which the Croatian opposition ostensibly did not notice, to 
the great surprise and almost astonishment of all, and 
consequently did not comment on, although the integral text was 
published in Croatian newspapers -- the agreement signed between 
Mile Akmadzic, on behalf of the Croatian Republic of 
Herceg-Bosna, and Nikola Koljevic, on behalf of the Serbian 
Republic, in which both sides emphasize that "there are no 
disputed issues between them that cannot be solved in a peaceful 
way." 
  Quote: "Two republics have decided to establish diplomatic 
relations, so that the Serbian Republic will open an office in 
Mostar, while the Croatian Republic of Herceg-Bosna will open an 
office in Sarajevo (Pale)." 
  Thus Croatia has actually eliminated the quotation marks 
from 
such terms as so-called, self-called, or self-proclaimed, 
thereby recognizing not only the FRY, but also the Serbian 
Republic. 
  In that act, many people are likely to see only a logical 
course of what was happening as early as in 1990 in 
Karadjordjevo, when Tudjman and Milosevic discussed, for the 
first time, the partition of Bosnia. However, as for the Croats 
and what they have now (of course, provided that no secret annex 
to the agreement exists), they did not need the war, because by 
it they only lost, rather than profited. Of course, the fact 
that Croatia did not start the war remains undisputed, but many 
are confused by the fact that the erstwhile ally has become the 
main enemy now, and cannot explain why that happened. 
  The Croatian estimates say that, by the Geneva agreement, 
the 
possibility of the second Serbo-Croatian war, which the foreign 
experts were quite positive might break out in spring, has been 
thereby removed, but, when speaking of Muslims, all 
possibilities remain open. One possibility is that Muslims 
accept what they are offered, and become reconciled with their 
defeat, because, as Lerotic says, it is insane to wage a war 
with two states that have come to an agreement. The second 
option is that the Muslims will continue the war, and accomplish 
at least some of their aspirations with the help of the 
international community that is not so unwilling to help them as 
is represented by both the Croatian and Serbian media. 
<H5>  Not a Single Shell Fell on Serbia </H5>
  Furthermore, when we add to all this the problems regarding 
the access to sea that is demanded by both the Serbian and the 
Muslim sides in Bosnia, when the questions of Bosnian Posavina 
[Bosnian side of the Sava River basin] and central Bosnia are 
still open to a degree, when the hostility among all three 
factions still exists, and above all that there are the issues 
of Sandzak, Kosovo, and Macedonia, then it can be said that the 
Geneva piece of paper is just a tiny step toward peace, and 
still far away from being called an historic one. Far more 
palpable proofs than, say, the reestablishment of the telephone 
connections between the FRY and Croatia will be necessary in 
order for us to be able to speak of the start of a peace 
process. Because, the Geneva signatures may as well be the 
beginning of an even more fierce war, even initiating new 
conflicts. That is to say, an attentive listener and reader may 
also have heard in the statements made by the FRY officials 
assessments that the declaration makes it possible for 
Yugoslavia and Serbia "to get down to settling other problems as 
well." It is obvious that it is not only the economy that those 
assessments refer to, although it is one of the key reasons why 
Milosevic needs a reconciliation with the West, and a deal with 
Tudjman regarding the lifting of the sanctions. Whether 
Milosevic will return the favor by relinquishing Krajina and 
recognizing Croatia in its internationally recognized borders is 
the key that will make it possible for Serbia to get down to 
settling those other problems. 
  What is particularly bothersome in all these options is 
that nobody in Croatia sees any reasonable alternative to 
Milosevic's regime, because now one can hear the bellicose 
sounds coming from the Serbian opposition lines as well. To a 
certain degree, the case is similar with the Croatian 
opposition, since it refuses any negotiations with war 
criminals, and, as a rule, is quite skeptical toward the Geneva 
declaration. 
  This "certain degree" refers above all to the unquestionable 
fact that not a single shell fell on Serbian ground during the 
war that was actually never officially declared, whereas one 
third of the Croatian territory is, as a matter of fact, 
devastated, while Croatia as a state is reduced to a few pieces 
of land. Moreover, Croatia is probably the only UN 
member-country, in addition to Bosnia-Herzegovina where the 
state is even more catastrophic, that does not know either what 
its territory is or how many citizens it has. 

