Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Roger Rumrrill] </F>
  [Text] Judging by results, there is no reason whatsoever -- 
no economic, political, or social argument -- for continuing the 
antidrug policy implemented in October 1990 as part of the 
so-called "Fujimori Doctrine." 
  Except for the official definition that coca growers are 
farmers who work within the informal sector -- an expression 
coined by General Alberto Arciniega Huby in 1989 and 
subsequently taken up by Hernando de Soto [chairman of the 
Freedom and Democracy Institute] when he classified these 
peasants as valid interlocutors -- the balance of the struggle 
against drug trafficking is lamentable. If there were 5,000 
hectares of coca plantations in the Huallaga Valley back in 1970 
when the cycle started, there are now 300,000 hectares in the 
departments of the Amazon region -- Loreto, San Martin, Madre de 
Dios, and Ucayali. 
  Thus, one of the main objectives of the drug enforcement 
policy -- namely the reduction of coca plantations -- has not 
been attained and neither has the goal to control and check the 
export of drugs. Official sources show that only 9,461.43 
kilograms of drugs were seized in 1993. These 9 tonnes 
represent less than 1 percent of all the drug processed in Peru. 
  The control of money laundering, the clean-up of drug 
kingpins -- the cartel leaders -- and the war against corruption 
throughout the government and society, leaves much to be 
desired. The "Vaticano" case has laid bare a Peruvian society 
racked by corruption. 
  Explaining the reasons behind the change in the U.S. drug 
enforcement policy -- which now emphasizes better control on 
demand, the rehabilitation of addicts, education, and prevention 
-- President Clinton pointed out that the six-year "War on 
Drugs" has cost the American people $56 billion and produced 
hardly any results because the same or more drug enter the 
United States and the number of users continues to increase 
proportionally. Hence the change in outlook and approach. 
  Given the fact that the Clinton administration has adopted 
an 
inward-looking policy, why should we -- the Andean countries -- 
adopt an outward-looking policy? In other words, why should we 
embark on a crop-substitution policy like the one they just 
dropped because of its failure? 
  I believe the centerpiece of a new drug policy in Peru -- 
which should be part of a comprehensive development policy for 
the Amazon region -- must include economic and social 
considerations. On one hand, it should ensure that tropical 
valley producers -- where coca and poppies are farmed -- recover 
their productive capacity, which was nearly destroyed by an 
overly free trade policy (flexible surtaxes are not enough to 
check unfair and abusive competition by foreign countries) and 
by the closure of the Agrarian Bank; that is to say, via a 
system of credits for the agricultural sector. 
  Only 10 percent of credit requirements in the Amazon region 
are at present met by Fondeagros [expansion unknown] and other 
mechanism. The situation in the rest of the country is most 
probably the same. 
  On the other hand, the organization of agricultural 
producers 
into agro-businesses should be given top priority in the social 
area. The entrenched shortcomings of the present marketing 
mechanisms (calling it a system is out of the question) rob 
agricultural producers of nearly 40 percent of their returns or 
earnings. Given this state of affairs, it is impossible to talk 
about streamlining agriculture through the incorporation of 
leading-edge technology geared to stepping up production, to 
diversifying crops, and to promoting agro-industries. 
Modernizing Peruvian agriculture first requires the elimination 
of the middlemen -- who many times are totally unnecessary -- so 
that producers may recover that 40 percent. 
  The establishment of new agro-businesses is of the utmost 
importance to achieve two immediate ends in the new drug policy: 
To negotiate with the European Union, the United States, and 
Japan the sale of our tropical products, and to enable these 
organizations to create a new sustainable productive pattern in 
the Amazon region through the development of administration 
projects and the sensible use of tropical biodiversity. 
  While the first priority for the United States is now to 
combat drug use, for Peru it is to combat production. This 
should not be a military fight, it should be economic, social, 
and political. 
  I believe it is time the struggle against drug trafficking 
in 
Peru was demilitarized. There are several reasons for this: The 
ability for drug trafficking has to corrupt others is immense, 
and the militarization of drug enforcement has failed. The 
results of this are there for everybody to see and the role of 
the military is relegated to other spheres within the new 
strategy. 
  The argument for militarizing the struggle against 
trafficking through the Internal Operations Front Command (Cofi) 
may have something to do with the relationship between political 
subversion and drug trafficking. But this argument is no longer 
valid in 1994. 
  This change in approach and new strategy should lead to a 
change in Peru's antinarcotics legislation, commencing with Act 
No. 22095 enacted in 1978 during Moralez Bermudez's 
administration, as it is interdictory legislation against coca 
from a doctrinal standpoint. 
  As a government campaign to enhance the value of coca -- 
implemented through the Enaco [National Coca Enterprise] -- the 
Foreign Ministry and the peasants should be the hub of this new 
campaign. We have unfortunately lost a precious ally in this 
field, Bolivia, which embarked on the impossible mission of 
eradicating coca crops in an operation whose results will surely 
be reflected in its name -- the Zero Option. Of course it is 
necessary to create the necessary mechanisms and civilian 
institutions to make this new drug policy feasible one in our 
country. Control mechanisms should, at the same time, be 
enhanced. Three Tucano planes flying off into the immensity of 
the Amazon skies are like three swallows that do not make a 
summer. 

