Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Three laws intended to govern the use and disposal 
of hazardous waste have been rendered ineffective because the 
list of restricted chemicals has yet to be completed, the House 
standing committee on the environment learned yesterday. 
  Experts who testified before the committee said that, while 
the list was more than six months overdue, the problem was 
becoming more urgent as increasing numbers of people were 
falling sick from exposure to dangerous chemicals. One expert 
said the list was being delayed because of pressure from 
industry. 
  Committee adviser Dr. Teanchuang Kalayanamit said the 
problem 
of toxic chemicals in Thailand stemmed mainly from the fact that 
the laws which regulate them are ineffective. The relevant laws 
are the Hazardous Substances Act, the Factory Act and the new 
Environment Law. 
  ``All three laws, which are related to the import, use and 
disposal of toxic chemicals, are not workable now. They are 
dependent on the chemical categories list, which is currently 
incomplete. This is why we seem to have such poor enforcement 
of toxic chemical-related law,'' he said. 
  This list is supposed to divide chemicals into different 
categories: some are supposed to be used with care, others 
require strict labelling and some are supposed to be banned 
outright. The main agency responsible for drawing up the list 
is the Pollution Control Department. The Department of 
Industrial Works and the Agriculture Ministry would then 
implement the laws. 
  ``Sections 17 and 92 of the Hazardous Substances Law require 
the list of hazardous chemicals classification, while section 18 
requires the list of occupational diseases,'' Teanchuang 
explained. ``Even though this law stated that these lists had 
to be finished within six months, it's been more than one year 
now since the amended law was enacted.'' 
  Dr. Teanchuang said the Factory Act also has no toxic 
chemical classifications, giving industry a ``golden period'' 
during which it can do anything without paying attention to the 
law. The law is also supposed to control waste treatment while 
in fact there are not enough treatment plants, and hazardous 
waste is usually dumped, he added. 
  ``The Environment Law, which also stated that different 
types 
of waste will be announced, is now nothing. So, all of the laws 
have lost important parts,'' Teanchuang said. ``As we know, the 
lists are late because there are some lobbies from industrial 
owners who pressure government agencies to label favorably the 
chemicals they use.'' 
  Pollution Control Department's Hazardous Wastes and 
Chemicals 
Management Division Director Dr. Prakarn Boonchueydee accepted 
that hazardous chemicals are now uncontrolled. 
  ``We are now asking for experts from other countries to form 
an industrial organizing committee to solve this problem, but it 
may take time,'' he said. 
  Dr. Oraphan Metadilogkul, occupational health doctor from 
Rajvithee Hospital, said she has found that the number, 
frequency, and seriousness of occupational diseases are all on 
the rise. 
  ``We need an effective protection plan,'' she said. 
  Dr. Teanchuang said there are several ways to move towards a 
solution to this problem. The advice of nongovernmental 
organizations should be sought to help categorize the chemicals. 
  Dump sites should be investigated by private-sector 
inspectors without waiting for the government to fund the 
inspections, because the government works too slowly. 
  Factories must pay for the clean-up costs. 
  The categories of hazardous chemicals should be listed soon. 
If Thai experts do not have time to do it, then the list should 
be copied from foreign or UN lists in order to solve the problem 
today. 

