Studied 

<F P=102>   94WN0120A Lanzhou KEXUE JINGJI SHEHUI [SCIENCE 
ECONOMY SOCIETY] in Chinese Vol 11 No 3, Sep 93 pp 24-28, 80 </F>

<F P=103> 94WN0120A </F>
<F P=104>  Lanzhou KEXUE JINGJI SHEHUI [SCIENCE 
ECONOMY SOCIETY] </F>

<F P=105>  Chinese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Peng Keshan [1756 3784 3790], Northwest China </F>
Soil and Water Conservation Institute, CAS: "Ecological and 
Environmental Disasters During the Economic Development of 
Northwest China and Strengthened Measures to Deal with Them"] 
  [Text] Northwest China comprises Shaanxi, Gansu, Ningxia, 
Qinghai and Xinjiang provinces. Its total area of 3.03 million 
square kilometers represents 31.6 percent of the country's land 
area, and its 11 million hectares of arable land represents 12 
percent of the national total. Its population is 74.92 million, 
7 percent of the country's total, and includes an agricultural 
population of 58.75 million, 6.8 percent of the country's total. 
The amount of wasteland that could easily be brought under 
cultivation is roughly equivalent to the current area of 
cultivated land. Northwest China is the main pasturing and 
livestock-raising area of China, with 110 million ha of usable 
grassland, constituting 33 percent of the country's total; it 
also has 14 million ha of forest land, or 11.9 percent of the 
national total. Although the area has vast land resources, 
hard-to-use deserts and barren hills now represent 50 percent of 
its total area. The region contains an important part of China's 
supplies of coal, petroleum, natural gas, rock salt, and 
nonferrous metals. With the rapid development of the national 
economy, various types of irrational human activities will 
intensify, and ecological and environmental disasters will grow 
increasingly serious, causing harm to the economy. 
  I. Principal Aspects of Environmental Disasters in Northwest 
China 
  Some aspects of environmental disasters in Northwest China 
are a historical legacy, while others are the result of 
human-caused damage to the ecology and environment. As people 
have come to take ecological development more seriously, and as 
environmental awareness has increased, environmental development 
in the northwest has made some progress. But the problem of 
ecological and environmental damage has not been brought 
thoroughly under control, and eco-environmental disasters are 
becoming increasingly serious. They have become the limiting 
factor on economic growth and they threaten the conditions of 
life: thus they have reached the alarm stage. The principal 
types of ecological disasters are as follows. 
  A. Serious Damage to Vegetation 
  1. Damage to Forests and a Decrease in the Forested Area -- 
Damage to forests is the principal culprit in creating an 
ecological and environmental imbalance. The region has a 
harvestable forested area of 13.7 million ha, or 11.9 percent of 
the country's total forested area of 115.2 million ha. But the 
high elevations in the area and its cold, dry climate, with 
scarce precipitation, combined with human-caused damage to the 
region's ecology and environment, result in a very slow forest 
growth rate. The world average rate of forest cover is 22 
percent and China's national average is 12.7 percent. But as a 
result of serious forest damage, Northwest China's percentage of 
forest cover is only 3.28 percent, one of the lowest figures for 
any region of the world. 
  2. Excessive Cultivation of Grasslands -- The Northwest is 
China's main livestock raising area. Xinjiang, Qinghai and Gansu 
are three of the country's five major pastoral areas. Northwest 
China has a total of 1.133 billion ha of grassland. The 
currently usable natural grass areas total 106 million ha or 33 
percent of the national total. But most of the grasslands in the 
Northwest are arid prairie, desert prairie, or alpine 
grasslands; these areas do not have the lush appearance 
described in the old poem, "When the grass bends before the 
wind, you can see the cattle and sheep." The majority of the 
grass area is shortgrass prairie with a very low grass 
production rate. In addition, there has been serious human 
interference. Since liberation, a total of 3.4 million ha of 
grassland has been brought under cultivation in Xinjiang 
Province. For the most part, this was fertile, well watered 
land, and much of it served as winter and spring grazing land 
for livestock. When it was brought under cultivation, the 
livestock was displaced to poorer, more arid grasslands, and the 
change in land use and inadequate development measures resulted 
in a significant amount of desertification. A sharp decline in 
the area of grassland caused the grass production of Gansu and 
Qinghai to decrease by 20 to 40 percent. In the mid-1980's, the 
economic loss resulting from damage to the grasslands of 
northwestern China was 2.0 billion yuan in Xinjiang, 1.4 billion 
yuan in Qinghai, 900 million yuan in Shaanxi, and 200 million 
yuan each in Gansu and Qinghai (all in constant 1989 yuan). The 
condition of the ecological environment, with its damaged 
vegetation, continues to deteriorate. 
  B. Deterioration of Soil Quality 
  1. Intensified Erosion -- Erosion is one of the most 
troublesome aspects of damage to Northwest China's ecological 
system and is seriously affecting agricultural and livestock 
production and posing an increasing threat to human productive 
activity and to the conditions of life. Land areas suffering 
from erosion in the region already total more than 330,000 
square kilometers. Just in Shaanxi and Gansu, the annual loss of 
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium as a result of soil erosion 
is equivalent to more than 10 million tons of fertilizer, and 
1.358 billion tons of silt is carried annually into the Yellow 
River from these provinces, representing more than 84 of the 
total amount entering the entire river. The cumulative amount of 
silt in the lower course of the Yellow River is 400 million 
tons, 50 percent of which comes Shaanxi. Soil loss by erosion in 
Shaanxi Province exceeds 10,000 tons per square kilometer, and 
the area subject to catastrophic soil erosion is 44,000 square 
kilometers or 21.4 of the total area of the province. Of the 192 
reservoirs built prior to 1973, 41 (21.3 percent) are now fully 
silted up, and 40 percent of the effective volume of the 
remaining reservoirs has also been lost as a result of silting. 
  2. Spreading Desertification -- Northwest China has 149 
[as published; error for 1.49 million?] square kilometers of 
desert and gobi, or 15.5 percent of the nation's total. It is an 
arid or semiarid region, with precipitation of only 50 to 600 mm 
per year. These circumstances, combined with human-caused 
damage, are causing increasingly serious desertification. The 
area converted to desert is steadily expanding and already 
amounts to 23.80 million ha, in addition to which about 3.933 
million ha of farm land, 4.933 million ha of grassland, and 
2,000 kilometers of railway right-of-way are under the threat of 
desertification. The region east of the Helanshan and Wushaoling 
areas, and the mixed agricultural and pastoral region that 
extends from the Ordos to Ningxia, are in especially serious 
condition. Spreading desertification in Northwest China poses a 
great threat to hydroelectric plant construction and railway 
construction and is affecting the economic development of the 
Northwest. 
  3. Expanding Salinization -- The Northwest is the region 
of China with the most serious salinization problem. In a large 
part of the affected area, the plow layer of the soil has 
accumulated large amounts of salts; the salt content is 
sometimes 30 percent or more, producing large areas of salinized 
wasteland and converting the region to one of abundant 
halophilic vegetation. The area of salinized land exceeds 1.6 
million ha. Of this total, 1.22 million ha is in Xinjiang, 
accounting for 30 percent of its total area of arable land. 
Since the filling of the Baojixia and Fengjiashan reservoirs in 
Shaanxi was begun in 1971 and 1977, the groundwater level has 
been rising steadily, and in Fufeng County alone, 0.53 [as 
published; error for 5,300?] ha of arable land has become 
salinized, with an average grain yield of less than 1500 kg/ha. 
  C. Frequent Natural Calamities 
  As a result of ecological degradation, natural disasters 
have 
become more serious. The principal such disasters in the 
northwest are drought, hail, high winds, flooding, landslides, 
and mud and rock flows. The frequency of drought is increasing: 
a minor drought occurs an average of once in 3 years, and a 
major drought once in 7 years. The area of farmland in Shaanxi 
subject to drought increased from 182,000 ha in 1952 to 2.311 
million ha in 1990, representing 65.26 percent of the total area 
of arable land. In addition, the annual precipitation is largely 
concentrated between July and September, and as a result, 
torrential rains may cause flooding in mountain regions, along 
with landslides and rock and mud flows. 
  D. Serious Shortage of Water Resources 
  Northwest China is the country's main arid and semiarid 
region. It has little precipitation, and the amount of rainfall 
varies greatly through the year. The bulk of the area has less 
than 400 mm of precipitation a year, and 2/3 of that area has 
less than 250 mm per year. Surface water consists primarily of 
river systems, which are dependent on replenishment from 
glaciers and snowpack. Groundwater supplies are also not 
abundant, and only a few regions can practice irrigation. In 
most of western Qinghai, the annual precipitation is only 25 to 
50 mm, and the precipitation in Toksun, Xinjiang, is only 3.9 mm 
per year, the country's lowest figure. The loess plateau belt 
that extends across Shaanxi, Gansu, Ningxia and Qinghai has very 
little surface water or groundwater, and in addition the terrain 
is complex and hard to use; as a result, irrigation water, 
drinking water, and industrial water are in extremely short 
supply. Although surface water is relatively abundant in most of 
the Qinbashan region, the area lacks high-quality level land, so 
that there is little potential for irrigated agriculture. These 
circumstances, in combination with human impact, the lack of 
scientific awareness, and ill-considered mass-scale projects, 
are producing numerous problems in the use of water resources. 
Chief among them are: (1) Inefficient use of water on the upper 
and middle sections of rivers, including excessive irrigation in 
the upper sections, which causes a lack of water in the lower 
sections of the rivers and produces desertification. On the 
upper Tarim River, the diversion of water for agricultural uses 
increased, and the water was indiscriminately dammed and 
withdrawn in the industrial areas of the middle section of the 
river, resulting in an acute water shortage in the lower reaches 
of the river and making it impossible to bring new areas under 
cultivation. (2) Owing to inadequate protection of the water 
quality of lakes, some of the freshwater lakes in the region 
have received large discharges of clean but saline water, 
causing a decline in water quality. Because no thought was given 
to protecting the waters of Bosten Lake when the Jiefang No 1 
Canal and the Baolansu Dam were built, the amount of fresh water 
entering the lake is steadily decreasing, with an attendant 
increase in the proportion of high-salinity discharge waters 
entering the lake. As a result, the salinity of the lake's water 
rose from 0.38 g/liter in 1959 to 1.98 g/liter in 1992. 
  E. Uncontrolled Waste Disposal 
  Environmental pollution is becoming increasingly serious as 
a 
result of the irrational disposition of high-energy-consumption 
local industry and other types of local industry and small-town 
enterprises. The "three synchronizations" (of programs, design, 
and construction) were rather poorly carried out, and the 
discharges of solid residue and of liquid and gaseous wastes 
were rather large. In addition little of the waste was treated. 
As a consequence, the environmental condition of Northwest China 
has been worsening, and pollution levels in some regions are far 
higher than those in coastal regions or developed regions. 1. 
Solid Residue. Northwest China is the country's largest energy 
base, and during the extraction process, mining enterprises 
usually consider only their own immediate benefits, 
indiscriminately piling up or dumping tailings or waste rock. 
Shaanxi produces about 14 tons of mineral tailings and solid 
waste from coal pits, chemical engineering plants and mining and 
metallurgy enterprises a year. While 8 percent of this waste is 
utilized, most of the rest enters rivers and streams. 2. 
Wastewater. On the Yinchuan Plain in Ningxia, where there is a 
sizeable concentration of industry and industrial wastewater is 
used to irrigate farmland, it was found that of 39 samples of 
wheat, 41.0 percent were contaminated with the harmful metals 
lead and cadmium and 10.3 percent were contaminated with 
arsenic; of 29 samples of paddy rise, 44.8 percent were polluted 
with lead, 41.4 with cadmium, and 6.9 percent with mercury. 
Nitrate pollution of such crops as chives, turnips, cabbage, 
rape, celery, spinach and radishes have reached levels that are 
cause for alarm. Some 24 percent of a group of soil samples had 
levels of cadmium pollution that exceeded the standards. The 
Yellow River too is polluted to various degrees. The main 
pollutants are: suspended matter, above the standard in 100 
percent of samples; COD [chemical oxygen demand], above standard 
in 83.33 of samples; phenols, above standard in 40 percent of 
samples; arsenic, above standard in 55.5 percent of samples; 
mercury, above standard in 11 percent of samples; and hexavalent 
chromium, above standard in 5.56 percent of samples. 3. Waste 
Gases. The principal waste gases are flue gas from the 
combustion of coal and such harmful gases as sulfur dioxide, 
which can form acid rain and can damage or kill forests and 
crops. The frequency, extent and severity of acid rain are 
increasing in Shaanxi Province. The frequency of acid rain in 
Shangzhou, southern Shaanxi, has reached 52.3 to 80 percent, and 
even Xifeng Peak, 2000 m above sea level in the Huashan range, 
receives acid rain. 
  II. The Human Factor in Ecological and Environmental 
Disasters 
  Protecting the ecology and environment is equivalent to 
protecting the conditions of life for mankind and for all 
vegetation. But the condition of the environment is still 
deteriorating in the Northwest. Natural disasters are 
increasing, torrential rains are more frequent in summer, and 
winter droughts are more serious; forests are being logged 
excessively, the country's land resources,are shrinking, 
indiscriminate cutting and overcutting cannot be controlled. 
Soil erosion is serious, producing a range of damage that 
exceeds control capabilities. Scientific and technological 
capabilities are weak, and new technologies and conventional 
technologies are difficult to disseminate. Environmental 
pollution by large industries is increasing steadily, and the 
harm done by pollution accidents is mounting, with the threat 
becoming steadily more serious. The rapid rise of low-level 
industry, with primitive equipment, outmoded processes, and 
inadequate management, combined with a lack of environmental 
protection awareness, has caused increasing pollution. When 
chemical fertilizers, agricultural pesticides, and plastic 
sheeting are used, they produce new and increasingly severe 
pollution. 
  The fact that the ecological system is made to produce high 
output while receiving low inputs is the primary factor 
responsible for damage to the eco-environmental balance. For 
many years, China's average investment in production industries 
that consume biological resources has been small, based on the 
belief that these renewable resources are inexhaustible. But the 
cumulative result over a long period has given rise to many 
human-caused ecological and environmental disasters. In forest 
management, the emphasis has been on logging, with a neglect of 
afforestation, and there has been overcutting of forest. More 
has been taken out than has been put in, and the practice of 
indiscriminate clear-cutting has left barren areas of wasteland 
and has damaged an increasing amount of the country's territory. 
In livestock grazing, the visible investment in building up and 
transforming grasslands has been insufficient. Their annual 
output value per hectare is an average of 15 to 23 yuan, but the 
annual investment per hectare is only 0.3 to 0.45 yuan. The 
great imbalance between inputs and outputs that results from 
insufficient investment is a growing trend. 
  In construction projects, there have been some rudimentary 
programs aimed at producing a beneficial ecological and 
environmental cycle, but they have generally been short-sighted, 
non-specific, unscientific, and infeasible. Many such programs 
have lacked any thorough systems-oriented preliminary studies 
that would have allowed the best program for integrated 
development to be chosen. As a result, in macroscopic terms, 
control was inadequate, and in microscopic terms there was a 
lack of specific detail. The result was that in the placement of 
municipal and rural construction and of industrial and 
agricultural production, and in the layout of the transport 
network, each project was usually a law unto itself. There was 
no careful, integrated provision for both the present and the 
long term, the particular and the general, the river basin and 
the local area, the main stream and side channels, the cities 
and the countryside. Administratively, there was no attempt at 
comprehensive consideration of mountains, waters, farmland, 
forest and roads; efforts to manage large and small river basins 
were not coordinated with each other; and it was very difficult 
to carry on integrated administrative measures. Ecological and 
environmental management was frequently plagued by lax 
observance of laws, failure to follow regulations, and 
inadequate management. 
  III. Stepped-Up Measures Against Environmental Disasters 
  We should step up integrated research and protective 
activities in order to deal with ecological and environmental 
disasters and to develop and utilize China's land resources 
rationally. We should readjust the structure of industrial and 
agricultural production and strengthen our ability to guard 
against ecological and environmental disasters. An ecological 
viewpoint should be used to guide disaster prevention measures, 
to decrease losses from eco-environmental disasters, and to 
increase the effectiveness of efforts to ward off such 
disasters. The following stepped-up measures should be taken. 
  A. Strengthen Environmental management, Improve Disaster 
Reduction Capabilities 
  1. Stepped-up Research, Integrated Preventive and 
Management Measures -- Stepped-up research on ecological and 
environmental disasters is a major task of the science of 
natural disasters in the 1990's. Environmental disasters 
constitute a global system of deterioration, which is made up of 
disaster-breeding environments, disaster-promoting factors, 
disaster-prone entities, and the disaster-causing events 
themselves. The social application of research into disasters 
should consists of efforts to lessen them. Thus, emphasis should 
be laid on the following theoretical subjects. (a) Investigation 
of eco-environmental disaster chains: while specialized research 
is important, integrated research is even more important. (b) 
Investigation of clusters of eco-environmental disasters: they 
occur in clusters both spatially and temporally, and an 
integrated investigation of this subject is also necessary. (c) 
Investigation of the mechanisms of ecological and environmental 
disasters: these include both disaster-causing mechanisms and 
disaster-promoting mechanisms, and environmental research 
dealing with regional eco-environmental disaster systems should 
emphasize their integrated mechanisms. (d) Research on regional 
disaster categories: disaster-prevention measures should be 
drafted on a scientific basis and should be geared to the 
disaster conditions of particular regions. (e) Research on 
eco-environmental disaster warning systems, with the purpose of 
giving timely predictions of disasters and minimizing the losses 
that they cause. (f) Major scientific investments in the 
prevention and management of eco-environmental disasters, and 
organization of a set of disaster evaluation systems, and of 
system science and system technology structures, uniting all 
three so that they work together to enhance research on 
eco-environmental disasters. 
  2. Raise Awareness, Treat the Land as Precious -- 
Protecting the land is an effective means of mitigating 
eco-environmental disasters. But the land resources of the 
Northwest have been damaged repeatedly by such factors as 
erosion, indiscriminate use of agricultural land, recultivation 
of waste lands, and cutting of forests, and policies that leave 
the land idle; the result has been a sharp decrease in the 
amount of arable land. The world per-capita area of arable land 
is 0.37 ha. The figure for Northwest China is 0.152 ha, but in 
view of the rapid population growth, inducing all peoples in the 
region to value the land highly is a top-priority matter. Some 
provinces or regions in northwestern China have declared "land 
alarm days," on which organizations at all levels include 
long-term tasks of carrying out the Land Law, the Water and Soil 
Conservation Law, the Forest Law, the Grasslands Law and the 
Water Law on the agendas of party committees and governmental 
bodies and in addition take steps to increase the land awareness 
of all cadres and of the masses. Along with mass publicity in 
all forms, plans should be made to hold basic information and 
training classes on national land resources. Focal-point 
training classes should be held for rural and village cadres in 
order to make them thoroughly aware of the essential fact that 
China has a large population and limited land resources and that 
China's reserve land resources are inadequate. 
  3. Focus on Propaganda, with Education as the Foundation -- 
Bringing about a beneficial ecological and environmental cycle 
is an immense systems undertaking and a basic means of 
mitigating eco-environmental disasters. We must rely on the 
combined efforts of the entire populace, propagandize and 
educate them, and use a variety of methods to increase 
awareness. The following steps should be taken. (a) Increase the 
ecology-mindedness of cadres at all levels and of the peasants, 
make use of oral presentations, pictorial propaganda, typical 
examples, visual education and the like to disseminate 
ecological information and to strengthen an 
environmental-protection orientation. (b) Hold classes on the 
integrated utilization of the ecological environment in 
institutions of higher education, make use of adult-education 
examinations, offer two-year specialized courses, and train a 
contingent of advanced research and management personnel. (c) 
Use workplace training, radio and television educational 
programs, agricultural correspondence colleges and peasant night 
schools to train a home-grown contingent of technical personnel. 
(d) Strengthen ecological and environmental research. (e) Set up 
an ecological and environmental monitoring network and increase 
its density, and gradually convert people from indiscriminate 
measures and passive adaptation to conscious adoption of 
protective measures and conscious reform. 
  In the development of the socialist market economy, we must 
deal effectively with numerous contradictions between economic 
development and the environment. We must guarantee the resource 
requirements for state construction, suitably develop the area's 
resources, and engage in optimal planning, scientific 
management, and coordination. If environmental protection lacks 
correct guidance, or if comprehensive management of industry 
programs, siting programs, product-oriented programs, 
environmental protection programs and basic construction are 
ignored, it is likely that the result will be significant damage 
to the ecology and environment. If so, then the numerous 
dispersed rural enterprises will become the chief rural 
polluters and will cause large-scale pollution. Therefore, the 
development of rural enterprises must promote improvement of the 
environment and protect the natural ecological balance. This 
will produce great social and economic benefits. 
  B. Protect the Environment and Promote a Beneficial Cycle 
  1. Afforestation and Intensification Activities -- In 1978, 
the state undertook the "Three Northern" protective forest 
program, whose objective was to bring about beneficial 
ecological and environmental cycles. By the year 2050, over an 
area of 4.069 million square kilometers in 14 provinces, 
regions, and municipalities, representing 42.4 percent of the 
country's area, a total of 0.251 [as published; error for 25.1 
million?] hectares of plantings will have been created, along 
with 275 [as published] ha of forest growth in closed mountain 
areas, which will essentially control erosion in the area 
covered by the project. Implementation of the program and the 
relevant construction activities are in full swing. 
Afforestation must be carried out in a manner suited to local 
conditions in order to bring about a rational distribution of 
forest plantings. In medium-elevation and alpine river-source 
areas, the focus can be on watershed forests; in low mountain 
and hill areas or denuded slope areas with severe erosion 
problems, the focus should be on water-protection forests and 
special economic forests. 
  2. Effective Rural Construction, with Conservation of Water 
and Soil -- The per-capita arable land area of Northwest 
China is 0.251 ha; the arable land consists primarily of 
low-productivity slope areas. Medium- and low-productivity areas 
account for 85 to 90 percent of the total land area, and 80 
percent of the area is subject to the "three losses" (of water, 
soil, and fertilizer), so that the potential of arid-zone 
technologies for increasing output cannot be utilized. As a 
result, rationally developing land resources is a top-priority 
matter. After slopes have been brought under cultivation, areas 
of gentle slopes must be reconstructed. The construction of 
basic plots is an important measure for strengthening the 
utilization of arable land. The construction of a variety of 
such basic plots, including level embanked areas, terraces and 
small furrow-irrigation areas can be carried on concurrently. In 
many areas, a variety of measures suited to the conditions may 
be used, such as building stone-reinforced terraces and 
walled-off terraces, building dams to create reservoirs, 
blocking gullies, and the like; of these measures, soil- and 
fertilizer-conserving terraces are the most effective. 
  3. Integrated Management, Thorough Development -- The basic 
type of landscape pattern in Northwest China is large areas of 
mountainous terrain with small areas of level floodplain; land 
resources are extremely scarce. Drafting programs for the 
rational utilization of China's land resources is of major 
importance for the thorough development of this region. In areas 
with severe environmental damage, a variety of measures must be 
used. (1) Intensified macroscopic land control, establishment of 
an effective land resource management organization, and vigorous 
overall planning for land resources. National land resource 
development programs should be included in the overall system of 
programs for the development of the national economy and 
society. (2) Diversified use of limited agricultural lands in 
accordance with local conditions, effective three-dimensional 
development, and maximization of the land utilization rate, the 
solar energy conversion rate, and the commodity up-valuation 
rate. (3) The fertility of large areas of barren land should be 
built up, stubble and straw from crops should be returned to the 
fields, and crop rotations that include the growing of grasses 
should be used to increase inputs into the land. Unused land 
resources should be put into use, and the renovation of medium- 
and low-productivity fields should be intensified, increasing 
their output per unit of area. (4) Develop both "channels and 
shoals," thoroughly use all available land resources, and strive 
for optimal resource utilization, optimum replacement, and 
maximum effectiveness. 
  4. Control Pollution, Clean Up the Environment -- The 
expanding range of human economic activity and its increasing 
frequency give rise to environmental damage and pollution. The 
administrative, economic, legal, and public-opinion dimensions 
must be used to bring about integrated control of pollution. 
Enterprises with outmoded processes that are heavy polluters 
may, as appropriate, be abolished, idled, merged, or 
respecialized; local sulfur refineries, paper mills and 
electroplating plants without environmental protection 
facilities must be put on a modernization program; new paper 
mills and electroplating plants that are capable of causing 
pollution and environmental damage too must be put on a 
modernization program. Construction projects and development 
projects that may cause environmental pollution or damage must 
be coupled with stringent environmental protection measures in 
order to prevent new pollution sources from arising. To deal 
with agricultural pesticides, pesticides that exceed the 
standards must be abandoned, with active development of new 
high-effectiveness, low-toxicity, low-persistence pesticides; 
the development and dissemination of microorganisms as anti-pest 
agents must be intensified, and biological, physical and 
chemical measures must be used to minimize disease and insect 
damage. The processes and technology of chemical fertilizer 
production must be modernized, and the output and quality of NP 
fertilizers and mixed fertilizers must be improved. 
  5. Broaden Sources, Regulate Flow, Decrease Water Shortages 
-- Water resource utilization should be put under comprehensive 
management in the context of an overall systems development 
approach. (1) Within a river-basin system, the legal regulation 
of natural waters and mountain areas and the centralization of 
water rights should be instituted, with consistent 
administration of the water resources protection law, 
unification of water rights at higher levels, and coordination 
of the higher and lower levels, with the higher levels having 
primacy; institute central distribution and central construction 
within the drainage-basin unit, rather than allowing all units 
to go their own ways. (2) In the integrated management of 
mountain areas, natural waters, agricultural land, forests and 
roads, it is waters, agricultural land and forests that are the 
main subsystems of the river-basin system, and they must be 
placed under integrated management. (3) Construction of mountain 
reservoirs, reconstruction of plains reservoirs. Since the state 
was founded, numerous plains reservoirs have been established in 
Northwest China, effectively promoting the regulation of water 
flow and the development of industrial and agricultural 
production. In the future, the construction of new mountain 
reservoirs will be considered, which should both assure 
sufficient regulation of river flow and provide resources for 
irrigation, electric power generation, and flood protection. 
This will be a key factor in regulation at the level of the 
entire river basin. 4. Draft effective river basin management 
programs. The hydraulic construction and water conservation 
departments should take the lead and should coordinate the 
efforts of the agricultural, forestry, livestock raising and 
water-management departments to establish an effective 
river-basin program and to carry on large-scale, planned, 
effective regulation. 

