Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Turkish Prime Minister Tansu Ciller by </F>
Pierre Lefevre; place and date not given] 
  [Text] [Lefevre] Do you think there is a military solution 
to the Kurdish problem in Turkey? 
  [Ciller] There is no military solution. There is a solution 
which must come from implementation of the law. We are doing 
nothing you would not do in your country. People are being 
massacred in Turkey. The PKK [Workers' Party of Kurdistan] is a 
separatist group that must be distinguished from the Kurdish 
population. They live throughout Turkey, not only in Anatolia 
in the southeast. 
  We have 25 very mixed ethnic groups throughout the country. 
But the PKK separatists are killing the Kurds themselves. That 
is why that population is afraid and supports them. The law 
must protect that population where it is. The Kurds and the 
Turks coexist in the Army and in Parliament; they make laws 
together and implement them together against that separatist 
group. 
  [Lefevre] Last March, the PKK proposed a cease-fire. Why did 
the Turkish Government not seize that opportunity and seek a 
political solution, as the British Government is doing with the 
IRA? 
  [Ciller] What is a political solution? Does it mean 
abandoning part of your country? You do not have the right to 
do that. People live there and do not want their house, their 
land to be abandoned to uncertainty. As for the cease-fire 
demanded by the PKK, it was exactly what we thought: A means of 
temporarily withdrawing to recover and secure logistical aid. 
Toward May or early June, they relaunched their massacres on 
all sides. We knew that would happen. 
  [Lefevre] Do you not think that applying the CSCE principles 
relating to minorities to the Kurdish population could make it 
easier to find a political solution? 
  [Ciller] We do not have a minority. Turkey is a mixture of 
25 ethnic groups. We do not have second-class citizens, or 
minorities, or first-class citizens. What do you Belgians want? 
You want to be able to travel where you wish, speak your 
language, be a voter, become a minister, carry on the business 
you wish. Everybody can do that in my country. If that was 
what the PKK wanted, there would be a solution. 
  [Lefevre] Why are radio broadcasts in Kurdish banned in 
Turkey? 
  [Ciller] We do not even have a framework law governing radio 
or television broadcasts. We have more stations than you have 
here in Europe. 
  [Lefevre] Are you saying that these broadcasts in Kurdish 
are 
banned for technical rather than political reasons? 
  [Ciller] What I am saying is that we have in Turkey all the 
freedoms which you in Europe do not have and do not give the 
Turks who work here. You massacre our workers. Did you know 
that? 
  When you ask that question you should ask why you do not 
defend human rights and a political solution for the Turkish 
workers in Europe. You should not have double standards. 
  We are much more consistent. We resisted the aggression in 
Armenia, in Bosnia-Herzegovina, in Kuwait, and we still have 
soldiers in Somalia. It is Europe which has double standards, 
which has fundamentalism. It is time it looked at itself. 
  [Lefevre] You have just met with the Belgian prime minister. 
What do you think of his refusal to ban the PKK in Belgium? 
  [Ciller] The PKK is a terrorist group. It is not Turkey's 
problem if it is able to operate in Belgium. It will disturb 
law and order at the expense of Belgian citizens and remain 
there for a long time. It is involved in the trafficking of 
drugs and arms. And you will have all that in Belgium. It is 
not what Turkey wants, but I am simply pointing out the problems 
which will arise in your country. The prime minister has 
expressed his concern in this regard. He said that he would 
monitor it closely and that the Belgian Government would take 
the necessary measures. 
  [Lefevre] What is your answer to the Belgian interior 
minister who noted the presence of "gray wolves," the extreme 
right-wing Turkish nationalists, during incidents on 1 and 2 
January in Brussels, and that of members of the Turkish 
diplomatic services? 
  [Ciller] We clearly do not support that. This is the first 
time that such incidents have occurred in Belgium, although 
Turkish workers have lived here for years. It is due to the 
fact that that action was so unjust. It is due to the fact that 
the PKK is a terrorist group which kills without legitimacy. 
The Turks living here simply reacted against that. 
  [Lefevre] Your country borders on the former USSR. What do 
you think of the Russians' attitude in what they call their 
"immediate neighborhood?" 
  [Ciller] We support the development of the reforms in 
Russia. 
When I was in Russia a few months ago, I told Prime Minister 
Chernomyrdin and President Yeltsin that Turkey is in favor of 
cooperation, not competition, in the regions which have become 
independent countries. 
  We want to take action with Russia, and to support the 
reforms and democratization. But, on the other hand, we cannot 
fail to see that there is a resurgence of nationalism and ethnic 
conflicts in that part of the world. We have the feeling that 
this resurgence of nationalism has the support of the 
population, whatever President Yeltsin has in mind. This 
nationalism does not necessarily mean a desire to return to 
Communism. Instead they want stability, security, the good old 
days, they expect too much too soon from the changes under way 
and they are not getting it. That is why there is a reaction. 
  What we must do is support the reforms, but also assess the 
risks. 
  [Lefevre] Do you think that there is an expansionist threat 
from the Russians? 
  [Ciller] They want bilateral military agreements with all 
the 
countries of the Community of Independent States. Azerbaijan is 
the latest. They say they want to protect Azerbaijan by a 
bilateral military agreement and they want to do so alone. 
  Against whom? Against the allies? Against Turkey or against 
what? Why just a military agreement? Why not a mutual 
agreement which would also include Europe as observer to monitor 
Armenian aggression? This is not the right attitude. 
  [Lefevre] You are due to meet with Mr. Delors and Mr. 
Brittan 
at the European Commission. What will you tell them about 
Cyprus? 
  [Ciller] That we want a solution in Cyprus, that we have 
everything to gain from a solution. The two communities must 
sit down and talk. We support measures to restore confidence 
and anything which could contribute to a lasting solution. The 
only problem is to know whether the Greeks will have the same 
attitude. Contrary to what is customarily done, I did not use 
the Greek question for internal political ends during my 
election campaign and so far I have not responded to all the 
aggressive statements coming from the Greek side. A 
good-neighborly attitude is much more constructive. 
  By contrast, the Cyprus question was used in Greece in 
Papandreou's campaign and in recent months. But I am still 
hopeful. Although we are not directly involved in the 
negotiations, we will give all the support we can to reach a 
feasible and lasting situation. 
  [Lefevre] Are you on the point of normalizing your relations 
with Iraq? 
  [Ciller] We were the first to oppose the invasion of Kuwait. 
The oil pipeline which we constructed with Iraq is still closed. 
Nobody has suffered as much as us from the embargo. But it is 
time to reexamine the embargo question in the light of what we 
want to obtain. Turkey will not act alone. We want to continue 
to cooperate with our allies and examine with them where the 
embargo leads. If the aim is to remove Saddam Husayn, it will 
not work. 
  He is increasing in popularity in his country and throughout 
the Near East and it is the population which is suffering as a 
result of the embargo. It is not producing the effects for 
which it was established. 

