Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Joseph Gouala] </F>
  [Text] Brazzaville, Jan 7 (AFP) -- The Congolese Army is 
currently grappling with a dangerous internal split, as officers 
have begun to take sides in the bloody political struggle 
between supporters of the president and an opposition coalition. 
A military source has warned that the 20,000-man Army is 
undergoing a crisis of authority. 
  President Pascal Lissouba late Wednesday [5 January] 
announced plans to recruit 2,000 additional men for the security 
forces, of whom 1,000 would be assigned to the Army. The goal 
of the campaign is to "revitalize" the Armed Forces, according 
to Prime Minister Jacques Yoachim Yhombi Opango, who noted that 
the last time new blood was injected into the Army through a 
recruiting drive was in 1983. But Opango said the government 
also wanted to ensure that the future Army and police force 
would reflect national diversity. The recruiting effort will 
therefore be undertaken in each of Congo's 47 districts. 
  The prime minister, himself a general, appealed for "more 
discipline within the public forces" and insisted that the Army 
"remain apolitical but subject to civilian authority." 
  At least 95 people have died since mid-December in southern 
Brazzaville in confrontations between partisans of Lissouba and 
his opponents. A military source acknowledged that officers 
were backing different militias in the clashes. 
  The Army commander, General Claude Emmanuel Eta-Oka, who 
recently toured Army barracks, suggested in a television 
interview that soldiers had taken "individual" decisions to back 
parties to the ethnic violence. "In a country that was heavily 
politicized under a one-party regime and where ethnic rivalries 
were suppressed, soldiers can't escape the influence of 
political bipolarization," explained one officer. For Defense 
Minister Raymond Damase N'gollo, troops must be accorded better 
living and working conditions to withstand such influences. 
  Ethnic frictions weighing on the Army have meant that 
"orders 
from the high military command are not respected in the conflict 
zones, where private militias are defying the regular Army," 
notably through "illegal identity controls," said a Western 
diplomat, who said he was pessimistic on the outcome of the 
current crisis. 
  A senior officer with close ties to Lissouba disclosed that 
regular security forces appeared to have lost control of the 
internal situation despite their reliance on heavy weapons to 
stamp out the activities of the private militias. 
  Oppostion supporters have denounced the use of such weaponry 
and stressed that the Congolese people are determined to carry 
on with their campaign for democracy in the face of the most 
sophisticated arms. 

