BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Pressler's Proposal"] </F>
  [Text] The suggestion of Larry Pressler, U.S. Republican 
party senator and the author of the Pressler Law, that China's 
nuclear programs should be capped along with India's and 
Pakistan's seems to be an honest one. He is right in saying 
that India cannot give up its nuclear program because of China's 
continuing nuclear program. This suggestion makes it quite 
clear that Pressler's attitude is free from any prejudice. He 
goes into the details of an issue and arrives at an objective 
analysis. He had argued first before the U.S. Administration 
that economic aid to Pakistan should be stopped because Pakistan 
was secretly manufacturing the nuclear bomb. He has again 
advanced the argument that F-16 fighter planes should not be 
supplied to Pakistan because there is a danger of a nuclear war 
between India and Pakistan. F-16 fighter planes could be used 
to drop nuclear bombs. Pressler has further said that Solarz is 
considered a friend of India and he is very knowledgeable as far 
as this area is concerned. The way the proposal to appoint him 
as the envoy to India has been taken back has been condemned by 
Pressler. Maybe Pressler has not been a close friend of India 
as Solarz has been, but his neutrality has certainly shown that 
he is a well wisher of India. 
  The proposal advanced by Pressler fully fits into the United 
States' South Asia policy; hence, the U.S. Administration will 
definitely ponder over it. America wants South Asia to be a 
zone totally free of nuclear weapons. But is it possible for 
America to "arm-twist" China? We don't think that America can 
persuade China to cap its nuclear program. Like India, China 
can also ask why only South Asia should be converted into a 
nuclear weapons free zone? America has inter-continental 
missiles which can drop nuclear bombs at a given target. 
However, Larry Pressler's proposal goes in favor of India and 
India can't give up its nuclear program, not only because of 
Pakistan, but because of China also. Recently, the Chinese 
Ambassador to India said that India could not be forced to sign 
the NPT [Nonproliferation Treaty] because India is a sovereign 
country. China is not as opposed to India's nuclear capacity as 
the U.S. is. Of course, the Chinese envoy's statement about 
India was in line with his country's own interests. Each country 
talks about its own interests. Therefore, India can do 
likewise, and its arguments will be carried to the U.S. 
Administration by people like Pressler, which will strengthen 
the Indian stance in America. Of course, nothing may come out 
of it, but the fact remains that India's position is being 
properly understood. 

