BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 18 May (MENA)--Dr. Nabil Sha'th, political 
adviser to Palestinian President Yasir 'Arafat, arrived in Cairo 
from Tunis early today. 
  In an arrival statement, Sha'th said the Palestinians came a 
step closer to their dream of full independence with the 
restoration of control over their land under the leadership of 
the PLO and the Palestine Liberation Army. 
  The next three months, he added, will see the liberation of 
the cities of Nabulus, Hebron, and Ramallah. We hope to achieve 
there what has been achieved in Gaza and Jericho, Sha'th said. 
He pointed out that Jerusalem is the highest objective and 
dearest hope of the Palestinians but will not be discussed until 
the negotiations on a "final settlement" begin around 15 October. 
  The return of 6,000 officers and soldiers to the Palestinian 
land in Gaza and Jericho will open the door for the return of 
their 35,000 relatives. Some 5,000 more Palestinian cadres are 
also expected to return to Gaza and Jericho. In June, the doors 
will open for the return of approximately 860,000 refugees who 
left their land following the 1967 war, Dr. Sha'th announced. 
  Dr. Sha'th expressed appreciation for the support the 
Palestinians received from President Husni Mubarak and the 
Egyptian people and Government, particularly the Foreign and 
Information Ministries and the Armed Forces. Egypt sacrificed 
some of its valiant sons in the war for Palestine and then stood 
by the side of the Palestinians in the negotiations, he declared. 
  The Palestinian official pointed out that he will enter 
Jericho with president Yasir 'Arafat in the first week of June. 
He expressed the hope that a Palestinian government will be 
formed that can achieve security and justice and pursue the 
successes in the negotiations until the gradual liberation of 
the entire Palestinian land. 
  Dr. Sha'th added that on his short visit to Tunis he briefed 
members of the Fatah Movement's Revolutionary Council and the 
Central Committee of the Fatah Movement on the 
Israeli-Palestinian Agreement. 

