Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Karlo Jeger: "The Most Important Stronghold of </F>
the Serbian Air Force Outside Serbia Is Situated in Croatia!"] 
  [Text] Serbian military aircraft are still flying freely 
above Croatia. Vladimir Desnica, a NOVI LIST reporter, visited 
the occupied territories in Croatia and witnessed yet another 
demonstration of the power of the rebel Serbs. Desnica claims 
that jet planes flew over his head during daytime, in front of 
UN Protection Forces [UNPROFOR] members! They flew to Knin and 
then proceeded south. This piece of information, which is 
shocking to Croatian citizens, is commonplace for UNPROFOR 
members. According to the information we have received from the 
United Nations there are 12 aircraft of the "Jastreb" type at 
Udbina airport. According to the prewar standards, these 12 
aircraft correspond to the power of a single assault unit. 
UNPROFOR members claim that Krajina aircraft did not fly from 
September 1993 until February 1994. The reason was allegedly a 
shortage of spare parts. 
<H5>  19 Serbian Aircraft on Croatian Territory </H5>
  The attempt to obtain official information about the air 
force owned by rebel Serbs at UNPROFOR headquarters ended with 
the usual response: "No comment." The technologically 
well-equipped UNPROFOR press service, which employs several 
dozen people, does not want to know what is going on in UN 
Protected Areas. There are reports by UN members directly in 
these areas, but they can hardly be used as a basis for the 
estimation of the technical equipment and the legal status of 
the Serbian aircraft (these areas should have been demilitarized 
according to the Vance plan). It is known today that many 
UNPROFOR members cannot differentiate a gun from a howitzer, let 
alone different types of combat planes. More than a year ago, 
an UNPROFOR officer informed, for example, of large-scale 
movements of Croatian "Leopard" tanks toward the front in the 
south. The information that the Croatian Army has these modern 
German tanks created panic among rebel Serbs. The case had a 
banal epilogue, since it was established that these were trophy 
tanks from World War II on which Croatian soldiers had written 
"Leopard." This means that the information sent by UNPROFOR 
members from the front has to be taken with a pinch of salt. 
  Unfortunately, the information that the Serbs in the 
so-called "republic of Serbian Krajina" have a certain number of 
aircraft that fly over the UN Protected Areas without any 
restrictions, is quite reliable. 
  There are three large airports remaining in the occupied 
Croatian territory that can hold Serbian jet planes. The former 
Osijek airport was occupied by the Yugoslav People's Army 
already at the beginning of the war. After certain parts of the 
Yugoslav People's Army withdrew, Osijek airport, the only 
airport in Slavonia -- which has the official name of Klisa 
airport now, taking the name of the nearby village -- was given 
to chetniks and later it became the UNPROFOR headquarters for 
Sector East. Since it was thoroughly cleaned out, like all 
other airports at which the Yugoslav People's Army was based, it 
is out of use at the moment. Only the runway can be used for 
training purposes. 
  Bihac airport, which became a part of the Croatian territory 
after the Yugoslav People's Army withdrew, was completely 
destroyed in a spectacular mining operation controlled from a 
helicopter. The $5 billion investment was blown into the air 
and it is out of use now. A whole wing of MiG-21's was 
transferred from Bihac airport to Ponikve airport near Uzice in 
Serbia and most of the equipment and devices, as well as 
technical personnel, were transferred to the airport on the 
other side of Pljesivica Mountain, near Udbina. Udbina airport, 
which the Yugoslav People's Army constructed as a reserve 
warbase, thus became the westernmost Serbian airbase. The 
decision to occupy Udbina airport was taken for tactical 
reasons. Other airports are situated too close to demarcation 
lines. 
  After the Vance plan for Croatia was signed and the 
cease-fire reached, it seemed that Udbina airport would not have 
any special importance. For some time it served civilian 
purposes. The KOS [the former Yugoslav intelligence service] 
members who participated in the "Opera" action organized a 
regular flight service between Belgrade and Udbina by Yugoslav 
Air Force planes. After some "Opera" members were arrested, the 
regular air traffic between Belgrade and Udbina was given up, 
too. With the escalation of the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
especially after the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina became a 
no-fly zone, the military importance of Udbina airport 
increased. During the first several days after the ban was 
imposed, the Serbs, as usual, completely ignored this 
requirement of the international community. Since the beginning 
of 1993, however, when NATO aircraft started controlling Bosnian 
airspace, the Serbs have reduced their activities in the air to 
the use of helicopters and transferred some of their aircraft to 
Croatia. 
  In fact, Serbian planes and helicopters flew -- in spite of 
the ban -- from the Bosnian airspace to the occupied Croatian 
territories all the time. They were not stopped by UN monitors 
who were stationed at all active airports. 
  Since it cannot be established how often Serbian aircraft 
are 
still flying from Bosnia to Croatia, neither can it be precisely 
stated how strong the Air Force led by Milan Martic is. 
  It is known, however, that Serbs have more than 12 aircraft 
in the occupied Croatian territory. Apart from that, they have 
helicopters. 
  Already at the time when the so-called UN Protected Areas 
were being established, Serbs painted the helicopters of the 
former Yugoslav People's Army blue, trying to declare them as 
helicopters of the local police forces. The Knin Police thus 
got a large number of "Mi-8" transporting helicopters of Russian 
origin as well as "Gazella" combat helicopters for antitank 
actions and for reconnaissance purposes. At the same time, 
there were several old- fashioned attack airplanes of the 
"Jastreb" type, and several trainer planes of the "Galeb" type 
at Udbina airport. They had been already almost out of use 
since their maintenance level was below the technical minimum. 
This was confirmed at the air show, organized above Benkovac 
Barracks several months ago, during which one of the "Gazellas" 
split in the air. The members of the crew were badly wounded. 
Captain Suput later died from injuries. 
<H5>  Pilots From Lika Villages </H5>
  This situation in the Knin Air Force represents the general 
chaos, poverty, and anarchy in the regions ruled by rebel Serbs. 
Like other Krajina leaders, Lieutenant Bubalo, the commander of 
Martic's Air Force, has a large apartment in Belgrade. His wife 
and children live there. 
  Most of the pilots of the Krajina Air Force stem from Lika 
villages; after the Vance plan was signed they have been working 
more on activities necessary for survival, such as in 
agriculture, than on maintaining their flying capacity. 
  The announcement of a NATO intervention in Bosnia has again 
enhanced the importance of Udbina airport. Before the NATO 
ultimatum was issued, General Ratko Mladic, the commander of the 
Bosnian Serb Army, visited the occupied Croatian areas. He also 
visited the Knin headquarters of General Novakovic. Soon after 
this visit, Milan Martic, the new "president" of the "republic 
of Serbian Krajina," gave a statement on the necessity of close 
connections between Western Serbian countries, and Udbina 
airport was reactivated at the same time. Serbian combat jet 
planes started flying to the training polygon situated near the 
occupied town of Benkovac. They have been practicing classic 
maneuvers of reaching a destination at rooftop level as well as 
various maneuvers for bombing and rocket attacks. 
  The sudden reactivation of Udbina airport can be explained 
in 
two ways: The Serbian pilots from Bosnia have either come to 
the airport in order to refresh their skills, since they had a 
break of several months, or they have come here in order to 
prepare themselves for a response in case of NATO air strikes. 
It was stated that the Serbs can reach the NATO air base in 
Aviano only from Udbina airport. 
  Udbina airport is not a serious threat to Croatia. After the 
successful action in the Medak area, this airport is now within 
the reach of Croatian artillery. 
  More important is, however, the attitude the Federal 
Republic 
of Yugoslavia has toward this airport, which is situated deep 
within the internationally recognized borders of Croatia. 
  The Ministry of Traffic of every country issues the IAP 
[International Airport] publication for its airspace. It is 
used by pilots and flying personnel since it contains 
information on airports and infrastructure important for 
activities in the air. The Belgrade Ministry of Traffic, with 
which Croatia is now negotiating about the reestablishment of 
telephone lines, has declared Udbina airport one of the official 
Yugoslav airports in this publication -- apart from the Belgrade 
and Nis airports. The official code of Udbina airport is LYUD, 
and its telephone number is 078-76800. 

