Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Xie Songxin] </F>
  [Text] Five foreign companies yesterday signed the first 
contracts to supply construction equipment to the giant Three 
Gorges hydro-electric power project on the Yangtze River. 
  The companies--Caterpillar and Ingersoll Rand of the United 
States, Atlas Copco of Sweden, and Fried Krupp and Mannesman 
Demag of Germany--will provide $10 million worth of earth-moving 
equipment, said officials with the China National Machinery 
Import and Export Corporation (CMC). 
  The five suppliers were selected through public bidding held 
a month ago by CMC and China National Technical Import and 
Export Corporation. 
  The drills, bulldozers, cranes and excavators are to be 
delivered before June. 
  Xiao Chongqian, a senior manager with the Yichang-based 
China 
Three Gorges Project Development Corporation, said negotiations 
for another batch of contracts covering the supply of similar 
equipment worth $20 million were now going on. 
  The Three Gorges project will build the largest 
hydroelectric 
power station and dam in the world at a cost of nearly 100 
billion yuan ($11.5 billion). It will affect about 12 million 
residents on the middle reaches of the Yangtze and take 17 years 
to finish. 
  Construction started last year, and Xiao expects 20 million 
cubic metres of earth will be shifted this year. 
  As the project grows so does the demand for equipment, said 
Xiao. 
  The project has already sparked fierce competition for 
contracts among foreign manufacturers and suppliers. 
  Xiao said billions of dollars worth of equipment will be 
bought abroad for the project. And the purchases will be made by 
different means as the project moves along. 
  After the earthmovers, China will start to buy concrete and 
sand processing equipment and large plant, Xiao said. 
  His company is now looking for foreign partners willing to 
help Chinese companies make dump trucks in the country. 
  "We want the Three Gorges Project to bring on the 
development 
of Chinese industries by using foreign technology instead of 
merely buying equipment from foreign manufacturers," Xiao said. 
  In addition, his company is seeking foreign funds, including 
export credits and other foreign government loans, to pay for 
the equipment. 
  China is also looking for international help to design and 
produce the huge generators for the Three Gorges Project. 
  The plans include 26 water turbines with an installed 
capacity of 700,000 kilowatts each. They will be among the 
biggest in the world. 
  To encourage international cooperation, a month-long 
symposium was held late last year, with more than 90 Chinese and 
foreign experts taking part. 
  Many leading foreign companies with experience of building 
generators with a capacity of 600,000 kilowatts and more were 
represented. 
  They included the Volth and Siemens companies of Germany, GE 
of Canada, Hitachi, Toshiba and Mitsui of Japan, and LMZ and 
Electrical of Russia. 

