BFN 

<F P=106> [Nikolay Burbyga report: "Two States' Military Ministers </F>
Fail To Reach Agreement in Wake of `Odessa' Incident"] 
  [Text] IZVESTIYA has already reported on the incident 
which involved the hydrographic vessel Cheleken in the Odessa 
Port's Prakticheskaya Harbor, almost leading to an armed 
conflict between Ukraine and Russia. 
  How do the two states' military ministers, who met "one on 
one" in Moscow, assess the action taken by the military? 
  Here is the view of Army General Vitaliy Radetskyy, 
Ukrainian 
defense minister: 
  "The Odessa Port incident can be called an act of piracy -- 
when people arrive, load up, and then give the order for weapons 
to be used. Of course, this has angered the citizens of Odessa. 
It has angered the Ukrainian people, because the Ukrainian 
people have their own Armed Forces. Just what is going on when 
there is this kind of disorganization? What is typical is that 
the soldiers who were ordered to shoot were Ukrainian 
citizens.... If a division is ordered to use its weapons, then 
that division is not needed and there is no place for it on 
Ukrainian territory. That is why I have ordered it to be 
disbanded." 
  [Burbyga] What is your relationship with the Russian defense 
minister, is there any mutual understanding? 
  [Radetskyy] There are issues which, clearly, do not depend 
on Pavel Sergeyevich. I understand that. This incident would 
not have happened if we had contacted Grachev and settled the 
matter over the phone. But I was unable to contact him and 
resolve the problem for 24 hours. An underling would reply that 
the minister was out, or was busy, and so forth..... I can get 
through to the U.S. defense secretary in five minutes. 
[Radetskyy ends] 
  Here is the view of Army General Pavel Grachev, Russian 
defense minister: 
  "The Cheleken hydrographic vessel is part of the Black Sea 
Fleet, and no customs officers or border guards have the right 
to inspect what the Black Sea Fleet command is carrying. These 
actions were provoked by the Ukrainian authorities." 
  [Burbyga] Why, when the Black Sea Fleet situation was 
discussed during the "one on one" meeting, were you unable to 
reach mutual agreement with your colleague Vitaliy Radetskyy? 
  [Grachev] He defended himself during the discussion of the 
situation involving the hydrographic vessel, claiming that we 
had wanted to use weapons. But nobody used them. That is why 
there was no mutual agreement. I pointed out to him that their 
actions were one-sided and fell outside the framework of the 
Yalta agreement on the Black Sea Fleet which was signed by the 
two heads of state. 

