CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Eduardo Damaso and Fernando Semedo] </F>
  [Text] The geopolitics of drugs is being discussed 
today in Lisbon, at the Franco-Portuguese Institute. A current 
issue, its debate is being attended by two European specialists: 
Labrousse, head of the geopolitical observatory for drugs in 
Paris, and Stievenard, chief of the EC's [European Community] 
drug unit. This is a useful debate in a country such as 
Portugal, which is the entryway for half of the cocaine consumed 
in Europe. Exaggeration or not, this is the percentage cited by 
several observers. At least it allows us to understand the 
dimensions of the facilities enjoyed by the drug traffic on the 
Portuguese coast. This situation is a result of the lack of 
inspection facilities, but is also due to the corruption of 
agents in certain forces supposedly existing to combat the drug 
traffic. 
  There are over 100 agents from the defunct Customs Guard 
[GF] 
and the Maritime Police, with ranks as high as lieutenant and 
captain, providing security for the unloading of drugs on the 
Portuguese coast. This situation, which PUBLICO reported in 
feature articles published on 21 and 22 December of last year, 
has been described in various official documents. However, a 
more detailed account is provided in a confidential survey 
conducted by the Criminal Investigations Police nearly a year 
ago, along the entire Portuguese coast. 
  This survey, based on information collected during various 
drug trafficking proceedings, was reported to the justice 
minister, Laborinho Lucio, early last year. On several 
occasions, he referred to this situation at meetings of the 
Council of Ministers. 
  PUBLICO has learned that the survey was being discussed by 
the Criminal Investigations Police administration, which decided 
to notify the minister of the facts. The seriousness of the 
situation would entail options (regarding material resources 
and, possibly, coordination among various police forces) on a 
cabinet level. Hence, the decision was made to inform the 
minister of the report's existence. 
<H5>  Country Divided Into Areas of Influence </H5>
  The abolishment of the Customs Guard may have been hastened 
owing to the situation described in the report. This is one of 
the hypotheses accepted by several sources contacted by our 
newspaper. They even admit the possibility that various measures 
for coordinating the security forces in the drug area may have 
been discussed in the context of the serious state of corruption 
existing among the paramilitary forces. 
  The document, prepared by a brigade created especially for 
this purpose, was written in order to identify the individuals 
and logistical resources involved in the drug trafficking along 
the Portuguese coast, for subsequent investigations of both the 
trafficking and money laundering. 
  The work carried out made it possible to identify the groups 
operating from the Algarve coast to Minho, with their leadership 
structures and operational facilities; as well as the boats, 
warehouses, vehicles, properties, and assets purchased with the 
profits. Also identified were the accomplices "contracted" in 
institutions such as the ex-Customs Guard and the Maritime 
Police. There are nearly 50 names of individuals, including 
civilians and agents of the security forces; as well as accounts 
of millions of contos' worth of houses, vehicles, boats, and 
warehouses. 
  The agents most directly involved with the traffickers are 
of 
low rank; nevertheless, in at least half a dozen cases the 
situations involving collaboration with the unloading of drugs 
are known to persons with high-level assignments in the chain of 
command. A captain, lieutenants, and sergeants, as well as 
scores of agents, have been identified. 
  In the survey, which has already prompted several individual 
investigations, the country is divided into areas of influence 
wielded by the groups most active in the unloadings. It is well 
known that the main organizations are set up in the Viana do 
Castelo district, in Foz do Douro, Matosinhos, Espinho, Figueira 
da Foz, Peniche, Nazare, Cascais, Lisbon, Sesimbra, Setubal, 
Sines, Vila do Bispo, and Portimao. In some of the cases 
detected, entire outposts of the ex-Customs Guard were found to 
be implicated with the Mafia engaged in unloading drugs. 
  Those localities along the Portuguese coast are the chief 
reception sites for the drugs, which arrive on medium and 
large-sized vessels as far as the boundaries of the national 
waters. They are later transferred to smaller craft (in some 
instances, to boats belonging to the GF itself), which carry 
them to warehouses, some located on sites a little farther from 
the coast. 
<H5>  Spaniards Know </H5>
  The work done by the Portuguese police has updated some 
information already contained in a report prepared by the DEA 
[Drug Enforcement Administration] in 1989, following an 
infiltration of the network run by the Galician drug trafficker, 
Laureano Oubina (one of those with better contacts in Portugal), 
and of the Spanish police. 
  During the investigation related to the proceedings that 
culminated in Operation Necora, Judge Baltazar Garzon had in his 
possession the names of all the contacts of some of the leading 
Galician drug dealers in Portugal, particularly those in the 
Algarve. There was even information detailing the names of bars, 
restaurants, and coffee shops visited or owned by some of those 
contacts, with telephone numbers, home addresses, etc. 
  This information was retained in the dossiers of the Spanish 
police who, as several sources from Portuguese police circles 
told PUBLICO, have "highly detailed" information on who's who in 
the Portuguese drug trade. At least, they know who is providing 
logistical support to the Spanish traffickers. 
  Much of this information may have been provided to the 
Spanish authorities by the "repentant subject," in the Necora 
process, Ricardo Portabales, whose statement was heard by the 
Portuguese police in Madrid last summer. Portabales' hearing was 
prompted by the many references that he made, in interviews 
published in the Spanish and Portuguese press, to a meeting held 
in Cascais three years earlier, between Galician and Portuguese 
drug traffickers. However, during the questioning to which he 
was subjected by the Portuguese police, he did not give any 
objective information possible to put in writing. 
<H5>  European Police Attentive </H5>
  Certain police forces and intelligence services in some 
European countries and in the United States may also have known 
for some time the content of the report whose existence we are 
revealing publicly today. 
  The British intelligence service, MI-5, and Scotland Yard, 
the British police headquarters, are in this category. The same 
may hold true of the DEA (Drug Enforcement Agency), the U.S. 
police department specializing in combating drugs, and of the 
German police. 
  Portugal's role in the international drug trafficking 
networks has warranted very special attention from those police 
forces. Some of them have agents here on a full-time basis. The 
drug traffic and matters associated with the (legal or illegal) 
arms business are the focus of special attention. 
  Moreover, the DEA, which is currently monitoring Portugal 
from its office in Madrid, is preparing to become installed in 
Lisbon as well. 
  Despite the highly confidential nature of the information 
revealed in the document, those agents working in close 
proximity to the Portuguese investigators in the Criminal 
Investigations Police have had access to it. 

