Conflicting     interpretations between Zagreb and Belgrade of their 
recent agreement to begin normalizing relations suggests that the 
pact will do little to ease tensions between them.  Serb leaders 
continue to call for the creation of a Greater Serbia 
incorporating the so-called Republic of Serbian Krajina (RSK) in 
Croatia and Serb-held areas of Bosnia-Herzegovina into the FRY, 
while the Croats insist that the pact implies Belgrade's 
acceptance of Croatia's existing borders.  However, the agreement 
may also have been intended to serve as a signal to the Bosnian 
government of President Alija Izetbegovic that the Croats and 
Serbs are willing to cooperate in the Bosnian conflict despite 
their unresolved dispute. 

   Meeting on the periphery of the international peace talks on the 
Balkan crisis, Croatian President Franjo Tudjman and Slobodan 
Milosevic, president of the Republic of Serbia in the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY, including Montenegro), reached an 
agreement on 19 January to take steps toward normalizing 
relations between Croatia and the FRY.  Although Tudjman and 
Milosevic were the central figures involved in the talks, the 
brief "joint declaration" was signed by the two sides' foreign 
ministers since, as a republic president, Milosevic does not have 
the authority to sign agreements for the FRY.  The declaration 
stated that, "guided by the provisions of the UN Charter and the 
basic documents of the CSCE," Croatia and the FRY have agreed to 
"embark upon the process of normalization" of their relations. 
As a "first step in this direction," the two sides would open 
"official representative offices" in each other's capitals to 
"ease interstate relations and contacts" and "contribute to the 
development of mutual trust" (Tanjug, 19 January).  Both Zagreb 
and Belgrade have reported that one of the main purposes of the 
Geneva talks was to facilitate the reopening of communications 
and economic links both between Croatia and Serbia and within 
Croatia that were disrupted by the war between the Croats and the 
Krajina Serb separatists (Zagreb TV, 22 January; Borba, 1 
February). 

   A subsequent meeting between Croatian Foreign Minister Mate 
Granic and FRY Vice Premier Zeljko Simic established a framework 
for further talks.  Granic and Simic, in addition to discussing 
issues related to the reopening of communications links and the 
creation of a commission on displaced and missing persons, agreed 
that the two sides would meet monthly "at a high political level" 
to examine "all other issues of importance" for normalizing 
relations.  Meetings will take place on an alternating basis in 
Zagreb and Belgrade (Zagreb radio, 27 January).  Suggesting that, 
for their part, the Serbs want to continue the  negotiating 
process, Tanjug reported favorably that the 27 January session 
had taken place "in a highly tolerant atmosphere" (Tanjug, 27 
January). 

   At the same time, obstacles have already been put in the path of 
achieving detente.  RSK "Foreign Minister" Slobodan Jarcevic has 
announced that the Krajina Serbs will allow the opening of the 
Belgrade-Zagreb highway only in return for "certain concessions." 
The Serbs would set up "border crossings" and all those 
travelling through the RSK would be subject to Krajina laws. 
"Similar" concessions would be demanded for opening rail and 
telecommunications links (Borba, 1 February).  The Croats have 
adamantly refused to consider such demands in previous talks 
aimed at opening communications links through Krajina Serb 
territory (Vjesnik, 28 October 1993). 

   Expansive Croatian Interpretation 

   Tudjman immediately claimed that the agreement was tantamount to 
Belgrade's recognition of Croatia's existing borders and a 
retreat from its desire to incorporate Krajina into an expanded 
FRY (more commonly referred to as "Greater Serbia").  Although he 
acknowledged that the agreement did not "clearly" state that the 
FRY recognized Croatia's borders, he insisted that implicit in 
the declaration's references to the UN Charter and CSCE 
principles is "precisely" such recognition (See box).  Moreover, 
he insisted that the agreement meant Belgrade has "given up" the 
Krajina Serbs and acknowledged that the Serbs in Croatia must 
submit to the authority of the Croatian government (Zagreb TV, 19 
January).  Even after denials by the Belgrade leadership that the 
agreement signified the FRY's acceptance of Croatian sovereignty 
over Krajina, Tudjman insisted that his government is "on the 
right track" and that it had "found a way" to "liberate every 
square inch of Croatian soil" by peaceful means (Zagreb TV, 22 
January). 

   Other leaders echoed Tudjman's views.  Tudjman's chief of staff 
and general secretary of the ruling party, the Croatian 
Democratic Community, acknowledged that the document did not 
specifically refer to Belgrade's recognition of Croatia's borders 
but insisted that its reference to the "Republic of Croatia" 
implied such recognition because "it is completely clear to 
anyone" that the Republic of Croatia is that state and its 
borders that have been recognized by "over 100 countries."  He 
also insisted that references to the UN Charter and CSCE 
documents in the joint declaration imply Serb acceptance of 
Croatia's borders as "recognized internationally" (Danas, 25 
January). 

   Croatian Foreign Minister Granic hinted that Belgrade's adherence 
to Zagreb's interpretation of the joint declaration might help 
win an easing of the UN sanctions against the FRY.  In a speech 
to the Croatian parliament, he suggested that "several elements" 
of the agreement "could be relevant" to UN Security Resolution 
871 that links lifting of the sanctions to a resolution of the 
Krajina Serb issue as well as establishment of peace in Bosnia- 
Herzegovina.  He predicted that the agreement would lead to 
normalization of relations between Zagreb and Belgrade and would 
"have an impact on the position of minorities" in Croatia and the 
FRY "if the Serb side displays goodwill" (Zagreb radio, 26 
January). 

   Granic has also acknowledged that the Croat-Yugoslav agreement 
could be viewed as an attempt to isolate the Bosnian Muslims but 
has denied that this was the purpose of the joint declaration. 
Although he described all of the talks taking place about the 
crisis in the Balkans as "mutually interdependent," he dismissed 
the idea that the Croat-Yugoslav pact was intended to put 
pressure on the Bosnian Muslims, insisting that Croatia is "not 
conducting talks with anybody to the detriment of a third, absent 
party."  Granic maintained that Tudjman had recently offered 
"much more" to Izetbegovic during their meeting in Bonn in 
January than he had to Milosevic in Geneva (Zagreb radio, 26 
January). 

   Bosnian Connection 

   In contrast to the Croats' interpretation,  Belgrade has put more 
emphasis on the impact of the joint declaration on the peace 
process for Bosnia-Herzegovina and has narrowly interpreted the 
bilateral impact of the agreement.  In his statements to Belgrade 
television immediately after the joint declaration was signed, 
Milosevic emphasized the international negotiations in Geneva 
aimed at achieving a Bosnian peace and barely mentioned the 
Croat-Yugoslav bilateral agreement (Belgrade TV, 19 January).  On 
the previous day, he emphasized the "high degree of 
understanding" between the Serbs and Croats at the Geneva peace 
talks because the two sides arrived an "identical approach to 
solving" the Bosnian crisis without mentioning the negotiations 
about normalizing relations between Zagreb and Belgrade (Tanjug, 
18 January).  FRY Foreign Minister Vladislav Jovanovic 
specifically linked the Croat-Yugoslav agreement to the Bosnian 
war, asserting that, by signing the joint declaration and 
displaying a willingness to make peace, the Serbs and Croats had 
"unmasked the Muslim side, which proved itself [at the talks in 
Geneva] not to be interested in peace but in war" (Vecernje 
Novosti, 21 January). 

   Narrow Serbian Interpretation 

   Taking a much different view than the Croats of the meaning of 
the joint declaration as it relates to bilateral relations 
between Belgrade and Zagreb, Serb leaders have made it clear that 
they intend to press ahead with their plans to create a Greater 
Serbia.  While they profess support for the idea of normalizing 
relations with Croatia, Serb leaders and the Belgrade media have 
taken a much narrower view of the agreement: 

   Milosevic.  Typically, Milosevic was circumspect in his response 
to a question about whether the 19 January agreement implied 
Yugoslavia's recognition of Croatia's borders.  Without directly 
answering the question about recognition of Croatia's borders, he 
insisted, as he has in the past, that the question of the status 
of the RSK "can be settled only" by negotiations between the 
Croatian government and the Krajina Serbs.  By denying any role 
in helping to resolve the status of the Krajina Serbs, he 
appeared implicitly to indicate that he would not intercede to 
persuade the Serbs to compromise with the Tudjman government.  At 
the same time, he stressed that "all responsible Serb and Croat 
politicians must work on normalizing" relations (Tanjug, 19 
January). 

   Jovanovic.  Foreign Minister Jovanovic has emphatically and 
specifically denied that the joint declaration implied any 
diplomatic recognition of Croatia or of Croatian sovereignty over 
the RSK (See box).  Immediately after the 19 January announcement 
of the joint declaration in Geneva, he told a Belgrade TV 
interviewer that the agreement "means neither recognition nor the 
establishment of diplomatic relations."  He stressed that, 
despite the agreement, there were no grounds for "prejudging" the 
issue of the RSK, which would be decided by "direct negotiations" 
between the Krajina Serbs and the Croatian government (Belgrade 
TV, 19 January). Subsequently, in a letter to the UN Security 
Council, Jovanovic indicated that the Serbs viewed the reference 
to CSCE principles in the 19 January agreement quite differently 
than the Croats.  He reiterated the FRY's stand that the Krajina 
Serbs should be allowed to exercise the "right of self- 
determination" guaranteed by the "Helsinki final act of 1975" 
(Tanjug, 1 February). 

   RSK President Martic.  In the wake of the joint declaration, 
Milan Martic, who won the runoff election for "president" of the 
RSK on 23 January with strong backing by Milosevic-controlled 
Belgrade media, has emphatically refused to compromise on the 
Krajina Serbs' claim to independence from Croatia.  He told a 
Belgrade television interviewer that the Krajina Serbs will 
"negotiate peace" with the Croats on "how to live together as two 
neighboring countries" but that "under no circumstances" would 
the RSK revert to Croatian sovereignty (Belgrade TV, 28 January). 
Martic based his campaign for election on a platform that 
promised uncompromising support for the RSK's independence and 
unification with the FRY in a Greater Serbia.  In one statement 
he claimed that he received "some promises" that "unification 
could take place" by the end of 1994 (Vecernje Novosti, 18 
January).  Commenting on Martic's victory, a Belgrade television 
correspondent stressed that it should be "understood as a message 
to the world" that "not a single inch of this most western 
Serbian land will ever, under any circumstances, be part of 
Croatia" (Belgrade TV, 25 January). 

   Steps Toward Greater Serbia 

   Demonstrating the Serbs' resolve to create a unified Serbian 
state, the RSK and the Republic of Srpska (RS) in Bosnia- 
Herzegovina announced that they will adopt the newly introduced 
Yugoslav "super dinar" to facilitate economic integration.  Three 
days after the Belgrade-Zagreb joint declaration on normalizing 
ties, officials of the FRY, RSK, and RS announced a joint 
"economic recovery" program that would include recognizing the 
Yugoslav convertible dinar as a common currency.  Belgrade's 
National Bank of Yugoslavia will serve as the Serbian lands' 
central bank and the RSK and RS announced they would adopt 
economic programs that would dovetail with Belgrade's economic 
reforms that went into effect on 24 January (Tanjug, 22 January). 
Commenting on the economic program RS "Premier" Vladimir Lukic 
expressed the hope that all the Serbian republics would "soon be 
one political territory" (Belgrade TV, 22 January). 

   Prospects 

   Although Milosevic probably hopes that the agreement will help 
persuade the UN Security Council that the FRY is trying to 
fulfill the terms of Resolution 871 and Tudjman, under pressure 
from domestic political opponents, would like to show he is 
making progress toward reincorporating the Krajina Serbs, neither 
is likely to gain much from the 19 January joint declaration. 
Both the Croats and Serbs are likely to use the agreement as 
leverage to try to advance their goals at the expense of the 
other, suggesting that they will make little progress at actually 
normalizing relations.  While the liaison offices in Belgrade and 
Zagreb will serve to facilitate bilateral communication between 
the two governments, it is unlikely that the two sides will make 
much progress in opening communications in the near term. 
Opening of communications links will depend on agreements between 
the Tudjman government and the Krajina Serbs, and neither side 
has displayed much willingness to cooperate with each other over 
the past 3 years.  Even the most basic step toward normalization, 
a general ceasefire, remains tenuous at best with frequent 
violations on both sides.  Given this lack of cooperation, the 
joint declaration is unlikely to persuade the Muslims that they 
need fear a Belgrade-Zagreb condominium in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 

   BOX 

   The Two Opposing Views of the Agreement 

   Tudjman on the 19 January Agreement 

   We agreed in this declaration on the opening of offices--an 
office of the Republic of Croatia in Belgrade and an official 
office ... of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in Zagreb.  This 
is a way to establish normal diplomatic relations, to achieve 
diplomatic recognition.  I remembered in this context that 
such offices were opened after [former U.S. Secretary of State] 
Kissinger's trip to China.  Therefore, this is an extremely 
important development. ... 

   I want to make this clear to everyone:  This is recognition of 
sovereign Croatia.  This is a possibility to incorporate 
peacefully, without casualties and new destruction, all those 
Croatian areas that are currently occupied or under UN protection 
into the constitutional and legal system of the Republic of 
Croatia (Zagreb TV, 22 January). 

   Jovanovic on the 19 January Agreement 

   This Yugoslav-Croatian agreement stresses the position of peace, 
which will strengthen the Serbian and Croatian positions in the 
peace process for Bosnia-Herzegovina....  By signing this 
agreement, our two sides have unmasked the Muslim side, which 
proved itself [at the talks in Geneva] not to be interested in 
peace but in war.... 

   The joint statement is very clear and there are no ambiguities in 
it.  The only thing that is stated in it is that two offices will 
be opened.  The statement does not mean either mutual recognition 
or the establishment of diplomatic relations.  It does not offer 
solutions to any political problems.  If this were the case, it 
would have been mentioned in the text (Vecernje Novosti, 21 
January). 

   END BOX 

(AUTHOR:  NASH.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF 
ANALYST, ELAG, (703) 733-6120) 
ELAG/GILISON/ta 03/0035z feb 

