Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Amman, QUDS PRESS -- Hamas [Islamic Resistance 
Moement] has criticized the Palestinian opposition alliance's 
current framework. 
  Ibrahim Ghawshah, the movement's official spokesman, said: 
We in Hamas consider the Palestinian alliance framework to be 
incompatible with what Hamas has endeavored for. He added: 
This is a compromise framework that does not fulfill the 
desired goals. 
  Ghawshah, who recently participated in the Alliance of 
Palestinian Forces' meetings in Damascus on 19 and 20 February, 
called for changing the current alliance framework, which he 
said was "a temporary framework that should be changed." He 
noted that the Palestinian forces must work to draw up a formula 
for setting up "an elected Palestinian parliament -- just as in 
all democratic states -- that truly expresses the Palestinian 
people's stance on all issues pertaining to their destiny and 
future." 
  Ghawshah affirmed Hamas' refusal to regard "popular 
conferences" as a political authority from which a 
representative assembly emanates. He said that this formula "is 
a manifestation of part of the people. We believe that there 
must be a general manifestation. This is precisely the bone of 
contention between the democratic-leftist factions." 
  The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and the 
Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine had called for 
convening conferences in Palestinian populated areas with the 
aim of choosing a leadership that represents the Palestinians. 
  On the recent meetings of the alliance central leadership in 
Damascus, Ghawshah said: Three issues were discussed at the 
meetings. First, internal arrangements of the alliance. 
Second, the rules of these arrangements. Third, moves inside 
the occupied territories as well as among Palestinians in 
Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria. 
  Ghawshah said that the meetings discussed "ways of enhancing 
internal coordination in light of the alliance's defeat in the 
Gaza medical association elections." He stressed that the 
defeat stemmed from "lack of coordination among opposition 
factions." 
  Ghawshah said that in the meetings "preliminary plans were 
drawn up for activating the Alliance on the political and 
popular levels." Agreement was also reached to organize visits 
by Alliance Forces representatives "in a bid to establish 
contact with the world in general and the Islamic one in 
particular on the official and popular levels." He noted that 
the aim of these visits is "to affirm to the world the 
Palestinian people's devotion to their land, future, and 
homeland." 
  Ghawshah disclosed that an alliance forces internal draft 
bill will be discussed so that it will be approved by Alliance 
officials at a meeting whose date will be set shortly. 

