Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, January 6 (KCNA) -- Many people have 
become performers of feats and heroes of the time in the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. 
  Last year, 135 people were awarded the title of hero for 
their unexcelled self-sacrificing spirit, patriotic devotion and 
creative activity for the country and the people, for the 
society and collective. 
  Among them are heroes of the Republic Hwang Yong-chun and Yu 
Kyong-nam and labor heroes Kwon Sun-hui, Yi Ung-su and Yi 
Sung-ha. 
  Yi In-mo, a former war correspondent of the Korean People's 
Army, who underwent unspeakable sufferings behind bars in South 
Korea for 34 years, maintaining his patriotic principle, was 
embraced by the great homeland last year and awarded the gold 
star medal of the hero of the Republic amid blessings of all the 
people. 
  Hwang Yong-chun rendered distinguished service in defending 
the country, while serving as a soldier until he was 37 years 
old though he received demobilization orders six times. Yu 
Kyong-nam died at the age of 22 while serving in the Army. He 
saved scores of his comrades by covering with his body a 
handgrenade on the point of explosion. 
  Among the heroes are those who distinguished themselves in 
socialist economic construction, effected innovations in 
production and contributed to the development of the nation's 
science, education and literature and art. 
  It is unthinkable apart from the noblest benevolent politics 
of the illustrious leader that a good many people have become 
heroes while defending socialism. 
  The dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il published a historic 
work "Let us All Live and Struggle Like Heroes" in May 1988. In 
the work he said that to live like a hero and to become a hero 
is the only valuable and worthy life for a [word indistinct] man 
and encouraged all the people to perform heroic feats. 
  Thus heroism of the Korean people that originated from the 
anti- Japanese revolutionary struggle is being given a fuller 
scope in grand socialist construction today after years of the 
arduous yet worthwhile revolution. 
  Mass heroism and unexcelled devotion have been fully 
displayed in all sectors of the national economy, producing many 
heroes of the Republic and labor heroes every year. 
  Heroes in the Army and among the people remain loyal to the 
leadership of Comrade Kim Chong-il, a great brilliant commander. 
This is the true appearance of the Korean society. 

