BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Focus on Africa" program] </F>
  [Text] The battle for the Liberian town of Tubmanburg has 
reached a crisis. It is a stronghold of Alhaji Koromah's 
Mandingo faction of the ULIMO [United Liberation Movement for 
Democracy in Liberia] movement. They have been fighting 
Roosevelt Johnson's Krahn group since a power struggle erupted 
in March. The United Nations and ECOMOG [Economic Community of 
West African States Cease-Fire Monitoring Group] force have been 
powerless to stop it, and civilians have inevitably been caught 
in the crossfire. Now it looks as though Roosevelt Johnson's 
forces are poised to capture the town. From Monrovia, our 
correspondent, Nii Nartey Allison, telexed this report. 
  Diplomats and military sources today said that 700 soldiers 
loyal to Roosevelt Johnson launched a major attack on Tubmanburg 
at 6 AM yesterday morning. United Nations officials here said 
that UN observers in Tubmanburg are still holed up in their base 
on the outskirts of the city as sporadic gunfire echoes 
throughout Tubmanburg. They said there were heavy casualties on 
both sides, and dozens of civilians trying to escape the 
fighting have been killed in the crossfire. The situation still 
remains unclear. 
  A spokesman for the ECOMOG peacekeeping force said today 
that 
their troops which had deployed southwest of Tubmanburg have 
been drawn into the fighting following an attack on its base by 
one of the ULIMO factions. Yesterday, Alhaji Koromah's faction 
accused the African peacekeeping troops of siding with the 
Krahns in the ULIMO conflict, but the ECOMOG commander in charge 
of Western Liberia, the Nigerian, Kunle Togun, told reporters 
that he was not surprised by the accusation because the same 
allegation had in the past been made by the Krahns. 
  Unconfirmed reports said the commander of the Mandingo 
faction, General Mohamed Dumbuya, was killed last night in a gun 
battle. Roosevelt Johnson, leader of the Krahn faction, told 
reporters late last night that he was compelled to move on 
Tubmanburg to stop the killings of innocent people by the 
Mandingo tribe. The World Food Program said here today that 
fighting in Tubmanburg has disrupted food distribution to 20,000 
people living in Tubmanburg. 
  We have just heard from Nii Nartey Allison that Tubmanburg 
has fallen to Roosevelt Johnson. He says Alhaji Koromah's 
faction has moved its headquarters to Voinjama in Liberia's 
northern Lofa County. He also says that Alhaji Koromah has 
denied that his trusted field commander, Mohamed Dumbuya, has 
been killed. 

