CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vadim Nekrasov under the rubric "In the </F>
Corridors of Power": "What Does Autumn Mean for a Deputy? Autumn 
Means New Laws"] 
  [Text] The Supreme Council of Kazakhstan has 
developed a plan for parliament's work on draft laws until the 
end of 1994. The deputies are to approve this document in the 
next few days. 
  Judging from everything, this autumn in parliament will 
bring 
a rich crop of laws on economics. 
  In August the president of the republic will submit to the 
Supreme Council the drafts "On Procedure for Registration of 
Economic Entities" and "On Fundamentals of Economic Activity." 
The latter document could be called long-suffering since it was 
developed and critically discussed by the deputies last year. 
And now, almost a year later, a reworked version will be 
presented to the members of parliament. In the meantime in 
foreign trade the "belle of the ball" has been the executive 
power, and, as a study of the former Control Chamber shows, far 
from always successfully. The law on concessions has been 
abolished, the law on foreign investments (almost four years 
old) looks like an empty declaration, the free economic zones 
have amounted to nothing--on the whole, one of the most 
important spheres of our economy has been forced to rely on the 
norm setting of the Cabinet of Ministers. 
  In September the government will offer to the members of 
parliament a new redaction of the Law "On Destatization and 
Privatization" and a completely new draft of "On Protection of 
Rights of Stockholders." The Committee on Agrarian Questions and 
Food will by that same date prepare a draft Law "On Selection," 
and the Committee on Ecology and the Utilization of Nature--a 
draft Law "On the State Nature Preserve Fond and Especially 
Protected Natural Territories in Kazakhstan." 
  In September businessmen will probably be bitter about the 
abolition of two laws: "On Protection and Support for Private 
Entrepreneurship" and "On Freedom of Economic Activity and the 
Development of Entrepreneurship in the Kazakh SSR." Instead of 
these the deputies might adopt the codified Law "On 
Entrepreneurship," the draft of which ABV commented on in detail 
last week. The main thing is that there not be a long hiatus 
between the "elimination" of certain business laws and the 
generation of others; otherwise there will inevitably be a legal 
vacuum like the one now seen in the sphere of financial and 
economic activity. 
  October will be decisive for our financial legislation. The 
Cabinet of Ministers is preparing for this time new redactions 
of the Laws "On the National Bank of the Republic of Kazakhstan" 
and "On Banks in the Republic of Kazakhstan." It seems that 
quite recently there were heated discussions in the House of 
Parliament concerning these laws, but a year has past, the tenge 
has burst into our life--and relatively "fresh" legislative acts 
have to be rewritten. 
  One must assume that by October a certain amount of 
information will have been accumulated by the new members of the 
Control Chamber, who intend to deal precisely with banking 
structures first of all. 
  In November most of the attention of the deputies will be 
devoted to questions of reinforcing legality--drafts of the 
republic's Civil, Criminal, Criminal Procedure, and 
Administrative Codes. At that same time members of parliament 
will have to discuss the changes and additions to the 
Constitution proposed by the president. Discussion of the draft 
Law "On Political Rehabilitation of Participants in the Events 
of December 1986" is scheduled for 20 November. 
  The Fourth Estate will probably receive in that same month 
the Law "On Television and Radio Broadcasting," the 
highbrows--the Law "On Scientific-Intellectual Property," and 
people who are somewhat stronger physically--the Law "On 
Physical Culture and Sports." 
  The deputies have left December fairly open so far: There is 
the Civil Procedure Code, the draft Laws "On the Procuracy" and 
"On Grain," the draft of the new republic Housing Code, and also 
a number of economic resolutions. 

