Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Fatos Bitincka, minister of transportation </F>
and telecommunications of the Republic of Albania, by Goli 
Trebeshina in Tirana; date not given: "Economic Reform in 
Transportation"] 
  [Text] [Trebeshina] After Albania's many years of isolation 
and after many disasters in the transition period, one of the 
sectors of the economy which has frequent and extensive contact 
with Europe is that of automobile, sea, and air transport. Mr. 
Minister, what are some of the achievements so far in the 
implementation of the reform according to contemporary 
requirements? How is privatization proceeding and are there 
still some problems to be resolved? 
  [Bitincka] Because of the limited investments in this branch 
in comparison to industry and agriculture, transportation and 
communications suffered more from the socialist system of 
centralization and from the many years of isolation. The sector 
is on a much lower level than it is in any other country of 
Eastern Europe. It inherited a serious backwardness and a very 
grave situation in the respective infrastructures, in the means 
of transportation and in the machinery and eqipment in the 
workshops. About one-third of the roads which are under the 
administration of our ministry are asphalted and half of these 
were asphalted 20 years ago. More than 90 percent of the 
existing railroad tracks have wooden crosspieces. As a result, 
the technical-utilization indicators and the speed of the trains 
are extremely low. Rinas Airport has depreciated. The landing 
strip is seriously damaged and must be reconstructed immediately 
since there is a danger that it will deteriorate rapidly with an 
increase in air traffic. During the transition period, serious 
damage was caused to the means of transportation, especially the 
passenger cars and the freight cars which are used for 
transporting goods outside the country, as well as the buses, 
the ships of the merchant fleet, the lighting equipment in the 
airport, the telephone communication lines, and so forth. The 
democratic government has made it possible for the 
transportation system to contact Europe, first of all. This is 
the result of the establishment of a strategy and activity with 
a rapid effect, which is part of the application of the economic 
reform through the restructuring of enterprises, the initiation 
of privatization, the encouragement of new private activities 
and cooperation with a number of countries in the preparation of 
transportation agreements. The restructuring of enterprises and 
of transportation sectors brought, first of all, reform, which 
was accompanied by the division, downsizing, and breaking up of 
enterprises and activities. At the beginning of 1993, 28 percent 
of the enterprises were restructured by the reform process. Some 
eight joint enterprises were created. Along with the 
restructuring, provisions were made for public assistance for 
workers in all the enterprises which suffered a reduction in the 
number of workers and in excessive and unproductive 
administrative personnel and there was also a decrease in the 
main activity in some sectors, such as in the railroad sector 
because of reduced need to transport ores, and so forth. Thus, 
37 percent of the workers in the [transportation] system are on 
public assistance. Privatization is the main objective of the 
economic reform in transportation. During the two years of the 
reform, in the automobile transport sector, the vehicles of the 
taxi service for goods and passengers have been privatized. 
Currently, the services of agencies in the sea transport sector 
are privatized. The implementation, step by step, of the 
measures for economic reform and the utilization of corridors in 
the country by the transportation system have developed many 
transportation sectors, at quite high levels. Compared with the 
situation three years ago, the number of vehicles in automobile 
transport in the country as a whole has quadrupled; sailings in 
our ports have increased from three or four a month to five or 
six a day; air traffic has increased fourfold. The number of 
automobiles transiting Albania has increased about 35 times. The 
development of the transportation has made it possible to employ 
a number of workers. This number is expected to be three to four 
times the number of those receiving public assistance. 
  [Trebeshina] On what criteria was the administrative 
institutional reform in your ministry based and have any party 
criteria been placed above the criteria of ability and 
professional skills? 
  [Bitincka] The administrative reform in the ministry was 
carried out on the basis of tasks set by the government, in a 
very tight and constrained budgetary situation. In this 
framework, we tried -- while setting as a final goal the 
establishment of an able staff for the purpose of responding to 
the great and new demands which must be confronted in this 
sector -- to coordinate skilled and experienced specialists who 
have worked in difficult sectors of transportation with young 
cadres who are taken from the whirlpool of transportation. As a 
result of the restructuring of the apparatus, 68 percent of the 
jobs were recycled. I believe that the staff carried out a 
number of tasks in accordance with specified objectives and that 
this was the basis for bringing about an administrative and 
institutional reform in accordance with the new criteria of the 
market economy. 
  [Trebeshina] Rinas Airport, the Tirana-Durres highway, the 
seaport of Durres are all coveted by foreigners or.... What 
concrete investments will be made? Have sources of financing for 
the transportation infrastructures been obtained and what place 
does Albania occupy in the meeting of the Group of 24 countries 
in which you are participating? 
  [Bitincka] The rapid development of transportation and, in 
particular, the heavy traffic, require investments in the 
backward infrastructure. The implementation of the economic 
reform and of competition concretize the possibility of 
obtaining souces of financing from abroad. In these projects, we 
making the final preparations to make it possible to begin 
obtaining financing from abroad, such as, in the first 
transportation projects, from the World Bank and the Kuwait Fund 
for the rehabilitation of the highway system, the rehabilitation 
of the seaport of Durres, and also for the initial work on the 
construction of the Tirana-Durres highway, with contemporary 
parameters. The meeting held in Brussels, especially for 
Albania, was for the purpose of holding discussions with 
international financial bodies, various states to obtain support 
for a medium-term program for 1991-96 in projects identified in 
the transportation sector, which are included in the priority 
projects of the country. 
  [Trebeshina] At the Qafa e Thanes customs control point we 
have often seen cars waiting in line for hours and even days. 
How can speedier and more effective movement be achieved? What 
are the obstacles and who should assume responsibility for this? 
  [Bitincka] This is a real problem. There is need for action 
as soon as possible, along with the possibilities which have 
been created for opening border control points in Bllate and 
Tushemisht, in Diber and Pogradec districts, respectively. With 
the sparse funds in our budget, we have begun some very 
necessary work, but, for the future, if the necessary funds are 
obtained for financing, investments are earmarked for widening 
the narrow transit points in accordance with contemporary 
requirements. 
  [Trebeshina] After the 22 March elections, the democratic 
government transferred the posts and telecommunications sector 
to your ministry. Was this sector a bonus or...? 
  [Bitincka] In my opinion, the democratic government, which 
took over the management of the country in a very serious 
economic crisis, combined sectors in a very tight budgetary 
situation dictated by the economic reform. It was thought that 
it would be best to combine this sector with the transportation 
sector. 
  [Trebeshina] There is a lot of talk about corruption. What 
is 
the situation in the sector which you head? 
  [Bitincka] This matter has been at the center of attention 
in 
our activity. We have tried to draft, approve, and promulgate 
the appropriate regulations, ordinances, and criteria for the 
examination of activities, projects, and other issues which have 
been the objects of activity in the transportation sector. 
Important issues and basic problems have been the subject of 
roundtable discussions, combatting the tendency to avoid 
discussing undesirable phenomena in our sectors. 
  [Trebeshina] Recently, the democratic government drafted and 
approved a medium-term program for the development of the 
economy during the 1993-96 period. What is the place of the 
transportation and posts and telecommunications sector in this 
program? 
  [Bitincka] In the medium-term program stipulated by the 
democratic government, transportation is a priority branch of 
the economy. Therefore, it is in a key place and is given its 
proper value, after being underappreciated in the socialist 
system during the past 50 years. 

