BFN 

  [Text] Caricom [Caribbean Common Market] is to adopt a new, 
outward-looking foreign policy orientation. So says Trinidad's 
Foreign Affairs Minister Ralph Maraj. Maraj made this comment 
upon his return from the Caricom Foreign Ministers meeting held 
in Belize. According to the minister, Caricom can no longer 
afford to be inward-looking. He points to Caricom's 
participation in a number of regional summits as evidence that 
the grouping is serious about establishing wider trading links. 
  [Begin recording] [Unidentified reporter] Recently returned 
from the 20th meeting of the Standing Committee of Foreign 
Ministers, in Belize, Minister Maraj said Caricom is no longer 
solely concerned with the integration process. While he 
acknowledges that integration will always be a priority, the 
foreign minister says Caricom realizes a need to interact with 
other regional trading blocs. Minister Maraj feels foreign 
policy coordination among member countries has remained at the 
level of rhetoric for too long. With the coming of the World 
Trade Organization and the new foreign policy outreach of the 
region, he says there will be an absolute need for Caricom to 
combine its efforts at internatinal fora. 
  [Maraj] Whatever it is that we consider important [word 
indistinct] the region, the particular vulnerability of small 
countries like ours, all of the Caricom countries will be 
shooting together to ensure that our voice is heard. I must tell 
you that this is important because this has not happened before. 
  [Reporter] Minister Maraj says the Caricom secretariat has 
been mandated to compile a list of matters of collective concern 
for discussion. He says Caricom will seek to have its concerns 
included on the agenda for the December hemispheric conference 
in Miami. Minister Maraj says too that Caricom will hold summits 
with Mexico and Canada. The expectation is that these 
discussions will foster Caricom's NAFTA ambitions. The minister 
says the decision was also taken for joint Caricom diplomatic 
representation in South Africa. [end recording] 

