Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel by Vlastimil </F>
Kovar and Petr Nemec; place and date not given: "The 
Attractiveness of the European Union Is Unshakeable"] 
  [Text] [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] The so-called Euroskepticism 
is spreading in Europe. The faith in a united Europe is less 
intensive now than it was at the time of the signing of the 
Maastricht Treaty. Do you think that the original ideas about 
the European Union [EU] will undergo modification? 
  [Kinkel] One Briton said recently about Europe: "It is 
boring to be part of it, but it would be a tragedy not to be 
part of it." That describes the situation quite aptly. A 
minister of foreign affairs does not like to come across 
Euroskepticism often. Indeed, there are growing doubts about 
Europe, which used to develop on its own. Brussels is being 
blamed for everything that is negative. Europe does, of course, 
have its weaknesses. I agree with the criticism of excessive 
regulation. Unfortunately, however, I frequently hear criticism 
that turns out to be unsubstantiated when taking a closer look. 
  The main question is: What sort of Europe do we want? What 
should the EU look like in the future? An even more important 
question is: What is Europe doing to secure jobs and internal 
and external security? Those are legitimate questions to which 
we, politicians, must reply. To respond to your specific 
question -- a rectification of the excessive regulation and 
exaggerated centralism is inevitable. The goals of the EU will 
remain unchanged, however. The attractiveness of the union is 
unshakeable. Just look at the list of states that have 
expressed their wish to join. 
  [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] Europe has not been able to resolve the 
conflict in former Yugoslavia. All political and security 
mechanisms, such as the CSCE, have failed. Do such institutions 
still have any raison d'etre in the first place? What could 
replace them? 
  [Kinkel] Although we justifiably feel bitterness, we should 
not succumb to radical pessimism. It is a sad fact that in 
former Yugoslavia there is a danger that, for the first time 
since World War II, the European map might be redrawn by means 
of weapons. Europe could pay for a long time to come for its 
failure to prevent that. The decisions by the EU, NATO, and the 
UN Security Council of the last few days clearly show the 
firmness with which the international community reacts to the 
Bosnian war. We have sent a signal to all parties to the 
conflict that the civilized world will no longer stand idly by 
and watch killing and political maneuvering. NATO has expressed 
unambiguously, and with firm deadlines, its determination for 
military action, if necessary, which has evidently had its 
impact. 
  [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] What are your ideas of a fully 
functioning system of European security that could guarantee 
also the security of the states of Central and East Europe? 
  [Kinkel] Our aim is a just and lasting order in Europe that 
would bring peace, stability, and security to all Europeans. To 
achieve this aim, it is important that different institutions 
with their specific contributions to the security architecture 
-- that is, the CSCE, the EU, the Western European Union [WEU], 
and, of course, also NATO -- join together in a way that will 
not create new trenches in Europe. We support the efforts of 
the Czech Republic and other countries of Central and East 
Europe to draw closer on a wide front toward the structures of 
European and trans-Atlantic security. By advancing to these 
countries the Partnership for Peace offer, the NATO summit in 
January 1994 submitted specific proposals to this effect, some 
of which have been partly implemented. Partnership for Peace 
will play an important role in the evolutionary process of 
NATO's expansion. We are also trying to improve the status of 
these countries with regard to the WEU. Trans-Atlantic 
partnership and European unification are for us pillars of 
Europe's future security architecture. 
  [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] There is talk at present of stagnation 
in Czech-German relations. Do you agree with this assessment? 
If you do, where do you see the causes? Another question: The 
Czech Government is taking steps to partially indemnify [Czech] 
victims of Nazism. What do you think about this? When will 
Germany itself be able to compensate for this guilt, in your 
opinion? 
  [Kinkel] I would not speak of stagnation in Czech-German 
relations. However, their development does not meet our mutual 
expectations in every respect. 
  In the economic sphere, with a roughly 25 percent share in 
both imports and exports, we are clearly the most important 
partner of the Czech Republic. We have opened our market to 
Czech products. Thousands of Czechs have found jobs in Germany, 
especially in the border regions. Millions of German tourists 
visit the Czech Republic. By all this we are considerably 
contributing to economic and social stability in the Czech 
Republic. 
  In other areas, such as cooperation in the border regions or 
political cooperation among young people, I see possibilities to 
achieve success, following problems that were associated partly 
with Czechoslovakia's partition. 
  Of course, claims of Czech victims of Nazism for 
compensation 
exist. Along with these claims, there also exist the claims of 
Sudeten Germans expelled from Czechoslovakia after World War II. 
  Germany is aware of its responsibility toward the Czech 
victims of Nazism. We will seek an adequate solution. 
  We are watching with interest the Czech Government's steps 
concerning partial indemnification of Czech victims of Nazism. 
There must not be any prejudice, however. A dialogue must be 
conducted with the Sudeten Germans. Results of the German-Czech 
commission of historians, which has just published a report on 
its second symposium on "Germans, Czechs, and Slovaks during the 
[1918-1938] First Republic," should be taken into consideration 
much more than heretofore. This could help make the discussion 
more businesslike, which is badly needed. 
  [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] Do you think that the upcoming election 
campaign in Germany is making the talks on outstanding issues 
with the Czech Republic more complicated? 
  [Kinkel] No. The topic itself is not complicated. Quick 
solutions cannot be expected, however. 
  [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] How do you assess conditions for 
Western businessmen in the Czech Republic? What shortcomings 
exist in this area, in your opinion? 
  [Kinkel] An assessment of the general conditions for 
entrepreneurs in the Czech Republic has been carried out by the 
German economy itself. On the one hand, it transpires from the 
bilateral trade statistics that Germany is the by far most 
important trading partner of the Czech Republic. Besides, the 
Czech economy has absorbed a considerable portion of German 
investments oriented towards Central and East European 
countries. The Germans are in second place among foreign 
investors, close behind the Americans. All this serves as proof 
that the German economy assesses the conditions for economic 
involvement in the Czech Republic as advantageous. The only 
point about which German entrepreneurs occasionally complain are 
certain administrative problems they encounter when implementing 
their projects. These problems are rather marginal, however, 
considering the great dynamism with which the Czech economy has 
been realizing its transition toward market economy. 

