BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with National Assembly Speaker Dr. Frene Ginwala </F>
by correspondent Leslie Mashokwe in the Cape Town studio -- live 
or recorded] 
  [Text] [Mashokwe] Good evening, Dr. Ginwala, and 
congratulations on your appointment as speaker. Exactly what is 
a speaker? 
  [Ginwala] I think there's one role, that you preside over 
the 
National Assembly. It means, in a sense, managing, ensuring its 
objectives are reached. There's been a lot of joking today 
about keeping people in order, but hopefully, if you set up the 
right cooperative atmosphere, you don't need to do too much of 
that, but eventually you might have to do that. You also, in a 
way, give leadership to parliament in terms of the staff, the 
support -- all of that falls within the office of the speaker. 
But I don't know what else, because I've just -- it's not even 
a few hours. I'm learning what else is involved. 
  [Mashokwe] We're told you are the first lady to be speaker 
in 
the world. 
  [Ginwala] No. In South Africa. There are speakers in the 
British Parliament. I think, Austria. A number of other 
countries. Not many, but there are some. 
  [Mashokwe] Okay. For South Africa, it's an important 
occasion, though. What exactly do you think will be your 
problems, presiding over this parliament of different 
backgrounds -- ANC, National Party [NP], and anybody else? 
  [Ginwala] I think that....[pauses] Let me put it as a 
challenge, rather than a problem, because I hope it's not going 
to be a problem. I think the challenge is going to be to bring 
into parliament a democratic tradition. Now people say: But 
surely, that's automatic. It's not. Parliament can be -- in 
many positions it is -- simply a rubber stamp. The cabinet 
decides, and parliamentarians debate and approve legislation. I 
think we need to bring into parliament...it must own...because 
it is the -- and this is what I said when I accepted -- that it 
is the repository of the principles and the values for which 
people have struggled, which have actually driven the kinds of 
changes we've got. [sentence as heard] The natural home for 
that is in a parliament. So if we see parliament in that way, 
then members of parliament have got to be creative; they've got 
to drive the changes that still lie ahead. It doesn't mean that 
they're acting contrary to cabinet, but it does mean a more 
equal relationship, moving in tandem, each contributing, so that 
we speed up the process of change. But even after that, it has 
to be the repository of democracy. 
  [Mashokwe] Looking at a political background, are you going 
to be fair with the IFP [Inkatha Freedom Party] and the NP, with 
the ANC background that we know you're from? 
  [Ginwala] I don't think my problem is fairness. To be very 
honest, at a personal level I've been involved in politics. 
Because you're involved in politics, it doesn't mean you're 
involved in adversarial politics. It doesn't mean my beliefs in 
what the ANC stands for have changed. But it does mean that a 
speaker believes in democracy; parliament has got to hear every 
voice. This is again what I said today. It's very, very 
important, because you don't serve democracy by stifling debate. 
So you have to encourage debate. Then the composition of the 
house is not determined by the speaker. It's determined by the 
people of this country, and then they can make the decisions of 
what is the outcome of the debate. But while the debate 
prevails, every voice must be allowed its fullest say. 
  [Mashokwe] I'm trying to understand that, allowed its 
fullest 
say. Is there no temptation, would there be no temptation on 
your part to stifle other voices that are not in your camp, as 
it were? 
  [Ginwala] Well, in terms of my personal record, that would 
not be a problem. I think, like everybody, you sometimes get 
annoyed with someone, and say: Oh, what are they going on about. 
I think obviously, as speaker, you can't show that. But that 
is one thing. But to stifle and to prevent it goes contrary to 
everything I personally have wanted, so it's very difficult to 
say what the future holds, and I've been in this job just a few 
hours. But it would be very wrong to stifle any debate. The 
house itself regulates itself in many ways. It sets rules; it 
sets time schedules. As speaker, my job will be to make sure 
that there's a fair -- that people who want to speak out, ask, 
but within rules, within procedures that everybody has agreed. 
[sentence as heard] That's the process we have to take forward. 
  [Mashokwe] I have to ask you this question now. You're going 
to be presiding over a predominantly male.... 
  [Ginwala, interrupting] Much less so, Leslie, than it was 
two 
days ago. 
  [Mashokwe] Has it changed? 
  [Ginwala] Significantly. Look at it. I don't know the 
number of women, but when you look at the composition of this 
parliament -- and it's not just women. [sentence as heard] I was 
sitting where I could see them, as they were being sworn in, and 
this parliament represents South Africa. There are men and 
women; there are people of all religions, political persuasions; 
there are workers; there are capitalists -- you've got them all. 
That is what it's all about, and it's really marvelous. 
  [Mashokwe] Does it make it more easy for you, if you have 
more women in it, as opposed to presiding over a male-dominated 
parliament? 
  [Ginwala] It makes me feel more comfortable. It makes me 
feel we're reaching the point we need to reach, because it will 
be more democratic, because women's experience will feed into 
the debate, so that when we are talking about laws, we will 
not... [pauses] The lives of half the population in the previous 
parliament were probably more, because blacks were also 
excluded. [sentence as heard] But in terms of the male 
domination, the experience of women will feed into the debate, 
so that.... 
  [Mashokwe, interrupting] But don't dominate Parliament? 
We're having all this liberation of women.... 
  [Ginwala, interrupting] Why should that be suddenly 
domination? I mean, after all, women are the majority in this 
country, and we're not -- nowhere near -- the majority in this 
parliament. But you might argue, I mean, that by their own 
contribution they might dominate. I think every member's own 
contribution will determine the extent to which they are able to 
shape things. 
  [Mashokwe] You have a background of media, working in the 
media. How is this going to change now that you are Lady 
Speaker? 
  [Ginwala] Well, I don't know whether the background is going 
to have anything to do with it, but my political background 
leads me to believe that parliament has to be open. People have 
got to see what goes on in parliament, and I hope therefore that 
the media will actually cover parliament. But I hope also that 
the media will explain parliament, because there is a lot of 
ritual in parliament which you won't always get rid of. What is 
the difference between a bill and an act? Media, in many ways, 
has to explain that. We will be talking of select committees. 
What are those? So the media have a vital role to play in 
explaining parliament. But from parliament's point of view, 
from the needs of democracy, we need people to feel this is 
their house. We need members of parliament to be aware that all 
of South Africa knows what they are doing, and they are saying, 
and we need the public to know that they have a right to make an 
input into that parliament. We've got to find ways of doing 
that. 
  [Mashokwe] Were you surprised at your appointment, and are 
you ready for it? 
  [Ginwala] No, I'm not ready for it. I was surprised. I was 
honored. I felt very proud, rather intimidated, I'm afraid -- 
regretting that I will not be that active in politics. A 
certain mixture of feelings. 
  [Mashokwe] Dr. Ginwala, on that note, thanks for your time, 
and thanks for talking to us. 

