Language: <F P=105>Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] The agenda of the 26th meeting of the National 
Council of the Slovak Republic includes a document on the 
foreign policy of Slovakia in 1993 and its priorities in 1994. 
[passage omitted] Editor Magda Pospisilova reports from the 
building of the parliament. 
  [Pospisilova] It has already become a tradition that a 
discussion of such a fundamental topic of our foreign policy is 
being watched by ambassadors, heads of missions, and diplomats 
accredited in the Slovak Republic. The opening address on the 
report on the fulfilment of tasks and the current aims was 
delivered by Minister of Foreign Affairs Jozef Moravcik. 
  He stressed in the beginning that if there is a sphere where 
a high degree of consensus of all, or at least an overwhelming 
majority of political parties, is consistently sought, then it 
is the sphere of foreign policy. 
  Slovakia entered the international scene with a positive 
assessment of the peaceful division of Czechoslovakia. [passage 
omitted] 
  Three postulates were being stressed when dividing 
Czechoslovakia: first, the two new states will take over all the 
tasks of the disappearing states as two successor states; 
second, the international community should apply the principle 
of an undifferentiated approach towards the two successor 
states; third, the division of Czechoslovakia will not disturb 
stability in Central Europe. Following the division of 
Czechoslovakia we have concluded 2,014 bilateral treaties and 
987 multilateral treaties. Last year we signed 54 new treaties 
[all figures as heard]. Others are currently being discussed at 
the expert level. 
  Minister Moravcik considers that one of the most important 
of 
last year's successes was the signing of the European agreement 
on Slovakia's association to the European Union. The process of 
ratification of this agreement in the European Parliament and in 
the parliaments of the individual member countries of the 
European Union has already started. We shall pay priority 
attention to its success this year. [passage omitted] 
  Jozef Moravcik went on to say: 
  [Begin Moravcik recording] The principle of an 
undifferentiated approach towards the two successor states was 
generally accepted by the international community. It was fully 
implemented, for example, also during our acceptance into the 
Council of Europe. It accompanied our establishment on the 
international scene. Another matter is whether or not we will 
be able to continue keeping pace with the Czech Republic. This 
will depend on internal political viewpoints. This problem 
emerges strongly in connection with the deliberations on 
expanding NATO and with the separation of Slovakia from the 
first group of the states aspiring to NATO membership, which 
sometimes happens. The causes of this separation should not be 
sought in foreign political or even internal political 
conspiracy against Slovakia. Slovakia must concentrate on 
maintaining a good pace in building democratic instititutions, 
in developing basic institutions and values in the pluralistic 
society and the market economy environment. 
  The assurance that the division of Czechoslovakia will not 
influence stability in Central Europe, which we gave when 
dividing the federation, has been fulfilled to the extent that 
our common state has been divided in a peaceful and cultivated 
way. Our natural pledge towards Europe, but above all, towards 
ourselves, is to maintain the stability of Central Europe. It 
means developing cooperation with our neighbours and deepening 
the atmosphere of trust, possibly creating it where it is 
lacking. 
  This relates, above all, to Hungary. If we want to create 
mutual trust we must completely eliminate any confrontational 
tone and establish a dialogue as the fundamental method of 
seeking compromise. Apprehensions of irredentism, nurtured by 
unsuitable statements of some politicians in our country and in 
Hungary, are being felt in Slovakia. Allegations are spread 
from Hungary about non-adherence to fundamental rights of 
national minorities. The institutional mechanism must be 
created to eliminate suspicions on both sides. Its basis could 
be an agreement containing principles of correct behaviour, that 
is what is being created within the CSCE. I believe that the 
project of the pact of stability in Europe, which is being 
prepared under the auspices of the European Union, will 
contribute towards creating the atmosphere of trust. 
  It is important for stability in central Europe that the 
questions of rights of national minorites should not become a 
permanent problem. It is desirable as soon as possible to 
achieve a stabilizing solution so that we might avoid situations 
where satisfaction of one demand is a pretext for presenting 
other demands. It is also important, above all, for us, since 
we are characterized by ethnically mixed areas, that the rights 
of minorites do not create artificial boundaries among the 
citizens of various ethnic groups. I have in mind the so-called 
collective rights of national minorities. The principles of a 
multiethnic society rather than the principle of creating 
ethnically compact entities, could be useful in the process of 
uniting Europe. [end recording] [passage omitted] 

