Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["The Implementation Regulations for the Protection of </F>
Aquatic Wildlife of the PRC"] 
  [Text] Order of the Ministry of Agriculture of the PRC 
  "The Implementation Regulations for the Protection of 
Aquatic 
Wildlife of the PRC," which were approved by the State Council 
on 17 September 1993, are now promulgated for implementation. 
  Minister Liu Jiang 
  5 October 1993 
<H5>  Chapter 1: General Principles </H5>
  Article 1. The regulations are formulated in accordance with 
the Law for Protection of Wildlife of the PRC (hereinafter 
shortened to the Law for Protection of Wildlife). 
  Article 2. The aquatic wildlife referred to in these 
regulations refers to rare aquatic wild animals on the verge of 
extinction. The products of aquatic wildlife referred to refer 
to any part of the rare aquatic wild animals on the verge of 
extinction and their derivatives. 
  Article 3. The fishery administration of the State Council 
supervises the national administrative work of aquatic wildlife. 
  The fishery administrations of local people's governments at 
the county level or above supervise the administrative work in 
their own administrative areas. 
  The right of fishery administrations to impose 
administrative 
punishment stipulated by the Law for Protection of Wildlife and 
these Regulations can be exercised by their affiliated fishery 
administration and supervision agencies. 
  Article 4. People's governments above county level and their 
administrative units concerned should encourage and support 
scientific research institutions and teaching units concerned in 
carrying out research on aquatic wildlife. 
  Article 5. Fishery administrations and their affiliated 
fishery administration and supervision agencies have the right 
to supervise and inspect the implementation of the Regulations. 
The units and individuals inspected should be cooperative. 
<H5>  Chapter 2: Protection of Aquatic Wildlife </H5>
  Article 6. The fishery administrations of the State Council 
and of the people's governments of provinces, autonomous regions 
and municipalities directly under the central government should 
regularly organize investigation of aquatic wildlife resources 
and set up resource files to provide a basis for the formulation 
of plans for the protection and development of aquatic wildlife 
and the formulation and revision of lists of aquatic wildlife 
under national and local major protection. 
  Article 7. Fishery administrations should organize various 
social forces to take effective measures to protect and improve 
the living environment for aquatic wildlife and also to protect 
and increase the propagation of aquatic wildlife resources. 
  All units and individuals are forbidden to damage the 
waters, 
habitats and living conditions of aquatic wildlife under 
national and local major protection. 
  Article 8. All units and individuals have the right to 
report to local fishery administrations or their affiliated 
administration and supervision agencies acts of seizing or 
damaging aquatic wildlife resources and to accuse the wrongdoers. 
  Article 9. Any unit or individual that discovers aquatic 
wild animals which are wounded or stranded or which are trapped 
in inlets or river branches should report in a timely manner to 
the local fishery administration or its affiliated 
administration and supervision agencies so that they can take 
emergency measures to rescue the animals. They can also request 
nearby units with the requisite resources for rescue to take 
emergency measures and report to the fishery administration at 
the same time. Dead aquatic wild animals are to be handled 
appropriately by the fishery administration. 
  Aquatic wild animals caught by mistake during fishing 
operations should be released unconditionally. 
  Article 10. Application can be made to the fishery 
administration of the local people's government for compensation 
for damage caused by protecting aquatic wildlife under national 
and local major protection. The local government will provide 
compensation in accordance with the relevant provisions of the 
provincial, regional, or municipal people's government when the 
damage is proved to be true and merits compensation after 
investigation. 
  Article 11. The fishery administrations of the State Council 
and of the people's governments of provinces, autonomous regions 
and municipalities directly under the central government should 
designate nature reserves for aquatic wildlife in the major 
habitats and waters of aquatic wildlife under national and local 
major protection and propagate and strengthen protective 
management. Specific measures will be provided by the State 
Council separately. 
<H5>  Chapter 3: Administration of Aquatic Wildlife </H5>
  Article 12. Catching and killing aquatic wildlife under 
national major protection is forbidden. 
  It is necessary to apply for a special permit for catching 
aquatic wildlife under national major protection when one of the 
following situations occurs: 
  1. Catching is necessary for scientific investigation of 
aquatic wildlife and aquatic wildlife resources. 
  2. It is necessary to obtain individuals of species from 
natural waters or habitats for taming and propagating aquatic 
wildlife under national major protection. 
  3. It is necessary to obtain aquatic wildlife under national 
major protection from natural waters or habitats to undertake 
scientific research projects above provincial level or medical 
production tasks assigned by the state. 
  4. It is necessary to obtain aquatic wildlife under national 
major protection from natural waters or habitats for propagation 
and popularization of knowledge about aquatic wildlife, teaching 
or exhibition. 
  5. It is necessary to obtain aquatic wildlife under national 
major protection due to other special circumstances. 
  Article 13. Procedure for application for special catch 
permits: 
  1. Anyone who needs to catch aquatic wildlife under 
first-class national major protection should apply to the 
fishery administration of the State Council for a special catch 
permit with the signed opinion of the fishery administration of 
the people's government of the province, autonomous region or 
municipality directly under the central government where the 
applicant resides and where the catch site is located. 
  2. Anyone who needs to catch aquatic wildlife under 
second-class national major protection in their own province, 
autonomous region or municipality directly under the central 
government should apply to the fishery administration of the 
people's government of the province, autonomous region or 
municipality directly under the central government with the 
signed opinion of the fishery administration of the people's 
government of the county where the applicant resides. 
  3. Anyone who needs to catch aquatic wildlife under 
second-class national protection outside their own province, 
autonomous region or municipality directly under the central 
government should apply for a special catch permit to the 
fishery administration of the people's government of the 
province, autonomous region or municipality directly under the 
central government where the catch site is located with the 
signed opinion of the fishery administration of the people's 
government of the province, autonomous region or municipality 
directly under the central government where the applicant 
resides or works. 
  Zoological gardens which need to catch aquatic wildlife 
under 
first-class national protection should be verified and approved 
by the construction administration of the State Council before 
they apply for special catch permits to the fishery 
administration of the State Council. Applicants need the 
verification and approval of the construction administration of 
the people's government of the province, autonomous region or 
municipality directly under the central government where their 
zoological gardens are located for the catching of aquatic 
wildlife under second-class national major protection before 
they apply for special catch permits to the fishery 
administration at the same level. 
  The administration in charge of issuing special catch 
permits 
should decide whether it approves an application within three 
months from the date of receiving it. 
  Article 14. Special permits are not issued when one of the 
following situations exists: 
  1. The applicants can obtain individuals of species and 
products of aquatic wildlife under national major protection or 
achieve their aims by legal, non-catch ways. 
  2. The application does not conform to relevant state 
regulations or the equipment or methods used or the time or 
location chosen for the catch are inappropriate. 
  3. The aquatic wildlife is not in a condition for catching. 
  Article 15. Units or individuals that have obtained special 
catch permits should catch according to the species, numbers, 
location, time limit, equipment, and methods of catch specified 
in the special catch permit to prevent accidental injury to 
aquatic wildlife or damage to its living environment. On 
completion of the catch, they should apply for inspection to the 
fishery administration of the county-level people's government 
where the catch site is located or its affiliated fishery 
administration supervision agency. 
  The fishery administration of the county-level people's 
government or its affiliated fishery administration supervision 
agency should supervise and inspect the activities of catching 
aquatic wildlife under national major protection in its 
administrative area and report the result of its supervision and 
inspection to the department concerned that approved the catch. 
  Article 16. Foreigners intending to engage in activities 
such as scientific investigation, sample collecting, filming or 
videotaping of aquatic wildlife within China's territory should 
apply to the fishery administration of the people's government 
of the province, autonomous region or municipality directly 
under the central government where the habitats of the aquatic 
wildlife under national major protection are located. After 
verification, the administration concerned will submit the 
application to the fishery administration of the State Council 
or its authorized unit for approval . 
  Article 17. It is necessary for those taming and propagating 
aquatic wildlife under first-class national protection to hold a 
permit for taming and propagating verified and issued by the 
fishery administration of the State Council. And it is 
necessary for those taming and propagating aquatic wildlife 
under second-class national protection to hold a permit for 
taming and propagating verified and issued by the fishery 
administration of the people's government of the province, 
autonomous region or municipality directly under the central 
government. 
  Fishery administrations can entrust construction 
administrations at the same level with verifying and issuing 
permits for taming and propagating to zoological gardens taming 
and propagating aquatic wildlife under national major protection. 
  Article 18. The sale and purchase of aquatic wildlife under 
national major protection or its products are forbidden. It is 
necessary to apply to the fishery administration of the people's 
government of the province, autonomous region or municipality 
directly under the central government to sell, purchase or use 
aquatic wildlife under first-class national protection or its 
products for special purposes such as scientific research, 
taming, propagation or exhibition. The fishery administration 
will submit the application to the fishery administration of the 
State Council for approval after it writes and signs its 
opinion. It is necessary to apply to the fishery administration 
of the people's government of the province, autonomous region or 
municipality directly under the central government and obtain 
its approval for the sale, purchase or use of aquatic wildlife 
under second-class national protection or its products. 
  Article 19. Fishery administrations and industrial and 
commercial administrations of the people's governments above 
county levels should establish a supervision and inspection 
system for the operation and utilization of aquatic wildlife and 
its products and strengthen the supervision and management of 
the operation and utilization of aquatic wildlife and its 
products. 
  That aquatic wildlife and its products which enters trade 
fairs is supervised and managed by the industrial and commercial 
administration, while the fishery administration assists. 
Business concerning aquatic wildlife and its products run 
outside trade fairs is supervised and managed by the fishery 
administration, the industrial and commercial administration or 
their authorized unit. 
  Article 20. Those transporting or taking aquatic wildlife or 
its products out of the country should apply to the fishery 
administration of the county people's government for approval 
with the special catch permit or the permit for taming and 
propagation they hold. The county fishery administration will 
submit their application for approval to the fishery 
administration of the people's government of the province, 
autonomous region or municipality directly under the central 
government or its authorized unit. For zoological gardens which 
need to transport aquatic wildlife under national major 
protection to each other for propagation, the fishery 
administration of the people's government of the province, 
autonomous region or municipality directly under the central 
government can authorize the construction administration at the 
same level to verify and approve their applications. 
  Article 21. Communications, railroad and civil aviation 
enterprises as well as postal services should not undertake the 
transport or accept the sending of aquatic wildlife or its 
products without a legal transport certificate, and should 
report the matter to the department concerned. 
  Article 22. It is necessary to apply to the fishery 
administration of the people's government of the province, 
autonomous region or municipality directly under the central 
government for introducing aquatic wildlife from abroad. The 
fishery administration of the people's government above 
provincial level will submit the application to the fishery 
administration of the State Council for approval after it 
assigns a particular scientific institution to establish 
scientific proof of the necessity of the introduction. 
  Article 23. For the export of aquatic wildlife under 
national major protection or its products and the import and 
export of aquatic wildlife which is restricted by the 
international convention of which China is a member or its 
products it is necessary to apply to the fishery administration 
of the people's government of the province, autonomous region or 
municipality directly under the central government where the 
import or export unit is located or the applicant resides. The 
fishery administration will submit the application to the 
fishery administration of the State Council for approval after 
verification. Import and export business activities should be 
undertaken by units that have the right to import and export the 
commodities concerned. 
  Import and export of the above-mentioned aquatic wildlife by 
zoological gardens for exchange should be verified and approved 
by the construction administration of the State Council before 
it is approved by the fishery administration of the State 
Council. 
  Article 24. Economic returns gained by holding exhibitions 
of aquatic wildlife or its products should mainly be used in the 
protection of aquatic wildlife. 
<H5>  Chapter 4: Awards and Penalties </H5>
  Article 25. Units and individuals that have performed one of 
the following deeds will be awarded by the people's government 
above county level or its fishery administration: 
  1. Outstanding contributions to resource investigation, 
protection and management, propagation and education and 
exploitation and utilization of aquatic wildlife. 
  2. Strict implementation of the Law for Protection of 
Wildlife with remarkable achievements. 
  3. Remarkable results in salvage, protection, taming and 
propagation of aquatic wildlife. 
  4. Great service in preventing or reporting in a timely 
manner the discovery of acts violating the law and regulations 
for protection of aquatic wildlife. 
  5. Great contributions in the investigation of cases in 
which wildlife resources have been damaged. 
  6. Great achievements in scientific studies of aquatic 
wildlife or remarkable benefits attained in the application and 
popularization of relevant research results. 
  7. Engagement in the protection and administration of 
aquatic wildlife in grass-roots units for five years or more 
with remarkable results. 
  8. Other special contributions to the protection and 
administration of aquatic wildlife. 
  Article 26. Those who catch or kill aquatic wildlife under 
national major protection should be investigated to determine 
their responsibility for the crimes in accordance with the 
Supplementary Stipulations for Punishing Crimes of Illegal 
Catching and Killing of Rare Aquatic Wildlife Under National 
Major Protection on the Verge of Extinction adopted by the 
Standing Committee of the People's Congress. If the offenses 
are obviously light and the harm done is not serious or the 
crimes committed are not serious enough for trial and 
sentencing, the fishery administration will confiscate the 
animals caught and the catching equipment and illegal gains of 
the offenders, revoke their special catch permits and impose 
fines not exceeding 10 times the value of the animals caught. 
Fines imposed on those offenders without catches will not 
exceed 10,000 yuan. 
  Those destroying the main habitats of the aquatic wildlife 
under national or local major protection in nature reserves for 
aquatic wildlife in violation of the law and regulations for 
protection of wildlife are subject to a fine according to 
Article 37 of the Law for Protection of Wildlife. The range of 
fines imposed on offenders will not exceed three times the cost 
of restoration of the damaged site to its original condition. 
  Article 28. Those selling, purchasing, transporting or 
carrying aquatic wildlife under national or local major 
protection or its products in violation of the law and 
regulations for protection of wildlife will be punished by the 
industrial and commercial administration or its authorized 
fishery administration. The objects and illegal gains are 
subject to confiscation and the fine imposed on offenders will 
not exceed 10 times the value of the objects. 
  Article 29. Those forging, selling, or transferring permits 
for taming and propagation are subject to a fine according to 
Article 37 of the Law for Protection of Wildlife, the range of 
fine not to exceed 5,000 yuan. Those forging, selling, or 
transferring special catch permits or import and export 
certificates are subject to a fine according to Article 37 of 
the Law for Protection of Wildlife. The range of fines will not 
exceed 50,000 yuan. 
  Article 30. For those who tame and propagate aquatic 
wildlife under national major protection without a permit for 
taming and propagation or who exceed the range assigned by the 
permit for taming and propagation in violation of the law for 
protection of wildlife, their illegal gains will be confiscated 
and a fine not exceeding 3,000 yuan will be imposed on them by 
the fishery administration. At the same time their aquatic 
wildlife can be confiscated and their permit for taming and 
propagation revoked. 
  Article 31. For foreigners who engage in scientific 
activities such as scientific investigation, collection of 
samples, filming, and videotaping within China's territory 
without approval, the data and samples collected and the film 
shot during investigation will be confiscated by the fishery 
administration. At the same time a fine not exceeding 50,000 
yuan can be imposed on them. 
  Article 32. Those who act in one of the following ways which 
do not yet constitute a crime will be punished according to the 
Regulations of the PRC for Security Administration and 
Punishment: 
  1. Obstructing inspectors from fishery administrations and 
hindering their carrying out their duty according to law; 
  2. Stealing, looting or purposely impeding the instruments, 
equipment or facilities for protection of aquatic wildlife. 
  Article 33. Objects confiscated according to the law and 
regulations for protection of wildlife will be disposed of 
according to the relevant regulations set by the fishery 
administration of the State Council. 
<H5>  Chapter 5: Appendices </H5>
  Article 34. The fishery administration of the State Council 
is responsible for the interpretation of these Regulations. 
  Article 35. The Regulations are to come into effect on the 
date of promulgation. 

