BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Ying Qian (2019 6197)] </F>
  [Text] Morristown (New Jersey), 28 Apr (XINHUA) -- At the 
U.S. Government's invitation, Zou Jiahua, vice premier of 
China's State Council, arrived at Morristown in New Jersey State 
in the small hours of 28 April for an official visit to the 
United States. 
  Zou Jiahua arrived here after attending the funeral service 
for former U.S. President Nixon in California. 
  During the visit, Zou Jiahua will meet U.S. leaders in 
Washington and deliver a speech by invitation at the U.S.-China 
National Trade Commission. He will also meet with people from 
various circles -- industrial, commercial, and business -- in 
the United States, as well as tour some important infrastructure 
facilities and enterprises that maintain economic and trade 
relations with China. AT&amp;T, which is located near Morristown, 
will be the first U.S. company he will tour. 
  Upon arriving at Morristown Airport, Zou Jiahua said the 
main 
purpose of his visit is to enhance mutual understanding, promote 
Sino-U.S. friendship, and expand mutually beneficial 
cooperation. He said he was looking forward to exchanging views 
with the U.S. side on issues of common concern, such as 
Sino-U.S. relations and Sino-U.S. economic cooperation and 
trade, so as to promote the further improvement and development 
of relations between the two countries. 
  He added: China and the United States share wide-ranging 
common interests and are highly complementary to each other in 
many areas such as economics and trade. There are vast 
potential and broad prospects for expanding mutually beneficial 
cooperation. Maintaining normal and good relations between the 
two countries is not only in the fundamental interests of the 
two peoples but also represents the wishes of the world's people 
and has an important effect on promoting world peace and 
stability and economic development. Differences between China 
and the United States should be solved step by step through 
dialogue and consultation between the two sides on an equal 
basis. The Chinese Government has always attached importance to 
its relations with the United States, and hopes that the two 
sides will build up trust, reduce trouble, expand cooperation, 
and refrain from confrontation. 
  Accompanying Zou Jiahua on his visit to the United States 
are 
Zeng Peiyan, vice minister of the State Planning Commission; Liu 
Huaqiu, vice foreign minister; and Zheng Silin, vice minister of 
foreign trade and economic cooperation. 

