CSO 

  [Text] How well Egyptian security has done, after they 
began to understand the basic fact that they were facing an 
enemy who should not be taken lightly. The enemy is not a bunch 
of crooks or fools, but rather it is a group of organizations 
that plan and execute and are trained to kill, use explosives, 
and assassinate. How well Major General Hassan al-Alfi, Egypt's 
minister of the interior, has done when he recently announced 
the discovery of a dangerous terrorist organization. 
  Following the murder of one of the important major generals, 
Ra'uf Khayrat, the deputy chief of state security and, for many 
years, the man responsible for counter-terrorist activity, 
rumors and questions spread on Egyptian streets. Questions have 
been raised about the possibility that the terrorist 
organizations may have been able to penetrate the security 
apparatus, especially after Maj. Gen. Ra'uf Khayrat was 
assassinated. He was not well known to the public, and the 
thinking was that this was his best protection. No one guarded 
him, he drove his own car, and he used pseudonyms. He never 
resided in one place, but moved among several houses that were 
leased to him. 
  Thus, a logical question would appear to be: Was the 
security 
operation penetrated and information leaked about the movements 
and life of Maj. Gen. Ra'uf Khayrat, facilitating his 
surveillance and assassination by brutal means unlike previous 
assassination operations? Three groups took part, two to do the 
shooting and a third to throw the bomb to blow up the car to 
make sure he was dead. 
  Thus, the only time that Interior Minister Maj. Gen. Hasan 
al-Alfi became agitated was when he was asked about the extent 
of penetration of the Interior Ministry's agencies by 
terrorists. That he was clearly irritated was evident to dozens 
of media persons who were keen to attend the conference. He 
said: "Who has penetrated the security operations? Terrorists? 
Absolutely not! On the contrary, they are the ones that have 
been penetrated." 
  The minister did not want mere irritation to be his defense 
of his security apparatus. On the contrary, he cited facts and 
figures, pointing out that security had foiled 20 major 
terrorist operations in 1994 during the last three months. They 
included a series of violent and destructive acts, as well as 
the assassination of prominent public figures and innocent 
bystanders. Security was able to capture 43 terrorists, some of 
whom died in gunfire with security forces. This figure was out 
of a total of 52 terrorists on the wanted list--an 
over-82-percent success rate. 
  Therefore, the minister's numbers refute any possibility of 
security's penetration by terrorists. One sould understand the 
assassination of Maj. Gen. Ra'uf Khayrat within the context 
of--if he was not well known to the public, the terrorist groups 
and all religious leaders knew the man well. Despite the fact 
that his role was to monitor these groups and devise strategies 
to counter them over the past few years, knowing and watching 
him would not be difficult for those who are sympathetic to the 
terrorists, or for those who are a part of the religious trend 
in Egypt. 
  Moreover, Maj. Gen. Ra'uf Khayat's methods and view of 
protection might have made it easy for terrorists to hunt him. 
In addition, his assassination was a reprisal for the latest 
operation he planned and carried out, which was to arrest the 
most dangerous terrorist organization. So far, 30 of its members 
have been arrested. 
  The minister of interior had the opportunity to delay the 
announcement concerning this organization, while waiting for 
security to complete their investigation of the events 
surrounding Maj. Gen. Ra'uf Khayat's assassination. Moreover, 
the minister did not need to make this announcement, [after] the 
Egyptian People's Assembly enacted the Emergency Law, which 
allows security to speed up actions against terrorism. However, 
the haste in holding the conference and revealing this 
organization, in the first place, was to refute the rumors on 
the Egyptian scene regarding the possibility that terrorist 
groups had penetrated the security apparatus. 
  As for the latest terrorist organization, described by Maj. 
Gen. Hasan al-Alfi as "extremely dangerous," the facts confirm 
that, by security being able to uncover it, security will have 
achieved an "important point" in its constant battle with 
extremist groups over the years. There is considerable evidence 
for that: 
  1. There is evidence pertaining to the leader of the 
organization, 'Adil Siyam, who was killed during the attempt to 
arrest him on 4 April 1994, and who was described as being a 
"dangerous element." He was the deputy of Dr. Ayman al-Zawahiri, 
head of the Jihad Organization abroad. He was responsible for 
the organization's operations inside Egypt. He had planned to 
assassinate Minister of Interior Maj. Gen. Hasan al-Alfi. He 
prepared the personnel for the ambush and persuaded one of the 
participants in the crime to carry out the suicide bombing 
mission (Diya'-al-Din Mahmud Hafiz). He was the one who planned 
to assassinate Prime Minister Dr. 'Atif Sidqi, Minister of 
Information Safwat al-Sharif, and UN Secretary General Dr. 
Butrus-Ghali, during his participation in the African Summit 
Conference in Cairo last summer. 
  According to unconfirmed press sources, i.e., security 
information, Siyam was responsible for a bold operation by 
digging up Salah Salim Road. This is one of the most important 
main roads in Egypt. It is 12 meters wide in a specific area. It 
was chosen carefully to be a fixed center for an explosion, 
preparatory to a terrorist operation being planned. In fact, 12 
of the organization's personnel, dressed in municipal workers 
uniforms, dug up the street, laid electrical cables under it, 
and then concealed it. They had therefore prepared a fixed spot, 
so as to target any official who passed through this street. 
They are numerous. Cellars were also found underground in nine 
locations belonging to the organization, used as storage areas 
for weapons and as places to hide any victims who might be 
abducted. In addition, there were places to create a "special 
atmosphere" for those tasked with suicide missions. This is what 
happened with those who attempted to assassinate Maj. Gen. Hasan 
al-Alfi--they became victims of their crime. They were Nazih 
Nashi Rashid and Diya'-al-Din Mahmud Hafiz. 
  In addition to all that, 'Adil Siyam planned to assassinate 
Sayyid Abu-Yahya, the primary witness in the case of the 
attempted assassination of Prime Minister Dr. 'Atif Sidqi, the 
night before the trial was to begin. 
  Because of all this, it was not odd for Maj. Gen. Hasan 
al-Alfi to describe him as "one of the most dangerous terrorists 
that I have seen during the last few years of combatting 
terrorism." 
  2. There is evidence relating to the huge quantity of arms 
seized from the organization, when security forces 
simultaneously raided nine places in several governorates. This 
can be summarized as follows: 

  -  Thirty members of the terrorist organization were 
captured. Their names have not been announced, because there are 
others still being hunted. 
  -  Amounts of money valued at $7,000, 3,000 pounds sterling, and 
9,000 Egyptian pounds. 
  -  Guns, including two automatic rifles, one 
Israeli-manufactured 
'Uzi machine gun, six pistols, 17 magazines for automatic 
weapons, various pistols, 583 rounds of 9-mm ammunition, three 
RPG shells, three silencers, and a large quantity of detonators. 
  -  335 bombs of various types, explosive materials and explosive 
devices, including 5,000 detonators, 100 kilograms of high 
explosive material, sulfuric and nitrate acid, ammonia nitrate 
mercury, chlorine, ammonia salts, 150 kilograms of gelignite 
powder, and 150 kilograms of nitrite powder, which is the 
strongest form of dynamite. 
  -  A large quantity of materials and equipment required to make 
explosives. 
  -  A tricycle vehicle used as a deceptive trap, three radio 
sets, 
two wireless telephones, and magnets to attach explosives under 
vehicles. 
  -  Organizational papers and documents, including information 
about the security of installations and personnel, and ways of 
manufacturing explosives and deceptive traps. 
  -  A list of targeted persons, various organizational charts, 
and 
the organization's private code, in addition to receipts for the 
transmittal of foreign currencies abroad. 
  -  Large quantities of various uniforms, including policemen and 
armed forces, and a large amount of officers' rank emblems. 
  -  A Yemeni passport for the number one suspect 'Adil 'Awad 
Siyam. 
  -  Various types of private vehicles, including cars used in the 
incidents that the terrorist organization personnel confessed to 
committing. 


    Therefore, all these weapons and explosives seized with the 
organization are some of the evidence regarding the extent of 
this organization's dangerousness. Minister of Interior Maj. 
Gen. Hasan al-Alfi declared that this organization was 
responsible for the assassination of Sayyid Ahmad Abu-Yahya, the 
primary witness regarding the failed attempt to assassinate 
Prime Minister Dr. 'Atif Sidqi on 4 February 1994. The weapons 
used in that incident have been seized. 
  Maj. Gen. Hasan al-Alfi also confirmed that this 
organization 
attempted to assassinate the minister of interior on 18 August 
1993 and detonated the explosive charge that blew up the 
al-Jazirah Youth Center on 13 July 1993, during their physical 
fitness training. In addition, there was the assassination of a 
member of an off-shoot organization, 'Adil Anwar al-Sayyid, in 
front of his home on 13 July 1993. 
  The minister was content to report on these operations 
carried out by this organization and did not mention other 
operations, which had been foiled in one way or another, to 
assassinate prominent public, political, executive, media, 
judicial, and military figures by means of blowing up 
booby-trapped vehicles. These persons include Prime Minister Dr. 
'Atif Sidqi; Fathi Surur, speaker of the People's Assembly; 
Interior Minister Maj. Gen. Hasan al-Alfi; and former ministers 
of interior, 'Abd-al-Halim Musa and Zaki Badr. Among the 
military officers are Maj. Gen. Ahmad 'Abdallah, chief of the 
Supreme Military Court; Maj. Gen. Wajdi al-Laythi, also of 
Military Justice; and the former head of State Security secret 
police, Maj. Gen. Mustafa 'Abd-al-Qadir. 
  Thus a round has ended, but not the battle. It is constantly 
escalating and taking on new dimensions, especially since 
official Egypt has abandoned playing down the phenomenon of 
terrorism and no longer holds terrorists in contempt or 
downgrades their danger. Interior Minister Maj. Gen. Hasan 
al-Alfi stated to the People's Assembly that during the past 
three years there have been 14 explosions in public places, 
resulting in 97 Egyptian deaths, including children. Extremists 
also hit 35 tourist targets, either buses carrying tourists or 
boats on the Nile. This resulted in the deaths of 12 tourists 
and the wounding of 50 more. In addition, there were eight 
explosions in banks. 
  Statistics prepared by the Ibn Khaldun Institute for 
Developmental Studies indicate the extent of the escalation of 
violence during 1992 and 1993. The statistics show that police 
victims totalled 23 in 1992 with 38 wounded, while terrorists 
killed were 39, with 83 wounded. Civilian totals were 32 and 107 
respectively. Therefore, total deaths in 1992 were 94, with 228 
wounded, a total of 322. The number of extremists arrested were 
3,645, along with 128 civilians. The figures were multiplied in 
1993. Police deaths reached 120, with 181 wounded. Extremists 
had 111 deaths and 252 wounded, while civilians totalled 101 
with 341 wounded. Total victims were 1,106, with 17,191 
terrorists and 594 civilians arrested. 
  The security strategy that was decided upon during Maj. Gen. 
Hasan al-Alfi's term calls for gradual escalation by expanding 
the area of confrontation with all terrorist elements, in order 
to abort terrorism, pluck out its roots, and liquidate all the 
elements of impetus that stand behind it, supporting it, and 
financing it both at home and abroad. I have enumerated the 
forms of confrontation with certain of their basic features: 

  -  Contacts with a large number of world nations to hand over 
persons against whom sentences for terrorist acts have been 
issued. The latest measure in this regard was the signing of a 
security agreement with Pakistan, during the visit of the 
Pakistani minister of justice to Cairo two weeks ago. This 
agreement stipulates the handing over of Afghan Egyptians who 
are still in Peshawar, or in any Pakistan city. This has also 
been done with several other countries. Egypt intends to broach 
the issue of international cooperation to end terrorism at the 
Interpol Conference, which will be held in Turkey soon. 
  -  Revealing the ugly face of terrorism by presenting former 
terrorists to declare their repentance to public opinion via the 
media. This experiment was successful with one of the 
"al-Shuqiyin" group, 'Adil 'Abd-al-Mun'im. There are others that 
could be presented, including women, such as the wife of the 
terrorist Tharwat Hajjaj, who was killed in a battle with police 
several weeks ago. 
  -  Adopting the principle of taking the initiative against and 
aborting terrorism, by means of modernizing and updating data 
pertaining to terrorist organizations and supplying the police 
with the most modern arms and equipment, to enable them to 
combat terrorists. 
  -  Allowing opportunities for repentance to those from terrorist 
organizations who wish to do so, especially in the towns of 
Upper Egypt, and solve any problems that they face, either in 
finding them jobs or other matters, so long as the repenter was 
not convicted in terrorist operations against the police. 


    This policy has proved its worth, on the evidence of large 
numbers of repenters. In addition, certain Jihad leaders have 
backed away from their political views. One of them is Hasan 
al-Hilawi, an important and long-time leader of the Jihad 
organization, who has begun to call for self-control, an end to 
violence, to throw down weapons, and a dialogue with the 
government. He issued a fatwah to the effect that it was not 
permissible to oust the ruler or to create groups that defy 
public order. This policy has been successful to a degree that 
has caused certain lawyers representing them, especially the 
lawyer Muntasir al-Zayyat, to ask for dialogue with the 
government. However, the government rejected this request, and 
Maj. Gen. Hasan al-Alfi stated, "We will not negotiate with 
killers and criminals." 
  The most recent major blow came last week, when security 
forces were able to kill Tal'at Yasin Himam, leader of the 
Islamic Group's military wing, who led the operation that 
resulted in the death of Maj. Gen. Ra'uf Khayat. Himam died in a 
battle with security forces in the Hada'iq al-Qubbah district. 
  The security apparatus considered Himam a most dangerous 
terrorist and had sentenced him to death in absentia in the 
Afghan case. That proves the security forces' success in 
penetrating terrorist organizations, since they learned Himam's 
hiding place and the whereabouts of the headquarters for 
organization meetings. 

