Neglected 

<F P=102>   94WD0310A Sao Paulo ISTOE in Portuguese 30 Mar 94 pp 60-64 </F>
<F P=103> 94WD0310A </F>
<F P=104>  Sao Paulo ISTOE </F>
<F P=105>  Portuguese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mario Chimanovitch and Paulo Cesar Teixeira, </F>
with collaborators: Osmar Freitas, Jr., New York; Helio 
Contreiras and Francisco Alves Filho, Rio de Janeiro; Eliane 
Trindade, Brasilia; and Ivan Padilha, Sao Paulo] 
  [Text] The Federal Police [PF] are tightening the cordon 
around the cocaine traffic in the Amazon Region, but the country 
still lacks an effective policy for preventing drug use and 
treating addicts. 
  Wednesday, 23 March. It is nearly midnight in Jutica, a 
settlement on the Amazon shore inhabited by no more than 50 
persons, and a two-hour boat trip from Tefe. Here, the river 
records one of its narrowest widths: approximately 6 km from one 
side to the other, until it reaches over 90 km at its mouth, 
many traveling days ahead. At this deserted site, surrounded by 
the forest, a natural habitat for cashew pickers, no one can 
complain of monotony. On the horizon visible to the naked eye, 
one can now discern the outline of an immense ship, all lit up, 
suggesting the appearance of a large Christmas tree floating on 
the Amazon. It is the Rio Guama, arriving from Tabatinga, on the 
Colombian border, and promptly forced to anchor by seven men 
armed with machine guns, FAL rifles, and heavy caliber shotguns. 
Subjected to a scrupulous search by Federal Police agents, with 
the aid of drug-sniffing dogs, the ship, with 300 passengers and 
200 tons of cargo, is released three hours later, to continue 
sailing to Manaus. The target of all that searching is cocaine. 
  Anchored in the silence and murkiness of the Amazon jungle, 
the PF's floating headquarters in Jutica is the embryo of an 
ambitious plan intended to track the Colombian cocaine powder 
route. It also includes the monitoring of fuel supply stations 
for private aircraft. The reason for so much concern is simple: 
Last year, the police seized over half a ton of pure cocaine 
transported by planes or boats in the Amazon Region. It is 
through there that the Colombian cocaine is entering the 
national territory, to reach the large consuming centers in 
Southern and West Central Brazil and, in particular, the U.S. 
and European markets. Officer Jairo Cacenote, commander of the 
riparian operation, comments: "The goal is to gradually corner 
the outlaws." 
  The PJ's plan to establish floating headquarters in the 
Amazon Basin has revived the controversy in the country over the 
most effective means of combating drug consumption. On the one 
hand, there are those preaching the notion that drugs must be 
prevented from reaching the user at all costs. On the other, 
there are those considering it a priority to treat addicts and 
to discourage the use of narcotics. "We are working hard to 
prevent a continued flow of the powder on the Amazon. The 
possibility of a direct confrontation between the traffickers 
and the forces of repression hasn't been ruled out." This 
assertion is made by the PF superintendent on the Amazon, Mauro 
Sposito. However, in the opinion of other police members, such 
as the director of the State Narcotics Department (Denarc), 
George Millard, it is unrealistic to expect that repression 
alone will suffice to curb the cocaine market. Millard makes the 
comparison: "It is like drawing water from the sea with a 
perforated bucket." The perforated bucket is certainly 
represented by the unequipped Brazilian police. The problem is 
that, even if the bucket were sound, without spilling a single 
drop, the ocean would still remain to be collected. Millard 
claims: "We must rely on prevention." 
  Cited as the newest cocaine paste producer in a report from 
the UN three weeks ago, Brazil is, in fact, a passageway for 
drugs heading for Europe and the United States. To patrol the 
Northern Region, the police are facing not only internal 
difficulties, but also insecurity regarding their weapons and 
equipment. They are confronted with a powerful enemy (it is 
estimated that the drug traffic turns over $500 billion per year 
worldwide). For the traffickers crossing the Amazon, possible 
disadvantages are largely offset by the profits accrued later. 
On the other side of the border, in the producing countries, a 
kilo of cocaine is worth $1,500. On the Rio-Sao Paulo axis, it 
costs $5,000; and, when unloaded on the European market, it is 
priced at $50,000. That is the explanation for the drug 
traffic's daring, creative behavior. To cross the ocean, drugs 
travel in clothing, packages, or beer cans, if not swallowed by 
the trafficker. The powder has even been discovered inside a 
head of Jesus Christ made of wood. In more sophisticated 
operations, it is concealed in tractor wheel hubs, or inserted 
in blocks of granite. 
  Not even the change of command prompted by the death of 
Pablo 
Escobar, the chief of the Medellin Cartel killed by security 
forces last year, has upset the profitability of the cocaine 
powder business. True, the Medellin Cartel has been crushed, but 
the drug traffic has come under the control of the Cali Cartel, 
Escobar's arch-rival, headed by the Guzman Ramos Gracia family. 
To enter Brazilian territory, the Colombian cocaine goes through 
the hands of a Brazilian, Antonio Mota Graca, aka "Curica," a 
prominent man in the Mafia chain of command. A fugitive since 
1992, when he bribed jail guards in a Sao Paulo prison with 
$300,000, "Curica" set up his headquarters in southern Colombia, 
from which he directs the operation shipping the powder to 
Brazil. Another recent change in the traffic's behavior is its 
association with Colombian guerrillas from the ELN [Army of 
National Liberation] and FARC [Revolutionary Armed Forces of 
Colombia], as the PF's superintendent on the Amazon points out. 
"We are facing a new phase of the drug traffic on the 
continent," maintains Sposito, who also believes that the 
traffickers are connected with SL [Shining Path], a guerrilla 
group of Maoist orientation in Peru. According to Sposito, the 
drug traffic decided on a "three-way system" for the production 
and storage of cocaine, by joining the guerrillas. 
  Hence, it is not fortuitous that the cleverness and 
refinement of the methods used by the outlaws have forced 
governments of various countries to reconsider their policy for 
fighting the traffic. During the last decade, the United States 
spent $6 billion annually to prevent drugs from reaching its 
territory. The results proved unconvincing: only 20 percent of 
the shipments were seized. Last September, the White House's 
Justice Department chief, Janet Reno, admitted that her 
government had lost the war against the traffickers, who are 
changing routes, circumventing barriers, and modernizing their 
equipment. What is even worse: the American taxpayer has 
realized that he is the one paying for the losses. Internally, 
the costs of maintaining and constructing prisons increased by 
$21 billion during the 1980's, at the height of the hard-line 
policy dictated by the Republican Party. Of every 100,000 
American citizens, 455 were jailed for drug-related crimes, 
including the son of Joyce Elders, the surgeon general, with a 
post equivalent to that of the health minister in Brazil. 
Elders' son attempted to sell a gram of cocaine powder to a 
policeman infiltrated among users. 
  In February of this year, President Bill Clinton announced a 
drastic change in the policy of repression developed during the 
so-called Reagan era. With the end of communism, during that 
period the drug problem had been raised to the category of 
public enemy number one for Americans. "Drugs came to represent 
the source of everything bad in the culture," judges the 
psychiatrist Dartiu Xavier da Silveira, director of the Proad, a 
program of guidance and treatment for drug addicts at the Sao 
Paulo School of Medicine. Clinton envisions saving funds and 
increasing the effectiveness of the battle against trafficking 
with action giving priority to the treatment of addicts. The 
reasoning of the American president, who has already admitted 
experimenting with marijuana in his youth, is quite simple: If 
the number of addicts is reduced, the drug market will tend to 
shrink. It is a long way from theory to practice, but the voices 
opposed to a policy based only on repression are multiplying in 
the United States. Six months ago, the Colombian writer, Gabriel 
Garcia Marquez, winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 
1982, defended decriminalization of drug use, in an article 
published in THE NEW YORK TIMES. 
  The turnabout in the U.S. Government's program to combat 
drugs is not an isolated event. Officer Millard, from the 
Denarc, comments: "A city of 17 million inhabitants like Sao 
Paulo has a trafficker in every school, dance-hall, or shopping 
center. When we catch one, another arrives to take his place." 
However, there is no policy for rehabilitating addicts in 
Brazil. Evidence of this is the fact that Deputy Elias Murad's 
(PSDB-MG [Brazilian Social Democracy Party-Minas Gerais]) 
narcotics bill has been stalled on the National Congress voting 
agenda. "The bill was pushed aside by the CPI [Congressional 
Investigating Committee] for the budget and by the 
constitutional revision," complains Deputy Moroni Torgan 
(PSDB-CE [Ceara]), the CPI's reporter on the drug traffic. Among 
other points, Murad's proposal creates clearer distinctions 
between the user and trafficker, imposing more lenient penalties 
on the former and more severe ones on the latter. The 
legislation on drugs currently in force in the country was 
created in 1976. As if the lack of laws geared to reality were 
not enough, the rehabilitation clinics charge prices 
inaccessible to the middle class, whose drug problem is serious. 
This claim is made by Dr. Sabino Farias, director of the Maxwell 
Clinic, in Atibaia, 50 km from Sao Paulo, where the monthly fee 
ranges from $3,000 to $7,000. Farias paid for five minutes on a 
national television network, in prime time, to demand that 
health insurance pay the costs of rehabilitating addicts. "They 
must comply with the resolution of the Federal Council on 
Medicine that requires them to cover all illnesses." 
  With the lack of an effective policy to help the addict, the 
rehabilitation programs have been carried out on the basis of 
good will and improvisation. The Denarc set up a prevention 
service that treats nearly 500 drug users per year, with the aid 
of volunteer psychologists. Oddly enough, the prevention sector 
operates on the floor above the narcotics headquarters on the 
Police Palace premises in downtown Sao Paulo. "The eighth floor 
must act before the seventh is forced to take to the streets for 
repression," notes the prevention sector chief, clerk Sonia 
Depieri. It is on the eighth floor of the Sao Paulo police 
building that the street child, A.L., aged 16, has appeared 
religiously once a week for the past 10 months. There, he talks 
with the psychologist Suzi de Moraes, performing a ritual that 
has helped him to remain far away from "crack." "I would put my 
hand into the fire for him," claims the psychologist. However, 
Suzi complains of the lack of agreements between the government 
and private enterprise that would make it possible to reinstate 
ex-addicts in society. "There are no work-study grants that 
would teach them a trade," she remarks. According to the 
psychologist, an extremely limited number of addicts have a real 
chance to give up the vice. A.L. is not one of them. He will 
soon reach age 18, and will no longer be able to live in public 
boarding-houses, as he is doing now. So, the kid's fate will be 
sealed: a return to the streets. "Helping the addict doesn't 
produce money or notoriety, and doesn't even elect anyone," 
charges Suzi. 
  Furthermore, prejudice is a trademark where drugs are 
concerned. A Denarc investigation of the Sao Paulo trafficker's 
profile dispelled some historical misconceptions, such as the 
notion that most of the outlaws consist of blacks or mulattoes. 
On the contrary: 65 percent of the traffickers arrested in Sao 
Paulo are white. Another simplistic view is that the artisans 
selling trinkets in the squares of Brazilian capitals, direct 
descendants of the "hippies" of the 1960's, comprise the bulk of 
the addicts. The Denarc investigation showed that industrial and 
commercial employees are the leading consumers of narcotics, 
followed by liberal business owners and professionals. The 
Denarc director explains: "There is a great deal of myth 
regarding the subject." 
  However, certain signs indicate a change in mentality with 
respect to the drug problem. For the first time, the Health 
Ministry has authorized the implementation of an AIDS prevention 
plan that would propose "safety" to the user, instead of merely 
repressing drug consumption. A team of 120 "street multipliers," 
as the addicts or ex-addicts serving as contacts with the 
addicted population are called, was recruited by the Sao Paulo 
School of Medicine's Proad. The Proad director, Dartiu Xavier da 
Silveira, reveals: "We are going to teach the user to clean the 
needle and prevent infection with the AIDS virus." The 
psychiatrist adds: "Repression only alienates the addict, 
contributing to the ever-increasing spread of AIDS." 
  Silveira cites the former Soviet Union as an example of a 
country that lost time in the battle against the disease because 
of its prejudice toward the drug user. "Since communism was 
perfect by definition, the Soviet authorities didn't even admit 
the existence of drug addicts." Silveira upholds the idea that 
absolute abstinence is a "utopia without scientific grounds," 
and goes even further: In his view, the addict who gives up 
drugs and becomes a religious fanatic, for example, remains as 
sick as he was before. To be sure, this position is indefensible 
to a large part of the population. Be that as it may, there is 
now consensus among police and physicians regarding the need to 
accelerate the prevention programs, while simultaneously 
fighting the traffic. After all, it seems unlikely that mankind 
will ever be capable of permanently dispensing with the use of 
artificial paradises, as the British writer, Aldous Huxley, 
reasoned. In his view, "The majority of men and women lead lives 
that are so painful, or so monotonous, poor, and limited, that 
the temptation to transcend themselves, even if only for a few 
moments, is and always has been one of the soul's principal 
appetites." 
<H5>  [Boxes, pp 62-64] </H5>
  W.P.O., aged 17: "I began stealing to buy cocaine. My hand 
was shaking when I aimed the weapon and grabbed the guy's bag. 
With the money, I had enough to get 4 grams of the drug. I 
sniffed it all in an hour." 
  W.T.C., aged 26: "Suddenly, my life became complicated. I 
couldn't relate to anyone any longer. My brain seemed to be 
disconnected. I hadn't sniffed cocaine for three days. My time 
clock was slowed down." 
  A.P.S., aged 15: "I began using heroin eight months ago in 
Spain, where my mother lives. She was the one who offered it to 
me. One day, I felt ill, and she sent me back. I want to stop 
now. I'm going to be confined for six months, and study ballet 
again." 
  R.S.D., aged 21: "I have always been open to new 
experiences. 
On a lysergic acid trip I had a vision of a rose. I decided to 
have the image of the flower tattooed on my right arm. Now I 
prefer to smoke marijuana." 
<H5>  [Boxes, pp 62-63] </H5>
  Marijuana: The marijuana cigarette causes relaxation or 
anxiety, with altered memory. Physical effect: red eyes and 
tachycardia. The "packet," with 15 grams, sells for 10,000 
cruzeiros. 
  Cocaine: Injected in the vein or sniffed, it produces 
euphoria with loss of sleep and appetite, causing respiratory 
problems and cardiac arrest. The "envelope" with one gram goes 
for 10,000 cruzeiros. 
  Crack: A mixture of sodium bicarbonate and cocaine paste, 
the 
"acid" is smoked in a pipe; rapid addiction, with serious lung 
damage. One gram of the "acid" costs 5,000 cruzeiros. 
  LSD: Derived from a mushroom, lysergic acid causes visual 
and 
hearing losses, as well as a sensation of pleasure or panic. A 
microdot (LSD dripped on blotting paper) goes for 35,000 
cruzeiros. 
  Ecstasy: The "drug of love" was invented in a laboratory to 
heighten sexual pleasure, but there is a risk of cardiac arrest 
and brain lesions. Rare in Brazil, the capsule costs $50 abroad. 
  Skunk: A kind of super-marijuana grown in hot-houses in the 
Netherlands, with an effect 20 times stronger than that of 
marijuana. It was fashionable during the summer of 1993 in Rio 
de Janeiro. Price: 250,000 cruzeiros (10 grams). 
  Heroin: Derived from opium, when breathed or injected into 
the vein it creates a happy sensation; causing addiction with 
fewer than 10 doses, it leads to loss of consciousness, coma, 
and death. It is virtually nonexistent in the country. 
  Solvents: Shoemaker's glue, enamel, paint, and gasoline are 
sniffed. They produce euphoria, dizziness, nausea, and lowered 
blood pressure. Continuous use causes lesions on the medula 
ossea, lungs, kidneys, and liver. 

