Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Erich Inciyan: "Pasqua Sets Up Immigration </F>
Police Force"] 
  [Text] The interior minister is going to set 
up a single police force responsible for overseeing the 80 
million foreigners that enter or leave France every year. It 
will have the job of fighting illegal immigration and the 
"underground" work done by foreigners. 
  For the first time in its history, the French Government is 
setting up a specialized immigration police force. After 
redrafting legislation on the entry and stay of foreigners and 
after modifying the law on ID inspections, the Balladur 
government is thus creating a police force responsible for 
enforcing this restrictive legislation. In terms of the police, 
it thus completes the response provided by the government to the 
illegal immigration issue that it had from the outset ranked 
among its top priorities. 
  Drafted by an Interior Ministry under the stewardship of 
Charles Pasqua, the reorganization will result in the creation 
of a Directorate To Oversee Immigration and Fight Illegal 
Employment (DICILEC) within the National Police. According to 
the draft order sent on to the prime minister, DICILEC will be 
responsible for "organizing and coordinating the action of the 
National Police with respect to the fight against illegal 
immigration and the employment of illegals." It will be headed 
by Prefect Robert Broussard, who previously served as special 
commissioner in the fight against organized crime before being 
entrusted with an antidrug mission. The creation of the new 
directorate should take place--following an examination of 
legislation creating it by various party technical committees, 
followed by the Council of State--in March or even February. 
  The bulk of police supervision of immigration has heretofore 
been the responsibility of the Central Branch of the Air and 
Border Police (PAF). Created in August 1973 and established in 
some 50 departments, the force has so far essentially devoted 
itself to border surveillance at airports and at land and 
maritime borders. In his report to the prime minister, Pasqua 
stated his opinion that the PAF "cannot provide an effective 
response to the new guidelines of government policy which imply 
going beyond mere supervision of crossborder traffic." 
  DICILEC has therefore been entrusted with an "overall 
strategy" of fighting illegal immigration. In addition to 
exercising surveillance over the borders, which will remain one 
of its primary missions, the new directorate is to carry out two 
other aspects of the policy of overseeing the migratory flow: 
the fight against the underground employment of undocumented 
foreigners and the deportation of illegals or undesirable 
persons from France. 
<H5>  "Black Market" Work </H5>
  Feared as the immigration "suction pump," the problem of the 
employment of undocumented foreigners will henceforth be the 
responsibility of DICILEC, which will have to find a modus 
operandi with the labor inspection departments. The problem had 
previously been handled by the police only marginally. Working 
with the Criminal Investigation Police (PJ) and General 
Intelligence (RG), the PAF had indeed succeeded in breaking up a 
few rings bringing in undocumented workers from Asia or Turkey. 
  However, the employment of "black market" workers, whether 
foreign or French, is far from being a priority for the police 
except in the capital, where the 12th section of Parisian 
Intelligence began in the early nineties to specialize in the 
fight against the employment of undocumented foreigners. In the 
rest of France, urban police stations and Gendarmerie squads 
have generally concentrated on missions relating to public 
safety. 
  The government also hopes that the handling of the 
deportation of foreigners, illegals or undesirable elements will 
be improved with DICILEC's creation. Its dissatisfaction is 
mainly based on the drop in the rate of actual deportations, 
which fell from 58 percent in 1987 to 18 percent in 
1993.[.sup]1[/] One solution to the difficulties considered 
by Place Beauvau was the merger of DICILEC with the Directorate 
of Public Freedoms and Legal Affairs (DLPAJ), but the plan was 
abandoned. 
  Modeled after the American immigration office, the merger 
would have posed problems of liberties by bringing together the 
DLPAJ "jurists" responsible for drafting regulations with the 
DICILEC police officers responsible for applying them. The 
Interior Ministry therefore rejected the option, going instead 
for increased coordination between the new police directorate 
and the regulatory departments under the DLPAJ which are 
responsible in the prefectures for individual followup on 
deportation measures. 
  Within DICILEC and in coordination with the DLPAJ, a 
deportation office will oversee the "implementation of material 
means (transportation, escorts, and so on) making it possible to 
effectively carry out administrative and legal deportation 
measures ordered against undocumented foreigners or those 
disturbing law and order," the ministry states. 
<H5>  Schengen Space </H5>
  Concerning the mission traditionally performed by 
PAF--overseeing border traffic--the new directorate must fit 
into a Europe of immigration. The interior minister is therefore 
asking DICILC to step up its control of crossborder traffic, 
"particularly at the future external borders of the Schengen 
space." 
  Originally scheduled in February 1994 but constantly 
postponed, the implementation of the agreements signed in 
Schengen by nine European countries (the Twelve, minus Great 
Britain, Ireland, and Denmark), provides for the free 
circulation of nationals within the space common to the 
territories of their nine countries. As a result, DICILEC police 
officers are to be assigned to the outer borders (the 
Oder-Neisse line, for example) of the Schengen space. The 
Interior Ministry is therefore also entrusting DICILEC with the 
task of intensifying "inspection and training action above the 
(common) border (with signatories of the Schengen) and, in 
sensitive countries, in liaison with the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs." 
  If the 6,000 PAF police officers are to be reassigned to the 
new directorate, no increase in personnel is planned in the near 
future (except to staff the teams exercising surveillance over 
the Channel tunnel). Pasqua has personally deplored the 
"unstandardized" presence of the PAF. In the initial period, 
DICILEC will therefore have territorial detachments worthy of 
the name only in departments in which the PAF had established 
its own presence. 
  In addition, the new directorate is expected to suffer from 
a 
lack of personnel necessary for its new missions, particularly 
since migratory pressure has recently increased on the borders 
of countries (Germany, Belgium, and Italy) affected by 
immigration from East bloc countries. According to the most 
recent statistics, nearly half of the nonadmission measures are 
applied at borders with these countries in the Schengen space. 
In the long run, the national arrangement will nevertheless be 
"completed by the implementation of a multiyear plan" consisting 
of setting up specialized departments and units throughout 
France that will perform the duties of administrative and 
criminal investigative police with respect to illegal 
immigration. 
  In the immediate future, the acronym for the new directorate 
therefore risks, particularly in departments where the PAF 
maintained no presence, ending up being but a skeleton 
immigration police force. Is it for the sake of compensation 
that the Interior Ministry notes, with no further ado, that "the 
action of Police and Customs will complement one another?" 
Footnotes 
  1. This drop is largely explained by the decision made in 
1991 to systematically issue deportation orders to all 
undocumented foreigners, not just those stopped by police, but 
also those whose visas have expired. 

