CSO 

  [Text] Bangalore, March 31--The chairman of the Indian 
Space Research Organisation (ISRO), Prof U.R. Rao, yesterday 
said that India would be getting seven Russian cryogenic engines 
under the re-negotiated settlement and that the first engine 
would arrive in India by mid-1996 and after than an engine every 
six months. 
  Speaking to reporters on the eve of his laying down office, 
Prof Rao said under the settlement India would get four 
cryogenic engines, while using the `old option' ISRO would buy 
another three engines spending $3 million. 
  In addition to these seven engines, India would also get two 
mock stages, he said. 
  India and Russia had re-negotiated the Rs 340-crores project 
and Russia had agreed to supply seven engines in stages. ISRO 
had asked for an additional grant of Rs 250 crores for the 
project, he informed the reporters. 
  Denying that the Indian space programme had suffered a 
setback as the negotiations had run into rough weather following 
the United States' opposition to the transfer of technology, 
Prof Rao said the talks between the two countries concluded 
about two weeks ago and India would develop its own cryogenic 
engine. 
  Prof Rao said India had earlier ordered two engines and 
rounded off the agreement with a request for three more engines. 
The project needed seven engines including two mock ones. The 
deal was dropped in October. "We are moving on our own in the 
right direction," he said. 
  Stating that ISRO would like to see the Geosynchronous 
Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) operational at the earliest, 
Prof Rao said, the first GSLV using the Russian engine would be 
launched during 1996-97. 
  Prof Rao, however, denied that the scheduled visit of the 
Prime Minister, Mr P.V. Narasimha Rao, next month to Russia, was 
in connection with the cryogenic resettlement. 
  According to Prof Rao, instead of the old practice of 
designing the vehicle and then identifying industries for 
components' production, ISRO had been developing the technology 
and immediately transferring it to the identified industries for 
production. This, he said, would augment the development of the 
engines at the earliest. 
  The first indigenously designed cryogenic engine for the 
GSLV 
would be ready by 1998 and the test-flight would be carried out 
at different stages of production simultaneously to save time, 
he said. 
  Stating that the first flight would be carried out in six 
months, Prof Rao said the liquid hydrogen plant for the 
production of propellent had been commissioned and various 
testing facilities for the engine on production were in various 
stages. 
  As the multi-start engine was very essential these days, 
ISRO's efforts were now on to develop a two-start engine, he 
said. 
  Asked about his contribution to ISRO during his nearly 
ten-year tenure as chairman, Prof Rao said, "the achievement was 
not personal but that of ISRO," adding from the time when he 
took over ISRO's foundation was good, but subsequent planning 
was needed and the whole programme had to be integrated from 
application to satellites and launch vehicles. 
  As soon as the hub-station was ready, the mobile 
communication system would also be ready and depending on the 
requirement it could be marketed, he observed. 
  About a fall in expenditure in the development of satellite 
programme in the last year from Rs 64.5 crores in 1992-93 to Rs. 
37.9 crores Prof Rao said every year the project changed and 
most of the expenditure was needed at the initial stages. 
However, he denied that the fall was an indication that the 
country's satellite front was saturated. 
  Prof Rao, yesterday said the second indigenously built Polar 
Satellite Launch Vehicle--D2 (PSLV-D2) would be launched in 
July/August this year. 
  Subsequent launches would take place every year. While the 
PSLV-D2 would carry an X-ray satellite apart from the Indian 
Remote Sensing Satellite (IRS-P2), PSLV-D2 was expected to carry 
a payload for studying ocean development. 
  According to Prof Rao, most of the hardware including three 
PS-1 segments, nozzle and motor interstages were already 
realised for flight and remaining hardware was being finished. 
The only work needed to be done was at the launch pad. 
  The `failure analysis committee' (FAC) constituted to look 
into the cause of the failure of PSLV-D1 had suggested some 
modifications. The FAC had confirmed that all major systems 
integrated in PSLV-D1 had worked as planned and there was no 
serious defect in the design of the vehicle, he said. 
  However, according to Prof Rao, the FAC had confirmed that 
the failure of the PSLV-D1 in reaching the intended orbit was 
primarily due to a software error in the pitch control loop of 
the on-board guidance and control processor. But for this, the 
PSLV-D1 would have reached its orbit, the FAC confirmed. 
  Further, Prof Rao said the fourth developmental launch of 
the 
Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) would be by the end of 
April or first week of May to place a 115 kg payload in a 
circular orbit of 400 km. It is already on the launch pad. 

