BFN 

<F P=106> [PASASON 8 Apr Editorial: "Wholeheartedly Welcome His </F>
Majesty King Phumiphon Adunyadet of the Kingdom of Thailand"] 
  [Text] Today, all Lao people nationwide together with the 
residents of Vientiane, are elated and highly honored at the 
opportunity to welcome His Majesty King Phumiphon Adunyadet and 
Her Majesty Queen Sirikit of the Kingdom of Thailand, who are 
scheduled to pay their first official, friendly visit to the Lao 
People's Democratic Republic [LPDR] from 8 to 9 April at an 
invitation of LPDR President His Excellency [H.E.] Nouhak 
Phoumsavan. During the visit, His Majesty King Phumiphon 
Adunyadet, together with H.E. LPDR President Nouhak Phoumsavan, 
will jointly preside over the inauguration ceremony of the 
Lao-Thai friendship bridge across the Mekong river. The bridge, 
built with gratis aid from the Australian Government and people, 
will be handed over as a gift to the LPDR and the Kingdom of 
Thailand. His majesty the king of Thailand will also meet with 
our Lao leaders and visit some of our establishments of economic 
and cultural significance. 
  The visit by His Majesty King Phumiphon Adunyadet and Her 
Majesty Queen Sirikit on this occasion is a very significant 
event in the history of Lao-Thai relations. It is an important 
milestone in the new era of bilateral ties -- an era of mutual 
understanding and sincerity serving as the basis for cooperation 
in building and developing the countries and raising the 
standard of living and prosperity of the two peoples of Laos and 
Thailand. 
  Laos and Thailand are neighboring countries bound to one 
another by race since ancient times. They have maintained 
similar customs, religions, cultures, and languages. Their 
peoples have maintained neighborly, fraternal relations, and 
have together earned their living in a civilized way in this 
part of the world for a long time. With time, Laos and Thailand 
developed as independent countries. In the history of their 
ties, though there had been some disturbing incidents at certain 
periods, there were many other times when the two nations 
enjoyed friendship, mutual assistance, and solidarity in 
defending their respective countries. Regarding this, the late 
President Kaysone Phomvihan said in his speech at a dinner 
hosted by His Majesty King Phumiphon Adunyadet in his honor 
during his visit to the Kingdom of Thailand in early 1992: 
Should we only uphold the spirit of fraternity and 
neighborliness, refrain from being partial or prejudiced against 
one another, and together adhere to Buddhist ethics and the five 
principles of peaceful coexistence, it is believed that we can 
settle each and every problem that arises to disrupt Lao-Thai 
relations. The facts about Lao-Thai relations in the recent 
past have clearly proved these words. As a result, steps of 
developments in many fields have been achieved in bilteral ties. 
  All Lao people wish His Majesty King Phumiphon Adunyadet and 
Her Majesty Queen Sirikit of the Kingdom of Thailand glorious 
success in the official, friendly visit to the LPDR. It is 
certain that the success of the visit will worthily contribute 
to promoting and expanding, ever more extensively and 
fruitfully, the relations between the two countries to bring 
about benefits to the two peoples of Laos and Thailand as well 
as the interest of peace, friendship, and cooperation in this 
region and the world. 

