Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the press review] </F>
  [Text] Under the headline "Silence Over Terrorism," the 
newspaper AL-THAWRAH writes on the UN Security Council's delay 
of its deliberations to adopt a clear and decisive resolution on 
confronting Israel's state terrorism following the al-Ibrahimi 
Mosque massacre two weeks ago. 
  AL-THAWRAH says: Calls on the UN Security Council to assume 
its responsibilities, to issue an appropriate resolution, and to 
implement this resolution within a specific period of time are 
due to the fact that Israel has continued its policy of 
occupation and aggression, and that it has continued to evade 
discussion of any issue related to the substance of the peace 
process. 
  AL-THAWRAH adds: President al-Asad has stressed the 
importance of dealing with the bases of peace process to the 
Palestinian delegation, to U.S. President Bill Clinton at the 
Geneva summit, and to all officials and delegations that have 
come to Syria or contacted its leadership. He has also stressed 
that the Arabs accepted the U.S. initiative because they viewed 
it as a clear initiative based on the land for peace formula 
always stressed by the Arab side based on UN Security Council 
Resolutions 242 and 338. 
  AL-THAWRAH also notes that President Hafiz al-Asad's address 
to the Palestinian delegation has proved once again that Syria 
is committed to the constants of a just and comprehensive peace, 
that Syria will not submit to any pressure or blackmail, and 
that it will not relinquish any of the Arabs' rights. Despite 
all this, Syria wants a comprehensive and full peace. If it is 
not comprehensive, then it is not peace. We, the Arabs, 
constitute one nation and our position is very strong. We have 
a claim to a right. 
  Concluding, AL-THAWRAH says: In light of this, the UN 
Security Council, particularly the United States, should deal 
decisively with Israel alone, especially since developments 
before and after the al-Ibrahimi Mosque massacre have proven 
that Yitzhaq Rabin's government is implementing the Shamir 
government's plan to prolong the talks. It has continued to 
execute the expansionist Zionist plan of building settlements 
and of killing the Palestinians. The occupation army's soldiers 
and officers admitted this when they spoke about the strict 
orders they received to escalate the killing of Palestinians and 
to give a free hand to the settlers to kill instead of disarming 
and expelling them, along with their settlements, from the 
occupied territories. 

