BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Give Quiet Diplomacy A Chance in North Korea"] </F>
  [Text] Angry at the International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA) decision to suspend technical aid, North Korea announced 
on Monday that it was immediately withdrawing from the UN 
watchdog. 
  In a statement, the North Korean Foreign Ministry said the 
authorities would stop all IAEA inspections adding that any 
punitive measures taken would be regarded as declaration of war. 
  North Korea's defiant decision has caused worries in the 
region with some nations seeing the move as reinforcing the 
position of countries seeking sanctions at the UN Security 
Council. 
  The United States, Japan, and South Korea agree that the 
time 
has come to impose sanctions on North Korea because of its 
failure to allow international inspections of its nuclear 
programme. 
<H5>  Nuclear ambitions </H5>
  Yet few have asked what such sanctions would achieve, it 
being assumed that sooner or later North Korea would have to 
admit its nuclear ambitions. But if such a admission is not 
forthcoming and if neither Russia nor China cooperate fully with 
Washington, the US would have little real leverage, and North 
Korea would have succeeded in undermining the post-Cold War 
principle of the non- proliferation of nuclear arms. 
  As North Korea has rejected the final appeal to make 
available its nuclear records, the issue will be debated again 
by the United Nation Security Council. If a resolution is 
proposed to impose sanctions, what action will North Korea take? 
  Assuming that UN Security Council sanctions are imposed, 
there is a strong possibility Pyongyang will decide to leave the 
Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT). 
  Ironically, North Korea's accession to the NPT in 1985 has 
been attributed to Soviet pressure. In 1992, Boris Yeltsin 
declared that Russia would not help North Korea in the event of 
a war despite having an assistance pact which Moscow signed with 
Pyongyang in 1961. 
  Withdrawing from the NPT is the right of all signatories to 
the treaty though withdrawal must follow a set procedure which 
includes a three month notice. 
  Once outside the NPT, North Korea would undoubtedly suffer 
from further recriminations and isolation. But UN action to 
impose sanctions or take other measures would be legitimized 
only if the country could be declared a common security danger 
to the general peace and safety of the world. 
  Is it credible to regard North Korea as such? 
  The claim that it is a general threat because of its 
development of nuclear weapons is a weak one. There are several 
states outside the NPT, including Pakistan, India and Israel 
that have nuclear arms programmes more sophisticated than North 
Korea's. 
  Also, North Korea has not been engaged in a war since 1953, 
and although Kim Il-song's international behaviour is something 
like that of a mad man, Pyongyang's recent record is no worse 
than say Syria, which is presently being courted by Washington 
as an associate in the Middle East peace process. 
  With these considerations in mind, it is unlikely that China 
would cooperate in imposing sanctions on North Korea and would 
veto any Security Council resolution. More than half of 
Pyongyang's external trade is with Beijing and China still 
provides credit to North Korea. 
<H5>  World of the sane </H5>
  Meanwhile, the Russian proposal to convene an international 
conference on the issue seems to complicate matters. Ever since 
Yeltsin's visit to South Korea in 1992, Russian influence in 
North Korea has been considerably reduced. This in turn has 
caused Yeltsin to come under severe criticism back home, with 
his detractors saying that Russia's foreign policy is being 
tailor-made to suit Washington. 
  This leaves the United States in a very awkward position. 
Though South Korea and Japan have agreed with Washington to 
impose sanctions against North Korea, it is doubtful whether 
they would be effective without the support of China and Russia. 
  We do agree that the Kim Il-song regime in Pyongyang must be 
helped into the world of the sane. However, imposing 
US-proposed sanctions would only prove to be a big farce. North 
Korea must not be provoked further because the threat of war on 
the peninsula is real. Quiet diplomacy must be given a chance 
and under such circumstances the display of machismo by the 
United States is just as dangerous as a cornered and embattled 
North Korea. 

