Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yoichi Takahashi, Ministry of Finance] </F>
  [Excerpts] Nonperforming assets from the so-called bubble 
period are eroding our economy, particularly our financial 
institutions. Once faced with nonperforming assets due to the 
three L's (land, leveraged buyouts [LBO's] and less developed 
countries [LDC's]), the United States now has the situation 
almost completely under control, the result of strenuous 
restructuring efforts (personnel adjustments and the sale of 
unprofitable units) and aggressive efforts to dispose of problem 
loans. Without looking any further than our own backyards, we 
can easily see that nonperforming assets are now one of the 
biggest problems also facing our own financial institutions. 
  Those responsible for dealing with the problem at these 
institutions have been forced into a tough, lonely battle. First 
of all, problem loans are the "shame" of their institutions and 
are not something they can confer about with outsiders. It would 
be a different matter if their main banks took the lead and 
worked cooperatively with other financial institutions to settle 
the repayment of loans and other credit problems; but the harsh 
reality is that financial institutions without strong 
informational capabilities lose out to their stronger brethren 
in the competition to settle these loan problems. Also, the 
actual handling and write-off of nonperforming assets is 
essentially based on basic rulings or transmittals regarding 
corporate taxation. Both theory and legal precedent are poor in 
this area, and financial institutions do not have a clear 
understanding of the details for writing off nonperforming 
assets. 
  Second, those in charge of disposing of nonperforming assets 
are under pressure from the top management levels of their 
financial institutions, where there is a great deal of concern 
about the outcome of these assets. 
  Third, the Finance Ministry's banking inspectors have a hard 
time explaining matters concerning the write-off of 
nonperforming assets. It is harder to verify the lack of 
prospects for the repayment of a problem loan than it is to show 
that the chance of recovery exists. In order that the soundness 
of a financial institution's assets is maintained, the financial 
investigator not only verifies write-offs at the end of an 
accounting period, serving as a watchdog for depositors, but 
also assesses the company's assets during routine financial 
inspections. Still, although he may be told confidently by the 
loan officer in charge at the time that the institution's assets 
are being reviewed that a certain loan is not a problem and the 
company expects to be able to collect on it, when it comes time 
to document a write-off, the official in charge may tell him the 
loan is, in fact, uncollectible and that he wants to write it 
off. (Of course, there is no contradiction in what the financial 
institution's officers have said; the situation has changed 
between the time the two statements were made.) 
  The financial investigator who is in charge of verifying 
write-offs also has reason to feel impatient. Frequently, more 
than one financial institution will request a write-off for 
debts incurred by the same borrower. If the information from all 
of these sources were combined, everything one needs to know 
about the debtor in question would be available. But since the 
issue of confidentiality is concerned, that sort of information 
cannot be passed on from one financial institution to another. 
Consequently, because of shortcomings in their access to such 
information, some of their write-offs end up being taxable 
rather than nontaxable. 
  In this article, we would like, therefore, to explain 
certain 
underlying views concerning the write-off of nonperforming 
assets held by financial institutions and hopefully provide a 
useful reference for those who are routinely struggling with 
these matters. 
  Opinions expressed in this article are the responsibility of 
the author and do not necessarily reflect the official views of 
the Ministry of Finance. 
  I. What Does "Writing Off" a Bad Loan Mean? 
  [passage omitted] First of all, for the purposes of 
clarification, the term shokyaku in this article 
refers to the write-off of nonperforming assets such that, when 
a creditor is no longer able to expect repayment of a loan, it 
is either dropped from the balance sheet as an asset (direct 
write-off) or entered as a liability (and carried over to a 
special loan reserve account) (indirect write-off). 
  It goes without saying that a write-off constitutes a loss 
for a financial institution from a management perspective. 
Whether it constitutes a loss in terms of tax law, however, is a 
different matter. A write-off which constitutes a loss in terms 
of tax law is called a nontaxable write-off since it reduces a 
company's tax liability. Those that are not considered a loss 
are called taxable write-offs. 
  Shokyaku, which is used here in the sense of 
"writing off" a bad loan, has two homonyms whose uses probably 
have had something to do with its eventual relationship to 
taxes: one is shokyaku used in the sense of 
"burning," or extinguishing a bond (debt) and the other is 
shokyaku used in the sense of "erasing" a debt. 
  In other words, tax practices concerning the treatment of 
losses due to bad loans have been strict from the very start, 
and the only way that a direct write-off could be taken in the 
past was when the (problem) loan was removed, or "erased," as an 
asset. In 1954, however, given the frequent number of cases 
involving the nonpayment of notes and credit sales, indirect 
write-offs came to be recognized as long as a reserve account 
was set up to deal with such loans. No longer necessary to 
remove (problem) loans from one's list of assets, the amount of 
these nonperforming assets were then listed as liabilities and 
eventually came to be associated with shokyaku in the 
sense of "writing off" these nonperforming assets. 
  II. Methods of Handling Nonperforming Assets 
  1. The Present State of Nonperforming Assets 
  First of all, what are "nonperforming assets"? The term is 
ambiguous and its meaning differs from person to person. 
  The phenomenon, however, has garnered a great deal of 
attention, and there is a growing call, even among financial 
institutions, to have these so-called nonperforming assets 
disclosed. There are two types, which have a bearing on the 
soundness of the asset holdings of city banks, long-term credit 
banks, and trust banks, which are the targets of this call for 
disclosure: credit extended to borrowers involved in bankruptcy 
proceedings (i.e., credit involving borrowers who have begun 
liquidation or reorganization proceedings according to the 
provisions of the Commercial Code or reorganization proceedings 
according to the Corporation Reorganization Law) and credit 
extended to borrowers who are behind in their loan payments 
(i.e., credit where, when interest payments are in arrears 
beyond six months, the accrued interest is not calculated as 
revenue). These transfers are summarized in Table I. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table I. Changes Over Time in Amount of Loans Extended to Borrowers in Arr-| 
|ears or Involved in Reorganization or Liquidation Proceedings              | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(Unit: 100 million yen)                                                    | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |March 1992        |September 1992    |March 1993        | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|City banks        |--                |--                |84,549            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Long-term credit  |--                |--                |18,502            | 
|banks             |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Trust banks       |--                |--                |24,695            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Totals            |79,927            |123,000           |127,746           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Note: Totals for March and September 1992 are from the Ministry of Finance | 
|(individual bank figures are unavailable). Figures for March 1993 are base-| 
|d on reports by individual banking institutions.                           | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The amount of nonperforming assets disposed of by banks is 
shown in Table II. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table II. Loans Disposed of 1992-1993                                      | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(Unit: 100 million yen)                                                    | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |March 1992        |September 1992    |March 1993        | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|City banks        |6,679             |4,284             |13,450            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Long-term credit  |1,129             |633               |2,709             | 
|banks             |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Trust banks       |971               |427               |1,496             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Totals            |8,781             |5,344             |17,667            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Note: Amounts for disposed of loans are based on transfers to special loan | 
|reserve accounts plus loan write-offs plus other operating expenses. Figur-| 
|es for the March accounting period are 12-month figures; those for Septemb-| 
|er are six-month figures (all figures are based on closing account reports)| 
|.                                                                          | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  2. Importance of Disposing of Nonperforming Assets 
  In regard to the handling of nonperforming assets, it is 
written in the August 1992 publication, "Management Directions 
for Financial Administration 3: Disposal of Nonperforming 
Assets," "Delays in finding an early solution to the problem of 
nonperforming assets will create anxiety with regard to the 
financial system. Such delays will also become a major factor 
contributing to a slump in real estate transactions and, in 
turn, become an obstacle to economic recovery. From this 
perspective, the early establishment of guidelines for gradual, 
planned disposal of nonperforming assets is an urgent 
responsibility of government. Along with easing any doubts about 
our financial system, such steps are very important to ensuring 
its stability." 
  Why is it necessary to dispose of nonperforming assets? The 
answer is treated as a self-evident truth, and few sources seem 
to have taken up the subject of problem loans directly. We would 
like to take the opportunity to do so in this article and 
consider these problem loans from the perspective of disclosure 
and also their effect on corporate profits, particularly their 
effect on bank behavior. 
  Disclosure is the foundation of a free enterprise system 
based on a highly developed capitalist society, and it will 
become even more important as the demand grows for more market 
discipline (selection based on the market) among companies. 
  Balance sheets, the source of disclosures, are a way of 
clarifying a company's financial situation to outsiders, showing 
a balance between the company's total assets and its total 
liabilities and capital. In short, a company's assets on these 
balance sheets show how the company's liabilities and capital 
have been invested, while its liabilities and capital indicate 
the source and state of funding for its assets. For outsiders 
like shareholders, creditors and investors, the balance sheet is 
an essential source of information about a company's financial 
state of affairs. Needless to say, accuracy is the first rule of 
the day when it comes to balance sheets. 
  If, then, a company lists nonperforming assets--a loan, for 
example, to a borrower who has gone bankrupt--in the same way it 
would its healthy assets, neglecting to write it off properly on 
its balance sheet, this would constitute an unsound accounting 
procedure that actually presents a misleading picture of the 
company's real finances. Nor, without correctly evaluating its 
assets, does the company present a reasonable picture of its 
losses and earnings. In either case, when bad loans are not 
properly written off, disclosure is reduced to window-dressing 
accounting. 
  Disclosure requirements for nonperforming assets are 
important, in a legal sense, for a society that is governed by 
laws and regulations. Nonperforming assets, on the other hand, 
to the degree that they influence corporate revenues, have an 
important economic impact. 
  When companies are able to manage their losses by disposing 
of nonperforming assets by means such as (nontaxable) 
write-offs, they are able to lighten their corporate tax burden 
(and sometimes to reduce their dividends) and thus to limit the 
outflow and drain of profits from their companies. The result is 
an improved situation with regard to their assets. Secondary 
effects include a rise in the value of their stock and in their 
ratings as well as lower fund-raising costs, all of which 
encourage corporate growth. In the 1980's, U.S. financial 
institutions, from savings and loan companies to large ("money 
center") banks, fell on extremely hard times, some even failing, 
but as a result of restructuring their operations by cutting 
their work force and selling off unprofitable units while also 
disposing of their nonperforming assets, they are said to have 
recovered their earning power to a considerable extent. 
  Especially important in regard to financial institutions is 
the assurance that they be able to respond to lending demands. 
As noted in "Current Directions for Monetary Administration 2" 
(August 1992): "Because the drop in real estate and stock values 
which has accompanied the collapse of the so-called bubble 
economy may reduce the internal resources of financial 
institutions by lowering their latent profits and increasing 
their nonperforming assets, there is a danger that these 
institutions will be less able to respond to lending demands. To 
use the analogy of the human body, financial institutions are as 
important as blood is to the human system in terms of their role 
in facilitating smooth, sound economic activity. So there are no 
blockages in the financial system, if our economy is to develop 
in a sound, stable manner, we must try to safeguard the lending 
abilities of our financial institutions." As indicated in this 
statement, there is a potential risk that [nonperforming assets] 
can have the negative effect not only of disrupting the 
operations of individual financial institutions but, by lowering 
their lending ability, of disrupting the entire economy as well. 
  3. Comparison of Japanese and U.S. Write-Off Systems 
and Allowances for Bad Debts 
  In addition to the disposition of bad debts that have 
already 
been deemed uncollectible, anyone addressing the problem of 
nonperforming assets also has to deal with the subject of bad 
debt allowances to cover future losses due to such debts. Here, 
then, we would like to compare the systems in Japan and the 
United States for writing off such debts and the allowances in 
both countries for bad debts. 
  There are two kinds of allowances or reserves for bad debts. 
There is a general reserve, which is set up to cover the risk, 
inherent in all loans, that borrowers will default on their 
payments, and a special reserve set up as a hedge against the 
nonpayment of specified loan credits. 
  Japan has a fixed-rate reserve fund system, which is based 
on 
the Corporation Tax Law. (For banks, the ceiling rate is 0.03 
percent.) Such funds are considered nontaxable but, depending on 
the decision of the company, can be treated as taxable. In the 
United States, there is no fixed rate reserve system. Instead, 
funds may be accumulated at specific rates as determined by each 
company. As a rule, such funds are treated as taxable. 
  When there are no prospects for the repayment of a loan, an 
indirect write-off is possible if a special loan loss reserve 
account is set up as provided for in the Corporation Tax Law's 
basic rulings. Such accounts are treated as nontaxable. Indirect 
write-offs are also possible by setting up a special taxable 
account when the criteria set through such basic rulings are 
inappropriate to the situation of a company. Again, with regard 
to financial institutions, when there are no prospects for the 
repayment of a loan, the authorities concerned, who carry out 
the assessment of the institution's assets, will verify that the 
loan is a Category IV loan (debts determined to be 
uncollectible) and, when approved by the tax office, can be 
written off without being subject to taxation (write-off 
verification system). However, companies frequently choose 
taxable write-offs. 
  In the United States, on the other hand, if a loan does not 
seem to have any prospects for being repaid, it can be written 
off and is nontaxable. Frequently companies may set up a reserve 
account, however, that is not tax-deductible. Again, when loans 
considered losses (bad loans; comparable to our Category IV 
loans?) by the loan criteria of the auditing agent who assesses 
the institution's assets, financial institutions can deduct 100 
percent [of the expected amount of payments on those loans]; in 
the case of doubtful loans (i.e., repayment is questionable; 
comparable to our Category III loans?), 50 percent can be 
accumulated as a taxable bad debt allowance and at the stage 
where repayment is deemed impossible, it can be written off and 
be treated as nontaxable. However, loans which are considered 
losses, instead of being charged off to the loan loss reserve, 
may be written off, in which case they are treated as nontaxable. 
  Moreover, in regard to whether the amounts written off are 
nontaxable, not a few problems were said to have occurred 
between financial institutions and the tax authorities in the 
past. However, in February 1992, the Internal Revenue Service 
decided to treat amounts written off at the closing of accounts 
for noncollectible debts as nontaxable in the case of financial 
institutions following the criteria for loans and loan 
categories determined by the authorities concerned. Since the 
tax authorities can disallow the amount written off based on 
later tax audits, approvals based on this method are not final, 
but problems between financial institutions and the tax 
authorities seem to have been somewhat reduced. In this 
connection, there is a system of verifying write-offs in Japan 
for financial institutions that is carried out by the 
authorities concerned, as mentioned earlier, and in principle, 
approvals with regard to taxes are finalized by the time of the 
write-off, thus causing few problems between tax authorities and 
financial institutions. 
  As indicated above, it is difficult to make simple 
comparisons between Japan and the United States in terms of 
write-offs and allowances for bad debts. There is not a great 
deal of difference, however, with respect to our systems for 
special allowances for bad debts (as opposed to general 
allowances); nor, because of recent revisions on our part, are 
there significant differences at present in the circumstances 
for tax deductible and nondeductible write-offs when there are 
no prospects for a loan's being repaid. 
  4. Cooperative Credit Purchasing and Securitization 
  Another method of disposing of nonperforming assets, besides 
write-offs, which we are attempting to explain in this article, 
is that of selling off the problem loan itself. For this 
purpose, in January 1993, the Cooperative Credit Purchasing Co. 
was set up with financing from the various financial 
institutions. In selling nonperforming assets, the consent of 
the debtor is needed. As with direct write-offs, the loan itself 
is dropped from the balance sheet. Since it is then no longer 
subject to disclosure requirements, this method has recently 
come to be widely used. However, writing off problem loans has 
advantages not found in this method; for example, the debtor's 
consent is not required, nor does it matter what type of 
collateral was used to secure the loan. Both of these methods, 
therefore, complement each other and are effective ways to 
dispose of nonperforming assets. For example, the same debt, 
depending on the status of the collateral that was used, may in 
part be sold off during the settlement term and the remainder 
may be written off at the end of the term. 
  Again, another more evolved method is that of 
securitization. 
This method is very commonplace in the United States and has 
been used by foreign-based financial institutions in Japan to 
some degree but, in general, has otherwise rarely been used in 
this country. Unfortunately, skills in the area of 
securitization could have been better honed during the bubble 
period; nor was there sufficient penetration in our markets of 
securitized products. Still, there seem to be no basic, systemic 
restrictions in this area, and since it represents a business 
opportunity, we can probably expect the emergence in the future 
of competent, motivated "originators" (innovative creditors) in 
this area. 
  Leaving aside problems that may exist with regard to taxes, 
we see, for example, that many financial institutions and 
companies, after setting up special companies, are transferring 
their nonperforming assets to them. Rather than settling for 
this sort of backward-looking solution, such companies need to 
take a broader, more forward-looking perspective that includes 
the possibility of using these special companies to securitize 
these nonperforming assets. 
  Before getting into the practical details of the discussion, 
we would first like to give a brief outline of the nontaxable 
write-off system along with an overview of the way 
[nonperforming assets] are currently handled for financial 
institutions. Then, while considering the environment 
surrounding nonperforming assets, we would like to go into the 
main subject of this paper, which is non-taxable write-offs, 
particularly, indirect write-offs based on criteria defined by 
Basic Ruling 9.6.4 (one of the more important non-taxable 
write-offs, we feel), and also an explanation of taxable 
write-offs. Finally, in hopes of furthering the reader's 
understanding of these matters, we would like to go into some 
actual case studies involving nonbanks. 
  III. Outline of Nontaxable Write-Off System 
  Current provisions for nontaxable write-offs are found in 
National Tax Administration Agency Corporate Tax Law, Basic 
Rulings, Chapter 9, Section 6 ("Losses From Bad Debts") 
(hereafter referred to as "Basic Ruling"). An outline is 
provided as follows: 
  (a) Direct write-offs based on formal criteria (Basic Ruling 
9.6.1) 
  According to this ruling, when calculating their losses, 
creditors may write off a loan as a bad debt by waiving the debt 
or otherwise erasing it whether or not they report it as a loss 
on their balance sheets. 
  (b) Direct write-offs based on substantive criteria (Basic 
Ruling 9.6.2) 
  When it has become clear, because of the debtor's inability 
to pay, that a debt is uncollectible, it can be counted as a 
loss for tax purposes as long as the creditor accounts for it as 
a loss on his balance sheet for the period in which the loss 
occurs. In such a case, however, when collateral is involved, it 
must be disposed of before such a loss can be accounted for and 
recognized as a bad debt. 
  (c) Indirect write-off based on formal criteria (Basic 
Ruling 
9.6.5) 
  When a debtor becomes subject to the beginning of a 
reorganization procedure according to the Corporation 
Reorganization Law or has suspended bank draft transactions, up 
to 50 percent of the amount of the loan (excluding the amount 
secured by collateral) can be transferred to a special loan 
reserve account in the same accounting year that the above 
actions are taken against the debtor; approval will be given for 
including the transferred amount as a loss for tax purposes. 
However, in this case, a precondition is that the creditor 
report the loan as a loss on his balance sheet. 
  (d) Indirect write-off based on substantive criteria (Basic 
Ruling 9.6.4) 
  When a substantial portion of a loan is deemed irrecoverable 
due to the lack of prospects for a turnaround in the debtor's 
business or his inability over a substantial length of time to 
rid himself of his debts, the creditor may petition the head of 
the local tax office concerned (or where [one of the Finance 
Ministry's] corporate tax auditors is involved, the head of the 
National Tax Administration Agency) for his approval [before 
writing off] that portion of the loan which is deemed 
irrecoverable (excluding the amount secured by collateral) up 
until the last day of the business year in which the above set 
of facts have become pertinent to the creditor's claim; when 
that amount is transferred to a special loan reserve account, it 
will be recognized for the business year in question as a loss 
for tax purposes. 
  Here, too, the loss must be accounted for as such on the 
balance sheet. If, after the creditor submits his final return 
for the year in question and the head of the local tax office 
concerned has some dispute with the amount listed, the filer 
then has to submit a revised return as soon as possible. 
  Aside from the above, there are basic rulings that also have 
to do with the establishment of a special loan reserve account 
for loans that have been inactive for an extended period of time 
(9.6.6) and with increasing the amount in special loan reserve 
accounts when circumstances change (9.6.7). Also, the disposal 
of a bad loan is recognized if two years have lapsed since the 
accrued interest receivable on the loan has been listed as an 
asset (see National Tax Administration Publication 11, 
"Concerning the Treatment of Accrued Interest Receivables by 
Financial Institutions," 5 September 1966. 
  IV. Write-Off Verification System 
  Substantive matters regarding taxes and credits ought to be 
decided objectively and without any ambiguity in meaning. In 
fact, however, legal regulations are not often written so 
clearly as not to leave room for questions of interpretation; 
subjectivity also plays a role in determining the facts as they 
relate to taxes. Taxes would be robbed of their fairness, 
however, if such interpretations and decisions were left up to 
the individual taxpayer to make, and in the end, there is no 
other alternative but to rely on the tax authorities to come up 
with uniform interpretations and decisions. 
  In principle, the tax filing system is based on the 
taxpayer's self-assessment of his tax liability. When that 
assessment differs from that of the tax office, the tax office's 
decision is the one that must be followed (though, of course, 
the taxpayer can file an administrative complaint against the 
tax office's disposition of his case and can even fight the 
validity of the decision in court). 
  The same can be said about writing off loans. The specific 
amount to be written off is tentatively decided at the end of 
the business year but the final determination of the amount has 
to await the decision of the tax authorities following their tax 
audit. 
  However, in the case of write-offs of nonperforming assets 
by 
financial institutions, an agreement between the Ministry of 
Finance and the National Tax Administration Agency has made it 
possible since 1950 for the amount of assets verified by the 
bank inspector as "uncollectible or worthless" to be recognized, 
in principle, as losses for tax purposes without having to be 
approved by the tax authorities. This arrangement, known as the 
nonperforming asset write-off verification system, recognizes 
the write-off of loans and other assets as nontaxable losses if 
the write-off is verified by the bank inspector. This 
arrangement applies to all but a segment of our financial 
institutions (the exceptions are noted later). Such write-offs 
can not be discounted by the tax authorities. 
  The reasons that such a system was set up only for financial 
institutions probably lie in the special nature of these 
institutions, which sets them apart from general businesses, and 
the view that it would be more effective to leave the 
verification of nonperforming loan write-offs to the bank 
inspectors, who are routinely involved in the audit of financial 
institutions and have a thorough knowledge of their special 
character. 
  The disposal of bad loans, as far as taxes are concerned, is 
dealt with, as in the above examples, through basic rulings of 
the National Tax Administration Agency. The main points, in 
terms of carrying these rulings out, are defined in transmittals 
by the chief of the Banking Inspection Department [of the 
Ministry of Finance]; that is, in "Outline for Implementing the 
Verification System for Nonperforming Assets" (hereafter, 
"Implementing Verification System") and "Outline for Handling 
Verifications Concerning Special Loan Reserve Accounts" 
(hereafter, "Outline for Reserve Accounts"). According to these 
sources, the nature of the bank inspector's verifications are as 
follows: 
  (1) When a creditor waives an obligation (Basic Ruling 
9.6.1(4)), the bank inspector verifies the appropriateness of 
disposing of the bad debt. 
  (2) In the case of a direct write-off based on substantive 
criteria (Basic Ruling 9.6.2), he verifies the amount of the 
loss due to the bad debt. 
  (3) In the case of an indirect write-off based on 
substantive 
criteria (Basic Ruling 9.6.4), he verifies the amount 
transferred to the special loan reserve account. 
  (4) In the case of an indirect write-off based on formal 
criteria (Basic Ruling 9.6.5), he verifies the amount deducted 
from the debt. 
  (5) In the case of the indirect write-off of a loan that has 
been inactive for an extended period of time (Basic Ruling 
9.6.6), he verifies the amount that has been secured by such 
means as a mortgage or right of pledge. 
  (6) When a special loan reserve account is added to because 
of a change of circumstance (Basic Ruling 9.6.7), he verifies 
the (additional) amount that has been transferred to the account. 
  In cases (4) and (5) above, even when no amount has been 
secured by means of a mortgage or right of pledge or there is no 
amount to be deducted from the amount of the loan, that fact, 
too, must be verified. Again, in cases of a direct write-off 
based on formal standards, with the exception of cases where a 
debt has been waived by the creditor (Basic Ruling 9.6.1(1) 
through (3)), it is not necessary to verify the write-off. 
  In principle, a loan write-off that has been verified by the 
bank inspector in the manner discussed above is recognized as a 
loss for tax purposes; however, if some question should arise 
regarding its write-off as a loss during the verification 
process, tax authorities will be contacted to discuss whether a 
write-off will be appropriate or not. When tax authorities find 
a write-off inappropriate after the loan has been verified, the 
matter is settled through a discussion between the tax 
authorities concerned and the bank inspector who verified the 
loan. In fact, however, tax authorities rarely question a loan 
that has already been verified. 

