CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jaime Cristancho Gomez] </F>
  [Text] A new dispute has erupted between farmers and the 
board of directors of the Bank of the Republic about the rise in 
inflation. Agricultural sector spokespersons charge that some 
Bank directors and certain economists "act as if they live in a 
developed country." They pay no attention to rural poverty and 
focus only on statistics, while ignoring social considerations. 
  Spokespersons for the sector defended the Ministry of 
Agriculture for implementing agricultural recovery programs. The 
codirector of the Bank of the Republic, Maria Mercedes Cuellar 
de Martinez, blamed those programs for contributing to this 
year's increase in inflation, especially in February, when it 
was 3.68 percent. 
  The president of the SAC [Association of Colombian Farmers], 
Cesar de Hart Vengoechea, said the Bank of the Republic is not 
behaving responsibly when it blames inflation for errors in its 
calculations. 
  "In 1992 and 1993, the cost of living attributable to 
agriculture was used to cover up rises in other components of 
inflation, especially items for which the state is responsible, 
like utility rates and public services," said de Hart Vengoechea. 
  "It is time for the people who design economic policy to 
answer to the nation for their actions, due to their high social 
costs," he added. 
  The president of Fedegan [Association of Colombian 
Cattlemen], Jorge Visbal Martelo, said meat and milk price 
increases have been normal, below this year's projected 
inflation rate (19 percent). 
  "In our case, middlemen keep most of those increases. This 
year meat and milk prices will not go up very much. I can put 
consumers' minds at rest about that," said Visbal. 
  The director of Fedearroz [National Rice Growers 
Federation], 
Rafael Hernandez Lozano, said rice prices have been repressed, 
hurting profits in this sector. 
  In 1992, when inflation was 26 percent, the price paid to 
growers rose 4.8 percent; in 1993, when the cost of living index 
was 22.60 percent, prices paid to rice growers rose 14 percent. 
  Hernandez said that this year rice prices should rise 
between 
25 and 28 percent. "That has already started," he added. 
  "In inflationary periods, services and public spending go up 
and nothing is done about that. If we accept the unfettered 
operation of neoliberalism, the free market, as proposed by the 
National Planning Office and the Bank of the Republic, rice 
prices should go up 100 pesos per kilo this year," said the 
Fedearroz director. 
<H5>  Agriculture, a Burden </H5>
  According to the manager of Fenalce [National Federation of 
Cereal Growers], Adriano Quintana Silva, "grain growers cannot 
be held responsible for the rise in inflation." In his view, 
corn and sorghum producers are being overwhelmed by imports, and 
he asked that those grains be protected by the government. 
  "Economists consider agriculture a burden. Their problem is: 
what we do with the sector? They see nothing beyond cold 
mathematics, as they are only concerned about reducing 
inflation. They want cheap food with guerrillas, crime, and many 
social problems," said Quinta. 
  The president of Fedepapa [Potato Growers Federation], 
Augusto del Valle, said potato prices will go up until May, 
starting from last December, by about 80 percent, but will then 
begin to decline in the second half of the year. 
  "I support food imports. But what do we do about very 
low-tech campesinos, people who grow crops on vertical slopes? 
According to people from the Bank of the Republic, they should 
just go away. How? By digging a trench around them? Where do we 
put those people? Economists have skin as tough as a 
crocodile's. They seem impervious to social phenomena," 
commented del Valle. 
<H5>  Ministry Does not Control the Climate: Ocampo G. </H5>
  Armenia Minister of Agriculture Jose Antonio Ocampo Gaviria 
denied charges by some members of the board of directors of the 
Bank of the Republic, and said that a number of climate-related 
factors helped to boost inflation during the first two months of 
1994. 
  The minister denied that the government's present 
agricultural policy was responsible for the rise in inflation 
and said that, among other factors, the climate played a role. 
  Ocampo mentioned the Bank of the Republic and said that 
probably "some members of the board thought that as HIMAT 
[Colombian Institute of Hydrology, Meteorology, and Land 
Improvement] is part of the Ministry of Agriculture, the 
Ministry controls the climate." 
  Ocampo Gaviaria was in Armenia to take part in a seminar to 
publicize the General Agricultural and Fishing Development Law. 
  He announced that within the next few days the government 
will finalize two measures to protect campesinos whose yucca and 
fiber production (for bags) has been hurt by lowered trade 
barriers. 
  Ocampo said that when a certain type of import is 
detrimental 
to farmers, the law provides protective mechanisms that may be 
initiated or requested by private individuals, the private 
sector, or by the government itself. 

