Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Lilian Nduta] </F>
  [Text] Kenya requires to import 1.4 million tonnes of 
cereals this year to avert a looming famine, the Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO) says. The UN agency says in a 
special report on food supply situation and crop prospects in 
Sub-Saharan Africa, that the food scarcity in the country is due 
to disastrous crop harvest last year. The report says the poor 
harvest was realized through a combination of erratic rains in 
high potential areas, reduced fertilizer application and 
localized ethnic disturbances. 
  It adds that the food crisis has been worsened by the 
presence of a large number of refugees and serious drought in 
the pastoral areas. 
  The report is the first issue of a series prepared by the 
FAO 
global information and early warning system on food supply 
situation, cereal import and food aid requirements for 
developing countries. 
  The report lists Kenya among 15 poor countries which face 
exceptional food emergencies in Africa. It estimates that Kenya 
will need 724,000 tonnes food aid of which 100,000 tonnes is 
emergency food aid for drought-affected and displaced people. 
  However, the report gives favorable prospects for the 
1993/94 
short rains crop whose harvest commences next month in most 
parts of the country. FAO says short rains were received in the 
major growing areas in late November and early December. 
  The report adds that there was a likelihood of good harvest 
this year through large stocks of fertilizer and farm inputs 
carried forward from previous season. The report says the 
current estimate of 2.2 million tonnes was far below the average 
for the last five years. It says the situation has been eased 
by the cross-border trade which has enabled large quantities of 
maize to cross into Kenya from Uganda. 
  Total commercial imports, including cross-border trade and 
purchases on the international market are forecast at a maximum 
of 713,000 tonnes. 
  The report says other cereals such as rice and wheat are 
expected to be imported through the private sector but added 
that there was still little incentive for maize importation. 
  The FAO report further adds that the government's ability to 
import commercially has been constrained by financial problems. 

