BFN 

<F P=106> [Nidal Mansur report: "This Is What the United States Wants </F>
From Jordan: Jordanian-Israeli Declaration of Principles, 
Normalization, End of Boycott of Israel"] 
  [Text] Politicians were initially optimistic that the 
al-'Aqabah siege would be lifted following official Jordanian 
protests and his majesty's announcement that Jordan would 
suspend its participation in the peace talks unless the siege 
was lifted. 
  But, days have gone by without any clear progress. To the 
contrary, economic personalities and merchants have told SHIHAN 
that the U.S. Navy has continued to tighten the noose on 
al-'Aqabah, indicating, as some Jordanian politicians say, that 
the al-'Aqabah blockade has no connection with the Gulf crisis 
and the rumored leaking of goods into Iraq from Jordan, and that 
the blockade is a systematic U.S. policy to compel Jordan to 
meet demands connected in a basic way with the peace process 
with Israel. 
  Clearly, the Jordanian leadership immediately understood the 
U.S. message, prompting the king to link the al-'Aqabah blockade 
with the peace process. 
  Well-informed government sources say Jordan will place the 
al- 'Aqabah issue at the top of the agenda of any talks with the 
Americans. 
  This information coincides with reports of U.S. Secretary of 
State Warren Christopher's approaching visit to the region in 
the next few weeks. Western diplomats believe that if the 
United States wants to continue to pressure Jordan without 
offering it a clear picture, Jordan will not be part of 
Christopher's coming tour. 
  Jordanian officials are bewildered by the U.S. stand and are 
wondering what the United States is demanding of Jordan. 
  It is certain that these demands are clearly linked with the 
peace process. Political observers indicate that the United 
States wants the following from Jordan: 
  1. An Israeli-Jordanian declaration of principles similar to 
the PLO-Israel Oslo agreement; 
  2. A clear Jordanian role in ending the Arab boycott of 
Israel; 
  3. An effective and primary Jordanian role in normalizing 
ties with Israel, such as the economic conference that was 
scheduled to convene in Jordan, with Shim'on Peres 
participating, and which the government demanded be postponed. 
  A minister who preferred anonymity told SHIHAN that while 
Jordan had known about these demands since the start of its 
participation in the peace process, it is difficult for Jordan 
to meet these demands in the way the United States wants, 
especially since it is governed by local and regional formulas 
making it revolve in a fixed orbit, calculating its slightest 
moves with extreme care. 
  Perhaps the more dangerous issue for Jordan, which prevents 
it from quickly responding to the U.S. desire, is that it does 
not know the price it is going to pay in return for these offers. 
  Until now, the United States has not told Jordan that the 
al-'Aqabah blockade will be lifted in return. Therefore, 
Jordanian officials are not reassured about the U.S. position. 
They say indignantly that since the beginning of the peace 
talks, the United States has not offered enough in terms of 
economic assistance and aide to Jordan, which is suffering a 
crisis after its boycott by the Gulf states. The United States 
has continued to monitor this Gulf boycott of Jordan, especially 
the Saudi veto against Jordan. The U.S. silence may have 
increased the Gulf's intransigent attitude. 
  America's ambiguity is one reason why Jordan is not rushing 
into hasty action. However, there are no less compelling 
reasons from Jordan's standpoint. 
  Jordan cannot afford to break ranks with fellow Arabs the 
way 
the PLO did when it signed the Oslo accord. There is the 
constraint of its relations with Syria. Jordan cannot proceed 
without the Syrians, unless the Americans provide sufficient 
guarantees to protect it regionally. 
  In the wake of the Oslo accord, it seems that history has 
come into play, with Jordan seeking cover under the Syrian 
option. Syria, for its part, cannot afford to let Lebanon or 
Jordan go it alone, and so be left high and dry. 
  By not accommodating America's requirements, Jordan is not 
being inhibited by purely regional calculations; given its 
internal politics, Jordan cannot afford to take a short cut. 
  With the institution of democracy in Jordan, the regime has 
been made stronger and political opposition has been given 
greater elbowroom and the ability to pester the government. Any 
action toward normalizing relations with or ending the economic 
boycott of Israel will not be easy to sell to the Jordanian 
public. For the government to undertake such moves, it will 
have either to secure a regional cover, or tame internal 
opposition. 
  With such givens, Jordan seems to be walking a tight rope. 
It is in the position of someone who has travelled half the 
distance and seems to be unable to go backward. Neither can it 
proceed forward without having to make real sacrifices. 
  There seems to be more than one school of thought in Jordan 
on how to proceed. 
  His majesty the king is known to be disinclined to adventure 
and gambling. He favors a more cautious approach to local and 
regional developments, even if that means the noose being 
tightened around Jordan. 
  However, political observers argue that Prime Minister 
'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali, having led the negotiating team with 
Israel, seems to be more inclined to breaking the deadlock. 
Al-Majali is thought to believe the "taboos" complex that 
Jordan resolved by joining the peace negotiations should not act 
to inhibit its movement. 
  Obviously, the king's line of balancing acts and keeping his 
lines open in all directions has not gone down well with the 
U.S. Administration, according to Western diplomats. Citing 
examples that inconvenienced the Americans and clouded relations 
with Washington, the diplomats point to Jordan's coordination 
with Syria. They also cite Jordan's failure to suppress 
Palestinian opposition, namely Hamas, the Islamic resistance 
movement, headquartered in Amman, and Jordan's flexibility 
toward its own Islamists. 
  Jordan is now facing difficult options. 
  It wants to reconcile its regional calculations and future 
interests, an argument observers cite while speculating that the 
king may dismiss the present government and bring in a new prime 
minister who would be prepared to cope with regional 
developments and pressures without worrying too much about the 
consequences. 

