BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Karasev, secretary of the </F>
Interdepartmental Committee for Ecological Safety, under the 
"Ecology" rubric in the "Prescription" section: "We Drink Dirty 
Water...But There Are Sufficient Reserves of Clean Water for the 
Whole Planet" -- words between slantlines are printed in 
boldface] 
  [Text] Groundwaters [podzemnyye vody] need no lengthy 
explanation. They are above all a source for the population's 
domestic and drinking water supply. In addition, mineral 
medicinal and table waters are used for balneological purposes, 
high-temperature (thermal) waters for thermal energy needs, and 
mineral-rich natural leachates for the extraction of minerals: 
iodine, bromine, lithium, and so forth. Groundwaters, 
especially those in the aquiferous strata nearest the surface, 
in many ways determine the ecological state of landscapes, that 
is, they determine directly how favorable conditions are for the 
functioning of the human organism. 
  Because groundwaters are better protected from pollution 
(than surface waters), they are used on a massive scale in many 
countries of the world to satisfy the population's drinking 
water requirements. In the United States groundwaters are the 
source for 75 percent of communal water supply systems; they 
satisfy the requirements for potable water of around half of the 
country's population. Groundwaters play a great role in the 
water supplies of Germany, Australia, China, and other countries. 
  Unfortunately, the use of groundwaters for drinking water in 
the Russian Federation, lags way behind former USSR and other 
countries. The list of cities in which surface waters are the 
only source of domestic and drinking water supply includes such 
metropolises as Moscow, St. Petersburg, Nizhniy Novgorod, 
Yekaterinburg, Omsk, Rostov-na-Donu, Vladivostok, and many 
others. But since surface waters are essentially not protected 
against possible pollution, the population of these cities is 
constantly threatened with the drinking-water supply being cut 
off. 
  At the same time the use of groundwaters, reliably protected 
from pollution as they are, is of great strategic significance, 
since they are the only drinking-water source during emergency 
situations, as is convincingly demonstrated by what happened in 
Kiev and a number of other population centers when the surface 
water supplies were shut down as a result of the Chernobyl 
catastrophe. 
  Deep below the Russian Federation there are significant 
potential reserves of fresh [presnaya] groundwater, estimated at 
more than 300 cubic kilometers per year. /This quantity of 
fresh water is sufficient to supply the entire population of the 
planet with drinking water./ Reserves of groundwater that have 
been prospected and are ready for use, including some that have 
been adapted for industrial use, exceed the reserves that are 
currently tapped. Why is this? The small degree of 
exploitation is partially to be explained by the fact that 
reserves in many deposits have been prospected to satisfy needs 
in the years 1995-2000. However, the main reasons are 
inadequate financing, poor material and technical support, and 
the incorrect strategic policy carried out by water resources 
organizations. This results in a situation in many regions, 
where because of the insufficient use of groundwaters to meet 
the demands for drinking water, there is effectively an 
ecological risk to the population, forced as it is to use 
surface waters, which are unprotected against direct pollution. 
  Thus, the chief merit of groundwaters is their higher degree 
of protection in comparison to surface waters. Therefore, in 
natural conditions, as a rule, fresh [presnyye] groundwaters 
meet the regulation requirements for drinking water. However, 
in terms of the degree of protection against pollution, a 
distiction is made between groundwaters in aquiferous substrata 
nearest the surface, which are mostly insufficiently protected 
against pollution, especially in river valleys, and artesian 
waters from deep aquifers, which are mostly reliably protected 
against pollution. 
  Despite the higher degree of protection, cases are not 
infrequent where fresh groundwaters contain this or that 
component in concentrations which do not satisfy existing 
standards. You can single out a number of hydrogeochemical 
provinces on the territory of the Russian Federation which are 
characterized by the drinking-water's high content of components 
that are subject to restrictions. Such elements include 
fluorine, iron, manganese, strontium, selenium, arsenic, and 
beryllium. 
  But a high content of components subject to restriction is 
not an obstacle to the use of such waters, since the water 
quality can be brought up to the required standards through the 
use of various water treatment methods (defluorination or 
fluorination, deferrization, and so forth). Because of the 
stability of this content, the water treatment of groundwater 
supplies is cheaper than the purification of polluted surface 
waters. 
  Undoubtedly more dangerous is the human pollution of 
groundwaters linked to various forms of economic activities, 
since such pollution is characterized by the exceptional 
diversity of the pollutants; moreover, for some of them 
virtually no purification methods have been developed. 
Long-term and ecologically dangerous sources of pollution 
include sewage settlement tanks and the solid waste from 
industrial and municipal enterprises, livestock complexes, 
mineral fertilizer and toxic chemical depots, oil storage 
facilities, fields irrigated by sewage waters, and other 
facilities. In the period 1985-1992 pollution was recorded in 
280 drinking-water supplies situated in 60 Russian cities and 
settlements. 
  In Samara and Penza Oblasts 55 water intakes with signs of 
pollution of the groundwaters have been discovered. In 
individual water-intake boreholes in the Tolyatti region, 
groundwater polluted by benzene, phenols, petroleum products, 
formaldehyde, titanium, methanol, sulfanol [as transliterated], 
and aluminum have been discovered. In many population centers 
pollution is linked with the effect of technological operations 
at industrial, municipal, and agricultural facilities. Four 
boreholes with nickel levels in excess of the maximum 
permissible concentration [MPC] have been recorded in the region 
of the Monchegorsk Combine. 
  On the territory of Novyy Urengoy, industrial facilities and 
a development site were found to be situated within the second 
and third bands of the health protection zone of the city's 
water supply intake. On the territory of Saratov Oblast 
pollution of artesian waters has been recorded in sectors of 
existing water intakes. In 13 sectors nitrogen-containing 
compounds (livestock-raising complexes), ammonia gas and 
polymetals (areas where there are ponds and municipal and 
industrial waste settlement tanks), toxic chemicals and nitrates 
(in areas with irrigation systems), petroleum products (around 
bulk plants), and chlorides and sulphates (in water-intake 
areas) have been detected in groundwaters. In certain cities 
and population centers the deterioration in the quality of 
groundwaters is a result of substandard water being drawn in 
under conditions of a violation of the recommended regulations 
for operating water intakes (as in Tomsk, and population centers 
in Arkhangelsk, Smolensk, Samara, Chita, and other oblasts). 
  The hazard to human health posed by polluted groundwaters is 
linked first and foremost to water-intake sectors which are 
being utilized for drinking water. As a rule, this is for the 
moment localized pollution but the detected quantities of 
pollutants components and the makeup of the pollution are 
extremely serious. The following contents of groundwaters used 
as drinking-water supplies have been established: nitrogen -- 
up to 40-70 times the MPC (Maritime Kray, Samara Oblast); iron 
-- up to 35-40 times the MPC (Novosibirsk and Penza Oblasts); 
sulfates and chlorides -- up to 3-5 times the MPC (Novosibirsk, 
Orel, and Tula Oblasts); phenols and petroleum products -- up to 
5-7 times the MPC (Komi Republic, North Ossetia, Orel, Samara, 
and Saratov Oblasts); strontium and aluminum up to 5-6 times the 
MPC (Arkhangelsk, Smolensk, Kirov, and Rostov Oblasts, and 
Maritime Kray). 
  In some water intakes the presence in groundwaters of silica 
(Valday and Yekaterinburg), lead (Komsomolsk-na-Amure), and 
selenium (Upper Pyshma) is being noted in quantities exceeding 
the MPC. 
  Unfortunately, we must also talk about the ecological risk 
caused by polluted groundwaters from the angle of water 
conservation activity. In the majority of cases this is being 
carried out unsatisfactorily. The rules for the operation of 
water intakes are most frequently being violated. For example, 
in Sakhalin Oblast this was noted at all of the 92 water intakes 
that were investigated: At 14 of these there were signs of 
chemical pollution oringinating from technological activity. 
Some 201 potential sources of pollution of groundwaters were 
brought to light. 
  As an example one may also cite the pollution of 
groundwaters 
at eight existing water intakes in Nizhnyy Novgorod Oblast. The 
Teplovskiy water intake which is still under construction 
is...under threat of pollution. Effluent settlement tanks at 
enterprises of the chemical industry are the source. The area 
of pollution has reached 100 square kilometers. Groundwaters 
contain sulfates, phenols, organic nitrogenous compounds, 
cyanides, and benzene -- all in quantities that considerably 
exceed the MPC. 
  In connection with the obvious threat of an ecological risk, 
certain water intakes are being switched from drinking water 
supply purposes to industrial water supply purposes. 
  The water intake at Prigorodnyy settlement near Kemerovo is 
a 
case in point. 
  Taking Russia as a whole, according to statistics provided 
by 
experts, about 1.5 million cubic meters per day (five-six 
percent) of polluted groundwaters are used for domestic and 
drinking water supplies. 
  Groundwaters are not only becoming polluted in the vicinity 
of the water intakes, but also in areas where they are not being 
exploited, which is also very undesirable as polluted 
groundwaters can get into the surface-water runoff and bodies of 
open water which is particularly dangerous for small rivers. In 
certain cases, where the groundwaters [gruntovyye vody] do not 
lie deep, atmospheric conditions and the condition of the soil 
and vegetation may become impaired owing to evaporation from 
their level, and there may be a risk of fire (when the 
groundwaters are polluted with petroleum products). 
Characteristics of the groundwaters' pollution are given below. 
  More than 1,200 areas of polluted groundwaters have been 
brought to light on Russian territory. But this figure does 
not, it seems, reflect the full picture because by no means all 
sources of pollution have been checked and investigated. At 
present, the most reliable information is available on 946 
polluted areas, of which 75 percent are situated in the European 
part of Russia. The table details the structure of the 
pollution according to the type of economic activity. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Type of Economic Activity|Number of sectors        |Percentage               | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Industry                 |395                      |42                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Agriculture              |205                      |22                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Municipal Services       |110                      |11                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Combined effect of vario-|236                      |25                       | 
|us types of economic act-|                         |                         | 
|ivity                    |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  From the point of view of the degree of danger they present 
to the human organism (toxicity) and severity of the likely 
ecological threat, the pollutants detected in groundwaters are 
divided into: 
  a) extremely dangerous substances (mercury, beryllium, 
phosphorus, carbon tetrachloride). These have been detected on 
the territories of Volgograd, Voronezh, Samara, Novosibirsk, and 
Irkutsk Oblasts, as well as on Sakhalin) -- in all 15 areas); 
  b) highly dangerous substances (lead, cadmium, fluorine, 
bromine, arsenic, etc.) These have been detected in the 
groundwaters of the majority of Federation components situated 
in the European part of Russia, the southern part of Western and 
Eastern Siberia, in the Far East, and Kamchatka -- some 217 
areas; 
  c) dangerous and moderately dangerous substances (nitrates, 
ammonia, iron, zinc, benzenes, petroleum products, pesticides 
etc.) Some 714 groundwater areas, analyzed for these 
constituents, have been found in the Central Regions, on the 
territory of Kalmykia and Chechnya, in Tyumen Oblast, the 
Transbaykal Region, and Khabarovsk Kray. 
  The prolonged consumption of drinking water which does not 
conform to hygiene standards as regards its chemical 
composition, causes people to contract various illnesses. 
  For example, according to statistics from the State 
Committee 
for Sanitary and Epidemiological Supervision 
[Goskomsanepidnadzor], more than one third of water pipelines 
periodically or continuously provide drinking water with an 
increased iron content, whose concentration in a number of cases 
is 5-10 times the permitted hygienic level. Apart from its 
unacceptability from the point of view of public and domestic 
sanitation, using such water constitutes a health hazard due to 
the increased risk of people contracting allergenic illnesses 
and conditions. 
  About five percent of the population consume mineral-rich 
drinking water from artesian wells which is harder than average 
and containing various salts (chlorides and sulfates), which is 
causing an increase in the incidence of illnesses of the 
gastrointestinal tract, kidney stones, renal disease and 
diseases of the cardiovascular system, is encouraging the onset 
of arterial sclerosis and hypertonia, and is having an effect on 
women's reproductive functions. 
  A study of the sickness rate and medical checkups on the 
population in Saratov Oblast, have shown that when waters of the 
type containing hydrocarbonates and possessing increased 
alkalinity are consumed for long periods, they depress the 
stomach's secretory function, encouraging the onset of a 
prehypertonic state in people and increasing the incidence of 
chronic types of hypoacidic gastritis. 
  An increase in the concentration of copper in drinking water 
causes damage to the kidneys' and liver's mucous membranes; 
increased nickel causes damage to the skin; increased zinc 
causes kidney damage; and increased arsenic causes damage to the 
central nervous system. In Lipetsk's drinking water there are 
increased concentrations of nitrates which are capable of 
suppressing the body's hemogenic function. 
  An increase in the number of cases of chronic types of 
nephritis and hepatitis, an increase in still births, toxoses 
during pregnancy, and congenital developmental abnormalties 
among the population of Kemerovo and Yurga are linked to the 
consumption of drinking water polluted with nitrogen-containing 
and organochlorine compounds, and the consumption of water with 
a high boron and bromine content has led to an increased 
incidence of illnesses of the digestive organs in children in 
Shadrinsk, Kurgan Oblast. In the settlement of Malaya Vishera 
(Novgorod Oblast) water containing more than five times the 
permitted level of aluminum has affected the central nervous and 
immune systems in children. 
  Insufficient intake of fluorine into the organism makes 
dental enamel more prone to dissolve causing damage to the teeth 
through caries. At present, owing to the low fluorine content 
in drinking water, about 60 percent of the Russian Federation's 
population is not receiving sufficient quantities of this 
microelement. In connection with this, the number of people 
suffering from caries remains at a high level and is showing no 
signs of falling. On the other hand, a high fluorine level in 
the water causes people to contract fluorosis, polyneuritis, 
osteosclerotic changes in the bones, and arterial hypertonia. 
  It has been established that a heightened manganese content 
results in the development of anemia and disrupts the 
functioning of the central nervous system; a low level of 
manganese leads to a reduction in growth rate and a breakdown of 
lipid metabolism. A heightened level of strontium causes the 
demineralization of bones, retards the closure of infants' 
fontanels, and causes "strontium" rickets. Heightened levels of 
cadmium in drinking water result in the development of Itay-Itay 
[name as transliterated] disease, malignant tumors, higher 
levels of still births, bone damage, kidney damage, congenital 
disorders, and pregnancy and labor complications. 
  Assessing the quality of groundwater as a whole, it can be 
noted that pollution is local (point-source) in nature and, in 
the majority of cases, is restricted to the parameters of the 
pollution source. It is usually the inadequately protected 
aquifers immediately beneath the surface that are polluted. 
Major centralized water intakes that generally use artesian 
aquifers supply good-quality water to the population; pollution 
is recorded in very rare cases and is connected with 
unsatisfactory water protection activity -- including 
poor-quality water intake borehole design. 
  As has been said, negative changes in the state of 
groundwater are brought about by man-made factors and often have 
critical environmental consequences. Modern warnings about such 
phenomena are possible if the laws of the flow of natural 
processes are taken into account, and if norms are laid down for 
economic activity in the utilization of natural resources. 
Obtaining the necessary information to resolve these tasks has 
required the creation of a standing service to regularly study 
the dynamics and to assess and predict the state of groundwater 
-- in other words, a service to monitor groundwater as one of 
the most important components in the monitoring of the 
geological environment and of the environment as a whole. The 
service's tasks include the functions of informing the organs 
administering the subsoil resources fund and the utilization of 
nature as a whole, as well as the population, about the state of 
groundwater, along with the functions of issuing recommendations 
to prevent or reduce and overcome negative consequences and 
economic damage which could be brought about by any particular 
condition of the groundwaters. 
  Its condition is formed under the influence of groundwater 
[as published], vegetation, atmospheric and climatic factors, 
just as groundwater largely determines the condition of the 
continguous natural environments. This requires systematic 
interdisciplinary exchange of information and the comprehensive 
processing of that data on the basis of the state regulations 
governing information flows (the state military land survey, 
land monitoring, the unified state system of environmental 
monitoring, and so forth). Given these circumstances, and in 
connection with the very important role played by groundwater 
for drinking water supply and in the shaping of other conditions 
for people's vital activity, the monitoring of the geological 
environment and a most important aspect of it -- ground water -- 
should have the status of a state system, and the monitoring 
system should receive reliable state and municipal support. 
  One of the reasons for the unsatisfactory state of drinking 
water supply as a whole and of the utilization and protection of 
groundwater in particular is the lack of the necessary 
legislative base and, as a result, the lack of any payment for 
the utilization of water resources. The Russian Federation 
Water Code and the Russian Federation Law on the Supply of 
Drinking Water to the Population have still not been ratified, 
and a Law on the Protection of Groundwater has not been 
elaborated. 
  An analysis of the state of ground waters permits the 
following assessment of the prospects of their use for domestic 
and drinking water supplies. 
  /The long-term requirement for domestic and drinking water 
supplies can be met in full (by more than 90 percent) by means 
of ground waters in 62 components of the Federation -- Bashkiria 
[Bashkortostan], Buryatia, Mordvinia, Chuvashia, Altay Kray, 
Krasnoyarsk Kray, and Amur, Bryansk, Vladimir, Voronezh, Pskov, 
Ryazan, and other oblasts/; be partially met (by 25-90 percent) 
in 15 components of the Federation -- Dagestan, Udmurtia, 
Stavropol Kray, Khabarovsk Kray, and Volgograd, Ivanovo, 
Kemerovo, Kostroma, Chelyabinsk, and other oblasts; and be 
inadequately met in six components of the Federation -- 
Kalmykia, Karelia, and Astrakhan, Kurgan, Murmansk, and 
Yaroslavl Oblasts. 
  As already pointed out, large cities are characterized by 
the 
most complex conditions for providing the population with fresh 
ground waters. From this aspect all cities with a population in 
excess of 250,000 may be divided into four groups. 
  The first includes cities provided with explored reserves of 
ground waters, some of which relate to aquifers reliably 
protected against pollution. This group includes both cities 
whose domestic and drinking water supply is entirely or 
primarily based on surface waters (Arkhangelsk, Ivanovo, Nizhniy 
Novgorod, Kirov, Makhachkala, Vladivostok) and cities whose 
present water supply is provided entirely or to a considerable 
degree by ground waters (Tver, Smolensk, Tambov, Krasnodar, 
Nalchik, Barnaul, and others). 
  The second group can include cities whose requirements are 
also fully met by ground waters, but the currently exploited or 
explored aquifers are insufficiently reliably protected against 
pollution. These are Tolyatti, Saratov, Sochi, Orenburg, Ufa, 
Krasnoyarsk, Angarsk, Bratsk, Ulan-Ude, Khabarovsk, and 
Kaliningrad. The organization of exploratory and prospecting 
work for highly protected aquifers, whose reserves can satisfy 
part of the need, is urgent for the aforesaid points. 
  The next group should include cities which at the present 
time entirely or partly meet the needs for water of drinking 
quality with reliably protected ground waters, but it is 
necessary to carry out exploratory and prospecting work in order 
to meet the long-term need (Bryansk, Vladimir, Kaluga, Orel, 
Belgorod, Ulyanovsk, Groznyy, Magnitogorsk, Kemerovo, Chita, 
Tomsk). 
  Finally, the last, largest group is made up of cities whose 
requirements for water for the domestic and drinking water 
supply can be met partially. These include major cities whose 
present water supply is entirely or almost entirely based on 
surface waters, such as Moscow, St. Petersburg, Yaroslavl, 
Yekaterinburg, Perm, Rostov-na-Donu, Astrakhan, Omsk, 
Novosibirsk, and others, as well as Saransk, Tyumen, and Tula. 
For all the cities belonging to this group, in addition to 
opening up the explored reserves, it is necessary to organize 
exploratory and prospecting work aimed both at ascertaining and 
exploring deposits whose reserves can satisfy a substantial part 
of the need and at ascertaining promising sectors for the 
construction of bottling plants. At the same time exploratory 
and prospecting work must encompass considerable areas. 
  In discussing the situation with regard to ground waters -- 
extremely topical in the context of the requirements and the 
quality of the water which we drink -- the participants in the 
Interdepartmental Commission session pointed out that water 
conservation measures in recent years have been financed at the 
level of 20 percent of what is needed. The Goskomsanepidnadzor 
has drawn up an economic mechanism based on paid water 
consumption, but its introduction is being held up by the 
absence of a legislative base. 
  The service for monitoring the state of ground waters and, 
primarily, their quality, requires substantial development and 
improvement. In connection with a higher degree of protection 
for ground waters against pollution the strategy for providing 
the population with drinking water must be aimed at making all 
possible use of ground waters to improve the reliability of 
domestic and drinking water supply systems. 
  With a view to increasing the volume of groundwater used to 
supply drinking water to the population, protecting it from 
pollution and depletion, and reducing the risk of groundwater 
pollution for the health of the population, the 
Interdepartmental Commission considers it necessary: 
  1. For the Russian Federation Government to be asked to 
elaborate a state program for providing the Russian population 
with quality drinking water that is reliably protected against 
pollution. 
  2. For the Russian Federation Committee for Geology and the 
Use of Natural Resources to carry out work to assess the degree 
of provision of the Russian population with groundwater sources 
that are reliably protected against pollution. 
  3. For the Russian Federation Ministry of Civil Defense, 
Emergencies, and Natural Disasters in conjunction with the 
Russian Federation Committee for Geology and the Use of Natural 
Resources to assess the degree of provision of drinking waters 
for public water supply systems during emergency situations, and 
to elaborate a plan of measures to organize supplies of drinking 
water during such periods. 
  4. For the Russian Federation Committees for Water Resources 
and Geology and the Use of Natural Resources to take an 
inventory of utilized and unutilized groundwater deposits and of 
water intakes operating on unproved reserves, and to assess the 
possibility of developing explored but unutilized deposits. 
  5. For the Russian Federation State Committee for Sanitary 
and Epidemiological Supervision to conduct work to assess the 
arrangements for economic activity in zones subject to sanitary 
controls for existing groundwater intakes and to submit 
proposals to executive organs for improving the protection of 
groundwaters against pollution. 
  6. For a recommendation to be given to executive organs 
within Federation components to carry out the necessary 
exploratory and prospecting work for groundwaters in order to 
enhance the reliability of domestic and drinking water supply 
systems. 
  7. For the Russian Federation Committee for Geology and the 
Use of Natural Resources to draw up proposals for the Russian 
Federation Government to develop a system for monitoring 
groundwaters with a view to monitoring its condition as a source 
for the domestic and drinking water supply. 
  8. For the State Duma to be asked to expedite the 
examination and ratification of the Russian Federation Water 
Code and the Russian Federation Law on the Supply of Drinking 
Water to the Population, and to elaborate a Russian Federation 
Law "On the Protection of Groundwater." 
  9. For the Russian Federation Committees for Water Resources 
and for Geology and the Use of Natural Resources to elaborate 
normative documents for payments for the right to use water 
facilities. 

