Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of interview with President Husni Mubarak by an </F>
unidentified AL-QABAS reporter on 7 March; place not 
given--opening paragraphs are MENA introduction] 
  [Text] Kuwait, 6 Mar (MENA)--President Husni Mubarak has 
stressd the importance of finding a way to guarantee the 
security of Palestinians in the occupied territories. He 
expressed his deep regret and sadness over the Hebron Mosque 
massacre of Palestinians at prayer. He stressed the importance 
of continuing the peace process and denying extremists the 
opportunity to destroy the negotiations. In a comprehensive 
interview with Kuwait's AL-QABAS' Monday edition, President 
Mubarak said that Egypt has consistently supported the 
Palestinians, noting that it backs the Palestinian request to 
disarm the settlers. 
  President Mubarak pointed out that Egypt's view of the 
area's 
future in light of the plans being proposed, such as the "Middle 
Eastern Market," is that there is a need for cooperation among 
all the countries of the region. He said that if there is 
cooperation among the region's countries, it would benefit all 
of them; it is unreasonable that one party should benefit from 
such a market. He noted that the world currently is being run 
by mutual interests and not by emotion and that peoples 
currently look for what secures a means of living. He said that 
Arabs need to trust their potential and that they are capable of 
enhancing cooperation with any party through coordination among 
themselves in their common interest. 
  Discussing the negotiations on the Syrian track, President 
Mubarak said that Egypt is always prepared to cooperate with all 
parties to facilitate the negotiating process, noting that the 
Syrian brothers have the capability and potential to negotiate. 
  Regarding the Damascus Declaration, President Mubarak said 
that Egypt's relations with the Gulf countries are excellent 
with or without the declaration. He said that Egypt will stand 
by the Gulf countries if they need help whether the declaration 
exists or not. 
  On relations with Iran, President Mubarak pointed out that 
Egypt is prepared to establish good relations with all countries 
of the world if they are based on good intentions and respect 
for the principle of nonintervention in the domestic affairs of 
others. He reviewed Egypt's efforts before and after the Iraqi 
invasion of Kuwait and its impact on Arab relations. He said 
that Egypt always calls for respecting international legitimacy. 
  Discussing the domestic situation in Egypt, President 
Mubarak 
said that he gives priority to the economic reform program, 
noting that a great deal has been achieved. He noted that the 
terrorist groups are trying to stop the economic reform process 
by striking at the country's stability but that they have not 
and will not succeed. He noted that certain information media 
organizations, notably Western ones, are trying to exaggerate 
the incidents that occur in Egypt. He asserted that the 
security agencies in Egypt are strong and capable of uncovering 
and hunting down perpetrators of terrorist acts and referring 
them to courts. He stressed that no one will escape justice. 
He said that the Egyptian people and their institutions are 
capable of traversing this stage and achieving stability. 
  Following is the text of the interview: 
  [AL-QABAS] It seems to me that we must begin with the 
painful 
Palestinian developments. Where are we heading? How do you 
evaluate Arab reactions to the limited Israeli measures after 
the Hebron killings? What effect will moving the 
Palestinian-Israeli talks to Washington have? 
  [Mubarak] I would like to say that the incident was really 
sad, a shock beyond belief. It is true that there are 
extremists all over the world, but I believe Israel can control 
this kind of extremism. What is worse, the incident took place 
in the al-Ibrahimi Mosque during prayers and in the holy month 
of Ramadan. This act, therefore, is unimaginable. But 
extremists can do any thing because they have no principles or 
values. Some say that the killer (Goldstein) could not do it 
individually, and that he had accomplices. I cannot be sure, 
but I hear things here and there. In the final analysis, it is a 
dirty attack that might have been intended to hinder the peace 
process. If we respond by hindering the peace process, both 
sides will lose a great deal. 
  I believe Israel must take strict measures to protect the 
Palestinians. At the same time, I tell the Palestinian people 
that we must carry on with the peace process; we will face many 
obstacles because many groups on both sides do not want the 
peace process to move ahead. 
  [AL-QABAS] Do you believe, Mr. President, that Palestinian 
President Yasir 'Arafat is capable of defending and implementing 
the Cairo Agreement, or is there a need to amend it? If 
amendment is needed, how can it be done? 
  [Mubarak] I believe that there should be no postponement of 
the peace talks. Opportunity comes only once, and it is now 
available. 'Arafat is in a stronger position now and I believe 
that he should not postpone the negotiations, but continue the 
process. Who knows what will happen if he postpones the talks? 
Some Palestinian group may carry out an act of revenge and 
things will move in a vicious circle. Now the Palestinians are 
the victims. If an extremist Palestinian group carries out some 
operation, the position of the Israelis will grow stronger. 
And, because they have a more powerful media and other 
capabilities, we will lose. This is my personal opinion. 
  [AL-QABAS] So, what should Israel do to put things back on 
the right course? 
  [Mubarak] I do not want to go into the details of what 
Israel 
needs to do. I am talking in general. First, strict measures 
must be taken against those who contributed to the attack. 
Second, we must find a way to protect the Palestinians from the 
attacks that may be perpetrated by extremist groups while the 
peace negotiations are in progress. 
  [AL-QABAS] The Egyptian position is clear, Mr. President. 
You are demanding that the Israeli settlers be disarmed. 
  [Mubarak] This is a Palestinian demand, and we support it 
and 
demand other measures. What is important is to secure the 
Palestinians and the peace process. If things are left 
uncontrolled, then attacks and counterattacks will take place 
daily; we will enter a vicious circle and we will not reach a 
solution. Now we have a chance for a peace process, and no one 
knows what will happen later. 
  [AL-QABAS] Mr. President, are you still trying to facilitate 
the negotiations on the Syrian track? How far ahead did the 
Geneva summit between Presidents al-Asad and Clinton push things? 
  [Mubarak] Our brothers in Syria have the capability for 
negotiations. When we are asked to facilitate things or bring 
viewpoints closer, we do not hesitate. But we do not impose 
ourselves on anyone: the Syrians, the Palestinians, or any other 
party. Anyone asking for our help tells us exactly what he 
wants and we do not hesitate. But we do not act automatically. 
We discuss the request, assess the possibilities, and then try 
to help through contacts with either Israel or the United States. 
  [AL-QABAS] Mr. President, how does Egypt see the region's 
future in light of plans that are being proposed, such as the 
Middle Eastern market? What is your stance on this particular 
plan? 
  [Mubarak] The Middle Eastern market was an idea proposed by 
someone. It does not mean that we should concentrate on it and 
put everything else aside. They have been talking about a 
Middle Eastern market since 1983. I believe that it was Israeli 
Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres who proposed it in 1982 or 1983. 
He has some specific ideas, but should we deal with them before 
the peace process? I do not think so. 
  [AL-QABAS] This Middle Eastern market initiative came from 
them. Why is our role as Arabs always limited to receiving 
initiatives? Why don't we came out with initiatives? 
  [Mubarak] Let me tell you that we do not receive 
initiatives. 
Egypt was the first country to take the peace process 
initiative. How then can it be said that Egypt is at the 
receiving end of initiatives? We surprise the world with our 
initiatives. France and Germany were very bitter enemies, but 
when the issue concerns peoples and public interest, then I 
cooperate with anyone whoever he is, even if he is a genie. We 
take the people and economic interests into account. Everyone 
wants what is best for his people. If I believe that I have an 
interest in such type of cooperation, then I will not hesitate. 
Take the countries that had bitter enmity between them and you 
see that there is cooperation between them now. I do not say 
that there are friendly relations between Germany and France but 
mutual economic interests. 
  If I have to cooperate strategically with Israel or anyone 
else, then it is because I have an interest. Of course, they 
too have interests. We, the Arabs, have interests too. The 
world is motivated by mutual interests and not by emotions. 
People are now looking for whatever ensures their livelihood 
and we want to raise our peoples' standards of living. If there 
is cooperation, it means that the benefit has to be mutual. It 
is not reasonable to have one side only benefiting and not the 
other. Let us see, for example, what was said about Egypt when 
it established relations with Israel. It was said that Israel 
would swallow Egypt economically. Has this happened? Almost 13 
years have passed since then, but has Egypt been drowned "as 
some are claiming" by Israeli goods? They are the ones buying 
from us. 
  Why are we, the Arabs, trying to belittle our capabilities? 
We must be confident that we are capable of cooperating with 
any party as long as we are coordinating together, taking care 
of our interests, and operating within the framework of common 
interests. 
  [AL-QABAS] Mr. President, there is the problem of relations 
with Iran and Turkey. Do you believe that they can be brought 
together with the Arabs in a regional framework, especially as 
these two countries have common interests, civilizations, and 
history with the Arab world? 
  [Mubarak] The Arab world is bound by many ties based on 
language, culture, and religion. This does not mean that I am 
excluding Turkey or anyone else. We have very good relations 
with Turkey in particular. The Arab countries have good 
relations with Turkey. If you are talking about a regional 
framework, I do not want to talk about alliances now. It is 
still too early to talk about alliances. 
  As for Iran, our relations with it in the past were good. 
I made numerous attempts to cooperate with Iran, but it says 
one thing and does the opposite. The last time Iranian 
officials contacted us, "some time ago," they talked about 
reopening offices and a consulate. I needed some time to think 
before I could agree. They had a charge d'affairs here, who did 
certain things, made contacts, travelled around the country, and 
spent money; despite this, I agreed after long consideration. 
They then said that it was time to exchange ambassadors. I was 
cautious about this for a long time and after approximately a 
year and a half I said that I agreed in principle. They asked 
that we name the ambassador. The next day, I heard about a 
problem in Iran between certain extremists and 'Ali Akbar 
Velayati. They asked him if he was going to open an embassy in 
Egypt. He said no and that he was only opening a cultural 
office. I told them thank you but we do not need a cultural 
office. This shows that they have domestic differences. 
  I am prepared for cooperation with Iran if its intentions 
are 
good and if there is a respect for the principle of 
nonintervention in domestic affairs. For our part, we do not 
interfere in Iran's domestic affairs. Should Iran try to 
interfere in our domestic affairs, we will reject this. It is 
easy for Iranian officials to say that we interfere in Iran's 
domestic affairs, but we do not do that because it is 
inconsistent with our values. 
  If any country imagines that it can play in our country, we 
can do the same because it is not difficult. However, our 
principle is not to interfere in the domestic affairs of others. 
I will not change this principle. If anyone makes a mistake, I 
will warn him but I will not interfere in domestic affairs. 
Recruiting people inside other countries is not difficult and 
the cost is not that high. How much would be spent on 
recruiting? They are mistaken if they believe that we are not 
doing this for economic reasons. This is an erroneous belief 
because all countries have economic problems. All countries are 
suffering from economic problems, but our principle is not 
spending but adherence to values. 
  [AL-QABAS] Mr. President, this topic prompts us to ask a 
question about what certain people call the problem of Egypt's 
role in the region, or, rather, they cite as an indication of 
the crisis the fate of the Damascus Declaration. 
  [Mubarak] To begin with, the Egyptian role is not in a 
crisis: Our relations with the Gulf countries are excellent with 
or without the Damascus Declaration. We will support any Gulf 
country that requests help or assistance in any field, including 
the military one. If any Gulf country requests help, is it 
conceivable that Egypt would refuse? We are signatory to "the 
Joint Arab Defense and Economic Cooperation Agreement." The 
first part was not implemented but we will not lag in defending 
our Arab brothers. The Damascus Declaration changed nothing. 
  [AL-QABAS] This talk leads us to broach inter-Arab relations 
and Iraq's future. Do you think that Saddam Husayn's regime can 
comply with all UN resolutions? 
  [Mubarak] I had hoped that the Saddam Husayn regime had not 
done what it did in August 1990. I had not imagined that he 
would do what he did, particularly because in the first Arab 
summit that I attended in Rabat, Saddam Husayn spoke in his 
capacity as the guardian of the eastern gate of the Arab nation. 
He assailed Syria for having forces in Lebanon and told the 
Arabs that if Iraq attacks any Arab country, let all Arab armies 
fight against Iraq. 
  Whoever thought that someone who saying this would invade a 
country to destroy it and try to kill its rulers. Who knows 
whether he would have stopped there or gone further. In his 
message to Iran, Saddam Husayn said: There are 800 kms of 
maritime border between me and you. This meant that the United 
Arab Emirates was included. 
  Then it became clear that he had a huge nuclear force and 
apparently was in need of the oil money to develop it and become 
the third power in the world. The invasion took place. I was 
shocked and could not believe it. I thought that he would stop 
at the disputed area and the issue would be over, but he had 
expansionist ambitions and was planning for them. 
  I was with him one week earlier and he promised me that 
nothing would happen. He told me: I will not take any action 
against Kuwait. He and others denied that this ever happened, 
but it was clear, in black and white. Saddam Husayn denied that 
this happened and said that he had witnesses. Who are they? The 
two delegations, Egyptian and Iraqi, were on the lower floor and 
Saddam and I were on the upper floor, and they did not attend 
the meeting we held. 
  [AL-QABAS] The Arab reader must know these details about 
what 
went on when you sat alone with Saddam. 
  [Mubarak] When I found out that the threats were continuing 
and the foreign media was talking about troops massing, I said 
it is better to hasten before a mistake is committed since 
prevention is better than a cure. I rose at 0600, 0700 due to 
the time difference, and arrived in Baghdad at 1000. I rode 
with Saddam in his car. I was accompanied by the foreign and 
information ministers. We went to a palace that overlooked a 
lake and went to a hall where we sat alone. I asked him: Do 
you intend to commit aggression against Kuwait? He said: No. 
But don't tell them. I said: There is a big clamor. Do you 
have forces close to them as the news agencies are reporting? 
He said: No, only the usual forces are present. After a long 
discussion we agreed on finding a solution at a meeting to be 
held between an Iraqi delegation and a Kuwaiti one and that the 
first meeting would be held in Jeddah. I did not propose Cairo 
but Jeddah with King Fahd. Saddam at first refused. I told him 
that this was better than having them come to meet with you in 
Baghdad, after all that you have done and where they would feel 
powerless, or you going to Kuwait. Both of you, Iraqi and 
Kuwaiti leaders, come to a third country and prepare the 
atmosphere at the first meeting for later. Then you will meet 
one time here and one time in Kuwait. Those were my exact 
words. After a long discussion, he agreed on holding the first 
meeting in Jeddah. I still had not informed King Fahd. 
  At the end of our closed meeting, we went together to the 
lower floor where we had lunch with the delegations' members. 
The issue of Kuwait was not broached at all at the table. He 
kept talking about the hall and other general issues. The 
meeting ended at this point. 
  Before I traveled to Kuwait, Tariq 'Aziz made a statement in 
which he said that the meeting between Presidents Mubarak and 
Saddam did not concern the Kuwaiti question but bilateral 
relations. 
  I read the statement on the plane and asked: Is this 
statement necessary? When I landed, the Kuwaiti brothers asked 
me. I said that the matter might be designed to pressure you. 
I told the amir: Give them some money and silence them. I left 
the amir after he promised that he would answer me on the 
question of the meeting. The next day I went to Saudi Arabia, 
where I met with King Fahd and told him that I had proposed the 
meetings. He said: Brother, whatever you want. The second day 
they told me that the meeting would be one of protocol. Saddam 
was saying that it was a protocol meeting. He spoke to me about 
a meeting, but then he invaded Kuwait. Then why did you agree 
with me on a meeting in Jeddah, then in Kuwait, and then in 
Baghdad? Are you deceiving me? The lack of frankness and 
deception of people causes dismay and exasperation. 
  [AL-QABAS] As for us the Kuwaitis, is there anything new 
regarding Kuwaiti prisoners in Iraq? I am not asking as a 
reporter, but as a man who is related to some of the captives. 
  [Mubarak] We have tried in many ways, and we are still 
trying, despite Iraq's denial that it has any Kuwaiti captives. 
  [AL-QABAS] Can we say that Egyptian-Gulf relations are cool, 
or that there is a retreat in bilateral contacts in general? 
  [Mubarak] Who said so? I had a telephone conversation with 
Shaykh 'Isa (the amir of Bahrain) yesterday, King Fahd 
telephoned me a week ago, and my brother the amir of Kuwait 
spoke with me some time ago, and so did Shaykh Zayid. Qatar's 
foreign minister was here with me; he left and will return on 
Saturday. I do not know why the press is talking about cool 
relations. 
  Our relations with our brothers in the Gulf and in all Arab 
countries are not cool. We are a big country in the region; we 
do not antagonize this one or that one. We support right. 
Although we and Iraq were together in the Arab Cooperation 
Council, we stood against Saddam Husayn when he attacked Kuwait. 
Syria asks us to help its cause, and we do; the Palestinians do 
not stop asking for support. But we must say that we provide 
help and support only when we are asked to. 
  The talks in Cairo are between the Palestinians and the 
Israelis. When we are asked to help, we speak with the Israelis 
and the Americans and we reach understandings. We do not impose 
agreements or things on any party; we only provide our expertise 
and opinion and use our influence in the right place and at the 
right time. 
  [AL-QABAS] After this last question on foreign policy, we 
will move to domestic issues. What is the latest in 
Egyptian-Iranian relations? Why is Iran's role in the regional 
order being neglected? What are the conditions for Iran's 
participation in this order and the protection of the Gulf? 
  [Mubarak] There is nothing wrong between Egypt and Iran. We 
would have wished not to have our relations with Iran, or indeed 
with any other country, frozen. I am eager for good relations 
with all countries. Iran is a Gulf state; I extended a hand to 
it and am ready to cooperate with it provided that no side 
interferes in the internal affairs of the other. But Iran is 
trying to interfere. 
  I remember that Iran slandered us at one point under the 
slogan of liberating Jerusalem. I tell those who want to 
liberate Jerusalem to go and do it; Jerusalem cannot be 
liberated by abusing us. We do not prevent anyone from 
liberating Jerusalem. But this age no longer accepts mere talk, 
inflammatory rhetoric, and accusations of others. These are 
soon exposed, thanks to the communications revolution the world 
is experiencing. Nothing can be hidden now. Lies soon become 
exposed in two or three days. I like nothing but realism. If I 
can do something, I say I can, if I cannot, I say I cannot, even 
if this does not please others. 
  Regarding Iran's position, I believe that the Arab 
countries, notably the Gulf countries, can defend themselves 
through cooperation. These countries are in no need of Iran or 
any other country. They can coordinate among themselves. They 
have huge financial and material resources that enable them to 
draw up a strong defense plan against any aggression. What 
counts is good intentions and clear vision. They don't need 
Iran or even Egypt. However, being an Arab state and member of 
the Arab League and committed to Arab agreements, Egypt will not 
hesitate to protect the Gulf when asked to do so. Egypt has no 
ambitions on the land or anything else possessed by its 
neighbors. 
  [AL-QABAS] Mr. President, what is the latest development in 
the Lockerbie issue? 
  [Mubarak] The issue is at a standstill. We have done a great 
deal to resolve it, but it seems that it has calmed down for 
some time. 
  [AL-QABAS] Mr. President, we cannot broach the issue of 
Libya 
without mentioning the issue of Mansur al-Kikhya. Is there 
anything new about this humanitarian issue? 
  [Mubarak] Al-Kikhya used to meet with Libyan visitors from 
Libya. He would go out with them on his own and travel with 
them to Alexandria alone. At the Ambassador Hotel, where he was 
staying, he would go out with various individuals. Also, Ahmad 
Qadhdhaf al-Damm visited him. Numerous possibilities are 
conceivable. There is a possibility that they have taken him 
somewhere. They might have travelled by any passport or by a 
Libyan passport because he used to deal and travel with them. 
He is likely to have left with them in a vehicle across the 
border. Vehicles belonging to the consulate leave Egypt for 
Libya daily. For your information, the Libyan-Egyptian borders 
are open and Libyans come and go without passports but with 
identity cards. 
  If al-Kikhya himself goes out with them alone and they come 
to him from Libya daily and go out at night, what can we do? If 
he was afraid, why would he go out with them for dinners at 
night? They once accompanied him in a vehicle to Alexandria. 
There is a quarter in Alexandria called the Hayy al-Magharibah 
where thousands of Libyans live. Can the Egyptian security 
agencies watch everything? Summing up, no one can tell for sure 
where and how al-Kikhya disappeared. We asked the Libyan 
officials but they denied their connection with his 
disappearance. You know that there are opposition Libyan 
figures living in Egypt such as al-Huni, former Prime Minister 
al-Bakkush, and others. There are other Libyan opponents whom 
no one can harm because we know them and know their residences 
and where they go. As for al-Kikhya, we were surprised by his 
arrival without notice or request to protect him and we were 
surprised by his disappearance. We have an agreement with the 
Libyans to respect political refugees. They have not assaulted 
anyone. Al-Kikhya arrived here in transit and he used to go out 
here and there. 
  [AL-QABAS] If we move to the issue of the internal 
situation in Egypt, the agenda of your third term in office is 
crowded with the issue of completing the economic reform, 
promoting the national dialogue, confronting terrorism, and 
continuing development. Can the priorities be listed, and what 
has been achieved? 
  [Mubarak] Economic reform and development are continuing. 
All that you mentioned is continuing. The development of the 
infrastructure utilities is continuing. All our efforts are now 
focused on achieving stability because there can be no 
development, life, or production without stability and no safety 
for capital without stability. Some media organizations, 
especially Western ones, are exaggerating. Even if a person 
throws an aerosol can, it is exaggerated. I do not believe that 
governments are the source of this exaggeration but the press. 
Anyhow, we are persisting and continuing our course. 
  One of the groups that committed a terrorist act in front of 
one of the banks in al-Jizah Square said they did it to revenge 
"those who died in the al-Ibrahimi Mosque." The majority of 
these people are not Muslims or anything else. 
  This is an insult to Islam. Islam has nothing to do with 
these actions. This is proof that they are far removed from 
Islam. They are a gang of criminals who get paid from abroad 
and have been sentenced since the days of President al-Sadat. 
They get paid from abroad and from others in the region and I 
know this. 
  [AL-QABAS] But they are having an effect. They have reached 
the information minister, the prime minister, and almost reached 
you, Mr. President, in the rest house. 
  [Mubarak] I do not have a rest house there. They are 
confused. They plant something with the aim of hitting just any 
person. All their attempts had failed and God willed that those 
perpetrators be exposed so that they can be tried. Egypt's 
security organs are strong and capable of chasing and exposing 
all these criminals. Sooner or later, they are apprehended after 
every crime they commit and no one escapes justice. 
  [AL-QABAS] What have you done then to confront them? Have 
you started a dialogue with them? 
  [Mubarak] We are not opposed to a dialogue. We have spent 11 
years in a dialogue with them since the death of al-Sadat. The 
dialogue gave them the opportunity to establish themselves. But 
we rejected this when they started to use weapons. Our police 
are loath to use weapons against citizens regardless of their 
crimes but they started to shoot after becoming the target of 
perfidy. Think of it: a policeman began to shoot when the issue 
became a matter of life or death for him or the terrorist. The 
police have been forced to defend themselves. But, by God's 
will, they will not be shaken by this. 
  I, with all the Egyptians, am capable of getting through 
this 
stage and achieving stability. We have full control. A look at 
history shows us that they were the ones that killed al-Naqrashi 
Pasha [prime minister under King Faruq] and tried to kill Jamal 
'Abd-al-Nasir. We in Egypt have an accumulated experience of 
confronting these criminal attempts and must expect them. But 
this is not limited to Egypt alone. Someone tried to 
assassinate U.S. President Clinton and another England's Crown 
Prince Charles. There was also an attempt to assassinate 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani. Not a single European country has escaped 
terrorism. 
  The president expressed surprise that some European 
countries 
have accepted some terrorists and granted them political asylum, 
even though they have been sentenced to death. He said: I warn 
these countries that they will pay the price sooner or later at 
the hands of these people. 
  [AL-QABAS] Such as 'Umar 'Abd-al-Rahman in the United 
States? 
  [Mubarak] I do not want to talk about the United States 
because this caused trouble for us there. The Americans 
believed I had known the terrorists would do something at the 
World Trade Center, but I was only giving general warnings 
before the incident. Be careful, the terrorist groups will play 
in your country, I would warn. Then, after the attack against 
the center, they asked if we had prior information. The fact is 
that we did not have prior information, but our warnings were 
based on our knowledge of those groups and their methods. Those 
who receive these terrorists, these fugitives, will deeply 
regret it. 
  [AL-QABAS] Mr. President, each phenomenon has its positive 
as well as its negative sides. What did Egypt lose in its war 
against terrorism and what did it gain? 
  [Mubarak] The main negative point was the impact on tourism 
in Luxor and Aswan, although tourism in Luxor is better now. 
But we won over the people; they are against any terrorist, and 
they are active in arresting them. We won the public's 
solidarity, and this is our biggest strength. We lost some 
revenue from tourism but we gained in the fact that the people 
discovered that this terrorism is removed from Islam. They 
claimed they were working for Islam, but they are only a group 
of hired people. One of them received 44,000 pounds to 
assassinate the prime minister. 
  [AL-QABAS] Where did the money come from? 
  [Mubarak] It does not come directly from the source; it 
moves 
from one place to another and finally comes from Afghanistan. 
It is most likely that your Iranian neighbors are the ones who 
pay 44,000 pounds. Instead of distributing the sum among his 
team, this person bought a private car for 26,000 pounds and 
gave 10,000 as a down payment for an apartment. He is a plumber 
who worked and made money, but he was tempted by 44,000 pounds 
coming in one installment without effort. He paid 5,000 pounds 
as marriage expenses. So he spent 41,000 pounds altogether. He 
then put 2,000 pounds in his pocket and distributed the rest 
among the others. He was arrested the next day after he bought 
the car. Regrettably, this is an Egyptian who does not 
appreciate what he is doing. He gets a little money, but he 
does not appreciate how this affects the country. 
  [AL-QABAS] According to some press reports, the Egyptian 
Government has accused some quarters in the Gulf of financing 
terrorist operations. Is this true? 
  [Mubarak] Some time ago, there were some nongovernmental 
societies that helped and paid, but mostly with good intentions. 
Thy imagined they were donating for charity or for building 
mosques; they did not know where the money went and how it was 
used. I spoke with the governments in the Gulf. They were not 
paying attention to this, but now they are taking it into 
consideration. 
  [AL-QABAS] What, then, is the possibility of cooperation 
with the moderate Islamic trend, specifically the Muslim 
Brotherhood? 
  [Mubarak] The Muslim Brotherhood is an illegal society; 
there 
is nothing called Muslims and Muslim brothers. We are all 
Muslims. Egypt's Constitution does not allow the formation of 
parties on a religious basis, as this would mean dividing 
Muslims. If you are not convinced of their ideas, and if you do 
not join them, they accuse you of blasphemy. The Muslim 
Brotherhood is a political society. If I approve an Islamic 
party, I will have to approve a second Islamic party, and a 
third, perhaps a Christian party, and then a Jewish party may 
emerge, and then a secular one. The Islamic parties are 
attacking each other. Do you think they have good relations 
among each other? We have many examples to the contrary. This 
will turn the county into a bloody theater. Religion is for God 
and the homeland is for all. All Muslims are equal; no Muslim 
is better than the other unless he is more pious and closer to 
God. Classifying people into Muslim brothers, non-Muslim 
brothers, and infidels means dividing society. 
  [AL-QABAS] Mr. President, my last question is: How long will 
the post of vice president remain vacant? 
  [Mubarak] I would like to say a very important thing: The 
Egyptian Constitution determines how power is transferred. If 
something happens to the president of the republic, the People's 
Assembly speaker takes over, which is what happened after the 
death of al-Sadat. If the People's Assembly is nonexistent for 
any reason, the president of the Higher Constitutional Court 
takes over as an interim president until the nomination of a new 
president is completed. The Constitution does not state that I 
must appoint a vice president, but allows the president to 
appoint a deputy or deputies, and also allows him to appoint 
assistants. I have noticed that the presence of a deputy or 
deputies in the past caused struggles and produced cliques, 
which divided the country. I do not want this. I am building 
the country and I have no time for such things. But I will 
appoint a deputy at the right time, although this is not easy. 
Consider how many times Jamal 'Abd-al-Nasir appointed deputies 
and later dismissed them. I received a letter from a person 
telling me not to appoint a deputy so that the presidency will 
not be inherited; I laughed. 
  [AL-QABAS] Shall we take it that you will not appoint a 
deputy in the near future? 
  [Mubarak] Not in the near future, but the time will come 
when 
I appoint one. There were rumors some time ago that I would 
appoint this person or that person, but I must chose a fully 
qualified person with integrity who may run for president later. 
But he may run and fail because the People's Assembly may not 
nominate him. 
  My selection of a deputy must be accurate. I do not want to 
appoint one and change him after some time. The vice president, 
moreover, does not have specific powers. Anyway, the Egyptian 
Constitution specifies how power is transferred, but the time 
will come when I appoint a deputy. When? I will not say. 

