BFN 

  [Text] At a regular news conference on 16 May, Okinawa 
Governor Masahide Ota referred to his planned visit to the 
United States, which starts from 9 June. He said: "The 
prefectural government is currently trying to get appointments 
for meetings with chairmen of the Armed Services Committees of 
both houses in the U.S. Congress. These meetings will be the 
highlights of my visit to the United States." His remark 
indicates that although he presented petition for the solution 
of Okinawa's bases issue mainly to the U.S. Government during 
his past visits, he would change this. 
  Asked about the results of his past visits to the United 
States, Ota said: "The number of Americans who understand 
Okinawa's bases issue has increased after we put a notice about 
Okinawa in U.S. papers and after we invited influential 
congressmen to Okinawa. At home, the Foreign Ministry and the 
Defense Agency have made official comments on the issue." In 
this way, he noted that the situation surrounding the bases 
issue is improving. 
  Ota has decided to make direct petition to the Armed 
Services 
Committees because he values highly the influencing power of the 
two committees, which have the right to decide on U.S. defense 
budget. At the news conference, Ota stressed differences between 
the upcoming visit and the previous ones. He said: "I would 
like to meet the chairmen of the committees and gain their 
understanding." 
  Meanwhile, concerning a proposal made by Okinawa Development 
Agency Director General Moriyoshi Sato to construct an 
international airport on Okinawa, Ota expressed the hope the 
proposal would be carried out. He said: "There is a plan to 
expand Naha airport over the coast. So, his proposal is 
fantastic." 
  Ota welcomed Sato's proposal, saying: "The Transport 
Ministry is reluctant about expanding Naha airport, claiming the 
airport has enough room. But Mr. Sato is serious about his 
proposal and is raring to carry it out." Ota intends to study 
measures to construct an international airport from various 
angles, including expanding Naha airport over the coast. 

