Language: <F P=105> Bulgarian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Plamen Enchev commentary: "How To Exploit the Embargo"] </F>
  [Text] As was recently announced, an entire train loaded 
with oil barrels is supposed to have crossed the border with 
Serbia undisturbed. Yesterday, a company tried to export 
ammonium nitrate by declaring it as a detergent. Chemical 
experts, however, claim that the substance can be used as a raw 
material for making gunpowder. 
  The idea of the embargo against Serbia and Montenegro was 
conceived by the UN for the purpose of subjecting the remaining 
part of Yugoslavia to economic sanctions because of the war it 
is waging in Bosnia. 
  Only future historians can assess whether this is an 
appropriate action. The UN member countries, however, are 
obliged to observe the embargo as long as it is in force. 
Special organs in charge of supervising the observance of the 
Yugo-sanctions were established. 
  All these reflections lead to the legitimate question of how 
the different countries are observing the embargo. Has anyone 
heard from the Western mass media or read in their newspapers 
about Romania, Hungary, or Greece, for example, violating the UN 
sanction measures? No. However, the opposite is true in the 
case of our country. World-reknowned papers, magazines, and 
news agencies are openly declaring that something is happening 
at the Kalotina border checkpoint. 
  The other day REUTER filed a rather scary correspondent's 
report from Sofia about threats to which the international teams 
in charge of supervising the observance of the sanctions by our 
country are allegedly subject. One of the observers even 
disclosed that, until recently, as many as 80 vans per day 
exported gasoline to Serbia without being disturbed by Bulgarian 
customs officials. 
  We officially declare to the world that our country is 
strictly observing the UN sanctions. Other neighbor countries 
of former Yugoslavia are claiming the same. 
  The truth is hardly likely to transpire in the near future. 
Some people are estimating its value in human lives, rather 
than in banknotes. 
  The question is whether anyone in our country is ready to 
declare that whoever violates the embargo shall be held 
responsible. In the opposite case, someone might think that 
busting the embargo is our state policy, which would not be so 
bad, if it was true. Nevertheless, we have some doubts about it. 

