BFN 

<F P=106> [Reported by JORDAN TIMES staff reporter Ayman al-Safadi] </F>
  [Text] Amman--The Lower House of Parliament Monday 
condemned "possible attempts by foreign groups" to fuel the 
civil war in Yemen in what was seen as an indirect reference to 
some Gulf countries that have been allegedly supplying arms and 
money to the parties to the conflict. 
  Urging Yemenis to exert all possible efforts to solve their 
conflict through dialogue, the House called on the Yemeni people 
to "give up arms and violence" in order to preserve their unity. 
  "The major victim of the war will be the Yemeni unity, which 
is the core of Arab unity," the House said in a statement. 
  Referring to Jordan's hosting of the signing ceremony of the 
Yemeni reconciliation accord in February, the House said its 
concern with the situation in Yemen stems from its belief in the 
necessity of maintaining all that is positive in the Arab World. 
  The conflict between the formerly north and south Yemens 
exploded into full fledged civil war last Thursday when troops 
loyal to Yemeni President 'Ali 'Abdullah Salih and Yemeni Vice 
President 'Ali Salim al-Bid attacked each other near the former 
border of the two Yemens. 
  The situation continued to deteriorate since then and the 
United Nations evacuated most of its non-essential staff from 
the Arab peninsula state. 
  Diplomats were Saturday quoted as saying that President 
Salih's troops have tightened the noose around Aden, the former 
capital of South Yemen, and were poised to break through the 
gates of the city. 
  President Salih seems determined to settle the conflict with 
his southern foes militarily amidst calls from Aden that it is 
willing to accept foreign mediation. 
  Mr. al-Bid on Sunday reportedly contacted His Majesty King 
Husayn saying he was ready for dialogue with President Salih. 
The King brought the two Yemeni leaders to Amman to sign the 
reconciliation accord in February, but said last month that 
Jordan was leaving a military commission charged with separating 
northern and southern Yemeni troops. 
  Indications that the civil war was instigated and supported 
by foreign countries also came from the Jordan Press Association 
which said the bloody events in Yemen "could open the door (to 
interfere in the conflict) for suspicious foreign sides that 
work against the interests of the (Arab) nation and and its 
aspiration for unity." The association said in a statement that 
the fighting in Yemen poses a threat to Arab national security. 
  AL-DUSTUR daily said in an editorial that the civil war in 
Yemen could be the making of countries that are trying to punish 
Yemen for its stands on regional development, in what was seen 
as a reference to Yemen's opposition to the foreign coalition 
that drove Iraq out of Kuwait in 1991. The paper did not name 
these countries, but the reference was believed to be to some 
Arab Gulf countries. 

