CSO 

<F P=106> [By Arisa Yoshida, Tokyo Economic Division reporter] </F>
  [Text] In March 1994, several leading U.S. banks reached 
agreements with Japanese city banks, long-term credit banks, and 
trust banks to engage in netting services relative to foreign 
currency transactions. The reason why the banks acted in unison 
was that a requirement existed to sign formal agreements before 
the end of the fiscal year ending in March in connection with 
changes in U.S. accounting standards to gain approval of the 
netting services. A planning specialist at a leading U.S. bank 
breathed a sigh of relief as he said, "We finally gained 
approval of an agreement which had been held in abeyance at the 
Ministry of Finance [MOF]." 
  The netting agreements involve the offsetting of debits 
against credits and settlement of remaining balances in the case 
of bankrupt clients. The ability exists to minimize risks 
because of the small settlement amounts. However, if the legal 
basis for the netting agreement is not recognized and the 
receiver executes only those transactions that are beneficial to 
the bankrupt firm, the risk-reduction effects of the system will 
be lost to the bank. 
  Accordingly, establishment of a netting agreement calls for 
the premise that the agreement is recognized as being legal. 
Japanese banks have signed agreements on the basis that they 
have the commitment of the MOF that the agreements are legally 
valid, but U.S. banks embrace a deeply rooted fear over the fact 
that the commitment is not issued in writing. The reason for the 
fear is that U.S. banks have experienced meandering negotiations 
with Japanese banks which involved the taxing experience of 
carefully observing and being influenced by MOF posturing. 
  "A U.S. bank has approached with a proposal to establish a 
netting agreement. Is it permissible to sign the agreement?" was 
the question posed by an attendee from a Japanese bank at a 
seminar on netting conducted in December 1993 by a department 
head of the MOF International Finance Bureau. The department 
head replied, "We have informed the U.S. banking authorities 
that the legality of netting agreements is being studied jointly 
with the Ministry of Justice [MOJ] and we are now awaiting a 
response from U.S. authorities," and the attending bankers 
reached the understanding that "such agreements should not be 
signed." 
  U.S. banks had already signed netting agreements with 
principal European banks, but viewed the situation as signifying 
that agreements with Japanese banks were being held in abeyance. 
Alarmed, U.S. banks appealed through the Federal Reserve Board 
(FRB) and about two weeks later, the MOF announced that "a reply 
has been received from the FRB," and approved agreements with 
Japanese banks. An attorney with a U.S. bank points out that, 
"Banks should be empowered to assess the merits of a private 
agreement on netting, but in the case of Japanese banks, the MOF 
exercises absolute authority." 
  After the New Year, the MOF obtained the interpretation from 
the Ministry of Justice that the netting agreements were legally 
valid and conveyed that interpretation orally. During a 
Federation of Bankers' Associations of Japan seminar in March, 
two department heads in charge of netting gave presentations on 
the legality of the system. Guidance furnished in that format 
was used by Japanese banks in concluding agreements with U.S. 
banks. 
  However, the Japanese situation which lacks legislative 
backing appears fragile in comparison with the U.S. situation in 
which the infrastructure was strengthened through the revision 
of related legislation such as bankruptcy laws. In view of the 
increased emphasis placed on U.S. banks' risks associated with 
off-balance-sheet transactions such as for foreign currency 
futures, U.S. banks strongly desire that the Japanese legal 
system should be strong enough to convince U.S. banking 
authorities. In the case of Britain, which set aside legal 
measures, currency authorities took the initiative in arranging 
for private advisory agencies to issue legal interpretations. 
U.S. banks have advocated the need for the MOF "to document its 
commitment in a way that explains the legal basis for its 
decisions." 
  As far as the MOF is concerned the legal issue concerning 
netting has been resolved and it has no intention of issuing new 
documentation. The International Finance Bureau reasons that "it 
is not in a position to issue bulletins or ordinances concerning 
the bankruptcy law over which it has no jurisdiction." The Bank 
for International Settlements (BIS) provides as a condition for 
recognizing netting as a means of regulating net worth "the 
existence of a legal opinion in writing," but the MOF has 
decided that the requirement has been satisfied. The MOF takes 
the position that it has explained the Japanese legal situation 
in consultations with the BIS and that it has no further 
obligation. 
  The problem is that the MOF is in a position to influence 
the 
decisions of Japanese banks on matters that exceed its actual 
authority. The U.S. argument is that, "as long as the MOF 
restricts the actions of Japanese banks, we would like to see 
the legal basis in documentary form." There's also a problem 
with the attitude of Japanese banks. The reason is that Japanese 
banks rely completely on government authorities and make no 
self-protective efforts relative to legal risks such as securing 
opinions from law offices as done by U.S. banks. 
  Underlying U.S. demands is criticism of "relationships 
between Japanese banks and supervisory authorities which are not 
clearly defined by existing rules and responsibilities." Foreign 
banks are not able to tolerate the arrangement wherein the MOF 
fails to issue documented guidance, but banks decide on the 
merits of transactions based on the posture taken by the MOF, 
which action the MOF expects of banks. Obscure regulations were 
supposed to have been eliminated because of financial scandals, 
but opinion is widespread that much remains to be accomplished, 
and a resolution of demands for financial deregulating actions 
cannot be attained unless both the government and private sector 
reform the Japanese way of doing business. 

