BFN 

  [Text] Guadalajara, 11 Jun (NOTIMEX) -- The explosion of a 
car bomb today at a Guadalajara hotel was, apparently, the work 
of individuals involved in drug trafficking, according to the 
preliminary reports released today by Jalisco State authorities. 
  A car bomb exploded at dawn on Saturday in the capital of 
Jalisco in western Mexico, causing two deaths and injuring five 
people, according to the Office of the State District Attorney 
(PGJE). 
  In a communique, the PGJE explained that the explosion took 
place during a birthday party at the hotel, which was attended 
by "families that may be related to the family of Rafael Caro 
Quintero." 
  Drug traffickers Rafael Caro Quintero and Ernesto Fonseca 
alias "Don Neto" are serving prison sentences for their 
involvement in the 1985 murder of U.S. DEA agent Enrique 
Camarena. 
  According to a document released by the Jalisco authorities, 
cards were found at the tables with the names of the following 
families: the Quintero Echeverria Family, the Perez Quintero 
Family, and the Hernandez Quintero Family. 
  The PGJE said "the 15th Military Zone, Attorney General's 
Office (PGR) and PGJE are conducting a joint investigation." 
Based on the testimony of a witness, the authorities 
established the sequence of events prior to the explosion. 
  According to Arturo Rangel Martinez (who was injured by the 
explosion), at 0200 local time (0800 GMT), he was in the bus 
owned by the music group "The Hurricanes of the North," for 
which he drives. 
  Rangel Martinez testified that he noticed "a parked Ford 
Grand Marquis, which was approached by a young man wearing a 
dark suit." According to the PGJE communique, Rangel Martinez 
said that "approximately five minutes later, while he was 
resting inside the bus, he heard and felt an explosion and saw 
that the vehicle had exploded." 
  According to preliminary reports, the PGJE noted, it was 
possible to determine that "the vehicle that exploded had 
apparently been stolen and bore a superimposed license plate 
because, according to records, the plates belonged to another 
vehicle." The explosion damaged the bus owned by the musicians 
who played at the party, and eight other vehicles. 
  The PGJE bulletin explained that the party, in honor of 
Karine Fernandez Castro who turned 15, was attended by 
approximately 200 guests, most of whom came from the northern 
Sinaloa State, one of the states that has the largest number of 
drug trafficking gangs. 
  The car bomb explosion follows the 7 June attempt by an 
armed 
group -- which subsequently confronted policemen -- to murder 
Leonel Quintero Payan, a relative of Caro Quintero, in 
Guadalajara. 
  There was also an incident on 10 June when drug agents 
prevented five armed individuals from kidnapping Leonel Quintero 
Payan, who had been wounded in the attack and was being treated 
at the Del Carmen hospital in this city. 
  "According to forensic investigations conducted so far on 
the 
bodies found at the site of the explosion, it is presumed that 
they are the bodies of two men" whose identities were not 
disclosed by the authorities. The authorities have also 
disclosed that "of the five people hurt in the explosion, four 
of them suffered only slight injuries." 

