BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Kang Song-san, member of the Political Bureau of </F>
the WPK Central Committee and premier of the DPRK Administration 
Council, at a central report meeting marking DPRK President Kim 
Il- song's birthday held at the 8 February Hall of Culture in 
Pyongyang on 14 April--live] 
  [Text] [applause] Comrades: Today our people are 
significantly commemorating the great leader Comrade Kim 
Il-song's birthday--the greatest national holiday--amid the 
socialist general march we are accelerating overflowing with a 
great pride in firmly defending, protecting and glorifying 
popular mass-centered socialism of our country, which has 
embodied the chuche idea. 
  Marking this day, the entire nation overflows with endless 
emotion and hope, and is filled with the sense of boundless 
admiration of the respected leader Comrade Kim Il-song. 
  Brothers in the South, who are courageously fighting for 
independence, democracy, and national reunification; all 
overseas compatriots; and the revolutionary people of the world; 
are also significantly commemorating the great leader's birthday 
as a great national holiday and as a common revolutionary 
congratulatory event of mankind. 
  The entire course of the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song's 
revolutionary activities has been brilliantly embroidered with 
annals of gigantic struggle and of creation during which he 
dedicated everything to the nation's happiness [haengbok] and 
prosperity and to the people's freedom and happiness [haengbok]. 
[applause] 
  Under the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song's leadership, our 
revolution traversed the victorious road of honor by breaking 
through various trials and difficulties. Even amid a grave 
situation in which the imperialists and reactionaries are more 
viciously waging anti-socialist and anti-Republic maneuvers more 
than ever before, our revolution is vigorously advancing without 
wavering even a slightest degree by demonstrating indomitable 
nature of the chuche revolutionary cause. 
  Comrade Kim Il-song, the great leader of our party and 
people, pioneered our revolution after embarking on the road of 
national liberation at an early date by shouldering the destiny 
of the fatherland. He constantly led our people's cause of 
independence-- the socialist cause--along the single road of 
victory with uncommon wisdom and outstanding leadership. He made 
immortal achievements in the progress of mankind and in the 
development of world revolution. At this significant occasion to 
mark the revolutionary April holiday, the greatest national 
holiday, I extend the greatest honor and warmest congratulations 
to the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song together with ardent 
admiration and unanimous loyalty and the sense of reverence of 
all party members and people. [applause] 
  Comrades, our people victoriously carried out the difficult 
and complex struggle for the nation's sovereignty and prosperity 
under the banner of the chuche idea for a long period of time 
since the Korean revolution was pioneered. The greatest national 
fortune that our people have during the entire course of this 
sacred and valuable struggle is the fact that we are upholding 
the great leader at the van of the revolution. 
  As was illustrated by the course of revolutionary struggle 
of 
the working class and working people for independence, only when 
the popular masses, although they created history and developed 
society, come under the precise leadership of the leader 
[suryong] who organizes and leads their struggle, can they have 
the position and play the role of the independent main force of 
history. 
  Only when the popular masses come under the leadership of 
the 
outstanding leader, can they become the master of their destiny 
and pioneer the independent and creative life. This has been 
clearly proven by our nation's ordeal-filled past and by today's 
brilliant reality. 
  Our people upheld the respected Comrade Kim Il-song--the 
great leader--for the first time in a national history of 
several thousand years and came under the wise leadership of the 
leader. As a result, we could emerge as a glorious people who 
are in charge of the chuche revolutionary cause. We could free 
ourselves from being the most miserable sufferers of a history 
of affliction. Thus, our people came to have the honor of being 
the independent people who are pioneering the victorious road of 
socialism--the valuable revolutionary road. [applause] 
  Because we uphold the outstanding leader [suryong] who has 
great ideas and leadership and the matchless leader [cholseui 
yongdoja] at the van of the fatherland and revolution, our 
people became strong and dignified people who are confidently 
pioneering the victorious road of socialism even amid 
unprecedented worldwide political storm without a slight degree 
of wavering by upholding the chuche revolutionary banner. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song opened a new origin in 
the history of struggle to liberate mankind, and brought about a 
basic turn in our people's destiny in the 20th century, when 
great changes were registered in world politics, while leading 
his life. He is a peerlessly great man and an elder statesman of 
world revolution who made immortal achievements in the socialist 
cause, the cause of independence of mankind. [applause] 
  History of mankind has recorded up to now a great number of 
reputed leaders of the working class. However, there was no such 
a leader as the respected Comrade Kim Il-song who victoriously 
shaped the revolutionary road and illuminated profound, 
diversified and long heroic annals with greatness in leadership, 
with richness in achievements, and with the influence over 
development of time and history. [applause] 
  The respected Comrade Kim Il-song is the great leader of the 
working class and working people who has ideological and 
theoretical wisdom and leadership and unprecedented moral 
character. [applause] 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song created the chuche idea 
which reflected the demand of our era--the era of 
independence--and illuminated the road of Korean revolution. He 
is the great thinker and theoretician who provided the working 
class and working people with invincible and ever-victorious 
weapon for freedom, liberation and socialism. [applause] 
  The people's destiny can be pioneered only under the 
leadership of the correct ideology. The socialist society can 
develop along the correct road of advance without wavering even 
amid the whirlpool of history only when it is led by the 
revolutionary idea which correctly reflects the demand of the 
time and aspirations of the people. 
  The cases in many countries where socialism collapsed in 
recent years seriously illustrate that when the people face an 
ideological crisis without precise guiding ideology, their 
destiny would be cruelly trampled underfoot by traitors of the 
revolution and (?opportunists) and the revolution, which 
victoriously developed through arduous struggle, would fail 
midway, and thus the people cannot avoid painful frustration. 
  Because the immortal chuche idea brightly illuminated the 
road of our advance, our people could attain victory and made 
advance by upholding the banner of independence--the 
revolutionary banner-- without any deviation over a long period 
of time up to present while pioneering difficult and complex 
road of revolution in the outdated colonial semi-feudalistic 
society in Asia. 
  The chuche idea created by the great leader Comrade Kim 
Il-song is the most correct guiding ideology for the revolution 
and construction which reflected the independent aspiration and 
demand of our era and of the working people. [applause] 
  Based on the chuche idea, the great leader Comrade Kim 
Il-song elucidated all theories, strategy and tactics for all 
steps and all domains of revolution to achieve independence of 
the popular masses, and carried to accomplishment the method of 
leadership to lead the cause of independence of the popular 
masses to victory. Thus, he developed the revolutionary idea of 
the working class onto a new higher stage. 
  Comrade Kim Il-song's revolutionary idea, which proceeded 
from and has embodied the principle of the immortal chuche idea, 
is the precious fruition of the great leader's long, profound, 
diversified, unique and encyclopedic ideological and theoretical 
activities. Creation of the chuche idea is the greatest, shining 
achievement made by the respected leader before time and 
mankind. [applause] 
  Today the imperialists and all sorts of the enemies of the 
revolution are clamoring that the collapse of socialism in many 
countries means a victory of capitalism and an end of socialism, 
thus, advertising that the ideology of socialism is wrong. This 
is a complete [word indistinct] of history and realities and is 
nothing but a foolish sophistry designed to block the driving 
force of scientific socialist idea. 
  The course of the Korean revolution which has victoriously 
pioneered the road toward independence, the road toward 
socialism, through its protracted struggle and the 
centuries-long transformation and today's world trend of seeking 
independence vividly prove the universal truthfulness of the 
chuche idea that the idea of socialism is correct and that men 
who are the persons directly in charge of its realization are 
precisely the masters of everything and decide everything. 
  The chuche idea, which sparked early in the dawn of the 
Korean revolution and has fully demonstrated its correctness and 
vitality through the practice of protracted revolutionary 
struggle, has become the basis of the socialist ideology, which 
is most superior in our times and the lifeline of our country's 
ever-victorious and invincible socialism. It has also become the 
immortal beacon and the encouraging banner of the world's 
revolutionary people who love justice and truth and who seek 
independence. [applause] 
  The respected and beloved leader Comrade Kim Il-song is the 
great statesman and the genius of creation and construction who 
has built a powerful country of chuche and an invincible 
fortress of socialism in the Orient of the world by embodying 
the chuche idea with his matchless farsightedness, scientific 
insight, iron-like will, and extraordinary leadership ability 
and by not only fostering our people into a revolutionary people 
who have strong sense of independence, but also leading the 
complicated and arduous Korean revolution to the single road of 
victory on the strength of the inexhaustible might of our 
popular masses. [applause] 
  Already in the early period of his embarkment on the road of 
the revolution, the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song elucidated 
the noble truth that the basic problem in the popular masses' 
struggle for independence is first of all to organizationally 
and ideologically awaken the popular masses, who are the main 
force of the struggle for independence, and, thus, to enhance 
their creative roles. Since then, the great leader has wisely 
led the work of strengthening the main force of our revolution 
and enhancing its role while personally surmounting numerous 
trials and crossing countless deadlines. 
  The anti-Japanese revolutionary struggle organized and led 
by 
the great leader Marshal Kim Il-song was the glorious 
revolutionary struggle which firmly built the main force of our 
revolution; which, on the strength of it, developed the 
anti-Japanese struggle for national liberation of our country 
and the Korean communist movement to a new high stage and 
realized the cause of national liberation; and which, thus, 
provided our party's brilliant revolutionary tradition. In his 
anti-Japanese revolutionary struggle period the great leader 
Marshal Kim Il-song, as the young general of his twenties and as 
the immortal legendary hero, received absolute trust and 
infinite reverence from all of the nation and victoriously led 
the overall Korean revolution which centered on armed struggle. 
As a result he provided the powerful main force of the Korean 
revolution, regained the divested fatherland for our people, 
and, thus, recorded an immortal, new victorious chapter in the 
history of the oppressed people's struggle against colony and 
for national liberation. [applause] 
  That the respected and beloved great Marshal Kim Il-song 
founded the Workers Party of Korea [WPK], the new type of chuche 
party, and has strengthened and developed it into an iron-like 
party is the great historic achievement which has provided a 
guarantee for certain victory in firmly strengthening the main 
force of our revolution and in achieving the final victory in 
the socialist, communist cause in our country. [applause] 
  Even in the complicated and confusing situation right 
after the liberation, the respected and beloved leader Comrade 
Kim Il-song completed the cause of founding our party, which he 
had persistently carried out from the days of the anti-Japanese 
revolutionary struggle, and strengthened and developed our party 
into the powerful staff office [chamobu] of the Korean 
revolution. As a result, our people could possess their own 
tested leading political organization, strongly unite around the 
party, and vigorously advance revolution and construction. 
  The entire course of the struggle which the great leader 
Comrade Kim Il-song waged to found our party and strengthen and 
develop it was a worthwhile course for building a new 
chuche-type party. And, for the first time in the history of 
our country's party building, a [calligraphy] brush was embossed 
in the party's emblem in addition to the hammer and a sickle 
during the days of this honorable struggle. This was a valuable 
experience in building a popular masses-oriented party. 
  We have fully embodied the theory of chuche in party 
building 
and party work under the correct leadership of the great leader 
Comrade Kim Il-song and our party Central Committee. As a 
result, the WPK today fully demonstrates its strength as an 
invincible party that has embued itself with a single idea 
[sasangjok ilsaekhwa], achieved organizational unity, and put 
down deep roots among the popular masses based on one idea, the 
leader's [suryong] revolutionary idea, and as a mature and 
tested party with a bright future that firmly ensures continuity 
in ideology and leadership [sasanggwa yongdoui kyesungsongul 
hwakkohui pojang] and leads the people's cause of independence 
to victory. [applause] 
  Based on the fundamental principle of the chuche idea, the 
great leader Comrade Kim Il-song has attached great importance 
to indoctrinating and reforming the people in a revolutionary 
manner, given top priority to the ideological revolution, and 
made strenuous efforts to arm our people with revolutionary 
ideas and raise them into an invincible combatant rank that has 
achieved harmonious unity [honnyon ilcherul irun] with the 
party. In this way, he has consolidated the rock solid main 
forces of our revolution into a social and political organism 
with a force that no one can break. This is an immortal 
achievement. 
  Today our people have become revolutionary people who have 
strong independence, and such people cannot be found anywhere 
else in the world. This is because they possess a high sense of 
independence and are strongly united around the party under the 
leadership of the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song. 
  The noble ideological and spiritual feature [pungmo] of the 
Korean communists and our people who were raised under the care 
of the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song is that they strongly 
believe their leader [suryong] and their party and devote 
themselves to carrying out the chuche revolutionary cause after 
being strongly united around them [their leader and their 
party]. This is the solid ideological and spiritual basis of 
the single-hearted unity between the party and the popular 
masses in our country. 
  In consolidating the main forces of our revolution's trait 
of 
being as solid as a rock, the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song 
has wisely led the work of responsibly building the party's 
organizational and ideological basis and leadership system for 
responsibly taking care of the people's destinies in both the 
distant future of the fatherland and of the revolution. In this 
way, he has provided a firm guarantee for inheriting and 
completing the revolutionary cause. This was an immortal 
achievement. [applause] 
  The revolutionary cause of establishing independence among 
the popular masses is carried out continuously generation after 
generation. And, we must carry out, in a farsighted manner, the 
work of strengthening the main forces of the revolution in 
compliance with the demand of the revolution's development to 
ultimately complete this historic cause. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song's most brilliant 
foresight lies in the fact that he earlier perceived the 
historic inevitability of victory in the revolutionary cause, 
made complete preparations for such a victory in compliance with 
the demand of our revolution and the earnest desire of our 
people, and strongly built the party's organizational and 
ideological basis and leadership system for brilliantly 
inheriting and completing the chuche revolutionary cause 
generation after generation. 
  Today, in our country the WPK stands firmly at the center of 
the revolutionary ranks. It also is single-heartedly united 
around the popular masses' dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il, who 
has shared the same destiny with the party and overcome all 
trials through the prolonged revolutionary struggle. It also 
loyally upholds the great leader's lofty intention and and fully 
demonstrates its creative power in revolution and construction. 
  The entire party, the entire Army, and all people have 
formed 
powerful main forces that will brilliantly inherit and complete 
the chuche revolutionary cause generation after generation after 
being united around the dear comrade leader based on a 
revolutionary moral obligation, noble comradeship, and a single 
idea and will. This is the noblest achievement that the great 
leader Comrade Kim Il-song has devotedly brought about for our 
party, revolution, and people throughout his life and that will 
be cherished in the hearts of people of all generations. 
[applause] 
  Today, the expression "single-hearted unity of the 
leader, the party, and the masses" can only be applied to our 
country. The single-hearted unity has entered a phase of full 
development in our generation under the leadership of our 
supreme commander General Kim Chong-il through a grand march for 
modelling the whole society after chuche and for implementing 
the programs. [applause] 
  Our people's single-hearted unity centered around the great 
leader and the great party is the source of the might and 
invincibility of our country's socialism and fundamental factor 
for our revolutionary cause to remain unshaken in any storm, 
continue for generations, and become ever-victorious. 
  By independently and creatively solving all problems in 
chuche point of view and in compliance of our country's 
situation during the entire course of his revolutionary 
activities, the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song brilliantly 
carried out anti-imperialist, antifeudal, democratic, and 
socialist revolution, accelerated socialist construction, and 
established chuche-based socialism on this land where 
independence, self-reliance, self-defense are firmly realized, 
thus marked an achievement of the century. [applause] 
  The popular masses-centered socialism of our own style, 
which 
is today deeply rooted in our country gaining absolute support 
and consent of all the people, is the greatest exhibit of our 
revolution established by the respected and beloved Comrade Kim 
Il-song through arduous struggles all his life, and is the 
cradle of our people's life and happiness. [applause] 
  Our country, which in the past had once lost its glory in 
the 
world's map, creatively carried out various democratic plans 
after the liberation, provided an excellent prerequisite for the 
continuous implementation of socialism, stood firm in the 
international stage holding the banner of the DPRK, which is 
proud of the name, built up its own regular revolutionary armed 
force, displayed the honor of the heroic Korea in the world 
after the war by winning great victory in the fatherland 
liberation war against the armed bandit aggression of U.S. 
imperialists, which proudly called themselves the world's 
strongest, consolidated a firm basis of self-reliant national 
economy after the war with the Chollima great advance on the 
ruin where everything was destroyed by the war, and established 
an advanced socialist system. These are brilliant fruitions of 
the respected and beloved Comrade Kim Il-song's firm 
chuche-oriented position and ever-victorious indomitable strong 
will, and extraordinary leadership, and the great victory of the 
party's chuche line. [applause] 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song created the world's 
model of socialism by elucidating all the aspects of the new 
socialist and communist construction theory and method in the 
chuche point of view after the victory of the socialist 
revolution and establishment of the socialist system in our 
country, by wisely leading our party and people to carry them 
out. [applause] 
  Our future is brightly enlightened by the line of the three 
revolutions of ideology, technology, and culture on continuous 
revolution under socialism as elucidated by the great leader 
Comrade Kim Il-song. Because of the great leader's outstanding 
and tested leadership, the works of reforming people's ideology 
and fostering communist humans, which are decisive factors for 
defining the development and destiny of socialist society after 
the establishment of a socialist system in our country, are 
guaranteed with precedence and ceaseless miracles. Innovations 
were marked in economic and cultural construction due to the 
masses' upsurge in revolutionary enthusiasm and creativity, 
brilliant achievements were made in the work of making all the 
society members revolutionary, working class, and intellectual, 
and of making the people's economy chuche- oriented, modern, and 
scientific, and of consolidating the socialist, political and 
ideological basis and material as hard as rocks. [applause] 
  Today, all people are equally enjoying the most worthwhile 
and happiest lives in all areas -- political, economic, and 
cultural -- as genuine masters of the state and society in our 
county. Genuine socialism, where all people enjoy independent 
and creative lives without exploitation and oppression while 
being practically guaranteed the social equality at a same 
material and cultural living standard, is what mankind had 
dreamed simply as an ideal for centuries and what many 
revolutionary martyrs desired and bled for by devoting their 
valuable lives. This genuine socialism has come true in our 
country and is now vigorously demonstrating its unique charms 
and boundless vitality in the world. 
  In our country, socialism has become our people's firm faith 
and unalterable daily routine, and it has also become 
inseparable with our destinies. It is the destiny of socialism, 
our people, and our fatherland. [applause] 
  The chuche socialism, which the great leader Comrade Kim 
Il-song has pioneered by devoting all his life, and to which all 
people entrust their destinies and their future, is constantly 
being advanced and developed in a new and higher stage for 
modeling the entire society after the chuche idea under the 
leadership of the respected and beloved leader [chidoja] General 
Kim Chong-il. 
  In the genuine society of the people, where chuche [word 
indistinct] has brilliantly been embodied, each person highly 
displays beautiful communist traditions under the collectivist 
slogan, "One for all, and all for one," lives the most 
worthwhile political life that an independent human being can 
enjoy, a sound and abundant cultural life, and an equal and 
happy material life, and vigorously advances while foreseeing 
the prosperous future of the fatherland and the revolution, 
filled with hope and optimism. This is the true look of chuche 
Korea, which advances perfectly along the socialist road under 
our party's leadership. [applause] 
  Today, socialism of our country has constantly and firmly 
[?emerged and developed to be] an invincible fortress that no 
frantic maneuver [parakchok chaektong] by imperialists or 
reactionaries can dare to smash. 
  Our people have firm faith in the justness and invincibility 
of the chuche socialist cause, which they themselves chose and 
firmly consolidated with their own strength under the wise 
leadership of the party and the leader, and they are filled with 
the fervent resolution to fight to achieve its ultimate victory. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song is a benevolent parent 
who has the lofty trait of endlessly loving the people. 
[applause] 
  After personifying his love for the people at the highest 
level, respected and beloved leader Comrade Kim Il-song has 
embroidered the most brilliant history of serving the people 
during the whole course of his revolutionary activities. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song has shared everything 
with the people during his whole life, considering the truth, 
"One can gain the world when one believes and depends upon the 
people, and one will be always defeated when one leaves the 
people and is abandoned by them," to be a historic lesson. He 
has practiced the best politics for the people while sharing 
sufferings, joy, blessing, and happiness with them. 
  The ideology of serving the people as though they were 
heaven 
is the great ideological source of the people-oriented politics 
that the respected and beloved leader Comrade Kim Il-song has 
invariably embodied and considered as his lifelong maxim. 
[applause] 
  With lofty ideology, the great leader Comrade Kim Il- 
song has brilliantly pioneered the victorious road of the 
revolution together with the people on the road of his arduous 
struggle which was full of ups and downs without stepping back 
or hesitating once. 
  The respected and beloved Comrade Kim Il-song has said that 
it is precisely our people who give him courage, faith, and 
encouragement during difficult periods of the revolution and 
that it is also our people who give him wisdom and methods that 
enabled him to lead revolution and construction on a correct 
road. Even today, through his on-the-spot guidance, he is 
directing great efforts to realize our people's long-cherished 
desire -- for everyone to eat white rice and meat soup, live in 
a tile-roofed house, and wear silk clothes -- at the earliest 
possible date. 
  All of the people-oriented policies in our country today are 
the noble fruition of the great leader Comrade's great love for 
and confidence in the people. [applause] 
  The respected and beloved leader's invariable love for the 
people is a boundlessly broad fatherly bosom which warmly 
embraces all the people without discrimination. [applause] 
  Thanks to the great leader's bosom of love as broad as an 
ocean, millions of our party ranks have been brought up, the 
indomitable revolutionary force of arms have been firmly 
prepared, and the entire society has become one big 
revolutionary family which is united with comradery. 
  Thanks to the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song's warm 
solicitude that is as broad as an ocean, an amazing development 
is being witnessed today in which those who once engaged in 
anticommunism, turning away from the country and the nation, now 
devote themselves to patriotic and nation-loving work. They 
have transformed themselves to live true lives. Likewise, a 
legend has been created in which an invincible fighter of the 
WPK, who had kept revolutionary principles and integrity for 
decades amid the enemies' evil acts and appeasement, has been 
embraced to the socialist fatherland's bosom. Whether they are 
in the North, in the South, or abroad, and irrespective of what 
ideology, political view, faction, religion, and history of 
political life they have had, they are all joining in the sacred 
cause of reunification, looking up to the respected and beloved 
Kim Il-song as the great father of the nation. This is because 
the leader's bosom is so warm and broad. Because our people 
have the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song, who has the most 
sublime virtue, as their father, they entrust all their destiny 
and future to the leader and enjoy rewarding and happy lives in 
the bosom of the leader. 
  The leader has the people in mind, and the people truly 
trust 
the leader from the bottom of their hearts and uphold him with 
utmost loyalty and filial duty. This is the great ethos of our 
society and the great pride of our chuche fatherland today. 
[applause] 
  Truly, the respected and beloved leader Comrade Kim Il-song 
-- who has made immortal achievements in the cause of 
independence and the cause of socialism of the popular masses 
for the protracted period of time since he initiated the Korean 
revolution under the banner of the chuche idea up to this day 
with his outstanding ideology, extraordinary leadership, and 
noble virtue -- is the great lodestar of the struggle for the 
complete liberation and eternal happiness of mankind. [applause] 
  Today, the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song, who has been 
waging the struggle for the fatherland, the people, and the 
revolution day and night throughout his whole life, is still 
wisely leading the entire party, the whole country, and all the 
people to the historic march for the victory of the socialist 
cause and for the independent reunification of the country today 
with his vigorous energy and extraordinary revolutionary sweep, 
standing at the head of the revolution. Immortally significant 
in the revolutionary cause of the working class and the masses 
of working people for independence, the respected and beloved 
leader Comrade Kim Il-song's achievements registered in leading 
our people's revolutionary struggle and construction to an 
ever-victorious road are the noblest revolutionary assets which 
will shine forever along with the advance of history, while the 
revolutionary cause of our party and our people who are 
advancing under the great leader Comrade Kim Il- song's 
leadership remains ever-victorious and invincible. [applause] 
  Comrades: Our revolution, which has surmounted multilayered 
barriers in victoriously advancing under the great leader 
Comrade Kim Il-song's leadership, is today vigorously advancing 
to a new developing stage, and our party and people are faced 
with heavy but honorable revolutionary tasks today. 
  The internal and external situation of our revolution is 
still complicated and tense, and safeguarding and defending the 
socialist cause from the anti-republic and antisocialist 
maneuvers perpetrated by the imperialists and reactionaries and 
further developing the socialist cause are the lofty and 
responsible duty that our party and people have been assigned 
for the times and (?the revolution). To successfully perform 
this important duty it is imperative for the entire party and 
all the people to uphold the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il's 
leadership and to advance forward, more firmly grasping the 
banner of chuche socialism. [applause] 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song has taught: To defend 
our country's popular masses-centered socialism and to 
brilliantly comsummate the chuche revolutionary cause it is 
imperative for the entire party and all the people to properly 
uphold Comrade Kim Chong-il's leadership. The firm guarantee for 
inheriting and consummating the socialist cause lies precisely 
in properly upholding Comrade Kim Chong-il's leadership. 
  The chuche revolutionary cause pioneered by the great leader 
Comrade Kim Il-song is synonymous with our party's revolutionary 
cause, and the fundamental key to brilliantly consummating our 
party's cause, that is, the chuche socialist cause, lies 
precisely in upholding the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il's 
ideology and leadership. [applause] 
  Although the imperialists and reactionaries are perpetrating 
the antisocialist and anti-Republic maneuvers today more 
viciously than ever before, any high-handedness, threat, or 
blackmail by the enemy cannot frighten our people who are 
advancing along the dear comrade leader's leadership and 
upholding the great leader nor can they block our march. 
[applause] 
  Even under today's complicated situation we should always 
cherish in our hearts the infinite national fortune of upholding 
the great leader [widahan suryong] and the great leader 
[widaehan yongdoja], who is leading with certainty the chuche 
revolutionary cause to the single road of victory with iron-like 
will and matchless courage, and excellent strategies and 
tactics, should more properly uphold the party and the leader 
[suryong] with infinite loyalty, and, thus, fly the banner of 
chuche socialism higher as the enemies' challenge becomes more 
vicious. [applause] 
  To firmly safeguard and defend the cause of socialism of 
chuche pioneered by the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song, to 
consummate it to the end, and to expedite national 
reunification, it is imperative to continuously concentrate 
great efforts on strengthening singlehearted unity of the party 
and the ranks of the revolution in the future as in the past. 
  The singlehearted unity of our party and the ranks of the 
revolution today are being deepened steadily by the dear leader 
Comrade Kim Chong-il who has mastered the features and talent as 
the people's leader. Carrying out the Korean revolution to the 
end by following the Paektu march under the party's leadership 
is precisely the firm faith and will of our people. [applause] 
  We should more firmly defend the singlehearted unity of our 
revolutionary ranks which has been firmly deepened under the 
party's leadership and should further consolidate and develop it. 
  All party members and the working people should make loyalty 
to the party and the leader [suryong] as their firm faith, 
conscience, and moral root with the firm faith and strong will 
that as long as the great leader [widaehan suryong] and the 
great leader [widaehan yongdoja] stand at the forefront our 
revolution will be victorious without fail and should 
demonstrate this loyalty in every moment of their daily life. 
  All party members and the working people should firmly arm 
themselves with the revolutionary ideology, that is, the chuche 
idea, should think and act only according to the party's 
ideological will, and should become the fortress and shield 
which resolutely safeguards and defends the party and the leader 
[suryong] politically, ideologically, and with life. 
  Holding aloft the slogan, "What the party decides we will 
do," Thoroughly implementing all lines and policies set forth by 
the party by holding aloft the slogan, "What the party decides 
we will do" and, thus, effecting a constant upsurge in socialist 
construction is an important task which arises in strengthening 
the might of the popular masses-centered socialism of our own 
style and in exalting its superiority highly. 
  Upholding this year's New Year address by the great leader 
Comrade Kim Il-song, tasks he set forth at the 21st plenary 
session of the sixth party Central Committee, and his historic 
letter to the national agricultural meeting, all party members 
and the working people should bravely surmount all difficulties 
and barriers with the revolutionary spirit of self-reliance and 
fortitude, which is the banner of the victory of our revolution, 
and should accelerate the general march of socialism with the 
spirit of adding the speed of the nineties to Chollima. Thus, 
they should thoroughly implement the party's agriculture-first, 
light industry-first, and trade-first policy; should firmly give 
priority to coal industry, power industry, and railway 
transport; and should continue to develop metal industry. In 
this way, they should effect innovations in all sectors of the 
national economy. 
  Today, the United States and its follower, the South Korean 
authorities, are not only perpetrating various acts of breaching 
faith, but are also dashing further toward the road of 
confrontation and division, thereby again leading the situation 
of our country to the dangerous brink of war. However, the 
provocative acts of outside forces and the flunkeyist, 
nation-selling Kim Yong-sam ring who flatter and submit to 
outside forces, are being recklessly perpetrated after losing 
the ability to reason, and only reveal weakness. 
  We do not like to utter empty talk. All the people and 
officers and men of the People's Army will maintain a mobilized 
and tense posture [tongwondoego kinjangdoen taese] more firmly 
than ever before to cope with the prevailing situation, and if 
the enemies ignite the fuse of a reckless war of aggression by 
turning away our patient peace-loving efforts, our Army and 
people will unite as one and impose stern chastisement on 
enemies and resolutely defend our socialist fatherland and our 
nation's sovereignty under the ever- victorious leadership of 
Comrade Kim Chong-il, the supreme commander of our revolutionary 
armed forces, in order not to allow them to arbitrarily touch 
even one inch of land or a blade of grass in our fatherland. 
[applause] 
  Under today's situation, we should further strengthen the 
country's barriers; make firm political, ideological, and 
military preparations to actively counter any of the enemy's 
provocative acts; and thoroughly set up an ethos of actively 
supporting the People's Army and valuing the Army throughout the 
entire society. 
  Keenly realizing the party's slogan, "We serve the people!" 
all functionaries should deeply mingle with the masses, further 
inspire their revolutionary zeal and creativeness, become a 
standard-bearer in implementing the party's line, and set 
practical examples in all work by standing at the head of the 
masses. Thus, they should become true loyal servants who are 
devotedly working for the people. 
  Only victory lies ahead of our people who are staunchly 
fighting to defend the chuche socialist banner with conviction 
in sure victory and revolutionary optimism under the wise 
leadership of the party and the leader [suryong]. [applause] 
  Upholding the banner of the chuche idea and the three 
revolutions of ideology, technology, and culture, let us all 
vigorously advance toward new victory in the revolution in firm 
unity with the party Central Committee headed by the respected 
and beloved Comrade Kim Il-Song. [applause] 
  Together with the people's ardent loyalty and endless 
admiration for the respected and beloved leader, I respectfully 
wish Comrade Kim Il-song, the great leader of our party and 
people, good health and long life, national reunification, 
everlasting prosperity for the nation, and accomplishment of the 
chuche revolutionary cause. [applause, shouting of hurrah] 
  Long live Comrade Kim Il-song, the great leader of our party 
and people! [applause, shouting of hurrah] 
  Long live the glorious WPK, the organizer and guide of all 
triumphs of the Korean people! [applause, shouting of hurrah] 

