Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Moscow, January 14 (XINHUA) -- Russian President 
Boris Yeltsin and visiting U.S. President Bill Clinton have 
pledged mutual support in a document signed here today. 
  Yeltsin offered to back the U.S. "Partnership for Peace" 
proposal which would gradually incorporate Eastern European 
nations into NATO, and Clinton has committed his support for 
further reforms in Russia. 
  Citing the U.S. proposal as an important element in the new 
architecture of European security, the document said President 
Yeltsin assured President Clinton of Russia's intention to 
become an active partner in and to promote broad, substantial, 
and intensive cooperation with NATO. 
  In their bid to avert further divisions in Europe, the two 
leaders recognized the need to set up a new order of European 
security that is inclusive, non-discriminatory and focused on 
practical political and security cooperation. 
  Yeltsin assured Clinton of the irreversibility of Russia's 
transition toward a market economy and its intention to further 
reforms and address consequent social needs associated with the 
transition. 
  Clinton reaffirmed his strong support for Russia's reform 
and 
suggested that social issues could be a new and promising area 
for cooperation. 
  In the agreement, the two presidents pledged that the two 
countries will stop targeting their strategic nuclear missiles 
at each other by this June, thereby ending nearly fifty years of 
conflict between the two superpowers. 
  Clinton and Yeltsin urged all countries to renounce nuclear 
testing and observe the requirements of the nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty. 
  They also denounced "aggressive nationalism and political 
extremism," which in their words are "the main threat to peace 
and democracy today." 
  Other issues addressed in the agreement were the attainment 
of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East, 
the progress achieved in the Jordanian-Israeli peace talks, and 
the talks between Syria and Israel. 
  Russian media hailed the declaration as the most important 
of 
all Russian-American agreements. 

