BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Focus on Africa" program] </F>
  [Text] Not only do Foday Sankoh's RUF [Revolutionary 
United Front] rebels in Sierra Leone seem to be resisting the 
Army's attempt to wipe them out, they also appear to be capable 
of launching devastating attacks of their own. The latest, by a 
band of well-armed rebels, was in Pujuhun District, where 100 
rebels entered a town, causing death and destruction. From Bo, 
southern Sierra Leone, Al Hassan Sillah reports: 
  [Begin Sillah recording] The commanding officer of the 
paramilitary SSD [Special Security Detachment] Force stationed 
in the town of (Bandajuma Sowa) in the Pujahun District 
confirmed in Bo this morning that rebels of Foday Sankoh's 
Revolutionary United Front attacked the town on Monday [25 
April], causing severe destruction and death. Speaking to me at 
the headquarters of the SSD Unit in Bo, Inspector Aliu Fofana 
said the rebels, something over 100, entered the town early on 
Monday, using a by-pass that brought them onto the main 
(Koribo)-Pujahun road. Inspector Fofana said that the rebels 
reached Bandajuma and then launched an assault on the town with 
rocket-propelled grenade launchers and AK-47 assault rifles, and 
were engaged for some four hours by small group of paramilitary 
troops who were on the ground at the time. 
  According to the inspector, when it became obvious that his 
men were being outmaneuvered both in numbers and firepower by 
the rebels, they had to pull out. But this, he said, was not 
before they had ensured that a great majority of the town's 
civilian population had moved to safety. 
  With the town now at their mercy, the rebels set fire to 
over 
half of the houses in the entire township and abducted an 
unspecified number of young men and women. Fourteen civilians, 
according to the inspector, were killed at the outset of the 
attack, while several people with gunshot wounds were evacuated 
to the government hospital here in Bo. The inspector told me 
that, although his headquarters was razed to the ground by the 
marauders, he lost none of the men and managed to evacuate all 
his armory. 
  (Bandajuma Sowa) had remained one of the two safe havens for 
the troubled people of Pujahun District, who arguably has been 
hardest hit by the rebel war. Sequel to the Monday attack, some 
7,000 people whose areas had been attacked and destroyed by 
Foday Sankoh's rebels, have been managing what remained of their 
lives in this town. [end recording] 

