BFN 

  [Text] The Ministry of Finance [MOF] is worried on account 
of the handling of a supplementary budget to make up for the 
fiscal year 1994 provisional budget. It is having difficulty 
deciding on the period to be covered by the supplementary budget 
because of prolonged political confusion over the choice of a 
successor to outgoing Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, although 
it is certain that a fiscal year 1994 budget bill will not be 
enacted before the stopgap budget runs out on 20 May. Also, 
because it cannot work on the budget during the consecutive 
holidays starting at the end of April, the ministry eagerly 
hopes that "the owner of the official residence (prime minister) 
will be decided as soon as possible." 
  The government submitted the fiscal year 1994 budget bill to 
the Diet on 4 March. However, because the Diet failed to open 
deliberations on the budget, the government compiled a stopgap 
budget with only necessary and minimum expenses. The stopgap 
budget, which is currently being implemented, covers a period of 
50 days starting from 1 April. Continuing arguments over who 
should succeed Hosokawa are even preventing the government from 
delivering its reasons for its proposing the fiscal year 1994 
budget bill to the Diet. It is now certain that the government 
has to compile a supplementary budget to compensate for the 
fiscal year 1994 provisional budget. 
  The government can have a supplementary budget covering a 
period of 40 days at the longest, until 29 June, when the 
current Diet session ends. With the supplementary budget, the 
government can avoid the situation in which it again has to 
compile another stopgap budget, even if deliberations on the 
fiscal year 1994 budget are further delayed. 
  But the MOF's Budget Bureau is worried that "If the 
government, which is calling for an early enactment of the 
budget bill, submits a bill on a supplementary budget that 
covers a period until the end of the current Diet session, some 
people may think that the government assumes the fiscal year 
1994 budget bill will not be enacted before the end of the 
current Diet session." 
  It will be convenient for the government if it can discuss 
the timetable for budget deliberations with opposition parties 
upon the election of the next prime minister and compile a 
supplementary budget based on the timetable agreed upon. The 
MOF, however, said the problem is that "we have no one to 
consult with about this plan at present because it is still 
uncertain who will be the next prime minister." 

