Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Gavrilenko commentary under "Postskriptum: Events </F>
and Commentaries" rubric: "I Would Like To Add the Final Period 
to the Story of the Arrest of Two Russian Generals in the 
Latvian Capital"] 
  [Text] ...But at the moment I have to make do with 
ellipses. The latest glaring incident is merely the most 
significant episode in a sequence of acts of provocations by 
Latvian nationalists against the Russian army. 
  Latvia's statesmen, embarrassed by this difficult situation, 
did everything they could: They immediately named the culprits 
and apologized to the Russian side. Outwardly everything seems 
to have been done respectably, promptly, and sincerely. It is 
just that I cannot avoid the banal question: Where were these 
people looking before? The Zemessargi (home defense guard), 
emboldened by impunity, have for a long time now quite literally 
been refusing to let Russian officers and soldiers pass: They 
threaten them with weapons and insult them. You get the 
impression that the sole reason for the Latvian military's 
existence is to bug the Russians. And this comes at a time when 
talks are going on, when the date for the withdrawal of the 
troops has been agreed in practice, and when problems of the 
states' normal mutual relations are becoming of paramount 
importance. So did they in the past have to connive with the 
actions of these tin soldiers from the home guard only 
subequently to lower their eyes and admit that these people have 
harmed Latvia's interests? 
  But the harm is clear because the timing of the provocation 
was chosen deliberately: the Russian-Latvian talks, the NATO 
summit, the U.S. President's visit to Russia.... In fact it 
worked out badly. Badly because Latvia is not a ship and cannot 
sail away from Russia's borders waving good-bye from the deck to 
the people of neighboring Pskov, who include assault forces 
among their number. And these are not the "Zemessargi" who chose 
as the object of their "heroic" endeavors the hotel and sports 
complex of the Northwestern Group of Forces. 
  Well, it seems that we can consider the incident closed. The 
reassuring words of the Latvian premier that the government will 
do everything in its power to mitigate the consequences of the 
occurrence are encouraging. But they do not lift from the heart 
the bitter resentment at the fact that the dignity of the 
Russian soldier has been impugned once again. 

