Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Vladimir Kuzar and Mikhail Pogorelyy: </F>
"Russian-American Dialogue in the Kremlin"] 
  [Text] U.S. President Bill Clinton arrived in the Russian 
capital for an official state visit on 13 January. After a 
short rest he met with Russian President Boris Yeltsin. The 
official ceremony was held in St. Georges' Hall, in the Great 
Kremlin Palace. The heads of the world's two leading states 
exchanged short speeches of welcome and then got down to work 
almost immediately. The basic content of the work was the 
development of ways of bilateral cooperation, those very ways 
thanks to which, Bill Clinton stated in his welcoming remarks, 
"Russia's greatness will be consolidated." 
  For Russians now embroiled in a long, drawn-out, and 
seemingly almost futile fight against poverty, inflation, 
falling output, and never-ending price rises the American 
president's words may sound like a standard polite form of 
words, a sign of respect for the hosts. But when you come down 
to it, the crux of the economic and sociopolitical reforms being 
pursued in the country is precisely to consolidate Russia's 
greatness and restore to it the great power status which 
legitimately belongs to it. After all, the might and power of a 
state rests on the prosperity and confidence in the present and 
future of its citizens and on the stability of its economy and 
the solidity of its international position. 
  Our people have to scale these heights themselves, through 
their own efforts, but they do not have to do it solo! It is 
easier and more reliable to do it with others, and here no small 
role could be played by the close Russian-American cooperation 
which is being built on the principles of partnership, equality, 
and mutual benefit. 
  After the first round of talks, held within a narrow circle, 
Boris Yeltsin expressed satisfaction at the work being 
conducted. Bill Clinton also went for a short walk around the 
Kremlin during the break, wearing a contented expression. Talks 
then resumed, now with expanded delegations including 
representatives of the national security structures and the 
foreign and finance ministries. The composition of the 
negotiating teams suggests the basic topics discussed at the 
presidents' meeting: That is to say, a range of questions 
concerning Russian-American cooperation in the economic sphere 
and in the sphere of international and European security. 
  Despite the fact that at this stage these topics are no 
longer, as it were, at the forefront of Russian-American 
dialogue, they remain important. Moreover they have been given 
a new dimension: Previously discussion was about reducing the 
danger posed to one another, lowering the level of military 
confrontation, and preventing nuclear catastrophe; it is now 
about joint, coordinated efforts to maintain world stability. 
The presidents discussed the problem of ensuring the 
nonproliferation of mass destruction weapons, including nuclear 
weapons. As was remarked in the corridors of the meeting, the 
prospects of securing an optimum resolution to the question of 
nuclear weapons on the Korean peninsula were touched on. The 
Yugoslav crisis and the continuation of coordinated, 
multilateral ways of resolving it is another topic to which the 
leaders of the world's two major military powers will doubtless 
have to return more than once. 
  Another major set of questions is connected with the 
Partnership for Peace concept, just adopted by the NATO Council. 
As the Russian Foreign Ministry has announced, Russia is still 
carefully studying the specific provisions of the NATO program, 
but Presiident Yeltsin's fundamental approach was described by 
his press secretary in these terms: We have no reason whatever 
to spurn the initiative; we just need to see to what extent its 
implementation accords with Russia's national interests. 
  President Clinton arrived in Moscow two hours behind his 
original schedule, but this caused no irritation in Moscow. On 
the contrary, the persistence and consistency shown by the 
American leader in his approach to the nuclear disarmament of 
Ukraine is welcomed here. En route to Moscow Bill Clinton had 
held a brief meeting with Leonid Kravchuk at which the terms of 
the agreement on eliminating the 176 strategic missiles and the 
1,500 warheads belonging to them which are now on Ukrainian 
territory were preliminarily agreed. The agreement itself will 
have been signed by the time you read this newspaper, so we will 
not try to guess its provisions. We will only query the 
justification of the request said to have been made by President 
Kravchuk that Russia write off Ukraine's multibillion debt for 
energy sources. Weapons should not be a bargaining counter; 
they are too dangerous, Russian Defense Minister Army General 
Pavel Grachev remarked on the eve of the Moscow summit, 
particularly as the United States is allocating considerable 
respources to Ukraine to carry out the dismantling of nuclear 
armaments and remove them to Russian territory. 
  Apart from the Russian-American-Ukrainian agreement on the 
results of the talks, it is also planned to sign the Moscow 
Declaration and agreements on air traffic, on cooperation in the 
sphere of studying the effect of radiation on people's health 
and the environment... But that takes place on Friday. 
  As far as the second half of Bill Clinton's first day in 
Moscow was concerned, a visit to the Danilov Monastery, where 
the U.S. President was to have held a meeting with Aleksiy II, 
patriarch of Moscow and All Russia, was dropped from the 
itinerary, although it cannot be ruled out that the meeting will 
take place, albeit not at his residence, but in the Moscow 
hospital where the head of the Russian Orthodox Church is 
undergoing treatment. 

