BFN 

  [Text] Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata is taking a different 
position from Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] Secretary General 
Ichiro Ozawa on the so-called "conservative-conservative 
coalition" with some Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] members. 
While Ozawa is very keen about allying with LDP members, Hata 
wants to continue to search for a way to persuade the Social 
Democratic Party of Japan to rejoin the coalition in order to 
secure the present administration's hold on power. 
  The prime minister strongly denied the possibility of a 
"conservative-conservative coalition" at the House of 
Councillors' Budget Committee on 13 June. He said, "The LDP 
exists as a bona fide political force. My honest feeling is 
that I want to rebuild a framework under which this political 
force and the new forces can confront each other in a debate on 
the future of this country." 
  A top government official also stressed on the evening of 13 
June that, "The prime minister's remarks meant that he still 
wants to return to the starting point of the coalition," thus 
indicating that Ozawa's statement was not coordinated with the 
Prime Minister's Office. 
  The reason behind Hata's negative view of the "conservative- 
conservative coalition" is his belief that switching from using 
political reform as the sole yardstick to classify politicians 
as "reformists" or "conservatives" to using basic policies on 
Japan-U.S. security pact, tax reform, and others to change the 
direction of political realignment is "merely a number trick 
aimed at gaining political power," (according to his close 
aides). 
  Furthermore, the prime minister undoubtedly perceives the 
"conservative-conservative coalition" scheme as the other side 
of the coin to "attempts to topple Hata." On the one hand, Hata 
shows his dispassionate attitude that "I did not become prime 
minister because I wanted to;" on the other, he seems to wish to 
personally give direction to policy issues such as 
administrative reform and deregulation, and to efforts to assess 
Japan's postwar history on the occasion of the 50th anniversary 
of the end of World War II next year. 
  It remains uncertain whether Hata and Ozawa, who have 
maintained a relationship of alliance so far, will be able to 
preserve their unity over the "conservative-conservative 
coalition" scheme. The "Hata-Ozawa relationship" is now facing 
a delicate turning point. 

