Viscosity 

<F P=102>   94FE0282B Tokyo NIKKEI MECHANICAL in Japanese 18 Oct 93 pp 
32-39 -- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0282B </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo NIKKEI MECHANICAL </F>
<F P=105>  Japanese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Masayoshi Yamada] </F>
  [Text] Electro-rheological (ER) fluid generally denotes all 
the fluids whose viscosities can be controlled by electric 
voltage. When such fluid is used, it is possible to see dampers 
whose damping forces can be easily changed. However, all 
previous attempts to commercialize ER fluids were unsuccessful 
because the ranges of their viscosity changes were too narrow, 
and their characteristics were unstable, in particular, with 
time. Recently, several companies in Japan have successfully 
overcome those drawbacks and improved the performance of ER 
fluids, and some of the companies have begun to develop 
applications for the fluid. 
  An ER fluid, as is, is merely a colloidal solution with 
fluidity. However, when an electrical field of several kV/mm is 
applied, the liquid loses its fluidity; in some cases, the fluid 
state is changed to nearly a solid state. When the electrical 
field is turned off, the original state is regained. ER fluids 
have that interesting property. 
  The existence of ER fluids has been known for about 40 
years, 
and proposals have been made for the use of ER fluids in 
variable-force dampers and clutches. Efforts have also been made 
in applications research. 
  Although many research-scale applications attempts have been 
made, no practical implementation was realized that would have 
an impact on the market. Previous ER fluids had many weaknesses 
in terms of implementation: the narrow ranges of viscosity 
change, the unstable characteristics, and the sedimentation of 
dispersed particles. 
  Recently, several companies in Japan have developed ER 
fluids 
with nearly implementable characteristics by overcoming the 
above-mentioned shortcomings. The new fluids are not only more 
reliable with more stable properties, but also have more 
practical features for implementation, i.e., the use of a 
non-aqueous material in the fluid to permit a wider temperature 
range of application, and the improved dispersion stability via 
more closely matched specific gravities of the dispersed phase 
and the insulating oil. Furthermore, an attempt is also under 
way to try liquid crystals for ER liquids to improve their 
performance. 
<H5>  Development of `Usable' ER Fluids by More Than 10 Companies </H5>
  At the New Materials Exhibition in May 1993, Bridgestone 
Corp. (Bridgestone) disclosed its new ER fluid containing 
micro-particles of a carbon compound and also displayed a damper 
using the ER fluid and a test-product to demonstrate 
vibration-proof mounting. By the end of 1993, Bridgestone says 
it will begin sample distribution. 
  Other companies that have announced their ER fluid 
development activities include Asahi Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. 
(ACI), Nippon Shokubai Kagaku Kogyo Co., Ltd. (Nippon Shokubai), 
Nippon Oil Co., Ltd. (Nippon Oil), Fujikura Kasei Co., Ltd. 
(Fujikura Kasei), and Nippon Mektron Co., Ltd. (Nippon Mektron, 
with main office in Tokyo). There are, however, more makers than 
listed above that are engaged in the development of an ER fluid. 
  For example, in the period from January through August 1993, 
there were more than 30 ER fluid-related patent applications 
filed and officially published. These applications were filed 
by, in addition to the companies listed above, Osaka Gas Co., 
Ltd.; Tonen Sekiyu Kagaku K.K.; Toray-Dow Corning Selicone Co., 
Ltd. (main office in Tokyo); Toyota Central Research Institute 
(main office in Nagakute Cho, Aichi Prefecture); Nissan Motor 
Co., Ltd.; Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd.; and 
Mitsubishi Chemical Industries Ltd. Perhaps, there are 
additional makers that are secretly pursuing ER fluid 
development. 
  As the level of ER fluids approaches perfection, development 
activities concerning applications and peripheral technologies 
have also begun to flourish. Bridgestone has accumulated 
technologies concerning control and power source through the 
test-production of the vibration-proof mount and the damper. 
Other ER fluid developers are working in cooperation with 
partners. 
  It has been a long time since ER fluids attracted the 
attention of mechanical engineers as the ``new mechanical 
element.'' Today, the fluids appear to have gained the status of 
being ``usable.'' 
<H5>  Smooth Actuation of Air-Pressure Cylinders with ER Fluid </H5>
  Examples of ER fluid applications will be discussed below. 
  CKD Corp., an air-pressure-device maker, jointly with Nippon 
Shokubai, is in the process of developing a technology for using 
an ER fluid to control the speed of an air-pressure cylinder 
(Fig. 3). The ER fluid was developed by Nippon Shokubai. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-020L-03A>      Figure 3. Air-Pressure Conveying Device using ER Fluid </FIG>


  Conveying devices using air-pressure cylinders are 
lightweight and are capable of generating strong force and high 
speed. On the other hand, such devices make such sudden moves to 
start and to stop that they produce a shock in their operation; 
furthermore, it is difficult to stop them accurately in 
mid-position. According to Mr. Kazuhisa Ito, of the Development 
Department of the Air-Pressure Business Division of CKD Corp., a 
method had been developed to more precisely control air pressure 
by means of a servo valve, but ``the method was never able to 
completely overcome the shortcoming of unsmooth movement.'' 
  In contrast, the ER fluid-using air-pressure cylinder can 
move as smoothly as ``a conveying device that combines a screw 
and a servo motor,'' according to Mr. Ito. Furthermore, a system 
using the cylinder is simpler and less expensive than a system 
using a servo valve. 
  As shown in Figure 4, the system under development is 
constructed with two cylinders: one filled with an ER fluid, and 
the other being an air cylinder. The ER fluid cylinder is a part 
of a closed circuit with both cylinder ends joined through the 
electrodes. When pressure is applied to the air cylinder, the 
piston moves and pushes the ER fluid to the electrode section. 
The pushed ER fluid passes between the electrodes and returns to 
the opposite side of the piston. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-020L-03B>      Figure 4. Combination of ER Fluid and Air Cylinders </FIG>


  A voltage is applied to the electrodes to stop the piston. 
Depending on the magnitude of the voltage, the viscosity of the 
ER fluid increases; and the flow between the electrodes is 
impeded. When sufficient voltage is applied, the flow stops 
completely and the piston comes to a halt. 
  The only function of the air pressure is the generation of 
force. The speed of the piston is controlled by the voltage to 
be applied to the electrodes. When the voltage is gradually 
increased, the piston will smoothly come to a stop. By adding a 
position sensor, the piston's position can be simply determined. 
  As discussed above, the method of using the electrode 
section 
as a flow-rate control valve that can continuously control the 
flow rate without moving parts is the typical usage of an ER 
fluid. Basically, the same idea can be applied to construct a 
vibration-proof mount and a damper (Fig. 5). Such an ER fluid 
system is simpler in structure and more reliable than a system 
using mechanical valves and hydraulic pressure. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-020L-04A>      Figure 5. Structure of ER Vibration-Proof Mount Developed </FIG>


<H5>  Flow Impeded by Particle Chains Between Electrodes With </H5>
Change in Apparent Viscosity 
  If ER fluids are defined as ``fluids whose viscosities can 
be 
controlled by voltage,'' the ER fluids that are currently under 
development can be classified roughly into two groups. One group 
is the ``dispersion-type'' ER fluids that are dispersions of 
particles in an insulating oil. Until very recently, all ER 
fluids belonged to this group. 
  The other group is a group using liquid crystals as the ER 
fluids. Studies involving ER fluids of the second group have 
just gotten under way. Dispersion-type ER fluids have 
electrically polarizable particles dispersed in an insulation 
oil. In many cases, the insulation oil is silicone oil. The 
mechanism for viscosity change is explained in the following 
manner (Fig. 6). 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-020L-04B>      Figure 6. Mechanism for ER Effect Manifestation. Particles </FIG>


  When a voltage is applied, an induced electrical field 
between the electrodes polarizes particles that are dispersed in 
the fluid. The polarization of particles creates an attractive 
force among them, and the particle chains are formed between the 
electrodes. These chains impede the flow of the fluid, resulting 
in an ``apparent'' viscosity increase for the fluid. This 
phenomenon is called the ER effect. As the mechanism clearly 
indicates, the greater the polarization of particles, the more 
profound the ER effect. 
  Earlier ER fluids did not manifest sufficient ER effect, or 
the polarization of particles in them was too unstable to make 
the characteristics of the fluids reliable. Today, improvements 
have resulted in particles that reliably show marked ER effects 
becoming available. 
  The shear stress of a dispersion-type ER fluid can be 
expressed as a function of the shear rate, as in Figure 7(a). 
When a voltage is applied, the fluid behaves uniquely like a 
Bingham fluid by displaying a force (surrender stress) that 
fixes the electrodes at zero shear rate. 
  The magnitude of surrender stress is one of the indexes for 
the magnitude of an ER effect. Although it is different from 
fluid to fluid, surrender stress values for the newest 
dispersion-type ER fluids range from 0.5 kPa to 4 kPa. To make 
this change more understandable in a familiar sense, it is 
approximately equivalent to the change ``from milk to cheese,'' 
according to Chief Researcher Kazuya Edamura, of the Technical 
Development Department, Technical Division, Fujikura Kasei. 
  The ER effect of a dispersion-type ER fluid diminishes when 
the shear rate exceeds a certain level, because particle chains 
are broken down by shearing. As long as the shear rate remains 
low, these broken chains can recombine with adjacent chains; but 
the recombination becomes difficult as the shear rate increases. 
  The liquid crystal-type ER fluid behaves completely 
differently from the dispersion-type ER fluid. When an 
electrical field is applied, the viscosity changes for the 
liquid crystal-type as it does for the dispersion type. However, 
the liquid crystal-type literally changes its ``viscosity'' 
(Fig. 7(b)). This viscosity-changing phenomenon will not 
disappear even after the shear rate increases. As far as the 
liquid crystal-type ER fluids of today are concerned, the rates 
of viscosity change are more than one order smaller than the 
rates for the dispersion-type ER fluids. Thus, it is necessary 
to design devices so as to have a narrow distance between the 
electrodes, in order to be able to use a liquid crystal-type ER 
fluid in the same manner as a dispersion-type ER fluid. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-020L-05A>      Figure 7. Different Characteristics of Dispersion-Type (a) </FIG>


<H5>  Attempt to Improve Total Balance With Full Manifestation of </H5>
ER Effect 
  In order to implement a dispersion-type ER fluid as a 
machine 
component, the following items, in addition to the magnitude of 
the ER effect, need to be considered: 
  (1) high level of response; 
  (2) low power consumption; 
  (3) stable dispersion after standing for long period of 
time; 
  (4) a wide range for actuation temperatures. 
  Needless to say, the fluid need not have an excellent rating 
in each and every item listed, because requirements for the 
fluid vary, depending on its application (see box below). For 
example, an automotive engine room must be able to function 
reliably up to a temperature of 120C, while such a wide 
actuation temperature range may not be needed for uses in a 
factory. 
  The key consideration is to have an all-around balance 
instead of one super-excellent rating among other so-so ratings. 
A maker needs developmental skill to create this balance of 
ratings for an ER fluid, while maintaining its stable and 
significant ER effect. The particular area where the uniqueness 
of each maker is shown to be most pronounced is the method of 
securing the dispersion stability for an ER fluid. 
  When left standing undisturbed, a dispersion-type ER fluid 
loses its colloidal state because the dispersed particles 
settle. When this happens, the fluid is no longer an ER fluid. 
Thus, one needs to make such an ER fluid capable of maintaining 
the colloidal state as long as possible, and/or being readily 
redispersed even if sedimentation has taken place. 
  The basic approach to this problem is to use a surfactant to 
make particles repel each other in the absence of an electrical 
field. When coagulation of particles is prevented, sedimentation 
proceeds slowly. Also, even if sedimentation has occurred, 
particles can be redispersed easily. 
  The next approach is to make it difficult for particles 
themselves to settle. This approach can be roughly divided into 
two groups. One involves making particles as microfine as 
possible, so they will stay dispersed due to their Brownian 
motion. Nippon Mektron developed its ER fluid based on this 
idea. Takahisa Akatsuka, the associate head of the Second 
Development Department, Development Division, Nippon Mektron, 
says this: ``We see practically no sedimentation with particles 
with a diameter of 0.45 m.'' 
  The other involves making the specific gravity of the 
particles essentially equal to that of an insulating oil. If 
they are exactly the same, theoretically no sedimentation will 
occur. In order to use this approach, one must produce particles 
from a material with small specific gravity. As a result of this 
consideration, an organic polymer, whose specific gravity can be 
controlled with comparative ease, is used to make particles for 
an ER fluid by ACI, Nippon Oil, and Nippon Shokubai. 
  Fujikura Kasei developed an ER fluid containing spherical 
particles made of an organic polymer in whose surfaces finer 
inorganic grains were embedded (Fig. 9). The idea was to 
generate the ER effect with the inorganic grains on the particle 
surfaces and to match the specific gravity of the particle to 
that of the liquid medium by using the polymer spheres for the 
particles. The polymer spheres are total insulators that give 
the added advantage of consuming an extremely small quantity of 
electric currents. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-020L-06A>      Figure 9. Electron Micrograph of Dispersed Particles to Be </FIG>


  However, it is still impossible to completely eradicate the 
problem of dispersion stability. It may be necessary to 
compromise to some degree. Chief Researcher Yuichi Ishino, of 
the Sixth R&amp;D Group, Second R&amp;D Division, Bridgestone, 
says 
this: ``We don't worry about slight sedimentation as long as a 
fluid has excellent redispersibility.'' 
<H5>  Aiming for Market Niche With Advantages of </H5>
Dispersion-Problem-Free Liquid Crystal-Type ER Fluids 
  No matter how hard one tries, one cannot escape the problem 
of dispersion stability if one is dealing with a dispersion-type 
fluid. Is there no homogeneous ER fluid that can solve this 
dispersion problem? Liquid crystal-type ER fluids emerged based 
on this thought. 
  Liquid crystal-type ER fluids may be either ER fluids 
low-molecular-weight liquid crystals or ER fluids using 
high-molecular-weight liquid crystals. A well-known ER fluid of 
the first group is the one developed by Nikko-Kyoseki Co., Ltd. 
(Nikko-Kyoseki). Examples of the second group are the one 
disclosed by ACI and another under development by Nippon Oil. 
  Liquid crystal-type ER fluids have several advantages, in 
addition to being free of the dispersion problem. Assistant 
Professor Shin Morishita of the Shipbuilding and Marine 
Engineering Section, Construction Department, Faculty of 
Engineering, Yokohama National University, test-produced a 
variable-attenuation-force damper (Fig. 10) by using 
low-molecular-weight liquid crystals for display. According to 
Morishita, ``the best advantage of the liquid crystal type is 
that it can be used in a high-shear-rate region where the 
dispersion type loses the ER effect.'' In addition, unlike the 
dispersion type, the liquid crystal-type behaves as a Newton 
fluid under the influence of an electrical field, i.e., the 
stress increases in proportion to the shear rate. Therefore, the 
control of a vibration-controlled damper becomes simple when a 
liquid crystal-type ER fluid is used. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-020L-07A>      Figure 10. Variable-Attenuation-Force Damper Using Liquid </FIG>


  There are two problems with liquid crystal-type ER fluids. 
They are expensive, and their viscosities vary much less than 
that of dispersion-type ER fluids. Today, low-molecular-weight 
liquid crystals for display are sold at approximately &yen;1,500 
per g. It is unlikely that the price will come down when the 
liquid crystals begin to be used for ER fluids. 
High-molecular-weight liquid crystals cost much less, at 
approximately several tens of thousands of yen per kg. In 
contrast, a mass-produced, dispersion-type ER fluid is said to 
often be sold at a price of less than &yen;5,000 per kg. 
  Both low- and high-molecular-weight liquid crystal-type ER 
fluids currently show a viscosity change rate of approximately a 
factor of 10. However, since the base (original) viscosity of 
the high-molecular-weight liquid crystal-type is high, ``it is 
possible to obtain a shear stress of approximately 1 kPa at a 
shear rate of 400 s[.sup]-1[/] and under an electrical field 
of 5 kV/mm,'' says a spokesperson for the New Chemistry 
Laboratory, Central Research Institute, Nippon Oil. 
  Some researchers, like Mr. Hideichi Okubo, of the R&amp;D 
Planning Department, Nikko-Kyoseki, are of the opinion that 
``the small viscosity change can be supplemented by a narrower 
distance between the electrodes when the device is designed. 
This design is possible with the liquid crystal-type ER fluid 
because its particles never plug up between the electrodes. The 
narrower distance between the electrodes permits the production 
of a more compact device.'' If only a small quantity of the ER 
fluid is required for a compact device, the price will not be a 
serious problem. 
  Thus, according to Chief Researcher Akio Inoue, of the 
Technical Research Institute, ACI, ``with the advantages of 
their Newtonian behavior, being free of the problem of 
dispersion stability, and being suitable for compact devices, 
[liquid crystal-type ER fluids] are expected to gain some niche 
in application fields along with dispersion ER fluids.'' 
<H5>  Joint Development is Key for Implementation; Quick </H5>
Partnership through Information Disclosure 
  Those who are involved with ER fluids seem to be unanimous 
in 
saying that the future of ER fluids ``depends on whether or not 
appropriate application products can be discovered.'' The key to 
the development of such products for an ER fluid maker will be 
the cooperative relationship with a machine manufacturer. 
  Thus far, ER fluid development has been pursued primarily by 
each material maker alone. Even if a maker had some cooperative 
partners, the number was only a few. The reason was that each ER 
fluid maker was developing a fluid as a top-secret project, 
aiming for applications only for automobile-related markets with 
potentially a growing demand. 
  However, today, the auto industry in the midst of a severe 
recession is not expected to implement these devices 
immediately. ``Technically speaking,'' an auto maker that has 
aggressively attempted to develop an engine mount using an ER 
fluid confesses, ``we should have no difficulty implementing the 
engine mount, although it will be difficult for us to absorb its 
cost.'' 
  The technology levels of ER fluid makers each have 
advantages 
and disadvantages, and no single one offers a marked 
superiority. In other words, no one ER fluid is outstandingly 
superb. Under these circumstances, it is advantageous for an ER 
fluid maker to join forces with a machine maker capable of 
application development. It is unreasonable to assume that an ER 
fluid device can be implemented without cooperative exchange 
between an ER fluid maker and a machine maker. Therefore, an ER 
fluid maker may try to improve an ER fluid, for example, to 
match the specifications of a machine, and a machine maker may 
attempt to offset any weakness of an ER fluid with machine 
design, if necessary. 
  The quickest way to make contact with an excellent machine 
maker is to disclose information as soon as possible. 
Bridgestone announced its ER fluid technology at the 1993 New 
Materials Exposition precisely because Bridgestone ``wanted to 
openly solicit a machine maker that will be a future partner,'' 
according to Department Head Norio Goto, of the Sixth R&amp;D 
Group, 
Second R&amp;D Division, Bridgestone. As a result, says Goto, 
Bridgestone ``received inquiries from more than 200 companies. A 
few of them have already begun cooperative projects with us.'' 
In the future, other companies are expected to follow the lead 
of Bridgestone through information disclosure. 
  Chief Researcher Asahi Sugimoto, of the Machine Research 
Section, Industrial Safety Institute, Ministry of Labor, says 
this: ``Using an ER fluid, it would be easy to make an actuator 
like a muscle that is capable of making a stand while suspending 
action. It would be difficult to do so by any other method.'' 
Professor Nao Sasada at Precision Engineering Department, Chiba 
Institute of Technology, appreciates the value of ER fluids. He 
says: ``In normal machine design, viscosity is treated as a 
constant. However, the viscosity of an ER fluid is a variable, 
which may force the modification of the basic machine design 
concept.'' 
  Chief Researcher Sugimoto and Professor Sasada are two of 
the 
pioneers in ER fluid research in Japan. Apparently, ER fluid 
development has been pursued with the vague expectation 
expressed by these pioneers. It is a fact that previous ER 
fluids have never achieved a state of completion that invites 
ideas for actual applications, i.e., How are they to be used, 
and for what? Today, it appears that, when solutions are being 
found for many problems, mechanical engineers are beginning to 
question the true value of ER fluids. The fluids of ``dreams'' 
have traveled a long road to reach today's status. They ought 
not die in vain without realizing the dream. 
  [Box, pp 38, 39] 
<H5>  Potential Applications for Latest ER Fluids -- Fields </H5>
Involving Vibration As Key Factor 
  What kind of applications can be expected for the latest ER 
fluids? 
  Roughly speaking, dispersion-type ER fluids can be used for 
one of two things: for clutches by making use of a surrender 
stress generated by the fluids, or for use as a flow-control 
valve by making use of their viscosity change, as discussed 
earlier in the main text in reference to air-pressure cylinders. 
If used as a clutch, the force to be transmitted can be 
determined by the magnitude of the surrender stress. It appears 
difficult to find realistic clutch applications for today's ER 
fluids, whose surrender stress amounts to only several kPa. 
  More realistic applications should be found in the 
flow-control valve area. The currently most popular idea is to 
use the flow-control valve in the form of an ER fluid for 
dampers with variable attenuation force. Where will the 
variable-attenuation-force dampers that use an ER fluid be used? 
Basically, they will be used in the field where problematic 
vibrations need to be suppressed through the active control of a 
damper. For example, the field includes automotive devices, such 
as suspensions and vibration-proof mounts. 
  In addition, applications are possible for incorporating a 
device in industrial machines, such as conveying devices. 
Professor Junji Furusho's group at the Mechanical Control 
Engineering Department, University of Electro-Communications, is 
considering the incorporation of ER fluid devices into a robot's 
arms. While an arm is in motion, the device will not function as 
a damper, and damping occurs a moment before the motion is to 
stop. The device will help reduce vibration prior to a stop, 
improving the precision and simultaneously increasing the speed 
of position determination. 
  Needless to say, each set of specifications for an ER fluid 
is different depending on application requirements. However, 
such information has never been clarified. Therefore, material 
makers are completely confused when they say, ``We have no idea 
as to what kind of ER fluid we need to develop.'' Today, in 
order to pursue ER fluid development smoothly, one needs to (1) 
list possible applications for currently available ER fluids, 
and (2) roughly outline the specifications for an ER fluid 
required by each application. Such an attempt has already been 
initiated by the Special Research Group for ER Fluids and Their 
Applications of the Machine Element Lubrication Design Section 
of the Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers. The Special 
Research Group is expected to compile a report no earlier than 
March 1994, when the Group is to be disbanded. 

