BFN 

<F P=106> [Feature by Soumountha: "Nam Theun-Hinboun Hydro-Power </F>
Project Poses No Treat to Environment"] 
  [Text] "Nam Theun-Hinboun Hydro-Power Project poses no 
threat to environment." That was a welcome answer given to 
"VIENTIANE TIMES" reporters by the Project Manager. 
  In fact, this Hydro-Power project signed on April 20 augers 
well for the farming villages of the once-dry Nam Hai basin 
through possible small-scale irrigation systems taken into 
consideration under the Theun-Hinboun Hydro-Power Project. 
  Accessible by car, 300 km from Vientiane via Routes Nos. 13 
and 8, the project site is located roughly 100 km upstream of 
the place where Nam Theun meets the Mekong. The location thus 
lends itself perfectly for the purpose of developing an existing 
natural resource to earn foreign currency for the country. The 
Power Station when completed is expected to generate enough 
energy and income three times higher than that of Nam Ngum Power 
Station. 
  The combined technical know-how of the surveyors, designers, 
and construction engineers has resulted in this ingenious plan. 
The plan in brief is to construct an intake weir across Nam 
Theun at a point where a narrow mountain ridge separates the Nam 
Theun basin from the Nam Hinboun basin which lies at a lower 
level. The 240 metre difference in elevation will be fully 
exploited for power generation through a trans-basin diversion 
in that the water flow of Nam Theun will be diverted by 10 km of 
waterways into Nam Hai, a tributary of Nam Hinboun, eventually 
to the Mekong about 30 km upstream of Thakhek. In actual fact, 
water from Nam Theun will flow along a tunnel cut through the 
mountain, then down a 300 metre long inclined steel-lined 
pressure shaft, along a 650-m long steel-lined pressure tunnel 
to the power station on the other side of the mountain. The 
power station has an installed generating capacity of 210 MW 
(Megawatts). The water will then be discharged into Nam Hai 
through a 4-km long tailrace canal. 
  The 230 KV (Kilovolt) transmission line strung directly to 
the Thai border at Thakhek will be 100-km long. Beside the 
foreign currency earned, the Theun-Hinboun Power Project 
envisages power supply to meet future demands in Savannakhet and 
Thakhek, if the demand is high enough to justify the cost of a 
sub station. 
  Theun-Hinboun Power Project is the first attempt for private 
participation in the power sector in Laos. 
  This run-of-river hydropower development will be developed, 
owned and operated by the Theun-Hinboun Power Company Ltd., 
(THPC). Substantially all the power generated will be sold to 
the Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand (EGAT). 
  THPC is the combined efforts of Electricite du Laos (EDL, 55 
percent), Nordic Hydropower AB (NH, 25 percent) and MDX Power 
Company Ltd, (MDX, 20 percent). 
  THPC is established with a capital of U.S. dollar 110 
million. Asian Development Bank provides a U.S. dollar 60 
million loan towards EDL's equity contribution. THPC's debt 
financing will be arranged from a mix of commercial sources and 
export credits with a 30-years concession period. 
  Actual construction on site will begin at the end of this 
year's rainy season, and the Project will be commissioned in the 
third quarter of 1997. Commercial operation is expected to 
commence September 1, 1997. 
  Nordic Hydro Power (NH) will manage implementation of 
project 
and be responsible for operation while MDX Public Co. Ltd., 
Thailand is to handle accounting and financial management 
services. Local staff will be trained and deployed to the 
maximum possible extent. 
  There will be no resettlement or loss of cultural heritage 
because of Theun-Hinhoun Power Project. On the contrary, it 
will eliminate water supply constraints in the Nam Hai area 
during the dry season and increase fish production and improve 
navigation upstream of the diversion dam. The local community 
will benefit from improved health and education facilities, 
employment opportunities and rural electrification. 
  Theun-Hinboun Power Project will bring about the greening of 
the surrounding areas in many ways, in addition to earning hard 
currency for Laos. 

