BFN 

  [Text] The foreign minister contacted the UN secretary 
general by telephone last night and reiterated the Islamic 
Republic's readiness to dispatch forces to Bosnia. Velayati 
criticized the UN's policies and asked Butrus-Ghali: Is the 
fall of Gorazde not a prologue to the Serbs' attacks on other 
safe havens and the repetition of the Gorazde tragedy in vaster 
dimensions? 
  In answer to the criticisms by the Islamic Republic's 
foreign 
minister, the UN secretary general spoke about his efforts to 
solve the Bosnian problem, saying that he tried to encourage 
influential countries in the Security Council to defend Gorazde 
but that he failed. Butrus-Ghali promised to inform the 
Security Council of Iran's reiteration of its readiness to 
dispatch forces to Bosnia. 
  Minutes ago we contacted Velayati and asked him to comment 
on 
his contacts last night with the UN secretary general. Velayati 
said: Because of our repeated statements that we are ready to 
dispatch forces to Bosnia, Butrus-Ghali was mentally ready for 
this and promised that after holding talks with the Security 
Council members tonight he will inform us of the outcome of his 
steps concerning Iran's readiness to dispatch forces. 
  The second question we put to Velayati was: Two days ago the 
UN secretary general said that the only solution to the Bosnian 
problem is through talks. But in his remarks to you last night, 
he said that the Security Council members are not replying 
positively to his efforts for a military effort in Gorazde. 
There is a contradiction in these two stances. 
  In answer, Velayati described the future steps to be taken 
by 
our country as far as the Bosnian crisis is concerned: 
  [Begin Velayati recording] He [Butrus-Ghali] added last 
night that he has asked NATO to act but NATO has refrained. Of 
course, there is no doubt that the United Nations has displayed 
its inability in this field. Unfortunately, this organization 
and especially the Security Council has been transformed into a 
forum where big powers exercise their influence on it in order 
to fulfill their own intentions, and the innocent people in 
hotbeds become victims of the greed of influential powers in the 
Security Council. 
  Of course Mr. Butrus-Ghali has not used the power that the 
UN 
Charter has given him. On the basis of Article 99 of the UN 
Charter, when the Security Council is unable or unwilling to 
take a serious step to preserve world security and peace, the 
secretary general can use the UN tribune to call for help from 
world public opinion to overcome the specific problem that is 
threatening peace and security in some part of the world. But 
Mr. Butrus-Ghali has not made use of this power. 
  I told him last night: I want to know your opinion because 
after my conversation with you I intend to call the Islamic 
Conference Organization [ICO] secretary general and the 
Pakistani foreign minister who is the current president of the 
ICO and some others in order to organize the steps to be taken 
by Islamic countries. I want to know your opinion; and these 
are the next steps that we plan to take. 
  In tandem with our conversation, [Iranian UN representative] 
Dr. Kharrazi informed us from New York that he attended the 
contact group session there and that he proposed that the 
foreign ministers of the ICO contact group hold an emergency 
session in New York and call for presence in the Security 
Council to seriously discuss the issue at the Security Council. 
[end recording] 
  Minutes ago, IRNA reported from the United Nations that the 
UN secretary general discussed Iran's readiness to dispatch 
forces [to Bosnia] with Security Council members and that as 
usual, the Security Council did not make any decision on this. 

