Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Nikolayev article under "Security" rubric: </F>
"Vilnius Politicians Demand Missile Umbrella for Lithuania From 
NATO"] 
  [Text] As you know, the extraordinary NATO Council session 
in Brussels 10-11 January decided in favor of creating new 
Euro-Atlantic security structures to include Russia. This 
notwithstanding, the debate is continuing in Central and East 
Europe over the question of the unilateral eastward expansion of 
the North Atlantic alliance and the granting to these countries 
of bloc security guarantees without heed for Russia's vital 
interests. 
  Observing Vilnius officialdom's vigorous political rhetoric 
at this time over the republic's request to be admitted to NATO 
and, in particular, the statements on this score by J. 
Paletskis, adviser to the Lithuanian head of state, you 
involuntarily imagine yourself at a performance in a provincial 
theater given by amateur actors who faultlessly mouth the lines 
they have learned on stage but have a poor understanding, 
however, of the big picture and the roles of the main 
protagonists. 
  Lithuania's desire to come under the NATO defense umbrella, 
adviser Paletskis explains, is not directed against neighboring 
states and will not complicate its "good relations" with Russia. 
The political naivete of these statements, which are evidently 
designed as a formal apology to Russia, is obvious. Along with 
the illusory nature -- obvious even to a nonspecialist -- of the 
hopes of its request being met at this crucial stage in European 
history, this does make one wonder about the true motives behind 
this Lithuanian move. 
  Let us leave aside the domestic factors that brought about 
this decision. Even a fleeting glance at Vilnius's foreign 
activity indicates that the eternal desire to publicly combat a 
small state's inferiority complex, a desire which has repeatedly 
played a negative role over the last few years in the most 
recent history of Russian-Lithuanian relations, causing the 
republic considerable economic damage, has once again prevailed 
over the tendency to organize relations with its neighbors in a 
well-considered manner, without excessive emotion. 
  Amid the intensive dialogue under way in Europe over 
partnership strategy in the postbloc era and the vigorous 
formulation of fundamentally new security structures, 
Lithuania's desire to act at the expense of third countries 
evokes feelings of profound surprise and hostility. How can it 
speak of "good relations" with Russia and at the same time 
openly disregard the latter's pressing legitimate concerns which 
it has set out on various occasions -- to Lithuania among others. 
  These concerns are quite clear and understandable: Russia 
will not put up with any steps by its neighbors that hint at the 
possibility of its isolation and the resurrection of its former 
image as the potential adversary of "civilized Europeans." 
  In today's conditions Lithuania's declaration on joining 
NATO 
cannot be interpreted otherwise. Vilnius clearly realizes this, 
which evidently accounts for the desire on the part of top 
Lithuanian officials to hide the obvious and call black white. 
However, people here seem to be disregarding the fact that 
another division of Europe into blocs which would result from 
attempts to bar Russia from taking part in European security 
structures and NATO's expansion in direct proximity to Russia's 
borders may, given the Kaliningrad factor, create in the future 
unacceptable risks for Lithuania itself. 
  It only remains to hope that an honest, realistic approach 
to 
relations with Russia will prevail in Vilnius, along with a 
correct understanding of the interests of Vilnius's own security 
and prosperity, factors which, as it transpires, Lithuania must 
and can develop by acting with Russia rather than against it. 
Only then will the historical mutual mistrust between the two 
countries give way to a desire for partnership, only then will 
Russian-Lithuanian cooperation become natural and mutually 
beneficial and our relations be described as good without any 
diplomatic latitude. 

