Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Neris Germanas, Seimas chancellor and member of </F>
the Lithuanian Democratic Labor Party: "The Fever of `Taking' 
Power"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] The right-wing opposition 
declares its adherence to the principles of democracy, while at 
the same time it tries to destroy the legally elected government 
by all means. It has one sole goal -- to regain its lost power 
at any cost. However, this cannot be achieved in a democratic 
manner, at least not in the near future. 
  All sociological surveys to date show that, despite all 
proposed populist and socialist slogans, the rating of rightist 
parties is low. 
  Nevertheless, it is very difficult to wait for the election 
date set by the Constitution.... The only thing that remains 
then is to arouse emotions, inspire and often even organize 
different acts of dissatisfaction and strikes, and enhance 
social tension through all possible measures, often by 
objectively damaging the vital interests of the state and 
satisfying egoistical personal or group interests. All this is 
accomplished under the cover of the same well-known 
organizations, and recently even in the name of "the nation" and 
"the working people." 
  How familiar everything is! 
  Turning back to the past and analyzing different facts, one 
can say today that such well-planned and coordinated actions 
began immediately after 25 October 1992, when the Seimas 
[parliament] of the Republic of Lithuania assembled for its 
first session. It was already then, when the bitterness of the 
right wing over its defeat in the parliamentary elections had 
not yet subsided, that a course toward the removal of 
Lithuania's new and democratic power was chosen. If in the 
beginning the right wing had some illusion that the presidential 
elections might change the situation slightly, it became 
absolutely clear to its leaders after the ballot that their 
prestige among the population is hopelessly low. We can judge 
this from the fact that their leader V. Landsbergis refused to 
run for the Presidency, and they had to search for such a 
candidate [S. Lozoraitis] abroad. All this must have encouraged 
them to continue the policy of discrediting and "taking" power. 
It is paradoxical that radicals from the other extreme are 
talking similarly about the necessity of "taking" power. 
  Since the very beginning, the minds of local and foreign 
"strategists" have considered two possible ways of returning to 
power -- armed and unarmed. Conditions have been created for 
both options, without dismissing either one. Recurrent rumors 
about possible coups were not only statements by irresponsible 
people, as sometimes they are presented. [passage omitted] 
  The withdrawal of a volunteers' group to the woods near 
Kaunas also had different goals aside from service and 
accommodation problems. This was not an attempt to rise or to 
raise an armed conflict. Its key goal was to test the reaction 
of the community -- and not only in Lithuania -- to the 
possibility of "taking" power by force of arms. [passage 
omitted] 
  Power seems to be the sweetest and most desired fruit for 
some people. It is no wonder that the first public talks about 
early elections began after this failed armed action. This 
means that another and historically legal way of "taking" power 
was chosen. The scenario is totally clear: To build up a 
feeling of dissatisfaction in the community, organize strikes 
and other actions, put forward and implement the idea of a 
referendum; in other words, to remove the current government and 
return to power. There is no talk about some serious program of 
action because it does not exist. The most important thing is 
to return to power. 
  This campaign began at meetings with constituents in 
different areas back in the summer. [passage omitted] 
  The congress of the Homeland Union (Lithuanian 
Conservatives), held on 11-12 December, clearly mentioned the 
necessity of early elections. 
  It is not enough to put forward an idea. It is necessary to 
root it in "cultivated" soil. 
  What affects the human mood most today? 
  The economy! Therefore, to inspire the citizens' 
dissatisfaction, first of all, it is necessary to make them 
discontent with both the country's economic situation and their 
own financial condition. 
  Of course, this situation is really difficult today. 
However, it has not emerged over the past year alone. For 
example, the highest inflation in Lithuania was between 1991 and 
1992. However, the initiators of new elections keep silent 
about this. 
  Right-wing forces can aggravate the current situation 
through 
their representatives in various government structures by 
"putting spokes" into government policies and fostering relevant 
social moods. Furthermore, it is quite easy to exaggerate 
different threats and inspire suspicion in today's politicized 
Lithuania in personal and political group interests. 
  We can clearly notice all of this in our current life. 
Seeking its own interests alone and discarding long-term state 
interests, the right-wing opposition is pursuing the tactics of 
economic and financial destabilization and government paralysis. 
I could mention the constant blocking of credits to Lithuania 
and the discarding of almost all proposed decisions in the 
Seimas as an example. However, loans from Western countries and 
international organizations link Lithuania firmly with those 
states and help it resolve definite economic problems. However, 
it looks like the right-wing opposition does not need this. 
  In the social sphere, the opposition is constantly trying to 
sustain tension by inspiring and, maybe, organizing strikes and 
supporting the demands of pensioners, disabled people, farmers, 
and practically all other protesters. [passage omitted] 
  Special attention is devoted to the Lithuanian Democratic 
Labor Party [LDDP]. Destroying LDDP unity, causing suspicion 
among its members, and advocating a split, a "hardline" policy, 
and "strong" personalities in the mass media in a peculiar 
manner, the right-wing opposition seeks to undermine the LDDP 
influence in the community, government structures, and the 
Seimas. 
  One could provide many more examples of such obvious and not 
so apparent activities. However, the presented examples may be 
sufficient to draw one conclusion: All of these activities have 
one key goal -- to discredit the party which enjoys the majority 
in the Seimas and its government, and seek early elections by 
all possible means. 
  As the prime ministers of the three Baltic states noted 
unanimously yesterday, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia have 
already survived the worst times. Foreign experts also confirm 
this. Thus, what is the aim of this destructive policy of 
negation? Certainly, not to serve Lithuania! 

