Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Baghdad, 29 Mar (INA)--Commenting on the statement 
issued by the UN Special Commission yesterday on what it 
described as an attack with stones by a group of people on a 
helicopter belonging to the Commission at Saddam Hospital in 
Mosul, northern Iraq, an official spokesman for the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs has stated the following: 
  1. Three helicopters belonging to the UN Special Commission 
have been operating in Iraq since late 1991. These helicopters 
carry out the tasks assigned by the UN Special Commission in 
accordance with Resolutions 687 and 715. 
  2. In emergency cases, the UN Special Commission requests 
that Iraq agree to the use of these helicopters in medical 
evacuation operations for other UN organizations. For 
humanitarian reasons, Iraq has agreed on such sorties, despite 
the fact that the missions of these helicopters have nothing to 
do with medical evacuations for organizations other than the UN 
Special Commission. 
  3. On 26 March, the Special Commission requested that Iraq 
give permission for one of the helicopters to carry out medical 
evacuation from Mosul to Baghdad for two UN guards at Saddam 
General Hospital. Iraq agreed to the request for humanitarian 
reasons, and the helicopter's route was defined from the 
al-Rashid Air Base in Baghdad to the Ibn-Firnas Air Base in 
Mosul. 
  4. On 27 March, a helicopter belonging to the Special 
Commission, accompanied by an Iraqi helicopter, left Baghdad for 
Mosul. A few minutes before arriving at the Ibn-Firnas Air Base 
in Mosul, UN elements accompanying the two UN guards at Saddam 
Hospital in Mosul contacted the Special Commission's helicopter 
and requested that it land at Saddam Hospital because the 
ambulance at this hospital was not fit for transferring the 
wounded to the Ibn-Firnas Air Base. 
  5. When the helicopter approached the base, the pilot of 
the UN Special Commission's helicopter requested that Iraq 
change the landing area and to make it the Saddam Hospital in 
Mosul. Despite the fact that the Iraqi side knew that this 
request would be difficult to meet due to the existence of 
technical and administrative obstacles that require advance 
preparation, it responded to the request for humanitarian 
reasons and based on the Special Commission's pledge that the 
landing at the hospital would be on their own responsibility. 
  6. When the Special Commission's helicopter landed suddenly 
in the Saddam Hospital area, which is a residential area, some 
of the citizens, visitors of the Saddam Hospital, assembled and 
expressed spontaneous anger by throwing stones at the 
helicopter. These feelings are not at all strange to Iraqis 
these days. 
  7. The accompanying Iraqi side did all that it could to 
protect the Special Commission's helicopter and its crew, and 
through their efforts, they were able to control the situation. 
Three accompanying Iraqis and a UN employee were slightly 
wounded as a result of the stone hurled at them. Among those 
who were wounded was the accompanying Iraqi pilot. The Special 
Commission's helicopter also sustained slight damage as a result 
of stones hitting it. Afterwards, the helicopter accomplished 
its mission and transported the two injured UN guards to Baghdad 
peacefully. 
  8. The abovementioned facts show that the incident, which 
was limited and spontaneous, was the result of the Special 
Commission's miscalculation by changing the landing area from 
the air base to a residential area in the center of Mosul. All 
this took place only a few minutes before the scheduled landing 
at the air base. From a technical and security viewpoint, this 
made it difficult, in fact impossible, for the Iraqi side to 
secure a new landing site due to the shortness of time, and in 
light of the fact that the Special Commission's pilots changed 
the landing area at their own responsibility. Facts also prove 
that Iraq exerted every effort to control the situation. This 
fact was recognized and appreciated by the German crew of the 
helicopter. 

