Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "U.S. State Secretary's Statement -- Need for </F>
Further Steps"] 
  [Text] Warren Christopher, the U.S. secretary of state, has 
categorically stated that one of the U.S. priorities is to have 
the nuclear capabilities of both India and Pakistan frozen. He 
said one important priority for us is to find a way in which the 
nuclear capabilities of both India and Pakistan can be frozen 
and conditions be created under which the nuclear threat to 
South Asia is reduced. Speaking at the House of Representatives 
Subcommittee on Appropriations, Warren Christopher disclosed 
that both India and Pakistan are at the threshold of acquiring 
nuclear facility and we are very concerned about that. One more 
issue that is raising its head, he added, is the capability of 
these two countries to deliver nuclear weapons to their targets 
and we are also paying due attention to it. Christopher's 
statement is the first policy statement from the highest level 
official of the Clinton administration, in which an evenhanded 
policy has been adopted toward the nuclear capabilities of both 
India and Pakistan, and which has caused due concern among the 
Indian community living in the United States. According to the 
daily NEWS, Christopher's statement has caused great resentment 
among the Indian community which understands that this new 
statement, which came close on the heels of the U.S. declaring 
Kashmir as a disputed territory, is the reflection of a shift in 
the U.S. attitude. 
  This is a matter of satisfaction that a most important 
official of the U.S. Administration has spoken about the nuclear 
programs of both India and Pakistan in a fair and equitable 
manner, but a mere expression of view by the United States 
cannot be considered adequate to meet the requirements of 
justice. James Moran, a member of the same subcommittee, asked 
Christopher: When you talk of adopting an evenhanded approach 
to the nuclear programs of both India and Pakistan, what is the 
justification for applying the Pressler Amendment only to 
Pakistan and not to India? The secretary of state pointed to 
his other engagements instead of replying to this question and 
sought leave of the committee. This reflects that Warren 
Christopher could not defend the continuation of a 
discriminatory legislation against Pakistan and it was not 
possible for him to prove whether there was any justification 
for the Pressler Amendment in view of Washington's desire to 
treat both India and Pakistan equally. 
  It is true that the signals given in recent weeks indicate 
that the U.S. Administration either intends to totally waive the 
application of the Pressler Amendment or wants to provide 
military aid, especially the F-16 aircraft, to Pakistan by 
finding some exceptional ways even while the Pressler Amendment 
remains effective. However, no practical way has thus far been 
found under which aid to Pakistan can be restored without 
harming its interests. This proves that the talk of equal 
treatment to both India and Pakistan is still in its initial 
stage and the actions of the U.S. Government do not confirm the 
veracity of its pronouncements. If the U.S. Government views 
both India and Pakistan equally in the context of their nuclear 
programs and intends to place them on equal footing, then it 
must abolish the discriminatory legislation like the Pressler 
Amendment or impose the same restrictions on India as are placed 
on Pakistan. If this is not done, then the claims about 
treating both India and Pakistan equally will appear only hollow 
and unreliable. 
  It is no secret that India had exploded a nuclear device 
some 
20 years ago and possesses enormous resources for the 
advancement of its nuclear program. The United States had been 
keeping its eyes closed to India's nuclear program for the past 
20 years. On one occasion, Washington rather directly assisted 
India in acquiring heavy water from France without raising any 
objection to it. The U.S. has also supplied computer technology 
to India, which also can be used for military purposes. In the 
presence of this policy, the U.S. claims about treating India 
and Pakistan equally cannot be accepted to be correct. 
Christopher's statement can be welcomed as a first step 
forward, but Washington needs to do much more to prove that its 
approach is fair. Pakistan has been declaring for the past 10 
years that it is ready to sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty provided India also did the same, but the U.S. failed to 
fully use its influence on India to persuade it to do so. It is 
hoped that the statement of the U.S. secretary of state will 
prove to be the first drop of rain for Pakistan and Washington 
will really be able to adopt a fair and equitable policy on 
South Asia and will stop pressuring Islamabad to unilaterally 
"cap" its nuclear program. No Pakistani Government can ever 
think of taking such a step under any greed or pressure, and 
this is a fact which the United States should never overlook. 

