BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "European Union Limits Immigrant </F>
Entry -- [Belgian Interior Minister] Tobback Would Have Liked To 
Modify Text"] 
  [Text] In Luxembourg on Monday [20 June], the European 
Union (EU) governments committed themselves to setting strict 
limits on the entry of immigrant workers into the EU. 
  "The high unemployment rates currently affecting the member 
states strengthen the need to implement community preference in 
employment," emphasized the resolution, passed on Monday in 
Luxembourg by the EU's interior and justice ministers. At 
present, the EU has 18 million unemployed, representing 
approximently 11 percent of the working population. 
  The Maastricht Treaty, which took effect in November 1993, 
gives the EU new powers in justice and home affairs. This 
resolution on immigrant workers corresponds very largely to the 
policies which the member states have been following for some 
years, a diplomatic source indicated. 
  Immigrant workers will only have access to a job in the EU 
if 
the position cannot be filled "by national and community labor 
or by noncommunity labor which has permanent and legal residence 
in the member state," the resolution states. In this case, 
immigrant workers with a work permit will be able to enter the 
EU. The resolution specifies that the member states "reserve 
the right, in accordance with their national legislation," to 
also accept the spouse and children of those workers who are 
allowed into the EU on an exceptional basis. 
  The resolution lets it be understood that seasonal work must 
be encouraged. For this purpose, immigrants will be allowed to 
stay in the EU for up to six months per year. It advises the 
national authorities to limit "the admission of these workers to 
cases where there is no reason to think that the interested 
party will seek to stay permanently on its territory." 
  Permanent workers will only be allowed to stay for a 
duration 
less than or equal to four years in a first stage. 
  Belgian Interior Minister Louis Tobback was concerned by the 
text's "negative tone" and indicated to his colleagues that he 
would have liked to see some modifications, while maintaining 
the resolution's main principles, a diplomatic source indicated. 
  The resolution's principles will not be applied to people 
with the right of asylum, refugees allowed to stay for 
humanitarian reasons, and asylum-seekers. They can be made more 
flexible on the basis of bilateral agreements between members 
states and certain third countries. 
  The delicate question of workers with a work permit in one 
EU 
member state wishing to work in another EU member state was left 
for a later resolution. 

