BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Port-au-Prince Radio Metropole in French 
at 1045 GMT on 17 June carries its regularly scheduled newscast, 
which includes the following reports: 
<H5>  Government Urges Public To Help Police </H5>
  "The government in Port-au-Prince has asked everyone living 
in the cities and in the provinces to remain alert to the 
current team's orders and to collaborate with the local police 
forces and to be ready, if the case arises, to lend them a hand 
in fulfilling the exceptional duties that the latest 
acceleration of the crisis has imposed." 
<H5>  Ministry Release on Housing Foreigners </H5>
  "The Information and Coordination Ministry has reissued an 
Interior Ministry press release reminding hotels, boarding 
houses, and people housing foreigners that under Article 60/61 
of the 26 December 1978 law, they are required to notify the 
Immigration and Emigration Service as well as the Police Bureau 
within 24 hours of the arrival of a customer, resident, or 
foreign tenant." 
<H5>  Front Official Chambelain Returns </H5>
  "Louis Jodel Chambelain has returned to the fold. 
Chambelain, who temporarily distanced himself from his 
political base, seems to have recovered his position within the 
Revolutionary Front for the Promotion and Progress of Haiti. 
Chambelain renewed his support for the Jonassaint government 
after several untimely statements." 
  Radio Metropole then airs the following recorded remarks by 
Chambelain: "We respond to the appointment today as we did in 
Crete-a-Pierrot, Breda, and the Citadelle Henri. How can we 
forget 11 October 1993, the lucky day when all of our cohorts 
demonstrated a chivalrous spirit and, in unison along the 
Port-au-Prince shoreline, protested the opposition and its 
self-interested generosity under the cover of humanitarian aid. 
How can we forget those deeply moving pages in history on which 
the story is written of burning tires burning our alive 
brothers? The pills of yesterday are too hard to swallow. No! 
We will not change." 

