BFN 

  [Text] Nairobi, May 8 (AFP) -- Rebels and government 
soldiers battled for control of Rwanda's capital Sunday [8 May] 
despite two ceasefire announcements. 
  Gunfire crackled and mortars boomed in central Kigali as 
sporadic battles continued, relief officials and a United 
Nations spokesman said. 
  But fighting slackened off considerably over the weekend 
after a week of fierce artillery duels, they said. 
  UN spokesman Abdul Kabia expressed "cautious optimism" about 
a ceasefire. 
  One ceasefire to start at midnight Saturday was signed by 
Rwanda's interim government in Tanzania last week. 
  The rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front (RPF), which refused to 
negotiate with the government which they consider illegitimate, 
did not sign. 
  But Tanzanian officials said the rebels had promised 
verbally 
to observe the ceasefire. 
  Zaire's ambassador to Belgium said the rebels had signed 
another ceasefire to begin at midnight Sunday. 
  There was no confirmation from the rebels themselves, but 
Kabia said they had asked the UN to send ceasefire monitors to 
work with their military commanders. 
  "There is an eerie calm now and occasional shooting," Kabia 
told AFP by telephone from Kigali. "We are working on modalities 
of implementing the ceasefire with both sides, and we are in 
constant contact with both sides." 
  Foreigners who arrived in Nairobi said they had seen bodies 
lying on the streets with their limbs and heads hacked off with 
machetes as they drove to the Kigali airport Sunday. 
  They said that even if the rebels and army observed the 
ceasefire, pro-government militias would still send death squads 
to butcher members of the minority Tutsi tribe which supports 
the rebels, and opposition supporters. 
  "They kill silently," said a foreigner who requested 
anonymity. "Even when you can't hear shells, they're still out 
there killing." 
  He estimated that militiamen from the majority Hutu tribe 
had 
killed "more than half" the 100,000 people slain since the April 
6 death of president Juvenal Habyarimana unleashed a torrent of 
blood in the tiny central African country prone to ethnic 
massacres over three decades. 
  The foreigners said the rebels appeared to have sealed off 
Kigali on three sides and believed they were on the point of 
taking it. 
  The Red Cross meanwhile said it would evacuate some wounded 
people later this week from Kigali's main hospital to Kabgayi, 
about 45 kiLometres (27 miles) southwest of Kigali. 
  Patrick Gasser, deputy head of the International Committee 
of 
the Red Cross delegation in Kigali, denied reports of a mass 
evacuation to start Sunday. 
  "We are opening a new field hospital in a convent in 
Kabgayi, 
about three kilometres south of Gitarama town," Gasser said. 
  "The Kigali hospital is overcrowded and we cannot discharge 
any patients for security reasons," he said. 
  Thousands of Rwandans crammed into the hospital fear that if 
they leave they may become easy targets, diplomats said in 
Nairobi. 
  Gasser said government forces had guaranteed the security of 
patients to be transferred to Kabgayi, controlled by the interim 
government proclaimed after Habyarimana's death. 
  The rebels have also been informed of the plan. 
  "We don't expect the army or the RPF to attack our convoys," 
Gasser said. 
  Only patients well enough to travel by truck will be sent 
from Kigali to Kabgayi, but a surgical team will treat local 
casualties, Gasser said. 
  The first UN relief plane into Kigali since the world body 
suspended flights after one of its aircraft came under fire 
Thursday landed safely at the airport Sunday. 
  The UN resumed flights carrying desperately needed medicine 
and food after both sides pledged not to attack relief planes. 
  A visit by the new UN human rights commissioner Jose Ayala 
Lasso to Rwanda was delayed by "a day or so," Kabia said. 
  He had been scheduled to arrive in Kigali on Sunday in his 
first mission since taking office a week ago. 
  But Kabia said he would only reach the Kenyan capital 
Nairobi 
on Monday and would probably go to Kigali on Tuesday. 

