BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Wang Chuanzhen (3769 0278 4176)] </F>
  [Text] Guangzhou, 25 Jun (XINHUA) -- During his recent 
fact-finding trip to flood-stricken areas in Guangdong, Xie Fei, 
member of the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau and 
secretary of the Guangdong Provincial CPC Committee, rallied and 
called on all cadres and people to provide for themselves and 
help each other by engaging in production with the assistance of 
all quarters, and to do all they can to make up for losses 
caused by the disaster, in a spirit of motivation, collectivism, 
and self-reliance. 
  From 23 to 25 June, Xie Fei led officials in charge of the 
provincial party committee, government, and military district to 
assess disaster damage in Qingyuan, Yingde, and Shaoguan, as 
well as on the the Bei Jiang dike. They also studied specific 
disaster control and relief measures and procedures. 
  Since mid-June, Guangdong has been stricken by this year's 
No. 3 strong tropical storm and by the largest flood since New 
China's founding. The storm and flood have affected more than 
11 million people in nine cities and 60 counties and districts, 
and caused heavy economic losses. 
  The Guangdong Provincial CPC Committee and government have 
taken decisive and effective measures to protect the Bei Jiang 
dike, which plays an important role in ensuring the safety of 
Guangzhou, Shenzhen, and the Zhujiang delta region. Party, 
government, and military leaders at all levels have taken the 
lead by directing the evacuation of people on the frontline of 
flood control and relief operations and by saving state property 
and stranded disaster victims. Many moving deeds have come to 
the fore. 
  Xie Fei commended primary party organizations in 
disaster-stricken areas for displaying fighting power at the 
crucial moment. He said: Faced with the flood, grass-roots 
cadres and CPC members in the countryside have played a vanguard 
and exemplary role by rescuing disaster victims and protecting 
people's interests without regard for their personal safety. 
The People's Liberation Army [PLA] has played a crucial role at 
the critical moment. Facts confirm the presence of PLA troops 
in every disaster-stricken area. 
  During the trip, Xie Fei showed deep concern for clothing, 
food, housing, and health care for disaster victims. He often 
had conversations with senior citizens, women, village cadres, 
party branch secretaries, town administrative heads, and 
peasants working in the fields. He was very pleased to see that 
cadres and people in disaster-stricken areas were in high 
spirits, had great trust in the party and government, and were 
confident of overcoming the disaster. He was particularly glad 
to learn that, thanks to rescue operations launched by all 
quarters, not a single person had died of starvation or disease 
or had been forced by famine to flee their hometown. 
  Xie Fei said emphatically: Party and government departments 
at all levels should continue working to ensure that people in 
disaster-stricken areas will lead a stable life, to keep the 
markets there stable, and to ensure social stability. He noted: 
The primary task of the moment in disaster-stricken areas is to 
resume production quickly by all means, to ensure high yields 
and bumper harvests of late crops, and to tend winter-planted 
crops as if they were single crops to make up for losses 
inflicted on early crops. Authoritative command posts for 
disaster relief operations should be set up at the provincial, 
city, and county levels so that relief operations will be 
carried out in earnest under unified leadership, in 
coordination, and through common efforts and shared 
responsiblity. Banking, insurance, civil affairs, industrial, 
communications, agricultural, public health, commercial, and 
public security departments at all levels should show strong 
motivation and enthusiasm, and go all-out to assist 
disaster-stricken areas. Leaders at all levels should mobilize, 
rely on, organize, and help the masses to overcome difficulties. 
  Xie Fei told party and government leaders in 
disaster-stricken areas: The floods have taught us a good 
lesson. From now on, we should pay attention to harnessing big 
rivers and to building water conservancy projects, and give 
priority to disaster prevention in modernization. 
  Accompanying Xie Fei on his fact-finding trip were Wen 
Yuzhu, 
commander of the Guangdong Provincial Military District, and 
officials in charge of relevant departments. 

