BFN 

  [Text] A news conference took place on Tuesday 31 May in 
the Consulate General of the Republic of Cuba in St. Petersburg. 
A reportage by our correspondent Vladimir Izotov has the 
details. 
  [Izotov] (Felix Leon Carabello), consul general of the 
Republic of Cuba in St. Petersburg, did not conceal the fact 
that the main aim of the news conference was to attract the 
attention of Russian and, in the first place, St. Petersburg 
businessmen toward cooperation with his country. 
  In the early 1980's trade turnover between Cuba and the 
Soviet Union was some 7 to 8 billion rubles [R] per annum, Mr. 
(Caraballo) recalled, in terms of the ruble exchange rate at 
that time. Now it would be excellent if the target of R1.5 to 2 
billion could be achieved, he added. 
  After the break-up of the Soviet Union and the Council for 
Mutual Economic Assistance, considerable changes took place in 
Cuba, the consul general said. Circulation of foreign currency 
has been legalized in the country. Joint enterprises, in the 
first place in the sphere of tourism, have undergone development. 
  The most hurtful thing, Mr. (Caraballo) added, is that the 
place of the Soviet Union in the development of such sectors of 
the Cuban economy as the nickel and oil refining industries has 
been taken not by Russia but by Canada, Sweden, and other 
western countries. 
  In reply to a question by the Radio Rossii correspondent 
about trade cooperation with our country, Cuba's consul general 
remarked that not very long ago an agreement was signed on the 
delivery of 1 billion tonnes of Cuba sugar to Russia in exchange 
for 2.5 billion tonnes of Russian oil. The government of St. 
Petersburg and Leningrad oblast is showing an interest in 
developing partner relations with Cuba, Mr. (Caraballo) 
remarked. The joint (Petrokub) firm is already in operation -- 
it is engaged in exporting Cuban tobacco to St. Petersburg. A 
joint enterprise for the delivery of Cuban medicines to Russia's 
northwestern region will start functioning soon. 

