BFN 

<F P=106> [By Annie Thomas] </F>
  [Excerpts] Kigali, April 12 (AFP) -- Ethnic Tutsi rebels 
fought their way into the Rwandan capital Tuesday [12 April], 
sending the government, foreigners and thousands of residents 
fleeing in fear of a new wave of tribal bloodletting. 
  As intense fighting rocked several parts of the city, the 
Hutu-dominated interim government fled its headquarters in the 
Hotel des Diplomates in downtown Kigali "for a more secure 
place," a Rwandan soldier in the hotel said. Unconfirmed 
reports said the week-old government had moved to the town of 
Gitarama, southwest of the city. 
  The last foreign residents seeking to leave the city were 
meanwhile escorted to the airport by French and Belgian 
paratroopers. France, Russia, Germany and the United States 
said they had evacuated virtually all their nationals from the 
city. 
  In Kampala, Christine Umutoni, spokeswoman for the 
Tutsi-dominated Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), said its forces 
had entered Kigali and were about to join a batallion of 600 
fellow rebels camped outside the city under a UN-sponsored peace 
plan approved by the two sides in August. She said RPF forces 
were awaiting instructions from their headquarters to seize the 
capital, where she said "government forces had dispersed, many 
of them surrendering with their arms to the RPF." The entry of 
the RPF rebels into the city was later confirmed by UN 
headquarters in New York. 
  The RPF totals around 20,000 rebels, as against an estimated 
30,000 government troops. [passage omitted] 
  The latest fighting erupted after the country's long-ruling 
Hutu president, Juvenal Habyarimana, was killed when his plane 
crashed here April 6, reportedly after being hit by a rocket. 
  His death sparked an orgy of killing, mostly of minority 
Tutsis by the majority Hutus. More than 10,000 people were 
killed in the capital alone, according to foreign relief workers. 
  The RPF has said for several days that it was sending troops 
into the capital to "restore order" and has rejected the interim 
government set up after Habyarimana's death, saying it was 
hostile to the Tutsis' goal of sharing power. As the rebels 
closed in on the capital and the government fled, residents 
emerged from hiding in their homes, hotels and foreign missions 
and tried to escape an expected wave of revenge killings by the 
Tutsi forces. 
  "It's going to be carnage," predicted a Nairobi-based 
Rwandan 
diplomat. [passage omitted] 
  Throughout the day, troops with the UN peacekeeping force 
here negotiated brief halts in the fighting around the capital 
so that the last convoys of foreign nations could get to the 
airport. But about 25 foreigners working for the International 
Red Cross remained behind to take care of the hundreds of 
wounded suffering in the city's hospitals. The Red Cross 
workers said a surgical team was due to arrive Wednesday despite 
the fighting and another group from the organisation Doctors 
Without Borders was at the airport waiting for an opportunity to 
enter the city. 
  Meanwhile the tribal killings continued and more bodies 
could 
be seen strewn around the city's streets. 
  Umutoni, the RPF spokeswoman, said the rebels planned to 
form 
a broad-based administration as called for under the peace 
accord signed last August aimed at reconciling the Hutu majority 
and Tutsi minority communities prior to free elections by 1995. 
"We shall put in place a framework where everybody can act 
together in the spirit of" the Arusha peace agreement," Umutoni 
said. But she stressed that the RPF would not cooperate with 
what she called "the illegitimate (interim) government of 
assassins." [passage omitted] 

