Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The eighth contact of working-level delegates for 
the exchange of North-South top-level special envoys took place 
today in the South side's area of Panmunjom amid great 
expectations and the attention of people at home and abroad. 
  The head of our side's delegation delivered the following 
keynote speech at the contact: 
  Almost 10 months have passed since our side proposed the 
North-South exchange of top-level special envoys last year, a 
significant event in national history, out of a patriotic 
position to achieve the cause of the country's reunification, 
the nation's greatest earnest desire, at an early date. The 
contact of the two sides' working-level delegates for the 
exchange of special envoys, which started here in Panmunjom amid 
the attention of people at home and abroad, has taken place on 
as many as eight occasions. 
  I would be correct to say that the entire course of the long 
discussions and contacts of working-level delegates of the two 
sides was a course in which one can distinguish between unity 
and confrontation, between national independence and dependence 
on outside forces, and between patriotism and treachery, which 
are incompatible with each other. 
  As all facts show clearly, our side, as the side which 
proposed the exchange of special envoys, has made every sincere 
effort to ensure that special envoys be exchanged satisfactorily 
in a favorable atmosphere. 
  Despite our sincere efforts and bold and magnanimous 
attitudes, no decisive phase could open to comply with the 
fellow countrymen's earnest desire and the expectations of 
people at home and abroad. And, rather, it is now difficult to 
predict prospects for the exchange of special envoys. We cannot 
help but express deep regret over this. 
  The contact for the exchange of special envoys, which 
started 
and has proceeded along arduous courses with differing views, 
has not been able to reap fruits and faces a grave obstacle 
today. This is totally caused by the South side's attitude 
toward this contact of working-level delegates and the exchange 
of special envoys. 
  The South opposed the exchange of special envoys from the 
very beginning. Even when, pressed by the public opinion at 
home and abroad, it attended the working-level delegates 
contacts, it pretended to be interested in the exchange of 
special envoys and made every effort in and out of the room of 
the talks to prevent progress in the contacts for the exchange 
of special envoys. This antidialogue act by the South side has 
indefinitely delayed the exchange of special envoys, which could 
have taken place in one or two rounds of contacts. 
  These days when, even amid twists and turns, step by step 
progress has been made at the contacts of working-level 
delegates, thanks to our side's magnanimity and sincerity, the 
South side has more openly committed acts to block the exchange 
of special envoys, instead of feeling responsible for this as a 
matter of course and rectifying its incorrect attitude. This 
has threatened the future of the exchange of special envoys. 
  We could not but express a deep worry over this and would 
like to express our side's position on today's contact of 
working-level delegates. 
  First, our side considers the four-point demand we have made 
in connection with the prevailing situation to be entirely just 
and has no choice but to insist on the four-point demand again. 
  After suddenly changing its attitude, the South side is now 
crying for a tough reaction [kanggyongdaeung] against its 
dialogue partner and openly babbling that the Team Spirit joint 
military exercise must be resumed, that the plan to introduce 
Patriot missiles must be reexamined, and that international 
sanctions must be imposed on someone else. 
  This is, indeed, an act that destroys [pagoe] the contact of 
working-level delegates for the exchange of special envoys and 
brings our country's situation to a very dangerous touch-and-go 
phase. 
  These acts the South side has committed against its dialogue 
partner graphically show that the South side's remarks at the 
previous contact with us that the issue of discontinuing all 
large- scale nuclear war exercises and abandoning an 
international alliance [kukche kongjo cheje] can be discussed 
during the exchange of special envoys were false. These acts 
also graphically show that its remarks that the situation has 
changed from the time it said that it could not shake hands with 
a partner that has nuclear weapons and its remarks that it has 
decided to withhold the plan to introduce Patriot missiles were 
all deceptive. 
  It would be correct to say that without changing from the 
past, the South side is committing a grave crime by again trying 
to stage nuclear war exercises against its fellow countrymen 
with outside forces, pursuing an international alliance to harm 
its fellow countrymen, entering into confrontation with us, and 
trying to frustrate the exchange of special envoys from the 
preparatory stage. 
  Viewed from this perspective, the fact that in the previous 
rounds of contacts our side asked the South side to express a 
clear attitude toward the four-point demand was very just, and 
we have no choice but to insist on it again. 
  We strongly demand that the South side bear responsibility 
for building artificial obstacles to the contact of 
working-level delegates and make clear its attitude toward our 
side's just four- point demand at today's contact. 
  Second, we cannot but take a serious look at the fact that 
the South side has tried to use the exchange of special envoys 
for other political purposes, taking a dishonest attitude toward 
the working-level delegates contacts. 
  The South side has never come out to the working-level 
delegates contacts with a position of actually realizing the 
envoy exchange. Even most recently, despite of the fact that our 
side took an epochal and magnanimous step on our own initiative 
to advance the working-delegate contacts for the envoy exchange, 
the South side did not answer our magnanimity and goodwill with 
understanding and sincerity. Worse still, the South side 
stubbornly opposed to and disapproved our constructive proposal 
on announcing a joint communique in which the two sides would 
have reaffirmed the will for the envoy exchange and agreed to 
exchange special envoys at the earliest possible date. 
  This is an act lacking common sense that a person with a 
sound mind cannot possibly do and it is an unjust act of 
opposing only for the sake of opposition which only the 
South--used to sticking to its unreasonable insistence--can 
commit. As regards to the duties of special envoys, the South 
knows that the issues on firmly protecting the nation's 
self-independence and promoting the whole nation's great unity 
are keys to promoting North-South relations and realizing the 
country's reunification cause. This notwithstanding, the South 
opposed to fixing these as special envoys' duties. It went so 
far as to aggravate the air surrounding the contact by 
committing an act of finding faults with its dialogue partner. 
  All these clearly tell that the South side attempts to delay 
the working-delegate contacts and abort the envoy exchange by 
playing an insincere show [moyang gachugi] of dialogues. The 
South side with outside forces, under this pretext, intends to 
put a brake on the third round of the DPRK-U.S. talks. 
  South Korea's insincere attitude toward the envoy exchange 
can only be said to be an anti-national, flunkeyist act of 
giving profits to the outside forces by trampling on the 
interest of fellow countrymen. 
  The South side is now facing the situation under which it 
can 
no longer hide or deny its intention before the people of the 
world that it used the working-delegate contact for envoy 
exchange as a means to deliberately rupture the DPRK-U.S. talks. 
We strongly urge the South side to apologize to the nation, 
frankly admitting that it has abused the working-level contact 
to hinder the DPRK-U.S. talks, fully revealing its dark 
intention. 
  Third, we cannot but take a serious look of the fact that 
the 
South side is bringing the North-South relations to the phase of 
an unpredictable confrontation by trying to hinder the DPRK-U.S. 
talks and abort the exchange of special envoys. 
  The South side, behind the curtain of dialogue, tries to 
stage a large-scale nuclear war exercise against its fellow 
countrymen in collaboration with outside forces. In addition, 
the South side continues to perpetrate acts of antagonizing its 
dialogue partner. 
  The South side is wielding the National Security Law, which 
even the United States is calling for its abolishment, and 
openly brands its dialogue partner as an anti-state group even 
in the courts. It went so far as to block the opposition party 
figures, who wish to meet with us for the country's 
reunification, from paying righteous visits to the North, thus 
agitating confrontation. 
  Confrontation and dialogue can never go together. It is a 
matter of course that confrontation will lead to a collision and 
a collision will escalate to a war [taegyorun chungdorul 
kajyoogimaryonimyo chungdorun chonjaenguro ponjyojigimaryonida]. 
  It is not very difficult to foresee how the situation will 
develop if the South side, in collision with the outside forces, 
attempts to stage the Team Spirit nuclear war exercise; brings 
in modern weapons, including Patriot missiles; and, furthermore, 
joins in the so-called international cooperative system. 
  We will never sit back and watch anybody trying to touch 
off a war on the Korean peninsula. As we have already declared, 
we are fully prepared to answer dialogue with dialogue, and war 
with war. We want to make clear to the South side that we do 
not like empty words and will take all necessary 
countermeasures. All prevailing situations show that realizing 
the envoy exchange totally depends on the South's attitude. We 
think it is high time for the South side to clearly express its 
stance on whether it will accept our justified demands 
concerning the envoy exchange or give it up. We do not have 
much time left and all the fellow countrymen will no longer 
tolerate if the South side further attempts to drag on the envoy 
exchange. We stress for the last time that the South side 
should manifest its stance at today's contact whether it wishes 
to part from us. 
  After the keynote speech, our side called on the South side 
to express a clear attitude at today's contact toward the 
problems that our side has raised without failure. 
  However, the South side repeated inappropriate excuses, 
instead of showing a positive attitude toward our justified 
demands and assertions. Our side repeatedly urged the South 
side not to utter unnecessary words but to give an answer to our 
side's position and clarify whether it would accept our side's 
proposal on the envoy exchange or refuse it. Our side sternly 
said that the South side was free to part with the North, if it 
wished. 
  Our side noted the fact that the South side had held a 
so-called high-level strategic meeting the day before yesterday. 
At the meeting, our side maintained, the South side had adopted 
a so-called policy of tough reaction toward us, and raved that 
it would resume the Team Spirit exercises, push for the plan to 
introduce Patriot missiles, and join in sanctions against us. 
As regards to this, our side pressed the South side hard for an 
answer to whether this is a declaration of refusal of the 
exchange of special envoys, a declaration of all-out 
confrontation and war with the North [tuksagyohwan pogisonon 
uriwaui chonmyondaegyolsonon chonjaengsonon]. 
  Upset by this, the South side said it would present what was 
called an emergency proposal. In the proposal, in connection 
with the fact that no progress has been made at the contact of 
working- level delegates, it urged our side to change its 
attitude and express a sincere attitude toward the following 
points: It urged our side to stop slandering its chief 
executive [choegodanggukcha], refrain from inciting South Korean 
people into antigovernment struggles, and agree to exchange 
special envoys primarily for the resolution of the nuclear issue. 
  In connection with such an attitude of the South side, our 
side pointed out that the working-level contact was not a place 
for making such remarks and asked it to go back and inquire of 
South Korean people about that idea. In this way, our side 
flatly rejected the South side's idea. 
  After that, the head of our side's delegation again urged 
the 
South side to express a clear attitude toward our demand, 
instead of referring to any other issues. He also said that if 
the South intends to part [kyolbyol] with us, it should say so 
clearly. Then, the South side said that the exchange of special 
envoys may be broken up [kkaejiji] if the two sides part with 
each other. 
  Our side said that the South had already broken up the 
exchange of special envoys. It clearly said that the so-called 
high-level strategic meeting, which took place yesterday or the 
day before yesterday, was a meeting to break up the exchange of 
special envoys. 
  Our side said: So, the South side must be held wholly 
responsible for leading the exchange of special envoys to a 
crisis. 
  Very much upset, the South side said that if the exchange of 
special envoys were broken up and if this contact was 
discontinued [kkunojimyon], the danger to be entailed by it is 
unpredictable [oddon wihomi ogedoegennunji alsuopta]. 
  The head of our side's delegation sternly warned the South 
side: Never mind. Do you know what the South side is? If our 
North side suffers damage, do you think South Korea will be safe 
[uri pukchchogi pihaerul tanghamyon namjosonun musahalchul 
annunga]? We are prepared for anything [urinun tajunbidoeo 
itta]. We are prepared both for dialogue and war [urinun 
taehwaedo chonjaengedo tajunbidoeo itta]. If any forces try to 
impose sanctions [cheje] on us and provoke us, we will promptly 
take a resolute self- defensive measure [tanhohan chawijok 
chochi]. We mean what we say. 
  The South side did not utter a word in answer. 
  Since the South side could not answer our proposal, our side 
said today's contact should be closed. 
  Our side concluded the contact, after saying that it would 
come to the next contact if the South side notified it of the 
date when it is willing to accept our proposal. 

