Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Hanoi VNA March 26 -- Malaysian Prime Minister 
Mahathir Mohamed gave a dinner in Kuala Lumpur yesterday evening 
in honour of Vietnam's party General Secretary Do Muoi now on an 
official friendship visit to Malaysia. 
  At the dinner, the Vietnamese party leader said: 
  We have had very profound impressions of Malaysia and its 
people. A few decades ago, Malaysia was known merely as one of 
the world's largest producers of rubber and tin. Today, it is a 
country with an advanced manufacturing industry and is striving 
to become an industrialized nation according to plan `Vision 
2020'. We are also deeply impressed by the fact that the 
economic development here has been closely linked with the 
promotion of the rich national culture in an atmosphere of 
harmony among different ethnic groups of a unified community. 
Malaysia has also been known for its initiatives for peace and 
cooperation among nations, especially among the regional and 
developing countries. 
  Allow us to share the pride of the people of Malaysia in 
their great achievements in national construction and sincerely 
wish Malaysia prosperity and the Malaysian people happiness. We 
are firmly convinced that the industrious, dynamic and creative 
people of Malaysia, under the clear-sighted leadership of your 
excellency the Prime Minister, Dr. Mahathir Mohamed, and the 
other leaders of the national alliance, will certainly bring 
about prosperity for Malaysia and make important contributions 
to the common prosperity of our region as well as of the whole 
of Asia and the Pacific. 
  After nearly half a century of arduous struggle to defend 
our 
national independence, sovereignty and unity, the Vietnamese 
people are now doing their best to build their fatherland, 
striving to become 'a rich people, a strong country, and an 
equitable and civilized society'. In renewing ourselves for 
that lofty goal, we have made very important achievements: 
production is up inflation repelled the people's living standard 
making one step toward improvement social situation stable and 
foreign relations ever broadened. [sentence as received] These 
achievements are providing us with the premise to bring our 
country into a new phase in which we will make a step forward in 
our industrialization and modernization. We are fully conscious 
that this is not a simple work. However, with the tradition of 
dauntlessness in struggle and industry in production, the 
Vietnamese will certainly succeed in building a prosperous 
country and a plentiful and happy life, contributing a worthy 
share to the prosperity of the whole region. 
  Our two countries are indeed close, both situated by a rich 
and beautiful sea.Our two peoples share many similarities in 
culture and history and a past of being colonized by foreign 
powers and having struggled undauntedly and persistently for 
national independence. Today, we also share the aspiration for 
peace and cooperation and the strive toward development and 
prosperity, and toward peace and stability in the region. These 
are the solid foundations for our friendship and long-term 
cooperation in the interest of the prosperity of each country, 
and of cooperation and development in South East Asia. We note 
with satisfaction that owing to the efforts by both sides over 
the past few years, we have forged a bilateral relationship full 
of fraternity and mutual understanding and trust. 
  Our many-sided cooperation has also developed quickly and 
favourably. We are sure that this trend will now continue to 
grow fruitfully for the benefit of both countries. A new proof 
is the exchange of views full of openness, friendship and mutual 
understanding that we have had with your excellency the prime 
minister and other leaders of Malaysia. 

