BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Igor Vukic: "`Rights of the Serbs Are Still </F>
Being Denied,' Says Djukic"] 
  [Text] Zagreb -- The Serbs are second-class citizens in 
Croatia, their position is similar to that of black people in 
the Republic of South Africa during apartheid or of the Indians 
in the United States. Those were the words of Milan Djukic, 
president of the SNS [Serbian National Party], describing the 
position of members of Serb national community at a press 
conference on Tuesday. 
  As usual, he substantiated his words by many concrete 
examples: The Serbs are still being evicted from their 
apartments, they are being denied their rights deriving from 
labor relations (under the guise of "rationalizing state 
offices"), their houses are still being blown up, courts do not 
provide adequate legal protection. Furthermore, Djukic says that 
perpetrators of the crime in Pakrac, Pakracka Poljana, and 
Gospic have still not been punished: "People who did not take 
part in fighting were taken away from their homes and killed in 
cold blood," those responsible for blowing up the Museum of the 
Orthodox Church in Nova Gradiska "situated right next to the 
police station" have not been found either. As to the "Zec 
case" -- "why has the president of the Republic not reacted 
before..." -- the authorities tolerate newspapers (Vinkovac 
HRVATSKI VJESNIK) that arouse national hatred and openly call 
for lynchings. It is not only common workers and members of the 
middle class that have problems at work, top internationally 
recognized experts encounter them as well: at the Sisters of 
Mercy hospital, applications were invited for the position of 
the head of the Diagnostics Department and its founder, who is a 
professor at the School of Medicine with all the necessary 
qualifications, applied. His only fault was that "he chose the 
wrong parents for himself." "His application was rejected and 
another vacancy was opened, suitable for another, "suitable" 
person, who got the position," said Djukic. 
  "The nonfunctioning of the rule-of-law state, in addition to 
the constant defamation of the Croatian Serbs in the media 
(Djukic also mentioned the "Rovinj case"), does not contribute 
to finding peaceful solutions and to the reintegration of the 
UNPA [United Nations Protected Area] zones into the Croatian 
legal system," SNS members say. They brief the government and 
the president of the Republic on their problems and Milan Djukic 
says that they "sometimes do something about it, especially when 
a particular minister can do that himself, but the problem lies 
in the malfunctioning of the rule-of-law state and in the 
discriminatory actions of civil servants, especially of those at 
lower levels. 
  Djukic also said that requesting the Serbs in Croatia to 
swear the so-called allegiance is another "act of 
discrimination." "Why are only some Croatian citizens asked to 
do that," wonders Djukic reminding of the activity of his party 
and especially of his petition "For Peaceful Coexistence in a 
Democratic and Sovereign Republic of Croatia," which was signed 
by more than 13,000 Serb citizens in August 1991. "We will not 
react to provocation, but we will demand a comprehensive 
parliamentary discussion about the position of the Serbs in 
Croatia and try to reach solutions that will be acceptable to 
everyone," said Djukic. 

