Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial from the "Notes and Information" page: "Cavallo's </F>
Criticisms"] 
  [Text] Domingo Cavallo has tremendous energy. He takes 
care of Argentine economic policy and still finds time to 
criticize the manner in which Brazilians conduct their own 
business. The Argentine economy minister does not like what he 
sees on this side of the border. For him, Brazil serves as 
example of what must not be done. What are we doing so wrong? 
According to Cavallo, we maintain low salaries and a policy of 
hunger so that surplus production may be exported at any price. 
And that, he guarantees patriotically, Argentina will never do, 
although it might have done so "in times of recession." 
  The Brazilian economic policy is one of Cavallo's favorite 
targets. He never loses an opportunity, and if there is no 
opportunity he creates one. It is an irritating habit which 
would be no more than that had the policy not been a copy of 
ideas or due to subjective evaluations. In this case it is 
difficult to ignore the minister's periodical diatribes, as he 
is the director of economy of our greatest partner in Mercosur 
[Common Market of the South], an undertaking which not only has 
consequences for the performance of some companies, but has 
become the greatest political adventure the two countries 
between them have ever tried. The economy minister's verbal 
lack of self-restraint does not contribute to a greater 
harmonization of relations, which fortunately are good and 
apparently gossip-proof. The Brazilians are, however, partly to 
blame for these untimely remarks, because of the harshness with 
which Itamaraty treated the Argentine distortions concerning the 
establishment of the minimum common tariff for Mercosur. In 
those sectors with long memories and little patience, Cavallo's 
criticisms generate distrust; and there are those who term it an 
Argentine "vice" to attack a neighbor in order to guarantee 
national unity, the most recent episode being that of the 
Malvinas Islands. 
  Minister Cavallo runs an economy that in general terms is 
the 
size of that of Sao Paulo, though not as complex. Thanks to 
less pressing and disturbing variables he could dollarize the 
economy, sell the assets the government had in the sector 
producing goods and services, and control public spending. This 
allowed him to reduce inflation to 7.4 percent annually and push 
the average annual growth rate since 1991 to 7 percent. That is 
not a minor achievement, but it does not make Argentina a 
compulsory model for Brazil. Neither does it prove that the 
macroeconomic differences between the two countries hinder the 
operation of Mercosur. 
  Minister Cavallo and those whose opinions he represents find 
it rather difficult to admit that even though Brazil's 
macroeconomic results are not like those of Argentina -- at 
least not the kind of results of which Argentines are justly 
proud -- the Brazilian economy is much bigger, more diversified, 
more sophisticated and, above all, our management and marketing 
methods are ahead of those of the other Mercosur countries. 
  The result of this, in addition to the very important 
factor that the dollar-peso rate has reduced Argentina's 
competitiveness in international markets, is that Brazil is 
currently Argentina's largest market. In turn, 20 percent of 
Argentine imports are supplied by Brazil, which buys only 9 
percent of its imports from Argentina. If Brazil were 
purposedly selling recession leftovers, such leftovers would be 
the products being purchased by Argentina. Yet this is not 
happening. The products we sell to Argentina can be sold on any 
market. And we sold them even after Minister Cavallo 
unilaterally cancelled the preferential tariffs that we should 
enjoy as members of Mercosur and ALADI [Latin American 
Integration Association]. 
  During the first 10 months of 1993, Brazil registered a 
trade 
surplus of $810 million with Argentina, a figure that is 31 
percent smaller than the figure for the same period in 1992. 
This was not caused by a reduction in the quality of our 
products, or by the dynamics of Argentine industry. Brazil has 
simply complied, without distortions, with the agreements 
reached with Argentina, and started buying Argentine oil and 
wheat instead of purchasing them from other suppliers. In the 
case of wheat, Brazil has even disregarded better offers from 
the United States, thus clearly proving that -- for the 
Brazilian Government -- agreements are valid even if they harm 
our consumers to the benefit of Argentine producers. 
  The year ahead of us poses challenges to those responsible 
for the economies of the two countries. They are serious yet 
different challenges. Brazil, despite its 2,500 percent 
inflation rate, registered a 4.5-percent growth in GDP and a 
9-percent growth in industrial product. Brazil is in an 
advantageous position. Argentina, however, with a 7.4-percent 
inflation rate and a growth rate of 7 percent of its GDP, has a 
high unemployment rate, which affects 17 percent of the 
economically active population. This has put 26 percent of 
Argentines outside the consumer market. It is not just by 
chance that the Menem government will this year concentrate on 
creating jobs in rural areas, in order to avoid the regional 
differences that produce disturbances like those in Santiago del 
Estero. 
  We have always maintained that Sao Paulo is not Brazil. 
Argentines will end up discovering that Buenos Aires is not 
Argentina. 

