Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Mexico City, 6 Jan (EFE) -- The Zapatista 
National Liberation Army (EZLN) today seized Tenejapa, 
approximately 40 km from the city of San Cristobal de las Casas. 
Meanwhile, fighting continues in the nearby towns of El 
Corralito, San Isidro, El Ocotal, San Antonio de las Bajos, 
Corazon de Maria, and Ocosingo. 
  Early this morning, the Armed Forces bombed towns near San 
Cristobal de las Casas, forcing many people who live in the 
mountains to flee to the archeological area of Palenque or take 
refuge in the city. 
  The rebels today sent a letter to Rigoberta Menchu, winner 
of 
the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize, warning her that the Mexican 
Government might accuse the Guatemalan refugees living in 
southeastern Mexico of being members of the rebel groups. The 
rebels indicated in the document that the government accepted 
the refugees 10 years ago "to give the world an image of 
humanitarianism and political opening." 
  Nevertheless, they added, that image "is not carried over in 
its relations with our own poor and exploited people, who suffer 
the same policies of genocide and ostracism that are practiced 
against Indian peoples in several Latin American nations." 
  From the beginning of the conflict, Menchu expressed her 
concern about the possible repression of the rebels and the 
conflict's repercussions on the Indian and popular organizations 
of Chiapas. She was especially concerned that the return of the 
Guatemalan refugees, which was scheduled to begin now, might be 
hindered. 
  In this regard, the rebels indicated in the letter that "no 
one knows better than us about their poverty and their desire 
for a decent life, which is denied in their own country, and we 
will not be the ones to prevent or use force against our 
brothers' return to their places of origin." 
  Meanwhile, the Mexican Army today increased its military 
movement in the mountainous areas of Chiapas and is preparing 
for new clashes with the rebels, who refuse to lay down their 
weapons and are recruiting more peasants to their ranks. 
  The conflict zone has been under siege by thousands of 
soldiers who are guarding all roads, with dozens of tanks, 
helicopters, and airplanes that are overflying the area to 
prevent a new offensive by rebel forces. 
  So far, the armed conflict in Chiapas has left, according to 
military figures, 96 dead. Unofficially, the number of deaths 
is estimated at 250, including soldiers, rebels, and civilians, 
and the number of wounded is estimated at 1,000. 
  With the intensification of the military offensive, hundreds 
of Indians and peasants are becoming the victim of thefts, and 
many have abandoned their homes and are fleeing to nearby towns 
in search of refuge. The Mexican Catholic Church has expressed 
its concern over the human rights violations that have been 
committed in the strife-torn area and has urged the government 
not to put down the violence with more violence. 
  Jorge Madrazo, chairman of the National Human Rights 
Commission, traveled to Chiapas to investigate charges about 
violations of the civilian population's constitutional rights, 
as well as excesses and arbitrary actions by the Army in its 
attempts to capture the rebels. [passage omitted] 

