BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, June 14 (YONHAP) -- South Korean Foreign 
Minister Han Sung-chu has asked former U.S. President Jimmy 
Carter, who travels to North Korea Wednesday, to make sure 
Pyongyang realizes there is an end to Seoul's and Washington's 
patience on the nuclear crisis. 
  Han shared a two-hour lunch with Carter at a downtown hotel 
Tuesday and emphasized that North Korea needs to understand the 
international community's firm position on its nuclear program, 
Foreign Ministry officials said. 
  Carter passes through the heavily fortified truce village of 
Panmunjom Wednesday morning and is scheduled to meet with North 
Korean leader Kim Il-song before returning to Seoul Saturday. 
  Seoul, June 14 (YONHAP) -- The former U.S. President is 
going to North Korea as head of the private peace center he 
established in his home state of Georgia. 
  Carter explained that he was first invited by Pyongyang in 
1991 and has since sought to visit both Koreas. North Korean 
officials invited him to come again recently and he decided he 
could play a positive role in helping defuse the problem, Carter 
was quoted as saying. 
  Both Seoul and Washington have repeatedly stressed that 
Carter comes and goes as a private citizen and that he is not a 
U.S. envoy. 
  But with North Korea's unexpected announcement Monday that 
it 
is withdrawing from the International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA), officials here admit that Carter could find out North 
Korea's intentions and drive home a message from Seoul and 
Washington. 
  Foreign Minister Han, noting that the visit comes at a very 
sensitive time, asked Carter to take special care in conveying 
to North Korea exactly how serious the nuclear situation has 
become, officials said. 
  Carter responded that by delivering such information, he 
hopes to contribute to the problem's solution through dialogue, 
they said. 
  Han stressed that North Korea's latest actions, including 
its 
announced withdrawal from the IAEA, make hard-line 
coutermeasures by the international community inevitable. 
  The North must be made aware that unless it changes its 
attitude soon, the South and the United States will run out of 
patience, Han was quoted as saying. 

