BFN 

  [Text] Shan State, Burma -- Reputed drug kingpin Khun Sa 
says he wants his Shan State to become a province of Thailand 
under Their Majesties the King and Queen. 
  Shan State has more to offer Thailand than Burma's central 
government in terms of a developing market, natural resources 
and cheap labour, he told THE NATION. 
  Khun Sa, also known as Chang Si Fu, is leader of the Shan 
Maung Tai Army (MTA). 
  "We the Shan State wish to become a province of Thailand. 
All Shan people have full respect for the Thai monarch and the 
Royal Family. Also we would like to have bilateral trade, the 
way the European Union countries trade among themselves." 
  The people of Shan State, like other Burmese ethnic groups, 
have been fighting for independence from the central Rangoon 
government, which is administered by the military's State Law 
and Order Restoration Council (Slorc). Khun Sa is widely 
reported to be funding his state by trading in heroin, which is 
produced from opium poppies grown throughout the area. 
  Khernsai Jaiyene, a close aide to Khun Sa, said the MTA has 
sent a letter to the King seeking his help in settling the 
problems of minority groups in Burma. 
  "So far, it seems to us that this (the King's help) is the 
only way to end the fighting by the Burmese people struggling 
for independence from the government," said Khernsai. 
  Khun Sa also expressed concern over the planned 
transportation network linking Thailand, Burma, China and Laos. 
He said it would adversely affect his people and his state. 
  "The network has been pushed purely for economic gain, 
without taking into consideration the wants of the people and 
without good management. The Shan State, which covers one third 
of Burmese territory, would be badly affected," he said. 
  According to Khun Sa, the Burmese government wants a leading 
role in the project because it would be an opportunity to 
eliminate the minority ethnic grouping. 
  "The Burmese government will spend money given for the 
project to purchase weapons to fight against our people and 
other ethnic groups," he said. 
  Slorc would make use of the transport system to be built 
under the project as strategic routes to transport men and arms 
to wage war against minorities. 
  Khun Sa said he was referring to two routes, one linking the 
Bumma-China border province of Lua to Keng Tung and to Tachilek 
in Thailand's Chiang Rai province, and to a proposed railway 
linking China and Laos. 
  "The only way the Burmese government will use the project is 
to tackle its domestic political conflicts, and that means more 
suppression of the minorities," he said. 

