Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Foreign ambassadors and representatives of foreign 
diplomatic missions and international organizations in Iran 
today were received by President Hashemi-Rafsanjani. Our 
reporter sent us this report: 
  [Unidentified reporter] During the meeting, the president 
said that the foreign policy of the Islamic Republic of Iran is 
based on strengthening friendship and cooperation and the 
establishment of friendly relations with all countries, with the 
exception of the regime occupying Jerusalem and America. He 
said: We are strongly against regional crises and wars, and we 
are prepared to cooperate with international organizations and 
peace loving nations of the world in order to eliminate centers 
of crisis. 
  Condemning America's hostile policy toward Iran, 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani said: America has never been able to 
comprehend the realities of the Islamic revolution of Iran and 
is still living in the past when she regarded herself the master 
of this country. Therefore, the Iranian people will confront 
America's hostile policies with firmness and strength and will 
never compromise with that kind of thinking. 
  He described the regime occupying Jerusalem as an 
illegitimate and imposed regime and added: Israel is not 
seeking a peace that guarantees the legitimate rights of the 
oppressed Palestinian people. One cannot support the so-called 
peace talks as long as the destiny of millions of Palestinian 
refugees is not clarified. 
  The president described the victory of the Islamic 
revolution 
of Iran in 1979 as being due to the justice seeking and 
antityrannical attitude of the Iranian people. He said: If we 
are witnessing the deterioration of values and principles and of 
human and international norms in many parts of the world today, 
this is due to deviations from the pure and peace loving nature 
of the nations of the world. 
  Enumerating examples of corruption and injustice during the 
era of Iran's former lackey regime, its collusion with unjust 
international policies, and its dependent foreign policy, 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani said: All members of Iranian society--with 
unprecedented unity and through reliance upon the call of their 
spiritual nature [fetrat] and by following the wise leadership 
of their religious leader--rose up against tyranny and 
injustice. They have paid a very heavy price thus far in order 
to achieve victory and to safeguard their gains. They are also 
prepared to continue paying the price of their independence and 
freedom in the future. 
  Referring to the progress made by the Islamic Republic of 
Iran during the era of reconstruction, Hashemi-Rafsanjani said: 
A serious effort is continuing in Iran to reconstruct and repair 
all of the losses inflicted and the backwardness. The most 
important engineering projects and basic measures--including 
roads, power generators, ports, transportation, railways, the 
discovery and transfer of oil and gas, and agriculture--are 
being implemented with great speed by the hands of domestic 
experts and by using domestic equipment and material. Great 
success has already been achieved in these fields. 
  Referring to regional and international crises, especially 
the bitter and painful events in Bosnia-Herzegovina, the 
president criticized the positions of international 
organizations. He said: Despite the readiness of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran to send 10,000 peacekeeping forces to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, this offer was rejected with the excuse of 
maintaining impartiality. At the moment, the Serbs are free to 
commit any crime, and the world stops at only condemning these 
crimes. 
  He stressed: The required seriousness toward defending 
oppressed peoples does not exist in the centers of power in the 
world. One should expect all the governments and nations to 
hold hands and to prevent so much tyranny and injustice. 
  Addressing the foreign ambassadors, diplomatic 
representatives, and delegations from international 
organizations based in Iran, Hashemi-Rafsanjani stressed: I ask 
you--as representatives who live in the Islamic Republic of Iran 
and witness our people's political and cultural maturity, as 
well as our country's development and progress--to fulfill what 
we expect from you. I ask you to convey the realities to the 
people of your respective countries, thereby making the world 
public aware of these realities. In this way, the foundations 
for establishing international and regional peace and stability 
will be laid down. 
  The president then referred to the loyalty of the people of 
Iran to the Islamic revolution and to the continued presence of 
the nation in different arenas. He said: You, as foreign 
diplomats based in Tehran, will witness the extensive presence 
of the various strata of people in the rallies tomorrow, 11 
February. You will witness that even after the passage of 15 
years, and despite enduring difficulties and hardship brought 
about by the imposed war and the process of reconstruction, our 
people are not prepared to allow the realities of their lives to 
be brought under the influence of negative and disheartening 
rumors and insinuations. He added: This shows the people's 
awareness and maturity on the one hand, and the failure of the 
imperialist media in attaining their inauspicious objectives, on 
the other hand. 
  According to a Central News Unit report, before remarks by 
the president, the ambassador of the Arab Republic of Libya [as 
heard] in Tehran spoke on behalf of the ambassadors as their 
doyen. During the course of his remarks, he congratulated the 
eminent leader, the president, and the revolutionary and 
liberated nation of Iran on the anniversary of the victory of 
the Islamic revolution. He said: We pay our respects to the 
lofty status of the founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran and 
the revered martyrs who sacrificed their lives for Iran's 
independence and freedom. We convey our respect to the blessed 
souls of these dear ones and hope that the Islamic Republic 
system and the heroic nation of Iran may always be able to 
achieve progress and success in reconstruction and development. 
The Libyan ambassador then condemned the plot to assassinate 
the president of our country and wished him health and success. 
  On the basis of this report, at the end of this audience, 
the 
ambassadors, diplomats, and the Iran-based representatives of 
foreign countries and international organizations held separate 
meetings with the president. During the course of their brief 
exchanges, they expressed their congratulations on the 
anniversary of victory of the Islamic revolution. 

