BFN 

<F P=106> [ITAR-TASS correspondent Aleksandr Trushin article: </F>
"Argentina Wants To Buy Large Consignments of Russian Weapons 
But Cannot Yet Do So Owing to Material Difficulties"] 
  [Excerpts] Brigadier General Luis Tracabal Lobo did not 
hide the fact that he represents General Augusto Pinochet, 
commander in chief of Chile's ground forces. Tracabal Lobo 
meticulously questioned Aleksandr Khinikadze, director of the 
Central Scientific Research Institute of Precision Machine 
Building of the Russian State Committee for the Defense Sectors 
of Industry, about the merits of small arms. He was 
particularly interested in one of the best developments -- the 
9mm Gyurza pistol with a powerful round which penetrates 
bulletproof vests. The Chilean general joked that such a 
pistol, if acquired by Chile's carabineros or other special 
services, would "undermine" his own product -- Tracabal Lobo is 
head of a factory which produces bulletproof vests in particular. 
  Chileans, Argentines, Peruvians, and representatives of 
other 
Latin American countries are showing interest in our combat 
hardware and weapons. But, at the same time, they are in no 
hurry to conclude contracts to acquire them. This is largely 
accounted for by the specific nature of the Latin American arms 
market. 
  On the whole, Russia is well acquainted with this region. In 
the past the former USSR had large contracts to deliver weapons 
to Cuba, Nicaragua, Peru, and Venezuela. Therefore it would be 
perfectly logical to expand this market by including other South 
American countries, primarily Argentina, Chile, and Brazil, 
which possess large armed forces. In this Russian 
representatives place special emphasis on Argentina, mindful of 
the fact that during the Malvinas [Falklands] war of 1982 it 
lost a considerable proportion of its combat hardware and 
weapons. In addition, throughout the past decade there has been 
a U.S. and British embargo on arms deliveries to that country. 
  A recent circumstance arouses extreme displeasure in 
Argentine military circles. Oscar Camilion, minister of 
national defense, has repeatedly told local journalists that he 
does not understand Washington's attitude to Argentina. "When 
its participation in UN peacemaking actions is needed, we enjoy 
the Americans' full trust. But if it is a question of arms 
deliveries, this trust is missing." 
  In putting pressure on Argentina in this sphere the United 
States pursues not so much geopolitical ends as economic ones. 
Washington is afraid that Argentina and other South American 
countries will start winning the Near East market above all with 
their developments, including in the nuclear sphere, and so will 
weaken the U.S. positions there. At the same time Washington 
carefully sees to it that nobody can encroach upon the nearby, 
Latin American market. 
  Nevertheless, certain military circles in Argentina are 
showing interest in purchasing arms and hardware from Russia. 
Here, however, the U.S. factor once again comes into play: The 
Argentines would like to join NATO in the future. The Americans 
say that this possibility has now increased significantly. 
True, for this Argentina's Armed Forces must have Western arms 
which meet NATO standards. "If you want to buy hardware and 
arms from Russia, this means that your initiative with regard to 
joining NATO will not be realized," the United States declares. 
  And yet the financial and economic situation in the South 
American country is one of the principal factors curbing 
Russia's penetration of Argentina's military market. [passage 
omitted] 
  So major deals along military lines are hardly possible 
between Russia and Argentina in the immediate future. Nor are 
there any prospects for joint arms production at present. This 
line in Russian exports requires careful preparation and a 
cautious and gradual approach. At the same time it is perfectly 
realistic to conclude small contracts right now with due regard 
for the fact that the Argentines are well informed about our 
successes in military technology and show definite interest in 
acquiring inexpensive models. 

