BFN 

  [Text] Baghdad, 1 Jun (INA) -- Deputy Prime Minister Tariq 
'Aziz has stated that the recent UN Security Council 
deliberations have paved the way for either lifting or easing 
the embargo on Iraq. 
  At a news conference here today, Tariq 'Aziz said: I cannot 
describe this meeting as a victory or that it achieved great 
gains because the gain we and our people expect consists of 
tangible steps to lift the embargo. 
  'Aziz emphasized that Iraq's political and diplomatic moves 
have started to produce results by having the UN Security 
Council change its stand despite the extensive hostile 
diplomatic and nondiplomatic campaign in which the Saudi and 
Kuwaiti rulers resorted to funds and bribes and the United 
States to pressures and attempts to influence people. 
  The deputy prime minister said that the Americans were 
forced 
to to come out in the open on this issue after Christopher met 
with ministers from the Gulf Cooperation Council countries and 
warned them against warming to Iraq and published an article 
stating that the embargo on Iraq should not be lifted. 
  'Aziz added: We met with all the UN Security Council members 
with the exception of the U.S. side. We met some of them more 
than once and some of the meetings were joint meetings. I also 
met with other Council members and with ambassadors of nonmember 
countries. An indepth discussion was held about all the stands. 
As to what they expect the Council will do, they told us that 
the U.S. side stubbornly refuses to admit that progress has been 
achieved concerning the implementation of the UN Security 
Council resolutions. 
  Tariq 'Aziz said: If we count the number of UN Security 
Council members that call for changing the formula of the 
[periodic] statement, recognize that there is progress in the 
implementation of the UN Security Council resolutions, and which 
believe that the question of economic embargo imposed on Iraq 
should be tackled by the Council, we find that this number 
represents the majority within the Council. 
  'Aziz said that they have been more understanding and more 
responsive than any time before to what Iraq has to say on the 
various issues, whether the issue of weapons and the 
implementation of Section C of Resolution 687, or the other 
issues that are raised against Iraq. He said that the main 
reason for this change between 1992 and until now is due to 
Iraq's steadfastness. He said Iraq's stand now finds better 
understanding than before. 
  'Aziz explained that the other positive aspects consist of 
the visits to Iraq by major business enterpreneurs from 
countries which have a say in this issue. 
  Tariq 'Aziz said another meeting will be held in July. This 
is a very important meeting and may be decisive. Perhaps, the 
deliberations and the discussions within the Council will last 
one month and perhaps Ekeus will raise a topic that has not been 
raised until now. But, this does not mean that the process of 
lifting the embargo has stopped or will stop. On the contrary, 
this process is advancing with firm steps and will produce its 
results, God willing. 
  'Aziz said that the world is moving in a direction that is 
opposite to that set by George Bush, which he called the new 
world order. It is now a world order that is different and where 
there is some kind of balance. That's why we see that they are 
paying attention to Iraq's stand. They are now listening to us. 
Those who listen to us and receive us in their capitals dispatch 
companies to discuss contracts and projects. Therefore, they 
know that the embargo on Iraq will be lifted. 

