BFN 

    [Editorial report] Tokyo FNN Television Network in 
Japanese at 2230 GMT on 5 June 1994, in its "News 2001" program, 
carries a live 34-minute studio interview with Wataru Kubo, 
secretary general of the opposition Social Democratic Party of 
Japan [SDPJ], by FNN announcer Yuji Kuroiwa, Keio University 
Professor Yoshiaki, and political commentator Kenichi Takemura 
in Tokyo. 
  At 2241 GMT, Kuroiwa begins the interview by asking Kubo 
about the possibility of the SDPJ returning to the ruling 
coalition. 
  Kubo says: "I am always willing to meet Mr. Ozawa [secretary 
general of Shinseito (Japan Renewal Party]) to discuss how to 
handle Japanese politics." 
  He is then asked by Kobayashi to comment on Ozawa. 
  Kubo says: "Mr. Ozawa has his own strategy and he pushes for 
his strategy in a high-handed manner," adding that he has often 
felt Ozawa has not listened to what others have said. 
  He also says: "The claim, though, that the Hosokawa 
government was under Mr. Ozawa's thumb, is incorrect." 
  Asked again about the possibility of the SDPJ returning to 
the ruling coalition, Kubo says: "Keeping a minority government 
in power is undesirable at a time when Japan is saddled with a 
lot of sticky domestic and foreign issues. The Hata government 
must be ousted from power." 
  He adds: "The ruling parties have called on the SDPJ to 
return to the ruling coalition, but it would be difficult for 
the SDPJ to join the Hata government. 
  "We want the Hata cabinet to resign en masse after the 
passage of the 1994 budget bill in the Diet. What we are saying 
is that the SDPJ is willing to discuss with other parties ways 
to form a new coalition government." 
  He is then asked by Kobayashi about the SDPJ's 
"uncompromising" conditions for joining the discussion on 
formation of a new coalition government. Kubo notes the 
three-point agreement reached among the coalition partners when 
they formed the Hosokawa government. 
  "The SDPJ cannot accept any change in the three-point 
agreement and will concede to other parties, if needed, on the 
basis of the three-point agreement." 
  [Editorial report] At this point an unidentified FNN 
correspondent reports from Seoul on South Korean reaction to 
North Korea's nuclear ambitions. Kuroiwa says the United States 
is highly likely to ask Japan to halt current remittances to 
DPRK by ethnic Koreans residing in Japan. He asks Kubo to 
comment. 
  Kubo says: "In reality, it is difficult to halt the 
remittances. It is difficult because they are made through third 
countries. I believe that there are various problems in trying 
to halt the remittances. I think there are things that need to 
be done before the United Nations imposes economic sanctions 
against North Korea. We should not put the emphasis on 
discussing how to impose the economic sanctionsKorean expert on 
North Korean affairs, discussing what the United States will ask 
Japan to do to support economic sanctions. 
  Kubo is asked to respond, and says: "I believe that given 
the U.S. strategy United ]? 
  Kubo says: "The SDPJ should first indicate to the people how 
it will deal with the situation when the Hata cabinet is voted 
out of power in the Diet." 
  Discussing the possibility of the SDPJ forging an alliance 
with the LDP, Kubo says: "The SDPJ will not forge any alliance 
with the LDP and the SDPJ will not return to the Hata 
government. We will seek to form a new coalition government." 
  Hinting at the big possibility of the Hata cabinet resigning 
en masse, Kubo says the SDPJ wants the Hata cabinet to seek the 
confidence of the people by dissolving the House of 
Representatives and holding general elections. 

