Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] A delegation of Israeli Arabs, led by Knesset 
Member [MK] 'Abd-al-Wahhab Darawshah, arrived in Cairo today en 
route to Damascus to extend sympathies to Syrian President Hafiz 
al-Asad over the death of his son Basil. The delegation met 
with Dr. Usamah al-Baz, President Mubarak's political adviser. 
On the line from Cairo is Qaysar Kabaha, who is accompanying 
the delegation on the visit: 
  [Begin recording] [Kabaha] The 57-strong delegation arrived 
in Cairo at noon today and is expected to proceed to Syria 
tomorrow morning to extend condolences to the Syrian president. 
The team was accorded an official welcome at Cairo 
International Airport. They received special laissez-passers 
valid for one trip to Syria. Knesset members 'Abd-al-Wahhab 
Darawshah and Talab al-Sani' of the Arab Democratic Party this 
afternoon met with Mr. al-Baz. Darawshah had this to say about 
the session: 
  [Darawshah] Al-Baz sounded upbeat about the possibility of a 
resumption of the PLO-Israeli negotiations. He admitted there 
are real difficulties, but hoped the UN Security Council would 
pass a resolution that would convince the PLO to return to the 
negotiating table. Al-Baz noted, however, that the Israeli 
Government should meet two central demands -- international 
protection for the Palestinians in the occupied territories and 
deterrent action against any future settler attacks on the 
Palestinians. He further emphasized that Egypt is engaged in an 
effort to end Israeli-PLO disagreements and relaunch the talks. 
  [Kabaha] Did the prospect of Tzomet joining the Israeli 
Government coalition and the potential results of such a step on 
the Israeli political landscape come up in your meeting with 
al-Baz? 
  [Darawshah] He did not conceal his apprehension, and could 
not see why Rabin wants to have Tzomet in the government. 
Al-Baz said that, in its present lineup and given the 
comfortable majority it commands, the Israeli Government is in a 
position to pursue the peace process. Al-Baz speculated that 
Rabin was likely out to influence certain Israelis and Arabs. 
He sounded really worried about the possible changes in 
Israel's political landscape. 
  [Kabaha] About tomorrow's visit to Syria by the Israeli Arab 
delegation, al-Baz said Egypt attaches high importance to the 
trip. In his recent meetings with al-Asad and Syrian officials, 
al-Baz said he got the impression they were looking forward to 
peace and that peace for Syria was now a strategic option. [end 
recording] 

