Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Noboru Ikeda, editor, JAPAN 21ST] </F>
  [Text] The New Energy and Industrial Technology Development 
Organization (NEDO) participated in ``POLLUTEC '93 + Energies 
'93,'' held for four days from October 12 at the Porte de 
Versailles Trade Fair Ground in Paris. This was the first time 
that NEDO took part in an overseas exposition. 
  As a public organization taking charge of national 
technology 
development projects, NEDO had refrained, as far as possible 
until then, from carrying out any form of PR activity akin to a 
private sector company's publicity. Its recent participation in 
the Paris event was aimed at breaking the fetters of convention 
and contributing to the creation of opportunities for 
international technology exchanges by widely publicizing its 
activities at home and abroad, in view of the need of its 
expanding international contributions in recent years in the 
midst of growing worldwide expectations for Japan's 
contributions to the world community. 
  POLLUTEC, one of the largest environmental equipment 
expositions in Europe, has traditionally been held in a local 
French city. 
  However, POLLUTEC '93 took place in the French capital 
because concern about environmental problems is growing to an 
unprecedentedly high degree in Europe against backdrop 
developments such as progressive formulation of common 
environment control plans for the European Community and the 
enhancement of environmental protection consciousness following 
the Earth Summit in Brazil and EC integration. Another 
remarkable fact about this event was that for the first time it 
combined with ``Energies '93,'' an energy-saving 
technology-related exposition hosted by ADEME (Environmental and 
Energy Management Agency), a French government-affiliated 
organization, to become a new comprehensive environmental 
protection technology exposition. This was one of the reasons 
why NEDO chose POLLUTEC '93 for its first overseas show. 
  NEDO this April launched the ``New Sunshine Project'' with 
energy-saving technology development and global environment 
conservation technology added, as new research themes, to the 
hitherto development of new energy technology. As a result, 
energy technology was given a more important position in 
POLLUTEC '93 through the participation of ADEME, with which NEDO 
has had exchanges for years as a similar governmental 
organization. This created an optimum climate for NEDO's 
participation in the event. 
  Partly because of its debut, NEDO confined its participation 
to a display of panels showing the technology research efforts 
it has exerted in the past and the results, and the distribution 
of pamphlets. For all this, the NEDO booth attracted many 
visitors. It was, for example, the only foreign booth, except 
for the booth run by Tunisia, with which France has 
traditionally maintained close relations, visited on the opening 
day by Michel Barnier, French Minister for the Environment. 
Given this, NEDO's first-time participation may well be 
described as a success. 
  ``It was very lucky that a French minister visited our 
booth, 
but we are sorry to learn that people abroad knew less about 
NEDO than we had imagined,'' said people associated with NEDO 
after the show. 
  This is not just the case with NEDO. 
  Japan is a world-leader in international contributions in 
terms of technological assistance and international research 
exchanges, as well as ODA, but the contents of such activities 
are not generally known overseas. This is because the Japanese 
government has not in the past vigorously conducted PR 
activities. At present, there are still voices abroad claiming 
Japan's contributions to the world community are inadequate. 
Therefore, the government recently decided to put a great deal 
of effort into PR activities. 
  In this context, it is extremely significant that NEDO 
participated in ``POLLUTEC '93 + Energies '93.'' The steady 
accumulation of such activities will certainly produce the 
desired results. It is, therefore, ardently hoped that NEDO will 
continue to avail itself of overseas events to demonstrate its 
activities. 

