Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by A. Yablokov, A. Demin, Russian Federation </F>
Interdepartmental Commission on Environmental Safety, ``And Our 
Health Will be Even Worse''] 
  [Text] The unforgiving statistics are showing that the 
public health of Russia's citizens is critical and is continuing 
to deteriorate. Likewise, the demographic situation in Russia is 
becoming increasingly acute. The most recent statistical data 
attest to an ``avalanche'' of deaths and ``burnout'' (they are 
even using this term) of entire population groups, primarily 
able-bodied men. 
  According to data from the State Statistical Committee, 
mortality indices are continuing to grow: in 1987, the total 
mortality rate was 10.5 per 1,000 of the population, and in 1992 
and 1993, it rose to 12.2 and 14.6, respectively. Furthermore, 
the total number of deaths during the last year exceeded the 
total number of births by more than 50%. According to 
expert 
predictions, by early 1994 a stable natural population decrease 
will be observed in 88 Russian territories which are home to 
93% of the total population. For comparison, in 1992, the 
same 
situation existed in 45 territories and in 1987--in only three! 
  A further decrease in life expectancy is being predicted. 
These indicators have been steadily deteriorating since 
1986-1987. The anticipated life expectancy among women is 11.8 
years longer than that of men--73.8 vs. 62 years. State 
Statistical Committee analyses demonstrate that if today's 
mortality age level remains unchanged in Russia, 40% of 
boys 
born in 1993 will not reach their sixtieth birthday. 
  What is hiding behind these frightful figures? The mean life 
expectancy is one of the most objective indicators for 
determining the quality of life and environmental conditions. 
According to World Health Organization data, 50-60% of 
human 
health depends on the socioeconomic factors, such as nutrition, 
smoking, personal safety, etc., 20-30% depends on the 
environmental conditions, 10%--on hereditary factors, and 
only 
7-8%--on medical care proper. Thus, the state of public 
health 
in Russia which has been at the center of experts' attention for 
over 10 years is affected by both the sociopolitical crisis, 
political instability, and environmental conditions in the 
country. And as a result, the increasing mortality trend due to 
chronic and infectious diseases is growing. The aging of 
Russia's population which is characteristic of all countries 
also affects the increase in the total mortality indicators: in 
1994, the number of retirement-age persons will be more than 
20% of the total number of people in Russia. 
  While we are citing the totals for the country as a whole, 
the situation is very different in various territories. For 
example, in the Tuva republic, the mortality level among 
able-bodied population is higher by 1.5 times than the average 
for Russia. In Pskov, Novgorod, Leningrad, Tver, Kemerovo, and 
Irkutsk oblasts, this indicator is 20-25% higher than the 
average. 
  According to recent predictions, the birth rate is expected 
to stabilize somewhat throughout the country, primarily due to 
an increase in the number of women of child-bearing age. In all, 
the demographic situation in Russia is the future of the nation, 
and it will in large measure depend on whether the family will 
manage to survive these difficult times and whether we are able 
to maintain our traditional universal values. 
  If we objectively sum up the above tragic statistics, the 
conclusion will be unambiguous: Russia is sick, and the state of 
its public health is already threatening national security. So, 
reliable information about this--the truth about all of us--must 
become public knowledge. Only then will we be able to make an 
analysis and take realistic steps which would give hope of 
improving the situation. 


