BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on crime, investigations, trials, sentencings, and other 
judicial- related activities in the PRC during the period 29 
March to 15 April. The source and mode of processing are given 
in parentheses at the end of each entry. Certain reports deemed 
more significant may have been filed separately, in which case 
the summary will include the serial number of the separately 
filed item. 
International 
Transnational Drug Trafficking Ring Broken Up 
  The city of Liuzhou broke up a major transnational drug 
trafficking ring, which brought drugs into China from Burma via 
Yunnan. Police arrested 13 criminals, of whom two were Burmese, 
and seized some 2.8 kg of heroin and 30,000 yuan in drug money, 
as well as 280,000 yuan and $500 in counterfeit banknotes 
[Summary] [Hong Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 27 Mar 94 p a3 -- 
HK0504115494] 
Pakistani Expelled for Traveler's Check Fraud 
  On 10 April, the Guangdong Public Security Department 
escorted a Pakistani called Abud Gehav, who held a counterfeit 
passport, to Guangzhou's Baiyun airport, expelled him, and 
declared that he is not allowed to re-enter the country for the 
next five years. On 28 July 1993 Abud cashed nine U.S. 
dollar-denominated traveler's checks (which had been reported 
lost), at the Bank of China branch in Guangzhou, receiving 2,395 
yuan in foreign exchange certificates. On the same day, he went 
to another Bank of China counter at a hotel to cash his six 
remaining checks. This time he failed and was arrested on the 
spot. On 22 March 1994 he was convicted of swindling. Abud 
accepted the verdict and had no plan to appeal. [Summary] [Hong 
Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 0552 GMT 11 Apr 94] 
Taiwanese Businessman, Partner Abandon Debt-Ridden Company 
  Cai Shunming -- owner of the Daguang Paper Product Company 
Limited, a Fuzhou Taiwan-capital enterprise -- and his mainland 
partner disappeared on 1 April leaving 500,000 yuan in debts 
behind them. Police believe they have not left mainland and are 
looking for them. The company is a sole-capital enterprise with 
$150,000 in registered capital, employing about 300 workers to 
produce tin foil used for religious worship, which is exported 
to Taiwan and South East Asia. On 31 March, Cai halted 
production for six days, claiming them as holidays, but the 60 
workers remaining behind discovered that Cai had gone. The 
company owed the workers two months' pay, 110,000 yuan in rent, 
and some 200,000 yuan of payment in goods. [Summary] [Hong Kong 
TA KUNG PAO in Chinese 11 Apr 94 p. 2] 
National 
Concern Over Secret Societies 
  An article in the latest issue of ZHONGHUA WENZHAI (CHINA 
DIGEST) revealed that the Central Commission on Politics and Law 
paid special attention to the activities of secret societies in 
China and took them as one of the ten major targets of the 
anticrime action. The Ministry of State Security also took 
organized crime as a highly dangerous phenomenon to be brought 
under strict supervision and control. The ministry has launched 
three major campaigns against secret societies: From Shaoyang 
in the south, to Harbin in the north. and to Lintong in the 
west. The article, entitled "Are There Mafias in China?" 
revealed that hundreds of criminal gangs often fought each other 
openly in the streets of Shaoyang, western Hunan. The 1991 
anticrime campaign solved 4,041 cases, including 1,096 major 
ones; eliminated 801 criminal gangs; and arrested 6,175 
gangsters, including 1,299 backbone members of the gangs in 
Shaoyang. The crime syndicates in Harbin operated as business 
enterprises, controlling the construction market in the city. 
The article also revealed that crime syndicates in China were 
involved in international criminal activities, such as drug 
trafficking and counterfeiting. [Summary] [Beijing ZHONGGUO 
XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1118 GMT 10 Apr 94] 
Provincial 
Beijing 
Policeman Sentenced for Beating Inhabitant 
  A few days ago, a policeman named Zhang, of Beijing's 
Haiding 
Public Security Sub Bureau, was sentenced by the Haiding 
People's Court to one year imprisonment, with a one-year 
reprieve, for deliberately beating an inhabitant. The accused 
also had to pay the economic loss incurred by the injured 
victim, who was having a quarrel with the conductor while 
traveling on a bus. This is the first sentence passed on a 
Beijing policeman for beating another person while on duty. 
[Summary] [Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 0942 GMT 7 Apr 94] 
  Fujian 
Quanzhou Uncovers Illegal Arms Sales 
  From January this year to the present, the Quanzhou public 
security organs cracked 5 cases of illegal arms sales, of which 
one was the largest in years. The Quanzhou public security 
organs first cracked an arms sales case in Nanan, by 
intercepting the ammunition delivered by the culprits via 
express mail. The public security organs took note of this 
crime and called on post offices throughout the city to heighten 
vigilance. By the end of last month, the public security bureau 
of Licheng district discovered 50 pellet rifles and 100 boxes of 
pellets in a parcel. They immediately arrested both the sender 
and recipient. The official in charge of the case said it was 
the largest one in the city over the past 45 years. [Text] 
[Hong Kong WEN WEI PO 23 Mar 94 p. b14] 
Government, Army Join Forces Against Bogus Military Licenses 
  Recently, Fujian's military command and government have 
undertaken joint operations to retrieve all expired military 
vehicle license plates. According to sources, the abuse of 
military vehicle license plates has been rather serious in 
Guangdong, Fujian, and Guangxi in recent years. Some people 
spend tens of thousands of yuan to get a military or armed 
police license plate "for show," while government officials do 
not have to spend even a cent. There usually are two ways to 
get license plates from military or armed police units: First, 
the Army grants one or two license plates to an enterprise 
jointly run by the military and the local government; second, 
the license plates are for rent. Beginning 11 April, the public 
security department, armed police corps, and various military 
units in Fujian began to carry out inspections and to ban the 
use of military license plates on non-military vehicles. 
[Summary] [Hong Kong MING PAO in Chinese 26 Mar 94 p a13] 
50,000 Cases of Counterfeiting Cigarettes Solved in 1993 
  According to Fujian Tobacco Bureau chief Jiang Chengkang, in 
1993, Fujian cracked some 50,000 cases of manufacturing and 
selling counterfeit cigarettes, destroying more than 2 million 
packs. According to incomplete statistics, more than 120 illegal 
cigarette factories and 222 illegal cigarette workshops were 
shut down in 1993. Counterfeit famous-brand cigarettes can be 
found everywhere in Fujian. Jiang said the reason counterfeit 
cigarettes cannot be thoroughly eradicated is that law is not 
enforced strictly and that some local governments even shield 
illegal cigarette factories because they turn over large amounts 
of taxes and profits. He said that the smuggling of imported 
cigarettes decreased last year, as people had regained 
confidence in Chinese brands. [Summary] [Hong Kong WEN WEI PO 
in Chinese 30 Mar 94 p b19] 
Guangdong 
Shenzhen Handles Corruption Cases 
  Mayor Li Youwei yesterday disclosed that among Shenzhen 
government officials who have absconded with public funds, more 
than 40 are still at large. In 1993, 21 people who escaped with 
money to places outside the border were brought back. This 
batch, plus those who have been brought back over the past 
several years, pushed the number to more than 40, half of them 
escaping with money. Some of them were brought back from the 
countries that have no diplomatic relations with China. He 
estimated that all the escapees had traveled through Hong Kong. 
He said that the 1994 budget for the police, judiciary, and 
procuratorate is 208 million yuan -- a 32.5 percent increase 
over 1993 -- and this sum does not include wages and equipment 
fees for the personnel in these departments. [Summary] [Hong 
Kong MING PAO in Chinese 24 Mar 94 p a10] 
  Last year, the supervision organ in Shenzhen handled 118 
cases of malpractice and corruption involving state 
functionaries, and 17 people were brought to the judicial 
organs. In order to effectively prevent corruption, governments 
at various levels in Shenzhen have established an anticorruption 
responsibility system. [Summary] [Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN 
SHE in Chinese 0750 GMT 22 Mar 94] 
Criminal Arrested for Stock Transactions Using Stolen Codes 
  On 22 March, a stock organization in Guangzhou used a newly 
designed alarm program to solve a case of using high technology 
to steal secret codes in order to steal and sell stocks. The 
case occurred on 14 March in the Guangzhou Stock Business 
Department of the Shenzhen International Credit, Trust, and 
Investment Corporation. When a stock trader made phone call 
entrusting the department with a transaction in Shenzhen stocks, 
he discovered that his secret trading code had been changed and 
that someone had bought on his behalf 10 lots of "Shenbaoheng" 
at 10.9 yuan per share and sold them later at 10.85 yuan per 
share. Within a dozen days or so, eight similar cases occurred. 
The department installed a monitoring and alarm system for the 
buying and selling of stocks by phone, and carried out overall 
monitoring of various internal business links. On 22 March, the 
criminal entered the trading hall to commit crimes, and the 
monitoring and control system at once accurately indicated his 
location. He was arrested at the telephone and has admitted all 
his crimes. However, whether the criminal committed the crimes 
alone or with others remains to be investigated. [Summary] 
[Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 1138 GMT 27 Mar 94] 
Daya Bay Kidnapping Case Ends With Hostage Killed 
  In the small hours of 24 March, Huizhou's Daya Bay Public 
Security Bureau cracked a kidnapping case in which the hostage 
was killed. Four criminals were arrested, and 320,000 yuan in 
illicit money, a pellet pistol, and a fruit knife were seized. 
On the morning of 3 March, the No. 1 Criminal Investigation 
Team of the Daya Bay Public Security Bureau received a report 
that on the evening of 28 February, self-employed businessman 
Zhou Yanming, 31, had been kidnapped and a ransom of 3.6 million 
yuan had been demanded. It was agreed that the ransom would be 
paid and the hostage released at midnight on 2 March. At 0030 
on 3 March, following negotiations with the kidnappers, Zhou's 
relatives put 430,000 yuan on the roadside of the Aoxia Highway, 
as demanded by the kidnappers, then drove away. At 1900 that 
day, the Zhou's body was discovered in the river below the Dutou 
Bridge. On the basis of the clues provided by the victim's 
family and the results of on-the- spot analysis, the Daya Bay 
Public Security Bureau carried out an investigation. After 20 
days, kidnappers Yuan Yongfa, Chen Kejian, Chen Jintian, and 
Chen Dongyi were arrested. [Text] [Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN 
SHE 1138 GMT 27 Mar 94] 
  Province-Wide Crackdown on Vehicle Theft 
  Between January and February, 263 motor vehicles were stolen 
or hijacked in Shenzhen, representing a 11.4 percent increase 
over the same period last year. According to Shenzhen's public 
security authorities, 92 percent of the hijackings occurred on 
remote roads on the outskirts, while 86 percent of the thefts 
occurred in the vicinity of residential areas, hotels, and 
restaurants. It is said that criminal syndicates hire thieves 
from Hong Kong who often succeed in stealing a car in 10 minutes 
or so. [Summary] [Hong Kong MING PAO in Chinese 26 Mar 94 p a13] 
  A total of 2,246 cases of car theft and carjacking occurred 
in Shenzhen in 1993, inflicting losses amounting to 430 million 
yuan. [Summary] [Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO in Chinese 30 Mar 93 p 4] 
  Shenzhen police recently set up a special operational group 
and office to combat car theft. This morning, a large-scale 
operation was launched to hunt down car thieves after statistics 
-- 105 vehicles and 150 motorcycles stolen in the first two 
months of the year -- showed that car theft has become a major 
problem for the city. According to concerned officials, during 
the operation, first they will issue notices urging citizens to 
report crime, set a deadline for criminals to surrender 
themselves, and ban illegal car transactions and changing car 
colors or license plate numbers. Investigations then will be 
stepped up, leading to the arrest of identified gangs that 
steal, ship and sell stolen cars. Roadblocks will be set up in 
Baoan and Longgang Districts on nine highways leading to Huizhou 
and Dongguan Counties, and 600 officers from the police and 
armed police corps -- including PLA soldiers -- will be deployed 
to mount a 24-hour guard in interception operations. The city 
also will launch a full cleanup of the auto trade and repair 
industry. Auto maintenance plants that refit and handle stolen 
cars must be shut down to await rectification, and some with 
serious involvement may see their licenses revoked. 
Unauthorized remodeling of car engines and changing of license 
plates also will become punishable by law. [Excerpts] [Hong 
Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 1203 GMT 29 Mar 94] 
  At a news conference on 30 March, the Guangdong Public 
Security Department said that a province-wide campaign would be 
launched to combat car theft. The campaign will include 28 
roadblocks on major highways to intercept stolen cars and 
fugitives. Car thieves are required to turn themselves in by 31 
May or face sever punishment. Last year, more than 4,000 cars 
and more than 26,000 motorcycles were stolen or hijacked. Cases 
of vehicle theft in the first two months of this year show an 
increase of 45 percent over the same period last year. 
[Summary] (Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO in Chinese 31 Mar 94 p 3] 
  At a news conference on 9 April, Guangzhou Public Security 
Bureau Director Zheng Guoqiang disclosed that since the 
publication of the provincial government circular instituting a 
crackdown on vehicle theft, Guangzhou has solved 457 cases of 
vehicle theft, destroyed 45 criminal gangs, arrested 243 
culprits, and recovered 36 cars and 221 motorcycles. The 
director demanded that those who have committed such crimes 
surrender themselves to public security organs before 31 May as 
stipulated by the circular. [Summary] [Guangzhou Guangdong 
People's Radio Network in Mandarin 0400 GMT 10 Apr 94] 
  Zheng said that following the crackdown, the number of cars 
reported stolen in the city dropped from an average of three to 
eight, to an average of one to two. The crackdown included 
inspections of parking lots, auto repair shops, and car rental 
agencies. The public security sub bureau in the town of Xicheng 
arrested four gang members who confessed to 13 car theft cases 
in Xintang, Baoan, and Dongguan. A small-gauge shotgun and 
10,000 yuan also were seized from the gang. [Summary] [Hong 
Kong TA KUNG PAO in Chinese 10 Apr 94 p. 4] 
  Public security organs in Huizhou have installed a telephone 
hotline for people to report vehicle thefts. Statistics show 
that more than 1,800 vehicles were stolen or carjacked in 
Huizhou's downtown areas, accounting for more than 50 percent of 
the city's total. [Summary] [Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in 
Chinese 0717 GMT 11 Apr 94] 
  According to information from the Guangdong Public Security 
Bureau's Command Post Against Car Theft, on 10 April, Maoming 
City's public security organ cracked a serious case of murder 
and car theft, arresting all four culprits, among whom were two 
women. Investigation reveals that it was a case of seduction and 
premeditated murder. One week ago, Lin Yongwen, a driver with 
the Maoming City Grain Bureau Materials Trading Company, met 
dancing companions Li Moping and Hong Jinwen in the Maoming 
Building. The women got his pager number and later arranged a 
meeting with him. After getting him drunk, Chen Hong and Xu 
Ming, the other two culprits, strangled Lin with electrical 
wire. They put him in his vehicle and tried to drive away, but 
were found and arrested by patrolling police. [Summary] [Hong 
Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 12 Apr 94 p a3] 
Shenzhen Breaks Up Drug, Burglary Gang 
  Based on the confession of an arrested burglar, a police 
unit 
of the Luohu sub bureau of the Shenzhen Public Security Bureau 
smashed a drug and burglary gang, arrested 44 addicts and 
thieves, and seized drugs and such stolen goods as wallets and 
bracelets. The burglary occurred on 24 March when owner of a 
house caught the burglar red-handed. All the 44 who arrested 
hailed from Sheungde County, Hunan Province. [Summary] [Hong 
Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 2 Apr 94, p a3] 
Fugitives Returned to Guangdong 
  The recently concluded Third Plenary Session of the 
Guangdong 
Provincial Discipline Inspection Commission disclosed that since 
last September, Guangdong has successfully waged an 
anticorruption struggle and adopted resolute measures to clamp 
down on economic crimes, with the result that a total of 55 
fugitives involved in many major economic crimes have been 
captured and repatriated from foreign countries, foreign 
regions, as well as other Chinese provinces. The successful 
arrest and repatriation of these criminals has made significant 
contributions to the province's work in investigating and 
handling major and serious cases. [Text] [Guangzhou Guangdong 
People's Radio Network in Mandarin 0400 GMT 4 Apr 94] 
  On 9 April, three scoundrels were returned under escort from 
Beijing to Guangzhou. They had been involved in a murder and 
been fugitives for eight months. Armed with knives, the three 
-- including Yu Pei and Zhang Lixin -- broke into a public 
lavatory at the junction of the Huangshi Center and Tongxin 
Roads on 1 August 1993. They ordered a Mr. Chen to surrender 
his belongings. When he put up a struggle, they stabbed him to 
death and fled the scene with Chen's mobile telephone. 
[Summary] [Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 0400 GMT 10 Apr 94] 
  Guangxi 
Two-Year Antismuggling Campaign Yields Results 
  Following an intense two-year effort, the Guangxi 
antismuggling force has gained control of smuggling activities 
once rampant along the coast. Antismuggling force officers said 
they had solved 236 smuggling cases involving 540 million yuan, 
and had seized 1,369 cars, 1,874 motorbikes, and 8,121 
television sets. The recent smuggling activities display three 
characteristics: 1) They concentrated in economically open 
areas like Beihai, Qinzhou, Dongxing, and Fangchenggang, with 
cars and electric machinery as the main items; 2) Drug and gun 
smuggling occur mostly in border areas, exploiting the 
complicated terrain there; 3) Smuggling is run by individuals. 
Guangxi has adopted the tactic of "making arrests at sea, 
intercepting on the coast, carrying out inspections on land, and 
tightening up controls over markets." Last year, Beihai Customs 
solved 47 smuggling cases involving 180 million yuan, seizing 
350 cars, 8,600 air conditioners, 4,523 color televisions, and 
5,992 compressors. A particularly serious car smuggling case 
that was solved in Qinzhou straddled four provinces, three 
regions, and one city, and involved some $11.2 million. 
[Summary] [Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 1022 GMT 2 Apr 94] 
Large Number of Abducted Women, Children Rescued 
  Miss Liu, 18, has left her 57-year-old "husband" and 
returned to her native place in Jingxi County, thanks to rescue 
efforts by the police. One year ago, she was sold by human 
traffickers to Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, which is 
thousands of kilometers from her hometown. A person in charge 
of the Guangxi Office for Cracking Down on the Abduction and 
Sale of Women and Children said that Guangxi is one of the 
country's major disaster areas for the abduction and sale of 
women and children, and that according to statistics, the number 
of women and children abducted and sold in Guangxi ranks second 
in the country, just after Sichuan. In order to crack down on 
the abduction and sale of women and children, Guangxi's public 
security organs have adopted many measures simultaneously, and 
have tried their best to rescue abducted and sold women. 
According to reports, since 1991, public security personnel 
have rescued thousands of women and children every year. From 
August to September 1993, Guangxi carried out a special campaign 
to crack down on the abduction and sale of women and children, 
and the whole autonomous region transferred more than 60 public 
security personnel from nine cities and prefectures, organized 
them into six work teams, and sent them to Hebei, Shandong, 
Anhui, Jiangsu, Fujian, Guangdong, and other places, to verify 
and rescue women and children who had been abducted and sold. 
During the campaign, 84 women and children were rescued. In 
1993, Guangxi cracked more than 1,740 cases of abduction and 
sale of people, detected 1,928 human traffickers, crushed 292 
criminal gangs, and rescued 997 women and 72 children. At the 
same time, Guangxi's public security organs and women's 
federation launched extensive propaganda throughout the region 
against the abduction and sale of women and children, and also 
strengthened education for women, so as to achieve the effect of 
prevention and rectification by the masses. [Text] [Hong Kong 
ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 10 Apr 94] 
Hainan 
Campaign Against Fake, Substandard Products 
  Since last year, Hainan industrial and commercial 
departments 
have launched many operations against fake and substandard 
products. Personnel numbering 17,000 were deployed to inspect 
shops, guest houses, restaurants, and so on in townships and 
towns. Of these businesses, 904 were found to be operating 
illegally or without proper authorization, 33 factories 
producing fake goods were broken up, and 1,126 offenders were 
investigated. Fake goods included 3,300 cigarettes, 23,316 
bottles of wine, 60,000 items of medicines, 88,000 food and 
beverage items, and 41,000 household appliances, as well as 
wire, trademarks and logos, and so on. Vice Governor Mao Zhijun 
said that fake goods still remain a serious problem, exhibiting 
four characteristics: 1) Many brandname goods are still being 
copied on a massive scale; 2) Trademarks are still being traded 
without authorization, and with increases in quantity and 
variety; 3) Fake and substandard household electrical appliances 
can still be seen frequently -- the 260 National color 
televisions imported last year to Keshan County, Guangdong, were 
found to be home products; 4) There are many fake brandname 
cigarettes. Public security forces and coast guards seized 
4,500 cartons of fake cigarettes last year in Haikou, Lingao, 
and other places. [Summary] [Hong Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 4 
Apr 94 p. b5] 
Heilongjiang 
Three Arrested for Stealing Capital Gains Tax Invoices 
  In close cooperation with taxation departments, Harbin 
public 
security organs recently solved a case of stealing capital gains 
tax invoices. They arrested three culprits and recovered all 
the invoices. In March this year, Harbin's Hulan county 
taxation bureau was robbed of 1,600 books containing a total of 
40,000 copies of invoices. The three robbers included Deng 
Yucai, a Harbin inhabitant, who remained in post with his salary 
temporarily suspended; Yu Min, who was sentenced to 18 years 
imprisonment for robbery and looting; and Sui Guohua, who was 
sentenced to 17 years imprisonment for robbery and injuring 
others. The police recovered 23,000 yuan of stolen money. The 
case is still in progress. [Summary] [Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN 
SHE 1226 GMT 1 Apr 94] 
  Hunan 
Procuratorial Sector Cracks Down on Economic Crime 
  Since the beginning of the year, Hunan's procuratorial 
sector 
has done a good job in investigating and handling major and 
important cases of economic crime, such as graft and bribery. 
In the first two months of the year, a total of 211 major and 
important cases were investigated and handled, accounting for 
64.3 percent of the cases filed, an increase of 85.1 percent 
over the same period last year. Some of the special 
characteristics of processing major and important cases are: 1) 
New breakthroughs have been made in cases related to such key 
sectors as party and government organs, judicial organs, 
executive and law-enforcement sectors, and the economic 
management sector, with a total of 273 cases involving these 
sectors handled in the first two months this year. Parties 
involved in these cases included eight cadres at or above the 
county and office level. 2) There are imbalances between 
different areas in terms of the processing of cases. For 
instance, in less than a month and a half, from 28 January to 4 
March, the procuratorial body of Xiangxi Autonomous Prefecture, 
a remote impoverished area in the west, solved five cases of 
graft and bribery involving cadres at or above the county and 
office level. [Text] [Changsha Hunan People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 4 Apr 94] 
Jiangxi 
Couple Executed for Abduction, Sale of Children 
  Li Wenchu and Luo Zhenlan, a peasant couple from Xiafu 
township's Hushan village, in Jiangxi's Pingxiang city, 
collaborated with Lai Changjian to kidnap children. From the 
August 1989 to April 1993, they abducted nine children aged 
between four and eight from the city's Xiangdong, Laoguan, 
Quantian, Futian, Mashan, and Nankeng townships, making a profit 
of 36,000 yuan by selling them in Changding and Sanming, in 
Fujian. The local public security organs arrested all the human 
smugglers and sent all the children back to their parents. The 
two principal culprits were sentenced to death, and other 
culprits also were punished by law. [Summary] [Hong Kong 
ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 0747 GMT 1 Apr 94] 
Jilin 
Peasant Arrested for Passing Counterfeit Money 
  In the latter half of March, after three months of 
investigation, public security organs in the city of Jian solved 
an exceptionally large case of counterfeit bills and arrested 
culprit Qu Changjiang, a 27-year-old peasant from a village in 
Baishan City. Late last year, he bought 500 kg of ginseng from 
a trader for 19,900 yuan. After Qu had gone, the trader 
discovered that the same number was printed in all those bills 
he had received, which later were proved to be counterfeit. Qu 
said following his arrest that the counterfeit bills had been 
purchased on the black market in Guangzhou and that the batch of 
ginseng had been sold at a low price and all the proceeds spent. 
[Summary] [Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 1024 GMT 
10 Apr 94] 
Liaoning 
Peasant Wins Lawsuit Against Township Government 
  While handing a dispute between Wen Shixia, a peasant 
businesswoman, and another person in early 1993, the Xiliu 
township government in Liaoning illegally detained the 
plaintiff's license and 91 jackets, which caused a serious 
economic loss. The Haicheng People's Court re-examined the case 
and passed a verdict, urging the accused Xiliu township 
government to withdraw the decision to illegally detain the 
property and to repay economic losses of 9,775 yuan to the 
plaintiff. [Summary] [Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO 27 Mar 94 p. 3] 
  Ningxia 
Public Security Organs Crack Down on Crime 
  Public security organs at all levels in Ningxia have 
seriously implemented the guidelines of the National Politics 
and Law Meeting and the National Meeting of Directors of Public 
Security Departments and Bureaus, closely linked the guidelines 
with local reality, sternly cracked down on crime, conducted 
different forms of special anticrime struggles, improved social 
order, solved conspicuous public security problems, and 
effectively safeguarded stability and social security throughout 
the region. In view of the increasing crime in some localities 
since last winter, the public security organs at all levels have 
severely and quickly punished criminals who have committed 
serious crimes; focused efforts on cracking down on crimes that 
seriously endanger public security, such as murder, robbery, 
rape, serious theft, and swindling; and gone all-out to 
safeguard social stability. In November 1993, three 
dagger-wielding criminals entered a house in Zhenan, 
Qingtongxia, stealing more than 10,000 yuan's worth of property. 
The Qingtongxia Public Security Bureau solved the case in only 
10 hours. Since the Yinchuan Public Security Bureau started to 
conduct activities to "ferret out criminal gangs and crack down 
on roving bandits" in December last year, it has wiped out more 
than 30 robbery or roving criminal gangs, and has recovered 
stolen money and property amounting to more than 700,000 yuan. 
In February this year, the Xiji County Public Security Bureau 
arrested a criminal involved in a serious ambush case. The 
bureau also succeeded in arresting 11 other robbers and thieves 
and solving more than 40 other cases. In January, the 
Shizuishan Mining Bureau cooperated with the public security 
organs to arrest a thief. This led to the solving of nine 
criminal cases. From December last year to the end of February 
this year, public security organs throughout the region solved a 
total of 1,082 criminal cases of various kinds, of which 291 
were major cases, and seized stolen money and property amounting 
to 1.749 million yuan. Various localities also have conducted 
different forms of special struggle in light of conspicuous 
problems in social order. People complained about bicycle 
thefts, so Yinchuan organized a 100-day special struggle against 
the stealing of bicycles. As a result, 1,217 bicycles were 
retrieved and most were returned to their owners. Yinnan and 
Guyuan Prefectures focused efforts on activities to crack down 
on encroachments upon the interests of peasants. Since January 
this year, the public security organs have retrieved returned to 
the collective or peasants 500,000 yuan's worth of property and 
livestock for agricultural production. At present, the Ningxia 
Regional Public Security Department has made arrangements for 
conducting a region-wide "spring struggle" to continue to 
sternly crack down on various kinds of crimes, and to organize 
the police forces to strengthen control over social order and 
precautions against crimes. It wants to provide a good social 
environment for the opening of the meetings of the region's 
people's congress and Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference. [Summary] [Yinchuan NINGXIA RIBAO in Chinese 31 Mar 
94 p. 1] 
Qinghai 
Major Drug-Trafficking Case Cracked 
  Recently, the Qinghai public security organ cracked a major 
drug- trafficking case, in which 6,220 grams of heroin were 
seized. It was the most serious case in the province ever. The 
culprits, Chen Ziyong and You Yutai, two peasants from 
Zhejiang, were apprehended according to the law. [Text] 
[Beijing FAZHI RIBAO in Chinese 18 Mar 94 p 3] 
Anticorruption Campaign Successful 
  Qinghai Province has scored initial success in fighting 
corruption, as more than 94 percent of cadres at and above the 
county level have undergone self-examination and 
self-correction. A number of cases of violation of law and 
discipline have been investigated and handled, and new progress 
has been made in the operation to rectify unhealthy tendencies 
in different trades. An anticorruption campaign was launched in 
last August. By the end of last year, most leading bodies at 
and above the county level throughout the province had called 
self-examination and self- correction meetings for cadres. To 
cope with the issues exposed, party and government organs at all 
levels have formulated and revised regulations to promote 
honesty and clean government. Meanwhile, discipline inspection 
and supervisory organs at all levels have intensified the system 
for processing letters of complaint and handling visits from 
complainants. The numbers of letters and of visits received 
have been increasing remarkably since last August. The 
provincial discipline inspection commission and supervisory 
department alone processed more than 1,000 complaints lodged by 
letter or visit from September last year to February this year. 
Last year, discipline inspection and supervisory organs 
throughout the province placed on file and processed a total of 
559 cases of violations of law or discipline, and disciplinary 
actions were taken by the party and the government against more 
than 200 offenders. Cases involving criminal violations have 
been transferred to judicial organs for further processing. So 
far in the province, more than 1,000 service charge items have 
been sorted out and reviewed, of which 206 classified as 
arbitrary and unreasonable have been sorted out and revised. 
Most localities and government departments now are studying to 
learn methods of disconnecting the managerial relations of 
economic entities from their related party and government 
organs. [Summary] [Xining Qinghai People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 5 Apr 94] 
Shaanxi 
14 Major Corruption Cases Solved 
  Courts in Shaanxi recently cracked 14 corruption cases 
involving 27 state workers. This was announced by a provincial 
court chief. Of the 27 criminals, three were sentenced to death 
for embezzling public funds, three to life imprisonment, and the 
remaining 16 to three to 15 years' imprisonment. [Summary] 
[Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1342 GMT 31 Mar 94] 
Shanghai 
Success in Uncovering Tax Evasion 
  In the first three months of this year, following the 
adoption of the new taxation system, Shanghai's taxation 
department followed the clues in 208 tax evasion cases, solving 
104 of them, in which the taxes evaded amounted to more than 6.9 
million yuan. There were 17 serious cases in which the amount 
of taxes evaded exceeded 100,000 yuan, while cases involving 
legal persons numbered eight. [Summary] [Hong Kong ZHONGGUO 
TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0916 GMT 22 Mar 94] 

