Language: <F P=105> Burmese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Declaration issued at an emergency meeting of the </F>
Democratic Alliance of Burma Central Committee in Manerplaw on 
14 January] 
  [Text] The secretary-1 of the SLORC [State Law and Order 
Restoration Council] expressed the SLORC's desire to meet with 
jungle-based armed organizations in Loikaw, Kayah State, on 17 
November 1993. The DAB [Democratic Alliance of Burma] believed 
that this desire to meet with jungle-based armed organizations 
would be worthwhile if it was intended to establish internal 
peace in Burma. That is why DAB Chairman General Saw Bo Mya 
proposed holding an official meeting between the DAB and the 
SLORC in a letter to SLORC Chairman Senior General Than Shwe 
dated 1 December 1993. The SLORC responded to this letter 
verbally, saying it would not meet or hold discussions with the 
DAB or the NDF [National Democratic Front]; it would only meet 
and hold discussions with individual jungle-based armed 
organizations. In this regard, the DAB Central Committee's 
emergency meeting, held from 11 to 14 January, has issued the 
following declaration to the local and international community: 
  1. The underlying problems -- the civil war and the lack of 
peace and stability in Burma -- are directly related to the 
political forces, national peoples, and public in the country. 
These problems are also directly related and connected to the 
state's constitutional system and the state's fundamental 
political policies. Separate and secret meetings between the 
SLORC and certain organizations will not produce the correct 
solution to these problems. Such separate and secret meetings 
will not produce a nationwide cease-fire or a genuine and firm 
internal peace. They will only produce a more dangerous 
situation for the country. 
  2. At the moment, there is a serious need to establish 
genuine national solidarity in Burma. In order to establish 
genuine and firm national solidarity, a plenary session of all 
political forces is required so that free, frank, and fair 
discussions can be held. Separate and secret meetings run 
completely counter to genuine and firm national solidarity; they 
are an abnormal act. 
  3. The DAB has no desire whatsoever for civil war. [Word 
indistinct], the DAB believes that the political issues that 
create and augment civil war need to be removed. The DAB deeply 
believes that the process of removing these political issues has 
to be based on the basic political interests and desires of the 
national peoples and the entire populace, and that the problems 
have to be resolved by political means. That is why the DAB has 
honestly struggled and is still struggling to achieve genuine 
internal peace. 
  4. The SLORC's excuse that it cannot meet with the DAB 
because of the different political objectives among the DAB's 
members is not a strong or valid reason. The DAB has one basic 
political objective. It is not just the DAB; the majority of 
political forces, all national peoples, and the entire public in 
the country -- regardless of organizational affiliation, race, 
religion, or region -- have the same political objective. This 
objective is to establish a genuine, democratic, federal union 
[federal pyidaungsu thamada naing-ngan]. The whole country is 
opposed to the SLORC and is fighting against it. Therefore, it 
is clear that not only the DAB, but the [word indistinct] people 
have the same political objective. 
  5. Meetings and discussions, as well as any internal peace, 
that overlook the fundamental political interests of the 
national peoples and the public have no meaning. Only the 
concerted effort and struggle of all peace-loving forces can 
produce a genuine internal peace and resolve political problems 
by political means. Therefore, the DAB will continue its 
struggle for a genuine and firm internal peace that can 
guarantee the fundamental political interests of the national 
peoples and the public by firmly joining hands with all people 
and patriots. 
  [Signed] Central Committee, Democratic Alliance of Burma; 
Central Headquarters, Manerplaw. 
  [Dated] 14 January 1994. 

