BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, April 11 (XINHUA) -- Bosnian Serbs 
claimed tonight that Serb forces have successfully repulsed 
today's NATO air raid and Muslim offensive against Serb 
positions in the Gorazde area. 
  It was reported that following Sunday's air raid by two U.S. 
F-16 war planes on the Serb positions southwest of Gorazde, two 
U.S. F-18 jets carried out another bombardment of these 
positions this afternoon. 
  A statement issued by the general staff of the Bosnian Serb 
forces confirmed the second NATO air strike and said it was 
accompanied by an offensive by the Muslim Army. 
  However, it added, the Serb Army repelled "the enemy's 
powerful assaults" and held their positions. 
  It also said a NATO C-130 transport, landing on Tuzla 
Airport 
this afternoon, carried NATO rapid reaction force units and a 
lot of weapons and ammunition. 
  The Serb general staff learned from reliable sources that 
the 
troops, from the NATO base in Frankfurt, will fight alongside 
Muslim soldiers against the Serbs. 
  These facts showed that the UN Protection Force (UNPROFOR) 
here has stepped over its peacekeeping mandate and will thus be 
held responsible for the further escalation of the Bosnian war, 
the statement stressed. 
  Momcilo Krajisnik, speaker of the Bosnian Serbs' parliament, 
told the newspaper "POLITIKA" that NATO's second air raid 
indicated that the UN is deliberately helping the Muslims in 
their spring offensives in the Gorazde area. 
  Yasushi Akashi, the UN chief representative in former 
Yugoslavia, explained to the press in Zagreb today why he twice 
asked the NATO to bomb Serb positions. 
  He said that the Bosnian Serb Army had repeatedly attacked 
downtown Gorazde and caused heavy losses and casualties there. 
  He had no choice but to request NATO air raids because the 
Serb Army continued their assaults regardless of repeated UN 
warnings. 
  Akashi also warned that if the Bosnian Serbs dare to 
continue 
their offensives against the Muslims, fresh air strikes will be 
launched to stop them. 

