Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Ulaanbaatar, January 17 (OANA-MONTSAME) -- In 
accordance with the proposal of the Mongolian prime minister on 
changes to be made into the governmental structure which has 
been passed by the parliament, the government will include some 
thirteen ministries and five special departments. Up to now 
there were fifteen ministries while the number of the special 
departments was the same in the governmental structure. 
Pursuant to the changes the Ministry of Geology and Mineral 
Resources, that of construction and urban development and the 
General Police Department have been dismantled, the General 
Board on Ensuring State Security is reorganized into the Central 
Intelligence Board, and the MONTSAME News Agency is included in 
the structure of the government. 
  By merging the Ministry of Geology and Mineral Resources 
with 
that of fuel and power industry there would be established a new 
sectoral ministry, by merging of the Ministry of Construction 
and Urban Development with that of roads, transport and 
communications a new ministry for infrastructure development. 
  The General Police Department has been included in the 
structure of the Ministry of Justice. 
  Totally as was submitted by Premier P. Jasray to the 
Mongolian parliament, 1230 people are working in those state 
offices. Out of them some 300 are technical and financial and 
economic staff, some 170 are engaged in the secretariats and the 
rest are made up by state employee so-called "white collars". 
  In accordance with the budget of 320 million tugrik assigned 
for the year of 1994 for the ministries and departments' 
provision a third is intended for salary payment and the 
remaining part of the means on expenditures relating to the 
economic activities and business trips. 
  However by implementing the decisions referring to the 
project, the Mongolian prime minister said, there will be 
arising some opportunities for reducing the budgetary 
expenditures of the government for about fifty million tugrik 
worth. 

