CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sophia Coudenhove: "National Union Congress </F>
Displays Egoism, Hatred--and a New Leader"] 
  [Text] Less than 24 hours after being voted head of the 
Czech Republic's trade unions, a sad and tired Richard Falbr 
said he already envied his predecessor for having quit the post. 
After supporting him with an overwhelming majority, the 
Congress of the Czech and Moravian Chamber of Trade Unions 
(CMKOS) spent almost six hours furiously debating whether Falbr, 
his deputy and the members of the CMKOS management committee 
should be screened for possible association with the 
communist-era secret police (StB). 
  "In a way, this congress has been a reflection of the 
situation in this country," Falbr said in his closing speech. 
"It would be hard to find as much egoism and hate as has arisen 
in this room in the last two hours, and I'm very sorry about 
that." 
  The whole issue of screening had barely come up at all until 
just before the vote, when Falbr told delegates that in his 
early 20s, he had taught Spanish and English at the Interior 
Ministry and might therefore appear on a list of alleged StB 
collaborators. He denied ever having signed anything for the 
secret police. "If these personal attacks on me continue, I 
will re-evaluate my continuation in this position," Falbr said. 
  Eventually delegates voted that their leaders should be 
screened, but not made to resign if the results were positive. 
And while union members hurled insults at each other across the 
congress hall, sometimes whistling and swearing, leaders cringed 
as they remembered that one of the aims of the meeting had been 
to show unity and cooperation for the future. 
  Although the congress succeeded in drawing up a 
constitution, 
a program for the next four years and an outline of their 
current demands, Falbr and his colleagues will face discord and 
confusion on more than merely personal fronts. 
  Falbr's greatest challenge remains bridging the gap between 
members who favor the moderate approach to the government that 
has so far prevailed, and those who would prefer to take more 
radical steps. 
  The country's transition to a market democracy has deprived 
workers of many privileges they enjoyed under communism. Union 
leaders have generally accepted these changes, causing 
opposition among many rank-and-file members. 
  Outside labor circles, the government and much of the Czech 
media has labeled the unions as "extremists," often comparing 
them to their communist predecessors. 
  Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus is among those most eager to 
condemn the unions. At the opening of the congress March 8, he 
did not hesitate to connect the unions' activities with their 
supposed political beliefs. 
  Referring to a speech given by Falbr's predecessor Vladimir 
Petrus at the March 22 union demonstration on Old Town Square, 
Klaus denied Petrus' allegations that employees were made to 
feel superfluous in the workplace. "I don't believe that this is 
the dominant feeling among union members," Klaus said, "except 
perhaps those who during the communist era got used to the fact 
that little was demanded of them at work." 
  Although Klaus' remark was met with whistles at the 
congress, 
Petrus was quick to forgive his previous attacks. Brushing aside 
Klaus' earlier comparison of the demonstration to the 1948 
communist coup, he said that the prime minister's presence at 
the congress could be considered as an apology. 
  Meanwhile, Falbr, while promising that he would take a more 
radical approach than Petrus, failed to specify what form this 
new radicalism would take. 
  Asked about parliament's and President Vaclav Havel's 
approval of the new labor code, against which the unionists had 
demonstrated, Falbr said that while he was not happy with the 
law, he understood that it would have been difficult for Havel 
to pit himself against the entire government coalition by not 
signing it. 
  Of all the speakers at the congress, the foreign 
representatives made the strongest attacks on the Czech 
government. 
  The head of the International Confederation of Free Unions, 
Enzo Friso, said that Czech politicians, especially Klaus, still 
had a lot to learn about democracy. And Andreas Botsch, a 
representative of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD), said that if the Czech government was 
interested in entering the organization, it would have to bear 
in mind that the OECD binds its members to dialogue with trade 
unions. 

