Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, Feb 3 (AFP)--Three of the seven Islamic 
militants killed in a police raid in Cairo were involved in the 
murder of a British tourist in October 1992, police said 
Thursday. 
  Police said the three shot dead on Wednesday -- Yasir Zaki, 
'Abd-al-Nabi Tayih and Tariq al-Qurayshi -- took part in the 
murder of 28-year-old Sharon Hill in the town of Dayrut, 300 
kilometers (180 miles) south of Cairo. 
  Two other British tourists were wounded in the attack. Hill 
was the first foreigner to be killed in a campaign of violence 
launched by fundamentalist militants in March 1992. 
  Western embassies in Cairo said Thursday they were taking 
seriously the threats against foreigners issued by the outlawed 
Islamic militant group al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah following the 
police raid. 
  However, the embassies stressed they were not warning their 
nationals against visiting Egypt. 
  On Wednesday, the militant group warned foreign investors 
and 
tourists to leave the country, saying it would retaliate against 
the "massacre" of seven of its members by police, and its next 
attacks would be "extremely tough." 
  The interior ministry said police shot dead the seven 
militants when they came under fire in a raid on an apartment in 
a poor district of Cairo. 
  They discovered a large quantity of arms, explosives and 
remote control devices in the apartment. None of the policemen 
was hurt. 
  Seven foreigners were among the 293 people killed since the 
militants launched their campaign aimed at toppling the secular 
government of President Husni Mubarak. 
  Two were killed in an attack on a coffee shop in Cairo in 
February 1993. Nobody claimed responsibility for the attack, 
which remained unresolved. 
  Four other foreigners were killed when a gunman opened fire 
last October in the Semiramis Hotel in Cairo. Police said the 
gunman, arrested on the spot, was mentally ill. 
  Interior Minister Hasan al-Alfi warned Wednesday that the 
security forces would continue the crackdown against Islamic 
militants "until the last terrorist is eliminated." 

