Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] The Second Session of the Eighth Shandong 
Provincial People's Congress, which is the focus of all the 
people of the province, ceremoniously opened at the Zhenzhuquan 
People's Assembly Hall of Jinan on the morning of 28 February. 
This session of extreme importance was held in a gratifying 
situation where all people of the province had the spirit of 
reform, adopted an all-new attitude, and closely focused on the 
grand goal of setting up the socialist market economic system in 
an effort to further accelerate reform, opening up, and economic 
construction. Entrusted with the heavy trust of some 86 million 
people throughout the province, the people's deputies from 
various localities and fronts of the province high-spiritedly, 
energetically, and confidently attended the session to jointly 
discuss great matters of reform, construction, and development. 
  Present at the session and also seated in the front row of 
the rostrum were executive chairmen, namely Jiang Chunyun, Li 
Zhen, Ma Zhongcai, Wang Shufang, Miao Fenglin, Guo Songnian, Xu 
Jianchun, Ma Shizhong, Guo Changcai, Yan Qingqing, Ma Xutao, and 
Xu Xuemeng. Comrade Li Zhen chaired the session. 
  [Begin recording] [Li Zhen] Fellow deputies and fellow 
comrades: The Eighth Shandong Provincial People's Congress has 
934 deputies. Thirty- eight deputies were absent on sick leave 
or compassionate leave. Eight hundred and ninety-six deputies 
are present for today's session. We have quorum. Now, I 
declare the Second Session of the Eighth Shandong Provincial 
People's Congress formally open. [applause] Please, stand for 
the playing of the national anthem. [Playing of the national 
anthem] We will now invite Comrade Zhao Zhihao, governor of the 
provincial government, to deliver the work report of the 
provincial people's government. [applause] 
  [Zhao Zhihao] Fellow deputies: On behalf of the provincial 
people's government, I will now present the government work 
report to the session for examination and discussion. 
Simultaneously, I ask the members of the provincial committee 
of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference 
[CPPCC] and other personnel attending the session as nonvoting 
delegates to give opinions. First, in 1993, the province 
realized the second economic doubling target ahead of schedule 
and laid a foundation for basically realizing modernization. 
The past year was one in which the province further accelerated 
the pace of reform, opening up, and modernization; and all 
undertakings developed vigorously. Under the leadership of the 
Shandong Provincial CPC Committee, governments at various levels 
united with and guided the people of the province to 
conscientiously implement the guidelines of Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's important talks and the 14th party congress; 
resolutely implemented a series of policies and principles on 
deepening reform, accelerating development, and improving and 
strengthening macroeconomic regulation and control as set forth 
by the party Central Committee and the State Council; worked 
solidly; bravely did pioneering work; and successfully 
accomplished the 1993 work tasks as defined at the first session 
of the eighth provincial people's congress. A gratifying 
situation characterized by economic development, political 
stability, unity of the people, and social progress emerged in 
the province. [applause] Here, I was pleased to announce that 
through the arduous efforts made by all people of the province 
in the past 10 years or so, the province's GNP in 1993 was 4.3 
times that of 1980, fulfilling the doubling target seven years 
ahead of the schedule. The first-step development target of the 
province's three-step goal was successfully realized. This 
indicated our province's entrance into a period of (?successful) 
development of modernization. This is the best historical 
achievement of the people of the province. [applause] [end 
recording] 
  Governor Zhao Zhihao's government work report consists of 
five parts. First, in 1993, the province fulfilled the second 
economic doubling target ahead of schedule and laid a foundation 
for basically realizing modernization. Second, define the 1994 
economic and social development principles and tasks and elevate 
modernization to a new height. Third, further strengthen 
agriculture's role as the foundation of the national economy, 
optimize structure, increase economic results, and promote 
faster and better development of the economy. Fourth, promote 
package reform with breakthroughs in key areas and accelerate 
the pace of setting up the socialist market economic system. 
Fifth, persist in the principle of taking a two-handed approach 
and ensure that both hands are tough so as to achieve spiritual 
civilization and the self-construction of the government. 
[passage omitted] 
  The members participating in the second session of the 
provincial CPPCC committee attended the session as nonvoting 
delegates. 

