BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Belarusian presidential candidate Stanislav </F>
Shuskevich by Arkadiy Khantsevich; place and date not given: 
"Stanislav Shushkevich: "We Will Take Russia's Wealth of 
Experience Into Account"] 
  [Text] Minsk/Moscow -- The presidential elections in 
Belorussia [Belarus] are on 23 June. Stanislav Shushkevich 
intends to compete seriously with the other contenders. Have 
his views of the course of the reforms in the Republic changed? 
  [Khantsevich] Stanislav Stanislavovich, it is no secret that 
one of the chief factors in the fight for the presidency will be 
the candidates' attitude toward the recently announced 
unification of the Russian and Belorussian [Belarusian] monetary 
systems. A strange situation has arisen: Many Russians 
disapproved of the idea, which is understandable -- they are 
frightened of a fall in their own living standards. But it 
turns out that in Belorussia as well many people are convinced 
that no good will come of the future union. Even National Bank 
Chairman Bogdankevich recently stated publicly that he is 
against this union. But Minsk officialdom, in the shape of 
Prime Minister Kebich, is unequivocally in favor. I believe you 
have a different view? 
  [Shushkevich] Do you know, I pondered it long and hard: 
Will ordinary people think that a negative attitude toward the 
unification of monetary systems is a negative attitude toward 
Russia itself? Will they not regard the two concepts as 
synonymous? But it turned out that our people are unusually 
sharp and intelligent. The National Bank chairman is a 
professional and he says perfectly sensible things. What is 
better: To combine our Belorussian bad management with Russian 
bad management, albeit less bad? Or to find ways of regulating 
the economy and think about fitting, European-type union? 
  In my view, we have to seek ways of collaborating as closely 
as possible -- in the customs, payments, and economic spheres. 
But without political intrigues; unification is friendship, 
they say, and all who are against friendship are anti-Russian. 
  [Khantsevich] So you think unification may not happen? 
  [Shushkevich] In principle it cannot happen. After all, 
there is no normal legal treaty. There is a protocol of intent, 
moreover, the intent of people who are not too hot on economics 
and have a poor idea of what a financial and credit system is 
but can well remember the USSR State Planning Committee and how 
you had to implement its directives. 
  [Khantsevich] Let us look at this problem from another 
angle. Does the approach you are advocating not contain the 
danger of further self-isolation, as has already happened in 
some former Soviet republics? For instance, in many Belorussian 
publications I have encountered the following notion: The 
national idea must be a priority for the future president. Do 
you agree with this statement? 
  [Shushkevich] I believe it is a normal statement to make. 
But first there is something I would like to emphasize. A 
person who loves Russia is called a patriot. A person who loves 
Belorussia is now called a nationalist. It is unfortunate, but 
it is a fact. 
  So I would like our sovereignty to be asserted not against 
Russia, but for the benefit of Belorussia. And if it is for the 
benefit of Belorussia, it must be in conjunction with Russia, in 
judicious collaboration with it. 
  [Khantsevich] Here is another fact from the newspapers. 
Some 77 percent of correspondents regret the collapse of the 
USSR and believe that the collapse is the main cause of the 
Belorussian people's current ills. What do you think? 
  [Shushkevich] First of all, who caused the Union to 
collapse? It is a totally naive view, one people use for their 
own political ends, that it was destroyed by three people -- 
Yeltsin, Kravchuk, and me. It is simply absurd, if you don't 
mind my saying so. The Union had collapsed and one had to have 
the courage to say so. We did have the courage. Strictly 
speaking, it was not three of us, but six, because the prime 
ministers also signed the agreement, including our Kebich. 
  It is propaganda, Goebbels-style, I would say, to try to 
persuade ordinary people that the Belovezhskaya Forest agreement 
is to blame for all our ills. It is based on a very simple 
slogan: They have destroyed the Union, so life has deteriorated. 
But the authors of this slogan are reluctant to admit that they 
have done nothing for three years and will not admit that they 
do not know how to reform the economy. 
  [Khantsevich] But, Stanislav Stanislavovich, your opponents 
in the current election campaign are resorting to more or less 
these arguments. Why vote for Shushkevich, they say, he was in 
power for three years, but managed to accomplish nothing.... 
  [Shushkevich] The answer is very simple. There is 
legislative power and executive power. I was head only of the 
Legislative Branch. If you recall, in former years leading 
writers were elected chairman of our Supreme Soviet -- 
Shamyakin, Tank, Naumenko.... Now I did not have any extra 
powers compared with what they had, except the right to sign 
international agreements. 
  So I repeat: I was not head of state. We would make laws 
whereby the executive branch was supposed to operate. And I can 
seriously say that a normal life and normal running of the 
economy can be created in accordance with the laws that were 
adopted in very difficult conditions, in a number of cases in 
confrontation with the Executive Branch. But it is also a fact 
that the government never had and still does not have the desire 
to do so. 
  [Khantsevich] Do you think that Belorussia is now going over 
the same ground as Russia, but much later? 
  [Shushkevich] No, I do not. Belorussia relishes Russia's 
failures and problems. It relishes the problems with 
privatization, with land and tax legislation. I am talking 
about those who officially represent Belorussia. 
  We do not have the same path as Russia, we have lost that 
option. 
  It is easy to be strong in hindsight. We must be grateful to 
Russia for its self-sacrifice. And we must study and digest its 
wealth of experience. 
  [Khantsevich] What do you think the Belorussian Government's 
reluctance to get down to serious reforms is due to? A lack of 
professionalism, an inability to analyze the situation, or 
something else? 
  [Shushkevich] No, it is supremely professional in the sphere 
of the distributive, state-planned economy. I would suggest the 
following analogy, since I am a physicist by education. The 
ideas of quantum physics were totally unacceptable to many 
people once, they were regarded as absurd. But they established 
themselves and now they in no way contradict the classical 
approaches that came from Newton. We have more or less the same 
story here -- the same protests from philistines who do not see 
how things can be different, different from the way they think. 
They have an algorithmic education, which is fine, perhaps, if 
you are involved in a trade, but very bad in the sphere of art. 
So in the matter of running a state, and this is an art, they 
are incompetents. They take on board today's slogans, but what 
they are essentially saying is: Let us be marketeers, but, for 
God's sake don't touch prices and subsidies policy, the policy 
of supporting bankrupts. What they say in the political sphere 
is: We will be sovereign, but we will abolish our national bank 
and become a piece of the Russian Federation budget. 
  That is why I believe that if a progovernment man becomes 
president at the elections, Belorussia's progress will be halted 
for many years. 
  [Khantsevich] Let us return to your resignation, while 
appreciating that it is not very pleasant for you. Was it 
inevitable or did it happen suddenly? 
  [Shushkevich] No, there was a logic to it. By a chance 
combination of events I managed to avoid resignation last June. 
Subsequently, the prevailing view among the deputies probably 
was that I would reform and honestly and carefully listen to 
advice. My November report convinced them that I had no 
intention of reforming.... 
  [Khantsevich] There is a view that you were too obstinate 
on the matter of collective security.... 
  [Shushkevich] I still believe we made the wrong decision. 
Collective security is no use to us. Belorussia has no 
interests in the Caucasus or in Tajikistan. Russia may have -- 
it is a great power and many Russians are living in those 
republics. But neutrality is more logical for us. 
  [Khantsevich] So how do you see the future of the 
Belorussian Army? 
  [Shushkevich] Very simple. It must be slimmed down again to 
one-half its present size. Leaving 40,000-50,000 men, no more, 
in view of the fact that we still have a very large number of 
armed Ministry of Internal Affairs internal troops. We must 
rely on the protection of Russia and the other great powers. 
  [Khantsevich] Fine, but how does the idea of sovereignty fit 
in with Russian protection? 
  [Shushkevich] Tell me, how did the idea of Finnish 
sovereignty tally with the fact that the USSR and the United 
States had given guarantees of Finnish neutrality? It was 
effectively protection by the two great powers. Here we have 
the same scenario. Let Russia acknowledge our neutrality -- 
that is all we want. And if Russia acknowledges it the United 
States will too. It would be splendid to have a neutral zone 
like that in the center of Europe. 
  [Khantsevich] It is fine in Finland. But how do you do it 
in Belorussia, where there is a missile silo under every fifth 
fir tree? 
  [Shushkevich] There are no silos in Belorussia, that is a 
mistake everyone makes. The only thing dug deep underground is 
the command and control system, the missiles themselves are 
mobile, so that the enemy does not know where they are deployed. 
So the presence of nuclear missiles reduces, rather than 
increases our security. It is merely tempting someone to put 
them out of action and hit Belorussia with a powerful nuclear 
strike. Basically, we are merely hostages at the moment. 
  [Khantsevich] One final question, Stanislav Stanislavovich. 
There is much talk in the Republic about corruption, including 
in the upper echelons of power. Various commissions have been 
set up, including a parliamentary one, but, as far as I know, 
there have been no big trials yet. Do you have your own program 
to fight this evil? 
  [Shushkevich] Do you know what I would do? Many people here 
have gotten rich under the law. The legislation was adopted 
either deliberately or unwittingly, but many people have 
obtained preferential credits for construction, which is 
tantamount to subsidies, and many banks have started functioning 
on the basis of the state capital holding and appropriating 
money and so on. Now, I would stop the witch hunt today and 
declare an amnesty for capital. We must rise above it, just as 
Russia rose above the idea of the "White House" shootout. 
  But that is now. Tomorrow let us establish very tough laws. 
Let us say: Here are the declarations of income, of property; 
now fill them in. 
  Of course, there will be many protests, but unless we focus 
attention on the defects in our legislation, on who is living 
off whom, we will lose a great deal in the future. That is what 
I would do. 

