BFN 

  [Excerpts] President Meles returned to Addis Ababa this 
evening, after attending the inaugural ceremony for President 
Nelson Mandela and his two deputy presidents in Pretoria on 10 
May. During his stay in South Africa President Meles held talks 
with the leaders of three countries. Negash Mohamed has the 
details: 
  [Begin Negash recording] [passage omitted] President Meles 
met and held talks with the presidents of Tanzania, Uganda, and 
Sudan. 
  The talks between President Meles Zenawi and Tanzanian 
President Ali Hassan Mwinyi focused on the current situation in 
Rwanda and the problems of the Rwandan people. [passage omitted] 
President Mwinyi briefed his Ethiopian counterpart on the 
efforts he had made and the grim massacres in Rwanda. Mwinyi 
noted that the Rwandan problem is complex and difficult. In 
addition to the serious matter of the refusal of the warring 
factions to mediate, is the fact that Tanzania lacks the means 
to sustain those refugees who have fled to this country. A 
spokesman quoting Mwinyi's statement on this issue told newsmen 
that, though Tanzania believes that the solution to Rwanda's 
problems lies in the hands of Africans, the assistance of the 
international community, and most of all that of the UN, is very 
necessary -- both on humanitarian grounds and because of the 
complexity of the problem. 
  President Meles, who hailed the efforts being made by the 
Tanzanian leader, for his part noted that Ethiopia will make 
every effort to assist Tanzania in finding a peaceful solution 
to the Rwandan problem. President Meles Zenawi, who termed the 
Rwandan massacres as grim and shameful -- not just for Africa 
but for the entire world -- told his Tanzanian counterpart that 
the OAU, the UN and other international organizations and 
countries should share the burden, according to the spokesman. 
  The Rwandan civil strife has claimed the lives of about 
200,000 people in one month. More than one million people have 
fled their country, including about 300,000 who are in Tanzania. 
  President Meles Zenawi's talks with President Yoweri 
Museveni 
of Uganda and the Sudanese leader General 'Umar Hasan al-Bashir 
centered on bilateral relations and the continent's current 
problems. [end recording] 

