Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on crime, investigations, trials, sentencings, and other 
judicial-related activities in the PRC monitored during the 
period 1-14 February 1994. The source and mode of processing 
are given in parentheses at the end of each entry. 
  As evidenced by the stories listed below, during the month 
PRC crime reportage focused on corruption, economic crimes, and 
the annual round of executions taking place around Spring 
Festival. 
<H6>  CENTRAL </H6>
  Twenty-two Chinese have been executed in the past few days 
in 
what has become a traditional clampdown ahead of the Lunar New 
Year. A total of 13 people were executed in Shanghai on 1 
February, all charged with murder and theft. Several more were 
condemned to death or prison terms. 
  Nine criminals were executed on 29 January in Jinan, and two 
bank employees were sentenced to death for corruption in Inner 
Mongolia recently. (Hong Kong AFP in English 1028 GMT 2 Feb 94) 
  More than 200 Chinese have been executed since 1 January, 
condemned for such crimes as murder, rape, drug trafficking, and 
financial crimes. 
  The run-up to the Lunar New Year is traditionally used by 
the 
government to press the Chinese regional authorities to sentence 
common-law criminals in order to avoid unrest during the festive 
season. Amnesty International says it recorded 1,890 death 
sentences and 1,079 executions in 1992, but believes these 
numbers to be conservative. (Hong Kong AFP in English 0911 GMT 
8 Feb 94) 
  In 1993 public security forces and border guards in Yunnan 
and Guangxi took effective actions to crack down on firearms and 
drug trafficking and smuggling. In the whole year, the public 
security organs and border guards in these two provinces cracked 
324 firearms trafficking cases, seizing 374 pieces of military 
firearms. They also cracked 961 drug trafficking cases, seizing 
812.3 kg of opium and 762.5 kg of heroin. The actions totally 
destroyed 136 criminal gangs. 
  The public security organs and border guard units in these 
two provinces transferred some 500 people from commanding organs 
to replenish the troops on active duty. The border inspection 
stations were on duty 24 hours a day, and strictly examined the 
vehicles and personnel moving to the interior mainland. 
  On the afternoon of 22 December 1993, the border security 
checkpoint in Mukang of Dehong Autonomous Prefecture discovered 
46.5 kg of heroin divided among three vehicles moving through 
the border to the interior area. 
  In order to mobilize the masses, the public security and 
border guard forces in Yunnan and Guangxi also dispatched a 
large number of police officers to border villages to publicize 
the government's policy on capturing smuggled drugs and firearms 
and to build up the police-civilian security network. According 
to Yunnan's incomplete statistics, in 1993 the masses provided 
148 pieces of information for the public security organs and 
assisted the police force in 193 actions. (Beijing RENMIN RIBAO 
in Chinese 1 Feb 94 p 3) 
<H6>  PROVINCIAL </H6>
<H5>  Beijing </H5>
  According to data provided by procuratorial organs in 
Beijing 
Municipality, in 1993 the municipal procuratorial organs handled 
1,466 corruption and other economic criminal cases, and placed 
844 cases on file for investigation and prosecution, including 
618 corruption and bribe-taking cases, which accounted for 73.2 
percent of the economic criminal cases. One ministerial-level, 
10 bureau-level, and 48 section-level corrupt officials were 
investigated and prosecuted. 
  Last August, procuratorial cadres in Beijing launched an 
unprecedented anticorruption campaign and they cracked a large 
number of major corruption and bribe-taking cases in party and 
government institutions, law enforcement institutions, banking 
institutions, and economic management institutions. Fourteen 
major corruption and bribery cases involving an amount of over 1 
million yuan were placed on file for investigation and 
prosecution, 38 corruption cases arising in law enforcement and 
judicial organs were handled, 128 criminal cases involved 
officials in various party and government institutions, and 37 
criminal cases involved personnel of banking institutions. 
  The procuratorial organs achieved such marked results 
because 
the chief procurators at all levels personally organized and 
directed the handling of all major and serious cases. The 
leaders of the municipal procuratorate personally took charge of 
the investigation and prosecution of 22 major cases involving 
over 1 million yuan of ill-gotten money or involving cadres at 
and above the bureau level. (Beijing RENMIN RIBAO in Chinese 1 
Feb 94 p 3) 
  Public security organs in Beijing Municipality achieved 
remarkable results in using the news media to issue "wanted" 
circulars for criminals at large. In 1993 a total of 428 
criminals were arrested through such means, which helped crack 
520 major criminal cases. (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in 
Chinese 0600 GMT 14 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Fujian </H5>
  In 1993, Fujian's public security organs cracked a total 62 
drug- related cases, captured over 220 drug traffickers, and 
seized 57.2 kg of drugs, as well as over 1.5 million yuan in 
profits from drug deals. 
  Over recent years, drug-trafficking rings and lawbreakers 
outside China have opened secret sea smuggling routes into 
Fujian. Driven by high profits, some wrongdoers inside China 
are willing to risk their lives and engage in drug trafficking. 
Since the beginning of this year public security organs of all 
prefectures, cities, and major counties have stepped up efforts 
in deploying antidrug police forces and setting up special 
investigation organs for cracking drug-related cases, while 
leaders of public security organs at all levels have attached 
great importance to such investigations. 
  From May to June 1993, public security organs across the 
province carried out a joint operation and cracked six 
"ice"-manufacturing dens set up by Taiwan drug dealers in 
Fuzhou, Putian, Quanzhou, and Zhangzhou. On 8 May, the Quanzhou 
public security organs cracked a drug-trafficking ring involving 
drug dealers and lawbreakers from Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the 
mainland, and seized 36 kg of drugs and heroin. Meanwhile, 
public security organs in all localities have made great efforts 
to trace drug sources of drug addicts, and successfully smashed 
a number of secret dens which "used drug trafficking to finance 
drug taking." (Fuzhou FUJIAN RIBAO in Chinese 23 Jan 94 p 7) 
  At a 15 January news briefing, He Xiaofang, vice president 
of 
the Fujian Provincial People's Court, announced eight cases of 
serious economic crime out of which 12 people were been 
sentenced to death, death with reprieve, life imprisonment, and 
fixed terms of imprisonment. 
  The criminals sentenced to death included: The former first 
section head of the Foreign Trade Center Group, who embezzled 
public funds totalling over 640,000 yuan and $170,000, plus 
another $274,000 by various means; a former employee of the 
Hushi Credit Cooperative of the Putian Branch of the China 
Agricultural Bank who embezzled over 240,000 yuan; and a former 
cadre of the Yongan Branch of the China People's Construction 
Bank, who embezzled 180,000 yuan. 
  The criminals sentenced to death with reprieved included: A 
former purchaser of the Shaowu Textile Factory, who embezzled 
230,000 yuan of public funds and accepted bribes; a former 
credit clerk of the Planning and Credit Section of the Fuan 
Branch of the China Industrial and Commercial Bank, who 
embezzled over 220,000 yuan; and a secretary of the party branch 
of Gaodian village in Xiamen, who embezzled over 309,000 yuan. 
(Fuzhou FUJIAN RIBAO in Chinese 16 Jan 1994 p 1) 
  Eighteen criminals in Changle and Pingtan Counties involved 
in the smuggling of people have been sentenced to one to five 
years of imprisonment. The 18 criminals were all "snakeheads." 
  This move is aimed at curbing the activities of illegal 
emigration from the province and is the biggest campaign for 
this purpose since the beginning of 1994. Officials have 
revealed that the province will continue its severe crackdown on 
these criminal activities. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in 
English 1532 GMT 9 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Guangdong </H5>
  Cao Zidong, deputy director of the Public Security 
Department 
of Guangdong Province, said on 1 February 1994 that the public 
security organs last year arrested over 110,000 criminal 
offenders of all types, an increase of more than 30 percent over 
the previous year. He also said they cracked over 80,000 
criminal cases, including more than 40,000 major cases. 
  Cao Zidong said: Since late December the public security 
organs have arrested over 2,000 train and bus robbers, and have 
also arrested more than 18,000 criminals. In this period, 
railway and highway robbery cases decreased sharply, and 
criminal cases of other types also decreased to a certain 
degree. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1248 GMT 1 Feb 
94) 
  Guangdong courts at all levels have increased the crackdown 
on car and train robberies, dealing with some 2,200 cases in 
1993. Of the 4,000 criminals involved, 3,040 were given 
sentences of five years, or even more, including life-in-prison 
and death sentences, according to Xu Liang, Guangdong Provincial 
Higher People's Court vice president. 
  Through hearing the aforesaid cases, the court believed that 
car and train robbery cases in Guangdong were marked by four 
characteristics: First, cases in this category continued to 
rise. Second, there was an increase in the incidence of car and 
train robberies organized by gangs. Third, there was a growth 
in heinous armed robbery cases, with homicide involved. Fourth, 
many bandits ran away with help of cars, and they had 
intelligent and technical ways of committing crimes. (Hong Kong 
TA KUNG PAO in Chinese 3 Feb 94 p 4) 
  Over the past month or so, public security organs in 
Shanwei City, Guangdong, cracked 16 criminal cases of train and 
road banditry, arrested 38 train bandits and highwaymen, smashed 
four criminal rings, arrested 19 ring members, and seized three 
motorcycles, two walking tractors, and a number of tools for 
committing crimes. In the small hours of 6 January, patrolmen 
from the Meilong Public Security Sub-Bureau in Haifeng County 
and from Shanwei City Public Security Bureau arrested nine 
suspects, including Lin Zhenguo along the Meilong section of the 
Guangzhou-Shanwei highway, who were about to commit robbery. 
(Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0600 GMT 14 Feb 94) 
  At a news briefing held in Guangzhou on 2 February, Zeng 
Tiangui, section head of the Guangdong Provincial Public 
Security Department, disclosed that some lawbreakers outside the 
territory had engaged in smuggling and drug-trafficking 
activities under the cover of running waste material purchasing 
centers. A major case was ferreted out in Huizhou on 17 
December 1993 which involved a gang of seven people who stole 
more than 1,000 kg of communication cables and disposed of them 
through a local waste material purchasing center. It has been 
reported that steel products, and even guns and munitions, have 
also been stolen and sold to such purchasing centers. (Beijing 
ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 0700 GMT 2 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Guangxi </H5>
  Beihai City recently cracked a major bribery case involving 
two cadres at the department level and three other people who 
accepted cash and gifts totalling more than 5 million yuan. 
  Huang Qilong, Beihai City's Haicheng District deputy 
magistrate, and Zhang Guosong, Beihai City Urban Planning Bureau 
Land Management Department chief, accepted bribes totalling more 
than 1 million yuan for approving a major land development 
project. 
  The five people involved in the case have now been arrested 
in accordance with the law. (Nanning Guangxi People's Radio 
Network in Mandarin 1130 GMT 8 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Guizhou </H5>
  The provincial political and legal affairs committee held a 
news briefing on 31 January at which it announced that in 
January 1994, a total of 2,020 fugitives were captured and 335 
criminal cases were cracked across the province. 
  The public security organs of Guiyang City and Liupanshui 
City smashed three drug trafficking syndicates and seized more 
than 3.9 kg of heroin. 
  The Guiyang City Railroad Public Security Department also 
captured two fugitives who escaped after murdering two 
accounting clerks in Guiyang on 8 January. (Guiyang Guizhou 
People's Radio Network in Mandarin 2300 GMT 31 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Henan </H5>
  The people's courts at all levels across the province held 
public sentence pronouncement rallies on 25-31 January 1994, and 
a batch of criminals involved in some major and serious crimes 
have been punished. 
  The provincial higher people's court yesterday held a news 
briefing at which Xu Guoping, provincial higher people's court 
vice president disclosed: Over the past two months, people's 
courts at all levels across the province have tried a total of 
404 criminal cases and sentenced a total of 719 criminals, of 
whom 464 people have been condemned to death, death with 
reprieve, or life imprisonment, and 255 people have been 
sentenced to 10 or more years' imprisonment. Over the past few 
days several criminals have been executed with a bullet to the 
head. (Zhengzhou Henan People's Radio Network in Mandarin 2300 
GMT 31 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Liaoning </H5>
  The Shenyang municipal authorities have recently 
investigated 
several economic crimes within party and government 
organizations, law-enforcement departments, and in 
administrative and economic management departments. The 
municipal anticorruption bureau recently publicized 12 such 
cases. 
  The cases involved several leading cadres, including Ma 
Shiteng, a deputy bureau-level director in the municipal bureau 
of public security; Yuan Zhiguang, the manager of the Trust and 
Investment Company Ltd. under the municipal Industrial and 
Commercial Bank; two division heads of the municipal Bureau of 
Public Health; and the director of the Bureau of Construction in 
Liazhong County. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 1459 
GMT 2 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Ningxia </H5>
  On 22 January 1994, the Yinchuan City Intermediate People's 
Court sentenced five criminals to death and three others to life 
imprisonment. 
  Between February and June 1993, Liu Wenqing and others broke 
into the homes in Yinchuan and stole goods and cash totalling 
44,842 yuan. On 8 September 1993, Li Wei started a quarrel with 
his colleague Wang Changan and then stabbed him to death. On 28 
October 1993, Ji Zhifei stabbed his wife Tang Ruihua to death 
following a row with her. On 4 July 1993, following their 
divorce, Ma Bentong wounded six persons and killed another of 
his wife's family. On 10 September 1993, Fu Jun and his two 
friends started a fight with a man called Xing and beat him to 
death following a quarrel. (Yinchuan NINGXIA RIBAO in Chinese 2 
Feb 94 p 1) 
<H5>  Shaanxi </H5>
  The Ankang Railway Public Security Department recently 
cracked a major transprovincial robbery case and arrested four 
criminals. Since December 1992, these four criminals had stolen 
gold, diamond rings, gold ornaments, and goods off of trains in 
35 counties in Hubei and Shaanxi Provinces, worth more than 
140,000 yuan. (Xian Shaanxi People's Radio Network in Mandarin 
0010 GMT 7 Feb 94) 
  Authorities in Shaanxi Province have executed a 31-year-old 
axe murderer who, spurned by the woman he loved, chopped up her 
and eight of her relatives. A Shaanxi court sentenced Cheng 
Tingbin to death on 2 February, and the execution was carried 
out immediately. (Hong Kong AFP in English 0847 GMT 8 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Shanghai </H5>
  Prosecutors at various levels recently brought 100 
corruption 
cases to court, in which 110 people were charged with such 
economic crimes as corruption, bribe-taking, and embezzlement of 
public funds. A number of responsible officials in party, 
government, law enforcement, and financial management 
institutions were involved in these cases and were prosecuted. 
The ill-gotten money involved in these cases amounted to 24.3 
million yuan. (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0826 
GMT 1 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Shanxi </H5>
  On the morning of 26 January a mass rally was held at the 
Workers' Cultural Palace in Taiyuan to announce the sentencing 
of criminal offenders. Lenient treatments were given to 39 
offenders who showed repentance and rendered meritorious 
service, and 18 of them were released immediately. However, 
severe punishments were meted out to 20 criminals in 13 cases as 
they obstinately stuck to the wrong course. 
  Three of them were sentenced to death and were immediately 
executed. Four were sentenced to death with a two-year 
reprieve, and the other four were sentenced to life 
imprisonment. A 19-year-old murderer, who was executed, killed 
his grandfather with a knife and then sold the television set, 
washing machine, and electric fan from his grandfather's home to 
a pawn shop for 630 yuan. (Taiyuan SHANXI RIBAO in Chinese 27 
Jan 94 p 1) 
  Police in Changzhi City, Shanxi Province have cracked a 
major 
drug-trafficking case, seizing 325 kg of caffeine and putting 
two drug dealers under arrest. 
  The two convicts, who disguised drugs as chicken feed, 
confessed that they had trafficked drugs five times since the 
beginning of 1993. At present, the case is under further 
investigation. (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0903 
GMT 11 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Xian </H5>
  From 22 to 25 December 1993, various people's courts of Xian 
sentenced 32 criminals to death and ordered their execution. 
  The criminals included Wang Yaoping, who stabbed a man to 
death outside a ballroom on 12 March 1992 following a row with 
him over a dancing partner, and Liu Jingsuo, Li Wumin, Qiao 
Yonghong, and Zhang Xianfeng, who stole and destroyed 
transformers and other farm equipment in Xian, Baoji, Weinan and 
Xianyang from October 1988 to January 1992, causing huge losses. 
(Xian SHAANXI RIBAO in Chinese 29 Dec 93 p 1) 
<H5>  Yunnan </H5>
  Party organizations and leading cadres have achieved good 
results in self-examination and self-correction. So far, 10,682 
leading cadres have taken part in special meetings on criticism 
and self-criticism, accounting for 87 percent of the total 
number of such cadres. Over 277 of the 470 leading cadres who 
have second positions in economic bodies have resigned their 
posts, and 741 leading cadres have accepted gifts and valuable 
securities, involving a total amount of 193,912 yuan. (Kunming 
Yunnan People's Radio Network in Mandarin 1000 GMT 7 Feb 94) 
  On 2 February, He Zhanjun, chief procurator of the Yunnan 
Provincial People's Procuratorate, announced that Shu Kaitai, 
former deputy director of the provincial personnel department, 
and He Zizhong, former chairman of the Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference of Dehong Dai-Jingpo 
Autonomous Prefecture, were arrested for economic crimes. Shu 
took a total bribe of 200,000 yuan for granting approval of a 
sale of 500 pieces (jian 0115) of Hongtashan brand cigarettes, 
while He provided 2 million yuan of public funds to his son for 
business. 
  Qiu Chuangjiao, president of the Yunnan Provincial Higher 
People's Court also said today that the court closed 29 serious 
and important economic cases in 1993. Tan Ye, former cadre of 
the Kunming blood center, was sentenced to death with a two-year 
reprieve for embezzling 110,000 yuan of public money; Han 
Shulin, a recidivist, was sentenced to death for gaining a 
profit of 1.19 million yuan from selling fake Hongtashan brand 
cigarettes; and Li Lanzhen, former director of the Kunming 
Xishan District Food Company sales department, was given a death 
sentence for embezzling 3.74 million yuan of public funds. 
(Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1357 GMT 2 Feb 94) 

