Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Deputy inquiry by Vasiliy Starodubtsev, as recorded by A. </F>
Golovenko: "Mr. Fedorov, Where Is the Peasants' Money?"] 
  [Text] The panicky and clumsy retreat of bankrupt 
monetarist Gaydar and his government team is being treated with 
a lot of pretense, almost provocatively. The former Minister of 
Finance B. Fedorov, too, played coy like a pretty maiden before 
leaving, presenting his ultimatums to the most "popularly 
elected president." 
  Yesterday the editors received an indignant telephone call 
from the Agrarian Union's chairman, Vasiliy Starodubtsev--to 
protect, as he put it, agrarians from incompetent attacks. 
  "Urban agrarians of the like of Chernichenko, Yemelyanov, 
and 
Tikhonov do not miss a single occasion to pour dirt on the 
kolkhoz-sovkhoz system which they praised in the past. This 
chorus of ill-wishers was joined by the falsetto of Minister of 
Finance Fedorov--a man nurtured by the regime. The mouth of this 
gentleman does not tire of the expression `the black hole,' by 
which he means our agriculture. This time he, as he banged the 
door, got as far as saying that in his opinion buying 
grain abroad is much more economical than producing it. 
  "I believe that this is not a slip of the tongue. This is 
the 
position of the Gaydar team, which had taken the course of 
making domestic industry and agriculture bankrupt. In my 
opinion, Mr. Former Minister never figured out that over past 
decades, thanks to various academicians-theoreticians, all vital 
problems of the state were being dealt with at the expense of 
agriculture. But while over the years of Soviet power the 
peasantry had at least some opportunity to develop, the policy 
of the current `democratic' government, including Fedorov 
himself, brought it to its knees. 
  "The crazy, inequitable exchange of agricultural output for 
equipment and fuels turned many flourishing farms into paupers, 
practically brought construction in the countryside to a halt, 
suspended modernization of agricultural machinery and use of 
mineral fertilizer. Having delivered the harvest to the state in 
July-August, kolkhozes and sovkhozes still have not received 
payment for it. So I want to ask Mr. Fedorov: Where is the 
peasants' money? People have been without pay for four to five 
months. Is it not clear that the current rate of inflation means 
free use of the results of peasants' labor by the state? 
  "Does the former minister not know that all Western 
countries 
conduct a protectionist policy with respect to agriculture, 
protect their producers? The share of subsidies in farmers' 
total expenditures reaches 50-60 percent; in our country, it is 
10 times less! Our consumers are charged R300 per loaf of bread, 
while grain is being procured from kolkhozes at R60 per 
kilogram. I want once again to ask Mr. Fedorov: Where is the 
R240 difference? In whose pocket does the people's money go? 
  "I will say without exaggeration and with figures in hand 
that our large socialist agriculture before `catastroyka' 
[turning into a catastrophe] used to be one of the most 
efficient in the world, and in some respects superior to that of 
the United States. Is this not why the inept reformers began to 
crush it with such zeal in order to please the Western farmer? 
The upcoming planting is in danger of failure: there is no fuel 
or fertilizer; there is not enough seed; equipment is not being 
repaired--no parts or tools! And these gentlemen still are 
talking about some agrarian lobby in the government! They leave 
it like rats from a sinking ship so that they will not have to 
answer to the economic collapse they have precipitated, and the 
impoverishment of urban and rural working people. 
  "Peasants do not have foreign currency accounts or dachas in 
California; their home is here, and they will do everything to 
survive and to feed the cities. But if, God forbid, famine does 
occur, the blame for it should be squarely placed at the feet of 
Mssrs. Gaydar, Fedorov, and other enemies of the Russian 
countryside." 

