BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Prime Minister John Major by Chris </F>
Buckland; place and date not given: "Major: I Won't Be Pushed 
Out"] 
  [Text] John Major last night turned on his critics with a 
robust determination to carry on as Prime Minister, declaring: 
"I am not going to walk away." 
  And he added: "I expect to lead the Conservative Party into 
the next election and beyond." 
  Mr Major also had a warning for supporters of Cabinet 
colleagues hoping to replace him if he "falls under a bus." 
  He said: "I am very careful crossing the road. I do not 
expect a traffic accident." 
  The Premier was speaking in an exclusive Daily Express 
interview on the week he celebrates the second anniversary of 
his surprise 1992 general election victory. 
  On the eve of today's tax rises for millions of voters, Mr 
Major admitted he would carry on with policies which were 
"almost impossible to defend now" but right for Britain in the 
long term. 
  He attacked the small band of critics who had called for his 
resignation, describing them as "incorrigible when put in front 
of a microphone." 
  He revealed that despite reports Lady Thatcher was opposing 
a 
leadership challenge, he had not spoken to her for some time. 
  Mr Major was buoyed by his warm reception from senior party 
officials of all constituencies in the pivotal Essex area, where 
support for the Tories is vital if they are to win the next 
election. At the end of his one-day visit to the county 
including Basildon, the symbol of his election triumph, the 
Premier spelt out his political philosophy declaring: "If you 
are doing something you care about you don't lightly put it 
aside. It Isn't a matter of personal position or ambition. 
That is not the first thing on my mind, not remotely." 
  He was committed to the policies being carried out for the 
country adding "I'm not going to walk away from it." Asked how 
long it would be before public support returned to the Tories, 
he pointed out the next election need not be until the summer of 
1997. 
  "One year before the last election when I had just taken 
over, we were 20 points behind and we won by seven points." 
  He again predicted Britain would grow by 2 and l/2 per cent 
economically this year. 
  And the effects of the new tax increases would be "only a 
fraction of the figure Labour is using." He pledged to lower 
taxes but did not know when. He was "unmoved by the criticism" 
he was subject to and he rejected the idea he was a weak leader. 
"We have Cabinet Government -- that is the way democracy works 
in this Country and I'm not going to argue with that." 
  Mr Major's tough fight back came after one of the blackest 
weeks of his premiership. 
  A survey showed that while most Tory MPs supported him, 41 
out of 100 questioned thought he would not be leader at the next 
general election. Three MPs on the "eccentric" wing of the 
party openly called on him to go. According to a new sounding 
taken yesterday, more than half the people of Basildon want Mr 
Major to step down. A poll carried out for GMTV [Good Morning 
Television] showed 54 per cent in favour of him, 26 per cent 
against and 19 did not know. 

