In     January 1994 the Mongolian Government approved changes in the 
government structure, including the combining of ministries, merging 
of institutes, and incorporation of the MONTSAME News Agency into 
Government.  The following changes and personnel assignments in 
response to these decisions were announced in the 1 February press. 

   In mid-January 1994 major changes occurred in the structure of 
the Mongolian Government:  the Ministry of Geology and Mineral 
Resources was abolished, its functions were amalgamated with the 
Ministry of Fuel, Power and Energy, and the Ministry of Power Power, 
Geology and Mining was established.  In conjunction with these 
changes the Mongolian Government announced the appointments of D. 
Misha and D. Amgalan as deputy ministers of power, geology and 
mining at its 27 January 1994 meeting. 

   At this meeting the Government also announced the decision to 
merge the State and Social Studies Academy, Leadership Development 
Institute and the Center for the Study of State Policy and Social 
Issues and create the State Administration and Leadership 
Development Institute effective 1 February 1994.  T. Adiyaa, doctor 
of economic sciences and former head of a Leadership Development 
Institute department, was named director of the newly established 
institute.  (Ulaanbaatar ARDYN ERH in Mongolian 1 Feb 94 pp 1, 2) 

   At its 28 January 1994 meeting the Government assigned Minister 
of Defense S. Jadambaa and Minister of Finance D. Dabaasambuu the 
task of determining the managerial structure of the State Civil 
Defense Office, the Tax Administration, and the Custom 
Administration, revising and approving the wage funds and estimate 
of expenditure limitations, and appointing directors and deputy 
directors. 

   In the process of preparing an organizational diagram, the 
government decided to subordinate offices, which had requested to 
belong to the substructure of the government, to ministries and 
offices of similar orientation.  The Railroad Administration, the 
Civil Air Transportation Administration, and the Geodesy and 
Cartography Office were subordinated to the Ministry of 
Infrastructure Development, the State Social Welfare Office and the 
National Welfare Center to the Ministry of Demographic Policy and 
Labor, the Archives Administration and Detention Units 
Administration to the Ministry of Justice, and the Patent Office and 
the National Center for Standardization and Measures to the National 
Development Office.  To comply with the law, the organizations of 
the Government will no longer be designated "subordinate to the 
Government" or "subordinate to a minister." 

   Focusing on the subordination of the youth and sports 
organizations the same meeting passed a resolution to abolish the 
Committee for Youths and Sports effective 1 February 1994.  It 
assigned to Minister of Demographic Policy and Labor E. Gombojab the 
organization and operation of the Office for Youths which the 
ministry's current staff will administer.  The Minister of Health P. 
Nyamdabaa was charged with the responsibility of the Mongolian 
National Olympic Committee in line with the policy to develop sports 
as specified in Paragraph 19 of the Law Concerning the Government. 
The issuance of this resolution also called for the implementation 
of measures to improve the structure and organization of youths, 
physical culture and sports in rural areas. 

   In conjunction with the inclusion of the MONTSAME News Agency in 
the government substructure C. Erdene was appointed its general 
director. (ARDYN ERH 1 Feb 94 p 2) 

(AUTHOR:  MIAB/CISD.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
MILITARY/INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS BRANCH, CISD (703) 733-6375.) 
ENEAG/28 MAR/POLCHF/CIS DIVISION/JF 28/1649Z MAR 

