BFN 

  [Text] Jakarta, April 5 (ANTARA) -- The investment in the 
non-oil/gas mining accounted only for 3.8 percent of the total 
investment of 415.4 trillion rupiah in the period of 1967 to 
March 1994. 
  The investment in the minerals processing sector reached 7.4 
percent, or 31 trillion rupiah, head of the Investment 
Coordinating Agency (BKPM) Sanyoto told a seminar on the Role 
and Prospects of Private Capital Investment in the development 
of the mining sector in the second long term development (PJP 
II), in Jakarta Tuesday. 
  He explained that investment in mining other than in the 
oil/gas sector consisted of mining of strategic minerals, vital 
minerals and C-category minerals. 
  Strategic minerals including tin, iron ore and copper are 
for 
domestic capital investment of 1.4 trillion rupiah (11 
projects), 7.8 trillion rupiah for foreign capital investment, 
and domestic investment of 187.7 billion rupiah (19 projects) in 
the vital minerals sector including coal, and 5.2 trillion 
rupiah for foreign investment. 
  In the meantime, the C-category minerals such as phosphate 
and zeolit covered 99 projects with a total domestic investment 
of 871.4 billion rupiah, and one project with foreign investment 
of 64.6 billion rupiah. 
  The investment in the mineral mining industrial sector 
outside oil and gas, such as non-metal minerals (cement, 
ceramics, glass and marble) amounted to 24.8 trillion rupiah for 
domestic investment projects and 6.2 trillion rupiah for foreign 
investment projects. 
  Sanyoto said further that in the Sixth Five-Year Development 
(Pelita VI), foreign and domestic investment may reach 19.9 
trillion rupiah. 
  The projection is to help collect investment funds amounting 
to 660 trillion rupiah needed to boost the economic growth rate 
of 6.2 percent per year during Pelita VI, he said. 
  In this context the government has taken steps to improve 
the 
investment climate in Indonesia by simplifying the process of 
licencing of investment projects, the lowering of import duties 
and the simplification of import procedures. 
  He said with a clear-cut and transparent capital investment 
policy, it is hoped the investors will become increasingly 
enthusiastic in doing business in this country. 
  "This is of vital importance, because in attracting foreign 
investment Indonesia has to compete with other countries which 
are also offering their business facilities," he added. 

