Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Wu Yunhe: "Reports Bode Brisk Economy in </F>
1st Quarter"] 
  [Text] China's economic performance will remain brisk 
during the first quarter of this year, the State Information 
Centre predicts. 
  Industrial production from January through March is expected 
to grow rapidly, just as it did in the previous three months, 
said a report released by the centre, which is under the State 
Planning Commission. 
  Retail sales will continue to be vigorous, while prices of 
consumer goods on the domestic market will also continue to 
rise, according to the report. 
  But because of the government's strict control over the 
banks' monetary supply, investment in the country's fixed assets 
is expected to experience a sluggish period during the first 
three months of this year. 
  The centre's economists also predict that China's trade 
deficit with foreign countries will be smaller than last year's. 
  This is partly attributed to the unification of the 
dual-rate 
monetary system, which effectively raises the import cost for 
Chinese companies. 
  The report predicts that during the first quarter of this 
year, the country's industrial output value will be 22 percent 
greater than during the same period last year. 
  Retail prices will be 14.5 percent higher in the first three 
months of this year than they were during the same period last 
year, the report predicts. Gross retail sales will show a 28.6 
percent jump during the same period. 
  Analysts say the recent New Year holiday and the coming 
Spring Festival are two major factors spurring consumer buying. 
Factory managers will, no doubt, be enthusiastic to gear up 
their production to meet the increased demand. 
  Other culprits stirring up the prices of consumer products 
include salary raises for State units' employees and the 
government's gradual decontrol over prices of China's crude oil 
and oil products, the report added. 
  Investment in capital construction at State units during the 
first quarter this year is expected to increase by 36 percent 
over that of the same period last year. 
  At a national banking conference in January this year, the 
People's Bank of China, the country's central bank, announced it 
will strictly control the banks' lending quotas, particularly 
for investments in fixed assets. 
  During the first quarter of this year, investment in 
technology upgrades by State units is expected to be only 40 
percent greater than that during the same period last year. 

