BFN 

<F P=106> [By Jack Taylor] </F>
  [Text] Sydney, June 8 (AFP) -- Canberra was under mounting 
pressure Wednesday to answer charges its counter-intelligence 
service was in "a state of crisis" amid claims it had been 
forced to sack three more agents for alleged spying. 
  An opposition MP said the three, all Russian-language 
experts, had been dismissed by the Australian Security 
Intelligence Organisation (ASIO) on suspicion of having 
compromised national security. 
  Liberal backbencher Ken Aldred, responsible for a series of 
disclosures about Russian espionage activities here, claims ASIO 
decided not to charge the three with espionage fearing the 
embarrassment of another spy controversy. 
  ASIO, closely modelled on Britain's MI5 domestic 
intelligence 
agency, has been wracked in recent months by revelations it was 
penetrated and compromised by foreign intelligence agencies. 
  The Australian intelligence operations are now the subject 
of 
two major inquiries after a series of embarrassing episodes in 
the last year, including the arrest of ASIO officer George Sadil 
and the expulsion of six Russian diplomats for alleged spying. 
  Sadil been committed to stand trial on 24 espionage charges. 
  ASIO's telecommunications and computer networks are said to 
have been replaced because they had been bugged by foreign 
intelligence and were no longer reliable. 
  Aldred has also asked Canberra to explain why former Soviet 
spy Valeriy Zemskov was allowed to enter Australia after it was 
informed he had been exposed to British intelligence by Soviet 
defector Oleg Gordievsky as a member of the elite KGB "special 
reserve." 
  "Why did the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade push so 
hard for his entry and who were members of the influence network 
he built of senior Australian public servants?" Aldred asked in 
a parliamentary question Tuesday night. 
  "What is the government hiding?" 
  Aldred told AFP Wednesday that about 30 senior Australian 
public servants, ministerial staff and others were currently 
under investigation by one inquiry, because of associations with 
Zemskov and for other matters. 
  The latest three Canberra-based agents to be accused were 
former colleagues of Sadil and all had been co-operating with 
him, Aldred said. 
  It is believed concerns about their conduct were raised by a 
long-running undercover investigation by the Australian Federal 
Police codenamed Operation Liver. 
  In his question Aldred claimed Australia's intelligence 
community was "in a state of crisis". 
  He asked if the three had been forcibly retired by ASIO and 
if it was true the government wanted them to go quietly rather 
than take action against them. 
  He told AFP Wednesday three separate sources had confirmed 
his information which suggested the three, who translated highly 
sensitive material including intercepts, had been a serious 
threat to national security. 
  "The government apparently preferred that they just go 
quietly rather than have the embarrassment of charging further 
people, which would have made the whole system look like it was 
falling apart, which it probably is," he said. 
  A spokesman for attorney general Michael Lavarch, who has 
responsibility for intelligence matters, said he had no 
information about the claims and in any case it was unlikely he 
would be able to either confirm or deny the story. 

