BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Tokyo NHK General Television Network in 
Japanese on 17 April broadcasts at 0000 GMT its "Sunday 
Discussion" (Nichiyo Toron) political talk show. This episode 
is 120-minutes long, is moderated by NHK commentator Takashi 
Yamamoto, and carries separate live interviews with Masayoshi 
Takemura, representative of Sakigake (Harbinger); Wataru Kubo, 
general secretary of the Social Democratic Party of Japan 
(SDPJ); Komeito secretary general Yuichi Ichikawa; Shinseito 
Acting Chief Secretary Kozo Watanabe; Michihiko Kano, one of 
five former Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) members who recently 
left the LDP; Koji Kakizawa, member of the LDP's Watanabe 
faction; and Shigeru Kasuya, acting LDP secretary general. 
Freelance commentator Naoki Tanaka also joins the program as an 
interviewer. 
  At 0003 GMT, after a short video clip reviewing moves by the 
coalition toward forming the new government, and the split in 
the LDP, Yamamoto starts interviewing Sakigake head Takemura, 
who recently said that his party will not take any posts in the 
new cabinet but will support the new cabinet. He says his party 
will cooperate with the new government in tackling such 
immediate issues as enactment of the budget bill because his 
party has responsibility to carry out tasks assigned to the 
outgoing Hosokawa government in which Sakigake was one of the 
coalition partners. He stresses the next prime minister should 
be chosen at a meeting of heads of each ruling party. In 
connection with this, Takemura expresses doubts about Shinseito 
Secretary General Ozawa's political methods, questioning Ozawa's 
initiative in making decisions in the ruling coalition while 
citing specific examples such as debates on a consumption tax 
hike. 
  Asked if his party will stand against the new coalition 
government after carrying out such tasks as enactment of the 
budget bill, Takemura says: "No, we are not thinking of taking a 
stand against the coalition." He notes his party's position 
depends on what policies the new coalition will come up with. 
Asked whether his party will support Foreign Minister Hata as 
the new prime minister if other ruling parties agree to choose 
him as successor to Hosokawa, Takemura says: "Yes, we are 
determined to support him." Asked if there is any possibility 
that his party will support LDP Vice President Watanabe as 
candidate for the new premiership, he says: "Actually we have 
not discussed such a possibility yet." On the secession of five 
LDP members, including former Management and Coordination Agency 
Director General Kano from the party, Takemura says: "I strongly 
hope to join hands with them in the near future." The interview 
ends at 0026 GMT. 
  The second interviewee, SDPJ General Secretary Kubo, joins 
the program through a satellite hookup. Kubo first explains the 
differences in views between the current coalition group and 
Sakigake on how to form the new cabinet. Commentator Tanaka 
then notes he does not believe that in the new government, the 
SDPJ will not take ministerial posts of foreign affairs and 
finance as well as defense affairs because of the party's 
differing position from other parties on such issues as North 
Korea, and asks Kubo to comment. Kubo says: "Our party has not 
discussed the line-up of the new cabinet." Kubo goes on to say 
that there are no big differences between the SDPJ and other 
ruling parties over policies. On the issue concerning North 
Korea's suspected development of nuclear weapons, he notes: "The 
SDPJ insists that North Korea should accept nuclear inspections 
and remain as a member of the NPT. There is no difference in 
policies on this matter between the ruling parties. If North 
Korea rejects inspections, our party will make efforts to settle 
the issue with emphasis on dialogue. I think an agreement will 
be reached among the ruling parties on this matter. If the 
situation should become worse, we have to respect the decisions 
of the United Nations." He adds: "While respecting decisions of 
the United Nations, Japan has to make all-out efforts to do what 
it has to do within the limits of the Constitution." Kubo then 
discusses the SDPJ's position on such issues as tax and 
administrative reform. 
  Asked whether the SDPJ will possibly support LDP's Watanabe 
as a candidate for the premiership, Kubo rules it out, saying: 
"One hundred percent, no." Kubo says he thinks Shinseito's Hata 
is also a qualified person for the premiership. Kubo notes the 
premiership election should be held as early as possible so the 
new cabinet will be formed soon. The interview ends at 0048 GMT. 
  The third interviewee is Komeito secretary general Ichikawa. 
Asked whether the framework of the ruling coalition is changing 
amid the current political turmoil, Ichikawa says he does not 
think so, but blames Takemura for the deterioration of the 
coalition's framework. Ichikawa denies allegations that he and 
Shinseito's Ozawa act high-handedly in the ruling coalition, 
noting the decision-making process of the coalition is 
transparent. He then discusses Komeito's position on such 
issues as tax reform. 
  Asked whether it is true that the present political 
confusion stems from conflict between Sakigake's Takemura and 
Ozawa of Shinseito, Ichikawa denies it. Asked what the ruling 
coalition will do if the LDP's Watanabe should leave, Ichikawa 
says: "If he, who is a leader of his own faction and has 
experience as deputy prime minister, leaves the LDP, regardless 
of the number of those who follow him, it will create a 
sensation." He adds: "We are watching Mr. Watanabe's moves and, 
in this sense, we will welcome him if he secedes from the LDP." 
He then notes it is possible to tie up with another former LDP 
group led by Mr. Kano, who recently seceded from the LDP. The 
interview concludes at 0110 GMT. 
  Following Ichikawa, Shinseito acting Secretary General Kozo 
Watanabe is interviewed. Watanabe first notes that an agreement 
is expected to be reached among the ruling parties on the basic 
policies of the new cabinet. He also says after reaching an 
official agreement on basic policies tomorrow, the ruling 
coalition will decide on who should be a candidate for the 
premiership. Asked if Shinseito actually hopes to reorganize 
the framework of the coalition in cooperation with would-be 
defectors from the LDP, while kicking the SDPJ out of the 
coalition, Watanabe says: "It will never happen." Asked how 
Shinseito will react if the LDP's Watanabe seeks Shinseito's 
support in the prime ministerial election, he says: "It is 
presumptuous to comment on this matter" because the ruling 
coalition is to meet on 18 April to decide on a candidate for 
the premiership. Watanabe says Shinseito welcomes the departure 
of former Management and Coordination Agency Director General 
Kano and his colleagues from the LDP. The interview ends at 
0125 GMT. 
  Michihiko Kano, who recently seceded from the LDP, is asked 
why he left the LDP. Kano says he felt it was difficult to 
achieve political reform under the current framework of the LDP. 
He also notes he left the LDP to work on regaining public trust 
in politics. He discusses the need for the LDP to dissolve the 
faction system and adopt the age-limit system. Kano stresses he 
plans to form a new party in the near future with other 
defectors. The interview ends at 0139 GMT. 
  Koji Kakizawa, a member of the LDP's Watanabe faction, and 
acting LDP secretary general Shigeru Kasuya are interviewed 
next. Asked why LDP Vice President Watanabe wants to become the 
next prime minister, Kakizawa explains that Watanabe is eager to 
tackle various domestic and foreign problems. Kasuya says it is 
hoped that Watanabe will stay in the LDP. Kasuya criticizes 
those who have left the LDP, or plan to leave the party. Asked 
about the possibility that the LDP will support Watanabe as a 
sole LDP candidate for prime minister, Kasuya rules out such a 
possibility. 
  The program concludes at 0200 GMT. 

