Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on developments related to the Salvadoran elections 
scheduled for 20 March 1994. 
  President Alfredo Cristiani asked fellow party members to be 
cautious in view of the results of the latest surveys, which 
show the party that took him to power in first place. He asked 
his party members not to decrease the campaign's intensity 
despite the favorable results shown by the latest surveys. 
Armando Calderon Sol, presidential candidate for the 
Nationalist Republican Alliance, Arena, was more optimistic, 
however. He said his party will be able to win in the first 
round. (San Salvador Canal Doce Television in Spanish 0300 GMT 3 
Mar 94) 
  Arena Presidential Candidate Armando Calderon Sol promised 
to 
develop tourism and the fishing industry in Usulutan Department 
if he wins the 20 March election. Calderon made the statement in 
Jiquilisco, located 90 km from the capital, on 6 March. (San 
Salvador LA PRENSA GRAFICA in Spanish 7 Mar 94 p 5) 
  At least three recently created political parties run the 
risk of disappearing following the 20 March elections because, 
judging from the recent surveys, they still do not have the 
minimum number of votes required by law. The three parties -- 
MSN, National Solidarity Movement; MUN, National Unity Movement, 
and the MADC, Authentic Christian Democratic Movement -- have 
not yet obtained 1 percent of the votes, which is necessary to 
remain active in politics. (San Salvador Canal Doce Television 
in Spanish 0300 GMT 3 Mar 94) 
  Edgardo Rodriguez, MSN presidential candidate, said the 
latest surveys conducted by private universities lack 
credibility. He said the MSN will not get 1 percent of the 
votes in the next elections and added that there could be 
surprises on election day. (San Salvador Canal Doce Television 
in Spanish 0300 GMT 3 Mar 94) 
  Ruben Zamora, presidential candidate for the Democratic 
Convergence, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, and 
the National Revolutionary Movement, said the results of the 
latest surveys show there will be a runoff presidential election 
because no one will get enough votes to win in the first round. 
He added that the final vote will be between Arena and the 
Democratic Convergence. (San Salvador Canal Doce Television in 
Spanish 0300 GMT 4 Mar 94) 
  Presidential candidate Ruben Zamora visited Zacatecoluca, La 
Paz Department, on 6 March and promised more credit for the 
agriculture sector and development projects if he wins the 
election. He made the promise during a rally held at the Jose 
Simeon Canas Park in Zacatecoluca. (San Salvador LA PRENSA 
GRAFICA in Spanish 7 Mar 94 p 4) 
  Presidential candidate Ruben Zamora said the United States 
has remained neutral with regard to the Salvadoran elections. 
For the first time the United States will not support any 
candidate because it does not perceive any threat from any of 
the candidates, Zamora said. Washington has stated that it 
"will work with any candidate who wins the election," the 
leftist candidate said. (Mexico City NOTIMEX in Spanish 2302 
GMT 8 Mar 94) 
  Fidel Chavez Mena, presidential candidate for the Christian 
Democratic Party, promised to eliminate the Value-Added Tax and 
freeze the prices of staples during the first six months of his 
administration if he wins the election. Chavez Mena made the 
promise during a rally held in Chirilagua, San Miguel 
Municipality on 5 March. (San Salvador LA PRENSA GRAFICA in 
Spanish 7 Mar 94 p 5) 
  The seven Salvadoran presidential candidates for the 20 
March 
elections agreed on the need to promote urgent programs to 
improve the country's health and education systems. The seven 
candidates signed an agreement regarding this with UNICEF. 
UNICEF has suggested that governments should spend at least 30 
percent of the national budget on education and 15 percent on 
health. (Panama City ACAN in Spanish 1951 GMT 7 Mar 94) 

