BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" interview with Hungarian Socialist Party </F>
Chairman President Gyula Horn by unidentified correspondent on 4 
June; place not given; from the "Newsreel" program -- recorded] 
  [Text] After delivering the closing speech, Gyula Horn gave 
an exclusive interview to Newsreel. The first question was 
whether the Federation of Young Democrats [Fidesz] will be taken 
into consideration as a coalition partner. 
  [Correspondent] It was mentioned that the Fidesz might be 
invited in the coalition. 
  [Horn] Such a concrete proposal was not brought up at the 
congress. However, during our earlier deliberations it was 
brought up. So the raising of this question is not unfounded. 
But, in the end, the congress decided that we would put forward 
a concrete coalition proposal only to the Alliance of Free 
Democrats [SZDSZ]. Thus, on the basis of the congress's 
unequivocal decision, I sent a letter to SZDSZ Chairman Ivan 
Petoe about the coalition proposal this afternoon. 
  [Correspondent] How many and which ministries does the MSZP 
[Hungarian Socialist Party] insist on? 
  [Horn] This was not brought up at the congress since it gave 
a free hand, a full authorization, to the negotiating delegation 
in every issue of this kind. We have an eight-person 
negotiating delegation and I am the leader of it. We think that 
there is a possibility--at least if the creation of the 
coalition depends on this delegation--of reaching an agreement. 
  I can imagine an arrangement that--going somewhat beyond the 
election results--gives a greater opportunity for the SZDSZ 
concerning their participation in the government, than their 
election results will entitle them to. 
  Among the topics to be discussed--providing the SZDSZ gives 
a 
positive reply--the future government's structure has to be 
discussed by all means. For example, whether there should be 
deputy prime ministers, whether certain ministries should be 
merged or whether it is necessary, and which offices, state 
institutions, or ministries should be abolished. Well, I do not 
think it would be normal or correct for a party that puts 
forward a coalition proposal to decide all this beforehand. 
  As the congress spelled out, the MSZP insists on Laszlo 
Bekesi having a determinative role in the next government's 
economic policy. 
  There is a great need for a readiness to make compromises 
and 
reach agreements. This does not only apply to the possible 
coalition partner, the SZDSZ; I would like relations to develop 
between the next parliament's governing and opposition parties, 
which would facilitate the reaching of agreements in a lot of 
issues that are common causes. There are a great number of such 
issues. 

