Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] "Poland is becoming the best place for 
distributing narcotics to West Europe, a money-laundering 
station, and an area for hiding narcotic wares," reports the 19 
December issue of the Poznan weekly WPROST. Adam Szyszko, chief 
of the Second Department of the National Interpol Bureau, told 
the Poznan weekly that since the outbreak of war in the former 
Yugoslavia, which was the "traditional country that acted as a 
transit point for drugs to West Europe, the `Polish idea' has 
attracted drug gangs." Interpol is said to believe that the 
equivalent of millions of dollars of narcotics-tainted money is 
in Polish banks. 
  Since 1990, Poland has become a "transit port" for 
narcotics. 
WPROST says that Colombian cocaine and West African hashish and 
marijuana make their way to either the ports of Szczecin and 
Gdynia or to Warsaw's Okecie airport, from which they are 
shipped to France, Germany, and Great Britain. Figures on 
customs seizures indicate that Okecie airport is being used more 
often than it had been in the past. On 1 December, for example, 
the Polish Customs Service seized a half-ton of marijuana that 
had arrived on a KLM flight from Lagos, Nigeria, marked as fish. 
"Just the fact that the shipment was from Nigeria caused 
suspicion because we do not import fish from that region into 
Poland," said one official. 
  Interpol's Szyszko says that the couriers are often 
protected 
by diplomatic immunity, which "seriously complicates the 
situation." The ambassador of Costa Rica himself was caught at 
Okecie airport with 12 kg of heroin in his baggage. 
  One of the most ingenious plans was devised by German 
smugglers. As Mr. Szyszko describes it, large parcels of 
narcotics were to be sent to Poland, where they would be 
repackaged, receive new papers, and be sent on their way to 
Hamburg to cover up the sources of the drugs. 
  WPROST points out that the efforts of Polish Customs 
officials to suppress the drug trade are hampered by Polish law, 
which does not make mere possession and consumption of drugs a 
crime. New banking laws have been enacted to prevent the use of 
Polish banks for drug-money-laundering schemes, but there are 
still loopholes that permit such schemes to flourish. 
  Wprost states that the involvement of international 
organized 
crime has further complicated enforcement efforts. According to 
Szyszko, these groups are far better organized and technically 
skilled than are Polish criminal groups. According to another 
official, both the Italian Mafia and the Colombian Cali cartel 
are involved in drug smuggling through Poland, with the Cali 
cartel reportedly using Polish couriers to smuggle narcotics 
over the Polish-German border." WPROST reports that police 
consider the production and smuggling of amphetamines to be one 
of the most dangerous recent developments. In the first quarter 
of 1993, seven and a half tons of these synthetic drugs were 
confiscated. Szyszko says that foreign money, principally from 
the United States, is funding Polish amphetamine production. 
  The 28 December Warsaw daily ZYCIE WARSZAWY reports that 
special police units have been formed to fight organized crime. 
These units, which will be several-hundred-policemen strong and 
will be under the direction of a Bureau for Fighting Organized 
Crime, were scheduled to become operational on 1 January. The 
bureau's work will be classified at the top secret level. It 
already has 26 domestic and foreign groups operating on Polish 
territory as its targets. Departments of the bureau will be 
opened in Krakow, Katowice, Wroclaw, Szczecin, Lodz, Gdansk, 
Poznan, Lublin, Bialystok, Olsztyn, and Bydgoszcz. 

