Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [V. Klimov report on interview with Vladimir Rubanov, deputy </F>
secretary of the Security Council; place and date not given: 
"How Much Does Law and Order Cost? The Security Council Has 
Examined the Federal Program for Intensifying the Fight Against 
Crime"] 
  [Text] Something which has been discussed many times in 
the mass media, and has always -- especially recently -- 
provoked heightened interest, has come to pass. Yesterday the 
Russian Federation Federal Program for Intensifying the Fight 
Against Crime for 1994-1995 was examined in the country's 
Security Council and, after criticisms had been taken into 
account, was recommended to be sent for ratification by the 
Russian Federation president. 
  The draft program is a Morocco-bound book comprising 84 
pages. Not many, one might think, but it is the quintessence of 
the colossal labor of many people. The book is divided into two 
parts. The first part examines today's requirements, the second 
examines long-term prospects. Everything is terse and 
absolutely clear: Urgent measures for intensifying the fight 
against crime are denoted, and the specific officials charged 
with implementing them are defined. 
  What is the essence of the federal program? What does it 
promise for Russians in the future? How did work on it proceed? 
Our observer Vladimir Klimov turned to Vladimir Arsentyevich 
Rubanov, deputy secretary of the Security Council, for answers 
to these questions. 
  [Rubanov] The program enables efforts to be concentrated in 
terms of time, place, and purpose. The legislator works in 
harness with law-enforcement organs, and they in turn work with 
social security organs, and so forth. The concentration of 
efforts presupposes a programmatic conception of the problem and 
the coordination of the actions of all elements of state power 
in the name of common goals. 
  The cornerstone of the federal program is the formulation of 
priority normative acts and guidelines for law-giving activity 
aimed at lowering the level of crime and increasing the 
protection of the individual in general. But it is not enough 
to prepare the necessary legislative acts; it is also necessary 
to define clear mechanisms for their implementation and 
interaction. The first section of both parts of the program 
deals with this. 
  The second part deals with crime prevention. It is important 
not only to detect crime and punish the culprits, but also to 
prevent it in good time. 
  The priority measures projected in the federal program will 
enable us to increase society's protection against criminal 
infringements and to protect the individual from crime. 
  Later in the program are two sections formulated for the 
sphere of specific actions. These include the fight against 
crimes against the individual, economic crime, and organized and 
gangland crime. It is necessary to dwell on the latter forms of 
crime in particular. For a considerable number of citizens 
crime has now become their major profession, and the level of 
organization among criminal formations is increasing. Whole 
criminal structures are being formed which are capable of 
1nfluencing political and economic life in individual regions of 
Russia and in the country as a whole. Crime has become 
international. It is already spreading from Russia to remote 
foreign parts. 
  But the nearby foreign parts are a separate question. We 
have too many links with the CIS countries. Apart from anything 
else, we still, unfortunately, have in effect a single criminal 
area. But now state mechanisms have been delineated. In this 
connection questions of interstate organizational collaboration 
between the CIS countries in this sphere are a priority. Common 
organizational and legal principles and specific interstate 
treaties are essential. 
  In point of fact, this is why the program has appeared, 
because new problems cannot be resolved in the framework of the 
old relations and the mechanisms through which they were 
conducted. 
  Many people worked on the compilation of the program. But 
above all I would like to note the work of the Security 
Council's Interdepartmental Commission for Combating Crime and 
Corruption, which is headed by Minister of Justice Yuriy 
Khamzatovich Kalmykov. This commission will in fact most likely 
become the coordinating organ for the implementation of the 
program. Representatives of about 20 departments sit on this 
commission. 
  The federal program was directly prepared and written by a 
group of 36 people. They are well-known academics, lawyers, 
executives, and economists. The program went through three 
stages of coordination with ministries and departments. It was 
subjected to expert study by eminent specialists. One of these 
was lawyer and academician Vladimir Nikolayevich Kurdryavtsev. 
  Following the expert studies many criticisms were, as a 
rule, 
submitted to us. In all somewhere in the order of 1,500 were 
examined. The criticisms were taken into account in the final 
version of the draft program. As a result the document was not 
only professionally prepared, as was noted at the last session 
chaired by the secretary of the Security Council, but was also 
highly politically coordinated. 
  The program was six months in preparation. Activity on the 
work was stepped up in late 1993. The contribution made by 
specialists of the sector for supporting the activity of the 
Security Council's Interdepartmental Commission was especially 
great. This sector is headed by Anatoliy Pavlovich Korotkov. 
  All three versions of the program were precisely costed; 
after all, a program without resource backing is simply a 
slogan. The initial version was a wish list. It cost 16 
trillion rubles [R], which was clearly unrealistic. It was 
necessary to lower our sights. The second version cost 
somewhere in the order of R10 trillion. This sum also proved to 
be out of the reach of the budget. In connection with this a 
dispute arose in the Interdepartmental Commission between the 
leaders of the law-enforcement departments and the financiers. 
Law-enforcement officials stated that they did not want to 
deceive society by projecting goals which were unattainable 
without resource backing. If we want to change the situation, 
the corresponding impact can be achieved only with additional 
investments. 
  However, even in these disputes everyone understood that, 
given the rigid economy drive, it was necessary to decrease 
expenditure. The final version of the program was also 
thoroughly costed. It was reduced by almost half. However, it 
was decided at the Security Council session to carry out a 
further estimate in order finally to determine the level of 
funding. 
  These funds have been distributed to the structures which 
are 
directly engaged in fighting crime. More than one-third is 
going to increase the cadres of the law-enforcement organs. We 
are a long way behind in information support, and a considerable 
proportion of the funds allocated will be spent on this. The 
rest will be spent on supplying weapons and special equipment, 
building premises for law and order organs, and other basic 
necessities. 
  An unreasonable desire to economize in the fight against 
crime would mean us losing more than we gain. After all, in the 
law-enforcement spheres we count only the cost, disregarding the 
economic and social benefit. I will not go into all the finer 
details; I will say only that, according to the methods which 
are accepted in world practice and recommended by the United 
Nations, the benefit of law-enforcement measures is bound to 
exceed the cost by roughly twofold. 
  That is talking money. But what figures do you use to assess 
the following fact: According to the forecasts of a Ministry of 
Internal Affairs scientific research institute, intensifying the 
fight against crimes against the individual will enable the 
lives of 20,000 Russian citizens to be saved. 
  The Federal Program for Intensifying the Fight Against Crime 
has been examined on a working basis several times already. 
Almost all questions have been removed. The Security Council 
has expressed an on the whole positive attitude to the program 
and ordered it to be finalized within one week, taking account 
of the criticisms made in the Security Council, and then to be 
submitted for the president's approval. The government has been 
instructed to provide the funding for the program. 

