Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jukka Perttu: "Report: EU Membership Would Make </F>
Environment Protection More Effective; 100 to 300-Meter-Wide 
Ecological Zone Planned for Coast"] 
  [Text] If Finland joins the European Union (EU), the 
effectiveness of protection of the environment would be 
increased in Finland. In its interim report, the committee that 
has been investigating the matter concludes that EU directives 
would require several changes in the laws governing 
environmental protection. 
  According to the directives on the environment, an EU 
country 
must, among other things, sufficiently increase the number of 
nature conservation areas through which the preservation of 
species and the environment are protected. Finland would 
evidently have to increase the number of conservation areas for 
some species and types of natural environment. At least the old 
forests and some environment types in coastal areas would need 
additional protection. 
  The protection of certain environment types would be 
incumbent on Finland since they are not found in the present EU 
area. These are the ragged southern and southwestern coastal 
areas and especially the elevated coast of Pohjanmaa. 
  Finland would have to present its list of areas to be 
protected by as early as 5 June 1995. 
  A member nation may, if it so wishes, protect its 
environment 
more rigorously than required by the environment directive. 
<H5>  Saimaa Ringed Seal Would Benefit </H5>
  The environment directive prescribes that species 
populations 
must be viably preserved and the areas they range in may not be 
reduced. 
  For the Saimaa ringed seal, for example, this would mean 
that 
the future of the population on the south side of Savonlinna 
would have to be protected. At the present time there are 
conservation areas only on the north side -- Linnansaari and 
Kolovesi national parks. 
  Researchers believe that, if the ringed seal group on the 
south side of Savonlinna is not protected, the population of 180 
Saimaa ringed seals will inevitably decline. 
  According to the environment directive, places where 
strictly 
protected species breed and rest must be protected from changes 
that weaken the populations of the species. The regulation also 
applies to activities the side effects of which cause them harm. 
Because of this, the environmental protection law would have to 
be amended since it states that species protection may not 
prevent land from being used for farming or construction. 
<H5>  Big Dispute Over Coast </H5>
  The committee also looked into the effects on the laws of 
the 
general agreement on biodiversity signed in Rio de Janeiro, but 
they are largely the same as the changes required by the EU 
directives. 
  The Environment Committee of the Baltic Protection 
Commission, or Helsinki Commission, has drafted a proposal as to 
how the article governing nature conservation approved in 1992 
for inclusion in the Baltic protection agreement is to be 
applied. The Environment Committee will propose to the 
Commission, which is to meet next March, that a coastal zone 100 
to 300 meters in width from the shoreline into the sea as well 
as inland be protected outside of populated areas. 
  The committee will also recommend that a network of 
protected 
areas be created in coastal and marine areas. Activities that 
alter the natural environment or the landscape, such as the 
construction of buildings and roads, would not as a rule be 
permitted in the protected 100 to 300-meter coastal zone. 
Saunas, boathouses, or wind power plants, for example, could be 
erected in the future as well. A project that is in the public 
interest could also be permitted if a less sensitive area [to 
build in] could not be found. 
  Intensive farming and logging, for example, soil drainage 
and 
clear-cutting, would also be restricted in the zone. 
  Department head Markku Tornberg of the MTK [Agricultural 
Producers Association] criticized the proposal, maintaining that 
the establishment of an ecological zone would drive a huge 
number of Archipelago farms into bankruptcy since their value as 
security [for loans] would plummet. 
  Tornberg made a statement on the interim report. In it he, 
among other things, said that the committee had drawn unfounded 
or overly far-reaching conclusions. 

