BFN 

<F P=106> [Fa.Bax. report: "`Omonia Activists Involved in Espionage'"] </F>
  [Text] Tirana -- Six local leaders of Omonia, recently 
arrested in a lightning strike of the Albanian police, have now 
been accused of espionage. Theodori Bezhani, Irakli Sirma, and 
Kosta Qirja from Gjirokaster; Vangjel Paparisto from Sarande; 
and Panajot Marto and Kosta Cavo, resident in Delvine, are now 
being held in prison on the serious charge of "maintaining links 
with the Greek secret services." Some time ago, they had all 
faced the preliminary charges of illegally carrying weapons and 
of anticonstitutional activities. Following further 
investigations, the Tirana Procurator's Office has now declared 
its opinion on the six arrested members of the Greek minority. 
Those arrested are almost all leaders of local organizations of 
Omonia, or people well-known for their activities in the Greek 
minority areas. 
  The news, since confirmed by the Tirana Procurator's Office, 
came only one day after the news conference of the leadership of 
the Greek minority organization, at which Omonia Chairman Sotir 
Qirjazati had one again asked for the highest Albanian state 
authorities to intervene to free the six persons under arrest, 
and had reemphasized their innocence. The Omonia leadership 
also repeated the demands they submitted about one year ago, 
including for "an increase in local self-government." Among the 
most important demands put forward by Omonia are the right to 
Greek-language broadcasting and the right to use two official 
languages and two national symbols. 
  All these developments take place at a time when there is an 
evident increase in diplomatic efforts to improve relations 
between the two states, which have passed through a chilly 
period following last month's serious terrorist incident near 
the village of Peshkepi. Meanwhile, following their first 
meeting in Zurich, the two foreign ministers, Serreqi and 
Papulias, have agreed to meet in Tirana in order to discuss the 
problems still existing between the two countries. Albanian 
President Sali Berisha himself reemphasized his readiness to 
assist the good progress of these relations. Replying to a Greek 
journalist's question on 19 May, Berisha said, "I agree to visit 
Athens, of course, if they invite me." 

