BFN 

  [Text] Shanghai, June 24 (XINHUA) -- Traditionally Chinese 
people who were wronged used to seek help from the government. 
  Nowadays more and more people go straight to lawyers and 
courts to ask for justice and protection. 
  Not long ago an ordinary woman worker from Fotang town in 
Yiwu city, Zhejiang Province, succeeded in winning a lawsuit 
against a local official who had raped her. 
  "The reason why I went directly to the court and not to the 
government office was that I believed that the law had absolute 
power and I was afraid that the government might shelter the 
official," said the young lady, who preferred to remain 
anonymous. 
  Influenced by the 2,000-year old feudal tradition, the idea 
of "power overriding the law" used to be deep-rooted among the 
Chinese. 
  But since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 
1949, the Chinese Government has formulated a package of laws 
and regulations, including the "Constitution of the People's 
Republic of China," and laws concerning administrative 
procedure, compulsory education, marriage, environmental 
protection, food hygiene and protection of the legal rights of 
disabled people. 
  Provincial governments have worked out a series of 
regulations and rules in line with local conditions. 
  Deng Xiaoping once said, "We must inculcate the idea of law 
into the minds of the people and enable more and more people to 
avoid violating the law but instead positively uphold the law." 
  In answering the call, the central government and the 
National People's Congress have launched a publicity drive on 
the legal system among the broad masses of the people. 
  Armed with a general knowledge of the law, people dare to 
bring suits against anyone who wrongs them. 
  Liu Daiguo, a blacksmith of Longguan village in Neijiang 
city, Sichuan Province, was suspected by the local police of 
disposing of stolen goods. All his iron and steel, which he had 
purchased through legal channels and his business license were 
confiscated. Liu appealed to the local court, which ordered the 
police to compensate Liu for his loss. 
  Failing to persuade her husband to confess his crime of 
bribery to a local procuratorate, a woman living on the 
outskirts of Shanghai reported him to the procuratorate herself. 
  A survey of the coastal areas shows that local 
procuratorates 
have received 92,317 letters and telephone calls of complaints 
over the past six years. 
  China has formed a network of judicial organs, and lawyers 
are respected and regarded as important by the people, who rely 
on them to protect their legal rights. 
  At present, more than 1,000 families, most of whom include 
public figures or private businesses, in Shanghai have employed 
lawyers. 
  In addition, notarization has been introduced into the daily 
life of the family. 
  Many families have their rights of inheritance, property and 
real estate notarized. 
  In Guangzhou, capital of Guangdong Province, there are 14 
notaries public. 

