BFN 

<F P=106> [Italicized passages recorded] </F>
  [Text] The political and military situation is still 
critical in N'dalatando where more than 100 civilians have been 
killed. Our correspondent Abilio Correia reports from Cambambe: 
  [Correia] Various commando platoons and special 
battalions of the National Union for the Total Independence of 
Angola [UNITA] coming from Huambo once again attacked 
N'dalatando on 16 June where violent clashes took place with 
government forces, National Police, and civilian defense. 
Lieutenant General Manuel Jose Nego, commander of the Cuanza 
Norte military region, today told our reporters that the clashes 
lasted more than five hours, and that Jonas Savimbi's soldiers 
had already occupied part of the city. In response, the Angolan 
Armed Forces [FAA] caused considerable losses to the 
enemy who fled in disarray. In their flight, the rebels left on 
the ground more than 37 of their soldiers dead. Eight prisoners 
were taken, and huge quantities of war equipment, such as 
mortars, antitank missiles, automatic machine guns, and an 
assortment of ammunition were also seized. 
  Our source revealed that the UNITA rebels are still 
shelling the city with 32 mm and 85 mm long-range guns although 
with reduced intensity. N'dalatando, which was recovered on 4 
May, is still under the control of the government after 18 
months of UNITA military occupation. Meanwhile, the FAA, 
National Police, and civilian defense are defending the city 
successfully, giving new lessons to the Black Cockerel 
soldiers. 
  The situation in Cuanza Sul has also been described as 
worrisome. Cuanza Sul Provincial Governor Francisco Jose Ramos 
da Cruz says heavy clashes are taking place in the outskirts of 
Cela District between government forces and UNITA. Our 
correspondent Joao Pedro reports from the area: 
  [Pedro] Jonas Savimbi's soldiers are currently moving 
all over the area. UNITA intends to militarily occupy the 
capital of Cela District, Waku Kungo. Governor Francisco da 
Cruz said these attempts and dreams will be neutralized and 
noted that the FAA are consolidating strategic positions in the 
outskirts of Ebo District. He said despite this the military 
situation is still very critical. 
  Clashes are still taking place in Kuito, and the number of 
the dead increases each minute. Abel Abraao reports: 
  [Abraao] UNITA is still killing residents of the 
martyrized city of Kuito. Over the past few hours 39 civilians 
were killed, mostly old people, children and women, and there is 
an unspecified number of wounded. The UNITA rebels intensified 
the shellings in the afternoon yesterday, focusing their attacks 
on the (Fasiang) building and other large centers of 
concentration used as refuge by the residents. 
  Besides indiscriminate raids on the defenseless 
population, the Black Cockerel soldiers attacked various 
positions of the FAA, National Police, and civilian defense 
without success. 
  Despite heavy shelling this morning, a number of people 
were buried in yards. At present there are shellings almost 
everywhere in Kuito. Clashes are increasing, and government 
forces are still inflicting heavy losses on Jonas Savimbi's 
soldiers, who are desperately trying to recover positions lost 
over the past few days. 
  Meanwhile, the situation in Huambo is different. Jonas 
Savimbi's soldiers stationed in Ukuma, Huambo Province, have no 
morale to fight against the FAA. This was revealed by Commander 
Acaba Gozo of the FAA Detachment in Ukuma. 

