Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Interpol Director General Raymond Kendall by </F>
Vladimir Sevela in Strasbourg; date not given: "According To 
the Interpol Chief, the Drugs Mafia in Europe Is Winning"] 
  [Text] Strasbourg -- Interpol Director General Raymond 
Kendall declared in the Council of Europe last week that the 
methods employed so far to combat the organized drugs trade have 
failed. He said that, despite the efforts by police forces 
throughout the continent, the drugs mafias have become 
consolidated during the past three years and the aggression 
shown by their organizations has also increased. 
  The Interpol chief appealed to European countries to 
incorporate their security and information services into the 
struggle against international drug mafias and to utilize all 
the potential left behind in this sphere following the collapse 
of the Iron Curtain. "Let us proceed from the fact that the 
organized drugs mafia is a foreign power set against the state. 
The current deployment of forces and resources between them and 
the police is uneven; therefore, it is necessary to apply other 
courses of action," he said. 
  Kendall also said that drugs-related crime is now spreading 
dramatically throughout Eastern Europe. Russia, Poland, and the 
Baltic states have become the main European producers of 
psychotropic substances, which are beginning to be the most 
sought-after drugs. According to Interpol's figures, several 
times more heroin was seized in Bulgaria and Hungary last year 
than in the countries with a long "tradition" of using 
it--France and Belgium. 
  Because the drugs problem is affecting the Czech Republic 
increasingly, MLADA FRONTA DNES asked Raymond Kendall for an 
interview. 
  [Sevela] How are politicians responding to your appeal to 
use the intelligence services in the struggle against the drugs 
trade? 
  [Kendall] At the moment, it is too early for me to outline 
any specific reactions, because this entire idea is--in 
essence--new. First of all, it is necessary for government and 
political officials to understand the seriousness of the threat 
represented by organized crime in the drugs trade and to be 
aware of the kind of resources that it is necessary to use. I 
think, however, that they are aware of the benefit that will 
arise from combining efforts in an assault on these criminal 
organizations. Then, it is necessary to put the security 
services--this massive apparatus for acquiring and analyzing 
information--at the immediate disposal of the authorities 
involved in the struggle against drugs. 
  [Sevela] Some politicians maintain, however, that the 
security and information services are already being used for 
this purpose.... 
  [Kendall] Yes, but intelligence centers always have a 
tendency to act independently. According to my proposal, they 
should not operate separately and in isolation. They should be 
subordinate to the people supervising the struggle against 
drugs-related crime. 
  [Sevela] Is it possible somehow to prevent corruption in the 
offices intended to combat the drugs trade? 
  [Kendall] Your question touches upon one of the biggest 
problems. Organized crime is a source of huge profit and brings 
with it the possibility of corruption among officials in all 
posts, including the most senior ones. Therefore, it is 
important for all countries--but mainly those whom corruption 
most concerns--to introduce specific measures. 
  [Sevela] You yourself are an advocate of balance between 
repression and prevention in the drugs sphere. You have 
proposed orienting efforts toward restricting the demand for 
narcotics. Should Eastern Europe proceed differently from 
Western Europe? 
  [Kendall] No, this problem is the same everywhere. Despite 
this, the countries of the former Eastern bloc are--to a certain 
extent--lucky, because the majority of people there cannot 
afford the prices that the traffickers demand for drugs. 
Another aspect is that many things from Western 
Europe--including drugs--are attractive, especially to young 
people. Of course, it is possible to avoid the problems that 
afflict us by means of prevention. It is enough to learn from 
our experience, first and foremost, in restricting the demand 
for drugs and to try to stop them infiltrating into the 
country--something that is on the increase--until your economy 
improves. 
  [Sevela] In what direction should prevention be oriented? 
  [Kendall] It is simply necessary to explain to people that 
drugs are bad. It is necessary to explain the health risks from 
these dangerous toxic substances as is being done for tobacco 
and alcohol. 

