Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [M. Abizanda report: "Air Force Must Reduce Its Operating </F>
Expenses in Order To Maintain Torrejon and Zaragoza"] 
  [Text] Madrid -- The Air Force budget shows appreciable 
cuts in the expenditure items relating to operational and 
systems modernization matters, while on the other hand those 
relating to logistical support are increasing. The latter show 
a 503.29-percent increase in order to meet the financing of the 
expenditure resulting from maintaining the Torrejon and Zaragoza 
bases following the Americans' withdrawal. 
  Although the Air Force budget increases by 5.675 billion 
pesetas -- 4.07 percent -- over the 1993 budget, the items 
devoted to fuel and equipment modernization show considerable 
decreases in some programs. 
  Thus the item devoted to the Armed Forces' [as published] 
operating costs shows a 23.3-percent increase over the previous 
year, although this increase is caused by a rise in expenditure 
on food and clothing. On the other hand the subprogram devoted 
to "fuel and lubricants" shows a 5.3-percent fall, from 3.168 
billion pesetas in 1993 to the 3 billion pesetas in 1994. This 
emerges from a report published by the REVISTA DE AERONAUTICA Y 
ASTRONAUTICA, published by the Air Force itself. 
  However, the Air Force's fuel costs total 6 billion pesetas, 
the difference being offset by the financial contributions from 
the ministries for which the Air Force performs various 
services, such as transporting VIP's or the fire-fighting 
missions which it carries out for the National Institute for 
Nature Conservation. 
  The biggest cuts occur in the modernization program, 
although 
in overall terms it also rises slightly, by 6.67 percent. 
Specifically, the missiles subprogram is cut by 29.65 percent 
(from 3.016 billion to 2.122 billion pesetas); the fighter 
aircraft subprogram is cut by 15.95 percent (from 3.567 billion 
to 2.999 billion pesetas); the cargo and in-flight refueling 
aircraft subprogram is cut by 6.17 percent; and the ammunition 
and explosives subprogram is cut by 26.82 percent. The training 
aircraft subprogram is eliminated. 
  However, in this modernization program there are increases 
in 
the sums earmarked for electronic warfare (152.53 percent), 
warning, command, and control systems (90.10 percent), and 
especially,"other materials and equipment and logistical 
support," which rise by 503.29 percent. 
  This considerable increase comes as a result of the need to 
finance the expenditure resulting from maintaining the 
infrastructure of the Torrejon and Zaragoza bases following the 
withdrawal of the U.S. units stationed there, representing 3.431 
billion pesetas. This financing was not previously an Air Force 
responsibility. 
  Other expenses which disappear are those relating to 
hospitals, homes, and cultural centers. 
  For its part the Defense Ministry believes that the Air 
Force 
units' ability to react has not been affected -- "at least, not 
substantially" -- since it states that the budget cuts have so 
far been applied to those units which can have the least impact 
on combat operations or operations directly supporting them. 

