BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Serbian Renewal Movement (SPO) leader Vuk </F>
Draskovic by Petar Ignja; place and date not given: "Obscurity 
of National Unity"] 
  [Text] People vote for politicians similar to themselves. 
The relative political success of Vuk Draskovic can also be 
viewed in this way because many people think that his sometimes 
lyrical and romantic, sometimes epic and rhetorical speeches are 
not welcome in politics, which requires more reality (although 
it seems that surrealistic politics are the most successful in 
Serbia). 
  What would the political world look like if we were always 
realistic, deprived of certain natural colors? Perhaps like a 
feast in the form of a pill, which might contain everything, but 
is tasteless. 
  Those who have never heard of the good man from Mancha [Don 
Quixote] -- who got himself into trouble when he decided to give 
up his quiet life and became a wandering knight -- speak and 
write about Vuk Draskovic without much understanding. 
  [Ignja] Will all this struggle of yours pay? Do you think 
that you are sometimes tilting at windmills, like the famous 
wandering knight? 
  [Draskovic] The most profitable thing for me would be not to 
get involved but write my books; however, I do not think that I 
have the right to be so selfish. There is no more important aim 
than to remove the present leadership -- to save the people and 
the state. It is a difficult and unpleasant task, however. 
Sometimes it seems a vain job, but we must be persistent. 
  [Ignja] Some time after the election it seemed that the 
opposition had a chance, since the Socialist Party -- the former 
Communists -- did not have a majority in parliament. It came to 
a breakup within the opposition, however. Were you surprised? 
  [Draskovic] I would not be sincere if I said that I had been 
surprised. In last year's election campaign I warned opposition 
supporters that their votes for change could be used against it. 
I told them that there was no risk only if they voted for 
DEPOS, or for the SPO [Serbian Renewal Movement]. 
  [Ignja] Do you want to say that many people fell into a 
trap? Who set it? 
  [Draskovic] It was noticed that one of the opposition 
parties opposed everybody and everything, even itself. It did 
not only oppose hatred and war, but the spiritual and mental 
emptiness. 
  Another opposition party built its image on hidden and half- 
public "dates" with the Socialist Party, but since its love was 
not returned, it was offended and expressed its feelings by 
offering to flirt with Pale. 
  A third opposition party has not even had a political 
strategy of its own; it plays the role of Karadzic's political 
representative in Serbia. This party is practically the bureau 
of the Srpska republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina in Belgrade. 
  [Ignja] Do you want to say that these three opposition 
parties cheated the people who voted for them? 
  [Draskovic] People who voted for them wasted their ballots. 
The SPO remained the only consistent democratic power of 
resistance and hope. It must be admitted, however, that we also 
had our Kalabic [World War II Chetnik chieftain], which is the 
only thing that surprised me. Mihajlovic's behavior is 
unbelievable; it cannot be excused.... 
  [Ignja] Yes, I know, but you have forgotten to say which 
three opposition parties you are referring to? 
  [Draskovic] If they cannot be recognized based on what I 
said, it is superfluous to mention their names. I am not 
against naming these parties; I just oppose their political 
activities. 
  [Ignja] I think that the Democratic Party of Serbia [DSS] is 
a real opposition party but that it will not meddle with the 
ruling party. 
  [Draskovic] Perhaps not with it, but there is a ruling party 
on Mount Jahorina [location of Bosnian Serb assembly], too. 
This is the leadership that has disgraced us in front of the 
world. For this reason it is opposed by the SPO, but the DSS 
approves of it! God forbid that Pale gets the chance to annex 
Belgrade and Serbia! According to them, and according to their 
representatives in Serbia, their center is neither Belgrade nor 
Topola nor Takovo, but Jahorina. 
  [Ignja] Why is your party so closely linked to the New 
Democracy party? 
  [Draskovic] New Democracy is one of the founders of DEPOS. 
This party obtained four seats in the 1992 election: three in 
the Serbian Assembly, and one in the federal parliament. I have 
to say that there have been no problems whatsoever between the 
SPO and the New Democracy parliamentary members. If you are not 
acquainted with parliamentary issues, you cannot tell which 
DEPOS representatives come from the SPO and which from the New 
Democracy party. The behavior of this party eased the pain 
inflicted on DEPOS by Kostunica after he obtained 20 seats in 
parliament. It was the behavior of this party that made the SPO 
hope that its efforts to unite all the democratic and opposition 
powers under one umbrella -- in the DEPOS -- are not all in vain. 
  [Ignja] The DEPOS umbrella, however, began to leak during 
the first rain -- to the delight of the Socialist Party. Is all 
this a coincidence? 
  [Draskovic] There are rumors that Mihajlovic attended a 
special course, where he was prepared for betraying and breaking 
up DEPOS. This is not true. He was blackmailed. He owns a 
private company, and the New Democracy party is nothing but a 
chain of several dozen large and small private companies. 
People earned big money by investing little or no money at all, 
and when they were faced with the choice of either retaining 
their companies (which meant coalition with the Socialist Party 
and joint government with them), or to stay loyal to the SPO 
(which would have meant the liquidation of their companies and 
probably a series of arrests), they chose the first option. 
  [Ignja] These are perhaps only assumptions, unfounded 
suspicions? 
  [Draskovic] Already in January 1994, the Socialist Party 
leaders proved to Mihajlovic that their threats were serious. 
In Bor.... 
  [Ignja] As soon as Bor is mentioned, one must immediately 
think of Tomidza, Sainovic, and Sokolovic junior. 
  [Draskovic] ...One of the New Democracy leaders, Bosko 
Nicic, was arrested in Bor. He, too, had a private company. He 
was arrested although he was not guilty, and there were no 
reasons for his detention, but the aim was to give an example to 
the big boss of what would happen if he did not give in. He 
gave in and Nicic was released from prison on bail. New 
Democracy allegedly proposed him as Sokolovic's deputy. 
  [Ignja] The party of private entrepreneurs wants to have its 
man in the police leadership. Purely grotesque! 
  [Draskovic] The most important thing in all police states is 
to be in the good graces of the police and its boss. 
  [Ignja] You wanted to form a government of national unity 
and salvation. You have not succeeded in forming a government 
of national unity, but you have achieved a government of 
salvation -- people are entering it in order to save their heads. 
  [Draskovic] If you are good and obedient, you can have every 
position. If your are not, you can end up in prison, although 
you are innocent. You and your family can even be murdered, and 
your company destroyed. Sicilian laws are effective here, but 
they cannot make the political disgrace and betrayal committed 
by New Democracy appear less tragic. There are businessmen in 
the SPO, too. Many of our members have been confronted with 
serious threats for four years, but none of them has responded 
to any of these threats yet. Nobody has given in. 
  [Ignja] You wanted to enter the government of national unity 
yourself. Are not you trying to convince yourself now that the 
grapes are sour? 
  [Draskovic] The idea of national unity and of a government 
of national unity was born in the SPO in 1990. We especially 
insisted on it in the spring of 1991, after the demonstrations 
on 9 March, 1991. During my first encounter with Milosevic I 
reminded him of that idea and told him that he was late in 
accepting our idea. I insisted on a consistent implementation 
of this idea. 
  [Ignja] This means.... 
  [Draskovic] Nothing else than that the chief of state has to 
respect the will of his people. Milosevic told me on that 
occasion: "Naturally, the opposition will get 12 out of 25 
ministerial positions, but it cannot count on the positions of 
the prime minister or minister of internal affairs." The 
president was very generous in offering seven to eight 
ministerial posts to the SPO. 
  [Ignja] The public was not informed about the details of 
this agreement. Can you tell us more about it now that a lot of 
water has gone under the bridge? 
  [Draskovic] Yes, I can. I told Milosevic that the 
opposition should have a majority in the government, since it 
won a majority in the elections, in terms of both the number of 
votes and the number of seats in the Assembly. I added that the 
offer to participate in the government of national unity had to 
be submitted to all parliamentary parties. The president 
frowned and said that there was no place for fascism and 
primitivism in the government of national unity; he probably 
meant Seselj's party. 
  "It was your party which promoted this fascism and 
primitivism; the SPO has had a very critical attitude toward it 
since its very beginning," I said. "This is not true," 
Milosevic answered, adding that they had only supported certain 
patriotic actions organized by the Radical Party, but that they 
had never been willing to give Seselj's party any ministerial 
position, although he had often asked for this. 
  [Ignja] You have to admit, though, that they did not attack 
the Radical Party until Seselj started destroying their 
government, at the beginning of last autumn. 
  [Draskovic] Yes, this is true. I went on to point out that 
600,000 people voted for the Radical Party, a political fact 
that cannot be ignored. These voters have to be as respected as 
those who voted for the Democratic Party of Serbia, but this 
party did not want to participate in negotiations about the 
government of national unity. Milosevic was happy to be able to 
say that he invited Kostunica, who, however, refused to come. 
He also added that the Radical Party was invited, too.... 
  [Ignja] He invited Tomo Nikolic, not Seselj. 
  [Draskovic] This does not matter -- the Radical Party 
refused the invitation. To cut a long story short, I insisted 
on an opposition majority in the government. I also wanted all 
parliamentary parties to be represented in the government and a 
SPO member to become the chairman of the federal parliament, but 
the Serbian president did not accept any of these proposals. 
  [Ignja] Can you repeat his words? 
  [Draskovic] He was astonished that I refused seven 
ministerial positions. 
  [Ignja] I am not sure, but it seems to me that the 
minister of internal affairs is nowhere as respected as in 
Serbia. 
  [Draskovic] In police states the minister of the police is 
the whole government. In the negotiations of which I have just 
spoken Milosevic did not even mention the possibility that the 
Communist Party, a minor party led by his wife that did not get 
a single seat in parliament, could be represented in the 
government. There followed talks with Mr. Minic and Mr. Zoran 
Andjelkovic, and they did not mention this possibility, either. 
It is clear to me now that Milosevic and these gentlemen were 
very skillful in hiding their strategy from me. The story about 
the government of national unity was only one of their false 
methods to bring communists into the government. Formally 
speaking, four of them are communists, but in fact all 30 of 
them are. This means that the Communist Party is the ruling 
party, since the Socialist Party of Serbia is the disguised 
branch office of the communists. 
  [Ignja] Mira Markovic, the Communist Party leader, recently 
proposed that political parties should not be active during this 
crisis period. 
  [Draskovic] I have addressed this issue in parliament. The 
aim of this proposal is clear. Under the pretext of national 
unity all political parties should be abolished, except for the 
Communist Party, which means that we would return to the 
one-party system. 
  [Ignja] This sounds absurd. 
  [Draskovic] They see politics as the theater of the absurd! 
The strategists of this evil intent are not interested in the 
price that Serbia will pay for it. The embargo was primarily 
introduced because of the tragic fact that Serbia is the only 
country in Europe that supports the communist world and which 
insists on reviving the communist leadership in the Kremlin. 
The sanctions will remain effective as long as the communists 
rule in Serbia. 
  [Ignja] I did not want to interrupt you, as you were 
speaking very quickly. I think that the opposition leaders are 
not aware of the role that they have to play. Some of them seem 
not to have recognized who their political enemy is. The 
Serbian political scene does not look like that in England, 
France, or Germany, where a political rise or fall does not 
change the political life on the whole. We had communist rule 
for 50 years. The opposition that is not able to disassociate 
itself from this system will disappear from the political scene, 
because former communists and present Socialists are obviously 
doing everything to preserve the socialist system in Serbia. 
Serbia is still a socialist country, as the problem of 
ownership has not been solved yet. 
  [Draskovic] The only hope for Serbia is a democratic 
opposition, but the coalition between the Socialist and the 
Communist Party wants to destroy this hope through the obscure 
project of national unity. They do not care for the Serbian 
people; they are not interested in Serbia. The only thing that 
they are interested in is to preserve their communist leadership. 
  [Ignja] Is it true that they wanted to preserve Yugoslavia? 
  [Draskovic] Yugoslavia was broken up by generals and 
officers, members of the Communist Party. The stories about 
greater Serbia enabled them to keep their positions at that 
time. These people are now preaching a revival of Yugoslavia, 
because they think that the greater Serbia story is worn out. 
Apart from that, many people are nostalgic about the former 
Yugoslavia. Destroyers are becoming founders, masters of war 
are becoming masters of peace. They might even support the 
restoration of the Austrian-Hungarian Monarchy if they thought 
that the Communist Party could profit from it. 
  [Ignja] The fear of communism -- which has, admittedly, lost 
an eye already -- has started circulating around all the Serbian 
territories. 
  [Draskovic] The Communist Party rules everywhere from 
Belgrade to Knin. Milosevic told me: "Give us as many people 
as possible for the diplomatic service, since it is horrible. 
More than horrible." He said that but he did not ask for 
anybody, although I accepted the proposal and was ready to send 
the cleverest people to represent the cultural and spiritual 
heritage of our country. Probably the most important diplomatic 
position -- and this is the position of the head of the [FRY] 
Bureau in Zagreb -- was given to a Communist Party member. This 
is a thorn not only in our side, but also in Zagreb's. 
  [Ignja] The chairman of the Democratic Party stated once 
that the opposition did not have a man who could rival Milosevic 
in the election. He was consequently praised by Milosevic. 
("That little Djindjic is not bad.") When you came out of 
Milosevic's office you looked more than happy, you paid him two 
compliments (charming and witty), and he returned by stating 
that your behavior had improved lately. People almost started 
crying. 
  [Draskovic] He also gave me a good grade in behavior last 
autumn, three months before we met. As far as my compliments 
are concerned, I would pay them again. I think that nobody is 
as powerful and superior as an innocent victim. I entered and 
left Milosevic's office with the feeling that my own power is 
superior to his; that is why I paid compliments to him. Apart 
from that, he is really a witty and charming head of state who 
looks you in eye and tells you the joke that he has no influence 
whatsoever on the television and that he does not even watch 
television. 
  [Ignja] The Democratic Party chairman goes even further 
and claims that anticommunism in Serbia does not pay. What does 
pay? Should we wait for the vizier's elephant to die a natural 
death in 100 years? 
  [Draskovic] Djindjic is perhaps right when he says that 
political parties cannot profit from an anti-communist attitude 
in a communist Serbia dominated by communist television, but the 
poverty in which we live, this prison, is the best proof that 
Serbia cannot profit from communism. 
  [Ignja] Will the opposition show enough mercy to the people 
-- to those two-thirds who did not vote for the communists -- to 
change at least some important laws? Although now -- after the 
betrayal by New Democracy -- this also seems to be impossible. 
  [Draskovic] If Djindjic, Seselj, Kostunica, and Agoston do 
not realize that all of us have to be one side in parliament in 
order to change the law on television, the election law and the 
law on election lists, it is senseless to participate in any 
future election. We are confronted with the problem of the New 
Democracy party, which has joined the other side and is now 
preventing us from changing these laws. 
  There are many democrats in the New Democracy Presidency and 
its Main Committee, so I hope that these people will soon take 
over the party and pull it out of its collaboration with the 
communists. 
  [Ignja] Why have they not been expelled by the DEPOS 
Council? 
  [Draskovic] There is no DEPOS Council. We used to have such 
a council in the beginning. In the meantime all the political 
parties that used to be DEPOS members have left the coalition. 
Only the SPO and New Democracy have remained in DEPOS. They 
were joined by the Citizens' Alliance in the last election. It 
is impossible to convoke the DEPOS council now. 
  [Ignja] This sounds logical. But how will you go into the 
next elections? 
  [Draskovic] The SPO will probably participate in the next 
elections as the SPO. We have used up all our reserves for 
turncoats. 
  [Ignja] But this will be a new situation. Is it risky, 
since people have got used to DEPOS? 
  [Draskovic] We can count on 800,000 voters, but our aim is 
to break the 1-million-vote barrier. 
  [Ignja] The Serbian opposition is only interested in a 
majority in parliament. Everything else is a minor issue. 
  [Draskovic] The easiest way to reach this democratic 
majority is to vote for the SPO. We do not rely either on the 
Kremlin or on Pale, we rely on Serbia. 
  [Ignja] Time passes, and you could be considering the 
presidential elections in three and a half years, since 
Milosevic cannot be re-elected. 
  [Draskovic] Yes. According to the Constitution, Milosevic 
cannot be re-elected. He is already the former president -- 
unless he changes the Constitution, or the people. 
  [Ignja] You have recently said: "...and nice weather is 
coming, too." Some people, for example the information 
minister, linked this to the struggle for political power 
outside parliament, in the streets. Will there be 
demonstrations, one of the constitutional rights and a 
democratic aspect of a state? 
  [Draskovic] Of course there will be demonstrations. There 
must be demostrations. The spring does not break up the winter 
only with the sun, but also with rain and wind. 

