BFN 

<F P=106> [Martin S. Lambeck report: "Secret Paper: Poland's Offer </F>
to NATO"] 
  [Text] Brussels/Bonn -- Poland is prepared to render 
unusual services to become a full NATO member as quickly as 
possible. This is shown by a secret presentation document of 
the Polish Republic that is known to DIE WELT. The paper, which 
serves as the document for NATO's Partnership for Peace program, 
is to be presented to the NATO defense ministers in Brussels 
next week. In Brussels it is stated that Poland is pressing for 
full membership because the developments in Russia are viewed 
with increasing concern in Warsaw. 
  Full membership of NATO would mean that Poland is protected 
by the alliance in the case of an attack. The document says 
literally: "Poland is determined to gain full NATO membership. 
The Polish Government regards the partnership initiative as a 
step that takes us closer to this objective." Poland wants full 
military integration within the alliance. Here the democratic 
control of the armed forces will be ensured. The Polish 
officers are already being prepared for the NATO language, 
English. 
  In the overall field of the command and control system, 
military intelligence, and communications, Poland is seeking 
speedy cooperation with NATO. The telecommunications systems 
are to be converted to the NATO standard. A permanent data 
exchange is offered. NATO norms and terms are to be introduced 
in the Polish armed forces. The Poles not only expect 
integration within NATO air defense, but they also ask for help 
in reequipment. 
  Warsaw wants to establish a Polish representation at the 
NATO 
headquarters in Mons. The Poles are offering training areas for 
international contingents. For UN peace missions, Poland wants 
to provide units that would be operationally ready within 30 
days. A unit of about 1,000 men is envisaged. 
  Moreover, Warsaw is planning several joint maneuvers, 
including: a Polish-U.S. paratrooper exercise; Polish-U.S. Air 
Force maneuvers with combat aircraft in Poland; joint exercises 
on German training areas; joint infantry exercises with German 
and Danish units in Denmark; and numerous naval exercises with 
German, Dutch, and Danish naval units are planned. In addition, 
Poland is planning joint exercises with Belgium, France, and 
Great Britain. Over the long term, it wants to convert its Naval 
ports and Air Force bases to NATO standards. 
  The presentation document still has to be negotiated with 
NATO, before it is finally handed over next week. At the 
conference of the NATO defense ministers in Brussels, the entry 
of those countries who want to participate in NATO's Partnership 
for Peace program will be discussed. 

