BFN 

<F P=106> [First part of report compiled by National Assembly Standing </F>
committee on voters' views submitted to Fifth Session of Ninth 
National Assembly] 
  [Text] The Implementation of Duties in the First Six Months 
of 1994. 
  I. In the socioeconomic field. 
  General speaking, voters in all localities unanimously 
agreed 
that the socioeconomic results achieved in recent years are 
encouraging. The economy enjoys a relatively high development 
rate. The life of a large part of the public has been 
significantly improved. These further confirm that the 
renovative line in all social aspects initiated by our party is 
very correct and appropriate with every passing day. 
  In agriculture production, the 1993-1994 winter-spring rice 
crop yielded good results throughout the entire country. 
Agricultural commodities are abundant. In general, the life of 
the peasants continues to improve. Voters in all localities 
hold that all party's lines and policies and state laws relating 
to agricultural production have significantly accelerated 
agricultural production, especially the Fifth Party Plenum 
resolution on the development of agriculture and rural areas. 
  However, a series of problems remained to be solved. The 
voters' suggestions mainly concentrate on the following issues: 
  1. The government needs to study and outline a management 
model for agricultural cooperatives in the new economic 
structure. At the same time, the government should introduce 
policies to make the use of land in rural areas more reasonable 
and just. At present, the long-term granting of land to peasant 
households is a correct line, which provides encouragement and 
peace of mind for the peasants, and allows them to carry out 
their production, improve the soil, and increase their harvests. 
However, the unfair and unreasonable granting of land still 
occurs amongst peasants and non-peasants. Land is still 
registered in the name of deceased people. Newborn people are 
not given land for their future production, and houses are still 
allowed to be built on five-percent reserved land. 
  2. The government needs to continue its policy of providing 
subsidies to agricultural products. The subsidizing of 
agricultural products is an issue brought up many times by 
voters throughout the country. At present, the imbalance of 
agricultural and industrial goods is being adjusted too slowly. 
This causes concern among peasants. 
  Voters in most provinces and cities suggest that the 
government should reduce the price of materials used in 
agriculture production and cut down the fee for the irrigation 
service because the current irrigation fee of 12 percent is too 
high. Voters in some localities suggest that the government 
should reduce agriculture tax rates and introduce more practical 
regulations so that agriculture promotion organizations can 
actually provide more support to agriculture production 
development. 
  3. The government needs to urgently improve its credit 
service and capital management to ensure loans to the right 
people, reduce embarrassing and inconvenient procedures, and 
increase the amount of credit and the repayment periods with 
reasonable interest rates to create conditions for peasants to 
improve production and business. They also suggest that the 
government end the situation where poor men can not obtain loans 
while rich men can repeatedly ask for them. In some localities, 
voters suggest that the government should instruct the banking 
sector to provide six-month loans for yearly crops and loans for 
more than two years for perennial plants. 
  4. While the entire country is enjoying a good harvest, 
central provinces, especially Quang Tri and Thua Thien-Hue, are 
still suffering continuously poor harvests due to harsh weather 
and frequent natural disasters. Voters in these provinces 
suggest that the government should adopt practical measures to 
help peasants suffering from poor harvests stabilize their life 
and develop production. 
  Regarding industrial production and small industrial and 
handicraft production, voters in many localities hold that, with 
the challenge of the market economy, industrial production and 
small industrial and handicraft production continue to stand 
firm and develop, helping to increase the state budget revenue 
and meeting most of the public demand for consumers goods. 
However, voters in some localities suggest that the government 
should introduce concrete taxation and credit policies for 
different economic sectors to ensure the leading role of the 
state economic sector. At present, state economic units have to 
shoulder a greater share of the national budget than the 
nonstate economic units. Therefore, the state economic sector 
and the collective economic sector can not compete with other 
economic sectors. In order to satisfactorily carry out 
government decree No. 388 on the rearrangement of state economic 
units, voters suggest that the government should instruct 
ministries which have production units to closely coordinate 
with local government so that the decree can be executed 
correctly and that, after the rearrangement, all state 
enterprises will continue to carry out their business 
effectively. Together with the rearrangement of state 
enterprises, voters also suggest that the government should 
continue the program to introduce a share holding system in 
state enterprises. 
  As on previous occasions, voters in many localities suggest 
that the government pay more attention to the agricultural 
product and foodstuff processing industry, balance investment in 
construction, and ensure a reasonable and equal distribution of 
industrial establishments in all localities in order to quickly 
consume products made by the peasants and overcome the current 
disparity of wealth in different provinces. Together with 
efforts to give priority to the development of the processing 
industry, voters suggest that the government should adopt 
suitable policies on investment in and marketing of products 
made by small industry and handicraft enterprises, continue to 
improve structure for the acceleration of small industry and 
handicraft production, and generate more jobs for the laboring 
people. 
  Regarding imports and exports, voters in many localities are 
concerned about the fierce competition between domestic goods 
and imported goods, especially among staple goods. Some of our 
good quality products such as electric fans, thermos, and 
ceramic products do not sell well because of their high price. 
Voters suggest that the government should apply policies to 
protect domestic production and resolutely stop smuggling. 
  According to reports presented by some National Assembly 
delegations, many voters hold that the rapid increase of 
production has lead to a large inventory, causing losses to 
business enterprises. In Ho Chi Minh City, the number of 
enterprises running at a loss is nearly 40 percent of the total 
enterprises. At present, some foreign companies are selling 
their products below cost in order to bankrupt Vietnamese 
enterprises before they can monopolize our market. Together 
with their market manipulation, foreign companies use high 
salaries to attract good Vietnamese technicians and workers. 
They also find measures to evade the control of the Vietnamese 
Government organs. 
  In order to overcome the aforementioned situation and ensure 
a stable development for our enterprises in the market 
mechanism, voters in Ho Chi Minh City have suggested to the 
government the following practical measures: 
  -- Conduct reviews to evaluate the socioeconomic 
effectiveness of the foreign investment. 
  -- Study the concretization of strategic targets in the 
issuance of investment licenses. 
  -- Overcome loopholes in management in order to draw 
experiences for new projects. 
  The government needs to study and establish a clear market 
strategy to develop and fully exploit the local advantages of 
different localities and sectors and provide adequate protection 
for locally made products. Modern technologies should be 
attracted by encouraging the setting up of companies which are 
in the business of renting equipment and the setting up of 
branches of foreign companies which can facilitate purchase 
through installment plans in order to quickly accelerate our 
national modernization. 
  The information service on the market situation and new 
technologies should be satisfactorily organized to help foreign 
companies set up businesses in Vietnam and assist Vietnamese 
companies to choose the most efficient measures and counterparts 
for their business. The vestiges of the old bureaucracy and 
subsidy structure, which limit the creative ability of the 
laboring people and obstruct the application of new 
technologies, such as the practice of wage control and the 
banning of a high percentage for machinery depreciation, should 
be totally destroyed. Plans should be outlined to train and 
retrain the contingent of key cadres on modern management 
knowledge, public relation technique, and negotiation skills in 
dealing with foreign counterparts. 
  Regarding finance and the state budget, the voters' opinions 
mainly concentrate on taxation and debt solvency. Regarding the 
taxation policy, voters in many localities continue to suggest 
that the government should not yet start applying new tax rates 
on housing land in rural areas because our peasants are still 
too poor. Therefore, the government should collect the housing 
land tax at the same rates as the land using tax. In some 
areas, the voters suggest that the government should leave 50-60 
percent of land tax to local governments for infrastructure 
construction. Voters in some localities suggest the government 
to consider authorizing villages to keep 20 percent of 
agriculture tax instead of 10 percent because at present village 
budgets are very small and do not meet local expenses. In 
villages, revenue resources are few while demand on expenses is 
still too great. Therefore, grassroots activities are facing 
numerous difficulties. 
  With respect to debts owned to the public by the government, 
voters in many localities suggest that the government should 
further study and adopt more practical policies to solve its 
debts to the public during the anti-French and anti-American 
wars and during the period after 1975. People in the Western 
part of South Vietnam have complained that the government still 
owes them a lot of money from when it bought paddy and rice from 
them. In some localities, the voters suggest that the 
government should finally settle government credit notes issued 
during the agrarian reform. Many families received the notes 
during the reform. Now they are facing hardship in their life. 
Some people left their children with government credit notes 
when they passed away, and the notes have not yet been paid. 
  Moreover, voters in some localities hold that the planning 
for revenue collection and expenditure assigned to different 
localities is sill unreasonable and not based on a uniform 
calculation. 
  Voters in Ho Chi Minh City hold that it is unreasonable for 
the Revenue General Department to set up a branch office to 
collect taxes directly at the Tan Thuan Processing Zone, because 
in so doing they strip the city of a source of funds which will 
be used to repay large amounts of debt borrowed to invest in the 
construction of the processing zone. 
  On capital construction, voters in most localities, 
especially those living in mountain regions, suggest the state 
pay more attention to building up infrastructure for localities, 
with appropriate investment policies and good coordination with 
people's contributions. Voters think that the current 
infrastructure situation and other social facilities such as 
public roads, electricity and water supplies, hospitals in many 
rural areas especially in mountainous and remote areas or the 
former revolutionary bases, are falling far behind compared with 
those in cities. Many voters suggest that the National Assembly 
should have a separate resolution on the infrastructure issue. 
  The issue of management in capital construction had been 
raised by voters several times in previous National Assembly 
meetings. This time, voters again suggest that the state quickly 
perfect the management mechanism in capital construction and 
strengthen inspection of investment projects, of the allocation 
of capital for projects at various levels, and of the building 
process of projects at the national level. Good management of 
capital investment is essential to avoid embezzlement, bribery, 
and waste. Voters in some localities express concern about the 
building of the north-south 500-kilovolt powerline and suggest 
the government report on this issue to the National Assembly in 
this session. At some places there have been suggestions for 
death sentences for perpetrators of sabotage activities which 
cause damage to national major construction projects such as the 
Hoa Binh Hydroelectricity Plant, the north-south 500-kilovolt 
powerline, and expressways. Voters in some localities repeat 
their suggestion that the state soon have a consistent policy on 
house pricing to ensure equality and to respond adequately to 
aspirations of many cadres and state employees. 
  II. In security and national defense fields. 
  Voters in many localities hold that achievements in security 
and national defense contributes significantly to our national 
socioeconomic development. The consolidation of a spirit of 
readiness for combat has brought good success in the past 
several years. Voters suggest, however, that the state have 
more active measures to strengthen the ability to safeguard the 
country and localities especially critical areas, directions, 
and lines. Voters in some localities propose a budget increase 
for the national defense sector and the strengthening of our 
armed forces. The state should quickly establish a law on 
national security, on borders and border protection, and approve 
the amended law on military obligation in this session in order 
to promote the quality of the army and to respond to the needs 
of national protection in the new situation. 
  III. In cultural and social fields. 
  Voters in many localities hold that cultural and art 
activities have scored some progress lately. Circulation of 
cultural products that are noneducational andd detrimental to 
young people and to people's morality gradually have been 
suppressed. The promulgation of the publishing law has brought 
practical results in the management of cultural and art 
activities. Voters in some localities, however, still think 
that the operational mechanism of cultural activities in the new 
situation is not yet clear, and management of the export and 
import of cultural products still shows flaws. Examples of new 
cultured lifestyle building at the grassroots level have not 
been used to campaign for more examples. Cultural interaction 
between mountain regions and lowlands is still too limited. The 
cultural life of compatriots living in mountains, remote areas, 
and in former revolutionary bases is still too meager. According 
to many voters, Vietnam television and radio networks as well as 
some papers carry too many advertisements and these 
advertisements are of poor quality and noneducational. 
  Voters suggest that the amount of advertisement be cut down 
and be replaced by useful programs such as law education and 
education of national traditions. Local voters also want to 
hear and listen to more programs from central networks. Voters 
also request stronger management of parabola antenna 
installments in hotels, restaurants, and private houses to 
prevent recording of films and videos which are noneducational. 
The cultural and information authorities should have clear 
stipulations on this matter. 
  Regarding education, voters in many localities took into 
account the recent progress of the education and training 
sector. The application of many forms of schools and courses as 
well as of rich and flexible training activities has met actual 
requirements and created conditions for more children to attend 
school. On the contrary, voters in other localities maintained 
that at present, instead of making progress, the education 
sector is facing the danger of being left farther behind with 
each passing day. Therefore, they suggested the National 
Assembly review the contents of educational policies and lines. 
  As in the past, voters in almost all localities suggested 
that the state and education sector continue to adopt practical 
policies and measures to improve the quality of education and 
train a contingent of young cadres having an equal level of 
professionalism with other countries. Due efforts must be made 
to improve the knowledge of teachers, encourage outstanding 
students and young men to attend teachers training schools, 
include foreign language training in Level II schools in the 
countryside, attach importance to the building of material bases 
and other learning facilities for children, abolish classrooms 
that have leaky roofs or are seriously damaged, and get rid of 
third shift class meetings. Steps must be taken to lessen 
contributions and henceforth, reduce the number of school 
dropouts. 
  Many voters suggested that the state continue to work out a 
textbook subsidization policy to benefit students. Voters in 
many localities also suggested that the state review the current 
system of education decentralization and budget allocation based 
on areas of activities. On the contrary, voters in some 
localities concurred with the policy on budget allocation 
management by the education sector and on giving full power to 
school principals to manage teachers and handle special issues 
and budget spending. Voters in many localities suggested that 
the state review the wage system for teachers in charge of 
management because many teachers are transferred to a management 
position after they have done an excellent teaching job, but 
still earn wages lower than those paid to teachers. 
  Voters in a number of localities, particularly mountain 
provinces, suggested that the state provide adequate budget 
allocations to compulsory elementary education and 
anti-illiteracy activities, particularly in high-altitude areas 
where the illiteracy rate remains very high. Voters in other 
localities suggested the state adopt a practical policy toward 
kindergarten and Level I teachers, especially those in the 
countryside and mountain regions where they have to work very 
hard whereas the wage and allowance system is very low and life 
is rife with many difficulties. 
  Regarding public health care, voters in many localities 
noted 
that so far, the public health care sector has made progress in 
a number of domains. However, like in the past, many voters 
maintained that no due attention has been paid to the 
development of grassroots public health care system. Generally 
speaking, the grassroots public health care system is still 
deficient in terms of cadres, medicines, and medical facilities. 
At present, the living conditions of the contingent of 
grassroots public health care cadres remain very difficult. 
Voters in a number of localities maintained that though the 
prime minister of the government had issued Decision 58/CP on 
the policy toward grassroots public health care cadres, the 
implementation of this decision still faces many difficulties, 
especially in terms of budget allocation. 
  Many voters agreed with the need to organize health 
insurance. However, voters in a number of localities maintained 
that health insurance coverage remains formalistic, that the 
application of a health insurance coverage based on a number of 
designated hospitals causes difficulties and inconvenience to 
patients whereas people capable of making direct payments still 
receive better care and treatment, that efforts to reorganize 
the hospital system and improve the ethical conduct of 
physicians have not yet brought about the expected results, and 
that the poor meet with many difficulties in seeking medical 
care and treatment. 
  According to reports by a number of National Assembly 
groups, 
voters hope that the state works out a health insurance policy 
to cover not only cadres and state officials but also peasants, 
with attention being given to poor households, and that the 
family unit should be used as the basis for the issuance of 
health insurance cards. 
  Voters in many localities also suggested that the state 
adopt 
a policy to give hospital fee exemption or reduction to social 
welfare recipients and needy people or organize charitable 
hospitals to serve the poor. 

