BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 13 (BTA) -- The editors-in-chief of 
major national dailies, supported by other media, today called 
for amendments to the Value-Added Tax [VAT] Act. They want the 
18 percent flat VAT rate introduced on April to be replaced with 
a zero rate for Bulgarian newspapers and books, scientific 
literature and magazines (excluding pornographic ones), and 
advertising in the media, BTA learned from the group of 
editors-in-chief who initiated the anti-VAT protest campaign. 
  Most newspapers and magazines in Bulgaria suspended 
publication on the last four days of March. Earlier they ran 
blank columns in protest against the "killer tax on Bulgarian 
books and the free press." Joining the campaign, private radio 
stations in Sofia suspended broadcasting for two days after 
which they started airing noises every hour on the hour. 
Provincial newspapers and radio stations also staged protests. 
Leaders of the Unions of Bulgarian Writers and Journalists 
joined a demonstration staged on March 30. The Bulgarian news 
agency also joined the anti-VAT protest campaign. President 
Zhelyu Zhelev supported the protest by Bulgarian intellectuals. 
Amendments which partly met the journalists' and publishers' 
demands were introduced in parliament but were voted down in a 
secret ballot. 
  The initiators of the protest issued a declaration today 
stating that a lot of MP's had failed to appreciate the 
civilized forms of protest and the markedly moderate nature of 
the media's demands. 
  Guided by caste egoism and a totally unjustified sense of 
superiority over the nation, the members of parliament in a 
secret ballot unprecedented in cowardice infringed on the right 
of the public to freedom and plurality of information, the 
declaration stressed. According to the protesters, the tax 
would lead to a large price increase, causing many papers to 
close down. 
  The editors-in-chief who launched the campaign will urge 
that 
the next elections be held according to the majority system in 
the hope that "this will prevent people of dubious business and 
moral character and people unknown to the electorate from 
entering parliament on omnibus party lists." 

