BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yakov Dubenetskiy, chairman of the </F>
Promstroybank Board of Directors, by correspondent Yelena 
Tokareva; date, place not given: "Yakov Dubenetskiy: "There 
Are Trillions in the Banks, But It Is Not Suitable for 
Investment"] 
  [Text] Politicians have recently started discussing how 
commercial banks' "available" resources might be used for 
investment. According to one estimate, it is 22 trillion rubles 
[R], while the Central Bank of Russia [CBR] figure is R36 
trillion. Our correspondent talks here about the feasibility of 
such resources being employed in this way with Yakov 
Dubenetskiy, chairman of the Board of Directors of Russia's 
Promstroybank, which is the government's official agent for 
financing and issuing credit to state investment programs. 
  [Tokareva] Yakov Niolayevich, every honest Russian citizen 
is worried not just by the rate of interest on his own savings 
but by the problem of investment in the ultimate basis of the 
country's security -- its industry, agriculture, and science. 
Our premier recently said that R22 trillion is lying idle in 
commercial banks. While the budget is gasping for lack of 
resources. Why is it that the banks don't invest resources in 
the economy but mostly deal in short-term money? At the same 
time Vice Premier Chubays has stated that a network of 
investment funds for G-7 resources will have to be set up for 
investment activity during the second stage of privatization. 
Do we really have such unpatriotic banks that they have no wish 
to bolster their country's prosperity? 
  [Dubenetskiy] Compared with the beginning of the nineties, 
investment has fallen off fivefold, although the official 
statistics indicate only a twofold decrease. In 1992 the 
construction of 32,000 installations was halted while at the 
same time construction was started up on 34,000. Of course, you 
might think that structural reorganization was happening. But 
most likely it is a case of confused thinking when you stop the 
construction of one plant for lack of resources but then 
immediately start laying down the infrastructure for another. 
  Each year the USSR made 210 billions' worth of capital 
investment, 70 percent of which went to Russia, where the 
capital-intensive sectors were based. If you discount 
investnment in agriculture and the social sphere, 50-55 billion 
was left. This constituted capital investment in industry 
during the time of stagnation. The value of all assets at those 
prices was R3.5 trillion. Production assets were worth R2.5 
trillion. They were 50 percent worn out. And each year roughly 
1 trillion rubles was required for their physical replacement. 
Very little was invested in modernization. It took 10 years to 
replace obsolete equipment. And it became obsolete twice over 
during that time. But yet in those conditions 50-55 billion was 
invested in modernizing industry. 
  Financing on a repayment basis is now accepted. The first 
quarter of 1994 saw 300 billion allocated to conversion and 400 
billion to investment in the remaining spheres. If these 
figures are allocated over the whole of the current year, R3 
trillion will go on investment in these spheres. But the 
construction costs index has gone up 1,500 times. Consequently, 
a simple calculation shows that in old prices 2 billion is 
actually being invested. Two billion to modernize assets during 
a democratic dash for the market! Just 2 billion! And that, 
given 60-70 percent obsolescence. 
  You say that banks are accused both from below and above 
for our engaging in usury. Yes, the commercialization of banks 
and their fragmentation in July 1990 did do the economy a bad 
turn. Settlements are in a state of disarray. Sharp practice 
flourishes. Banks have turned their back on investment and 
industry and switched to issuing credit to commercial structures. 
  What are banks to do? To issue long-term credit you need to 
have long-term money. The banks' sources of funds are insurance 
money, the population's pension payments, enterprises' 
resourcse, and the resources of the Central Bank. But their 
clients' money is money placed for three-six months. The banks 
have virtually no long-term money. Only 3-4 percent of 
short-term money can be employed for long-term credit. No more 
than that. You can invest only with long-term money. But the 
resources are extremely limited. You cannot talk in serious 
terms about the 36 trillion (the CBR figure) deposited in 
commercial banks as an investment stockpile. Credit deposits 
amount to R30.5 trillion, of which only 1 trillion is long-term. 
  What's to be done? It is difficult to find substantial 
resources within an inflationary system. And it is impossible 
not to sustain investment for the economy's survival. The only 
option is...to issue money? But in a severely restricted way -- 
by way of competitions and tenders. We are ready to work for a 
margin of 1 percent, at the same time as other banks work for a 
3-percent profit. 
  [Tokareva] Everyone is frightened by the term "issuing of 
money".... 
  [Dubenetskiy] You should not equate it with the effect of 
the inflation which accompanies investment. Resources are 
allocated for the long term. While issuing money to cover the 
budget deficit is just plugging a gap, and is dangerous. The 
effectiveness achieved by the processes of privatization will be 
of great importance. If a private owner borrows money, he 
normally makes use of it. 
  [Tokareva] How do you regard the discussion about foreign 
investment in our economy? 
  [Dubenetskiy] The West does not want a powerful competitor 
in the shape of a strengthened Russia. What they want from us 
is the development of the infrastructure of the economy so that 
resources can be utilized. Large-scale help from the West is 
unlikely to ensue. The West does not have the available money 
either. There is speculative capital which "sloshes around" in 
exchanges and banks. But it won't go into investment. The 
owner of such capital will always receive a guaranteed 
10-percent profit back home in Munich. Without risk. Here he 
could receive 17 percent or more, but he could lose his life. 
We are a high-risk country for businessmen. You won't find a 
"businessman" anywhere in the West who, as in our country, will 
after 18 months' "work" acquire a Mercedes for himself and a 
Honda for his wife while his mother-in-law drives a Toyota. 
  But the opportunity to receive investment only comes in 
exchange for concessions and the exploitation of mineral 
resources. And, according to certain estimates, we have 35 
trillion dollars' worth of the latter in our country. From that 
standpoint, Lenin really was a bold innovator and was not afraid 
to give the West access to our natural wealth. There was a law 
on concessions during the NEP period. This all played a role in 
the development of devastated Russia. Our innovators, however, 
fear to do this for some reason. They are no doubt anxious about 
how the patriots will react to them. Meanwhile, it is hardly 
worth pinning high hopes on the World Bank, the IMF, or the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development [EBRD]. These 
are politicized organizations. The terms they set are pretty 
difficult to meet. And their financial help is not of the 
requisite scale. We are unlikely to get large-scale state 
investment from the West either. So we are left with 
transnational corporations which have an interest in our mineral 
resources. 
  [Tokareva] What is your attitude toward the nonpayments 
crisis and the possibility of resolving it? 
  [Dubenetskiy] Nonpayments? It is difficult to find a plant 
which is not sustained by the capital of several banks and which 
does not keep too much credit, including hard-currency credit, 
on deposit. Why, given this, doesn't it pay its bills? Tough 
measures are needed. There is no other way. It is altogether 
time to make use of compulsion, on the one hand, and goodwill, 
on the other. We need agreements incorporating penalty clauses 
between industrialists, agricultural producers, and bankers. 
The Central Bank must work out mandatory terms for bankers. A 
high rate of interest for refinancing is no way to fight 
inflation. It is necessary to reach agreement on reducing the 
rate of interest on investment credit and on allocating 
one-third of resources for investment in the development of 
small and medium-sized businesses. Banks also have to make 
their contribution to curbing inflation. Those who don't play 
the game must be subject to economic sanctions, being denied, 
for example, access to centralized credit. It is essential to 
combine economic methods and compulsion. 

