Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by O. Lebedev, ``Irradiated! Quo </F>
Vadis?''] 
  [Text] Is radioactive contamination dangerous to the health 
and life of Russia's population? Many, primarily in high 
management spheres, maintain that there is no reason to worry, 
that there are more important things. People living in 
contaminated regions and some scientists think otherwise since 
it has been discovered that low doses may probably be just as 
lethal as the high ones. 
  But more about this later, and in the meantime, we should 
reiterate that in the West, 0.1 rad per year is regarded as the 
safe limit for human health over a 70-year life span. This is 
close to the natural background of 10-20 R/h. From the many 
units of measurements designating doses, we shall select the rad 
and the Curie. One rad is 100 erg of absorbed radiation per 1 g 
of substance. One Curie (Ci) is 
3.7[.sup].[/]10[.sup]10[/]decays of element nuclei per 
second: this is produced by 1 g of radium. 
Where Are We? 
  Demographic and medical statistics demonstrate that our 
genetic stock is in trouble. We have knocked out the fittest 
among us and spared the remaining ones. The weakened ones bred 
the sick ones. Today, we can hardly find 10% of perfectly 
healthy among the non-old. The population has been reproduced in 
an historically unprecedented fluctuating mode. The October 
[Revolution] engendered four catastrophic decreases in birth 
rates. The first one is still continuing, and since 1991, it has 
become deeper than the third decline, worse than the worst years 
of the last war. 
  The most poisoned country in the world, Russia is 
contaminating the biosphere with chemicals and radiation more 
than others. 
  Approximately 100 billion Ci of radioactive poison has been 
accumulated in the world and approximately half of this is ours. 
Some of it we discharged into the sea--twice as much as the rest 
of the world. Part of it we poured into the reservoirs. No one 
except us dares to store radiation in an open form. In the 
Urals' Lake Karachay alone, 120 MCi has been accumulated. Are we 
waiting for a stronger wind? In Chelyabinsk-40 (Kyshtym), 
storage practices were more reliable, employing steel vessels, 
yet even there something blew up in 1957 and released 20 MCi. It 
killed 20 km[.sup]2[/] of pine forest at once, and forests 
over 700 km[.sup]2[/] became sick. 
  Tomsk-7 ``excelled'' last spring. Then, a cry of despair was 
heard in July from the underground nuclear city in 
Krasnoyarsk-26: ``It may blow up with such a force that 
Chernobyl will look like a picnic!..'' 
  Burying radioactivity is a tricky business. The Americans 
are 
spending billions of dollars to build storage facilities, yet 
even there the scientists warned the U.S. President that the 
science was still not ready to guarantee the reliability of 
burial sites. 
  There is a debate in the West on whether mankind will 
survive 
until 2030. If it will not, who do you think will trigger the 
end? 
On Science and Applications 
  Let us look at the report from the ``UN Scientific Committee 
on the Effect of Atomic Radiation'' which incorporated data for 
1945-1984 (``Radiation: Doses, Effects, Risk.'' Moscow, 1990). 
  Virtually nothing is known about the effect of low radiation 
doses while available information is based either on linear 
extrapolation of large doses or the outcome of experiments on 
animals. Existing recording methods detect only significant 
disorders in the organism while small anomalies remain 
undetected although there are more of them, and their total 
contribution to the impairment of the organisms' functions may 
be even greater. 
Even proof is already available. 
  Nuclear power plant personnel irradiation and radon sources 
within the doses acceptable for operating personnel (5 rad/year) 
increase the number of chromosomal mutations. Little is known 
about the joint effect of radiation and chemical substances 
except perhaps tobacco smoke. The risk for a non-smoking uranium 
mine worker receiving a close-to-maximum permissible irradiation 
dose can be compared to the risk of a non-irradiated smoking 
worker. Yet the joint effect of smoking and irradiation does not 
double but quadruples mortality. In 1970, medical X-ray 
examinations in the United States took more lives than household 
injuries, fires, and poisonings together. 
  It seems like there is a bit more clarity with higher doses. 
A 300-500 rad dose results in a bone marrow injury, and half of 
the irradiated persons die. At 50-100 rad, some cells lose their 
ability to function normally but still regenerate. At 10 rad, 
temporary sterility is observed in men. The probability of dying 
from cancer under 100 rad increases by only 0.1-0.5%, 
while the 
number of serious genetic impairments in the sex cell ranges 
from zero to unity (it is higher among men). The probability 
that a disfigured child may be born to irradiated parents is 
low--0.2% per 100 rad. 
  Yet more recent studies show that cancer and genetic 
impairments appear even at doses which are one-to-two orders of 
magnitude lower than those according to the UN Scientific 
Committee data (Science No. 5002, 1991 and New 
Scientist No. 1871, 1993). 
What Has Chernobyl Shown? 
  Here are some data from the expert conclusion drawn by the 
"International Commonwealth on Restoring the Habitat and Safe 
Human Living Conditions" (Chernobylskaya Katastrofa (Chernobyl 
Catastrophe): Causes and Consequences, Minsk, 1992). In Belarus, 
thyroid gland cancer increased by sevenfold and cardiovascular 
diseases rose by 3.5-fold. In many regions of Gomel and Mogilov 
oblasts, chromosomal mutations increased by 1.5-2 times, the 
frequency of miscarriage and congenital diseases doubled, low 
birth weight jumped by fivefold, and ischemic heart disease 
increased by ninefold. Most schoolchildren have cardiovascular 
system disorders, and one-third of the population in these 
regions hase a weakened immune system. 
  Infant mortality and general population morbidity are 
continuing to rise, the intake of radionuclides into plants is 
not decreasing, and the physiological conditions of the animals 
are deteriorating despite the predictions of scientists from 
Biofizika and despite the measures taken in the aftermath of the 
accident. Social tensions are on the rise. Between 57 and 
90% 
of the respondents stated their categoric desire to relocate. 
The ratio of C-graders to A-graders in schools has increased by 
tenfold. The relocated persons are often met with hostility, as 
if they were lepers, and they run back to their contaminated 
places only to find new owners--refugees from the "near abroad." 
We still have a long way to go to match the Philippines or 
Indonesia where 80% of the population regard themselves as 
happy. 
  One cannot ascertain any pattern in the chaos of data. The 
favorite trick--to compare the polluted region to a clean 
one--does not work since contaminated food, water, and dust in 
the air know no boundaries. Cows in slightly contaminated 
territories (7 Ci/km[.sup]2[/] or approximately 7 rad per 
lifetime) give milk containing 20 times the maximum permissible 
concentration (PDK) of radionuclides. These territories are home 
to approximately 1 million persons. Given a 40 
Ci/km[.sup]2[/] contamination, milk contains 100 times the 
norm, yet shipments under state contracts continue from these 
territories. Drink our milk, my dear, and eat our beef... 
  According to some estimates based on Japanese analyses, the 
marginal cancer mortality due to Chernobyl will reach 70,000 
persons (A. Lyutsko). The Belarussians estimate the loss from 
the catastrophe as 60 annual budgets or 200 billion rubles. A 
modest accident at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant in 
the United States cost 135 billion dollars. Chernobyl has 
confronted the Belarussians with the problem of preserving their 
genetic stock. 
  At the same time, an amazing conclusion was drawn by the 
International Project on Chernobyl convened under the aegis of 
IAEA: there is no serious danger, so be fruitful and multiply. 
The IAEA press release is even more surprising: 100 experts from 
this agency admitted in an unofficial forum that there is no 
sufficient reason for their optimism. How shall we interpret 
this, gentlemen? What, indeed, are the reasons if the experts 
have predicted during the early weeks after the catastrophe that 
there would be water contamination, nuclide transport by winds, 
``hot'' dust particles (leading to tuberculosis), nuclide 
migration and presence in the soil, and joint effect of 
radiation and chemicals while forgetting about the immune system 
and genetic apparatus? 
  The IAEA has also approved the WHO concept of concentrating 
the efforts in individual population groups without spending 
them for wide-ranging, long-term research. What is this--penny 
pinching? Incompetence? Or maybe they are being overcome by 
curiosity? Were they finally given a unique opportunity--the 
whole country turned into a nuclear test site? In other words, 
let there be business as usual, and we will keep on looking... 
From Recording to Science 
  It soon will be 100 years since man has been irradiated with 
X-rays and radium and their effect studied. No unambiguous 
conclusions have been drawn thus far. The problem turned out to 
be a tough one. It is difficult to discern patterns among 
thousands of processes in the organism. What we have are 
recording of events, practical habits, and consequences. Yet 
there is no science, and no laws have been established. The 
emerging sciences of radiobiology and radioecology have not had 
the time to mature and bear fruit. 
  Western scientists are cautious: since we know little, let's 
stay close to the natural background of 7 rad per lifetime; the 
British prefer 3.5 rad while the ``British National Committee on 
Radiation Protection'' insists on 2 rad. 
  We do not like such standards. If these were in effect, we 
would be forced to relocate unknown dozens of millions of 
people. We have to choose another path: to raise the safe 
irradiation level. It will be worry-free, and all three branches 
of government will be happy. For us, the Biofizika Institute at 
the Russian Federation Ministry of Public Health has developed a 
standard of 35 rad per lifetime. Yet the foreigners are still 
praising us: yes, yes, they say. It is possible for you since 
you are ahead of the entire planet... Ahead. And running to get 
even further ahead. Give us our 100 rad per lifetime today (yes, 
there is such a proposal). Since the dogs are not dying, it will 
be fine for us too... 
What's Science up to? 
  The new science of radiobiology has recently stumbled across 
the central issue--the effect of low chronic radiation doses on 
the living organism, population, and the biosphere. Chronic 
irradiation may force the humans to depart from the biological 
arena or will generate a new breed of people--morons. Only 
active measures resting on fundamental knowledge have the power 
to resist this. The time when nature covered up for man's 
follies has passed, and today, he himself must save it. 
  Basic research began in the 1960s after the role of DNA 
became clear. Radiobiological studies proceeded according to the 
notion that small exposures resulted in small responses. Yet 
several years ago, Professors Ye. Burlakova and D. Spitkovskiy 
and Doctor of Biological Sciences L. Rozhdestvenskiy discovered 
some unexplained facts. It turned out that a 1-5 rad dose may be 
just as dangerous as 100 rad and even more dangerous than 10-30 
rad. These phenomena were identified in DNA and cell membrane 
lipids by Burlakova and in leukocyte chromosomes by Spitkovskiy. 
Changes occur in the bone marrow trunk cells which produce the 
blood and immune system components under the effect of low doses 
which either increase or decrease the cell's sensitivity to the 
damaging effect of large doses (Rozhdestvenskiy). 
  The earlier-observed effects of low doses clouded by the 
dogma of their low significance have not caused alarm. The 
discovery of the nonlinear character of the radiation's effect 
on living entities demolished this dogma and are in the phase of 
modern scientific paradigm of the behavior of self-organizing 
systems, such as living organisms. Yet the new observations also 
contradict traditional physics and chemistry. One rad is 
3[.sup].[/]10[.sup]-9[/] M/l, or 
2[.sup].[/]10[.sup]15[/] corrosive molecule fragments 
which rain upon the complex and fine mechanism of cell and 
intercellular processes. One rad is the small 
fluctuation which, near the critical state, may lead to a 
catastrophe--the breakup of the organism. One rad is 20 annual 
backgrounds. Yet in addition to radiation, there are pesticides, 
acid rain, heavy metals, and ultraviolet irradiation through the 
ozone holes... And all this is compounded and often multiplied. 
  This means that the problem must be examined and developed 
and research must be expanded. And this needs money. 
  The Chairman of the Scientific Council on Radiobiology at 
Russia's Academy of Sciences Yelena Borisovna Burlakova and 
Professor N.N. Semenova, chief of the Chemical-Physical 
Institute Department at Russia's Academy of Sciences visited the 
Vice President of Russia's Academy of Sciences and Deputy 
Minister for Science (who, by the way, is a corresponding member 
of Russia's Academy of Sciences and an expert in this field) at 
the Environmental Protection and National Resources Ministry and 
at the State Chernobyl Committee. 
  The professors were received splendidly everywhere they 
went, 
and the results of her and her colleagues' studies were praised 
highly, and deep understanding of the importance of the problem 
was expressed, after which they were footballed to the next 
department due to the shortage of funds... When the State 
Chernobyl Committee sent her back to the Academy of Sciences, 
the circle became closed. You guessed it right: no one gave her 
the money. 
Where to Get Money? 
  The Soviet man is accustomed to ``receiving'' money from the 
bureaucrat. A good Soviet bureaucrat knew perfectly well to whom 
``to give'' and for what. If a Politburo member had a pain in 
the eye all of a sudden, three laboratories were set up 
immediately. If the member was satisfied, the bureaucrat's 
bosses were happy and the bureaucrat was happy too. If the 
member died, all three laboratories were fired. And everybody 
was again unhappy. 
  And what is the advantage or satisfaction from radiobiology? 
Is there danger or threat to health without it? 
  Well, it is not quite like that. We do have a special 
agriculture industry, special food and water purified in order 
to remove from any kind of poison, and special environmental 
condition monitoring. We also have special children who will 
grow up, and we will make sure that they, in turn, do not give 
birth to monsters, and should the worst happen, we will park 
them abroad... 
  The biologists are asking for money to save academic 
radiobiology. In translation, this means to save us and our 
children, not the chosen ones. Yet they have to ask it from the 
same bureaucrat and oftentimes, from the same person. And 
naturally, with the same outcome. 
  The conclusion is self-evident. 


