Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tehran, March 16, IRNA -- The Guardian Council of 
the Islamic Republic of Iran approves the balanced budget plan 
for the new calendar year, 1373 (to start March 21) with a total 
amount of rls. 69,772.75 billion [rials]. 
  In view of materialization of the figure envisaged as state 
revenues, the Majles approved the total budget rls 10,000 
billion lower than proposed by the government. The general 
budget of the government for the new year has been predicted at 
rls. 32,303.35 billion. 
  The experience of the past two years over 
non-materialization 
of state revenues as predicted by the budget plan, made the 
parliament adopt a realistic approach towards the figures in 
this year's budget plan and to consider parameters outside the 
country effective in state revenues and to base the revenues and 
state expenditure on realism. 
  Of the total state revenues set at rls. 30,048.9 billion 
from 
public and other resources, rls. 2,254.4 billion will be 
provided by special incomes of ministries and state 
institutions. 
  In view of the sharp fall in oil prices on the world market, 
the Majles decided to limit the income earned through sale of 
oil to dlrs [dollars] reduced at dlrs. 10.154 billion [as 
received]. If oil revenues go up during the year, the extra 
amount will be spent to repay government commitments in hard 
cash or to carry out some development plans. 
  In the calendar year of 1372 [ending 20 March 1994], the 
total amount of state revenues from oil sales was set at dlrs. 
16.8 billion, of which according to Majles Vice-Speaker Hasan 
Rowhani Iran got dlrs. 4 billion lower than expected from the 
oil sales. 
  He said that in the course of the first development plan, 
Iran lost dlrs., 6.4 billion due to the fall in value of the 
U.S. dollar against other major currencies. Though the revenues 
in hard cash from oil sales are not much, but the Islamic 
Republic of Iran has reached understandings with the two main 
creditor banks of Japan and Germany to reschedule payment of 
dlrs. 4.6 billion, which is owed by Iranian companies to the 
Japanese amd German companies. Iran's schedulled commitments in 
the past year was reduced by 50 percent and it is expected that 
similar understandings would be reached with the creditors and 
the scheduled payments would be met and the growing demands for 
foreign currencies to pay the commitments would fall. 
  According to the new year budget plan, the Majles allowed 
the 
government to repay dlrs. 1,600 billion by the end of the year. 
  The Majles approved that dlrs. 800 million be spent on basic 
commodities including wheat, cooking oil, rice, meat, and sugar. 
The government was allowed to spend dlrs. 400 million to 
produce and import pharmaceuticals and milk powder. 
  The Majles also allocated dlrs. 30 million to be spent on 
higher specialized courses and dlrs. 80 million to provide 
students abroad with hard cash. The total amount of foreign 
currency stood at dlrs. 1,310 million. 
  In order to finance development projects such as dams and 
hydraulic power plants, dlrs 2.3 billion were set aside for the 
Energy Ministry while dlrs. 150 million was earmarked for the 
sugar-cane projects and related industries. The share of the 
fisheries was set at dlrs. 100 million through joint investment 
and buy-back scheme to carry out its development plans. 
  The Majles said that dlrs. 6 billion are to be spent on 
economic development plans of the country. The Majles said the 
Ministry of Energy is to supply 1,080 villages across the 
country with electricity, while the Ministry of Posts, 
Telegraph, and Telephones would set up telecommunications links 
in 500 villages. 
  The Construction Jihad Ministry is expected to supply 1,000 
villages with drinking water, while the Ministry of Transport 
will improve railway services and construct 1,000 kms of new 
rural roads in the new year. Money coming from the sale of the 
shares of factories under the organization of development and 
renovation of national industries of Iran, will be paid to the 
Ministry of Education for spending on its development plans. 
Another rls. 10 billion expected to come from the sale of 
shares of the factories will enable the setting up of 70 
technical and vocational centers. At least rls. 410 billion has 
been earmarked to carry out infrastructural plans in the 
deprived areas of the country. 
  Two-thirds of the income from taxes on imported cigarettes 
and 60 percent of the customs for export of pistachios will be 
channelled towards the Martyr Raja'i relief plan. 
  In order to finance health services, the Ministry of Health 
and Medical Education was given the go ahead to spent money 
earned through issuing of licences for sanitary-ware producing 
units, on modernizing of laboratories and improving the quality 
of pharmaceuticals. 
  Privatization has been envisaged in the new year's budget 
plan to a large extent. A considerable amount of money coming 
from the sale of shares of producing units under the industrial 
ministries will go towards social projects including those of 
the Ministry of Education. In other words, the budget for such 
projects will not be provided if the process of privatization 
does not continue in the course of the new year. 
  An important objective of the budget plan is to allocate 
state revenues in hard cash for basic projects in the oil, 
industry, energy, social welfare, education, health and other 
sectors for developing backward and remote areas of the country. 

