Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The research group of Professor Junji Furusho and 
his assistant Akito Sano has developed a new type of small 
actuator (drive mechanism). Its distinctive characteristic is 
that it uses electric viscous fluid with viscosity that changes 
in response to the strength of electrolysis. It is anticipated 
that this will be applied as a driving source for micromachines 
that output big force from a small structure. 
  The plastic body of the newly developed mechanism contains 
passageways for the electric viscous fluid, electrodes, and a 
reciprocating piston. The passageway has one entrance, divides 
into two part way, and becomes one again at the exit. The two 
divided passageways are linked part way by another passageway 
where the piston is. 
  The electrodes are made of electric discharge-processed 
stainless steel fluorine resin. An electrode is attached at the 
entrance and exit to each passageway to the piston. There is a 
total of four electrodes. There is a tiny opening the size of a 
comb's tooth between the positive and negative electrodes. When 
voltage is applied there it's difficult for the electric viscous 
fluid to move and the opening is closed. It acts like an opening 
and closing valve. 
  For example, when the left entrance valve is closed, the 
fluid flows into the right passageway, and when the right exit 
valve is closed, the fluid flows through the piston's passageway 
to the left exit passageway. This makes the piston move from 
right to left. If the closing of valves is reversed, the piston 
moves from left to right. The piston is attached to an exterior 
moving mechanism. 
  It's possible to some extent to reduce the size of hydraulic 
mechanisms, but it is difficult to reduce the size of the valves 
so they'll open and close mechanically. In contrast, since the 
electric viscous fluid itself instantly becomes a valve, there's 
no need for mechanically moving parts. It is relatively easy to 
reduce the size of non-moving parts such as electrodes. 
Moreover, subtle control is possible since the closing of the 
valve is responsive to the strength of the electric field. 
  Although for this reason this mechanism has been considered 
advantageous for micromachine actuators, it hasn't been produced 
until now. This time a prototype basic mechanism was created 
that can move and is two centimeters long and three centimeters 
wide. The plan next is to further reduce its size. 
  It is believed that, compared to the static 
electricity-method that has been the mainstream for micromachine 
actuators, this new type using fluids from the exterior will 
display greater driving power relative to its size. It appears 
that by strengthening the force it will be possible to create 
engines for powerful micromachines. 

