Serbs      Claim UNPROFOR Sides with Bosnian Government Army 
                          SUMMARY 
   Potentially undermining the United Nations' role in 
implementation of peace initiatives in Bosnia-Herzegovina, the 
Serbian leadership and regime-controlled  media in recent weeks 
have repeatedly charged that UNPROFOR (United Nations Protective 
Force) has intervened on the side of the Bosnian Government. 
Such accusations represent a substantial escalation of Serbian 
criticism of UN efforts in Bosnia-Herzegovina.  Previously the 
Serbs had for the most part professed acceptance of UNPROFOR's 
role and activity in the Bosnian conflict, even though they 
complained of UN bias toward the Bosnian Government and misuse of 
humanitarian aid efforts as a cover for smuggling arms to 
Government forces. 
                          END SUMMARY 
   The Serbs' accusations that UNPROFOR was actively engaging in 
combat operations against the Bosnian Serb army were first 
observed after NATO aircraft--with UN authorization--bombed 
Serbian positions near Gorazde in April, an operation that 
appeared to profoundly anger both the Bosnian Serb leadership and 
leaders of the so-called Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.  While 
the reports ostensibly originate with the Bosnian Serbs led by 
Radovan Karadzic, media controlled by Serbian Republic President 
Slobodan Milosevic have played a substantial role in 
disseminating the reports.  However, although some Bosnian Serb 
leaders did threaten that NATO aircraft carrying out UN-approved 
air attacks on Serbian military forces would be fired upon, for 
the most part they have not directly called for striking back at 
UNPROFOR ground forces allegedly aiding the Bosnian army.  At the 
same time, the reports could be used as a pretext for beginning 
combat operations against UNPROFOR: 
   -- Belgrade television charged that UNPROFOR troops "joined in" 
with Bosnian government forces during 3 June attacks on Serbian 
positions near Gradacac, a town located along the corridor 
linking Serb-held territory in northeastern and western Bosnia 
(Belgrade TV, 3 June). 
   -- Tanjug reported that the Bosnian Serb army claimed UNPROFOR 
tanks aided "Muslim units" in operations near Tuzla on 27 May 
(Tanjug in Serbo-Croatian, 27 June). 
   -- In a 21 May interview broadcast on Russian television, Bosnian 
Serb army chief General Ratko Mladic alleged that "some" members 
of UNPROFOR "openly side with the Croats or Muslims."  He added, 
however, that "not one" member of UNPROFOR "has been hurt" on the 
territory of the self-proclaimed Republic of Srpska in Bosnia- 
Herzegovina and "this will continue to be the case" (Moscow 
Ostankino TV, 21 May). 
   -- Tanjug reported a statement issued by Bosnian Serb "Chief of 
Staff" General Manojlo Milovanovic accusing an UNPROFOR armored 
unit of joining Bosnian Government forces in an "attack" near 
Tuzla that killed nine Serbs and wounded five.  Tanjug also 
claimed that the Bosnian Serb "main headquarters" had "received 
reports" that the UNPROFOR officers in charge had received 
500,000 DM for supporting the "Muslim infantry" (Tanjug in Serbo- 
Croatian, 1 May). 
   -- A 26 April statement issued by the local command of the 
Bosnian Serb army in the Banja Luka region warned that the Serbs 
would "do everything to protect the lives" of Serb soldiers and 
civilians if members of  UNPROFOR "continued to open fire on 
Serbian positions and settlements" in northern Bosnia (Tanjug in 
English, 26 April).  Mladic's 21 May statements to Russian 
television suggest that he may have countermanded such threats. 
   Earlier Criticism of UN Efforts 
   Previously, Serbian complaints have been aimed at alleged UN bias 
against the Serbs or against misuse of the UN-protected efforts 
to deliver humanitarian aid.  The Serbs have charged that 
humanitarian land convoys and relief flights were merely covers 
for efforts to arm Government forces and have been used as a 
pretext for disrupting aid shipments to the Serbs' foes.  The 
Serbs have recently shelled Tuzla airport to disrupt aid flights, 
contending that Serb observers should have the right to inspect 
all cargoes to ensure that they do not include arms (Sarajevo 
radio, 31 May; Der Spiegel, 18 April).  In another incident, aid 
workers from a private French humanitarian organizations were 
arrested in Sarajevo and accused of smuggling arms (Belgrade TV, 
9 April).  However, although Mladic accused the UN in the early 
months of the conflict of using aid shipments to supply the 
Croats and Muslims, neither he nor other Serb leaders have 
advocated attacking humanitarian supply efforts. 
   (AUTHOR:  NASH.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF 
ANALYST, EUROPE AND LATIN AMERICA GROUP, (703) 733-6120.) 
ELAG/GILISON/PF 07/1448z Jun 

