BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chatrudi Theparat in Vientiane] </F>
  [Text] PRIVATE companies seeking to participate in Laotian 
hydroelectricity projects may be rejected if they do not provide 
adequate planning for environmental conservation, Laotian PM's 
Office Minister Phao Bounnaphon said in Vientiane. 
  With 10 new hydroelectric dam projects planned, which aim to 
produce about 1,300 MW of electricity at a cost of billions of 
dollars, the issue of preserving the environment and avoiding 
the mistakes of the past is becoming more important to Laos, he 
said. 
  Feasibility studies for most of the projects have been 
completed. Most of their output will be sold to Vietnam and 
Thailand. The investment cost per unit of hydroelectric power 
is lower than that of plants using other types of fuel. 
  Mr Phao said Laos will be a significant energy source in 
Southeast Asia because it has enormous mineral deposits and 
potential for hydroelectric power. Laos aims to protect its 
forests, so only private firms that want to protect and revive 
the environment will be welcome. 
  Vatthana Pathoumvan, manager of the Electricite Du Laos 
(EDL) 
hydroelectric station at Nam Ngum, said feasibility studies will 
be completed next year, so no details are yet available. 
  However, he said, construction depends on the demand for 
electricity in neighbouring countries, especially Thailand. Of 
the 220 MW of hydroelectric power generated by Laos, 70 percent 
is sold to Thailand. 
  Apart from the Sedone I and II projects in Pakse province, 
which are being undertaken by Korean firms, Thai MDX Co is 
undertaking feasibility studies of the Nam Ngum II and III 
projects. 
  The executive manager of EDL, Ungreun Pakan, said the 
Laotian 
Government is concerned about environmental problems because it 
had trouble during the first stage of Nam Ngum I. 
  However, Laos is lucky that it has low population growth, so 
the government has no problems moving people to make way for 
construction of power plants, he claimed. 

