Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Egon T. Lansky, a journalist and political </F>
analyst who formerly served as Czechoslovak Foreign Ministry 
spokesman and ambassador to the Council of Europe: "After the 
Tragedy: A Look at Year One in the Two Republics"] 
  [Text] Despite being one of the staunchest defenders of 
Czechoslovakia until the very last minutes of its existence, I 
must admit that the majority of people in both successor states 
seem to have adapted to the new situation amazingly quickly. 
  Maybe that is always so with majorities. Life simply goes 
on, 
and most people cannot afford to do anything but try to hang on 
the best they can or else face the real existential dangers that 
seem to be lurking everywhere. 
  Passivity in the face of political decisions handed down 
from 
above, such as the unpopular split of the Czechoslovak 
federation, is, after all, what people in post-Communist 
societies have been used to for half a century, or even more. 
  People might even be suffering from a sort of social amnesia 
in reaction to the political shock treatment imposed by 
political leaders in both republics, and especially in Slovakia, 
where the negative consequences of the partition are much more 
obvious. 
  One year may be too soon to draw any final conclusions. 
Still, it is a natural milestone for initial observations and 
assessments of the "state of the states." If there were a final 
tally sheet of the direct expenses for each republic incurred as 
a result of the split, it would be much easier. But since I 
suspect we may never see that--when it comes to reliable 
statistics, we are far from having become real Western 
democracies--empirical facts will have to do. 
  As might have been expected, Slovakia seems to be the 
outright loser. It could have been even worse, though. Both 
inflation and employment are in double digits in Slovakia, but 
not any higher than in Poland or Hungary. 
  The Czech government, of course, prides itself on having 
kept 
the economy fully under control, even though, for all the 
official optimism, there are several clouds on the horizon. Most 
remarkably, Mr. Klaus and his team of economic ministers, while 
preaching an extremely conservative message, have been carrying 
out quite socialist economic policies. 
  They have maintained strict control over incomes (except for 
salaries of the political establishment, which went up 24 
percent before Christmas); controlled the prices of energy, 
housing and, occasionally, food and transportation; and 
postponed bankruptcies that could threaten anywhere from 15 to 
30 percent of all industries. These practices have served to 
push some problems into the future. And as long as this remains 
possible, the Czech government will sit comfortably. 
  No such luck for Mr. Meciar, who, on the contrary, seems to 
be the lone giant in Slovak politics after alienating even a 
good deal of his own party, the Movement for a Democratic 
Slovakia. That Meciar still runs the government can be explained 
by the fact that there is still no agreement either among the 
opposition parties or between the growing number of rebels 
within the two coalition parties. In Slovakia, there seems to be 
no political power interested in governing after Meciar; while 
in the Czech Republic, where the opposition appears to be even 
weaker, there is a government that is definitely not lacking in 
self-confidence. 
  For small, new states in the middle of the old continent, 
one 
of the most important interests must necessarily be 
international politics. Even more so now that the shining 
example of Czechoslovakia, once the standard-bearer of countries 
making a stable transition from communism to democracy, is no 
more. The new states will have to persuade the world of their 
qualities, redefine their geopolitical orientations, and try to 
realize their national interests under new and as yet unproven 
circumstances. 
  In this sense, it seems to me, both republics are in a 
significantly more disadvantageous situation than they were 
under the umbrella of the federation--especially Slovakia, which 
more than any of the countries of the Visegrad group became part 
of the true Eastern Europe. Its only borders with a true Western 
democracy are those few miles along the Danube with Austria near 
Bratislava. 
  Slovakia's drift toward clearly unstable regions such as the 
Commonwealth of Independent States and the Balkans is 
strengthened by tensions bubbling in the sough of Slovakia, 
where the large Hungarian minority is becoming increasingly 
alienated by growing Slovak nationalism. Slovakia's search for 
allies in Russia and Romania--something not only Mr. Meciar has 
been taking seriously of late--indicates as well as anything 
else the negative change in geopolitical realities. 
  Even the Czech Republic has found itself in a world more 
complicated than ever before. True, ridding itself of Slovakia 
was some soft form of "ethnic cleaning"--for the first time in 
more than 350 years there is an independent Czech state as 
homogenous as the Czech nation. But relations with the Czechs' 
largest and mightiest neighbor, Germany, have as a result of the 
split deteriorated in direct proportion to increased dependence. 
  The lack of coordination among the many politicians speaking 
on behalf of Czech foreign policy interests is not serving the 
country's interests. As a smaller state without a unified 
program, the Czech voice, calling loudly for security within 
international institutions, is going largely unnoticed. 

