Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 27 Feb (MENA)--Libya has called for an urgent 
Arab summit to discuss Arab affairs and the massacre that Israel 
committed in Hebron on Friday. 
  Jum'ah al-Fazzani, secretary of the Libyan General People's 
Committee for Unity, has stated that he informed Arab League 
Secretary General Dr. 'Ismat 'Abd-al-Majid of Libya's call, in 
compliance with the requirements of pan-Arab security and as 
part of the Common Arab Defense Pact. 
  In a news conference held last night, al-Fazzani added that 
Israel now, after concluding a deal for F-15 aircraft with the 
United States, has become a threat to the Arab and Islamic 
worlds. He stressed the need to lay down the foundations for a 
true inter- Arab integration agreement in accordance with the 
joint economic cooperation agreement. 
  In his news conference, al-Fazzani emphasized that 
Egyptian-Libyan relations are deep-rooted and serve the 
interests of both the Libyan and Egyptian peoples, thanks to the 
direct ties and deep understanding between the political leaders 
of the two countries. Al-Fazzani pointed out that two countries' 
executive institutions want to put Egyptian-Libyan integration 
into effect in all fields. He noted that a project to link the 
two countries by rail has already started from the Libyan side 
and that a joint oil project also has begun. 
  The Libyan official noted that there is an agreement between 
the two countries that gives their citizens full rights in 
either country. He pointed out that four Egyptian companies are 
working in the (?al-Wigh) project to prepare for settling 
approximately 4 million Egyptians in this agricultural area once 
the infrastructure work has been completed. 
  Al-Fazzani stressed that Libya cares about Egypt's security. 
He added: We will not permit anyone to stay in our country who 
could threaten Egyptian security. On this matter, al-Fazzani 
noted that the Libyan Government has allowed Egyptian 
authorities to inspect all Libyan cars that cross the borders, 
even those with diplomatic license plates. 
  In response to some accusations that Libya was lackadaisical 
about arresting some fugitive Egyptian elements, al-Fazzani 
stressed that Libya does not and will not allow its territory to 
be used in harming Egypt's security because that security is 
part of Libyan Arab security. Therefore, he added, Libya cannot 
allow any harm to be done to Egypt's security directly or 
indirectly. 
  Al-Fazzani also spoke about the conference for the three 
heavenly religions to be held in Tripoli on 12 June and attended 
by Islamic, Christian, and Jewish clerics. He pointed out that 
Libya calls for tolerance and common understanding among the 
heavenly religions and seeks to deepen faith and avoid collision 
among them. He said that as far as the presence of Israeli 
figures at this conference is concerned, the question of who 
will attend is a matter of formality that will be the 
responsibility of the international committee tasked with 
organizing this conference. 
  On the march of the Arab Maghreb Union [AMU], al-Fazzani 
disclosed that a Maghreb summit will be held in Tunis in the 
first week of April, adding that the AMU drive will continue 
despite the negative effects on the common Maghreb action 
resulting from the Libyan-Western crisis. He noted that the AMU 
member states have started to set up an Arab Maghreb free zone, 
secure trade exchange, and free movement for citizens using 
identity cards, as part of the rights of citizenship in the 
Maghreb region. 
  On Libya's conflict with Chad over the disputed Aozou 
region, 
al-Fazzani noted that the two countries have mutually agreed to 
refer the matter to the International Court of Justice in the 
Hague. He added that the ruling that the court passed giving 
Chad sovereignty over this region requires executive measures. 
The Libyan official declined to speak further about this matter. 
  Al-Fazzani denied that Libya is responsible for the 
disappearance of Libyan opposition figure Mansur al-Kikhya, who 
disappeared on 10 December 1993 after attending a human rights 
conference in Cairo. He ruled out the possibility of U.S. raids 
against the Libyan Jamahiriyah during the term of current 
Democratic President Bill Clinton. 
  Al-Fazzani emphasized that Libya is ready to open a dialogue 
with the U.S. Administration, provided that the Jamahiriyah's 
sovereignty is respected. He noted that dialogue is the key to 
solving disputes and consolidating international relations, in 
accordance with the UN Charter. 
  Turning to the Lockerbie issue, he noted that the defense 
panel tasked with defending the Libyan suspects involved in this 
case, which is made up of a number of Western lawyers, has 
decided that the guarantees offered by the United States and 
Britain are insufficient and do not ensure the necessary 
impartiality for the trial of its Libyan clients. Therefore, he 
added, the panel recommended that they do not give themselves up. 

