Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed feature: "Federal Assembly: Combat or </F>
Cooperation? Leaders' Positions Stated. Will They Be Confirmed 
by Deeds?"] 
  [Text] The work of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly 
begins today. It seems that everything has been said, all 
priorities have been defined, and the accents have been placed. 
But at the same time there is a welter of questions. There are 
as many positions as factions, as many opinions as deputies. 
Our brief review will remind readers of what the main political 
blocs are bringing to parliament with them. 
  Gennadiy Burbulis, elected to the Duma from the 
Russia's Choice list, stipulates the position of his supporters 
in parliament as being the aim of "ensuring stability in the 
country without losing the fundamental course toward profound 
democratic transformations." He believes that it is dangerous 
for the reformist bloc not so much to remain in the minority as 
to "lose face in society and the confidence of voters." 
  Although the Civic Union did not clear the 5-percent barrier 
in the elections on party lists, its leader Arkadiy 
Volskiy expresses the belief that a Civic Union faction 
will be formed in parliament and will include at least 25-30 
deputies, elected from single-seat districts. The centrists' 
leader is one of those politicians who believe that the 
government's voluntary resignation and the formation of a new 
one, which the president could entrust to Viktor Chernomyrdin, 
is necessary from the outset of the Federal Assembly's work. 
Despite the clear defeat of the "center" in the elections, 
Volskiy is pinning his hopes on the formation of an association 
of centrist forces in parliament, which could be a guarantee 
against the State Duma's political instability, primarily 
against right-wing "Zhirinovskiy" extremism. 
  Gennadiy Zyuganov, leader of the Communist Party 
of the Russian Federation, who on the eve of the elections put 
forward the formation of a strong political opposition in 
parliament as one of his association's main tasks, is now 
actively demonstrating the intention to cooperate with all 
parliamentary blocs. Commenting on the progress of talks with 
the three other biggest factions on the nomination of the 
speaker and leaders of parliamentary committees, he expressed 
the idea, not devoid of sophistication, that Communist deputies 
should defend "the interests of all factions," including 
Russia's Choice. What he possibly has in mind here is the 
proposal that representatives of each faction represented in 
parliament head one "key" committee each. One minor detail: 
This would mean sharing out these committees among factions 
without offending anyone and obtaining the support of all other 
Duma members. 
  The declaration of intent to cooperate constructively with 
political opponents could lead to a conflict with the program of 
priority initiatives elaborated by the Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation leadership, which include forming a State 
Duma commission to ascertain "the circumstances and 
socioeconomic and political consequences of the Belovezhskaya 
Agreements," and a number of draft laws of an economic nature 
aimed at changing the government's policy of reforms. 
  Alevtina Fedulova, chairman of the Union of Women 
of Russia, heads the Women of Russia faction in parliament. Her 
name is on the list of candidates for the speaker's post. What 
favors Fedulova is not only her membership of the "small" 
centrist faction, as a guarantee of political moderation, but 
also the fact that she belongs to the fair sex -- a guarantee of 
sensible conservatism, thoughtfulness, and loyalty to all 
deputies. In the opinion of Fedulova herself the speaker's sex 
should not play a decisive role; the main condition is that the 
speaker must not be a person of "extreme" political convictions. 
In order for the State Duma to work constructively "its leader 
must be able to collaborate with everyone and not waste time on 
bickering." 
  "Disturber of the Peace" Vladimir Zhirinovskiy 
heads the Liberal Democratic faction, and after the elections 
retains the image of the most active politician among his 
deputies, having had time to tour Europe and cause a furor with 
his comments on the subject of international politics. In the 
State Duma Zhirinovskiy aspires at least to the chairmanship of 
the international affairs committee, and generally his appetites 
extend much further -- he is prepared to head the Russian 
Foreign Ministry. 
  As regards the faction as a whole, according to Stanislav 
Zhebrovskiy, first deputy chairman of the Liberal Democratic 
Party of Russia, it "will not set itself the aim of 
confrontation" in parliament and intends to work in a regime of 
"constructive opposition." Evidently he deems the proposal for 
the State Duma to consider the draft edict on a general 
political and economic amnesty, including terminating the 
judicial proceedings in the case of the State Committee for the 
State of Emergency and absolving "from any type of 
responsibility" everyone who took part in the events of October 
1993, to be one of the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia's 
"constructive" initiatives. 
  Sergey Shakhray, leader of the Party of Russian 
Unity and Accord, has reaffirmed his intention to run for State 
Duma speaker, because he considers himself one of the few people 
who can ensure collaboration between the legislative and 
executive branches and who "is capable of opposing 
Zhirinovskiy." The Party of Russian Unity and Accord, which has 
twenty votes in the State Duma, intends to preserve its 
organizational and political autonomy in parliament and "is not 
prepared" to enter into a coalition with "Russia's Choice." At 
the same time the Party of Russian Unity and Accord faction is 
ready to cooperate with everyone who in the Duma will adopt "a 
position of unity and accord in Russia" and with whom common 
ground is found during the passage of specific draft laws. Based 
on this position, Shakhray comes out sharply against the "pact" 
between major factions on cadre nominations in parliament and 
defends the rights of all factions as well as "independent" 
deputies elected from single-seat districts. 
  It is well known that the Party of Russian Unity and Accord 
parliamentary faction advocates the submission of the question 
of confidence in the government to the Duma and has already made 
such a proposal to the head of government. Shakhray stated 
that, if such a vote takes place, his faction will support 
Viktor Chernomyrdin. 
  The Democratic Party of Russia faction, headed by 
Nikolay Travkin, is seeking the formation of a 
political "center" in the State Duma to balance the "government" 
bloc and the extreme opposition. However, even now its leader's 
comments can be seen as establishing preconditions for the 
centrists not to play an autonomous role in parliament but to 
become a source from which the Agrarians and the Communists can 
draw additional votes, as was once the case in the Supreme 
Soviet. If a coalition is possible with parties which are 
actually of a democratic persuasion, it will only be so on 
individual questions, and the closest ally will be Yavlinskiy's 
bloc, with its strong social democratic element. 
  Nikolay Travkin, as leader of a small but well-structured 
party, advocates rigid factional discipline and the right of any 
faction to recall a deputy. In Travkin's opinion this rule 
should apply only to deputies elected from electoral 
associations' lists, and it does not violate their rights 
because "this principle is predetermined by the very multiparty 
nature of the elections." 
  The main task of the Federal Assembly's Agrarian faction, 
according to its leader Mikhail Lapshin, will be "to 
prevent land speculation and wastage" and strengthen state 
support for agricultural producers. The Agrarian Party, which 
has secured places for 21 deputies in the Duma from its lists, 
is counting on a large number of deputies joining it from the 
single-seat districts, thus increasing the faction to 60 seats. 
The Agrarians intend to submit to parliament draft laws on land 
and land use, on a switch to plan-regulated market relations in 
the agrarian sector, and on the social revival of the 
countryside. 
  A proposal to set up a commission to investigate the events 
of 3-4 October 1993 will probably be a political initiative of 
the Agrarians in parliament. "Parliament absolutely must make 
an assessment of the events...from the viewpoint of the 
Constitution" (presumably the old one), Lapshin has stated. "It 
is a fundamental matter for deputies.... Nobody must ever again 
be tempted to issue or carry out such commands." 
  The Russia's Choice bloc, in the opinion of its leader 
Yegor Gaydar, first deputy chairman of the 
government, is hoping "to wave goodbye to differences" and form 
a broad democratic coalition in the State Duma. Russia's Choice 
could find allies among antifascist forces of various 
orientations, not excluding the Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation. The Russia's Choice leader does not exclude the 
possibility of cooperating with the Liberal Democratic Party of 
Russia, thereby taking a position distinct from that of 
Vyacheslav Kostikov and Mikhail Poltoranin. 
  The government, Gaydar believes, deserves criticism for the 
decisions which should have been made earlier, above all in 
relation to the fight against crime. The time has now come to 
reshuffle it, and Russia's Choice activity in the State Duma 
will be aimed at, among other things, identifying potential 
cabinet members. 
  Grigoriy Yavlinskiy, leader of the electoral 
association and parliamentary faction known by his name, 
believes that the Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin bloc will exercise 
the functions of an "independent, democratic, constructive 
opposition" in the State Duma. Defending the "basic values of 
democracy, freedom, and market economics," "Yabloko" advocates a 
tactical alliance with factions of a democratic persuasion, 
above all with Russia's Choice and the Russian Movement for 
Democratic Reforms, but stresses its hostility to 
"unpredictability and explosive measures" in both politics and 
economics. 
  In the State Duma the Yavlinskiy bloc will advocate shifting 
the main emphasis in implementing reforms to the regions, 
developing competition and a competitive environment, 
straightening out the tax system, and pursuing mutually 
advantageous cooperation with the states which were previously 
part of the USSR. Grigoriy Yavlinskiy believes that only 
institutional changes in the economy can lead to stabilization. 
The fight against corruption will also be an integral part of 
the bloc's policy in the Duma. 
  Anatoliy Lukyanov, ex-speaker of the USSR Supreme 
Soviet and a defendant in the case of the State Committee for 
the State of Emergency, elected to the Duma from a single-seat 
district, has been taking a most active part in organizational 
work to prepare for the work of the lower house of parliament. 
His name is on the list of hypothetical contenders for the 
chairmanship of the house. Lukyanov's own opinion on this 
subject is that the candidate for the chair should be sought 
among deputies representing small factions. The speaker, 
Lukyanov believes, "must be a balanced person with a good 
command of questions of politics and juriusprudence, who can 
give balance to such an unbalanced Duma." 
  Materials froim newspapers, telegraph agencies, and 
ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI correspondents have been used in this summary. 

