Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, February 1 (XINHUA) -- China is to import 
more technology and equipment this year, a Chinese business 
leader said here today. 
  The China National Technology Import and Export Corporation 
(CNTIC), the country's largest technology importer and exporter, 
plans to import four billion U.S. dollars' worth of technology 
and to export 350 million U.S. dollars' worth. 
  According to Tong Changyin, CNTIC's general manager, the 
corporation's volume of imports last year hit a record high of 
3.94 billion U.S. dollars, while exports totalled 310 million 
U.S. dollars. 
  At the company's annual working meeting, Tong said that his 
company signed contracts for some national or local key projects 
in the past year, which ensured the smooth development of the 
company's business. 
  These projects included the Henan Yahekou power station, 
Shandong Zouxian power station, Zhejiang Tianhuangping pump 
storage power station, Liaoning Fushun steel plant and Dalian 
steel plant. 
  CNTIC also made progress in export of equipment, high 
technology and high-tech products, signing contracts with 
relevant companies of Kuwait and Pakistan. 
  On the company's plans for this year, Tong said that CNTIC 
will continue its focus on import of equipment for key national 
projects, development of equipment, high-tech products and 
exports of machinery and electronic products with high extra 
value. 
  The company will thus strengthen its cooperative relations 
with all departments of the State Council, foreign trade 
advisory companies, investment companies, Bank of Development 
and other relevant departments all over the country. 
  Tong said that CNTIC will also set up high-tech development 
companies to form a system of research, design, 
trial-production, manufacture, and domestic and foreign market 
expansion, and to use overseas funds to import foreign 
experience of management and advanced technical equipment. 
  Tong said that in 1994, CNTIC will establish new offices in 
the south Pacific Ocean region, Latin America, Africa and the 
Gulf region. 
  The setting-up of headquarters in Southeast Asia and the 
Gulf 
region will be finished by the end of the year, he said. 
  Tong also said that CNTIC will make efforts to practise a 
share- holding system and act as a business agency, and to start 
a corporation group by the end of the year. 

