BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Biljana Plavsic, vice president of the </F>
republic of Srpska, by Branka Andjelkovic in Belgrade; date not 
given: "Woman in the Middle of the Road"] 
  [Text] For some people she is "the Serbian empress," for 
others "the biggest mistake the Serbian leadership has ever 
made." Biljana Plavsic, vice president of the republic of 
Srpska, does not want to give up radicalism. "We are not in a 
position to make compromises," she says. "If people's vital 
interests are at stake, my attitudes are not radical in the 
negative sense of the word." Mrs. Plavsic has no intention of 
withdrawing many of her statements, which in the Serbian 
Republic are often considered negative, because -- as she says 
-- the problem lies "only in their interpretation." We talked 
with Mrs. Plavsic in her office in the "Bosanka" residence. 
  [Andjelkovic] In the view of many people the crisis around 
Gorazde and the NATO involvement marked the beginning of a new 
attitude of the West toward the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina. How 
would you assess the new political situation as far as the 
Serbian side is concerned? 
  [Plavsic] If Serbs are not obedient there will be 
bombardments again. This will happen if we do not do what they 
want, according to Western criteria. We were told this very 
clearly by the latest ultimatum. Since we agreed with these 
rules of the game by agreeing to withdraw our weapons from the 
Sarajevo front it is too late now. The West explained the 
attack on Gorazde with the fact that Gorazde was a safe haven, 
but this is senseless, because the United Nations has not done 
anything to protect the safe havens in Bosnia-Herzegovina. They 
were not demilitarized, the Muslim army was supplied with 
weapons without any control, the UN Protection Force even helped 
them. This means that the West did not have any justification 
for that attack. If there is any new ultimatum for other 
unprotected areas, we should refuse all compromises. 
  [Andjelkovic] Do you believe NATO will get involved in 
events 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina in the future, too? 
  [Plavsic] This time it looked like the United States had not 
made a mistake by not giving in to 1,300,000 Serbs in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. We really gave them a chance to show to 
their people that their threats were effective. If they 
continue to use threats for protected and unprotected areas, it 
is quite clear what should happen. It has been clear for a long 
time already what should be done, but there are people who do 
not seem to know this. We shall certainly be bombed, sooner or 
later. The West does not know, however, that the Serbian people 
in the war regions are already completely resistant to threats. 
They do not respond to them any longer, and when you ask them 
about bombardments, the only thing they say is: "They should 
start at last, let them drop these bombs!" A threat that is 
repeated again and again loses its impact with time. I can say 
only one thing: They do not know the mentality of the Serbian 
people at all. The Serbs cannot be scared. 
  [Andjelkovic] Was the action in Gorazde necessary, however? 
Do you not think that the negotiating process would be different 
had there been no Gorazde crisis? 
  [Plavsic] It was Gorazde's turn after Sarajevo. Had there 
been no crisis in Gorazde, there would have been something else, 
we can expect continuous pressure. The West has now asked for a 
four-month cease-fire. Let me remind you that [Bosnian 
President] Alija Izetbegovic asked for the same thing before, 
and you know why. He wants to strengthen his army in these four 
months, he does not need these four months in order to reach 
peace. Anyway, let us assume that they need four months to 
carry out political negotiations, to reach some kind of peace, 
some kind of agreement. If we show resistance during these 
negotiations, they will use threats again, but we must not 
respond to them. We shall certainly find ourselves in the 
situation in which we shall simply have to do our job, no matter 
what kind of threats they make. 
  [Andjelkovic] Where is this leading to? 
  [Plavsic] Nobody wants to realize that there is a war in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. This is a very special war, but it is still 
a war. There is the attacking warring faction and the other 
which defends itself, and I want to repeat that we were attacked 
by the Croatian-Muslim coalition. Our lives, the existence of 
our people were at stake. In every war there must be one party 
that loses and one that wins. Whenever it is said that it must 
not be mentioned that somebody has won this war, this goes 
beyond common sense. How can an army be stimulated to defend 
itself if it is forbidden to win. There is no logic in it! 
  [Andjelkovic] If NATO becomes involved in the conflict in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, it could easily happen that the Serbs lose 
according to the war theory you have just explained to me. 
  [Plavsic] It is very difficult to make predictions. If we 
are isolated, it does not mean that we have to lose. I think 
that Vietnam was a big loss for the United States, and this is 
not the only example. We have always known why we are fighting, 
we have always defended ourselves, we have always seemed to be 
in somebody's way, as if we had built a house in the middle of 
the road. You fight in a completely different way if you know 
that you will not exist unless you defend yourself. This is the 
best possible motive. Apart from that, there is a great sense 
of responsibility in the United States for every human life lost 
without good reason. If 10 U.S. soldiers had lost their lives 
in our territory, Clinton would be endangered, especially 
because he is already under pressure because of the latest 
scandal in the United States. 
  [Andjelkovic] What is the present attitude of the republic 
of Srpska's leadership -- does it support war or peace? 
  [Plavsic] Since the London conference we have been searching 
for a solution to achieve peace. We want to achieve peace, but 
not at any price. We do not want peace if it means that we have 
to give up territory, we do not want peace if the dignity of the 
Serbian people is lost, we cannot do this. Peace can only be 
achieved if the three sides sit down at the negotiating table 
and start negotiating. It cannot be negotiated, however, as 
long as there is no peace. 
  [Andjelkovic] What is your attitude then? 
  [Plavsic] Peace, peace, and peace! We are offering peace, 
which should be followed by negotiations. 
  [Andjelkovic] Do not you think that because of Gorazde you 
are farther away from peace now than before? 
  [Plavsic] I do not think we have lost anything. We even won 
something at Gorazde. Our civilian population that fled in 
August 1992 are now returning to their homes in Gorazde. The 
United Nations said that the Serbian army had to withdraw to a 
3-km ring around Gorazde, so that civilians are protected now. 
If they protect the Muslims, they have to protect the Serbs, 
too. Whatever is good for these people who returned to their 
homes in Gorazde, since Gorazde belongs to them, is good for us, 
too. This makes us hope that peace can be achieved. 
  [Andjelkovic] Yes, but without Russian help, it seems. What 
was the reason for [Russian envoy Vitaliy] Churkin's sharp words 
to the Serbs? Is it perhaps your statement that the reason for 
such a large number of Serbian planes in the air was an air show? 
  [Plavsic] I am afraid that I shall be too severe as far as 
Churkin is concerned. It has been clear to me since the very 
beginning that Churkin is a man who has only one task, which was 
assigned to him not by Russia, but probably by the United 
States. We have been very cautious toward Churkin from the 
beginning, and it is good that the Serbs have not given him 
their confidence. We have learned in this war that there no are 
historical friendships, as for example with France or Russia, 
there are only interests. The present Russian politics is 
directly linked to the money Russia recently got from the West. 
If this sum is distributed to the Russian population, it means 
that every Russian citizen got $5. It is horrible to lose the 
dignity of the largest Slavic state and people for only $5! 
Such things happen, though. The Serbs are the strongest when 
they are alone, and now we are really alone. 
  Yuliy Vorontsov [Russian permanent representative to the 
United Nations] had been very firm in his attitude that the 
Serbs should not be bombarded, but after Russia received 
financial help he said that the NATO ultimatum could be used as 
a threat to the Serbs. There is no reason why Churkin should 
say that the Serbs lie, that they say one thing today, and 
another tomorrow. We are shocked and astonished! It is clear 
that a politician can be shrewd and use even lies. Every 
politician acts like that. [Secretary of State Warren] 
Christopher says one thing in the morning, and a completely 
different thing in the evening. Why does Churkin blame us even 
if what he said is true? If you take a look at the political 
line drawn by Serbian politicians, you can say that it is very 
consistent and clear. How could we deceive Mr. Churkin that 
much in one night and two days he spent with us? As if he were 
a saint and can therefore be shocked! All this is very 
transparent. 
  [Andjelkovic] Were there differences during the latest 
meeting between [UN special envoy] Akashi, [Serbian President] 
Milosevic and [republic of Srpska president] Karadzic regarding 
the relations between the Serbian president and the president of 
the republic of Srspka? 
  [Plavsic] I do not think that there were any differences in 
the basic attitude. There have been permanent consultations 
between the leadership of the republic of Srpska and the Serbian 
leadership, but no decisions have been taken. I would like to 
point out that it is only the republic of Srpska that can 
decide. The Jahorina assembly proved the same thing when the 
Vance-Owen plan had to be decided on. Consultations had 
preceded it, but the final decision was taken by parliament, or 
better said, in a referendum. It was opposite to the attitude 
of the Serbian leadership. 
  [Andjelkovic] There are rumors about your disagreement with 
Milosevic? 
  [Plavsic] It is clear that my attitudes, which are purely 
Serbian national attitudes, cannot comply with Milosevic's 
attitudes. He has one pedigree, I have a different one. I can 
listen to his arguments, I communicate well with people who have 
a different opinion from mine, but it seems that others cannot 
communicate with me because I have a different opinion. I 
disagreed with the previous regime, the biggest problem was that 
you had to think in the same way as everybody else. That regime 
deprived the people of the possibility to express their opinion 
openly. Somebody who supported things like that must be 
completely different from me. Therefore I cannot think like Mr. 
Milosevic. He is Milosevic, and I am Biljana Plavsic. It was 
really a low blow by Milosevic to manipulate my quotation of a 
statement a wounded soldier made in connection with the 
Vance-Owen plan in the following way: "There are 12 million 
Serbs, if 6 million die, the other 6 million will live 
honestly." It is a shame to manipulate a statement like that. 
And who is the person who manipulated it!? A president of a 
state. I really do not know what his interests were. 
  [Andjelkovic] There have been rumors recently that 
President Milosevic could betray the Bosnian Serbs. What do you 
think about it? 
  [Plavsic] As far as the Serbian national interest is 
concerned, I do not trust anybody. People have to be asked what 
they want. Somebody who does not respect parliament and thinks 
that it is something unimportant.... As far as the vital 
interests of a nation are concerned, the people who got the 
mandate have to be controlled all the time because we have 
already had bad experiences. It is easier for them, too, to 
share responsibility with parliament and with their people. The 
referendum is an institution recognized throughout the world. 
The world recognized the results of the referendum on the 
Vance-Owen plan. 
  [NIN] Why have you never been a member of Karadzic's team in 
international meetings? You have been elected to your duty by 
the parliament of the republic of Srpska. 
  [Plavsic] Ask Mr. Karadzic and not me! 
  [NIN] Do you often visit soldiers on the front? 
  [Plavsic] The whole of our territory is practically a front. 
Everybody participates in it; my function requires me to have 
direct contacts with the people. This enables me to know 
exactly what our soldiers and what the wounded think. I was 
told by the soldiers on the Gorazde front some time ago that 
they were happy to see me participate in the negotiations. They 
said that they knew that it would not come to any compromises 
that would harm the Serbs. I have to tell you that I am happy 
that soldiers have such a good opinion about me. 
  [NIN] Are you elegant at the front, too? 
  [Plavsic] I could go to the front right away, I have a pair 
of sports shoes here so that I can go anywhere. 
  [Andjelkovic] There has been much speculation about your 
suitors, among whom Prince Tomislav Karadjordjevic has been 
mentioned, too? 
  [Plavsic] Regarding my link with Prince Tomislav, you as 
well as all others must surely know that I am a monarchist and I 
believe that everything that can bring the Serbs, who are 
otherwise prone to divisions, together should be very much 
cherished. Personally, I believe that a monarchy is one of 
those factors that could preserve the unity of the Serbian 
people. We are facing a man who belongs to a monarchy that has 
never, not for a single moment, harmed the Serbian people nor 
has it threatened the dignity of the Serbs and I respect them 
all very much. By meeting with Prince Tomislav, who is a son of 
Aleksandar and a grandson of Petar I, and by expressing my 
respect toward him, I am in a way paying respect to his 
ancestors. 
  [Andjelkovic] However, you are often seen together. At the 
congress of the Serbian intellectuals you sat next to each other. 
  [Plavsic] What else could I have done when the organizers 
asked me -- "where will you sit, of course, next to Prince 
Tomislav I am sure" -- and then I sat next to him. Most 
probably we share similar views on this entire situation. 
  [Andjelkovic] Therefore, you reject the insinuations that 
there is something more than friendship between you? 
  [Plavsic] Well, out of the question! I must tell you 
immediately that not even friendship, to tell you honestly. 
Above all, just as none of you would know my age, it is normal 
that at my age there is no interest in anything of the kind. I 
only have to carry out this duty of mine, to live to see the 
Serbian state, and then I will end the political career in which 
I have ended up as a result of circumstances. 
  [Andjelkovic] You are well-known for your radical views. 
Your statement about "the Muslims who are disturbing you" in 
eastern Bosnia has provoked a considerable reaction at a given 
moment. 
  [Plavsic] That Markovic woman [wife of Serbian President 
Milosevic] used this immediately. She is very capable of 
manipulating one-sidedly and interpreting other peoples' words 
in her own way. I do not know what sort of an ambition people 
have to simply tear what people say out of the context and then 
interpret these words in their own way. I call such people 
malicious people. I always try to find something positive, even 
when it involves such persons, and I always concentrate on this, 
while she is specifically looking for something bad. I would 
have been awfully unhappy had I been like this. However, I am 
quick to forget unpleasant things and even though many have 
aspirations to cause me harm I bear no ill will against them. 
  [Andjelkovic] Beside this, there have been numerous negative 
assessments of your statements and moves in the public? 
  [Plavsic] If these people with bad intentions knew how 
nothing can hurt me I think they would stop attacking me. But 
they truly dislike me. I can be terribly hurt when someone of 
whom I have a good opinion does something to hurt me. However, 
I resolve this very quickly, I contact the person and clarify 
the matter immediately. This is how I resolve my problems. I 
do not turn to the past at all, and I also pass quickly over 
certain things that other people would not. I simply do not 
want to burden myself with this. Precisely because of this I 
believe that from this point of view I live a very comfortable 
life. 

