BFN 

<F P=106> ["Interview" with Prime Minister Chuan Likphai by </F>
unidentified MATICHON correspondent at the Imperial Hotel in 
Bangkok on 4 April] 
  [Text] [Correspondent] Would you tell us about your 
government's achievements? 
  [Chuan] Some critics say that the government has nothing 
much 
to talk about its past achievements. It's hard to say. The 
government's daily performance has always been overshadowed by 
more exciting political news such as those predicting the 
imminent fall of the coalition. This sort of news draws more 
attention. Frankly speaking, the mass media themselves have 
been trying to paint a picture of the prime minister as an 
incompetent and indecisive person. 
  However, I never allow such things to dishearten me. My duty 
is to keep on working. The government has its own principle to 
follow. We also hold consultations with academics. They do not 
have to agree with us. We have our own methods of working. 
Hence, I have become the target of criticism as a person who 
does not dare to make any decisions and who has no sense of 
responsibility. 
  I do not feel insecure if academics will not support me 
because I was elected by tens of thousands of voters. People 
have their own different opinions. Last week, lecturers of 
Prince Songkhla University, Pattani Campus, voiced their 
agreement with what the government has done. However, they said 
that their views might not be weighed because they are merely 
upcountry lecturers. 
  If we reject advice given by academics, it does not mean 
that 
we do not attach any significance to their views. The 
government always listens to their opinions. However, some 
members of the government like Akhom Engchuan frequently come 
out to counter criticism. 
  [Correspondent] We have the impression that the government 
is 
rather slow. How can it work under the current situation? 
  [Chuan] It is necessary for the government to be firm under 
the present conditions. Otherwise, the country will be plunged 
into confusion and disorder. We must have courage to deal with 
problems and to defend national interests. 
  [Correspondent] Isn't it necessary for the government to 
fulfill the desires of the people? 
  [Chuan] Sometimes, it is not what the majority of the people 
want. We must be rational and realistic in solving problems. 
  [Correspondent] What is your view regarding relations 
between 
your government and the Senate? We are talking about the 
incident in the National Assembly [the rejection of the 
government-backed constitutional amendment draft bill]. Most of 
the senators are military officers and apparently do not support 
your government. 
  [Chuan] I look at it from another angle. I believe that 
senators will vote against any draft bill that calls for the 
reduction of their number if the legislation is sponsored by the 
opposition. If, however, the National Assembly rejects the 
government's budget bill, that is a different story. 
  [Correspondent] Do you mean that the constitution drafts are 
not that important? 
  [Chuan] No, the Constitution is important. The government 
alone cannot amend the Constitution because it has only 193 
votes in the house. It is our intention to make the amendment 
perfect. Ten political parties earlier made a gentleman's 
agreement to support the government-sponsored bills. We have 
not added anything to the bills. We kept our promise. I admit 
that the bills are not that perfect, in particular the one on 
the reduction of the number of senators. 
  We have to look into the background of this issue. The 
government has not proposed the draft as its own legislation 
because it cannot ensure the passage of the bill with its 193 
votes in the house. It merely gives its support to the 
legislation. Whether the bill will be passed into law or 
rejected by the parliament is not important. The issue has not 
yet come near its end. Let's wait and see how things will 
evolve. In fact, the government-sponsored draft includes all 
major points. Since the government's drafts were on the agenda 
before those of the opposition, the deliberation should 
continue. We forwarded the drafts to the parliament before the 
opposition, but the agenda was later revised. 
  As we all know, the government only has 193 votes. If they 
do not support us, our law will be rejected. The house speaker 
faithfully did his job. 
  There is no need to dissolve the parliament. Nobody wants it 
to happen. Military officers who have the power in their hands 
have no such an idea. It is those with no power who talk too 
much. 
  [Correspondent] Pro-democracy groups such as the Group of 13 
Organizations have now emerged. 
  [Chuan] It is better if they come out to give support to the 
principle of democracy, not violence. 
  [Correspondent] Their emergence can lead to confrontation. 
  [Chuan] I reaffirm that we uphold the path of democracy. On 
this path, let changes be made. 
  [Correspondent] Do you see any chance of clashes among the 
Thai people? 
  [Chuan] We must try to prevent that. Democracy is the best 
avenue that relies on rationalism. 
  [Correspondent] But to follow the path of democracy means we 
must serve the people's interests. Otherwise, the people will 
not have faith in the democratic form of government. 
  [Chuan] We cannot use any particular group as a yardstick. 
We must look at the entire population in the country. If not, 
we will take the wrong approach to solve problems. We must 
stand firm regardless of what happens. If we fail to use the 
democratic approach in dealing with problems, we will put the 
democratic system in danger. If we reject the democratic way, 
we will do whatever is convenient for us even at the cost of our 
own credibility. But we adhere to the principle of democracy. 
We will not do anything simply to serve our own desires since 
we will not learn anything from doing that. 
  [Correspondent] Is the house dissolution an option in line 
with the principle of democracy? 
  [Chuan] Yes, it is. But I do not think that it's time to do 
so. 
  [Correspondent] What about your resignation? 
  [Chuan] Have I done anything wrong? 
  [Correspondent] Will you not feel embarrassed if you have to 
resign? 
  [Chuan] I do not feel like I will lose face. On the 
contrary, we, as a political party, must honor our promise. 
That is the right thing to do. 
  [Correspondent] Suppose you resign and become the prime 
minister again, will you consider including some opposition 
parties in your new coalition? 
  [Chuan] I have not yet thought about such a scenario. After 
the closure of this National Assembly session, we will have to 
take some time to iron things out. 

