BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Interior Minister Ladislav Pittner by </F>
Antonia Vymazalova and Milan Rusko; place and date not given: 
"Lest We Become a Dumping Site"] 
  [Text] A new regime is being introduced on the 
Slovak-Czech borders as of today. We spoke with Slovak Republic 
Interior Minister Ladislav Pittner about the changes and their 
consequences. 
  [PRAVDA] Sir, what does this measure mean in practice? 
  [Pittner] As of 18 May, we started conducting passport 
controls on all of the 15 road border crossings that have been 
guarded by the Czech Republic so far. We are going to engage 
several hundred people to conduct checks at these border 
crossings. We still have to solve a problem with seven railway 
border crossings. For this to occur, however, we need to append 
an appropriate supplement to the treaty between the Czech 
Republic and the Slovak Republic on passport and customs control 
of people transiting these border crossings so that the 
Immigration Police--that is, an armed force--is permitted to 
enter the territory of the other country when the train transits 
from the Czech Republic to the Slovak Republic, or in the 
opposite direction. 
  [PRAVDA] Will this affect our people? 
  [Pittner] No, they will still be permitted to travel with 
the documents provided for in the existing treaty. The 
objective is to accelerate clearance at the border crossings. 
By conducting controls on our territory, we will have the 
opportunity to learn about third country nationals and take 
legal measures against illegal immigration. 
  [PRAVDA] What will be required from your people? 
  [Pittner] We had to begin relocating police officers from 
other border crossings than those with the Czech Republic. We 
are retraining them while gradually complementing our personnel 
by several hundreds of police officers. This also means an 
increase in funds needed to perform the service. Some 80 
million korunas will be involved. 
  [PRAVDA] Why has the Slovak side adopted this regime now? 
The previous government had objections against enforcing such a 
regime. 
  [Pittner] Their objections were probably based on the fact 
that they wanted the borders to be perceived liberally after two 
independent states were established. Until the last moment, 
they tried to stress this liberal situation at the border 
crossings. The problem lies somewhere else, however. 
  Slovakia, the Czech Republic, and all of Central and East 
Europe have become a transit area for people immigrating through 
our territory from East Europe, the former Soviet Union, as well 
as India, China, and Pakistan, and desiring to enter Western 
countries, particularly the Federal Republic of Germany. This 
is why the German side was interested in signing the readmission 
treaty between Germany and the Czech Republic. On the basis of 
this treaty, the Czech Republic is obliged to readmit the 
refugees who made it to Germany from the Czech Republic. The 
German police are very strict and efficient in this respect. 
The Czech police, of course, used to transport those people 
back to Slovakia because they tried to prove that, on their 
immigration route, the refugees had entered the Czech Republic 
from Slovakia and, from there, Germany. Because we did not guard 
our borders, it was difficult to prove that they did not come to 
the Czech Republic from Slovakia. Therefore, we became a 
dumping site, collecting also those returned migrants who 
possibly had not entered the Czech Republic from Slovakia at all. 
  On the one hand, the former government, in an effort to show 
the people that it did not have this strict idea of guarding the 
borders, stressed a kind of liberal attitude toward the borders. 
On the other hand, because our borders had not been guarded, we 
could not prevent so-called illegals--that is, third country 
nationals who do not have a residence permit in our 
country--from moving around here. 
  [PRAVDA] In a German journal, there was an article recently 
on immigrants in Europe, saying that 26,000 official 
applications for asylum have been submitted in Slovakia and that 
50,000-100,000 people with expired visas or no visas at all are 
present illegally on the territory of our Republic. How do you 
view this situation? 
  [Pittner] The director of the Immigration Police gave me 
information that, in Slovakia, we have some 18,000 legal 
foreigners who are legally registered here and whose presence 
here was legally extended for various reasons. However, even 
more serious is the fact that there are 10,000-20,000 foreigners 
who are here illegally; this information was provided not by the 
Immigration Police but by other services. They are probably 
here temporarily. It is likely that they are waiting for the 
right time to move to Western countries. However, we also have 
information that they are here because of organized crime, for 
which they perform specific services--for example, car thefts, 
drug-trafficking, or violent crimes that are seemingly 
inexplicable. I mean, murders without a familiar motive, 
threats, extortion, etc. 
  [PRAVDA] How can the police intervene with people whose 
residence has not been legalized? 
  [Pittner] The police are in a very difficult situation. 
Immigrants from Pakistan, India, Southeast Asia, and also former 
Yugoslavia destroy their personal documents before entering this 
country. We get needed information only by interrogating them, 
and we proceed depending on the countries with which we have 
concluded treaties for readmission of these refugees. 
  [PRAVDA] With which countries do we have treaties? 
  [Pittner] We have treaties with Ukraine, Romania, Hungary, 
and the Czech Republic. The problem is that, until recently, we 
could return only Romanian citizens to Romania, but not third 
country nationals. Now, we are trying to amend the treaty in 
that respect. 
  So far, we have not succeed in concluding a treaty on the 
readmission of third country nationals with Hungary, not even a 
treaty that would allow us to deport such people by road or 
railway transportation, at our own expense, trough Hungarian 
territory to the country of their destination. Recently, 
however, I have received unofficial information that the 
Hungarian side is willing to sign such a treaty on the 
readmission of people to third countries with us. 
  [PRAVDA] The asylum law is closely related to immigration 
problems. In Switzerland, they adopted a law in March according 
to which they can put illegal migrants in jail for up to three 
months if they are unable to prove their identity--if they do 
not have their documents. A stricter asylum law is in force in 
Germany, France, and other democratic states. Are we, too, 
considering adopting a law on the same principles? 
  [Pittner] In view of the enormous number of the laws that we 
consider exceptionally important, the government does not 
anticipate that such a law would be included in the plan of 
legislative tasks for the time being. When conversing with 
ambassadors from Western countries, we draw their attention to 
the fact that, if the Western countries do not change their 
attitude toward Russia, Ukraine, and postcommunist countries, in 
general, even the strictest laws and measures may fail to 
prevent possible mass immigration to the West of people 
dissatisfied with the economic situation. I mean, after the 
disintegration of the Warsaw Pact and the entire former Soviet 
bloc, the West stopped spending huge sums on armament and 
defense programs but is not sufficiently active in supporting 
these countries with some kind of Marshall Plan. Economic 
tension can lead, in some countries, to an existential crisis 
and even to the possibility of civil war. In such a case, no 
police corps would be able to stop this immigration. 
  [PRAVDA] You mentioned that there are 10,000-20,000 illegal 
immigrants in our country. Do we know where they are, what they 
are doing....? 
  [Pittner] We do not have the kind of control that was normal 
under the former regime because many laws have been abolished 
and there is no registration duty--that is, no registration with 
the police. Even if such laws did exist, the control mechanisms 
that existed under the former regime have ceased to exist, and 
it is difficult to imagine that the record could be kept in this 
way. The police have no right to enter apartments if there is 
no well-founded suspicion that crime is being committed there. 
However, if someone is suspected of committing a crime, it is 
possible to shadow such people using available means, and, after 
verification, launch criminal proceedings. However, the police 
have lost--thank God!--certain tools they used to have under the 
former regime. I believe, however, that this problem is not to 
be solved by repressive bodies; rather, there should be a 
worldwide solution to this problem. I do not believe we should 
use repression but that we should eliminate the reasons for such 
immigration. 

