BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report:"Two Algerian Female Students </F>
Assassinated Because of Veil Issue"] 
  [Text] London, Algiers, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT, news agencies 
-- Two Algerian gunmen have assassinated two Algerian female 
students while were standing at a bus stop in Boumerdes province 
near the Algerian capital. 
  The incident occurred the day before yesterday after noon 
near the two students' Boudouaou Secondary School. One of the 
two girls was killed instantly. Her name is Rozeika Miloud 
Jammi (18). The second, Neima Kar Ali (19), died of her wounds 
in the hospital. The two gunmen escaped on a motorcycle. 
  The security services did not say whether or not the two 
students who were killed at the bus stop, where they were 
waiting to return to their home after the end of school, were 
wearing a veil. With this incident the number of female 
students killed in attacks attributed to members of the armed 
groups who threatened women who refuse to wear a veil has risen 
to three. 
  The Algerian security services have also announced that 
Sadouki Sadouk (53), regional director of the Algerian Red 
Crescent in the Sidi Rash [as transliterated], was killed in his 
home last Monday by two gunmen. 
  Reports in the Algerian capital have said that the day 
before 
yesterday the special court in the capital passed -- in absentia 
-- 12 death sentences on a group of gunmen on charges of harming 
state security and forming armed groups. 
  The group comprises 27 people, 16 of whom attended the 
trial. 
Six of these 16 were acquitted. One person was sentenced to 
seven years in prison, and nine to three years in prison. The 
group is accused of setting up an ambush in July 1993 for a 
police patrol in which three members of the patrol were killed 
and five abducted. 
  The Algerian Oran special court yesterday sentenced to death 
two gunmen for killing three policemen seven months ago. The 
two policemen are Lazrak Ben Sidi Ahmed and Mohamed Hemidi. 
  In Paris, Said Saadi, secretary general of the Rally for 
Culture and Democracy in Algeria, urged armed resistance against 
violence in Algeria. He said that "armed groups and 
self-defense cells" have been formed in that country. Saadi 
said in his opposition party's name in an interview with the 
French newspaper LE FIGARO yesterday that, as a result of the 
"state's importance" in the face of violence, society now 
understands that it has to run its own affairs, even at the 
security level. He also stressed that "a civil war has been 
imposed on society and we must confront it." 

