Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Trade and Industry Minister Gerard Longuet </F>
by Yann Le Gales and Arnaud Rodier; place and date not given: 
"Making Bull an Autonomous Company"] 
  [Text] [LE FIGARO] What lessons have you learned from your 
trip to Japan? 
  [Longuet] We were able to confirm and support the recent 
inroads made by French companies in Japan. I am in particular 
thinking of the authorization to import pork products obtained 
this summer and the opening up of certain local markets. These 
include public works markets GTM [Marseille Heavy Construction 
Works] was chosen for the construction of the customs clearance 
center at Yokohama) and transport markets, with the recent sale 
of an Aerospatiale helicopter to the Hokkaido local authorities. 
This sale is symbolic in a country where European helicopters 
have a 40-percent stake in the private market without ever 
having won the smallest public contract until now. 
  I was also able to note that the "Japan is possible" 
campaign 
has enabled a number of companies, often small concerns, to gain 
a foothold in this country, which is the second largest world 
economic power. As a result, at the "Foodex" agro-food fair 
there were some 40 companies which had successfully overcome the 
initial barrier and are now developing everyday trading 
relations. 
  [LE FIGARO] Do you have the feeling that this country is 
opening up its market to a greater extent? 
  [Longuet] My visit came at a time when Japan is experiencing 
a political upheaval while another upheaval, an economic one, is 
looming on the horizon. It is clear that the new government is 
displaying its intentions of opening up to the outside world, 
and it is up to us to seize the opportunity. Moreover, there is 
a significant desire to deregulate on the domestic level, 
especially in trade and distribution. It is good that French 
companies are getting a foothold. 
  Lastly, my role has been to make it clear to the Japanese 
authorities that we condemn any kind of unilateralism, such as, 
for example, the reimplementation of the "Super 301" provision 
by the United States. We should give priority to dialogue. 
Thus, Europe will be very careful to ensure that the settling 
of the U.S.-Japanese trade dispute does not have adverse effects 
on our exports. 
  [LE FIGARO] You caused a bit of a stir in France when you 
said that there was no limit to NEC's stake in Bull. Should we 
understand by that that you are ready to sell Bull to a Japanese 
company? 
  [Longuet] The government wants to make Bull an autonomous 
company in which the state will no longer have a majority 
shareholding. Thus we are making each of the possible partners 
face up to their responsibilities. That goes for the Europeans 
as well as NEC and IBM. This implies our saying to NEC that we 
view it with no suspicion and that all offers are welcome. It 
is unlikely that NEC is a candidate for an absolute majority 
stake. Quite simply, when you throw the thing open, there is no 
reason to restrict the rules. 
  [LE FIGARO] Do you not prefer, however, the majority stake 
to 
be held by Europeans? 
  [Longuet] Yes. I believe that Europeans will remain the 
majority shareholders in Bull. If they want to take a stake, 
they should do so now. They will not be able to accuse us later 
of not having made them face up to their responsibilities. 
  [LE FIGARO] Have the NEC managers you met with made any 
proposals? 
  [Longuet] No, and what is more, I never asked them to make 
any. It is simply a question of confirming to them that the race 
is now on. Those partners who are interested should let us know. 
  [LE FIGARO] Why did you decide so quickly that Bull should 
be 
privatized? 
  [Longuet] We have recapitalized the company with long-term 
objectives. Bull's privatization must be based on a balanced 
distribution of capital. It is up to the company to suggest the 
way, and we will then organize it together. It is not the 
state's intention to pull out of the shareholding completely. 
The personnel and all those who want to be associated with the 
operation, and the current shareholders -- France Telecom, NEC, 
and IBM -- have been asked. It is up to them to come forward. 
  [LE FIGARO] Will you force France Telecom to participate in 
the operation? What is it about Bull that interests NEC? 
  [Longuet] NEC is focusing on multimedia communications 
systems. It considers that Bull could be its partner in this 
area. France Telecom, too, is active in these fields. This is 
all to further the company's development. 
  [LE FIGARO] In the automobile sector, you have asked for the 
European-Japanese agreement to be extended for another two 
years. Why? 
  [Longuet] The year 1993 was so bad that we have to find a 
way 
of spreading the effects of the recession over a period of time. 
Clearly, it was not possible to strictly apply the terms of the 
agreement in 1993. I therefore suggested that the agreement be 
extended by two years. 
  [LE FIGARO] Did you not also ask Japan to open up to a 
greater extent to French suppliers? 
  [Longuet] I made it clear to the Japanese that French 
suppliers are capable of serving Japanese industry. Only 1.4 
percent of the suppliers Japan uses for the automobile sector 
are foreign companies. We must increase this figure fivefold as 
quickly as possible. This is all the more of logical since the 
Japanese know the European suppliers very well through their 
plants in Europe. 
  [LE FIGARO] The privatization of Bull, announced during your 
trip, coincided with the postponement of Renault's 
privatization. Are you disappointed at this? 
  [Longuet] Not at all. No one is contesting the privatization 
of Renault. The Volvo agreement made rapid action essential. 
Now that the agreement with Volvo looks less likely, Renault 
will have to take time to reflect. There are two possible 
choices: We either privatize Renault and leave it to the 
company to find partners; or we present possibilities for 
partnerships for the approval of the shareholders. It is this 
second option that was taken. 
  [LE FIGARO] Does Renault have to find a partner immediately? 
  [Longuet] Europe's surplus production capacity is about two 
million cars. The smallest and weakest will pay the heaviest 
price for this situation. Renault would not want to be among 
them. 

