Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of Cairo Agreement initialed by PLO Chairman Yasir </F>
'Arafat and Israeli Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres in Cairo on 9 
February]] 
  [Text] Cairo, Feb 10 (MENA)--The final official English 
version of the agreement between the PLO and Israel on security 
issues which was signed late Wednesday [9 February] in Cairo and 
obtained from Israeli officials: 
<H6>  THE CAIRO AGREEMENT </H6>
<H5>  Passages </H5>
  The two sides agreed on the attached text to be included in 
the Gaza-Jericho agreement. 
<H5>  The Jericho Area </H5>

  1. The size of the Jericho area will be as depicted on the 
agreed map attached to this agreement. 
  2. In addition, while not part of the Jericho area: 
  a. Pending the entry into force of the interim agreement, 
the holy site of al-Nabi Musa will be under the auspices of the 
Palestinian authority for religious purposes. 
  b. During religious events that take place three times a 
year and other special occasions that will be coordinated with 
the Israeli authorities, Palestinians will have the right to 
religious pilgrimage to the al-Maghtis under the Palestinian 
flag. 
  c. Palestinian private projects, as well as joint ventures 
in accordance with the Declaration of Principles [DOP], will be 
located as agreed on the shore of the Dead Sea. 
  d. Safe passage will be provided from the Jericho area to 
al-Nabi Musa, al-Maghtis and the projects and ventures as agreed 
in paragraph c. above on the shore of the Dead Sea for the above 
mentioned purposes. Details regarding the safe passage 
arrangements will be included in the Gaza-Jericho agreement. 
  3. Roads within Jericho city will be under Palestinian 
control. Joint patrols on the main roads will be operated, led 
by the Palestinian vehicle. The issue of al-'Awja' and its 
roads will be negotiated in the immediate future in Taba. 
  4. Religious affairs in the "Shalom Al Israel" Synagogue in 
Jericho will be under the auspices of the Israeli authorities. 

<H5>    The Gaza Strip </H5>
  1. In accordance with the DOP, during the interim period 
the Gush Katif and Erez settlement areas, as well as the other 
settlements in the Gaza Strip, and the Israeli military 
installation area along the Egyptian border in the Gaza Strip, 
as indicated on the attached map, will be under Israeli 
authority. In the areas delineated in yellow on the attached 
map and without derogating from Palestinian authority, 
responsibility will be shared as follows: The Israeli 
authorities will have the overriding responsibility and powers 
for security and the Palestinian authority will have the 
responsibility and powers for civil affairs, subject to the 
Gaza-Jericho agreement. In addition, with regard to those areas 
delineated in yellow, cooperation and coordination in security 
matters, including joint patrols, as agreed, will be 
implemented. Possible changes in the area designated yellow in 
the southern Security Zone will be dealt with in Taba. 
  2. Without derogating from Palestinian authority and in 
accordance with the DOP: 
  a. On the three lateral roads connecting the Israeli 
settlements in the Gaza Strip to Israel, namely: the 
Kissufim-Gush Katif road; the Sufa-Gush Katif road; and the 
Nahal 'Oz-Karni-Nezzarim road, including the adjacent sides upon 
which the security of traffic along these roads is dependent, 
the Israeli authorities will have all necessary responsibilities 
and powers in order to conduct independent security activity, 
including Israeli patrols. 
  b. Joint Israeli-Palestinian patrols will operate along 
these 
roads and the adjacent sides. Such joint patrols will be led by 
the Israeli vehicle. 
  c. Where the Israeli authorities carry out engagement steps, 
they will do so with a view to transferring, at the earliest 
opportunity, the continued handling of the incidents falling 
within Palestinian responsibility to the Palestinian police. 
  d. Overpasses will be constructed on intersections between 
the lateral roads and the main north-south road. 
  e. These arrangements will be reviewed by the JSCCC [Joint 
Security Coordination and Cooperation Committee] after one year 
from the date of completion of the withdrawal of Israeli forces 
from the Gaza Strip. 
  3. Zoning questions will be dealt with in Taba. 
<H5>  Other Issues </H5>
  The early empowerment agreement will be negotiated in Taba, 
after the completion of the Gaza-Jericho agreement. The interim 
agreement, including modalities for elections and redeployment 
of forces in the West Bank, will be negotiated in Washington, 
D.C. 
<H6>  ARTICLE </H6>
<H5>  Passages </H5>
  1. General: 
  a. While Israel remains responsible during the interim 
period for external security, including along the Egyptian 
border and the Jordanian line, border crossing shall take place 
according to the arrangements included in this Article. These 
arrangements aim at creating a mechanism that facilitates the 
entry and exit of people and goods, reflecting the new reality 
created by the Israeli-Palestinian Declaration of Principles, 
while providing full security for both sides. 
  b. the arrangements included in this Article shall apply to 
the following border crossing: 
(1) the Allenby Bridge crossing, and 
(2) the Rafah crossing 
  c. The same arrangements will be applied by the parties, 
with the necessary adjustments to agreed seaports, airports or 
other international crossings such as the Abdullah and Damya 
bridges. 
  d. The two sides are determined to do their utmost to 
maintain the dignity of persons passing through the border 
crossings. To this end the mechanism created will rely heavily 
on brief and modern procedures. 
  e. In each border crossing there will be one terminal, 
consisting of two wings. The first wing will serve Palestinian 
residents of the Gaza Strip and West Bank and visitors to these 
areas (hereinafter "the Palestinian wing"). The second wing 
will serve the Israelis and others (hereinafter "the Israeli 
wing"). There will be a closed Israeli checking area and a 
closed Palestinian checking area, as set out below. 
  f. Special arrangements will apply to V.I.P.s crossing 
through the Palestinian wing. The liaison bureau to be 
established pursuant to paragraph 5 below (hereinafter "the 
Liaison Bureau") will define the scope and the nature of these 
special arrangements. 
  2. Control and Management of the Passages 
  a. For the purpose of this Article "passage" is defined to 
mean the area from the crossing barrier at the Egyptian border 
or the Allenby Bridge, passing through and including the 
terminal and: 
(1) with regard to the Allenby Bridge crossing, from the 
terminal up to the Jericho area, and 
(2) with regard to the Rafah crossing, from the terminal 
up to the outer limit of the Israel military location along the 
Egyptian border. 
  b. (1) Israel will have the responsibility for security 
throughout the passage, including for the terminal. 
(2) An Israeli director-general will have the 
responsibility for the management and security of the 
terminal. 
(3) The director-general will have two deputies who will 
report to him: 
(a) an Israeli deputy who will be the manager of the 
Israeli wing. Israel will have exclusive responsibility for the 
management of the Israeli wing, and 
(b) a Palestinian deputy, appointed by the Palestinian 
authority, who will be the manager of the Palestinian 
wing. 
(4) Each deputy will have an assistant for security and an 
assistant for administration. The assignments of the 
Palestinian deputies for security and administration will be 
agreed up on by the two sides in Taba. 
(5) There will be maximum coordination between the two 
sides. Both sides will maintain cooperation and coordination on 
matters of mutual concern. 
(6) The director-general will continue to use Palestinian 
contractors to provide bus services and other administrative and 
logistical services. 
(7) Palestinian policemen present at the terminal will be 
armed with handguns. Their deployment will be decided upon in 
Taba. Other Palestinian officials present at the terminal will 
be unarmed. 
(8) The details of management and security and Liaison 
Bureau issues will be dealt with in Taba. 
(9) The two sides will work together in Taba in order to 
seek ways for additional arrangements in the Rafah 
terminal. 
  (10) Both parties will review these procedures in a 
year's time. 
  c. Except for the arrangements included in this Article the 
current procedures and arrangements applicable outside the 
terminal shall continue to apply throughout the passage. 
  d. (1) Once incoming passengers have crossed the terminal 
they will proceed to the Jericho area or Gaza Strip, as 
appropriate, without any interference from Israeli 
authorities. 
(2) Outgoing passengers may proceed to the terminal 
without any interference from Israeli authorities after joint 
verification that such passengers hold the necessary 
documentation for exiting the area to Jordan or Egypt, as set 
out in this Agreement. 
  3. Arrangements for Entry from Egypt and Jordan Through the 
Palestinian Wing 
  a. At the entrance to the Palestinian wing there will be a 
Palestinian policeman and a raised Palestinian flag. 
  b. Before entering the Palestinian wing, passengers will 
identify their personal luggage and it will be place on a 
conveyor belt. Each side will be able to inspect such luggage 
inside its own checking area using its own personnel and, if 
necessary, may open the luggage for inspection in the presence 
of the owner and a Palestinian policeman. 
  c. Persons entering the Palestinian wing will pass through a 
magnetic gate. An Israeli policeman and a Palestinian policeman 
will be posted on each side of this gate. In the event of 
suspicion, each side will be entitled to require a physical 
inspection to be conducted in inspection booths to be located 
adjacent to the gate. Passengers will be inspected by a 
Palestinian policeman in the presence of an Israeli policeman. 
Accompanying personal belongings may also be inspected at this 
point. 
  d. Having completed the above phase, person entering the 
Palestinian wing will pass through one of three lanes for the 
purpose of identification and document control, as follows: 
(1) The first lane will be used by Palestinian residents 
of the Gaza Strip and Jericho area, these passengers will pass 
via a Palestinian counter, where their documents and identity 
will be checked. Their documents will be checked by an Israeli 
officer who will also check their identity indirectly in an 
invisible manner. 
(2) The second lane will serve other Palestinian residents 
of the West Bank. These passengers will first pass via a 
Palestinian counter, where their documents and identity will be 
checked. Then they will continue via an Israeli counter, where 
their documents and identity will be checked. The two counters 
will be separated by tinted glass and a revolving door. 
(3) The third lane will serve visitors to the Gaza Strip 
and West Bank. An identical procedure as in paragraph 3.d.(2) 
above will apply to such visitors, except that they will first 
pass via the Israel counter and then continue via the 
Palestinian counter. 
  e. In the event of suspicion regarding a passenger in any 
of the three lanes described in paragraph d. above each side may 
question such passenger in its closed checking area. Suspicion 
justifying questioning in the closed checking area may be one of 
the following: 
(1) the passenger was involved, directly or indirectly, in 
criminal or planned criminal activity, in terrorist or planned 
terrorist activity and is not a beneficiary of the amnesty 
provisions of this agreement. 
(2) the passenger conceals arms, explosives, or related 
equipment. 
(3) the passenger holds forged or non-valid documentation 
or the details included in the documentation are inconsistent 
with those included in the population registry (in case of 
residence) or in the data base (in case of of a visitor), except 
that questions relating to such inconsistency will initially be 
raised at the counter and the passenger will be questioned in 
the closed checking area only if the suspicion has not been 
removed, or 
(4) the passenger acts in an obviously suspicious behavior 
during the passage via the terminal. 
  If, at the conclusion of this questioning, the suspicion 
has not been removed, such passenger may be apprehended, after 
the other side has been notified. In case of a Palestinian 
suspect being apprehended by the Israeli side, a Palestinian 
policeman will be asked to meet with the suspect. Following 
notification to the liaison bureau, any further treatment of the 
apprehended person will be in accordance with Annex III 
(Protocol Concerning Legal Arrangements in Criminal Matters). 
  f. In the Palestinian wing, each side will have the 
authority to deny the entry of persons who are not residents of 
the Gaza Strip and West Bank. 
  For the purpose of this Agreement, "residents of the Gaza 
Strip and West Bank" shall mean persons who, on the date of 
entry into force of this Agreement, are registered as residents 
of these areas in the population registry maintained by the 
military government of the Gaza Strip and West Bank, as well as 
persons who have subsequently obtained permanent residency in 
these areas with the approval of Israel, as set out in this 
Agreement. 
  g. Following the above procedure, the passengers will 
collect their luggage and proceed to the customs area. (The 
procedures will be agreed upon in Paris). 
  h. The Palestinian side will provide passengers whose entry 
is approved with an entry permit stamped by the Palestinian side 
and attached to their documents. 
  At the conclusion of the direct and indirect checking of 
passengers passing via the first lane and stamping their entry 
permits, the Palestinian officer will provide the passenger with 
a white card issued by the Israeli officer. A Palestinian 
official posted at the exit of the Palestinian wing will verify 
that the passenger holds such a white card and will collect the 
cards with indirectly an invisible Israeli checking. 
  For passengers going through the second and third lanes, the 
Israeli officer will provide the passengers with a blue card, 
after checking their documents and identity, and verifying their 
entry permits. An Israeli and a Palestinian official posted at 
the exit of the Palestinian wing will verify and collect the 
cards. White and blue cards collected will be checked by 
Israeli and Palestinian officials. 
  In cases where either side denies the entry of a 
non-resident 
passenger, that passenger will be escorted out of the terminal 
and sent back to Jordan or Egypt, as appropriate, after 
notifying the other side. 
  4. Arrangements for Exit to Egypt and Jordan Through the 
Palestinian Wing 
  Passengers exiting to Egypt or Jordan through the 
Palestinian 
wing will enter the terminal without their luggage. Thereafter, 
the same procedures described in paragraph 3 above will apply to 
them, except that the order of passing via the Israeli and 
Palestinian counters will be reversed. 
  For passengers going through the second and third lanes, 
the Israeli officer will provide the passengers with a blue 
card, after checking their documents and identity, and verifying 
their entry permits. An Israeli and a Palestinian official 
posted at the exit of the Palestinian wing will verify and 
collect the cards. White and blue cards collected will be 
checked by Israeli and Palestinian officials. 
  In cases where either side denies the entry of a 
non-resident 
passenger, that passenger will be escorted out of the terminal 
and sent back to Jordan or Egypt, as appropriate, after 
notifying the other side. 
  5. Liaison Bureau 
  a. There will be a liaison bureau at each crossing point in 
order to deal with matters arising regarding passengers passing 
through the Palestinian Wing, issues requiring coordination, and 
differences regarding the implementation of these arrangements. 
Without derogating from Israel's responsibility for security, 
the bureau will also deal with incidents. 
  b. This bureau will be comprised of an equal number of 
representatives from each side and will be located at a 
specified location inside each terminal. 
  c. This bureau will be subordinate to the CAC [Civil Affairs 
Committee] and to the relevant RCCO [Regional Coordination and 
Cooperation Office]. 
  6. Miscellaneous 
  a. Special arrangements will be agreed upon by the two sides 
regarding the passage of goods, buses, trucks and privately 
owned vehicles. Pending this agreement, the current 
arrangements will continue to apply. 
  b. Israel will attempt to complete the structural 
alterations on the Rafah and Allenby Bridge terminals not later 
than the date of the completion of the withdrawal of Israeli 
forces from the Gaza Strip and Jericho area. 
  If these structural alterations are not completed by that 
time, the arrangements described in this Article shall apply, 
except for those arrangements that cannot be implemented without 
the structural alterations. 
  c. In order to cross through the crossing points in and out 
of the Gaza Strip and Jericho area, residents of these areas 
will use documents as detailed in (the Annex developed by the 
Civilian Committee). Pending the entry into force of the 
interim agreement, other West Bank residents will continue to 
use the existing documents issued by the military government and 
its Civil Administration. 
  d. Visitors to the Gaza Strip and Jericho area will be 
permitted to remain in these areas for a period of up to three 
months granted by the Palestinian authority and approved by 
Israel. The Palestinian authority may extend this three-month 
period for an additional period of up to three months and will 
inform Israel about the extension. Any further extensions 
require the approval of Israel. The Palestinian request for a 
four-month period and an additional four months will be 
negotiated in Taba in the immediate future. 
  e. The Palestinian authority will ensure that visitors 
referred to in paragraph d. above will not overstay the 
duration of their entry permit and authorize extensions. 

