Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 30 (AFP)--China and Taiwan ended a 
heated fourth round of talks here Wednesday failing to reach any 
agreement on sensitive issues such as aircraft hijacking, 
negotiators said. 
  "We haven't reached agreement on the main points, but we 
have 
made some progress," said Sun Yafu, vice general secretary of 
the semi-official Association for Relations Across the Taiwan 
Strait (ARATS). However, he indicated that this progress 
amounted to little more than going "into greater detail on our 
differences." 
  Sun's counterpart in Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation 
(SEF) Xu Huiyu said his team had proposed holding the fifth 
round of talks as soon as possible in Taipei. The Chinese side 
has yet to respond to the proposal. 
  Both stressed the need to deepen the discussion at the next 
round of talks. 
  The five-day talks -- which focused on repatriation of 
aircraft hijackers and stowaways -- appeared on the brink of 
collapse earlier on the weekend as the result of deep 
differences over the issue of jurisdiction, according to Taiwan 
newspapers. The SEF and ARATS negotiators reportedly shouted 
and accused each other of breach of trust and of failing to live 
up to promises made at earlier meetings. 
  Taiwan insists the hijacking issue be solved within the 
framework of the repatriation of all "criminals," such as 
illegal immigrants and sea-pirates, while China wants the matter 
to be dealt with separately. The two sides began to talk 
seriously about the hijacking issue following a spate of such 
incidents which saw 15 asylum-seeking Chinese people hijacking 
11 Chinese airliners to Taiwan since April 1992. The teams have 
already reached an agreement in principle on the matter, but it 
has since become bogged down in jurisdiction and sovereignty 
issues. Taiwan insists it has the right to try the hijackers, 
while China demands they be sent back to the mainland 
immediately. 
  China and Taiwan's Red Cross societies also have an 
agreement 
already on repatriating tens of thousands of illegal immigrants 
that have sneaked into Taiwan in recent years but Beijing has 
been slow in taking them back, with disputes arising from who 
should foot the bill. Some 2,223 illegal immigrants remain in 
Taiwan detention centres. 
  Beijing has viewed Taiwan as a renegade province since 1949, 
when the Nationalists fled to the island after losing a civil 
war with the communists. 

