Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Foreign Ministry Memorandum: "True Picture of Production </F>
of Plutonium From PHWRs in South Korea" -- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, February 18 (KCNA) -- The Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on 
February 18 issued a memorandum exposing the true picture of 
nuclear weapons development in South Korea. 
  The memorandum reads in full: 
  It is a worldwide-known fact that the successive rulers in 
South Korea have long carried forward their clandestine 
programme for the development of nuclear weapons under the U.S. 
"nuclear umbrella." 
  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea issued its memorandum early last year, 
disclosing South Korea's nuclear weapons development programme. 
  Many governments, political parties, public organizations 
and 
the world community at large have expressed great concern over 
the South Korean authorities' machinations for nuclear weapons 
development and demanded their immediate discontinuation. 
  This notwithstanding, the South Korean authorities have 
refused to comply with this demand and stepped up their nuclear 
weapons development at accelerated pace. 
  In connection with another revelation of the fact that the 
South Korean authorities have recently increased plutonium 
output from their pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR) for the 
development of nuclear weapons, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is issuing this 
memorandum, considering it necessary to disclose the true 
picture thereof. 
<H3>  I. The South Korean Authorities' Nuclear Weapons 
Development Policy and Introduction of PHWR </H3>
  South Korea's nuclear weapons development policy was shaped 
in the early 1970s. 
  The 1960s witnessed a rapid collapse of the imperialists' 
colonial system in different parts of the world, that gave way 
to a chain of the declaration of independence by countries under 
the colonial domination. In the 1970s, the suzerain states 
moved toward withdrawing their troops from their former colonies. 
  Critically ill at ease over these moves, the former dictator 
Pak Chong-hui tried to find a way out in developing nuclear 
weapons. 
  A former aide close to the "Chongwadae" [presidential 
office] 
testified that Pak Chong-hui "concluded that the last resort for 
self-reliant national defence capability is the acquisition of 
nuclear weapons." (South Korean monthly magazine SINDONG-A, 
April issue of 1989). 
  Recalling this period, a South Korean newspaper reported 
that 
"with all testimonies pieced together, Pak Chong-hui seemed to 
have taken a `shortcut' toward the acquisition of nuclear 
weapons by the mid-1970s." (South Korean newspaper CHUNGANG 
ILBO, August 6, 1992) 
  As Pak Chong-hui committed himself to the nuclear 
development 
policy, his primary preoccupation was to obtain access to the 
nuclear explosive substances and introduce the PHWR to this end. 
  The South Korean monthly magazine WOLGAN CHOSON in its 
August 
issue of 1988 commented that "Pak Chong-hui forcefully 
suppressed the anti-PHWR voice within his `government' and 
ordered Chairman Mun Chung-sik of the `Korea Electric Power 
Corporation' (KEPCO) to resolutely push forward the introduction 
of the PHWR. This seemed to reflect his preoccupation with the 
nuclear arms development". 
  The same magazine in its October issue of 1991 wrote that "a 
person, once deeply engaged in the nuclear development 
programme, admitted that the introduction of the Wolsong PHWR 
from Canada was aimed at manufacturing nuclear weapons." 
  Even a physicist who remembers the PHWR introduction 
asserted 
that "the PHWR introduction is apparently related to the nuclear 
weapons development." (South Korean monthly magazine SINDONG-A, 
April issue of 1989). 
  South Korea embarked on a pilot-production of nuclear 
weapons through PHWR as early as in the late 1970s. These 
attempts by South Korea to develop nuclear weapons escalated 
during the years of the Chon Tu-hwan "regime". 
  On December 19, 1980, Chon Tu-hwan took the "measure of 
merging and dissolving the `government-subsidized agencies,'" a 
camouflage to feign the abandonment of nuclear weapons 
development scheme, but in fact "maximized their research 
capability." (South Korean YONHAP yearbook, 1981 edition) 
  In September 1983, Yi Ki-paek, the then "chairman of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff of the `ROK' Army", submitted his "verbal 
report on the nuclear policy" of South Korea to Chon Tu-hwan, 
and this was the occasion for the evolution of the "secretly 
planned strategy for nuclear arms option," which has since been 
vigorously promoted". (South Korean monthly magazine WOLGAN 
CHOSON, October issue of 1991) 
  Under the cloak of the "localization of nuclear fuel," the 
Chon Tu-hwan military "regime" succeeded in developing the PHWR 
nuclear fuel in 1986 and completed its experimental facilities 
for processing the PHWR nuclear fuel in 1987. This process has 
enabled the "regime" to move toward the goal of an independent 
capability of producing the total amount of nuclear fuel needed 
for the Wolsong PHWR and at the same time toward the stage of 
perfecting the technology of reprocessing the spent fuel. 
  The No Tae-u military "regime" stepped into a full-scale 
stage of achieving a greater practicability of the industrial 
foundation of its nuclear weapons development programme by 
completing this foundation. 
  Stressing the need to "actively meet the fast-changing 
situation", No Tae-u had the "Taedok Declaration" adopted 
pledging to complete by 1992 the project of the "Taedok science 
town", general headquarters of the nuclear weapons development 
programme, 4 or 5 years ahead of schedule, and on November 27, 
1992 he officiated at the dedication ceremony of the town 
project. (South Korean DONG-A yearbook, 1991 edition, MBC 
television, November 27, 1992) 
  Throughout the process of their nuclear weapons development, 
the present South Korean authorities attempted to divert the 
world public attention from their telltale nuclear arms 
programme under the cloak of the light water reactors (LWR) 
system. 
  In face of the mounting international public opinion against 
South Korea's increasing moves towards nuclear weapons 
development, Kim Yong-sam tried to whitewash such moves, saying 
that they "have no intention at all to go ahead with any 
independent nuclear weapons development programme". (South 
Korean Radio No. 1, November 14, 1993) 
  South Korean authorities' decision to introduce the PHWR was 
"motivated by the analysis which indicates a higher purity of 
plutonium from the reprocessed natural uranium as compared with 
the spent enriched uranium." (South Korean monthly magazine 
WOLGAN CHOSON, April issue of 1992). 
  The South Korean monthly magazine WOLGAN CHOSON in its 
November issue of 1989 quoted the chairman of South Korea's 
non-governmental "Council for Atomic Power Development and 
Safety" as saying in the early 1970s that "the Canadian 
Deuterium-Uranium (CANDU)-type PHWR is fuelled by natural 
uranium, which we can supply on our own". 
  The PHWR introduction is also aimed at circumventing the 
supervision by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). 
  A South Korean physicist who remembers the period of the 
PHWR 
introduction confessed that "the IAEA's supervision is almost 
difficult, because the PHWR leaves room for a random fuel 
discharge." (South Korean monthly magazine SINDONG-A, April 
issue of 1989) 
  As seen in the above, the Wolsong PHWR is a pile geared to 
plutonium production which the South Korean authorities have 
commissioned into operation in pursuit of their policy intention 
to develop nuclear weapons. 
<H3>  II. The Stockpiling of Plutonium Through the PHWR and 
Completion of System for the Full-Scale Nuclear Weapons 
Development </H3>
  The Wolsong PHWR plays a pivotal role in the South Korean 
authorities' nuclear weapons development programme. Under a 
South Korean-Canadian December 1974 contract, the Wolsong PHWR 
project began in January 1976 and went into operation in April 
1983. 
  At present, South Korea has the Wolsong PHWR, the 
multi-purpose research reactors (K-NRR) and post irradiation 
test facilities in operation as an integral centre of the 
plutonium production. 
  The amount of nuclear material from a 1,000 MWe [megawatts 
electric] PHWR after one year operation is enough to manufacture 
around 50 atomic bombs of Nagasaki type. 
  Therefore, it follows that the 678.7 MWe PHWR operating in 
South Korea since 1983 has by now produced potential plutonium 
enough to manufacture over 370 atomic bombs. 
  The U.S. newspaper INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE on November 
2, 1993 said that South Korea is speeding up its ambitious 
nuclear programme under IAEA "safeguards," and further wrote 
that "experts estimate that its accumulated spent fuel would 
yield about 10 tons of plutonium if reprocessed. This stockpile 
of potential plutonium will increase to an estimated 24 tons by 
the year 2,000." 
  This was pointed out also by the Japanese magazine SEKAI in 
its December issue of 1992, which reported that South Korea has 
stockpiled about 10 tons of plutonium extracted from the spent 
fuel. 
  Quite obvious is how much the stockpile of plutonium will 
bulk up, when another PHWR now under construction is 
commissioned into operation. 
  South Korea is speeding up its projects to build more PHWRs 
in an effort to extract more plutonium under the pretext of 
reprocessing 300 tons of spent fuel annually discharged from 
eight LWRs currently in operation plus 1,140 tons of spent fuel 
contained in underwater storage to be recycled back into these 
PHWRs. 
  Commenting on this, South Korean newspaper HANGYORE SINMUN 
reported on March 15, 1990 that the South Korean authorities 
were planning to recycle the LWR spent fuel into low-enriched 
PHWR fuel blended with other uranium waste, a move "implicative 
of their military consideration reflected by their intention to 
build more PHWR power plants that allow an easier extraction of 
plutonium." 
  Peter Hayes, an anti-nuclear activist, wrote in his essay, 
entitled "The Republic of Korea and the Nuclear Issue," that "it 
is evident that the South Koreans have not abandoned the idea of 
reprocessing their spent fuel. In October, 1989, South Korea 
began informal discussions to organize a trilateral arrangement 
involving South Korea, the United States, and Canada, whereby 
coprocessing would be established in South Korea. 
  "Also in October, 1989 an IAEA seminar in Vienna was told by 
a KEPCO official that South Korea wants to install more PHWRs. 
A South Korean official added at the same meeting that South 
Korea would like to reprocess LWR spent fuel for recycling 
plutonium back into these PHWRs." 
  The point at issue is that the spent nuclear fuel from the 
PHWR is diverted directly into manufacturing nuclear weapons 
after its conversion into plutonium through the undisclosed 
reprocessing facility at the "Taedok science town." 
<H5>  III. The PHWRs Must Be Replaced By the LWRs </H5>
  The South Korean authorities have given the United States 
carte blanche to deploy numerous nuclear weapons in South Korea 
and meanwhile, on their part, actively pushed ahead with their 
own nuclear weapons development programme, and they are planning 
these days to introduce even "Patriot" missiles. 
  This graphically testifies to a sheer incongruity of their 
words and deeds, allegedly devoted to the implementation of the 
"joint declaration on the denuclearization of the Korean 
peninsula". 
  Now, South Korea is practically moving toward invalidating 
the "joint declaration on the denuclearization of the Korean 
peninsula". 
  In this regard, an American scholar Selig S. Harrison wrote 
in his comment that "criticism of the agreement has intensified 
in South Korea since Mr. No left office. One of the key 
advisers to President Kim Yong-sam, Chong Chae-mun, chairman of 
the `National Assembly's Foreign Affairs and Unification 
Committee' has called for a review of the 1991 agreement. `We 
know that we could generate nuclear power at a lower cost if we 
have reprocessing facilities,' Mr. Chong said last May, `and we 
cannot continue to depend on foreign countries for nuclear 
fuel.'" (U.S. newspaper INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE, November 
2, 1993). 
  The increasingly undisguised efforts on the part of the 
South 
Korean authorities to invalidate the "joint declaration on the 
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula" have further 
intensified recently, simultaneously with the on-going ruckus 
over the DPRK's so-called `suspected nuclear programme'. 
  South Korea's former "Minister of National Unification" Yi 
Se-ki said in April 1993 that "the `North-South joint 
declaration on the denuclearization' has been invalidated in 
principle," and went the length of insisting that "it is high 
time we have to acquire nuclear weapons capability, and the 
`National Assembly' should raise voice calling for this." (South 
Korean newspaper TONG-A ILBO, April 11, 1993). 
  South Korean "MBC Television" reported on October 9, 1993 
that some observers speculated that Kim Yong-sam called a 
"security-related ministers' meeting," unusually attended by the 
"minister of science and technology," and the meeting discussed 
matters related to the "acquisition of nuclear fuel reprocessing 
facilities" and to the "review of the `declaration on the 
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.'" 
  It has become a stark fact that the persistent dustup by the 
South Korean authorities over the DPRK's so-called "suspected 
nuclear programme" is, after all, intended to justify their 
attempts to develop nuclear weapons. 
  Commenting on this, the Romanian weekly EUROPA in its 
edition 
No. 152 disclosed that "the South Korean authorities' kickup 
over the North's `suspected nuclear programme' is part of their 
propaganda offensive to legalize their own nuclear weapons 
development." 
  The Canada-based overseas Koreans' newspaper NEW KOREA TIMES 
commented on October 23, 1993 that "particularly, the voice of 
the new right-wing forces in South Korea calling for the 
possession of nuclear weapons was high in intensity and the 
opposition response was no less tough. As if reflecting such 
pros and cons, South Korea's nuclear independence turned out to 
be a favorite topic in the `National Assembly' as well". 
  These facts alone suffice to show that the South Korean 
authorities are dashing headlong toward nuclear weapons 
development, unconcerned with the "joint declaration on the 
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula," which they have now 
rendered worthless. 
  The South Korean authorities must renounce their "nuclear 
weapons development policy" for the denuclearisation of the 
Korean peninsula, remove the nuclear materials they have already 
produced or brought from other countries, and take urgent 
measures either to dismantle their PHWRs both in operation and 
under construction or to replace them with LWRs. 

