Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Butch Franco] </F>
  [Text] Multilateral cooperation among members of the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) claiming the 
Spratly Islands is needed in solving the dispute over the 
oil-rich islands as part of confidence-building measures in 
Asia, an association of nongovernment organizations within ASEAN 
said yesterday. 
  In a press conference, the ASEAN-Institute of Strategic and 
International Studies [ASEAN-ISIS], noted the importance of the 
role of China, a non-ASEAN member which, together with Taiwan, 
Vietnam, Brunei, Malaysia and the Philippines, is claiming 
wholly or in part the Spratlys in the South China Sea. 
  The claimant-countries agreed in July 1992 to restrain from 
the use of arms in the disputed territories. 
  The ASEAN-ISIS said it will recommend this to the ASEAN 
regional forum in Bangkok this July. 
  The forum may also be participated in by the United States, 
Canada, Japan, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand, and the 
European Union. 
  Jusuf Wanandi, chairman of Indonesia's Center for Strategic 
and International Studies, said the ASEAN-ISIS had in the past 
advised countries concerned against arms buildup in order not to 
create misunderstanding and misgivings among themselves. 
  "For that reason we now propose that our security 
cooperation 
should be increased among ASEAN," Wanandi said noting that 
confidence-building must stem from existing bilateral and 
multilateral agreements. 
  Wanandi said ASEAN must not be alarmed over China's reported 
arms buildup, and instead get it to engage more in 
tension-reducing and confidence-building measures. 
  He said in the overlapping claims on Spratlys, China's role 
is very important. "We have to get her more engaged in other 
types of approaches to find the solution because she is central 
to the issue, as you all know." 
  Kusuma Snitwongse, director of Thailand's Institute of 
Security and International Studies, also said Southeast Asia 
must engage China in a "cooperative manner" since it is no match 
to China. 
  The ASEAN-ISIS, on its second day of a four-day conference 
at 
the Edsa Shangri-La Hotel said ASEAN forums should encourage 
China to have a stake in the continued prosperity of the area 
following reports that China is no longer interested in a 
peaceful settlement of Spratlys disputes. 
  Carolina Hernandez, president of the Institute for Strategic 
and Development Studies at the University of the Philippines, 
said China must not be directly confronted regarding the 
Spratlys issue. 
  "China is very interested in the stability of the region and 
is willing to undertake tension-reducing and confidence-building 
measures," Hernandez said. 

