CSO 

  [Text] Editorial Criticizes Lax Structure Which Led 
to Huge Foreign Exchange Speculative Losses 
  Oil refining company Kajima Petroleum incurred foreign 
exchange losses approximating eight times its capitalization of 
20 billion yen and officials of the company are in the process 
of disposing of company assets to offset the losses. Last year, 
at about this time, another petroleum firm known as Showa Shell 
Sekiyu had suffered foreign exchange losses reaching 160 billion 
yen. Foreign exchange speculative losses have decreased among 
financial institutions and trading firms in recent times, but 
such problems have now shifted to the petroleum industry. Rigid 
reviews must be performed to determine whether internal 
structures of petroleum firms are the cause for the occurrence 
of the huge foreign exchange losses. 
  First, we need to examine why such huge foreign exchange 
loss 
accumulations were recorded. 
  During a session of the Foreign Exchange Council in June 
1993 
a rule was approved which banned, as a matter of principle, any 
postponement in the settlement of foreign exchange futures 
contracts. When the market rate reflects a higher yen valuation 
than the contracted futures rate at the settlement date, a 
larger amount of yen must be paid to settle the transaction than 
in the case where a conversion takes place on a cash basis. 
Businesses often fear the occurrence of such losses in currency 
fluctuations and delay settlement to a future date and wait for 
the market rate to move to a lower yen valuation. 
  The reason why petroleum firms suffer huge foreign exchange 
losses is that they conclude currency contracts in amounts 
exceeding crude oil import costs and undergo repeated delays in 
settlement of payments for crude oil transactions of huge 
monetary values. You might say that they had involved themselves 
in currency speculation. However, the rule change implemented by 
the Foreign Exchange Council has put a stop to the delays in 
settlement dates, forcing the petroleum firms to reveal their 
foreign exchange losses. 
  The question is, why were the petroleum firms able to delay 
their settlement dates over a period of several years? There was 
a time when financial institutions engaged themselves in a loan 
war targeting petroleum firms which had a need for huge sums of 
dollars. As the petroleum firms avoided the surfacing of their 
foreign exchange losses and intensified their pace of delays in 
settlement dates, their currency losses ballooned. 
  The normal approach used by Japanese firms is to engage in 
currency futures contracts within amounts which equal real costs 
of importing raw materials and finished products. Compliance 
with such intracompany financial discipline is a matter that 
requires both internal and external audit. It appears that 
petroleum firms maintained a very lax system which made it 
difficult for such audit capabilities to function properly. 
  Financial institutions of our nation rode the wave created 
by 
the myth that land values will rise forever, were mesmerized by 
the bubble economy and found themselves in a predicament. 
However, they were saved by generous industry protective 
measures designed under the "noble cause" of protecting 
depositors. 
  Similarly, it appears that the petroleum industry has 
suffered from a diminishing sense of responsibility amidst 
conservative government and industry systems which call for 
protection of industry interests under the "noble cause" of 
ensuring a stable supply of energy. 
  Prices of petroleum products such as gasoline in Japan which 
are higher than those of other nations as well as inflexible 
prices are caused by rigid industry structures which have 
rejected the decontrol of exports and imports and condoned costs 
and margins which are higher when compared on an international 
basis. Too much emphasis has been placed on stable supplies, 
while neglecting actions to cut costs and increase competition 
through the free market entry and departure process. 
  The deficiencies in management structure which permitted 
foreign exchange speculation and the need to pursue measures to 
compensate for speculative losses at Kajima Petroleum are not 
completely unrelated to conditions in the petroleum industry 
nurtured by protective government regulations. There is an 
urgent need to convert government and industry so that genuine 
use can be made of domestic and international competitive 
principles. 

