Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Algeria: Justice, Interior, and </F>
Defense Ministries Trade Accusations Over Tazoult Operation"] 
  [Excerpts] Tazoult (Algeria), AL-HAYAH -- The committee 
investigating the attack on Tazoult prison in Batna Wilaya 
completed its field investigations yesterday and returned to the 
Algerian capital. 
  President Major General Liamine Zeroual is expected to 
address the nation in a few days to announce "crucial decisions" 
in the light of the committee's report and other factors. It 
was striking yesterday that the Justice, Defense, and Interior 
Ministries, of which the investigation committee is comprised, 
accused one another of negligence -- which led to the production 
of three reports, instead of one. 
  Military units continued their combing operations in search 
of some 900 prisoners who escaped when scores of gunmen attacked 
Tazoult prison last Thursday. 
  AL-HAYAH yesterday saw scores of wounded escaped prisoners 
who were moved to Aress Hospital (50 km east of Batna) after the 
security forces pursuing them had shot them. Explosions were 
heard in the mountains and helicopters were seen flying over the 
area. It has been learned that the combing operations have been 
moved to Batna city itself, including the university campus and 
the area around it. As is known, the area is Maj. Gen. 
Zeroual's birthplace. 
  Reliable sources have told AL-HAYAH that the investigation 
committee comprises nine members representing the Justice, 
Defense, and Interior Ministries. The committee recorded 
"important observations" about the negligence that took place 
before and during the attack on the prison. [passage omitted] 
  It is not ruled out that measures may be taken against 
officials at the three ministries at various levels. One source 
expressed amazement at the inclusion of the director of the 
Justice Ministry Prisons Department in the committee, especially 
as he is one of those accused of negligence. The source also 
accuses the Defense Ministry of failing to carry out its duties. 
He also stresses that Justice Minister Mohamed Taguia informed 
all parties of the matter but they did not carry out their 
duties. 
  AL-HAYAH has learned that the regime has opened the Justice 
Ministry file and discovered that "high-level circles at the 
ministry are accused of bribery and favoritism." These 
accusations are based on "firm evidence" to a large extent 
linked to what happened in Tazoult prison and other prisons. It 
has been learned that the investigation committee also recorded 
the disappearance of Minister Taguia and his senior aides during 
the four-hour attack on Tazoult, and none of them went to the 
site. 

