Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Untitled editorial] </F>
  [Text] In the past, when the government became angry and 
annoyed with a high-ranking official and wanted to get rid of 
him, it assigned him to the Foreign Ministry. When that person 
was a middle-ranking official, he was assigned to the Finance 
Ministry. When he was a low-ranking official, he was assigned to 
the Ministries of Youth and Agriculture. What was the result? 
  When we needed bread, we found our agriculture destroyed and 
without irrigation; no one could plant in order to feed the 
people. So, the head of state, comrade leader Saddam Husayn -- 
as usual -- was forced to save the situation. He supervised the 
harvest from the beginning. He gave instructions to set up 
irrigation projects and build dams under the circumstances of 
the blockade. 
  What also happened? When youths were needed to stand with 
honor during the chapter of treason, they were the tools of 
implementation. When our economy was in a critical situation 
because of the lack of hard currency and the lack of dollars as 
a financial cover, and when we needed good economists and 
finance men, we noticed the cause of all that confusion was the 
economists and finance men of the Ministry of Finance and the 
Prime Ministry. As a result of this, the dollar exchange rate 
increased continuously from 54 dinar until it reached more than 
300 dinars. 
  Since the cease-fire -- praise be to God, the Iraqis who sat 
at the negotiating table with the Americans to reach the 
cease-fire were not the politicians of the Foreign Ministry, but 
a military group who fought in al-Qadisiyah and the Mother of 
Battles -- we can say the handling of Iraq's foreign policy has 
been deteriorating. Iraqis can say it is in a bad shape. Why? 
Is this the result of the current situation? The answer is no. 
Throughout the 8 years of the war with Iran and until the 
Mother of Battles our ambassadors worked in trade. One of our 
ambassadors to a Southeast Asian country had nothing to do 
except to trade in carpets, works of art, and electrical 
appliances in order to collect money. The main concern of other 
ambassadors in socialist countries was to profit from trade in 
the black market. Embassy employees who work in sensitive 
organizations and who are charged with security tasks work in 
trade. The other employees' primary concern is to live in free 
houses in the countries to which they are assigned and to obtain 
food at low prices in order to collect dollars to buy 
commodities for resale at high prices in Iraq. In one of the 
countries on which we depend until this moment, the ambassador 
has nothing to do but to take gifts from so-and-so merchant and 
to charge so-and-so merchant with running his own affairs. This 
takes place while their people are being besieged and need every 
honest effort to provide them with bread. The outcome is the 
escape of more than one ambassador who quit the service and did 
not return to the homeland of struggle or to their steadfast 
people. 
  If we assess the work of our foreign policy during the eight 
years of war -- in which each Iraqi house lost one, two, or 
three martyrs -- what will be our gains? Only part of the 
Jordanian people, three-quarters of the Yemeni people, and the 
very rich people in the Gulf were at our side? We now 
understand why the Gulf people's feeling were with us. Because 
we indirectly deterred Iran's danger to the nation. In other 
words, we averted the danger of fire so their money wouldn't 
catch fire and burn. 
  As a result, when we were engaged in the Mother of Battles, 
the Arabian Gulf states mobilized armies against us, directly or 
indirectly, and with their money. Part of Egypt, whose citizens 
were working in Iraq, stood by our side. The whole Arab Maghreb 
was against us because it believed Iraq had committed an 
aggression against a neighboring Muslim country. 
  Is the Arabs' love for Iraqis expressed by places that did 
not support us due to foreign policy? 
  The answer is no. It was due to Saddam Husayn who suits his 
actions to his words. This is what every Arab wants. He wants 
a leader who can talk in the name of the nation, who is one of 
the nation's best sons, and who raises the nation's banner 
against all symbols and idols that act against the nation and 
the liberation of Palestine and that led to the loss of 
Palestine. Those who travel outside Iraq feel the Arab people's 
love. The Arab citizen loves the Iraqis because he loves Saddam 
Husayn. Saddam is the key and Iraq is the door. 
  What have we won so far? Two people were playing cards. One 
of them revealed his cards to the other, placed all his money 
before him, and began to negotiate with him empty-handed. In 
other words, we surrendered to the United Nations. We agreed to 
everything. We did not keep any cards to negotiate with, 
including factories and weapons. We revealed all our diplomatic 
cards from the very first round. We agreed with them. But they 
were pursuing the Jewish mentality, namely, the take-and-demand 
formula. One of our comrades mentioned this point in a 
television interview. They asked just for one factory, then for 
just one piece of iron, them for just another piece, and then 
for just another item. We gave them everything. Now, we have 
nothing to negotiate with. 
  The United Nations understands only one language -- the 
language of Aidid and the Yugoslavs. The Somalis are a poor 
nation, and their best weapon is the Kalashnikov. But what were 
the results? The invaders left, although their armies 
outnumbered the Somali inhabitants. Aidid represents one trend, 
and the number of his supporters was equal to that of Ali Mahdi. 
After he entered into a conflict with the foreigners, the 
number of his followers increased at the expense of the other 
trends. In Yugoslavia, whenever the Yugoslavs want something, 
they behave properly with the United Nations and succeed in 
choosing the right way. 
  The best thing that can be said about foreign policy is the 
dialogue between two generations of Ba'thists, the pioneers and 
the young generation. Among themselves, youths criticize 
foreign policy represented by the person of the foreign minister. 
  The pioneers literally say: My dear comrade, so and so 
should 
be lauded for being able to work. Comrade so and so is more 
than a foreign minister, and our ambassador so and so is more 
than a foreign minister, but so and so is just a foreign 
minister. [as published] 
  I would like to relate to you the following dialogue that 
took place between Stalin and Mao Tse-tung. 
  Mao Tse-tung: Comrade Stalin, how many members should we 
have in the Communist Party of China in order to achieve victory 
and reach power? 
  Stalin, thankfully: Ten members. 
  Mao Tse-tung, surprised: But the members of our party number 
millions, comrade. 
  Stalin: I mean 10 members like Muhammad's followers. 

