BFN 

  [Text] As indicated by the "decision of the CPC Central 
Committee on some issues concerning the establishment of a 
socialist market economic structure adopted by the third plenary 
session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, establishing a modern 
enterprise system is a necessary requisite for developing 
socialized mass production and the market economy, and it 
represents the orientation of reform of China's state-owned 
enterprises. This exposition is a strategic measure adopted by 
the CPC Central Committee in the time when the reform is 
entering the most difficult stage and when the microeconomic 
foundation for the socialist market economy is being remolded. 
This exposition has provided a completely new angle of view and 
train of thought for the deepening of the reform of state-owned 
enterprises. 
  The so-called modern enterprise system means a kind of 
enterprise system that is suitable for the demands of socialist 
mass production, reflects the requirement of the socialist 
market economic structure, and enables enterprises to truly 
become the legal entities and the main body of market 
competition commensurate with the world and domestic markets. 
The modern enterprise system is a completely new system that 
standardizes the series of basic relations, such as the 
relations of enterprises with investors, with creditors, with 
the government, with the market, with other enterprises, with 
consumers, and with staff and workers, and that touches upon the 
external environment and the internal mechanism. Based on 
China's existing state-owned enterprises, not only are there no 
ready-made modes to follow but also there are many practical 
difficulties in establishing a modern enterprise system with 
Chinese characteristics and that is geared to the international 
economy. For this reason, when promoting the practice of this 
great reform, the vast numbers of theoretical and practical 
workers are all the more required to further emancipate the mind 
and make bold explorations and brave practice for this system in 
a bid to perfect it gradually. 
<H5>  Establishing a Modern Enterprise System Is An Objective </H5>
Demand for Building the Socialist Market Economic Structure 
  As early as at the initial stage of reform, some theoretical 
workers set forth the "theory of regarding enterprises as the 
foundation" and the theses that enterprises should become 
producers of commodities, enterprises should have their 
independent economic benefits, and enterprises should assume 
sole responsibility for their own profits or losses. In the 
middle of the 1980's, some comrades set forth the theory of 
separating ownership from management right, thus pushing forward 
enterprise reform in both theory and practice. After entering 
the 1990's, changing enterprises' operational mechanism with 
focus on delegating autonomy to enterprises has become the main 
orientation of endeavor of enterprise reform. These 
explorations and practices have played a tremendous role in 
promoting the initiation of China's enterprise reform and the 
formation of the idea of urban reform with focus on invigorating 
enterprises. This kind of new economic structure has decided 
that reform measures must change from the readjustment of a 
policy nature to the innovation of systems and has also decided 
that China must establish a modern enterprise system suitable 
for the demand of establishing a socialist mass production and 
the market economy. 
  The socialist market economic structure is different from 
the 
traditional planned economic structure. Its major 
characteristic is to enable the market to play a fundamental 
role in the distribution of resources. And the key to 
exploiting the role of the market mechanism lies in the endeavor 
of making state-owned enterprises to truly become the main body 
of market competition. According to this requirement, new trails 
must be blazed in the modern enterprise system. The specific 
pattern of the enterprise reform must serve this general goal. 
It is necessary to set up a modern enterprise system which 
meets the requirements of the market economy and in which the 
property rights as well as the rights and responsibilities of 
enterprises are clearly defined, government administration and 
enterprise management are separated, and scientific management 
is established. In division of functions and duties between 
governments and enterprises under this new system, the state, as 
an investor, enjoys the right to take part in strategic 
decisions and choice of managers and the right of dividend but 
will not directly interfere in enterprises' specific management 
activities any longer. In regard to the change of the enterprise 
managerial mechanism, enterprises are able to fully embody their 
capabilities and forms of behaviors under the market economic 
system and enter the markets in the capacity of legal persons. 
That is, the production and management orientation depends on 
the price mechanism and the market supply. The dynamics of 
competition depends on the amounts of cost, the quality, and the 
service quality. Self-development depends on the returns on 
investment, the results of management, and the management level. 
By standardizing the behaviors of managers, we can resolve the 
long-standing problems that state-owned enterprises have not 
clearly identified the responsibilities of plant directors 
(managers) and to whom they should be held responsible to, that 
responsibilities are divorced from rights, and that enterprises 
have myopic behaviors. With clear property right 
responsibilities and scientific organizational management 
organizations, enterprises will form powerful self-restriction 
mechanisms. In coordinating with the international practice, 
state-owned enterprises should operate according to the 
standards for companies. In this way, the enterprises will find 
it convenient to enter the international market; smoothly 
conduct the international trade, investment, and 
capital-circulating activities; and enhance their 
competitiveness on the international market. All these are 
specific targets for reforming the macroeconomic regulation and 
control and changing the enterprise managerial mechanisms that 
we have made persistent efforts to pursue for several years. 
<H5>  To Set Up a Modern Enterprise System, We Should Resolve the </H5>
Deep-Layered Contradictions and Problems in Enterprises' 
Development 
  Since the implementation of the reform policy, we have 
successively adopted major reform steps, such as expanding 
rights, conceding profits, replacing profits by taxes, carrying 
out the contract system, and changing the enterprise managerial 
mechanisms, basically with the focus on expanding rights, 
conceding profits, and giving a stimulus by giving profits in 
order to enhance enterprises' vitality and resolve enterprises' 
development problems. Of course, by no means does it mean that 
it is not necessary to readjust the relations of interests among 
the state, the enterprises, and the staff and workers. Under 
the highly centralized planned economic system, the state 
carried out a financial policy on unified revenues and unified 
expenditures, and enterprises had no independent economic 
interests and had no differences between good and bad 
performances. Thus, the enthusiasm of both staff and workers 
and enterprises was dampened. Enterprises will not be able to 
create internal economic motivation if the relations of 
interests among the state, the enterprises, and the staff and 
workers are not readjusted. The problem is that the change of 
mechanisms must be the prerequisite for readjusting the 
relations of interests. If the relations of interests are 
simply readjusted not in coordination with the change of 
mechanisms, the space for "talks on interests" will be left for 
enterprises. As of now, these reform measures of state-owned 
enterprises have not yet fundamentally got to the reform of the 
traditional enterprise systems under the planned economic 
system, but an orbit of reforming the comparatively simple 
shallow-layered enterprise managerial form emerges. The problems 
of not separating government functions from enterprise 
management and of enterprises having no clear property rights, 
no decision-making powers, and no perfect self-restriction 
mechanisms, by which the state-owned enterprises have been 
puzzled for a long period of time, have not fundamentally been 
solved so that enterprises are still noticeably short of 
vitality, have difficulties in standardizing their activities, 
and do not register ideal economic results. In short, the 
microeconomic foundation conforming to the market economic 
system has not really been established. To this end, the 
central authorities pointed out that determination should be 
made to blaze new trails in enterprise mechanisms, to resolve 
the deep-layered contradictions and problems affecting and 
restricting the development of enterprises, and to find out from 
the microeconomic layers an enterprise system that has the 
strongest competitiveness and efficiency and suits the needs of 
the market economic system. It is what we have said that the 
setup of the modern enterprise system is the fundamental task 
for enterprise reform. 
  Viewing the actual conditions of Heilongjiang Province, we 
know that fulfilling this task is of urgent and realistic 
significance. Although great changes have taken place in the 
overall appearances of the state-owned enterprises in our 
province through the reform over the past 10 years or so, we 
must calmly notice that the current situation of state-owned 
enterprises is worrisome. As a typical representative of the 
traditional planned economic system, our province objectively 
has more prominent contradictions and difficulties than any 
other provinces. Viewing the state-owned large- and 
medium-sized enterprises, we know that the natural resource 
distributions forms and established patterns, that took shape 
for a long period of time under the planned economic system, 
have brought about considerably great difficulties to the 
structural readjustment of state-owned enterprises and that with 
the influence by the habitual functions of the traditional 
economic management system, enterprises are still engaged in the 
nonmarket economic activities. Large- and medium-sized 
enterprises' deficits, debts payable, burdens to support the 
running of social undertakings, development speed, and economic 
results are not satisfactory. Viewing the small- and 
medium-sized enterprises subordinate to the counties, we know 
that after the 1993 Huachuan meeting, some counties (cities) 
boldly reformed the property right system so that the continuous 
declines in the production of county-run industrial enterprises 
starting from 1991 was halted. However, the problems, including 
the declines in production, more deficits, and insufficient 
reserve strength, are still extremely serious. Viewing the 
social environment, we know that the reform of the macroeconomic 
system, the change of the government functions, and the reform 
in the development of the market system and the social security 
system prominently cannot keep abreast of the fast progress of 
marketization in the realistic economic activities. This 
greatly restricts the pace of enterprise reform and development. 
To set up a modern enterprise system, enterprises should blaze 
new trails in the systems both internally and externally. By 
readjusting and blazing new trails in the property right system, 
the enterprise organizational form, the government functions for 
macroeconomic control, and other serialized systems, we should 
resolve the deep-layered contradictions and problems affecting 
the development of enterprises. This is a starting point as 
well as an ending point that must constantly be persisted in the 
course of setting up the modern enterprise system. If we are 
divorced from this point, the setup of the modern enterprise 
system will become meaningless. So long as we constantly 
persist in this point, the state-owned economy with state-owned 
large- and medium-sized enterprises as its main body will 
certainly be able to extricate itself from the strained 
circumstances and to step toward the new stage. 
<H5>  Establishing a Modern Enterprise System Requires the </H5>
Endeavor of Building a Contingent of Mature and Outstanding 
Entrepreneurs 
  The process of establishing a modern enterprise system is 
the 
process of gradually making enterprises the main body of market 
competition. In this process, enterprises must compete with one 
another in an even sharper manner. Competition between 
enterprises can be manifested as the commodities and service of 
enterprises first, as technology and management of enterprises 
second, and as the skills of managers and the quality of workers 
third. Practice has proven that under the same condition and 
environment, all the enterprises that have taken the lead in 
embarking on the fast lane of the economy, have anticipated 
others in reform and development, and has yielded marked 
economic returns can ascribe their success to their excellent 
managers. The real strength and momentum of enterprises lies in 
professionals, the managerial professionals of high level in 
particular. Training a group of managers who are highly 
professionalized and who meet the demand of the market economy 
constitutes an important condition for successfully establishing 
a modern enterprise system as well as a cardinal guarantee for 
establishing the socialist market economic structure. In this 
sense, without a contingent of mature and outstanding 
entrepreneurs under the market economy, the socialist market 
economic structure will not come to success. 
  The establishment of a modern enterprise system touches upon 
many fields. As a complete set of systems, the modern 
enterprise system is extremely rich in contents, many of which 
are the knowledge we have not commanded and understood yet. 
When viewed from the current situation, many leading cadres of 
enterprises were managers under the planned economic structure 
and thus they are still accustomed to the ideas and habits of 
the planned economy to a certain extent. These cadres lag far 
behind the demands of new circumstances and new structures and 
face extremely arduous task of study in renewal of ideas, in the 
structure of knowledge, in the method of management, and in 
practical skills. Therefore, leading cadres at all levels and 
all the comrades on the enterprise circles should first 
strengthen the study to improve themselves. All pertinent 
departments should adapt themselves to the demand of reform and 
development by positively creating conditions for training 
economic cadres and leading cadres of enterprises in an effort 
to enable these cadres to grasp and understand the guidelines of 
the "decision" as quickly as possible and to grasp the new 
circumstances and new contents of transforming the operating 
mechanism of enterprises, establishing a modern enterprise 
system, and many other major reform measures and in an effort to 
guide enterprises to keep abreast of the new reformed systems as 
quickly as possible. Managers of enterprises in the province 
have made tremendous contributions to developing the economy and 
invigorating Heilongjiang and have, in particular, experienced a 
lot of hardships under the current situation of having 
relatively more difficulties. Generally viewing, the quality of 
the ranks of entrepreneurs in the province is good. Of course, 
we should also catch sight of shortcomings. Excellent 
enterprise managers cannot be brought up without market 
competition. For this reason, we should proceed from the 
overall situation of our province's economic development and 
rapidly impose an external competition pressure and an internal 
profit-making motivation on entrepreneurs; cultivate a strong 
sense of mission of caring for the enterprise property of all 
legal entities, including state-owned assets; cultivate a 
pioneering spirit of participating in competition on one's 
initiative, reform and improve the enterprise leadership system 
and organizational management system, and create conditions for 
cultivating a great number of outstanding entrepreneurs in the 
course of market competition. 
<H5>  To Build a Modern Enterprise System, Pilot Enterprises </H5>
Should Shoulder the Mission of Exploring Ways To Develop and To 
Accumulate Experience 
  The establishment of the modern enterprise system involves 
not only enterprises in various sectors but also many issues 
concerning the economic system and political system. 
Therefore, the "decision" pointed out that since the 
"establishment of the modern enterprise system is an arduous and 
complicated task, we must accumulate experiences and create 
conditions to gradually push it forward." The State Council 
has designated 100 enterprises to experiment with this system, 
and explore the priorities and difficulties in establishing the 
modern enterprise system through conducting experiments in 
selected enterprises. In line with the demand of deepening 
enterprise reform, the provincial authorities have designated 50 
provincial-level enterprises to experiment with the modern 
enterprise system. These experimental enterprises are our 
province's leaders in establishing the modern enterprise system 
as well as the experimental fields, which will become the 
pioneers in establishing this system. They have to undertake 
very arduous tasks, and have to get ready for paying a price of 
varying degrees, because this reform is different from the 
previous policy adjustment. It is a new system carried out 
under the situation in which the current enterprise internal and 
external environments have not yet been improved. At present, 
we should attach importance to boldly exploring ways to improve 
the enterprise property relations, establish the enterprise 
property system, separate government responsibility from that of 
enterprises, establish diversified enterprise organizational 
forms that suits the level of productive forces, establish and 
improve scientific enterprise internal management system, and 
implement new financial accounting system, gradually accumulate 
experience in the course of experiments, and lay a good 
foundation for comprehensively promoting the modern enterprise 
system in other enterprises. 
  The establishment of the modern enterprise system indicates 
that the state-owned enterprises will finally free themselves 
from the shackle of the traditional planned economy. At 
present, it is the favorable opportunity for us to extricate 
ourselves from a difficult position and to tackle the most 
difficult aspect in reform. We have courage and determination 
to overcome all sorts of difficulties facing us. However, the 
establishment of the modern enterprise system, which is one of 
the fundamental systems created in the process of moving towards 
the socialist market economy, needs a series of supporting 
reforms. To establish this new system, we must have a 
scientific and practical spirit and guard against the old 
mistakes of easily rushing headlong into mass action, breaking 
up in a hubbub and formalism which we often practiced in the 
past. Meanwhile, we should conduct a series of related 
supporting reforms in changing government functions, cultivating 
the market system, and building the social security system. 
Otherwise, it will be impossible for us to make a great batch 
of state-owned enterprises eliminate difficulties in face of the 
market economy. This is a choice which we cannot avoid in the 
course of establishing the modern enterprise system. 

