Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [News Report: "Drug Mafia Gave the Code Words to the Agent </F>
and Put Him on the Plane; the First Trip Was Successful but on 
the Second Trip, the Agent Was Arrested at an Arab Country's 
Airport While Carrying a Briefcase Filled With Heroin; the 
International Smuggler's Confession of Guilt; Other Members of 
the Group Were Unmasked; the Accused Was Sent to Jail Under 
Judicial Remand."] 
  [Text] Peshawar (Court Reporter): 
Accused drug dealer on an international level, Fazlur Raziq son 
of Aslam Khan and resident of Badargah, Malakand Agency, 
confessed his guilt in magistrate Siraj Ahmad's court and 
revealed the facts. After his confession was recorded, the 
accused was jailed under judicial remand. In a statement 
recorded in court, the accused said that while he was employed 
in a tea house in Mengora, he and a companion, Aqal zada, were 
brought to Peshawar by a man named Bahadur. Negotiations were 
held in Peshawar regarding drug dealing with a group consisting 
of three men from Gandhab; at first, the negotiations were 
unsuccessful but a few days later, an agreement was reached with 
a member of the group named Amanat. The accused told the court 
that under the agreement, he and his companion went to Gandhab 
to see Amanat Khan, a member of the drug Mafia. There, travel 
papers were prepared for Aqal Zada and he was sent on a trip 
outside the country carrying a briefcase full of narcotics. The 
accused said that after his companion had made the trip 
successfully, the accused also was given a false identity card 
and passport and sent on a trip carrying a briefcase full of 
narcotics. The accused said that the group members told him that 
he was to call himself Naushad son of Mohammad Hussain and that, 
after reaching an Arab country, he was to hand over the 
briefcase to a man who would greet him with the words (Badargah 
Walah Pakhair Raghle). However, when the accused reached the 
airport together with his 3 companions, he was arrested while 
carrying the briefcase filled with heroin. In his statement, the 
accused named the members of the group but the identities of 
those men was kept secret. 

