Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 17 KYODO -- Japanese Prime Minister 
Morihiro Hosokawa's visit to Beijing this weekend comes just one 
week after China's bashing of U.S. Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher. 
  The visit, set to begin Saturday [19 March] and end Monday, 
is the first by Hosokawa as Japan's prime minister and is 
expected to set the tone for a new triangular balance between 
the two economic superpowers and China's emerging market. 
  Political analysts in Beijing believe that after the verbal 
thrashing that Christopher took, the Chinese leadership will 
most likely greet Hosokawa with open arms. 
  Hosokawa's busy but relaxed agenda, which will take him to a 
Beijing subway station and a free market, attests to the cordial 
atmosphere that is expected to surround the trip. He is also 
scheduled to have meetings with President Jiang Zemin, Premier 
Li Peng and Vice Premier Zhu Rongji. 
  Japanese-Chinese economic relations have made giant strides 
over the last two years with bilateral trade hitting an all-time 
high of about 38 billion dollars in 1993. 
  Japanese economic clout will be needed more than ever if the 
U.S. Administration of President Bill Clinton decides to pull 
the plug on China's most-favored-nation trading status. 
  China, of course, needs all the help it can get if its 
transformation from a centralized economy, burdened by a huge 
inefficient state sector, to an economy capable of responding to 
market forces is to be successful. 
  Hosokawa, however, is relatively unknown to a Chinese 
leadership that views him only as a transitional leader and 
which longs for the pandering meted out by the Liberal 
Democratic Party to continue. 
  For Hosokawa, the trip should offer a good opportunity to be 
firm with the Chinese leadership and to seek to use the trip in 
any way possible to shore up his domestic image, analysts said. 
Although he is expected to continue his policy of apologizing 
for Japanese war crimes, reports have also said he will push the 
Chinese on human rights issues and environmental protection. 
  Hosokawa is also expected to seek a sound explanation for 
the 
22 percent increase in China's military expenditures announced 
last Friday at the ongoing National People's Congress, China's 
legislature. He will push the Chinese to play a bigger role in 
helping solve international disputes stemming from North Korea's 
suspected nuclear development program, while calling for China 
to ban the testing of nuclear weapons. 
  After two days in Beijing, the prime minister will visit 
Shanghai on Monday and tour the Pudong development area before 
returning to Japan later in the day. 

