Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Bogdan Vladimirovich Budzulyak, member of </F>
the governing board of the RAO [Russian Joint Stock Company] 
Gazprom, conducted by Viktor Andriyanov; time and place not 
given] 
  [Text] We met with Bogdan Vladimirovich a long way 
from Moscow, in Ukhta when Severgazprom [North Gas Industry] was 
celebrating its 25th anniversary. He felt at home here--after 
all 20 years of his life had been given to the North. Starting 
as a worker, a foreman, he rose through the ranks, as people 
say, to general director of a large production association. 
Before his eyes and with his participation Vuktyl was developed, 
lines were laid to the Center, and the first steps were taken 
toward the extraction of natural gas in the Yamal area. 
  [Andriyanov] For many years the country called for 
volunteers 
to develop the North. Now, as RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA has already 
written, streams are beginning to flow in the opposite 
direction, and the migration of people from the northern cities 
and settlements is beginning on the level of the state. And if 
you take a look not from the situation at this particular moment 
but taking into account the strategic interests of Russia, is it 
justified to say, Bogdan Vladimirovich, that this is the latest 
great migration process? 
  [Budzulyak] Yes, of course, you can. I will try to justify 
this conclusion. Remember how the assimilation of the northern 
oil and gas deposits went. For the most part migrants from the 
southern regions of the Union rendered these krays habitable, 
migrants from Central Russia, Kuban, and Ukraine. Mines were 
built and near them settlements and cities. But deposits do not 
last forever. The oil, gas, and condensate were taken and there 
was nothing more there. But what about the people? The city? 
What could the population do? 
  Another feature is the climate. Only a person who was born 
here could live his entire life in the North. People from other 
places must sooner or later leave. 
  [Andriyanov] But why were these cities and settlements there 
in the permafrost zone? 
  [Budzulyak] Technology necessitates such decisions. 
Technology did not permit operation of the mines from a 
distance. And that is why the cities and settlements developed 
according to their own logic. The satellite enterprises, the 
social infrastructure. 
  The path of automation must be followed. Together with 
German 
firms our military-industrial complex enterprises, in particular 
the Scientific Research Institute of Measurement Systems from 
Nizhniy Novgorod, developed the latest control systems. On the 
new lines the primary compressor plants in the permafrost zone 
will be completely automated. Remote control and a minimum of 
service personnel. The tour-of-duty workers flew in, worked for 
15 days, and then, back to their families. 
  In general migration from the North, or rather from a number 
of oil and gas regions, has objectively become necessary. And 
the new development plans rule out bringing in excess people. 
Permanent housing will be in the Mainland, and only work here. 
  Remember how the assimilation of the deposits went in former 
years? Deliver the gas by such-and-such a date! And it was done, 
at all costs. Now it is possible to prepare carefully for going 
into new deposits. We ourselves determine, based on the market's 
needs, when and which deposits must be commissioned. 
  [Andriyanov] Despite the enormous debts... 
  [Budzulyak] Yes, the consumers received the gas but paid for 
only one-half. The debt to Gazprom is approaching R3 trillion. 
Including the consumer debt in Russia itself. 
  Recently I participated in negotiations with the leadership 
of Ukraine. A long-term governmental agreement was discussed. 
The government of Ukraine will ensure the construction of 
housing for Northerners on the territory of Russia and Ukraine 
to pay off the debt for gas. Ukraine will pay off another part 
of the debt using credit which it receives from Russia. 
  The debts increased greatly after prices rose, to world 
levels. We proposed to reduce the price for gas supplied to 
Ukraine, Belarus, and other CIS countries so that rates for gas 
transit would decline at the same time. These proposals were 
supported by the edict of the RF president "On the Russian Joint 
Stock Company Gazprom Ensuring a Reliable Gas Supply to 
Consumers in 1994-1996." This document also envisioned other 
provisions which are fundamentally important in order to develop 
the new deposits of natural gas at an accelerated rate and 
reinforce Russia's export potential. 
  [Andriyanov] We flew from slushy Moscow, and in Ukhta it was 
35 below. 
  [Budzulyak] And every degree of lower temperature is another 
almost 40 million cubic meters of gas a day. We have to boost 
field production immediately and take gas from the storage 
tanks. The entire system has to be in readiness and very 
flexible. 
  [Andriyanov] That is probably possible only with unified 
control of the country's entire gas system. 
  [Budzulyak] Such a system has already been created in our 
country. The Unified Gas Supply System. 
  [Andriyanov] But it bothers some people a great deal: they 
talk of monopoly and are preparing drafts to deregulate the 
energy market. 
  [Budzulyak] Altogether incompetent people could prepare such 
a draft. 
  [Andriyanov] Or, on the other hand, overly competent people. 
  [Budzulyak] Possibly. At their promptings the oil industry 
has been spoiled, and every year it loses up to 50 million in 
production. But the oil workers are not bound so tightly by 
these pipes as gas workers. 
  Western well-wishers give their recommendations based on the 
experience of building gas pipe systems in America. But where is 
America and where are we? They have closed deposits and local 
gas supply regions. In our country that is impossible. If 
certain structures are broken up, extraction and transport ones, 
the consumer will not get his gas. Whom can he work with when 
there are about 3 million consumers in Russia alone? Where will 
he go? To Tyumen? To Urengoy? Nadym? A lot of small monopolies 
will immediately appear. Because every person sits on some 
spigot, on some valve. If they do not like the conditions--they 
close it and shut it off. 
  [Andriyanov] Recommendations may be given for the best of 
motives. It is the job of the bosses to accept them or not. 
  [Budzulyak] The point is that they are stubbornly trying to 
convince us to do it just that way. And Mintopenergo [Ministry 
of Fuel and Energy], when Lopukhin was the head of the Ministry, 
took that position too. Even now some do. For it is no accident 
that such documents as the edict of the RF president on 
deregulating the energy market have appeared. 
  Here is another example. Recently Gazprom signed a credit 
agreement with one of the largest Italian firms. 
  [Andriyanov] RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA reported on that deal. 
  [Budzulyak] But how strong the pressure of certain 
structures 
on the government of Italy and the Italian banks to prevent this 
credit deal remained out of the picture. They demanded 
guarantees from the government of Russia and property as 
collateral. That naturally offended us. Many firms want to work 
with us and are working with us, knowing that Gazprom is 
solvent, has hard currency, and returns credits on time. 
  We worked with our partners on this agreement for two years. 
And then the hitches which I talked about appeared in the final 
stage. Now it is signed and Gazprom enterprises will be 
allocated capital to buy the equipment needed to reconstruct and 
technically re-equip the sector from Italy's firms. Cooperative 
production of gas pump units has been organized with Germany at 
the Kirov Plant in Petersburg. We worked on this project for a 
year and a half. 
  Of course, we are developing our own units. Tests on a unit 
made in Sumy based on components and an engine from the 
Semarskiy Plant will now begin at the testing unit in Tolyatti. 
The Saturn concern and the well-known aviation engine 
association "Lyulka" are participating in the program with the 
Italians. An engine with a high KPD [efficiency factor]--up to 
36 percent--has been developed. Perm motor builders created a 
unit that is essential to replace equipment which has exhausted 
its service life. 
  Overall the program of technical re-equipping is focused on 
domestic plants. The most important thing in it is raising 
efficiency so that fewer expenditures will yield better results. 
  [Andriyanov] RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA intends to talk in detail 
about how this program is being carried out. 
  [Budzylyak] We will be grateful to you. It is a big job 
important to the whole country. For ahead lies development of 
the Yamal area, the Barents Sea shelf, the Island of Sakhalin, 
and the Shtokmanovskiy Deposit. Heat for all Russia is there. 

