CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by correspondent Oscar Camacho Guzman] </F>
  [Text] El Bosque, Chiapas, 11 January--Sitting by the door 
of the parish church on a pine bench that was once painted 
brown, Herve Camier Duplouy, the priest in this town nestled in 
the Chiapas highlands, looks with contained rage at the soldiers 
filing into the house of God, bearing weapons and precise 
instructions. 
  "These are times of persecution and harassment for the 
Church 
of the poor in these parts," he says tersely, powerless to do 
anything about the soldiers who are poking around in every 
corner, overturning piled up planks, and peering everywhere some 
"lawbreaker" might be hiding. 
  "They are profaning the church, searching, harassing...," 
murmurs this French-born priest, who at age 56 "embraced the 
option for the poor" in his pastoral work, an option that he has 
been preaching for seven years in this region of northern 
Chiapas. 
  "I think it would be best if you did not bring weapons into 
the church," cried Father Herve Camier Duplouy, but his pleas 
were not heeded this time. 
  The soldiers have taken action. They are part of the 
military 
operation that the Mexican Army has conducted here for the 
second straight day under the assumption that members of the 
Zapatist National Liberation Army (EZLN) are lying in ambush 
somewhere near. A convoy of 1,500 soldiers has arrived in this 
region, backed by three guns and a light tank, to deal with the 
possible presence of "some 100 Zapatists" in the surrounding 
area, as the locals tell it. 
  "Is it legal for them to enter with weapons and search the 
church?" this reporter asked one of the officers who was 
watching the scene from a street corner. 
  "Legal?" he stammered. 
  "Yes, is it legal?" I asked again. The reply was total 
silence. 
  Meanwhile, the French priest, sitting on his old pine bench 
by the door to the church, reflected on this "dirty war," spoke 
of the Church, and quoted Saint Luke and Sacred Scripture. 
  "Do I think that the Church bears some responsibility for 
the 
situation in the state? I do not know. The only thing that I can 
say is that it never has and never will give anybody a single 
weapon. 
  "The Church is not responsible for their taking up arms. No, 
not that. Absolutely not. We are responsible for them, the 
Indians, no longer accepting idols and recognizing themselves as 
equal to others, as children of a single father and mother of 
God. But that is a very honorable responsibility." 
  He repeats: "Yes, we raised people's awareness, but we have 
never given arms." 
  "We have raised people's awareness in spite of their own 
reluctance to believe that they can be free, that they can have 
dignity, because they have always been victims of indifference, 
of scorn...." 
  "Are you surprised by what is happening?" 
  "I see it as a sign that people are tired, that is to say, 
tired of seeing no change in their situation. A situation in 
which they are unable to choose the authorities they want, 
because PRI [Institutional Revolutionary Party] always wins of 
course. In economic terms, they do not see any improvement in 
their situation, in the unfair prices for their products. They 
are tired of all the red tape, all the marches, all the mass 
actions. I think that it is a sign of tiredness." 
  "Is it easy for a priest to make the preferential option for 
the poor in his pastoral work? Has it been easy for you? Have 
you had problems?" 
  "Well, this preferential option for the poor comes from Holy 
Scripture, from Bartolome de las Casas; it is the model of Jesus 
Christ; Matthew 5:3, and more recently, the Second Vatican 
Council, where many bishops, especially Latin American bishops, 
were converted (paradoxically, they were inspired by the bishops 
from the wealthy countries); and also Samuel Ruiz in his 
pastoral letter, which was published before John Paul II's visit. 
  "First we sided with the rich, thinking that this was 
normal, 
but later we woke up. After the Council we saw that in our 
diocese as of 1974, the Lacandon Forest, which is heavily Indian 
and very poor, woke up, and instead of turning to the rich, the 
bosses, we went straight to the people. 
  "This is something that the powerful are never going to 
forgive Samuel Ruiz for. The diocese then lost its wealthy 
people." 
  "Have you had problems in recent days?" 
  "Yes, but I am not going to allow my heart to be overcome by 
fear. You can sense the hostility among people here, as they do 
not know where to go, they do not know which side is going to be 
stronger. And there are also these people (the soldiers)...It is 
a big stage...a theater, a circus," says the priest, his eyes 
almost tearful, his voice breaking. 
  The priest gazes into the distance towards the lower part of 
the town, where more than 25 trucks, tanks, and hundreds of 
soldiers remain stationed. They arrived in El Bosque on Monday 
after the mayor asked for them because armed rebels were rumored 
to be prowling the area. 
  It all started when five catechizers were arrested and 
thrown 
into the municipal jail. Around 150 people from neighboring 
towns then went to "rescue" them. The residents of this 
municipality say that they were "peasants under arms." But they 
also say that when "they arrived that time to rescue their 
companions, none of them were carrying weapons. They only came 
to get them and took off. But we think that they may return. 
This is why we asked them (the soldiers) to come," say several 
locals who have trouble expressing themselves in a foreign 
language. 
  Meanwhile, army troops hand out food, reminding people all 
the time that it is a gift "from the president of the republic." 
  Sitting on his old wooden bench, the El Bosque parish priest 
says that it has not been easy for people to accept "the 
kindness that you want to show them...It is not easy for these 
people to believe that love can develop so quickly after they 
have been treated with disdain for so long. These people, who 
have always been looked down on, are not going to believe this 
overnight. They are not going to believe so readily. They are 
still going to lower their heads...." 
  "And what about those who have already lifted their heads 
high?" 
  "Oh, I think that they are the rebels!" he says in 
conclusion, while alongside him the soldiers listen, watch, and 
act. 

