CSO 

<F P=106> [Text of interview with Dr. Djordje Djukic, member of the </F>
Board of Governors of the National Bank of Yugoslavia, by Zoran 
Jelicic; place and date not given: "Justice and Economics"] 
  [Text] In the issue before last of VREME, we informed our 
readers of certain ideas launched in the closed meeting of the 
Economic Council of Serbia, including the fact that Dr. Djordje 
Djukic, member of the Board of Governors of the National Bank of 
Yugoslavia, spoke about the needs and opportunities for a 
partial revision of losses and gains to hyperinflation. Dr. 
Djukic felt that his presentation was incomplete, and was 
therefore inaccurately interpreted, so with this interview VREME 
is giving readers an opportunity to acquaint themselves with 
Djukic's ideas. The conversation naturally began with a question 
about the content of the proposal itself. 
  [Djukic] This is an idea that I think deserves serious 
consideration. One of the key issues in the context of 
hyperinflation is how to treat the question of the immense 
redistribution of income that occurs in the national economy. 
This idea is not new. The same dilemma has forced itself upon 
other countries that have gone through hyperinflation, for 
instance, in Germany in 1923, although hyperinflation there was 
less destructive, because their maximum rise of prices was 20.9 
percent per month. 
  First, it is normal that under the conditions of mixed 
ownership there should be a much greater intermingling of the 
interests of socialized firms, which, being debtors, want there 
to be as large a volume of outstanding credit as possible, 
while, on the other hand, as depositors they naturally want 
their deposits to preserve their real value to at least some 
extent. Look what happened at the level of the entire banking 
system and within the individual commercial banks. At the 
general level, it is obvious that dinar capital is melting away: 
In January of last year, the share of dinar lending in total 
bank lendings was 45.28 percent--while at the end of that year 
it had fallen to 7.56 percent. That dinar subbalance was the 
basis for redistribution between debtors and creditors, but that 
is only a minor portion of the total redistribution. This means 
that small and medium-sized dinar savers have lost that property 
once and for all, that is, that they have been additionally 
impoverished, and it implies that the group of main users of 
credit--especially those in a position to quickly obtain 
information about primary note issue -- were in a situation to 
quickly take advantage of the effects of those loans, were in a 
position to realize immense gains as debtors. In the third 
quarter of last year, which was not horribly hyperinflationary, 
the user of credit from primary note issue returned 1.4 percent 
of the funds borrowed. Those figures give you an idea of what 
happened in the last three months of last year, that is, you can 
conclude that every loan was in practice a gift. 
  [Jelicic] Are you actually proposing some kind of 
compensation because of the government's erroneous policy in 
view of the fact that the principal users of credit from primary 
note issue were precisely those business entities which the 
government, both Serbian and federal, was supporting? 
  [Djukic] The essence of it is this: The discount rate of the 
National Bank of Yugoslavia and the rate of interest on the 
money market were far below real interest rates. The essential 
thing is not who was the greatest beneficiary at that moment; 
the essential thing is that the melting away of capital in the 
banks occurred because of hyperinflation and the administrative 
prescription of interest rates. Those circumstances pushed some 
banks into heavy losses, while others were purchasing foreign 
exchange through their enterprises and thus preserving the value 
of their capital--precisely that portion which need not be on 
the balance sheet in our country, but in some foreign account. 
  If you look at this from the standpoint of the state, then 
you see two general negative lines: The first is the extensive 
melting away of bank capital, and the second is the unfair 
approach to individual banks by the very fact that the customers 
of those banks were given differing treatment by the state. 
Thus, a redistribution of power among stockholders occurred 
within the commercial banks. 
  [Jelicic] In what direction should the adjustment of 
hyperinflationary profit go if the "good" banks were the ones 
that sheltered dinars in foreign exchange and thereby preserved 
the property of their customers, and the "bad" ones were those 
which to the end extended credits to the economy and thus left 
their stockholders with worthless stock? 
  [Djukic] There are both coercive and voluntary mechanisms 
for 
that. For instance, insisting on the quota would mean 
concentration and merger of the banks. That is what they are 
doing in Slovenia, and it is possible for the state to 
consistently defend all the criteria prescribed for the business 
operation of the banks. That brings us back to an issue we 
cannot get away from, and that is the conditions under which the 
banks operated last year: Those which bought foreign exchange 
with the credits from primary note issue will easily meet the 
minimum of $1.5 million, but the banks which did not do so are 
now in a position of either merging with some other bank or 
looking for new payments into the bank's capital from the old 
founders or from new ones. It is clear that the old founders 
might well ask whether they should do this again, although they 
have probably offset the loss to their subscribed capital 
through the use of inexpensive credits from primary note issue. 
However, the word is that it cannot be left at that if we want 
clean balance sheets, that is, if we want restructuring of the 
banks. 
  [Jelicic] Are you thinking also of the public, and not just 
of the business community, in connection with the professional 
assessments that this state has "relieved" the public and the 
economy of about $2.5 billion through last year's hyperinflation? 
  [Djukic] I am speaking about all the users of credit and 
investors, but I do not know how that sum was calculated, 
although it confirms my thesis of the immense redistribution in 
our country. I repeat, everything is getting more and more 
complicated in our country because of the multiple forms of 
ownership, so that it is not possible to discover all the flows 
of primitive accumulation of capital, as I call it. It is 
impossible, and it would be unnecessary, to attempt to calculate 
all the hyperinflationary losses and gains, so that I advocate 
only a partial compensation of the greatest changes. 
  [Jelicic] How much would that "partial" be? 
  [Djukic] It would be logical, as far as the banks are 
concerned, for the users of credit to have to bring bank funds 
at least up to where they were before hyperinflation. That would 
at least offset the changes within the bank. 

