Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Colombian Embassy in Washington and the Justice 
Ministry stated yesterday that they had no knowledge of the 
alleged decision by the U.S. State Department to suspend 
judicial cooperation and evidence exchange with Colombia until 
the scope of the Procedure Code is explained. 
  Gabriel Silva, Colombian ambassador in Washington, was 
puzzled by dispatches to that effect datelined in Washington by 
the news agencies AFP and AP, which attributed the information 
to the State Department. Silva indicated that no communication 
in that regard has taken place and added that, to the contrary, 
work is being conducted to agree on criteria on the matter of 
cooperation, "because whenever difficulties have arisen the aid 
has not been suspended." Justice Minister Andres Gonzalez said 
that "the government has no information to that effect neither 
in Bogota nor in Washington." 
  Attorney General Carlos Gustavo Arrieta and Prosecutor 
General Gustavo de Greiff made similar comments. After several 
consultations with officials in Colombia and the United States, 
they dismissed the reports. The attorney general said that 
important meetings are being held with U.S. officials to resolve 
the problems that may have arisen regarding the policy of 
surrendering to justice. 
  "There are differing views and interpretations regarding the 
policy of surrendering to justice and reducing sentences, but 
the U.S. Government has not formally made a decision," Silva 
said. According to Ambassador Silva, Colombian and U.S. 
officials have been discussing for some time judicial 
cooperation and how to resolve a series of obstacles that have 
arisen. "Cooperation is a two-way street," Silva noted, "and to 
cooperate we must be in agreement, and that is what where we 
stand." Justice Minister Gonzalez said the government has not 
received any kind of official communication on the alleged 
suspension of judicial exchange with the United States. 
"Although we have had differences, it has not led to a break in 
cooperation, and, quite the opposite, we hope to foster a 
climate to reinforce that cooperation because it is 
indispensable to combating drug trafficking for the sake of 
Colombia and mankind," Gonzalez added. 
  The differences between U.S. authorities and the Office of 
the Prosecutor General revolve around what the United States 
views as confusing guidelines within the Penal Procedure Code on 
the matter of sentence reductions. On this matter, the justice 
minister flatly denied that said code contains any benefit or 
automatic reduction of sentences to crminials who surrender or 
provide information to the Justice Ministry but rather gives the 
Office of the Prosecutor General discretionary power to grant 
some benefits provided the cooperation with justice is 
effective. "Surrendering alone does not entail a sentence 
reduction since effective cooperation with justice is 
indispensable," Gonzalez explained. This official, along with 
the Office of the Deputy Prosecutor General, promoted the code 
reform in Congress. 

