Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Roxana Rodriguez] </F>
  [Text] Jesus Sierra, the legal adviser to the Legislative 
Assembly Drug Committee, has reported that the DEA operation to 
uncover an alleged Panama-based drug trafficking and money 
laundering organization was geared to finding and seizing 
foreign exchange offices, credit companies, stock market 
operations, and [legal] offices that formed private companies in 
our country through letters of credit. 
  After gathering information on the alleged participation of 
Panamanian citizens in this criminal case, the legal adviser 
reported to the legislators on the Drug Committee and said no 
government official is involved in this case up to now. Jesus 
Sierra said the investigation, which, according to U.S. federal 
agencies, began more than two years ago, has not concluded and 
added that no Panamanian Government official appears to be 
involved in the case under investigation. 
  He emphasized that the DEA operation, which discovered the 
drug trafficking and money laundering organization in Panama, 
worked to find and seize foreign exchange offices, credit 
companies, stock market operators, and [legal] offices that 
formed private companies in our country through letters of 
credit to find out if they were involved in criminal activities. 
  Sierra said the DEA has a solid and strong case and has not 
yet concluded its investigation. Thus, he said, we will have to 
wait until the investigation ends to determine whether 
government officials have participated in those illegal 
activities. 
  Concluding, the official reported that he is preparing a 
file 
on this notorious case containing all the information he 
gathered during his trip to Tampa, Florida. 
  Jesus Sierra also gave information on Legislator Anel 
Ramirez, who is held in a Tampa jail on alleged drug trafficking 
charges. He said Ramirez had changed lawyers and appointed 
Richard Everst as his legal representative in the trial against 
him which will start in April. 

