Delivery   Service 

<F P=102> 944E0687A Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA in Russian 5 Apr 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 944E0687A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vyacheslav Polyakov, general director of the </F>
Federal Communications Directorate: "Is the Post Office to Blame 
for High Subscription Prices?] 
  [Text] Despite accusations of monopolism leveled at 
the Ministry of Communications, no one wants to take over 
delivery of periodical publications. 
  The times are long gone when the price of any newspaper did 
not exceed two or three kopeks, and the cost of its delivery 
simply did not exist. Today, because of the high cost, many 
people simply cannot afford to subscribe to a newspaper or 
journal. But even if you have become a subscriber, this still 
does not mean that you will receive the publication to which you 
have subscribed on a regular basis and in a timely manner. There 
are many reasons for this, but, as always, the most to blame in 
this case is the post office, which is the last stop along the 
newspaper's route to the reader. Today, everyone hurls angry 
accusations at the post office! And above all--the publishers 
themselves. It has gotten to the point where the editors of the 
newspapers TRUD and IZVESTIYA have filed a claim with the 
Judicial Chamber on Informational Disputes under the Russian 
Federation president, accusing the Federal Postal Communications 
Directorate of monopolism, of unjustified increases in rates for 
the delivery of printed matter, and even of infringing upon the 
rights of citizens to receive printed information. 
  I would like to make an attempt to determine calmly, without 
excess emotion, the degree to which the accusations leveled 
against the postal communications directorate are justified. A 
letter signed by Minister of Communications Vladimir Bulgak 
regarding this matter was sent to the Judicial Chamber on 
Informational Disputes, explaining both the essence of the 
question and the position of the ministry. 
  No one can deny the fact that the rates on delivery of 
printed matter are high. Unfortunately, this is an objective 
reality. Before, in the pre-reform times, the expenditures for 
delivery of printed matter were compensated from the profit 
received from other highly profitable services provided by the 
postal and electrical communications. Today we have no such 
possibility of re-distributing income. The new economic 
conditions in which we live, the market mechanism, have made it 
necessary to introduce rates on services for the distribution of 
periodical publications in accordance with the expenditures. The 
cost of delivery today reaches more than 50 percent of the total 
subscription cost of the publication. At first glance this may 
seem too much, but even these funds do not compensate all the 
expenditures. The expenditures for the transit and delivery of 
printed publications are constantly increasing, while the income 
received for the 8 months prior to the start of the subscription 
campaign is becoming just as quickly devalued. As a result, the 
postal service has incurred a loss in the sum of over 62 billion 
rubles [R] for 1993. 
  We are being accused of monopolism. Yet this is the very 
thing which we would gladly refuse. The Federal Communications 
Directorate supports any initiative for creating alternative 
services. In many foreign countries the distribution of 
periodical publications is handled by the publishers, which have 
their own distribution network. The postal service performs 
individual operations by contract with the editorial offices. We 
might add that today the Russian postal service is already not a 
monopolist in taking subscriptions, processing orders and 
expediting. Alternative services for the distribution of printed 
matter have been created and are in operation at the AO 
[joint-stock company] "AiF," "Izvestiya," "Rospechat" and 
others. A monopoly is retained only on one type of service--the 
delivery of printed publications. Because of its 
unprofitability, no one wants to engage in this and bear the 
losses. We have repeatedly made proposals to the editorial 
offices and publishing houses regarding the creation of their 
own delivery services, but they are in no hurry to do so. It is 
too expensive and unprofitable. Due to the low profitability (in 
1993 on the whole for the postal service it comprised only 2 
percent), we do not have the funds to develop this subsector. 
The network of postal institutions is getting smaller. In the 
last year there have become 1,000 fewer of them. The number of 
trains carrying mail is decreasing, in connection with which 202 
routes of postal cars have been cancelled. How can we speak of 
quality of servicing under these conditions? 
  The efficiency of printed matter delivery could be 
facilitated by a network of decentralized printing of central 
newspapers. However, due to their own economic difficulties, the 
editorial offices have begun to reduce the number of printing 
points. The problems of the transporters, polygraphers, and 
editorial offices are quite understandable and explicable. 
However, all the accusations of increasing the delivery times 
are being addressed only to the postal workers. The efforts of 
the postal institutions to distribute printed matter remain 
unnoticed. However, despite all the difficulties today, 70 
percent of the circulation of the central newspapers is 
nevertheless delivered to the subscribers on the day of issue. 
The subscription circulation of periodical publications for the 
first half of 1994 comprised 103.5 percent of the circulation 
for the second half of 1993. The number of titles of newspapers 
and journals distributed by the postal service continues to grow 
(from 1901 publications in 1993 to 2113 in 1994). I repeat, our 
efforts may seem inadequate to some, but we cannot forget that 
as long as the postal service endures losses from its activity, 
it is difficult to expect better results. 
  The existing system of state subsidies does not extend to 
all 
types of services, but only to the delivery of regular and 
registered correspondence and to the mailing and delivery of 
money orders and parcels. We have been categorically refused 
subsidies for the delivery of printed matter--the most 
unprofitable service. The Minfin [Ministry of Finance] 
explanation states that the expenditures for delivery of 
periodical publications must be determined on the basis of 
predictive calculations, taking into consideration the possible 
changes in prices on consumed products, and must be reimbursed 
by the publication subscribers. 
  Prices on subscription publications must, of course, be 
affordable to the main body of the readers, but this is a 
problem not only of the post office. All interested parties must 
strive toward this. The results of recent subscription campaigns 
indicate that the Federal Postal Communications Directorate, 
together with the editorial offices and publishing houses, has 
been able to stabilize subscriptions. However, the reduction of 
subscription prices may only be achieved in two ways. First--a 
state subsidy of editorial offices, publishing houses and 
distributors must be implemented. However, this would mean 
admitting our own helplessness without engaging the market 
mechanism. The second, and in my opinion the most optimal means, 
is the formation of a system of tax benefits for the entire 
complex associated with the publication and distribution of 
periodicals. Then we will not have to give away funds in the 
form of taxes with one hand, and to accept subsidies with the 
other. The repeal of the value-added tax on printed matter and 
of the taxes on property of enterprises associated with the 
printing of periodical publications and their distribution would 
make it possible to reduce subscription prices by almost 30 
percent and to increase the subscription circulations 
accordingly. The Ministry of Communications has repeatedly 
presented such proposals for discussion by the government, but 
unfortunately they have not been supported. We will hope that 
reason will prevail. After all, nothing will be accomplished by 
mutual accusations and justifications. 

