Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Lima EXPRESO in Spanish on 25 January 
publishes on pages A8 and A9 a 1500-word article by Liz Mineo on 
the threat of poppy crops expanding throughout Peruvian 
territory. 
  The article cites Adolfo Alcantara Vazquez, an adviser at 
the 
Executive Agency for Drug Control (Ofecod) of the Interior 
Ministry, who notes that the draft law punishing poppy growers 
with up to 20 years' imprisonment will not be a deterrent, 
because the threat will persist as long as the peasants living 
in poverty in the Sierra and Jungle regions are left unattended. 
  The author notes: "Alcantara said that the danger of 
expansion of poppy crops poses a serious challenge to the 
government, because `conditions are already ripe' for this to 
happen. He notes that the difficult situation of coca growers, 
the huge profits yielded by opium and heroin on the drug market, 
and the variety of climates existing in the Peruvian Sierra and 
Jungle regions may contribute to unleashing a poppy `boom' in 
the country." 
  The article says that the first confiscation of opium in the 
country occurred more than a month ago when the Chiclayo police 
seized 4 kg of a "strange substance" from two suspects, who 
claimed to have brought the opium from Bagua, Amazonas. 
  The article adds that, in a recent visit, EXPRESO reporters 
were able to confirm police reports that since mid-1993 
Colombian and Peruvian drug traffickers have been training 
peasants to grow poppies in some areas of Cajamarca, Amazonas, 
and San Martin Departments. 
  "It is feared that the collapse of coca crops in the 
Huallaga 
region, where nearly 200,000 farmers earn their living by 
growing coca leaves and making cocaine base, could pave the way 
for a boom in poppy growing." 
  Citing Huallaga residents, the article says that peasants 
are 
openly willing to grow poppies in light of the fact that 
Colombian traffickers "promised to pay them $1,500 per kg of 
opium, which is seven times what they would get for 1 kg of 
cocaine paste." 
  After citing the advantages of growing poppies instead of 
coca, such as the fact that poppies are easier to grow and 
harder to detect from the air, that opium requires much less 
processing than cocaine, and that heroin consumption is rising 
while cocaine consumption is declining on the U.S. market, the 
article cites experts stating that the Cajamarca, Apurimac, 
Urubamba, and Amazonas valleys would be ideal locations for 
poppy crops. By contrast, they note that poppies grow only in 
the Alto Biavo and Alto Mayo areas in San Martin Department, 
which is the largest coca production region in the country. 
  The article concludes by stating that "everything leads one 
to believe that it will be very difficult to prevent poppy crops 
from expanding in the country." Alcantara says: "We are 
already the world's leading producer of coca, and we could also 
become the leading producer of poppies." 

