Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By JORDAN TIMES staff reporter Nirmin Murad] </F>
  [Text] Amman -- Jordan does not anticipate having any 
problems with the security related issues entailed in the 
agreement between the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) 
and Israel signed in Cairo on Wednesday [9 February]. 
  Information Minister Jawad al-'Anani told the JORDAN TIMES 
Friday that because the PLO had signed a security agreement with 
Jordan in mid-January "we presume that Jordanian security 
considerations are calculated into the PLO-Israeli agreement." 
  Well-informed Jordanian sources also said that initial 
reading of the PLO-Israel document showed it to be 
"satisfactory." 
  The sources did not elaborate, but one said that "it 
appeared 
to support the Jordanian negotiating position" although a "more 
thorough reading of the document is needed." 
  PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arafat visited Amman Thursday for a 
short 
stopover during which he met with His Majesty King Husayn and 
briefed him on the accord he reached with Israeli Foreign 
Minister Shim'on Peres. He also handed over a copy of the Cairo 
agreement to the King. 
  This visit, albeit short, was apparently intended to prevent 
the kind of tension that arose after the PLO surprised the 
Kingdom by announcing the Oslo agreement without prior serious 
coordination with Jordan. 
  King Husayn has repeatedly called on the PLO to coordinate 
positions with the Kingdom and until last week was saying 
coordination was not of the level needed. 
  Jordanian officials, although still critical that there was 
no synchronisation of steps by the PLO with Jordan before 
reaching the Cairo agreement, were positively encouraged by Mr. 
'Arafat's stopover in Amman to brief King Husayn immediately 
after the signing of the accord. 
  The King and Mr. 'Arafat held a short meeting at the Queen 
Alia International Airport after which King Husayn said that 
"coordination and consultations are continuing (between the PLO 
and Jordan) and are of the level needed to face the challenges 
and meet the responsibilities fully." 
  The King said that Mr. 'Arafat's visit to Amman "was a good 
opportunity to brief us on what happened," adding that it was 
also an opportune time "to reaffirm (to 'Arafat) that our 
position has not changed in our absolute and full support for 
our family and brothers in Palestine and with all our strength 
and capabilities." 
  Mr. 'Arafat told reporters after the meeting that he was 
"happy and proud to have had this opportunity to discuss with 
His Majesty many important issues, especially the negotiations 
that took place in Cairo." 
  "I have listened to His Majesty's thoughts and ideas on ways 
to deal with future issues which we must meet as one and through 
a joint effort," Mr. 'Arafat said, adding that "this 
Jordanian-Palestinian family is one that is headed by His 
Majesty King Husayn and is always under his care." 
  Dr. al-'Anani, in telephone interview, said that 
"coordination has improved" between the Palestinian and 
Jordanian sides and that Thursday's meeting was "very good." 
  He denied that there was continued tension between the PLO 
and Jordan over coordination and said that the "Palestinians 
were fully aware of our position (regarding security issues) 
before they signed the agreement with Israel." 
  "I don't anticipate any problems with the PLO-Israel 
agreement because it appears to be borne out of our agreement 
with the PLO," Dr. al-'Anani said. 
  The PLO and Jordan concluded a draft security agreement in 
mid January which at the time was described by a PLO official as 
an accord that "would set the principles of future coordination 
on issues of borders, training and exchange of security 
information with the Jordanians.'" 
  Although the details of the January accord were not made 
public, a PLO security official was quoted as saying that it 
laid the basis for future security coordination and enhanced the 
PLO's negotiating position with the Israelis "by coordinating 
our own side's views." 
  On Wednesday, Mr. 'Arafat and Mr. Peres signed the 21-page 
document dealing with security issues and border crossing points 
in a ceremony hosted by Egyptian President Husni Mubarak. Most 
of it was put together in marathon talks held both in Davos and 
Cairo. 
  Mr. 'Arafat gave King Husayn a copy of the agreement during 
Thursday's meeting and told reporters he "was enlightened by the 
King's views on the various issues we must face together. 
  He thanked the King for what he described as his "warm 
embrace of all our problems and issues." 
  "It is not strange for the King (to do that) when he already 
carries the worries of the Jordanian-Palestinian family," Mr. 
'Arafat told journalists before leaving for Tunis. 

