Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Mehmet Salih Ceviker] </F>
  [Text] Frankfurt -- There are indications that the Idealist 
[Turkish right-wing organization affiliated with the Grey Wolves 
of Alparslan Turkes] mafia in Germany is getting ready to attack 
the Kurdish mafia. 
  A source that once was a member of MHP's [National Movement 
Party] European organization said that the attacks will be 
"directed against prominent Kurds in the narcotics business." 
The attacks are being organized from Germany. 
  There are indications that Kurdish businessmen, who have 
considerable control over the narcotics business in Frankfurt, 
are the primary targets. It was also reported that operations 
are also planned against the Kurdish businessmen and PKK 
[Kurdish Workers Party] leaders in other cities. 
  It is being said that MHP leader Alparslan Turkes has moved 
to activate the Turkish Federation, which is MHP's side 
organization in Europe. It is being said that Turkes has issued 
the following instruction: "We started the operation in Turkey. 
Now, it is the time to act in Europe. We will definitely go 
into action." 
  In recent years, the Turkish Federation has been rapidly 
losing ground. The grassroots of the Turkish Federation has 
been to a great extent taken over and organized by other extreme 
right-wing organizations. There are indications that "dergahs" 
[courts] organized abroad by a team operating under Muhsin 
Yazicioglu, leader of Grand Unity Party [BBP], have gathered 
most MHP members around them. 
<H5>  Turkes Was in Frankfurt on 25 December </H5>
  It is being reported that during his visit to Germany on 
25-26 December, Turkes held a number of meetings. It is being 
said that Turkes was introduced to people to be used in the 
operations, and that he even said the following to these people: 
"The Turkish people need you and your experience. Trust in the 
Federation and make your preparations." 
  There are indications that after many years, the Turkish 
Federation has started to gather "fanatic and arms-carrying" 
militants. It is being reported that these people are constantly 
subjected to the propaganda that "the Kurds are collecting 
protection money from the Turks, that is, from people close to 
us. How long could we remain spectators to this?" and that they 
have been given certain names as their targets. It was learned 
that they have particularly targeted the Kurdish mafia 
godfathers, a certain Huseyin and a certain Erdal in Frankfurt. 
  In the meantime, efforts are under way to "improve 
relations" 
between MIT [Turkish National Intelligence Organization] and the 
Turkish Federation for this operation. It is being reported 
that Turkes, who established excellent relations with MIT in 
Turkey, particularly recently, is trying to forge a 
rapprochement between MIT and his diaspora organization, which 
had been cool towards MIT because some of its members were 
tortured during the 12 September coup. 
<H5>  The Aim is To Establish a Monopoly in Narcotics </H5>
  It is being said that the reason for the MHP's ordering its 
grass roots to attack Kurds in Europe is to take revenge on the 
PKK members for preventing the Turkish Federation from 
organizing a cultural night in Vienna a few months ago and for 
beating up the MHP members in public. In this way, it is aimed 
at reviving the activities of the Turkish Federation and 
replenishing its funds. 
  A source closely watching the narcotics mafia made the 
following assessment: "The problem has totally to do with 
money. The aim is to eradicate the Kurdish mafia which has 
taken over the narcotics market, and thus revive the Idealist 
mafia. Frankfurt has been chosen as the center for this 
operation. It is mainly the Kurdish mafia that controls the 
narcotics business in Frankfurt and hence the Kurdish mafia is 
getting most of the protection money. The MHP members are very 
uneasy with this situation. They are angry that protection 
money is collected from their own people. They want to 
rechannel the financial resources to their own organization. 
This is because the Turkish Federation has no income of its 
own." 

