Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Justifiability in Halting Words"] </F>
  [Text] Saturday's [26 February] decision by Jordan, Syria 
and Lebanon to suspend peace talks with Israel in reaction to 
Friday's massacre of Palestinian worshippers at the Ibrahimi 
Mosque in Hebron, had to expected. The trauma and anguish 
caused by the progrom have made it extremely difficult for the 
Arab side to continue the negotiations on business-as-usual 
basis. A halt to the Washington talks was inevitable. 
  His Majesty King Husayn told members of Parliament Saturday 
that a decision to withdraw from the negotiations was not up to 
Jordan alone, but rather a collective Arab position that needed 
to be carefully taken. Now that a solemn decision has been 
taken, the PLO too can be expected to stick to its demands for 
protection of Palestinians under occupation before talks can be 
resumed in any manner or form. 
  Judging by the deliberations of the U.N. Security Council on 
a draft resolution on the Hebron massacre, the likelihood of an 
agreement among the permanent members for the establishment of 
an international regime for the protection of Palestinians looks 
dim. With the council's inability to move effectively in that 
direction due to opposition from Washington and London in 
particular, the chances of the PLO acepting without any question 
U.S. President Bill Clinton's invitation to both sides to take 
part in a continuous session in Washington till a breakthrough 
is attained look also bleak. 
  France's alternative proposal to place international 
observers in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to monitor the 
situation there may offer a middle ground that could be 
acceptable to both sides. Such an initiative could be a nucleus 
for greater international role in the occupied territories and 
deserves careful consideration. If accepted, the idea could be 
a modest beginning of a process that may prove unstoppable. 
  Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin has yet to address the 
French proposal and most probably he would reject it. PLO 
chairman Yasir 'Arafat, on the other hand, saw some merits in it 
and did not rule it out of hand. 
  The worthiness of the French idea lies in the fact that the 
other permanent members of the Security Council could find it 
workable under the circumstances. Besides, the Arab side is not 
exactly in a mood, politically or emotionally, to resume peace 
efforts as if nothing had happened. Something meaningful has to 
be adopted therefore as an effetive antidote to the massacre 
before Arab- Israeli negotiations can be put on track again. 

