Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Defense Minister Francois Leotard by </F>
Patrice-Henry Desaubliaux and Franz-Olivier Giesbert; place and 
date not given: "Leotard: `No One Should Doubt Our 
Determination'"] 
  [Text] NATO's ultimatum demanding the withdrawal of heavy 
weapons from around Sarajevo expires on Sunday [20 February] at 
midnight. In this interview, given before the declarations of 
Radovan Karadzic, Defense Minister Francois Leotard underlines 
France's determination. 
  [LE FIGARO] How will the international community, NATO, and 
the UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] evaluate whether or not the 
ultimatum has been respected? 
  [Leotard] The UNPROFOR's opinion will be the decisive 
factor. 
It will be up to UNPROFOR Commander General Rose, and above him, 
General Cot, to decide on the reality of the situation on the 
ground. 
  This is a twofold reality. First, it requires the cessation 
of the bombardments of the civilian population in accordance 
with the text adopted by NATO on 9 February. Second, it 
concerns the withdrawal of heavy weapons. 
  After the expiry of the ultimatum deadline, we will have to 
examine the results on Monday morning. The UNPROFOR will issue 
its opinion to the governments of the NATO countries. We 
ourselves will be in constant contact with our allies to 
evaluate compliance with the withdrawal requirement. 
  If this evaluation is negative, then the measures planned by 
NATO will be put into action. No one should doubt our 
determination to apply the decisions that were made in Brussels. 
  [LE FIGARO] Air strikes could be decided, then, simply by 
agreement between the allies? Will it not also require another 
meeting of the UN Security Council or the NATO Council? 
  [Leotard] The decision will be a political one after an 
analysis of the facts by General Cot, Mr. Akashi, and Admiral 
Boorda, while, of course, keeping the UN secretary general 
informed. The UN-NATO procedure is in accordance with what was 
decided in August 1993 and translates UN resolution 836. 
  [LE FIGARO] Has France, independently of the allies, set a 
threshold below which it would consider that the ultimatum has 
not been respected? 
  [Leotard] We remain totally free to make up our minds in the 
framework of the NATO resolution. We do not have to set a 
threshold, that is to say how many weapons, when, how, and 
where... If weapons remain, and the Serbs must be aware of this, 
then they will be, and I quote from the Brussels communique, 
"exposed to air strikes." 
  The question is not therefore who will decide, because that 
decision has already been made. If there is a question then it 
could be: Do you want to make one strike on 50 guns or on a few 
guns for 50 minutes? That, however, is just a problem of air 
strike tactics. Weapons have already been gathered together on 
both sides, but we are still nowhere near what is required. If 
the ultimatum deadline were to end halfway, I can tell you that 
the decision to strike would have been made immediately. 
  [LE FIGARO] Let us use a more favorable hypothesis, that is 
of the ultimatum being respected by Sunday night. What are the 
military consequences then? 
  [Leotard] There will be air and ground patrols. Air patrols 
by the aircraft that have for some time been engaged in 
reconnaissance missions over Sarajevo; and ground patrols by 
UNPROFOR units -- French, Ukrainian, and Egyptian, with the 
current reinforcements from Malaysia and Jordan, and perhaps 
other units too. We cannot exclude, either, British and French 
troops being redeployed. 
  [LE FIGARO] With fresh units sent from France? 
  [Leotard] No, using those already in Yugoslavia. The 
government does not currently intend sending more soldiers from 
France to Sarajevo. 
  [LE FIGARO] A second hypothesis is that the ultimatum is 
not respected and that air strikes are carried out... 
  [Leotard] Air strikes have been the subject of a constant 
process of coordination between the leader of the NATO forces, 
Admiral Boorda, the UNPROFOR, and ourselves. As for telling you 
where, when, and how they will be implemented and whether it 
will be a warning strike or a general strike, do not even hope 
that I will tell you. That is military information that cannot 
be disclosed. 
  [LE FIGARO] So nothing is ruled out? 
  [Leotard] Nothing is ruled out -- no location, no weapon, no 
progression in the strikes. That is the very principle of 
deterrent. 
  [LE FIGARO] Certain pieces of Serbian artillery could be 
moved rapidly... 
  [Leotard] All that is known and has been taken into account 
by the operations staff. For several months, we have had lists 
of targets that are known both to the Air Force and to the 
Ground Troops. We will use all the means at our disposal. 
  [LE FIGARO] Before these air strikes are carried out, have 
steps been taken to protect the UN forces in Sarajevo or 
elsewhere in Bosnia? 
  [Leotard] Of course, some very solid precautions have been 
taken. However, we know only too well that they cannot cover 
every risk. We must be clear: The aggressors would be running 
a considerable risk. They must know that. 
  [LE FIGARO] Could this new measure influence humanitarian 
operations? 
  [Leotard] Since 9 February, the mission of the UN forces has 
changed somewhat. In Sarajevo the 3,000 or so troops are now 
intervening a lot more, while before they were hardly 
intervening at all, and as a result they are accompanying a lot 
fewer humanitarian convoys. 
  At the same time, there has been an increase in other types 
of humanitarian action. On Mount Zuc, a very important 
electricity line was destroyed by Serbian bombing. The French 
Engineer Corps is trying to repair it. If they succeed, it will 
be possible to restart the pumps that supply a part of Sarajevo 
with drinking water and to reactivate some heating facilities. 
That would be a real civilian victory which would restore the 
people's confidence. 
  [LE FIGARO] If there are air strikes, is there a parallel 
process of political attempts toward finding a solution? 
  [Leotard] The whole operation consists of using force on the 
one hand while above all proposing negotiation on the other. I 
have said several times that the use of force itself is 
senseless if it has no other aim. 
  It is all the more true that the air strikes are not an end 
in themselves. They are a way of protecting the civilian 
population and bringing the belligerents, in particular the 
Serbs and the Bosnians, together around the negotiating table. 
You saw that, on Tuesday, the meeting that had been planned at 
the airport was cancelled by the Bosnian party. 
  [LE FIGARO] Did that seem to you to be a serious sign? 
  [Leotard] Neither party has any reason to exclude itself 
from 
discussions. 
  [LE FIGARO] Is there the risk of the UN troops being caught 
in the crossfire? 
  [Leotard] As I said, for several weeks now there have been 
no 
risk-free policies. There are hopeless policies, such as 
getting bogged down, but there are no longer any risk-free 
policies. We have to accept a degree of risk if we want to free 
ourselves from this deadlocked situation, where humanitarian 
convoys are being attacked, people are being pinned down, and 
supplies are increasingly failing to get through. We have 
examined this situation with the other European powers that are 
the most actively involved in Bosnia. All our policies include 
a degree of risk, if we try to maintain the previous situation, 
if we withdraw, or if we keep to the stance taken today. 
  [LE FIGARO] Do these risks also include the problem of 
moving 
from being the peace-keeper to the peace-maker? 
  [Leotard] Everything I have just described is the 
consequence 
and the strict application of resolution 836. That is what I 
recently told the Russians. We are only applying a resolution 
that was adopted unanimously by the members of the Security 
Council. 
  I notice that, while we are applying it in Sarajevo, it is 
not being respected in Bihac, Tuzla, or Srebenica. The United 
Nations identified six safe areas, but we are only applying this 
resolution in Sarajevo. 
  [LE FIGARO] Through a lack of resources or a lack of 
political will? 
  [Leotard] For the moment, through a lack of resources, 
because, since resolution 836 was passed in June 1993, no 
country has responded to France's call or followed our lead. 
However, we have to ask ourselves whether we really do want to 
apply the UN resolutions. As we speak, Bihac is being bombed, 
Tuzla is being bombed, and Srebenica is being bombed by 
aggressors who are going unpunished. 
  [LE FIGARO] At the 11 January NATO summit, the French 
priority was Tuzla and Srebenica.... 
  [Leotard] The massacre perpetrated on 5 February made 
international public opinion aware of the seriousness of the 
situation in Sarajevo. The situation is, keeping things in 
proportion, a little less serious in Tuzla and, generally, in 
the Bihac enclave. However, we are not abandoning any of our 
aims. You know that French troops are currently on the ground 
in Bihac. 
  In addition, in the European Union's plan, which is and 
which 
will remain the diplomatic objective, the area around Sarajevo 
is considered as having the right to UN administration for two 
years. France is looking for this plan to be applied. If we 
manage to find a solution for Sarajevo, maybe it will serve as a 
model. 
  [LE FIGARO] The United Nations came to Yugoslavia with the 
agreement of all three parties.... 
  [Leotard] Yes, and we remain there on that understanding. We 
currently hold Sarajevo airport with the agreement of both 
belligerents. There is permanently one Serb and one Bosnian in 
the control tower monitoring aircraft arrivals. 
  To move from a situation where the trucks will no longer be 
painted white in the colors of the United Nations but will 
instead be painted khaki and be accompanied by tanks, 
helicopters, and artillery, is not currently an option for us. 
  I know that some people find it hard to believe and that 
they 
want to "do battle." We have neither the UN mandate that is 
required to do that, nor the decision or the support of the 
French people and Parliament. France has not declared war on 
Serbia, nor has any of the other 30 nations declared war on any 
of the three protagonists. Many people would like it to be a 
black and white affair, but we have to accept a situation whose 
very complexity is the result of post-communism. 
  [LE FIGARO] Is it possible to avoid the logic of war? 
  [Leotard] It is true that we are on the fringes of the 
military and the humanitarian. If the French, the British, and 
anyone else had decided to go to war with Serbia, things would 
have appeared a lot less complicated. We would have been 
stronger with regard to resources, weapons, or troop numbers. 
The Serbs would certainly also have been less arrogant. 
However, we have not made any such decision and I do not think 
we should. We are intervening in one country, Bosnia 
Herzegovina, that is recognized by the United Nations, and which 
has a president, a Parliament, and which contains warring 
factions. We are not intervening between two states. 
  [LE FIGARO] All three parties in this UN-recognized state 
have formally accepted the European plan for partitioning the 
country. Is this plan viable? 
  [Leotard] The European Union's plan must be one stage on the 
path toward a final objective. Considerable progress will have 
been made when the three parties have signed and are respecting 
a cease-fire agreement. 
  The next stage would be for the three parties to discuss, 
negotiate, and become more open with each other. A no-hope 
solution, on the other hand, would be if each party became 
entrenched behind its lines of barbed wire -- that would be 
absurd. 
  The strength of the European action plan is that it has been 
accepted by all three parties and that it is the only one that 
exists. It is designed to favor the return to a stable 
situation, giving people time to once more adapt to peace and 
civilized life. Civilized life comes through exchange, not 
through entrenchment. 
  [LE FIGARO] Does that mean that a Bosnian Federation remains 
the political objective? 
  [Leotard] To be a man of peace means having a great deal of 
humility. I do not see how we could decree solutions that today 
are violently refused by the parties. It cannot be imposed 
through war. In any case, no European state envisages that. 
  [LE FIGARO] For any initiative to succeed, do we not need 
the 
support of the whole international community, including the 
Russians? 
  [Leotard] For the security of western Europe, Russia is an 
essential and probably the most important partner. To settle a 
crisis like the one in Yugoslavia, Russia's participation in a 
political solution is absolutely vital. 

