Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Javier Rodriguez: "The Island's Long-Standing War on </F>
Drugs"] 
  [Text] Havana, 10 Feb (PL) -- The recent burning of 2.5 
tons of cocaine by authorities is the latest chapter of an 
already long history of the nation's war on drug trafficking. On 
this occasion, the drug destroyed was part of shipments lost by 
international drug traffickers in their illegal operations near 
the Cuban archipelago. This situation has, on different 
occasions, even led to arrests, trials, and sanctions by local 
courts. 
  In fact, the Cuban Government's organization of the fight 
against drugs dates back many years and is even coordinated with 
international organizations and other countries interested in 
the topic. 
  Not even U.S. administrations, which Cuba has accused of 
politicizing the issue and using it as a weapon in its 
traditional conflict with the island, have been excluded from 
the cooperation Havana has proposed and is implementing to deal 
hard blows to drug traffickers. 
  A glance at the past reveals an interesting and important 
balance regarding Cuba's war on drugs. 
  In 1992, for example, Cubans seized 1,647.91 kg of cocaine 
and 2,000 kg of marijuana, captured three boats, and held 12 
drug traffickers, who were remanded to the courts. 
  In June of that same year, a national commission to combat 
drugs was created, comprised of representatives from the 
Justice, Interior, Foreign Relations, and Public Health 
Ministries, the Attorney General's Office, and General Customs. 
An earlier UN report cited Cuba among the top 10 countries of 
the continent in seizing cocaine and marijuana. An important 
thing about Cuba is that it does not produce or consume drugs. 
  In January 1993, the courts sentenced five U.S. drug 
traffickers for possession of drugs and illegal entry in Cuba, 
following contacts with U.S. authorities and the exchange of 
information on the matter. In May of last year, Cuban ovens 
incinerated almost 200 kg of cocaine found in bags that had 
drifted onto central Camaguey Province coasts as a result of 
illegal operations conducted in nearby waters. 
  In June 1993, authorities burned another 400 kg of drugs 
that 
had also drifted here through the northern keys in Camaguey and 
Ciego de Avila Provinces. In the same month, 2.5 tons 
confiscated from different points in Cuba were incinerated. 
  Last November, 10 foreigners and Cubans were tried and 
sentenced. They had been arrested when a specialized corps 
dismantled an entire network of drug traffickers, who used the 
island as a transshipment point for drugs sent from Colombia to 
Germany. 
  In a declaration by Gerd Merrem, director of the UN program 
for international control on drugs, the United Nations 
recognized Cuba's participation in the international effort 
against the drug scourge. 
  Merren praised the efficiency of Cuban authorities in 
combating drug trafficking, and he mentioned that the developed 
long-standing cooperation has left a deep mark because of the 
sincerity and professionalism of experts devoted to this task. 

