BFN 

  [Text] San Salvador, 1 Jun (ACAN-EFE) -- U.S. President 
Bill Clinton seems to have knocked on the wrong door when he 
asked Central America to provide temporary shelter to hundreds 
of Haitian refugees because, according to what several Central 
American leaders are claiming, current conditions do not favor 
this option. 
  The presidents conveyed this position in San Salvador, where 
they are attending the inauguration of President Armando 
Calderon Sol. The leaders took advantage of the event to hold 
meetings and to draw up common positions in advance of upcoming 
international conferences, including the Ibero-American Summit 
which is slated to be held in Colombia in June. 
  Honduran President Carlos Roberto Reina told the media that 
scores of Haitians are already in his country. According to 
Reina, these Haitians have been granted temporary asylum, have 
settled in the Atlantic region, and now "constitute a problem." 
  Reina told the media that Honduras "must defend its rights 
and options," and he added, "the refugee program has been 
distorted... it has become politicized." Reina explained: 
"Honduras has already welcomed Haitian refugees, who constitute 
a problem because they do not want to remain in the country or 
return to Haiti, and they are now demanding visas to go to the 
United States." 
  Honduras has already lived through the experience of 
providing asylum to thousands of Salvadorans and Nicaraguans who 
fled wars in their countries. All of these Salvadorans and 
Nicaraguans have since been repatriated. 
  Nicaraguan President Violeta Chamorro refused to talk to the 
media about her country's decision on the matter, but according 
to Central American politicians, it is obvious that the current 
political, economic, and social crisis in Nicaragua will prevent 
it from providing sanctuary to refugees because such a move 
would only exacerbate the domestic situation. 
  Guatemalan President Ramiro de Leon Carpio noted that his 
country "is not in any condition to welcome" the Haitian 
refugees because, currently, there are some 45,000 Guatemalan 
refugees in Mexico that are now being repatriated. "We respect 
the self-determination of all people, and we uphold this 
policy," De Leon said in reference to the Haitian crisis. He 
also reiterated that Guatemala is in no shape to offer sanctuary 
to the Haitians because of the nation's economic and social 
situations. 
  De Leon added that there are areas in Guatemala where armed 
clashes between the Army and guerrillas are still taking place, 
and he added: "We would be making a mistake if we received our 
Haitian brothers under such harsh conditions." 
  A Salvadoran official recalled his country's difficult 
postwar situation, and he noted that it has not received a 
formal petition from the United States to accept any refugees. 
Miguel Angel Salaverria, the outgoing Salvadoran foreign 
minister, noted that the United States is seeking to obtain 
temporary shelter for the Haitians while it reviews the 
Haitians' reasons for leaving their country. He claimed the 
United States is doing this in an effort to turn back economic 
emigrants and to allow only political exiles into the United 
States. 
  Costa Rican President Jose Maria Figueres did not discuss 
the 
refugee issue in his statement to the media, and he is the only 
one who has not voiced opposition to the proposal. So far, 
according to a statement Figueres made last week, his country is 
reviewing the issue, which is now being negotiated with the UN 
High Commissioner for Refugees. 

