Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Abu-Nidal's Group Denies Death of </F>
Its Leader"] 
  [Text] London, AL-HAYAH -- Fatah-the Revolutionary Council 
[FRC], which is led by Abu-Nidal [Sabri al-Banna], yesterday 
denied what it described as "reports distributed by Algerian 
intelligence" claiming that its leader had died. It attacked 
the ruling authorities in Algeria and accused them of "being in 
the lap of the Jewish-Zionist-crusade movement." 
  The denial came in a statement signed by Husayn Bin-'Ali, a 
spokesman for Abu-Nidal's group, a copy of which was received by 
AL-HAYAH, days after that group was accused of assassinating a 
Jordanian diplomat in Beirut. The statement did not indicate 
the whereabouts of Abu-Nidal, whose group has also been accused 
of carrying out terrorist operations in Western and Arab 
countries. 
  The group said that it was optimistic when Major General 
Liamine Zeroual assumed the presidency in Algeria, "but we were 
surprised" when the media, subservient to the Algerian regime, 
continued "to escalate their false allegations." It added that 
Algerian intelligence, which is headed by General Tawfiq, 
"distributed a number of reports targeting our movement to 11 
Arab countries." It pointed out that the wording of the reports 
differed from one country to another, saying in part that 
"Abu-Nidal has died and a group of people linked to the 
authorities of a certain Arab country occupied the movement's 
headquarters," and that "the movement, in cooperation with some 
terrorist Islamic fundamentalist forces, intended to implement a 
certain plan" in some Arab states, including Egypt and Jordan. 
  The group sees "these fabrications as being Jewish-Zionist 
fabrications," and said that it has "accurate knowledge" of the 
circumstances of the emergence of the Algerian intelligence and 
security organs "which grew up in the laps of the 
Jewish-Zionist-crusade movement." 
  It further said that "these lies and fabrications are part 
of 
the large-scale campaign aimed at Judaizing the nation, 
containing its masses, and weakening the resolve of the nation's 
masses and of a number of Arab countries." In conclusion, it 
"rejected civil wars and fragmentation of the nation." 

