BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Alfons Verplaetse, governor of the </F>
Belgian National Bank, by Philippe Engels on 19 April; place not 
given: "Verplaetse: `Belgian Growth of 1.2 or 1.3 percent in 
1994'"] 
  [Excerpts] The Belgian economy is doing better. Slowly and 
quietly. But it is doing better. This improvement is taking 
place in an international environment which has become more 
reassuring in recent weeks. [passage omitted] 
  Unofficially, figures are circulating, mainly for the use of 
political decisionmakers. At the time of the presentation of 
the 1993 annual report of the Belgian National Bank (BNB), [its] 
Governor Alfons Verplaetse cautiously mentioned an increase in 
Belgian GDP of around 1 percent in 1994. Yesterday, at a 
meeting of financiers, Verplaetse said that economic activity 
would produce the same figures as in 1993, "but with the 
opposite sign." This clearly means that after - 1.2 or - 1.3 
percent last year, it will be + 1.2 or + 1.3 percent this 
year. [passage omitted] 
  The important thing is that the recovery movement can now be 
launched, encouraging entrepreneurs and consumers to "liberate 
themselves." 
  Indeed, the improvement is such that some people in the BNB 
are accepting a range of forecasts with an upper limit higher 
than 1.2 or 1.3 percent. According to a generally reliable 
source, one forecast on domestic production goes as high as 1.9 
percent. 
<H5>  No Relapse in Germany </H5>
  Governor Verplaetse, who was the guest at the Financial 
Executives Institute of Belgium meeting yesterday, painted a 
picture of the present state of our economy which could be said 
to be encouraging. One piece of good news with regard to the 
international environment is that the weak recovery taking shape 
in Germany should not collapse. "This is new," Verplaetse said. 
"There will be no `double dip' (new fall in activity -- L'ECHO 
editor's note) as might have been feared." 
  In 1994, growth in Europe will continue to be moderate, 
around 1.5 percent but without any risk of falling back. In the 
rest of the world, aside from Japan, activity is more intense, 
especially in the United States and Canada. The governor of the 
National Bank, in constant contact with his foreign 
counterparts, expects a more uniform growth (in a positive 
direction) in all the industrialized countries in 1995. 
  What about Belgium? This year, exports will do better...but 
imports will also increase. The contribution made by foreign 
trade will therefore not be decisive. The rate of savings will 
fall, after reaching a very high level. Investments should no 
longer decline. 
  "Inflation," Verplaetse said, "will remain moderate `because 
the franc is strong.'" The increase in prices could be limited 
to 2.5 or 3 percent and develop more favorably than in Germany 
or the Netherlands. The minimum estimate (up 2.5 percent) would 
be accomplished if oil prices fall, as expected. Verplaetse 
also announced that there is good news for wage costs: Their 
nominal increase would be 2.5 percent, whereas it was 4.5 
percent in 1993 and would have been around the same without the 
overall plan. The rate would be identical, on average, in our 
three main trade partners (Germany, France, and the 
Netherlands). In terms of competitiveness, that would amount to 
maintaining the status quo. It should be noted that Governor 
Verplaetse estimates the current competitive decrease at 1.5 
percent compared with these three. "Generally, this is not too 
serious," he noted, admitting that this average conceals the 
problems which the sectors exposed to international competition 
may experience. "If there was a major problem of 
competitiveness, Belgium would not have such a current surplus," 
Verplaetse pointed out. In 1993, this surplus is calculated at 
370 billion [currency not specified]. It could increase to 400 
billion [currency not specified] this year. 
  That leaves unemployment and public finances. In June, the 
number of unemployed will still be up compared with the same 
month of 1993, the governor warned. With regard to this figure, 
however, there is reason to hope that the increase will stop at 
the beginning of next year. As for public finances, they seem 
to be under control...at the level of the federal budget (the 
first three months of the year were good) and social security 
"will do better than in 1993." The communities and regions, 
however, will not honor in 1994 the objectives assigned to them 
by the Higher Council of Finances; and "it will be too late to 
do anything about it," Verplaetse remarked. 
  Will the convergence plan which has been amended (in March) 
be respected? The governor of the National Bank refused to 
commit himself. But, in 1995 and 1996, he thinks that Belgium 
will be "more or less in order." With regard to the monetary 
sphere, we are also still on course, with "the system currently 
in force in Europe working well for the time being." 
Verplaetse's conclusion with a view to the decisive phase of 
economic and monetary unification is: "I am still convinced that 
Belgium will be able to join the front runners." 

