BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Wolfgang Purtscheller and Thomas Vasek: </F>
"Desperately Seeking Dr. Vanda"] 
  [Excerpts] At the end of March the usually very restrained 
director general of public security talked with surprising 
frankness about a specific lead. He hopes that the German 
authorities will soon find the suspected perpetrator of the 
letter-bomb attacks before Christmas, Michael Sika told DIE 
PRESSE. 
  The name that Sika mentioned in this connection was one that 
has been known for a long time in Austria: Ekkehard Weil, who 
was sentenced to six years in prison in 1981 after a series of 
bomb attacks on nine Jewish institutions and personalities. 
According to Sika, there has been no trace of Weil since 6 
December 1993, that is, since the beginning of the series of 
bombs. 
  This is purposeful disinformation. Because the "German 
lead," of which the Interior Ministry has been talking for quite 
some time, has never led to Ekkehard Weil. He was just 
considered as a witness, who it was hoped would provide the 
investigators of the Letter Bombs Special Commission with more 
detailed information about the German connection of Peter Binder 
and his comrades. 
  As if to prove that the lead to Weil cannot be so hot, the 
neo-Nazi appeared in public last week. He had to answer to the 
Eighth Criminal Division of the Bochum Land Court for 
"instigating people, fanning racial hatred, and insulting and 
slandering the memory of the deceased." On Monday and 
Wednesday, at 0900 in the morning each day, Ekkehard Wiel 
appeared in court room 147. 
  Months ago the right-wing extremist had found refuge in the 
Ruhr area under the cover name Karl Schubert. Most recently he 
found refuge with a Mrs. M. at Castropper Hellweg in Bochum. 
  So far, the trace leading to the Berlin Nazi rocker and 
Weil's friend Arnulf Priem has also proved to be unsuccessful; 
at the beginning of the bomb series Priem had been seen by three 
different witnesses on Vienna's subway. However, Priem brought 
regulars from his favorite restaurants to the Berlin police to 
back up his alibi. 
  The traces to Priem and Weil led to the surroundings of the 
infamous "occupied house" in Weitlingstrasse 122, where the two 
had free access for years. In Berlin's brown [fascist] scene 
the mystery of the "German trace" has become a bit clearer. The 
FRG authorities and the EBT (Antiterrorism Task Force) of the 
Austrian Interior Ministry have not been pursuing Weil since 
December but another one of the people living at 
Weitlingstrasse: Bendix Wendt, age 27, neo-Nazi and weapons 
fanatic with experience in using explosives. This man, who has 
been in prison several times and who has been a close friend of 
Priem's for some years, who has the say in the Berlin scene, was 
responsible for, among other things, the acquisition of military 
equipment from old GDR stocks. 
  Not quite two days after the arrest of suspected letter-bomb 
attacker Peter Binder, a certain Dr. Vanda from Berlin called 
the arrested man's wife. Why has Peter not yet arrived, the 
caller asks with an agitated voice. Binder's wife tells him 
what has happened: Her husband had just been caught at the 
Czech border. Vanda gets nervous, he must now disappear, he 
says, and puts down the receiver. The telephone had been bugged 
by the State Police. 
  Years ago, in a written statement to the police, Berlin 
ex-Nazi Ingo Hasselbach revealed the various cover names of his 
former comrades: Dr. Vanda, derived from Priem's troop The 
Vandals, is the pseudonym used by Bendix Wendt. 
  Under his correct name Wendt had talked to Binder's wife 
even 
before Binder was arrested, to tell her that his apartment had 
been searched and that he has to flee. "Why the search?" 
Brigitte Binder asks. Wendt: "Why do you think?" Cryptically, 
although the meaning is quite obvious, the two continue their 
dialogue. Everything indicates that subsequently Wendt became 
more cautious because of potential telephone bugging and, 
therefore, used his cover name for his next call. 
  Binder claimed he was on his way to Berlin when he was 
caught. He had met Bendix Wendt there during one of his 
previous trips. 
  The role of Dr. Vanda in the attacks in Austria is one of 
the 
last missing pieces in the letter-bomb puzzle, which the state 
has been trying to piece together for some months. The 
investigations of the EBT have now been concluded: Probably 
this week the so-called full complaint against three Austrian 
right-wing extremists, who are suspects in connection with the 
letter bombs, will be passed on to public prosecutor Sepp-Dieter 
Fasching: Peter Binder, 26 is suspected of having been 
essentially involved in the letter-bomb attacks and of having 
violated the Weapons Law and the law banning neo-Nazi activities 
(about 40 evidential facts). The case against Franz Radl 
junior, 26, is based on his being an accomplice to the deed and 
violating the law banning neo-Nazi activities (about 20 
evidential facts). The suspicion against Gerhard Endres, 32, 
refers to engaging in neo-Nazi activities and accumulating means 
of combat. [passage omitted] 
  Radl also had very close contacts with a Carinthian neo-Nazi 
group, which publishes the illegal Nazi pamphlet KAERNTNER 
BEOBACHTER [CARINTHIAN OBSERVER]. Two of Radl's closest fellow 
fighters, Andreas T. and Helmut Adolf S., turned up last year at 
the traditional Ulrichsberg meeting of the right-wing extremist 
scene in the company of a German Nazi terrorist and explosives 
expert: chemist Peter N., age 41. 
  Now, in addition to Dr. Vanda, this man is becoming the 
focus 
of interest for German and Austrian investigators. He is 
thought to have the expert knowledge in chemistry that the 
Austrians probably lacked. According to German sources, Wendt 
and N. were in contact with each other -- and with the Austrian 
comrades via Binder and the Carinthian Radl group. 
  "Given the fact that he started out at zero, the result is 
remarkable," a top state official concluded before these results 
of the investigations are passed on the public prosecutor. As a 
result, the Austrian State Police is closing the file on the 
letter bombs for the time being. Now it is Interpol's task to 
complete the increasingly complete letter-bomb puzzle: Because 
the Austrians are convinced that German neo-Nazis were involved. 
The search for Bendix Wendt a.k.a. Dr.Vanda is in full swing. 

