BFN 

<F P=106> ["Pool" item] </F>
  [Text] Takovo, Apr 23 (TANJUG) -- Yugoslav Army Chief of 
Staff Lt. Gen. Momcilo Perisic Saturday [23 April] said that the 
Serb people does not want war, but will not tolerate anyone from 
abroad ordering its life by military threats. Commenting the 
NATO threats to the Serbs in the former Yugoslav Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Perisic ponted out: "I want to believe that 
the latest threats will not be materialized, as their 
consequences could be catastrophic and push the whole Balkan 
region back into prehistory." 
  The NATO council Friday threatened Bosnian Serbs with air 
strikes if they do not withdraw their forces by Sunday at 0001 
GMT to three kilometers away from Gorazde, around which Serb and 
Moslem forces have been fighting bitterly for nearly one month 
since the Moslem forces launched their offensive from this safe 
area on Serb positions in late March. "We will not reply to 
threats by threats, but the Serbian and Montenegrin people must 
not remain indifferent and careless and [word indistinct] their 
state to be destroyed", Perisic said in Takovo at the 
commemoration of the 179th anniversary of the second Serb 
unprising. "We are aware of the great danger looming over all 
Serb lands, but we believe that this can be overcome only by 
just peace", Perisic said, adding that "the [word indistinct] 
weighing over the Serbs' national fate has regretfully received 
illusory legitimacy, and we must all take out fate in our hands, 
determined not to leave it up to others". 
  Commenting the U.N. sanctions against the Federal Republic 
of 
Yugoslavia (F.R.Y.), Perisic said that "the children, the future 
of the nation, are living today in a ghetto set up for them by 
the world powers, which hypocritically explain that peace is 
most easily achieved through the humanitarian isolation of the 
weakest". 
  At the end of May 1992, the U.N. Security Council imposed 
sanctions on the F.R.Y., accusing it of aggression on 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, even though there are no Yugoslav army 
troops in that former Yugoslav republic, but its three 
constituent peoples -- Moslems, Serbs and Croats -- are fighting 
in a civil war. 
  "Some world powers are doing all they can to push us to 
civilization's fringes, to subject us to their ill will and 
erase the best pages of our history, thus depriving us of our 
right to the future, but they will not succeed", Perisic said. 
"This is why the unity of the Serb people everywhere is 
necessary now more than ever in order to protect the people from 
the cruelest anti-civilizational isolation", he concluded. 

