Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The government strongly urged Iran on 30 November 
to exercise caution in allowing the DPRK (North Korea) to test 
fire the latter's new-type "Nodong-1" missile in Iran by 
notifying that country that if it allows North Korea to test 
fire such a missile on its territory, it would suspend the 
extending of yen-based loans to Iran that will be used to 
finance the construction of hydroelectric power plants. 
  This has been disclosed by a government source, and it is 
the 
first time that the Japanese Government has put diplomatic 
pressure on Iran not to permit North Korea to test fire such a 
missile in Iran. 
  According to the same government source, North Korea is said 
to be planning to test fire the "Nodong-1" missile in Iran in 
mid- December after obtaining Iran's consent. In response to the 
Japanese Government's urging, the Iranian side said, "Iran has 
no intention of allowing North Korea to test fire the missile." 
Yet the Japanese Government still remains suspicious. 
  The Japanese Government, which seeks U.S. collaboration in 
confirming North Korea's missile test firing in Iran, plans to 
suspend the yen-based loans to Iran when it confirms that. It 
is believed that Japan's suspension of the yen-based loans to 
Iran would inevitably sour relations between the two countries. 
  In late last May, North Korea test fired the "Nodong-1" 
missile from its eastern coast area over the Sea of Japan. At 
the time, the missile flew about 500 km over the sea, but it is 
said to have a range of about 1,300 km. The prevailing view is 
that in the test firing last May, North Korea shortened the 
distance of missile flight by adjusting launch method. 
  North Korea is believed to hope to test fire a missile with 
a 
range of 1,300 km in Iran. 
  Meanwhile, the Japanese Government in May last year 
committed 
38.6 billion yen in yen-based loans to Iran. 
  A note exchanged between Japan and Iran at the time included 
Japan's four principles for the Official Development Assistance 
(ODA) whereby Japan extends yen-based loans to other nations 
taking into account "the military spending; the development and 
manufacturing of weapons of mass destruction; and the export and 
import of weapons in those nations." The exchange of note, 
however, mentioned nothing about prohibiting Iran from providing 
North Korea with a site for missile test firing. 

