BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Vladimir Skachko in the "Ukraine" column: </F>
"Voters Ready, in Crisis Situation, To Vote for Left-Wingers. 
Democrats Cannot Bring Themselves To Support an `Outsider'"] 
  [Text] The parliament paper HOLOS UKRAYINY, citing the 
Kievo-Mogilyansk Academy Sociology Department, has reported 
that, according to a random survey of 1,005 people conducted two 
weeks before elections in 24 regions of Ukraine and in the 
Republic of Crimea, President Leonid Kravchuk heads the 
popularity rating, polling 29 percent. He is followed by 
ex-Prime Minister Leonid Kuchma (23 percent), parliament speaker 
Aleksandr Moroz (9 percent), Market Reforms Center President 
Vladimir Lanovoy (6 percent), parliament ex-speaker Ivan 
Plyushch (4 percent), banker Valeriy Babich (0.8 percent), and 
Education Minister Petr Talanchuk (0.3 percent). Twelve percent 
of the respondents intend to vote against all candidates, and 
another 16 percent have not yet made up their minds. 
  According to the poll, 76 percent of the respondents are 
going to take part in the presidential elections, 14 percent 
will not go to the polls, and 10 percent are not sure yet. The 
highest turnout is expected in western Ukraine --84 percent -- 
and the lowest in the east: 70 percent. 
  At the same time it looks as though Ukrainian citizens' high 
pre-election activity may well produce an imminent political 
power crisis because, first, the voters still do not know what 
the powers of the person they elect will be. Second, in this 
situation the main aspirants to the top post in the country are 
people from the old set: Leonid Kravchuk and Leonid Kuchma, 
who, thanks to their mutual efforts, appear in the eyes of the 
electorate in the case of the former as a symbol of stagnation 
and a near-criminal, do-nothing record in the state domain, and 
in the case of the latter as a symbol of Ukraine's pro-Russian 
orientation and gradual loss of political independence. 
Indicative in this respect are the results of another survey 
conducted in late May-early June by the Democratic Initiatives 
Center among 1,807 Ukraine citizens. Asked whether there are 
political leaders in Ukraine capable of running the country 
efficiently, 25 percent of respondents said that there are no 
such people; 56 percent do not know of such; and only 19 percent 
are sure that such leaders exist. Questioned about the role and 
powers of a future Ukrainian president, 53 percent of the 
respondents said the president should be the head of government 
and assume full responsibility for domestic and foreign policy, 
as in the United States. Some 25 percent were not sure, and 10 
percent said that Ukraine's president, as in France, should 
share power and responsibility with a prime minister approved by 
parliament. Another 7 percent said the president should be 
merely the head of state, a symbol of the nation without powers, 
which should, as in Italy and the FRG, be vested with the prime 
minister elected by parliament. Only 5 percent said that 
Ukraine does not need a president at all. Sociologists 
concluded that people want not so much new as efficient 
presidential power and that obvious preference is given to a 
strong presidential republic. However, this is something the 
upcoming presidential elections do not promise. 
  Moreover, after Vitaliy Masol's comeback to the political 
stage, the ideals of radical political and economic reforms have 
been jeopardized and the political situation has deteriorated 
because in one of his first public interviews the new prime 
minister stated that he wants to head the executive branch and 
is ready to assume full responsibility. It is quite possible 
that the left-wing parliamentary majority, in deciding the 
problems of power delimitation and having no president "of its 
own," will heed this wish and give him full executive powers. 
It is very difficult to do this today because this calls for a 
majority of parliamentarians' votes to change the current 
constitution and the left-wingers have no such majority. 
According to some observers, the leftists are in no hurry to 
share out powers because they are waiting for the results of the 
presidential elections and by-elections of 112 Ukrainian 
people's deputies, which may bring the required number of 
supporters. This plan is not totally groundless also because, 
according to the above-mentioned poll by the Democratic 
Initiatives Center, 21 percent of respondents said that at 
present they share communist and socialist ideas, whereas in 
April 1992 only 6 percent openly sympathized with this platform. 
Sociologists conclude that the orthodox left has substantially 
consolidated its positions in the last two years. If, 
sociologists say, "in the very near future there are no basic 
changes in living standards, this trend will grow," and 
therefore the leftists will win over at least another one-third 
of the politically aware population. The parliamentary 
by-elections on 24 July this year will show whether the 
communist renaissance in Ukraine will be complete. If the 
leftists manage to get through their candidates and obtain a 
stable majority in parliament, they will be able not only to 
change any constitutional norm but also adopt a new constitution 
which will include provisions beneficial to them. 
  The democrats so far are maintaining a wait-and-see 
position. 
In particular, the Ukrainian Rukh leadership has stated that 
this organization will not support anybody in the first round of 
voting and in the second round it will possibly support the 
reformist Vladimir Lanovoy. Statements by other democratic 
leaders make it clear that they cannot move away from the set of 
well-known political figures and support a new person or at 
least boycott the presidential elections, thus wrecking them and 
automatically extending the powers of incumbent President Leonid 
Kravchuk, whom many democrats see as "a lesser evil compared to 
the other candidates." 

