Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Joint news conference by President Fidel Ramos and </F>
Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir bin Mohamed with Filipino and 
Malaysian correspondents at Malacanang Palace in Manila on 3 
February -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Ramos] Your excellency, Prime Minister Datuk 
Sri Dr. Mahathir, ladies and gentlemen of the media, our 
coworkers in government. 
  I am delighted to welcome Your Excellency Datuk Sri Dr. 
Mahathir Mohamed, the prime minister of Malaysia, and his 
delegation to the Philippines. I welcome you as the leader of 
an Asian partner and neighbor, the first Malaysian head of 
government to make an official visit to our country since the 
foundation of Malaysia. [passage omitted] 
  In the year since my journey to Kuala Lumpur, many visits 
have been exchanged by others from our two countries. In some 
cases, the Malaysian businessmen's search for trade and 
investment opportunities has already born fruit for both sides 
in the form of substantial investments made in the Philippines, 
including a major tourist facility in Subic. 
  A few minutes ago, we witnessed the signing of various joint 
venture agreements, including agreements in the critical areas 
of water supply, banking, and tourism. 
  We are indeed gratified by the presence of the prime 
minister's delegation of more than 80 top Malaysian businessmen. 
  Malaysia Airlines has begun flying between Kota Kinabalu and 
Cebu. Philippine Airlines has opened a regular flight between 
Zamboanga City and Labuan. 
  Meanwhile, our officials are making satisfactory progress in 
their work on a bilateral investment guarantee agreement. The 
joint commission which Prime Minister Mahathir and I agreed to 
establish held its first meeting in Manila last December with 
results covering an extensive range of areas of cooperation that 
are of great importance for both countries. [passage omitted] 
  In our talks this afternoon, Prime Minister Mahathir and I 
reiterated our commitment to the establishment of East ASEAN 
Growth Area or EAGA among Mindanao, East Malaysia, Eastern 
Indonesia, and Brunei Darussalam. The EAGA will tie together 
those regions that are contiguous to one another through direct 
transportation and communication links, the sharing of 
facilities, the joint marshalling of complimentary resources, 
the [words indistinct] for goods, services, and persons, and 
networks of officials, institutions, and a wide variety of 
sectors. 
  We agreed on the early convening of the joint committee on 
border cooperation to greatly facilitate as well more 
effectively regulate the movement of goods and people across our 
border. 
  We discussed the situation of the Filipino migrants in Sabah 
and of the Filipino workers in peninsular Malaysia. 
  Prime Minister Mahathir reiterated his invitation to the 
Philippines to send trade and investment missions to Malaysia 
[words indistinct] and provide information on Philippine 
products and investment opportunities to Malaysia's business 
community. He stressed Malaysia's particular interest in joint 
ventures, including infrastructure development, joint air 
services, and the privatization of government enterprises. 
  We agreed to deepen our cooperation in the judicious 
development of our aquatic and forest resources and help each 
other in the research of technology needed in these areas of 
complimentary expertise. 
  We are determined to cooperate in carrying out the intent of 
spirit of the 1992 Manila Declaration of the South China Sea 
both bilaterally and with our other neighbors, particularly in 
the peaceful solution of the dispute over the area and enjoy 
scientific and economic endeavors there. 
  We renewed our commitment to the realization of the ASEAN 
Free Trade Area or AFTA, and the early launching of the East 
Asian Economic Caucus or EAEC, a concept that arose from Dr. 
Mahathir's statesmanly vision, a proposal which we fully 
support. [passage omitted] 
  [Moderator] His Excellency Dr. Mohamed Mahathir [Mahathir 
Mohamed], prime minister of Malaysia. We invite you to speak. 
  [Mahathir] [passage omitted] As is known, we have certain 
problems and as a result of these problems, there have not been 
many official visits on the part of either Malaysian or 
Philippine high officials and members of the governments to each 
other's country. I really feel that this kind of relationship 
has gone on long enough and that we should look into ways and 
means of cooperating while we try to resolve the problems that 
we have between ourselves. 
  And that is, Malaysia assures that we should renew cordial 
relations with the Philippines, and we should make visits to 
each other's country, as well as discuss the issues with a view 
of cooperating with each other. 
  During the visit of President Ramos last year, we reached a 
number of agreements on the approach and method of cooperating 
between the two countries. As a result, there has been many 
tangible results, in that, there have been a number of joint 
ventures and investments on the part of Malaysians in the 
Philippines. And we hope that trade between Philippines and 
Malaysia has picked up, although of course, we are in similar 
environment. As you see, the Philippines has purchased oil from 
Malaysia. 
  We hope that we can reduce this imbalance by promoting more 
Philippine goods in Malaysia, and this can be done through a 
division in the promotion in Malaysia of Philippine-made 
manufactured products. At the same time, we feel that we can 
tackle in developing the growth area involving not just the 
Philippines and Malaysia, but also Brunei and Indonesia -- all 
of which are permanent members of ASEAN. 
  I will widely work on this idea in the four countries. We 
feel that we should work on and cooperate on bilateral relations 
first. And this cooperation should be in the area of 
communications, tourism, etcetera, and fishery. 
  There are very many potentials in these areas. This will 
lead 
us to an invariable need to get to feel and witness the changes 
that have taken place mainly, particularly, under the presidency 
of President Ramos. And using the atmosphere that is just right 
for greater economic cooperation and cooperation in other fields 
between Malaysia and the Philippines. 
  We have begun ministerial level meetings between the two 
countries and we need to meet more often, and that includes of 
course the president of the Philippines and the prime minister 
of Malaysia. And on every opportunity that we have, whether in 
our country or at international gatherings, we should make it a 
point to see each other and to renew our personal relations and 
friendship. Also, we will discuss bilateral issues. I think we 
have made very good progress towards normalizing relations 
between the two countries, and I hope that in the proper time, 
we will be able to resolve whatever problems that there may be 
between Malaysia and the Philippines. So, that is all that I 
have to say, and I shall be prepared to answer any questions 
that you may ask. Thank you very much. 
  [Moderator] Before asking the question, will you kindly 
state 
your name and your agency. 
  [Ely Tordesillas of MALAYA] I'd like to address this 
question 
to His Excellency the prime minister of Malaysia. A few months 
ago, the APEC [Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation] meeting held 
in Seattle witnessed the gathering of twelve leaders. Was your 
reason for shying away from the Blake Island meeting relevant 
and valid up to this day? What were your reservations about the 
direction APEC is taking? 
  [Mahathir] Well, right from the beginning, we felt that APEC 
should not be a formal organization. It should be a forum for 
its 15-member countries to exchange ideas and to formulate 
programs, particularly programs which can be helpful to those 
members, that are developing countries. Of course, this has 
been done but we think that more should be done. However, the 
trend now is that it is a much more formal organization complete 
with secretaries and meetings of heads of government. We are 
not yet convinced that this is what we should be doing. And 
secondly, we, in Malaysia feel that APEC should not be used in 
any way to balance the (political) problems here between America 
and Europe. We are not amenable for that kind of view. We 
would like ourselves be caught free from any political problems 
that may be formulated by APEC. And it is because of this that 
we have not been (?imbued) to the ideas that formalizing and 
having regular meetings of heads of government of APEC. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Ahmad from (words indistinct) of Malaysia] I would like to 
address this question to President Ramos. What kind of 
incentives would the Philippines be giving to Malaysian 
investors in the future especially in the promotion of the EAGA. 
Thank you. 
  [Ramos] We have two kinds of investment (?categories) 
generally. And these are, first, we have export processing 
zones, and there are many incentives of Transfer EPZA [Export 
Processing Zone Authority], as we call it. Still of the same 
kind, the special economic zones and free ports of which the 
latest versions are those in Subic, and in Clark. Special 
economic zones are within a free port, and therefore, generally, 
the goods that enter into that free port area for processing and 
then later [word indistinct] coming duty-free, it did not 
normally go back into the local economy. We have also 
completely liberalized the various transactions involving 
foreign exchange which is good for the whole country, but this 
is another advantage here in the Philippines for investors. In 
the other kind which is outside these special zones and free 
ports, we do allow the possession of real estate that is within 
a developed or investment area for as long as 75 years. There 
are certain tax incentives and tax advantages and tax holidays 
given to our investors that invest in these areas that are 
outside our processing zones and the special economic areas. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Teddy Abanot of PTV 4] I would like to ask the president 
and the prime minister regarding their view of regional security 
in the ASEAN prompting the resolution of the Spratly issue at 
this time. 
  [Ramos] On the part of the Philippines, our policy within 
ASEAN as well as with our neighbors in the Asia-Pacific has 
always been one of cooperation. In this area we are not siding 
with any particular country in a formal defense or military pact 
except for the existing 1951 Mutual Defense Treaty with the 
United States. This is one of three military treaties with the 
United States, two of which we have already phased out. Our new 
policy on the part of the Philippines is that we must enhance 
our cooperation in the defense field by way of high level 
exchanges among our officials and officers in the defense 
department of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. 
  We cooperate also very comprehensively in regard to the 
training and schooling of our officers at various levels and we 
exchange information of mutual benefit among the countries in 
this region on a regional as well as a bilateral basis. We 
feel, however, on the part of the Philippines, that more than 
military alliances, the security, and therefore the stability of 
our part of the world will come more from economic 
interdependence, from mutual support in our economic endeavors. 
And at the bottom line, it will be our sustained progress that 
will ensure for the nations in this region a greater degree of 
stability and security. 
  [Mahathir] What I would like to add is the promotion of 
ASEAN. ASEAN was formed because we are a group or part of each 
other and if it is your time to discuss this problem, well the 
likelihood is that you would confront each other. But while we 
have ASEAN, let's sit down and talk and discuss the problems 
including security problems. [passage omitted] 
  I am honestly saying that security problems can be resolved 
by not resorting to harms and having powerful navies and armies 
in the region to protect us. We didn't see who is going to be 
our enemies. One of the things we believe in is, if you say such 
and such country is going to be your enemy in the future, then 
they will be your enemy now, and that is where it will put us at 
a loss. So we would rather say that they are our friends. And 
when you look around us, we see friends, so we won't be immersed 
to worry about security that much. 
  It is the other people out there who's thinking of harping 
on 
the question of security, implying that there is arms struggle 
forth around here. This is one thing to conquer us, that is, 
out of discontent because countries don't conquer anymore, but 
this is overt dream to conquer. 
  The other thing is that, one of the reasons for the feeling 
of insecurity is the fact that they have nothing else to think 
of. For example, if a country is very poor, then it may think of 
invading another country in order to get the wealth of another 
country. But if countries have prospered, they have invested 
into it to see that there is stability in the region. So that 
they continue with their economic expansion as well as trade. 
And we believe that if the whole of this region can become 
prosperous, then we would all have invested into it to maintain 
stability and peace without resorting to war. Just the fact 
that we need stability in order to trade would make us very much 
aware of the need to avoid conflict. And I think this is 
happening in Southeast Asia and in East Asia. [passage omitted] 
  Our experience with the Japanese is that they invested in 
Malaysia and their investments has enabled Malaysia to prosper. 
And because we are more prosperous now, we are buying a lot of 
Japanese goods. So the Japanese are getting the return of their 
investment more than just the profits from their investments. 
  But then, if we are not stable, then, they won't get returns 
for their investment. So, when we invest in other countries, we 
hope that their countries will become prosperous. And because 
they are prosperous, they will have vested interests and see to 
it that there is no war, no conflict, that peace is maintained. 
And because there is what is good for them, so, I don't think 
we need to resort to inviting the navies and armies from other 
parts of the world to come and defend us. And we feel that 
sometimes if it is not in their interest, they don't defend you. 
  [Abanot] Just a point of clarification from the president 
and the prime minister. It's been over a year that you got the 
Manila Declaration regarding the resolution of the Spratly 
issue. Are all the countries involved now making a timetable in 
resolving this once and for all? 
  [Ramos] [passage omitted] In our bilateral meeting today, we 
reaffirm our commitment -- the Philippines and Malaysia -- to 
that policy of a peaceful approach to the solution of any 
disputes in the South China Sea. And one of the major steps 
taken, which I consider to be a step forward, is to get our 
fisheries technical people to continue meeting -- because we 
have already started meeting -- so that we can work out some 
sort of a fisheries agreement between Malaysia and the 
Philippines. And our fishermen can jointly fish in the area for 
the benefit of both countries. 
  To further extend the idea of cooperation in fishing 
activities, Malaysia and the Philippines will look for other 
possible areas for fishing and food processing cooperation 
outside of the Spratly Island area. This kind of approach, in 
fact, is what will be used for other areas in which there are 
border problems. And it will also be the guiding principles 
behind our proposed border-crossing agreement, which is now 
under consideration of our joint Philippine-Malaysian 
commission. [passage omitted] 

