Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Policy speech by Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa to the </F>
129th ordinary Diet session on 4 March -- live] 
  [Text] Ever since my government was formed in August 1993, 
I have worked for the three reforms of political reform, 
administrative reform, and economic reform under the banner of 
responsible change. 
  With one era ended yet the emerging shape of the era to come 
yet unclear, we have no choice but to take the initiative in 
identifying new paths so as to ensure a bright outlook for the 
future. Having chosen the path of change and its demand that we 
remake politics, the economy, and our society, those of us 
responsible for government at this historic juncture have a duty 
to forge ahead no matter how great the difficulties. 
  Political reform was this government's first priority issue, 
and the passage of the amendments to the political reform laws 
represents a major step toward the attainment of new and 
responsible politics. Making every effort to ensure that the 
laws are implemented smoothly, I intend, with the consent of 
both houses of this Diet, to appoint the members of the House of 
Representatives Election District Advisory Commission soon and 
then, once their recommendations are received, to promptly 
submit legislation to this Diet for the actual redistricting. 
  Of course, I need not remind you that the real basis for 
rooting out political corruption and reestablishing trust in 
politics fundamentally has to lie in each and every politician's 
having a strong ethical sense. It is sad indeed that there are 
still widespread suspicions of structural linkages between money 
and politics as seen in the so-called construction scandals, and 
I believe it would be inexcusable should we fail to enact more 
effective anticorruption measures and other systemic reforms. 
  Political reform is the framework within which we can 
achieve 
responsible change, and we have only just reached the starting 
line for those real reforms where politics must take the 
initiative. Realizing how little time there is until the 21st 
century, it is clear that we must move steadfastly toward 
creating a society of quality and substance that will have the 
international community's trust. 
  In laying the foundations for a new era of development, it 
is 
first imperative that we demolish those systems and practices 
that are no longer compatible with the needs of the times. Now 
that we have made some progress on political reform, it is 
essential that we make a determined effort for economic reform 
and administrative reform, both for ourselves and so that we can 
fulfill our responsibilities to the international community. I 
thus intend to take up the gauntlet of new reforms, not 
forgetting the essential spirit of this reform government. 
  The thing that the people most ardently desire now is an 
escape from this grim recession. Although there are some bright 
spots, the overall picture remains one of uncertainty and 
dead-endedness, and we cannot take our economic future for 
granted. Within this, we must pay special attention to the grim 
employment picture. 
  It is thus crucial that we deploy all possible effective 
policy measures in a concerted and timely manner to work our way 
out of this situation. Thus it was that we recently drew up the 
comprehensive package of economic measures amounting to an 
unprecedented 15 trillion yen including income and residents tax 
cuts and additional measures under the third supplemental 
budget. Dovetailing this into the budget for fiscal 1994, we 
must now achieve seamless fiscal expenditures and get the 
economy on the road to recovery as soon as possible. 
  Along with ensuring strong growth for public works spending 
and local government projects in consideration of the state of 
the economy, the fiscal 1994 budget proposal represents a 
determined effort to promote social infrastructure improvements 
in preparation for the advent of the aged society, including 
priority investment in housing, water and sewer systems, parks, 
environmental facilities, and other areas impacting directly to 
improve the quality of Japanese life. Every possible 
consideration has also been paid to policies to support 
hard-pressed farmers and small businesspeople and to stabilize 
employment. 
  Given the critical state of the economy, I very much hope 
that this budget proposal will be enacted as soon as possible. 
  In addition to cyclical factors and the collapse of the 
speculative bubble, this recession is said to have been 
exacerbated by structural factors in that many of those economic 
structures that used to work so rationally are no longer 
effective. Dynamic development in the private sector, the main 
player in the Japanese economy, is essential if we are to 
resolve this problem and the ensure long-term development. I am 
confident that the private sector will face the current 
difficulties unflinchingly and will be able to overcome them, 
and it is to encourage and support these efforts that we must 
promote economic reform that, clarifying the medium-term 
outlook, will be conducive to business restructuring and the 
creation and development of new industries. 
  Looking specifically at deregulation, we intend to move 
toward making nonregulation the norm and regulation the 
exception in the economic sphere and to be constantly reviewing 
social regulations so as, inter alia, to expand business 
opportunities and broaden consumer choice and to enhance 
purchasing power by reducing the disparity between Japanese and 
overseas prices. We will take dramatic action with the priority 
on those areas that relate to promoting the more effective and 
appropriate use of land and encouraging housing construction, 
that stimulate the creation of new businesses in information 
telecommunications and other areas, that relate to reducing the 
disparity between Japanese and overseas prices in such areas as 
distribution and energy, and that affect import promotion. At 
the same time, we will work for the rigorous enforcement of the 
antimonopoly law to eliminate those anticompetitive practices 
that are a cause of Japan's higher prices and that inhibit the 
creation of new business opportunities and foreign access to 
Japan. 
  Administrative reform is an urgent issue that cannot be 
avoided as we seek to reform Japanese socioeconomic structures 
and make them better suited to the new era. While there is 
general agreement that Japanese administrative structures and 
systems functioned effectively for our development from the end 
of the war until recently, these structures and systems have not 
always been able to respond adequately to the striking 
transformation in the socioeconomic climate and the major 
changes in popular needs. It is impossible for administration 
alone to stand unchanged when there are such major changes 
taking place in politics and the economy. 
  Seeking to establish administration that is fair, 
transparent, and above all has the popular interest as its first 
priority, now is the time for us to initiate radical surgery on 
our administrative structures and systems. Starting with 
deregulation as an interface between the governmental and 
nongovernmental sectors and considering nothing sacred, I intend 
to reexamine all of those systems and structures that have not 
kept up with the times and to promote sweeping reform including 
redelineating governmental and nongovernment roles, redefining 
the relationship between the central and local governments, and 
correcting the impediments posed by our over-compartmentalized 
bureaucracy, as well as to make an effort for the greater 
disclosure of administrative information. 
  So far, we have spent an enormous amount of time on 
discussions at various venues, including the Second 
Extraordinary Administrative Research Council and the 
Administrative Reform Council. However, it is also true that 
there has been criticism, saying that not enough has been 
accomplished in administrative reform. While we are submitting 
legislation to this session of the Diet to establish a committee 
on administrative reform, I have resolved that the question 
before us is that of how to achieve effective administrative 
reform and am determined to promote visible administrative 
reform. 
  While I believe that our decision to implement the 
largest-ever income tax and residents tax cut was both necessary 
and justified given the current economic situation, that does 
not give us license to be irresponsible about the very serious 
fiscal situation that will exist at the end of fiscal 1994, 
including national bonds outstanding in excess of 200 trillion 
yen and a substantial overhang of local government bonds. It is 
imperative that the people understand that we cannot let the 
fiscal situation deteriorate unchecked and cannot leave future 
generations severely indebted. 
  If we are to avoid impairing the economy's vitality and are 
to respond appropriately to the needs of the times even with an 
aged society, it is essential that we press forward with fiscal 
reform and continue to work to ensure sound fiscal management, 
and further efforts will be needed to create a fiscal structure 
in which the value of national bonds outstanding does not 
continue to rise and rise. At the same time, we must also work 
for the smooth management of local finances as well. Thus it is 
that, in tandem with administrative reform, we are promoting 
thorough rationalization and prioritization of expenditures. On 
tax reform, we are working to promote discussion on the broad 
range of issues involved, including the national burden and the 
tax system, tax cuts and how to finance them, and how to 
distribute the tax burden appropriately and equitably, and hope 
to reach a consensus soon and to get the relevant legislation 
enacted by the Diet by the end of the year so as to institute a 
balanced tax structure combining income, consumption, asset, and 
other taxes and to achieve a vigorous and affluent welfare 
society. 
  I would like to make specific proposals in the three areas 
of 
(i) structuring society for boundlessly creative individuality, 
(ii) structuring the foundations for a life of abundance and 
quality, and (iii) structuring society so that older means more 
vigorous. 
  Looking at the world to come, I suspect the groundswell of 
diverse individuality will give birth to new cultural and 
economic activity and that will in turn become the fountainhead 
of new vitality. At the same time, this will constitute an 
important foundation enabling Japan to behave and to contribute 
as a responsible member of the international community. Now is 
the time for us to achieve new advances in science and 
technology, education, and information telecommunications so as 
to achieve this new development. 
  Science and technology is the driving force for the economy 
and the stuff of dreams for the future. Creating an environment 
in which scientists and engineers can engage creatively in the 
work they love is thus an indispensable investment in the 
future. It is often said that Japan lags behind in basic 
research and leading-edge research, but I believe Japan should 
play a leadership role, including international cooperation, in 
space, life sciences, the environment, energy, and other 
research areas looking ahead to the 21st century. Thus it is 
that, in addition to enhancing research facilities and the 
information infrastructure, I want to further improve the 
provisions for research and development, including education for 
boundlessly creative people and international cooperation. 
  At the same time, I would like to make Japan a society 
that radiates culture -- a society in which each individual, 
region, and the state projects richly distinctive culture that 
Japan can be proud of internationally and that works through 
cross-fertilization for new cultural creation. Accordingly, I 
will work to promote cultural, artistic, and sports activities 
such as fostering young artists and promoting cultural 
activities distinct to each region. In addition, I will place a 
high priority on promoting human resources development and 
international cultural exchanges by, for example, promoting the 
program to accommodate 100,000 foreign students by the beginning 
of the next century, further enhancing language education, and 
developing human resources in connection with our assistance 
programs so as to create a climate of dialogue in which we and 
our global neighbors can understand and accept our diversity 
better. 
  Using education to foster richly individual people is basic 
to creating a highly cultural country. There are many views of 
Japanese education, including that it is overly uniform or that 
it discourages initiative, and I want to promote educational 
reform aimed at creating more attractive and open education from 
the earliest years through university graduation. 
  One of the areas in which it is hoped that creative economic 
activity will open the way to new development in the years to 
come is that of information telecommunications. With the recent 
rapid technological advances, information is no longer limited 
by either space or time, and it is likely that we will be able 
to achieve a society early in the 21st century revolutionizing 
life and business as we now know them. Yet the fact is that 
Japanese information telecommunications has, unfortunately, not 
lived up to expectations. Thus it is that I want to draw up a 
new vision for the kind of information society that we seek from 
the long-term perspective as soon as possible, to make better 
use of information technologies in the public sector, and to 
develop a comprehensive package of measures including promoting 
the development of information telecommunications networks, 
fusing broadcasting and telecommunications, and promoting 
information education. 
  It should be noted that I will also work steadily to support 
the creation of new business opportunities in the information 
telecommunications sector by, for example, encouraging small 
businesses to go into new fields, working for flexible labor 
markets, activating the financial and securities markets, and 
promoting bold restructuring. 
  Japan has grown to be the world's second-strongest economic 
power, but I suspect many of the people do not yet have a sense 
of true affluence in their daily lives. People in the outlying 
areas feel they have fewer job opportunities than in the big 
cities and that they do not have the same convenient access to 
cultural and educational opportunities, and many people in the 
big cities feel their lives are blighted by the unaffordability 
of quality housing, the trauma of commuting, and other problems. 
Among the causes here are the overconcentration of functions in 
the Tokyo area and the inadequacy of social infrastructure 
relating to everyday life, and it is essential that we move 
quickly to institute effective policies in this area. 
  I believe the important thing here is that each region take 
the initiative in exercising ingenuity to create attractive 
communities and that we improve the infrastructure for balanced 
development throughout Japan. For this to happen, the first 
point is that local governments close to the people must take 
the lead in solving their residents' problems, which means we 
must make a determined effort to promote decentralization, 
including enhancing local government finances. I thus want to 
draw up a basic policy outline by the end of the year detailing 
the basic philosophy, the issues to be addressed, and the 
procedures to be followed, including the possibility of new 
legislation. 
  Working for the creation of a multicentered country, I also 
want to promote the dispersion of urban and industrial functions 
to outlying areas and to encourage the creation of efficient 
high-speed road, rail, and air transportation networks linking 
hub cities nationwide, to promote development for underpopulated 
and mountainous regions, and more. Along with working for the 
further enhancement of conservation and the total range of 
disaster- prevention policies, I will also continue to work 
vigorously for Hokkaido's overall growth and for Okinawa's 
development. 
  It is imperative that we further enhance the living related 
infrastructure directly related to providing greater convenience 
so that all people everywhere can have tangible sense of 
affluence no matter where they live. For example, we will seek 
to lower housing costs by promoting a dramatic restructuring of 
the housing industry, housing imports, and other means and will 
work to promote the more efficient and systematic use of land 
space so that people can live in bigger houses that feel less 
cramped and offer greater convenience. At the same time, it is 
necessary to steadfastly promote improvements in roads, parks, 
water and sewer systems, waste disposal plants, and other 
amenities and improvements in intracity rail carrying capacities 
and other social infrastructure to alleviate commuter crowding. 
  The environmental and energy issues are not only important 
issues for those of us alive today but must be dealt with in 
consideration of future generations and the whole of the global 
community. I thus want to draw up the basic environment law and 
to move to implement comprehensive policies as soon as possible 
so that we can bequeath a beautiful environment and the bounty 
of nature to future generations. Likewise, I want, in tandem 
with energy conservation and the faster development and use of 
alternative energy sources, to promote the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy premised upon assured safety. 
  The everyday safety and security that we enjoy in our lives 
is an asset that Japan can be proud of, and preserving this is 
one of the government's important responsibilities. Yet just as 
the crime picture has lately become quite grim with the 
increasing viciousness and ingenuity of organized criminal 
elements, the increasing frequency of drug-related incidents and 
shootings, and the fact that crime has become less localized and 
more international, we are also recording large numbers of 
traffic deaths. I intend to be unstinting in my efforts to 
maintain public order and to ensure public safety. 
  At the same time, I intend to submit comprehensive consumer 
protection and relief legislation, including the adoption of 
product liability rules, to this session of the Diet so as to 
enhance consumer interests in regard to product safety from the 
perspective of putting the consumer first. 
  If there is anxiety about the fact that Japan now has the 
longest lifespan in the world and will soon become the world's 
first society to have very large numbers of old people and very 
few children, this anxiety is politics' responsibility. If we 
are to achieve a vigorous and cheerful welfare society in the 
21st century, it is important that we draw up a comprehensive 
aged society welfare vision striking a balance among pension 
funding, health care, welfare provisions, and the other 
essential elements and reach a national consensus on how the 
envisioned welfare society is going to be supported. 
  To start with, I would like to structure society by the 
early 
21st century so that any individual who so desires can find 
gainful employment until at least the age of 65. In addition to 
modifying the unemployment insurance system to subsidize 
continued employment, I also want to make an active effort in 
support of reemployment and retraining for older people. The 
government pension system is a major financial support for the 
elderly, and I want to ensure that it is linked to this support 
for continued employment and want to ensure that it is basically 
reformed so as to be better suited to the truly aged society of 
the future. 
  In addition, I will fundamentally review the "gold plan" 
ten-year strategy to promote health care and welfare for the 
aged with all due heed to financing sources and will work to 
enhance the home- helper system and other care systems so as to 
create a society in which older people can enjoy good health and 
peace of mind. On the health insurance system and health 
insurance for the aged, I want to work to alleviate the cost to 
the patient of nursing care and to review the extent and 
specifics of coverage so as to enable the different systems to 
provide enhanced medical services responsive to the different 
needs of different patients. 
  Likewise, I will actively promote measures for the 
handicapped, including enhancing community access for these 
people under the new long-term program for government measures 
for disabled persons. 
  Health is a most important prerequisite to leading a rich 
life, and we will therefore move ahead with comprehensive 
policies to deal with cancer and other degenerative and 
intractable diseases. Along with drawing up a new 10-year 
strategy to defeat cancer and working to enhance the medical 
response to AIDs, including improving hub hospitals and 
advancing medical research on treatments, we will also work to 
contribute to the prevention and cure of AIDs on a global basis, 
including support for the tenth International Conference on AIDs 
to be held in Japan later this year. 
  Today's lower birth rates, the greater numbers of women 
working outside the home, and other factors have meant major 
changes in the social environment as it impacts children and the 
home. This year is the international year of the family. For 
these and other reasons, I want to work to create a climate in 
which people can have and raise children in confidence, 
including enhancing the nursery provisions and creating a 
children's environmental fund. In addition, I want to work to 
enhance the home-care leave system, including the possibility of 
postnatal leave payments under the unemployment insurance scheme 
and home-care leave legislation, so that people can reconcile 
the needs of home and work, and I also want to promote labor 
policies for part-time workers. 
  Likewise, I will promote comprehensive policies and seek to 
formulate systems conducive to the creation of a 
joint-participation society in which women are able to take an 
equal part with men in the total range of political, business, 
and social fields. 
  It bodes well for the world economy's future that the GATT 
Uruguay Round was finally concluded last December after more 
than seven years of negotiations. In concluding these 
negotiations, Japan accepted the draft agreement on agriculture, 
thereby according rice special treatment regarding tariffication 
and subjecting other agricultural products to tariffication. 
This was a most heartrending decision made after strenuous 
consideration in recognition of the broader national interest in 
the maintenance and strengthening of the free trading system. 
  Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries serve many functions, 
such as ensuring the stable supply of food so vital to our lives 
and providing restful spaces rich in tradition and local 
culture. Water-filled paddies and sheaves of ripe rice are 
symbolic of Japan, and rice farming also plays a crucial role in 
land conservation and environmental protection. 
  Thus I believe it is now all the more important that the 
government make every possible effort to allay the anxieties 
felt by farmers and to create a climate in which they can devote 
themselves to farming. Taking the helm of the emergency 
agriculture and farming area headquarters established late last 
year, I am determined to make every effort to draw up a vision 
for agriculture's rebirth and to institute the necessary 
domestic measures. 
  Likewise for forestry and fisheries, I will also work to 
promote the improvement and preservation of forest resources and 
to promote a strong fishing industry drawing on the rich bounty 
of the life- sustaining sea. 
  Japan is currently running a massive current account 
surplus, 
and there are still insistent voices claiming that the Japanese 
market is closed. While some of this criticism stems from 
misunderstanding, I would rather see this as evidence of the 
high hopes people have for Japan and I believe we should take 
the initiative in implementing the necessary reforms in our own 
interest. 
  The economic reforms and administrative reforms now under 
way 
are responsive to the international community's expectations. 
Along with domestic-demand-led economic management, we need to 
ensure that the Japanese market is open to the rest of the world 
in accordance with international trade rules by promoting 
further deregulation and other measures to improve market access 
and rectify price differentials, ensuring greater transparency 
in government procurement procedures, strengthening the office 
of trade and investment ombudsman, and enhancing the import 
infrastructure. 
  I find it very unfortunate that President Clinton and I were 
unable to reach an agreement regarding the establishment of the 
so-called target values in the Japan-U.S. framework talks 
recently. Recognizing that Japan's responsibilities for 
harmonization with the international community are now greater 
than ever before, I believe that we must, while firmly adhering 
to free-trade principles, take effective measures to achieve a 
highly significant decrease in our current account surplus over 
the medium term. 
  While the road to world peace and stability is by no means 
smooth, our course is gradually becoming clearer as the 
international community pools its wisdom and its efforts toward 
its common goals. Indeed, the peace in Cambodia and the 
progress in the Middle East peace talks are symbolic of the way 
issues can be resolved through cooperation within the 
international community. 
  The United Nations is obviously the fulcrum of the 
international community's efforts, and its capacities should be 
further strengthened so that it can respond effectively to the 
needs of the new era. This year will be marked by international 
discussion of the reform of the Security Council, and Japan 
intends to take an active part in these discussions and is 
prepared to do all it can to discharge its responsibilities in 
order to meet the international community's expectations. 
  Looking ahead, I intend to work for a more peaceful and more 
prosperous world of respect for diversity by drawing upon all 
the resources at Japan's command, including not only economic 
cooperation but also personnel and intellectual cooperation, and 
marshaling them in effective combination to make a distinctively 
Japanese international contribution consistent with our Peace 
Constitution. 
  One of the areas in which Japan must play a larger role is 
that of regional conflict prevention and resolution. I believe 
resolving regional conflicts and stabilizing the affected 
regions needs a comprehensive approach that includes diplomatic 
efforts to end conflicts, U.N. peacekeeping operations, 
humanitarian assistance, and reconstruction development 
assistance for countries that have been torn apart by violence. 
The process by which the conflict in Cambodia was successfully 
drawn to a close is one good example of this approach. 
Currently taking part in the U.N. peacekeeping operations in 
Mozambique, Japan intends to continue to support international 
efforts for peace, including dispatching election observers to 
El Salvador later this month, providing support for the efforts 
to enhance Palestinian living standards as a key to peace in the 
Middle East, and enhancing its humanitarian assistance to the 
strife-ridden areas of former Yugoslavia. 
  The end of the Cold War presented an excellent opportunity 
for arms control and disarmament. Along with continuing to 
firmly uphold our three nonnuclear principles, I intend to make 
active efforts for the nonproliferation of nuclear and other 
weapons of mass destruction and missiles. On the issue of 
nuclear nonproliferation, the way has been cleared for the IAEA 
to inspect the declared nuclear facilities in North Korea, but 
it is still necessary to get North Korea to be more forthcoming. 
It is thus essential that Japan continue to respond 
appropriately to the situation as it develops, and, maintaining 
close coordination with the Republic of Korea, the United 
States, and the other countries concerned, we will work for a 
peaceful resolution of this issue. Japan will also cooperate in 
other fields of arms control and disarmament such as in 
cooperating for the dismantling of the former Soviet Union's 
nuclear weapons and ensuring effective implementation of the 
United Nations register of conventional arms. 
  Official development assistance has an important role to 
play 
in our efforts for world peace and prosperity. Japan is today 
the world's largest ODA [Overseas Development Assistance] donor 
country, and we intend to use this ODA effectively in line with 
Japan's official development assistance charter with an eye to 
encouraging the recipient countries' efforts to democratize, to 
ensure human rights and freedom, to shift to market economics, 
and to curtail military spending. 
  Along with using ODA and other means to contribute 
actively to resolving environmental issues, population issues, 
the AIDS epidemic, and the scourge of narcotics, refugee 
resettlement, and other issues, Japan will take leadership 
initiatives in the United Nations and other international 
efforts on these issues. 
  Japan and the United States have maintained a firm and 
active 
relationship over the past half-century. Although the 
relationship is currently beset with serious trade and economic 
issues, it is imperative that we cooperate to resolve these 
issues calmly and in the spirit of mutual trust. President 
Clinton and I have agreed that these issues must not be allowed 
to distort the broader Japan- U.S. relationship -- a 
relationship that is moving to a new plane in which each of the 
two countries seeks cooperation while respecting the other's 
positions and judgments. The efforts under way for reform in 
both Japan and the U.S. will strengthen this bilateral 
relationship. It is essential, not only for our two countries 
but for world peace and development, that Japan and the U.S. 
continue to maintain close political, security, economic, and 
global cooperation relations and strive to further stabilize the 
Japan-U.S. partnership. 
  The Japan-U.S. security arrangements are increasingly 
important for security and stability in the Asia-Pacific region, 
which is still fraught with destabilizing factors even after the 
end of the Cold War. Japan will continue to make the possession 
of an appropriate-scale defense capability and the maintenance 
of these Japan-U.S. security arrangements its fundamental 
defense policies. It is about twenty years since the national 
defense program outline was adopted to provide the guidelines 
for Japan's defense capability, and I believe it is now 
necessary to reexamine the outline's basic approach in light of 
the dramatic changes in the international situation and the 
remarkable scientific and technological advances that have been 
made since then. Getting ideas from a wide range of people, I 
hope to identify the basic directions for this process as soon 
as possible. 
  Next year marks the 50th anniversary of the end of World War 
II. Once a battlefield, the Asia-Pacific region has today 
developed into one of the most promising regions anywhere in the 
world. The November 1993 informal APEC economic leaders' 
meeting bringing the region's leaders together was thus a 
historic event marking the start of a new era of regional 
cooperation. Attending this leaders' meeting, I had candid 
exchanges of views with the other leaders there and got the 
impression that there is a gradually but unmistakable 
groundswell of regional unity here. Political and security 
dialogues affecting the entire region are getting under way in 
earnest, and the ASEAN regional forum is scheduled to be 
convened this year with China, Russia and other countries also 
taking part. I do not intend to miss this opportunity to work to 
forge stable and open cooperative relations within the region. 
  Japan-China relations have made major strides forward with 
the 20th anniversary of the normalization of relations and the 
15th anniversary of the conclusion of the treaty of peace and 
friendship. I am going to visit China later this month and to 
hold candid exchanges of views with Chinese leaders, and I 
intend to work to have the cooperative relationship between 
Japan and China contribute even more to the international 
community. 
  In our relations with the Republic of Korea, as affirmed 
with 
President Kim Yong-sam in last year's summit meeting, we want to 
further expand our person-to-person and cultural exchanges and 
to work for the natural development of our future-oriented 
relationship. On the question of normalizing relations with 
North Korea, it is essential that we continue to carefully watch 
their moves on the nuclear weapons development and other issues. 
  President Yeltsin's visit to Japan last October laid new 
foundations for further development in Japan-Russia relations. 
While the situation in Russia is now less clear after last 
December's parliamentary elections and this January's cabinet 
reshuffle, Japan intends to make every effort for the resolution 
of the territorial issue and the full normalization of 
Japan-Russia relations in accordance with the Tokyo declaration 
signed during president Yeltsin's visit to Japan and to provide 
the appropriate support for reform efforts. 
  The European Union inaugurated last November represents 
further degree of integration beyond the EC, and this is also 
spreading to the North European countries and the countries of 
Central and Eastern Europe. There can be no doubting that this 
more-integrated Europe will have a greater voice and will play 
an increasingly important role in the international community. 
I thus intend to broaden and deepen our dialogue and policy 
cooperation with our European friends with whom we share common 
values. 
  It is now about half a year since this coalition government 
was created embodying the fervent hopes of the people for 
Japan's rebirth. We have confronted a number of major issues 
during even this short period of time, yet these trials are only 
natural given that we have dared to choose a new and untrod 
path. The people's voice is my only guide in this unknown 
journey, I am determined to effect these great historic reforms 
in response to popular expectations. 
  In this, I ask again for your understanding and cooperation. 

