BFN 

  [Excerpts] Buenos Aires, 21 Apr (NA) -- Foreign Minister 
Guido Di Tella has announced that the Malvinas Islands 
inhabitants have accepted an Argentine Government proposal to 
finance the elimination of minefields on the islands. The task 
will be carried out by U.S. Army Engineering Corps personnel. 
  Di Tella said this is "the first Argentine proposal the 
Kelpers have accepted" since the 1982 war. The foreign minister 
added that the Kelpers' main conditions are that the work "will 
not be carried out by Argentine experts" and that the work must 
be guaranteed to be "100 percent." 
  The Argentine Armed Forces planted some 30,000 mines on the 
islands during the conflict. It is estimated that the task of 
withdrawing them will cost between $5 and $6 million. 
  The foreign minister expressed a desire to travel to the 
islands once all mines are removed and "to walk over" the fields 
that have been surrounded by barbed wire since the end of the 
war. Argentines are forbidden entry to the islands. 
  During a news conference yesterday, Di Tella mentioned the 
possibility of financing the cleanup through a World Bank loan 
or a UN fund. The United Nations has approved a resolution 
creating a reserve to finance the removal of millions of mines 
planted around the globe. [passage omitted] 
  The foreign minister admitted that NAFTA is becoming 
"increasingly remote" for Argentina. He said this following a 
trip to Morocco where he met with representatives of various 
countries. 
  Di Tella spoke before representatives of 127 nations who 
were 
convened to sign the final act of the Uruguay round of GATT 
talks. 
  NAFTA, which comprises the United States, Mexico, and 
Canada, 
became a slim possibility when Canadian diplomats said there 
were doubts about any invitation to participate in the trade 
agreement. 
  The list of countries that are eligible to join NAFTA will 
be 
announced on 1 May. A report on who has ended up empty handed 
will be announced on 1 July. 

