Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Government Minister German Quiroga by Mario </F>
Canipa Vargas in La Paz--no date given] 
  [Excerpts] Canipa: The government has been 
making changes since its inauguration last August. It is 
insisting on making changes. What are the changes made in your 
ministry? 
  Quiroga: There are three basic aspects we want to 
change in the transition from the old Interior Ministry to the 
new Government Ministry. 
  The first one is related to the intelligence services, which 
terrified the people in the past. This was the part of the state 
that investigated the possibility of a coup, of sedition. But we 
now believe that under a modern and established democracy like 
ours, these services must contribute to people's security, and 
along with its basic organization--which is the police--should 
be the support of the Bolivian people to give them daily 
security. 
  We are working on it. The first step taken is to 
institutionalize the intelligence services and put them in the 
hands of the police in order to prevent them from becoming an 
instrument of the political power that happens to be in charge 
of the Government Ministry. 
  Canipa: Is there no longer a Government Ministry 
intelligence service? 
  Quiroga: There is an intelligence service in the 
Government Ministry that depends on the police, and all its 
members are part of the Bolivian police. 
  This is closely linked to the changes in the police as part 
of the first aspect. [passage omitted] 
  Canipa: What will happen with the struggle against 
drug trafficking? Will it be included in these changes? 
  Quiroga: Of course. To start with we have changed 
the Social Defense Secretariat, which in the past was 
exclusively linked to the issue of coca and cocaine. It now has 
a wider role involving prevention and interdiction. 
  Although interdiction was an important role in the past, we 
believe alternative development is also an essential issue. It 
will not be possible to achieve an adequate replacement for 
surplus coca production if we are not able to find an economic 
solution. 
  The only way that an individual who grows coca stops doing 
it 
is when he realizes that growing another product is more 
profitable than growing coca from the economic point of view. 
  This is what we are working on. We have taken control of the 
fund for alternative development by changing its structure. We 
created an executive board presided over by a delegate of the 
president of the Republic, and its responsibility is shared by 
the executive branch and coca producers. 
  We would like to see the executive board create the ideas to 
carry out alternative development. 
  Eradication will be linked to alternative development. In 
those places where eradication is being carried out there will 
be alternative development, and where alternative development 
took place it was because there was a reduction in coca growing. 
  But I am not saying that we will eliminate interdiction. We 
will continue the work being carried out in the country but 
interdiction will be exclusively against drug traffickers, not 
against coca growers or people involved in the legal 
commercialization of coca. 
  We have a Special Antinarcotics Force [FELCN] that is an 
example for Latin America, and we will continue to support it 
because we believe that interdiction is essential. We also will 
carry out prevention as an overall part of our strategy, and 
this is why we created the Social Prevention Under Secretariat, 
which will deal with alcoholism, drug addiction, and crimes. 
This organization will help try to prevent these evils in 
society through teaching programs. 
  Canipa: To talk about successful and real 
alternative development, not just in speeches the way it is now, 
means talking about resources. How will you finance the 
alternative development projects to become a reality? 
  Quiroga: We are talking about three basic sources 
of financing. The first is the resource that drug trafficking 
itself produces. The country has many resources from drug 
trafficking that are lost with time. We are talking about a 
great deal of money, many assets that have been disappearing. 
  The one responsible was first the Interior Ministry; later 
it 
was a shared responsibility between prosecutors and the Interior 
Ministry. Now it is the responsibility of prosecutors and the 
judges who hand over the assets to trustees who later disappear. 
  We will propose that the legislative branch change the law 
to 
be able to immediately auction confiscated assets to create a 
common fund to support the people found innocent after their 
assets were confiscated. 
  With this fund we hope to finance 30 to 35 percent of the 
alternative development programs. 
  The second resource will be multinational organizations. The 
United Nations and the Inter-American Development Bank are 
interested in carrying out alternative development programs 
under the concept that the only way to do it adequately is 
through the industrialization of the areas where surplus coca is 
grown. 
  The third financing resource is the United States with 
bilateral aid. That country gave about $20 million to $25 
million annually for alternative development but a large part of 
those resources were used to pay salaries and not necessarily to 
carry out alternative development. 
  With these three resources, which are not from the national 
Treasury, in addition to some funds from the national budget, we 
believe we can carry out a good alternative development policy. 
  Canipa: Regarding interdiction, there has been a 
great deal of talk about the presence of Colombian drug 
traffickers in Bolivia. Is that true? 
  Quiroga: We have information about new technology. 
The technology used in the country is different from that used 
by the Medellin and Cali cartels. But in the last two years we 
have seen that the technology to produce coca and cocaine in the 
country has quickly improved. And this makes the narcotics 
intelligence organizations think there is permanent and decisive 
cooperation by the Colombian drug cartels. 
  Another aspect is that probably 80 percent of the drug 
produced in the country goes to Colombia. Whether it goes to 
Paraguay, Argentina, or Brazil, its final destination is 
Colombia, where the last stage of purification is made before it 
is sent to the United States. 
  Perhaps this is the most important reason to continue with 
interdiction, to prevent Colombian drug traffickers from 
establishing themselves in our country. 
  Canipa: Does this represent a threat of violence 
...? 
  Quiroga: Without any doubt, this may represent 
violence because the mafia is violent and we will not send nuns 
from a convent to fight against them. We must send outstanding 
officers against them because this is a war, a war in which the 
government, the police, have to fulfill the laws when the other 
side violates them. 
  Drug traffickers violate sovereignty, hurt the population by 
threatening them, and they also murder with impunity. 
  It is an unjust struggle because one side has laws and 
regulations to fulfill while the other side has absolutely no 
restrictions. 
  Canipa: Do you have a list of the main drug 
traffickers in the country? Who heads the list? 
  Quiroga: We have a permanent list that undergoes 
changes based on the arrests made. The number one in the country 
is "Meco" Dominguez who received a sentence and has escaped; he 
is at large. 
  There is also a list of nine individuals who are a number 
one 
priority for FELCN. Only two months ago the number one on that 
list was "Nando" Gutierrez, who was captured. As you can see it 
is a list that changes periodically. 
  We have a FELCN that is very efficient but the DEA's 
cooperation in this work must be recognized. 

