BFN 

<F P=106> ["`Nuclear Strategy' Directed Against Developing Countries" </F>
-- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, June 17 (KCNA) -- NODONG SINMUN today 
carries a signed article on the further intensifying military 
threat of the imperialists and their followers against the DPRK 
and some developing countries under the pretext of 
"non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and missiles". 
  The article says: 
  The United States is stepping up its military offensive 
against the developing countries more feverishly than before 
under the pretext of "nuclear non-proliferation". This tells 
that the United States' global strategy, nuclear strategy is 
being focussed on the developing countries. 
  One of the new "modes of fighting" of the United States at 
present is the "nuclear non-proliferation strategy". This 
"strategy" means that the United States will counter a "threat" 
from the "proliferation of nuclear weapons and missiles" of the 
developing countries with newly developed weapons. 
  To this end, the United States granted the U.S. President 
and 
commanders of U.S. forces greater powers to use nuclear weapons, 
and is actively developing micro-nukes of new generation and 
detecting devices. 
  The ulterior aim sought by it through the "nuclear non- 
proliferation strategy" is to prevent the developing countries 
from possessing or making nuclear weapons under the pretext of 
"nuclear non-proliferation" and thereby maintain its position as 
a nuclear power and intensify interference and domination over 
them. 
  In a word, this "strategy" is to establish a "new world 
order" in which the United States has the field to itself 
dominating the developing countries with a nuclear whip. 
  Today the sharp edge of attack of this "strategy" is 
directed 
at the DPRK. The United States is scheming to dispatch, in case 
of "contingency" on the Korean peninsula, reinforcements of 
600,000 troops, more than 200 warships, over 1,600 aircraft and 
even its forces deployed in Germany and Alaska. And, when 
unleashing another war in Korea, it is trying to inveigle Japan 
and other international reactionaries in it. 
  But the United States cannot bring us to our knees with 
strength. 
  The Korean people are determined and prepared to counter any 
military option of the United States. The United States must 
give up its new adventurous strategy. 

