Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Network in Serbo-Croatian at 1800 GMT on 28 February carries in 
its regular 45-minute newscast the following report on the 
fighting in the Republic. 
  Maglaj correspondent Hajrudin Sermic reports that "the 
chetnik rabble that, thanks to the visibility here, kills 
civilians whenever it wishes, is systematically destroying a 
people. They do not even stop at targeting ambulances, 
civilians, and residential areas. An unheard-of massacre 
occurred again today. The direct hit on a clearly marked 
ambulance van that was transporting seriously injured people to 
the hospital in Tesanj left four people dead, while 11 sustained 
severe injures." 
  An unidentified correspondent reports from Srebrenica and 
says that "the population's suffering continues, and the 
everyday postponement of the Canadian Battalion's exchange 
resembles a farce. We have learned from reliable sources that 
the exchange of UN Protection Force members in Srebrenica is 
being blocked by the Serbian aggressor's resolve not to allow 
more peace forces into Srebrenica than are currently in the 
town. Moreover, the aggressor is denying entry to the white 
tanks and helicopters that are part of the Dutch forces." 
  An unidentified correspondent from the 1st Corps Information 
Service reports that "although the large-caliber artillery has 
been silent today, the aggressor has continued violating the 
cease-fire on the Sarajevo front, which resulted in one member 
of our Army being injured. This morning, the chetniks in 
Mrkovici, Zecja Glava, and Mala Kula used antiaircraft and M-84 
machine guns to target Orlic and Brekin Potok. Some time later, 
a portable rocket launcher from Gradina shelled Hotonje, while 
this afternoon antiaircraft machine guns again targeted Brekin 
Potok and Wilson's Setaliste. Chetnik snipers were also active, 
particularly those on Spicasta Stijena, Travnik Street, and the 
region of Ziga Kuca. A sniper bullet fired from Zica Kuca 
injured one of our defenders in Zabrdje." 

