CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by C. Friedl] </F>
  [Text] 
<H5>  Numerous products emit ozone killer </H5>
  International agreements to eliminate the production and use 
of ozone-depleting materials suggest that the CFC problem is as 
good as solved. That appearance is deceiving. Neither recycling 
nor destruction is regulated for the approximately 2.1 million 
metric tons of CFCs and halons now in use throughout the world. 
The first disposal plant will start operation in Germany this 
summer. 
  The Federal Republic of Germany will have completed its 
retirement of CFCs as the first nation in the world during 1994. 
"CFCs should be retired on a Europe-wide basis by 1997." 
"Countries that signed the Montreal Protocol want to advance the 
timetable for this retirement." 
  This and similar pronouncements provide the impression that 
the international efforts to find a common solution to the CFC 
problem are bearing fruit. Chlorofluorocarbons and halons 
threaten the stratospheric ozone layer. The danger they pose 
appears to have been eliminated by the Montreal Protocol of 1987 
and the more stringent retirement scenarios and step-by-step 
plans enacted in subsequent years. 
  "This impression is wrong," contradicts Vivian Sheridan. She 
is the environmental spokesperson of the American chemical 
company DuPont. This company was formerly the world's largest 
producer of CFCs. Upon close inspection, the Montreal Protocol 
merely regulates the production volume of new CFCs in the 
signatory countries. On the other hand, it permits the import, 
export, and even after 1995, the use of recycled CFCs. 
Developing countries may manufacture CFCs "for their own use." 
Finally, the production and sale of new product is possible to 
the end of the year. 
  On the other hand, the Montreal Protocol does not regulate 
the whereabouts of the quantities already produced, stored, and 
in use. These quantities are considerable. Throughout the world, 
UN estimates point to about 2 million metric tons of fully 
halogenated CFCs and 115,000 metric tons of halons that are in 
use and on the market. For Germany, the UN cites 80,000 metric 
tons of CFCs used as propellant in rigid expanded polyurethanes, 
25,000 metric tons as refrigerant in cooling and refrigerating 
plants, and 9,000 tons of halons in fire extinguishing systems. 
In addition, some few 100 metric tons more are used in Germany 
annually as solvents. 
  Additional CFCs are released from these sources into the 
environment. Some of them are legal. Solvents enter the 
atmosphere within a few months of their application. The same 
applies to spray cans--where CFCs, for example, are still 
permitted in medical sprays. The insulating gases from 
insulating foams diffuse partially over the course of years into 
the environment. In recycling refrigerators, almost every second 
unit is disassembled manually at this time. Thomas Engmann is 
the manager of Electrorecycling at the disposal company of 
Rethmann, Selm. In his estimation, "About 30% of the CFCs 
enter 
the atmosphere uncontrolled." Substantial CFC sources are also 
German landfills. According to a study by the Technical 
University of Hamburg-Harburg, 200 metric tons of CFCs escape 
annually from spray cans, plastics and refrigerators in 
landfills. Up to 40,000 metric tons of the gases are still 
stored in West German dumps, according to estimates. 
  In practice, the retreat of CFCs is in no way as orderly or 
at the speed proclaimed by political pronouncements. "CFCs are 
the hazardous waste that can be disposed of most easily," 
explains Dr. Holger Brackemann from the Federal Office of the 
Environment in Berlin. In other words, opening a valve in an 
unobserved moment is enough to "dispose of" the materials. This 
illegal path is taken often, particularly for fire extinguishers 
and extinguishing systems, suspects Brackemann. According to the 
CFC Halon Ban, all fire extinguishers and extinguishing systems 
filled with halon were to have been taken out of operation by 31 
December 1993 and the material disposed by way of the 
Associations. Of the 6000 metric tons still estimated in 
existing systems in 1992, "only considerably less than 1000 
metric tons have been recovered" by today according to 
Brackemann. 
<H5>  The temperatures in a conventional trash incineration plant </H5>
are sufficient to crack the CFC propellant R 11. This was shown 
by experiments in the Tamara test plant of the Nuclear Research 
Center at Karlsruhe. 
  If you need CFCs, you can still get them. "The market for 
secondary product is large and unmanageable," assesses Dr. Peter 
Schubert. He is a CFC expert for DuPont. In his opinion, a 
considerable quantity of the ozone killer is still stored by 
vendors. The conversion of equipment to alternatives is 
proceeding at a slow pace. "For example, most users of cooling 
units or air conditioners choose to use recycled CFCs rather 
than convert to alternatives," says Schubert. The development of 
environmentally compatible alternatives and the manufacture of 
these products, costing millions, have not yet become profitable 
for the chemical industry. The demand is moderate. 
  Correspondingly hesitant is the retreat of old CFCs. 
Schubert 
estimates that, at this time, around 100 metric tons of 
refrigerant are purified on site and then refilled annually. An 
additional 300 metric tons are processed into secondary product. 
About 700 metric tons arrived at Hoechst AG in Frankfurt for 
processing in the last year. 
  Product that is too dirty for redistillation had to be 
stored 
until now because destruction capacity was not available. 
Probably starting this summer, Germany will have its first 
disposal system available. "The approval has just arrived," says 
the system developer Dr. Siegismut Hug. Three cracking reactors- 
-originally constructed for purifying exhaust gas from CFC 
production at Hoechst--are to eliminate 9000 metric tons of CFCs 
annually when completed. 
  In this process, the molecules are split in a graphite 
reactor at 2200 C to 2500 C in a hydrogen/oxygen 
flame. The reaction products--essentially hydrochloric acid, 
hydrofluoric acid, and carbon dioxide--can be separated from one 
another in a second step and reused as chemical raw material. 
"Our system will then be available to all Europe," says Hug. 
American and Japanese companies have shown interest in obtaining 
a license, according to Hug. 
  Besides this, several other methods are undergoing 
experimentation. Engineers at Maschinen- und Apparatebau Grimma 
tested plasma cracking a few years ago. Concentric Machines (CM) 
in Treutlingen has developed the Chemical Reverser that obtains 
reusable cracking products from CFCs and halons. The American 
company Process Technologies of Boise Idaho splits the molecules 
at less than 50 C using UV radiation. A method of the Tokyo 
Electric Power and KRI International Inc. of Kyoto is based on 
the same principle. A mixture of 80% CFCs and 20% 
oxygen is 
exposed to a mercury-vapor lamp. UV radiation cracks the CFCs 
into chlorine gas which is filtered out of the process flow by 
way of a membrane. 
  The Industrial Research Institute of Kanagawa Prefecture is 
rolling out particularly big guns. CFCs, fuel gas, and air are 
mixed and made to explode in a steel pipe 1 meter in length and 
35 mm in diameter. During this process, temperatures of almost 
3000 C are created. Such temperatures, in addition to 
strong pressure waves, split up to 99.99% of the 
molecules. 
  Regarding the possibilities for destroying CFCs and halons, 
the experts of a working group in the UN Environmental Program 
(UNEP), the "Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) on the 
destruction technologies for ozone-depleting substances," have 
been racking their brains since 1991. TAC has investigated 
several dozen possible methods and come to this conclusion. "The 
only methods available now are based on thermal oxidation." The 
American Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) had a similar 
summary. "Incineration is at this time the only large-scale 
usable technology for destroying CFCs." 
  Even conventional incineration plants are suitable for CFC 
destruction. Tests at the "Tamara" incineration plant of the 
Nuclear Research Center at Karlsruhe (KfK) show that the 
propellant R-11 from insulating foams is cracked. However, the 
CFC proportion at the input must always remain limited to a few 
per cent of the trash because aggressive hydrochloric and 
hydrofluoric acids are created during incineration. 
  The development of disposal methods got a late start. The 
experts agree on this. "In addition," says Brackemann, "More 
commitment on the part of the chemical industry would have been 
desirable." One thing is clear. Until adequate disposal 
capacities are available worldwide, most of the existing CFCs 
have, either intentionally or not, literally disappeared into 
thin air. The DuPont expert Schubert can see a positive side to 
this despite the problems. "Then, we can use the methods to 
dispose of the CFC alternatives." 

