Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Sergey Karkhanin: "In Search of Justice. How </F>
Are the Amendments to the Law on Russian Citizenship 
Functioning?"] 
  [Text] It is around seven months since this law was 
amended and amplified, so some conclusions can now be drawn. It 
was the topic of a seminar organized in Moscow by the leadership 
of the Russian Federation Presidential Commission on Citizenship 
Affairs. Representatives of regional administrations and 
internal affairs organs participated in the discussion. 
  "The amendments are not functioning effectively everywhere, 
in some places the local authorities prefer to operate in the 
old way," Commission Chairman Abdulakh Mikitayev told your 
ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI correspondent. "Yet there has been a marked 
reduction in the flow of complaints and appeals to the president 
in connection with citizenship problems. So more often than not 
people are able to find help locally on the basis of the law: 
in Russian consulates abroad and through the internal affairs 
organs in Russia. Complaints from `first'- and `second'-wave 
emigres in the more remote foreign countries have virtually 
dried up: People there are now entitled to obtain Russian 
citizenship by registration, while remaining citizens of the 
country where they currently live." 
  Russian-speaking inhabitants of the Baltic countries are 
particularly active in taking advantage of this opportunity. So 
far 40,000 people in Estonia and 20,000 in Latvia have obtained 
the relevant stamp or insert in their passports. There are many 
waiting in the wings in Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan, but 
the situation is complicated by the fact that the network of 
Russian consulates is not yet sufficiently developed, and not 
everyone can afford to travel to the republic capital. The 
number of consulates must be significantly increased, Abdulakh 
Mikitayev believes, in the interests of present and future 
Russian citizens living in the neighboring foreign countries. 
  It is a fundamentally important fact that citizenship and 
registration are different things, although in order to become a 
Russian citizen a person is obliged to confirm where he lives 
via the internal affairs organs. This procedure has not yet 
been perfected in practice. Another problem is citizenship for 
members of officers' families and students who have come to 
study in higher educational establishments in the Russian 
Federation. The Commission is prepared to do something for the 
students, since many of them intend to work in Russia on 
obtaining their diplomas, and many of tomorrow's specialists 
consider that their future lies there. 
  The situation in Estonia and Latvia remains particularly 
worrying. Why? The answer is simple: There is legislative 
discrimination there against Russian-speakers, contary to 
agreements with Russia and their own constitutions. In these 
republics thousands of people have been left outside the civil 
space and are now called "illegal migrants" or "occupiers." 
  Abdulakh Mikitayev said that in conversation with the 
Estonian leaders he had tried to explain to them that Russian 
people as well as the indigenous inhabitants had constructed 
plants in the republic and had borne the hardships. Driving 
these people to desperation would mean provoking a social 
explosion, which many in Russia itself would certainly not 
regard with indifference... There are few mono-ethnic states in 
the world. Why should Estonia be one? But for some unknown 
reason the republic's leaders believe that Russian-speaking 
inhabitants are a potential threat to the formation of national 
statehood. 
  The multitude of worrying facts studied by the Commission 
on Citizenship Affairs formed the basis of a memorandum that 
Abdulakh Mikitayev sent to Boris Yeltsin in August: A state 
program is needed to support ethnic Russians in the neighboring 
foreign countries. The government has already prepared on the 
president's behalf a draft program touching on economic, 
political, and legal questions, and it is being finalized by the 
ministries. 
  "We will try to ensure that the neighboring republics 
observe 
both human rights and ethnic minorities' rights and interstate 
agreements," Abdulakh Mikitayev continued. "Let there be more 
vigorous action from the United Nations and other international 
organizations. At the moment their methods often smack of the 
old double standards: peremptorily demanding the withdrawal of 
Russian forces from other republics, but failing to notice how 
the authorities are treating Russian people. Actually, UN 
Commissioner for Ethnic Minorities Van der Stoel, who has made 
repeated visits to the Baltic countries, has noted that the 
legislation adopted there does not conform to international 
standards." 
  Two further conclusions could be drawn based on the 
experience of recent years, according to Abdulakh Mikitayev. 
The first is that a powerful coordinating organ is needed to 
support ethnic Russians in neighboring foreign countries. It 
could be the Foreign Ministry, a government section, or, as 
Andrey Kozyrev suggested, a separate new federal service. The 
second conclusion is that sooner or later there is clearly going 
to be a single citizenship again in the Commonwealth countries, 
on the model of the European states. But at the moment the 
protection of the rights of Russians in neighboring foreign 
countries can only be fully ensured if these people create 
autonomous entities where they live in numbers. "Aside from 
anything else, this is the only way to preserve Russian ethnic 
culture outside Russia. Anything else is a half-measure," 
Abdulakh Mikitayev said, bringing the conversation with your 
ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI correspondent to an end. 

