BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on developments related to the elections scheduled for 
29 May 1994. 
  Presidential candidates Andres Pastrana, of the Conservative 
Party, and Ernesto Samper, of the Liberal Party, both addressed 
issues related to Colombia's economic situation and outlook 
during the National Exporters Association annual congress. 
(Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision Cadena 1 in Spanish 0000 GMT 14 
Apr 94) 
  A recent National Consulting Center public opinion poll 
commissioned by EL TIEMPO reveals that with only 50 days 
remaining until election day, voters preference would seem to 
lean in favor of Liberal Party candidate Ernesto Samper over 
Conservative Party hopeful Andres Pastrana by a 10-percent 
margin. According to the poll, if the elections where held 
today, Samper would receive 49 percent of all eligible votes, 
while Pastrana would receive 39 percent; 4 percent would go to 
Antonio Navarro, while Miguel Maza and Enrique Parejo would 
receive 2 percent each; Regina Betancur would receive 1 percent, 
and the other candidates would receive less than 1 percent. One 
thing the polls evidence is that these latest results are 
clearly influenced by the selection of running mates, decisions 
which in the case of both the Liberal and Conservative Parties, 
took place during March. Samper was benefited with the 
selection of Humberto de La Calle as his vice presidential 
candidate. In this respect, 33 percent of those polled 
indicated that they were more inclined to vote for him after 
choosing de la Calle, and 16 percent said they were less 
inclined. At the same time, Pastrana's decision to select Luis 
Fernando Ramirez as his running mate clearly affected him. 
Approximately 22 percent pointed out that they were less 
inclined to vote for him after the selection of Ramirez, and 17 
percent said they would still vote for him. Pastrana still seems 
to be more popular among female voters than Samper, but not by a 
very wide margin. In this respect, the difference in favor of 
Pastrana is only of three or four points, very small if one 
takes into account that the margin of error is only 2.9 percent. 
The results also indicate that the higher the income group, the 
greater the support for Samper. However, his support begins to 
fall as one proceeds from higher, to middle, and to lower income 
groups. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 14 Apr 94 p. 8A) 

