BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Genka Markova: "They Embraced Disgrace"] </F>
  [Text] The government received a vote of confidence. Long 
live the parliament! 
  Today, now, this very moment, there is no glory for the 
Bulgarian politicians. 
  Long live the disgrace! 
  Some 125 people's representatives opted for the disgrace! 
They opted for prolonging the country's agony, hoping that, 
thus, they can prolong their own agony at least until the fall. 
At least this is how things look now. After exhausting 
haggling and consultations it became clear that the ugly and 
cynical trading ostensibly related to the fate of the cabinet is 
actually a life and death struggle for the parliament's fate. 
  During the last, tumultuous, parliamentary-political week, 
the people saw the naked truth about their politicians. It 
became pitilessly clear that the moral value of the Bulgarian 
deputy is catastrophically low. Against every political, human, 
and medical logic, the talks related to reshuffling the cabinet 
will begin again. 
  This is the situation, people! 
  A few days before their disgraceful spectacle, a deputy said 
that it is not the cabinet that is wrong, but the people who 
sent such deputies to the parliament. Actually, this specific 
deputy also was a prime minister and the sweet pleasures of his 
tenure are still fresh in our memory. 
  The petty, secret, and tactical games until the last moment 
yesterday night, and even during the voting itself, exceeded the 
elementary norms of political moral. Cynicism replaced the oath 
of the Bulgarian deputies that they will be led in all their 
actions by the interests of the people. Is there anything 
common between the cabinet's policy, the implementation of the 
economic reforms, and the interests of the people? There is no 
need to answer this question. 
  The agony of our state has continued for several months 
already and new complications are yet to appear. The parliament 
decided to hide behind the government by giving it its vote of 
confidence for the future, despite the fact that the government 
has done nothing in the past. 
  The Bulgarians are traditionally generous toward their inept 
politicians. Thank God, however, that they have not lost their 
memory! 

