BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Information Minister Jawad </F>
al-'Anani, in Washington, by Ashraf 'Abd-al-'Aziz, in Cairo; 
date not given; from the "Dialogue From Afar" program -- live or 
recorded] 
  [Text] ['Abd-al-'Aziz] Foreign Minister 'Amr Musa has 
declared that Egypt welcomes the progress made on the 
Jordanian-Israeli track of the peace talks as much as it 
welcomes the progress on the Palestinian track. On the 
telephone line between Cairo and the U.S. capital, Washington, 
we have Dr. Jawad al-'Anani, Jordanian information minister and 
a member of the delegation accompanying King Husayn to 
Washington. Minister Jawad al-'Anani, welcome to the Voice of 
the Arabs. 
  [Al-'Anani] Good morning and thank you. 
  ['Abd-al-'Aziz] Can you tell us about the results of His 
Majesty King Husayn's visit to Washington and his meetings with 
officials from the U.S. Administration? 
  [Al-'Anani] During his three-day visit, His Majesty King 
Husayn met many American officials, foremost among them U.S. 
President Bill Clinton. He also met U.S. Secretary of State 
Christopher, the defense secretary, trade secretary, and 
Congress members from both the House of Representatives and the 
Senate. This visit was important because it followed the 
agreement reached during the tripartite talks in Washington at 
the start of this month on demarcating the Jordanian border 
between Israel and Jordan or agreeing to form a committee to 
demarcate the border and share water fairly. Jordan and Israel 
also agreed on some big projects in the Jordan valley. The 
visit was held to confirm these points. 
  His majesty the king and President Clinton agreed to form a 
bilateral committee between the United States and Jordan to 
discuss economic and political issues between their countries. 
This committee will meet once every six months. Agreement was 
reached within this framework for the United States to offer its 
services to Jordan concerning rescheduling Jordanian foreign 
debts, writing off part of them, and offering American aid and 
aid from other countries that have strong relations with the 
United States to help Jordan continue its economic reform 
programs and restructure the Jordanian economy. Agreement was 
also reached on expanding bilateral trade cooperation, 
especially as the economic balance greatly favors the United 
States. 
  I believe the visit was generally successful. It constituted 
a beginning for cooperation based on mutual respect and 
strengthening the Middle East peace process to serve the 
interests of the region. It also constituted the beginning of 
greater cooperation involving the countries taking part in the 
peace process. 
  ['Abd-al-'Aziz] Dr. Jawad al-'Anani, you have clarified that 
there is a committee to study border demarcation between you and 
Israel. This subject was discussed in Washington. Could we 
pause at the issue of border demarcation between you and Israel 
and present the Arab listener with a general picture of the 
issue? 
  [Al-'Anani] You realize that the joint agenda signed between 
Jordan and Israel on 14 September 1993--one day after the 
agreement for the Israeli-Palestinian Declaration of Principles 
was signed--contained a clear item stipulating that the truce 
borders of 1922, which at the time separated the whole of 
Palestine from Transjordan, are the reference for demarcating 
the border now. Israel occupied some Jordanian territory after 
1967. Jordan has constantly demanded this land back as part of 
the solution and in accordance with Resolution 242, which 
stipulates exchange of land or land for peace. We reached 
agreement that border demarcation should be based on the mandate 
treaty or agreement. This means that Jordan will retrieve its 
land and that the current border with Israel is not 
internationally recognized but is an armistice line. 
  Thus Jordan is the second country after the Arab Republic of 
Egypt to have reached agreement with Israel on a final 
demarcation of the border. A technical committee consisting of 
representatives from both Jordan and Israel will meet at points 
along the border to work on the disputed land to demarcate the 
border, because you cannot demarcate a border from outside the 
area in question. 
  ['Abd-al-'Aziz] There are those who believe that bilateral 
agreements between the Arab countries and Israel are a departure 
from Arab coordination. Is this really the case or should we 
consider bilateral agreements the pillars for realizing a just 
and comprehensive peace in the region? 
  [Al-'Anani] First, the process of coordination is not 
frozen; 
it is constantly moving and is very dynamic. You cannot say 
that I will coordinate today and need not coordinate tomorrow. 
This is not correct. Coordination is necessary under every 
condition and at all times. Jordan has constantly advocated 
coordination and cooperation with its brothers, the Arab parties 
concerned in the negotiating process. Jordan has never failed 
to attend any coordination meeting. Indeed Jordan has always 
called for such meetings. You remember that the cordon states 
ministers meetings--the four negotiating countries including 
Egypt--used to meet periodically before and after each round of 
talks to define, study, and coordinate stances. 
  During these meetings it became clear that the Arab 
parties--the Arab foreign ministers who used to meet--agreed 
that the concept of comprehensive peace does not mean that one 
side cannot move ahead to achieve things on any track. Each 
track has its own specifications and requirements, which might 
not be 100 percent the same as the requirements for the other 
tracks. But the important point is that in the final analysis 
we reach a comprehensive peace agreement on every front, because 
deficiency in the peace process on any track will not see this 
peace be a permanent one. It will make it a fragile peace ready 
to collapse anytime. This is what we agreed on with the U.S. 
side. President Clinton approved this process. I do not 
believe Arab coordination should contend that if one side 
achieves something on its track that would mean it would have 
violated the coordination. We believe coordination becomes 
stronger with such an achievement, which then becomes the 
motivation and objective leading the other tracks to achieve 
similar results. 
  ['Abd-al-'Aziz] Dr. Jawad al-'Anani, Egypt welcomed this 
progress on the Jordanian track. Is there any specific idea on 
an Egyptian role in the coming stage? 
  [Al-'Anani] Of course Egypt played a big role in the peace 
process. To a great extent it participates in the peace process 
on the level of Arab coordination and mediation among some Arab 
sides and the conference cosponsors. Egypt even played an 
important role in mediating between the Palestinian side and 
Israel. And Egypt has an international, African, and Arab role, 
which cannot be ignored, because of the importance of this Arab 
country and its strategic position and significance in political 
and population terms inside the Arab world. We in Jordan 
greatly welcome the statements by Foreign Minister 'Amr Musa and 
other Egyptian officials who expressed their joy at this 
achievement. We believe such a positive spirit should prevail 
in the Arab world so that relations may continue, based on 
encouragement and support rather than hastening to criticize 
situations before knowing the full details. This would squander 
the Arab potential required by the peace process. 
  ['Abd-al-'Aziz] Dr. Jawad al-'Anani, we thank you very much 
and welcome you on the phone line between Cairo and Washington 
on the Voice of the Arabs. 
  [Al-'Anani] I would like to thank you for being very quick 
to 
contact the parties and in learning the facts. I am very happy 
to talk to you and wish you and the Arab Egyptian people much 
success and progress with God's help. 

