Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Carlos Catanaza Rosales] </F>
  [Text] Yesterday, Guatemalan Defense Minister General Mario 
Rene Enriquez asserted the Guatemalan Army will not accept any 
type of Belizean interference in the country's sovereignty and, 
even less, that they intimidate fellow Guatemalan citizens. The 
top military chief said he fully agreed with Foreign Minister 
Maritza Ruiz de Vielman, who rejected the [Belizean] imposed 
ultimatum on Guatemalan families, as initial investigations, 
carried out by military personnel under the commander of 
Military Zone No. 23 in Peten, indicated. 
  Commenting on the 15-day limit given to Dolores municipality 
residents to abandon their lands, Enriquez emphatically stated: 
"This is totally unjustifiable because the Belizean territory is 
still in dispute. We hope some day this situation will be solved 
in a positive manner. Currently, there are no clear borders, 
however, and the Belizeans are wrong when they say those 
families are in Belizean territory." 
  Enriquez said he had ordered Gen. Marco Antonio Gonzalez 
Taracena, the national defense command staff chief, to attend a 
meeting with Belizean and UK authorities to maintain peace and 
harmony in the area but would prefer it if the threats against 
the Guatemalans are not confirmed. 
  He reported that the Military Zone No. 23 commander has the 
responsibility of investigating and talking to the alleged 
aggressors in this case. The commander, however, must also 
coordinate with the foreign ministry to avoid intimidations, 
Enriquez added. Army Ready to Support Them [subhead] 
  Gen. Enriquez said: "We are ready to support and come to the 
aid of the Guatemalan people in that area." He said meetings 
with Belizean and UK authorities have been taking place prior to 
the government of President Serrano Elias. "The possibility of 
an armed confrontation or military raid in the area is very 
remote. There is friction, however, and several Guatemalan 
citizens have been harassed in different ways. We, of course, 
must support and protect them," he ended. 

