BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The Need for a Breakthrough in the Textile </F>
Trade"] 
  [Text] The second round of bilateral textile negotiations 
between Indonesia and the United States in Bali from 9 to 12 
June ended without an agreement on the export quota. The 
Indonesian negotiating team felt that the U.S team led by Caroyl 
Miller, did not seem to be serious about maintaining mutually 
beneficial political and business ties. 
  Halida Milyani, secretary of the Directorate General of 
Foreign Trade who led the Indonesian negotiating team, said that 
Indonesia had met the U.S. demands for a tougher circumvention 
ruling regarding the diversion of the Indonesian quota to other 
exporting countries. But, she said, the U.S. delegation did not 
return the favor of Indonesian concessions. 
  Without taking into account the fair or unfair attitude 
demonstrated by the U.S. team during the negotiations, we have 
to admit that Indonesia is in a vulnerable position because 
Indonesia is the party that needs a wider market in the United 
States for its textile products. We should take lessons from 
our past experience, knowing that the importing countries, like 
the United States and the EC, always have stronger bargaining 
power. 
  The uncompromising stance maintained by the U.S. team made 
the Indonesian negotiating team feel rather emotional. It is 
likely that later on, several associations of textiles and 
textile products in Indonesia will say that there is no need for 
us to make too many sacrifices just for the sake of business 
interest at the expense of our self-respect and national 
interests. 
  It has long been noticeable for a long time that Indonesia 
does not derive huge profits from the international textile 
market. We know that the time will come when the government has 
to make a breakthrough into the markets that do away with quota 
restrictions. It has been anticipated that it will be more 
difficult to sustain the quota system considering that the 
United States and the EC are inclined to be more protectionist 
although they have often come out for a free world trade order 
without tariff and non-tariff barriers in GATT talks. The EC 
has imposed the export quota on textiles and textile products 
such as yarn and jackets from Indonesia since 1992. 
  As we already know, the textile and apparel trade between 
the 
consumer and producer countries is regulated by the Multifiber 
Arrangement [preceding three words in English] [MFA]. The MFA 
contains the order on quota restrictions for textiles and 
textile products accorded to producing countries under bilateral 
agreements and the exports quota system. 
  Indonesia, which has been relying on the quota arrangements 
to export its textiles and textile products to the international 
market, has been spared from free competition on the one hand, 
but on the other hand, the quota restriction system may result 
in our textiles and textile products being complacent in the 
superficially secured market. At the same time, this creates 
the tendency for us to depend on the market mechanism of 
importing countries that are bound by the MFA. Actually, the 
MFA is not stable because it is influenced by many factors such 
as the desire of major importing countries to protect their 
domestic industries and the stiff competition among developing 
countries to vie for the exports quota. The competition will 
become more serious when all developing countries that rely on 
the quota arrangements use the cheap labor force as a 
comparative edge. 
  Besides, there is a need for strong lobbying and conclusive 
negotiations with the importing countries to secure the export 
quota. Regarding the lobbying tactics, Indonesia has been 
considered behind the PRC, Singapore, Hong Kong, and Malaysia. 
  This was evident in the call by economic observers on the 
Indonesian negotiating team to conduct more aggressive 
negotiations with foreigners. There is no reason for Indonesia 
to receive a much lower quota for its textiles and textile 
products compared to that accorded to the PRC. According to the 
data from MFA, the PRC receives a 13.5 percent exports quota for 
its textile and textile products, while Indonesia receives only 
2.8 percent. Thus, we are puzzled over this. When compared to 
the quotas accorded to other developing countries, the quota 
received by Indonesia is much lower than that given to India 
(4.3 percent), and Thailand (4.1 percent). 
  Considering that Indonesia's textiles have now become the 
country's largest nonoil and nongas commodity exports, the time 
has come for us to seek an alternative market for them. We need 
to think wisely and implement a prudent policy to face the 
fluctuations of markets for textiles and textile products. 
According to the Central Bureau of Statistics, 2.45 million job 
seekers were absorbed into the textile and garment industries in 
the beginning of the Fourth Five-Year Development Plan (1985). 
They made up 29 percent of the total 8.5 million workers in the 
industrial sector. 

