CSO 

<F P=106> [By reporter Kim Song-kol] </F>
  [Excerpts] With a grasp on power, political funds are 
bound to come in. Compared to the past, sources of political 
funding have been cut off, but Democratic Party (DP) faction 
lawmakers have not been doing that much "money grumbling." Being 
in a position of power helps fundraising considerably. 
  Looking at the spending of one newly-elected Democratic 
Liberal Party (DLP) lawmaker, he is clearly on a very tight 
budget. His monthly expenditures are about 10 million won (W). 
Because his constituency is spread out over two counties, rent 
for the offices of two local party chapters is W 1.5 million. To 
this W2.5 million is added for the salary of secretaries and 
other employees and W500 thousand in telephone bills. This means 
W4.5 million is needed for local chapter office-operating 
expenses alone. 
  Operating expenses for an office in the National Assembly 
Members' Office Building are not small either. The two phones 
provided by the National Assembly not enough, he installed one 
more phone at his own expense. The bill for this phone is about 
W300 thousand every month. He also has to have about W200 
thousand a month for treating visitors to a W3-thousand lunch in 
the Members' Office Building cafeteria. And no matter how tight 
his budget, he cannot ignore his four employees. He gives them 
each W50 thousand (per month), nominally as a lunch allowance, 
which comes to W200 thousand. 
  Here, he has no choice but to pay for office coffee, 
newspaper and magazine subscriptions, and office supplies. Since 
he has to go around his district every weekend, gasoline costs 
are no small burden. 
  When he goes down to his district, even though he meets with 
constituents he is frugal, because of his rather thin wallet. In 
the case of campaign rallies and other varies kinds of 
gatherings, he spends W100 thousand if the meeting is of 
myon-level or above and W50 thousand if it is below that, in 
order to save face. 
  In the cost of these meals too, he is determined not to go 
over W4 thousand per person. Ribs are out of the question; the 
best he can do is kimchi pot stew and cheap Korean liquor. He 
has even heard constituents say: "Is there anyone going without 
food these days? You're telling us to take the trouble to come 
out just to eat kimchi pot stew?" 
  As for occasions calling for congratulations or condolences, 
he decided not to send any flower wreaths beginning in July of 
last year, and though not much, he was able to save W3-4 
million. He expressed his condolences by visiting and showing 
his face at the home of the bereaved or with a thin envelope 
containing W30 thousand. 
  Calculated in this way, he is left with W3.5 million out of 
W10 million. This money is soon gone, however, just as food is 
soon gone from the home of a poor family with many children. 
  "I haven't seen a paycheck in some time," says this 
lawmaker, 
expressing his regret over his lack of funding, "If I just had 
W20 million a month, I could do a good job of it." 
  However, the limits of his income are obvious. All he gets 
is 
about W4.5 million a month with his National Assembly Member 
Allowance and support funds from a support association. Last 
year, W53 million in support funding came in. Calculated by the 
month, that is W4.4 million. Put the two together and it still 
does not amount to his monthly expense of W10 million. He has 
been making up the amount he lacks from his now ruined company. 
  "For opposition-party lawmakers, government officials will 
take them to dinner during times such as the periods of 
parliamentary inspection, but for ruling-party lawmakers, there 
is nothing," he said, "Nobody pays any attention to a 
newly-elected lawmaker and even support funding is low." 
  This is a straightforward example of the difficulties due to 
political funding suffered by members of the National Assembly 
in the newly changed political environment. 
  The time has now passed when bundles of money containing 
several tens of millions of won were brought to ruling-party 
lawmakers by industry and others. Furthermore, due to the sudden 
implementation of the financial realname system last year, the 
brakes have been put on dark, under-the-table dealings, for now. 
  To make matters worse, the funding which used to be sent 
down 
by the president, the head of the party, has been cut off. With 
all this, political funding placed in the hands of DLP lawmakers 
is much less than in the past. 
  Only last year when they were called to the Blue House, 
inside the bus they were riding, lawmakers exchanged 
half-hopeful remarks, "Will there be nothing this time too?" 
When there were no "royal grants" forthcoming, even as they 
passed the new year, lawmakers realized that such expectations 
were themselves pointless. 
  In the past, President Chon Tu-hwan would always send them 
W10 million; President No Tae-u, W5 million. 
  Actually, this is nothing compared to the other money former 
presidents would give them. Under the guise of hometown activity 
expenses during holidays, etc., encouragement funds was conveyed 
to lawmakers on occasion. Also, when elections were drawing 
near, full-scale campaign funding would be sent to each 
candidate. 
  Honorary president of the Hyundai Group, Chong Chu-yong, 
became the topic of conversation when, before founding the 
United People's Party, he made public the amount of political 
funding he provided the Blue House. "I provided political 
funding two times a year: at Chusok, the Harvest Moon Festival 
celebrated on August 15th of the lunar calendar, and the end of 
the year," Chong revealed at that time, saying, "During the 
Third Republic, I directly gave them W1-4 billion annually; 
during the Fifth Republic, W5-6 billion annually; during the 
Sixth Republic, W6-10 billion annually." 
  Later, this statement by Honorary President Chong was hushed 
up, but it showed a cross section of the scale of political 
funds created by the Blue House. 
  The story is widely known about how President Chon Tu-hwan, 
as he retired from office, left President No Tae-u with W55 
billion in political funds he had not used. Once after retiring, 
on an unofficial occasion, former president Chon even said, 
"President No Tae-u probably created a W500-billion political 
fund during his term in office." 
  Political funds thus created were put in envelopes and 
conveyed from time to time to members of the National Assembly, 
ministers, and Blue-House secretaries. Of course, the price was 
loyalty to the president. Thus delivered money envelopes were 
distributed on down the organization; "money-envelope politics" 
reigned supreme. 
  Only a little while after President Kim Yong-sam took office 
last year, he clarified, "I will not accept money from 
industry." There had also been a "declaration" that the 
president would not accept money from industry while President 
Roh was in office. However, President Kim's promise is different 
in that it is being kept. 
  When it was revealed recently that DLP Party President (PP) 
Kim Chong-pil collected W100 million from industry at the late 
Chong Il-kwon's funeral, President Kim stated that he was not 
accepting even relief funding from industry, and, showing 
displeasure toward PP Kim, reconfirmed the ban on accepting 
money envelopes. 
  "During the last year, depending on your perspective, we can 
mention military reform and the implementation of the real-name 
system as achievements of the new governments, but the Blue 
House's not accepting political funds should be assessed the 
most highly," said Rep. Choe Pyong-yol. 
  "Due to the moral character secured as a result of this, 
although I don't know about the new government, President Kim 
Yong-sam's support rate is unlikely to fall below 50 percent," 
Rep. Choe also said, placing great significance on this. 
  It appears that almost all lawmakers are now certain of the 
fact that the "golden egg" which used to descend from the Blue 
House has been cut off. 
  Therefore, the majority of lawmakers are feeling they have 
to 
raise their insufficient political funds themselves. 
Fortunately, in spite of this is the fact that constituents and 
voters are showing an, although not sudden, at least slow change 
of awareness. There are many instances in which they do not 
particularly complain even though they are not sent floral 
wreaths on occasions of congratulations or condolences, and, 
when only "spare change" is spent for various events, of 
overlooking this, "Lately, what money do members of the National 
Assembly have anyway?" 
  It is a fact, however, that when compared with the changes 
of 
the political environment, change in the awareness of voters is 
slow. Intending to make up this difference, lawmakers are 
working hard, each in their own way, to raise political funds. 
  Political funds are bound to come in if one holds power. 
Although sources of political funding are to a great extent 
being cut off compared to the past, DP faction lawmakers are not 
complaining that much. A position of power is a great help to 
political fund raising. 
  Restrained by those around him as a power within the DP 
faction, Rep. Kim Tok-yong is turning down the would-be 
supporters crowding in, competing to see him and offer political 
funding. Even after resigning his position as Minister of State 
for Political Affairs, as many people as ever come to see him. 
This is not unrelated to the fact that in his New Year's Press 
Conference President Kim mentioned his affection for Rep. Kim 
two times. 
  Taking a look into Rep. Kim's income, first, the annual 
legal 
limit for support association money of W150 million comes in 
with little difficulty. Last year, Rep. Kim used W100 million, 
in accordance with the law. 
  The help of his district Vice Chairmen's Group is also 
great. 
The Vice Chairmen's Group is generally made up of about 20 
municipal assemblymen and small and medium businessmen. They 
hold a meeting every month which is also a unity rally. In this 
meeting, which includes a meal, a fixed amount is collected to 
be used to support district activities. By conservative 
estimate, this amounts to about W60 million annually. 
  Rep. Kim's local party chapter is actively participating in 
the party expenses payment campaign pursued by the central party 
beginning last year. The amount collected annually reaches the 
W50-million mark. 80 percent of this returns to the local 
chapter, so here he raises W40 million. 
  Totaling all these amounts, they reach about W250 million 
annually. So he can use about W20 million a month for activity 
funds. [passage omitted] 
  Due to these circumstances, Rep. Kim can be relatively free 
in his district. He also has little reason to be anxious about 
funding. 
  Since taking his post, Home Affairs Minister Choe Hyong-u is 
busier and does not have to time to go around his district. 
Although he occasionally had opportunities to go to his district 
after quitting his job as secretary general when his son was 
involved in the illegal college admission scandal last year, 
this is now completely impossible. However, he hears that the 
local chapter's executive office director is taking care of 
running the district using the support association membership 
fees and the contributions of the Vice Chairmen's Group. 
  Newly elected in a special election last year, Rep. Son 
Hak-kyu betrays little concern over money problems. 
  At the end of last year, Rep. Son went to visit 
"unfortunates," orphanages and homes for the elderly. Although 
not large, he was able to bring gifts that were not inferior 
either. And for last years Taeborum (a holiday on 15 January by 
the lunar calendar), he held Yut tournaments in each tong. He 
aided 15 tong with W100-200 thousand each. 
  This time, however, the money did not go out through Rep. 
Son. The support association formed in early January of last 
year and the local party chapter solved the funding problem 
themselves. This means district-activity expenses are being 
secured in sufficient amounts. Rep. Son, who has a free and easy 
character, does not even receive a report on the local chapter's 
use of funds. 
  Rep. Pak Chong-ung is also a newly elected lawmaker in last 
year's special election. As a member of the Sangdo-tong Kasin 
Group, he was the last to put on a National Assemblyman's badge. 
  Early this year, Rep. Pak opened a one day tea house to help 
the unfortunate in his district of Pusan. He had planned to use 
earnings made here for expenses incurred in making a New Year's 
visit to the Kyongnodang Orphanage, etc. Earnings were 
originally predicted to be W5 million, but upon calculating them 
after concluding the event, they were discovered to be much more 
than that. Because of this, he was able to leave a hefty gift 
with a poverty-stricken hilltop neighborhood. 
  These two newly-elected lawmakers are thus comfortably able 
to raise political funding partly because they have fresh 
images. However, it is more because they benefit from belonging 
to the DP faction. 
  DP-faction people protest that their comfortable money 
situation is not because of political funding. "It must be 
considered that we have no place to spend a lot of money because 
we have long lived the political life, penniless," said one 
DP-faction lawmaker. 
  The funding situation of Floor Leader Yi Han-tong, who 
entered the ranks of the top three in the party in reshuffle of 
party offices late last year, is not plentiful. 
  "With the upheaval last year caused by assets registration 
and the resignation of government officials, not only did 
businessmen not hand out any money, they didn't come anywhere 
near," said Floor Leader Yi when talk of political funding came 
up, stressing that the present mood is totally different than 
that of the Fifth Republic, "The past is gone." 
  Yi entrusts local chapter expenses to support-association 
fund raising and takes care of operating expenses for his 
Sodaemun office and his office in the National Assembly Members' 
Office Building himself. First of all, he was originally a 
lawyer and is a legal consultant for seven companies. He gets a 
monthly gratuity of from W500 thousand to W1 million from each 
company. He is not paid fees as a lawyer, but other lawmakers 
originally from the legal profession make an average of W10-20 
million per month in legal fees. 
  Yi also occasionally receives money to be used for "personal 
expenses" from his classmates in the legal profession, it is 
reported. After the last presidential election, Yi strongly 
expressed an intention to run in the next presidential race and 
formed a support group of his classmates from North Kyongsang 
Province High School. However, the story circulated in political 
circles for a time that, warned by the Blue House, he did an 
about face, "prostrate on the ground, motionless." 
  The forms used by mid-level bosses to scrape together 
political funds in order to manage their factions no longer 
work. The collection of political funds is a problem, but this 
is because it can be easily interpreted as the actions of one 
eyeing the next presidential race. At the present, early in 
President Kim's term of office, the mood is one in which no one 
from either the DP faction or the Democratic Justice Party (DJP) 
faction will dare to step out. 
  A lawmaker with prominent abilities at least as far as 
political funding is concerned, Kim Yun-hwan has in actuality 
ceased political fundraising recently. He hoped to be given an 
important position in the reshuffling of party offices late last 
year, but when these hopes came to nothing, he actually reduced 
his personal office space and even the number of his employees. 
He did not want to be needlessly misunderstood. 
  Rep. Yi Chun-ku, who used to profess that he was directly 
junior to former president No Tae-u, had taken money from 
President Roh and used it to manage 20 some DJP faction 
lawmakers. He has been quiet, however, without any noticeable 
activity since President Roh left office. On top of not having 
much desire for material gain to begin with, the world has 
changed and he has fallen outside the interest of the media. 
  Borrowing the words of lawmakers close to him, he only comes 
out to the Suyohoe, a gathering of lawmakers, as a leading 
assemblyman elected many times and occasionally pays for dinner; 
he is living a quiet life, they say. 
  Even so, he is doing all right for a prominent lawmaker. 
Lately, with contributions from industry having ceased and 
Blue-House funds and funds for mid-level bosses having 
disappeared due to the implementation of the real-name system, 
generally newly-elected and reelected DJP faction lawmakers are 
poking around here and there, trying to come up with political 
funding; but it is not easy. 
  One DJP faction lawmaker, who was an object of scorn last 
year during the registration of personal assets because of his 
wealth, revealed that he has received requests from four of his 
senior lawmakers to join their support associations. This is an 
example showing the difficult circumstances of some DLP faction 
lawmakers. 
  "As for opposition supporter associations, they are small 
amount, majority systems, but it is characteristic of 
ruling-party supporter associations that they are large amount, 
minority systems. It is my understanding that they came asking 
for favors because they are having difficulty securing backers 
who will support them with large amounts," he said, "I 
respectfully refused to join because I too am a member of the 
National Assembly." 
  Up until the cold winds of the anti-corruption campaign came 
blowing in last year, it usually took W25 million to manage a 
local party chapter, lawmakers explain. Lately, however, this 
has shrunk to about W10 million as the reduction of various 
expenses, including monetary gifts for funerals, weddings, etc., 
has become routine, and lawmakers agree that local chapter 
management is possible. 
  This is to say, if one only does support-association 
fundraising properly, one can get by because up to W100 million 
in support-association membership fees can be used annually. The 
Political Funding Law revised in the last special session of the 
National Assembly elevated the maximum limit on funds collected 
from support-association membership fees to W150 million. 
  It may be because PP Kim Chong-pil, leader of Republican 
Party (RP) faction lawmakers, is maintaining his position as the 
face of the party, but their financial situation is better than 
that of the DJP faction. 
  The RP faction has several persons holding party offices as 
portions allotted to it, such as Rep. Cho Pu-yong being 
Assistant Secretary General II. If one holds an important party 
office, such as Chief Secretary to the Party President, 
Spokesperson, Director of the Central Political Education 
Institute, Assistant Secretary General, or Planning Mediation 
Office director, one's funding situation improves conspicuously. 
Support associations become active and, depending on individual 
ability, sources of funding develop. 
  Of the ten local chapter chief organizer positions announced 
in early March, deputy spokesperson Cho Yong-chik brushed aside 
DP faction people to occupy the post in the Songpa-ul chapter. 
Although it is said that Cho was chosen this time out of 
recognition for his contributions as candidate spokesperson in 
the last presidential election, there is no mistaking that the 
prestige of Kim Chong-pil also influenced the decision to a 
certain extent. 
  Cho had not asked people around him for money envelopes. 
Now, 
however, with the justification resulting from his leaving 
behind the "indoors" of a nationwide constituency to entered the 
"field" of a local constituency, he plans to sound out the 
intentions of his classmates and friends. It is his thinking 
that, inasmuch as his political position is not shrinking, it is 
not too much to expect the support of those around him. 
  Last year, DLP lawmakers received no political funding from 
the Blue House and almost no support from the central party 
either. Just once, in a meeting of members of the National 
Assembly and local chapter chairmen held before the summer 
season's hometown activities, they divided a total of W3 
million. Local-chapter chairmen not active members of the 
National Assembly received W2 million more at Chusok last year. 
This is because the funding situation is not good in the central 
party either. 
  The DLP's 1993 income was approximately W36.7 billion. This 
is about one-third of its 1992 election-year income of W96.5 
billion. As these are the figures reported to the Central 
Election Management Committee, it appears the actual difference 
will be much greater. 
  Contrarily, with 1993 expenditures of W94.3 billion, the DLP 
recorded a surplus of W2.2 billion. We see this sort of result 
because, although it had high expenditures, its income was 
greater. Last year, however, with expenditures on the scale of 
W40.4 billion, it had a deficit of W3.7 billion. 
  Having deposited in a bank the over W7 million in proceeds 
from the sale of its Karak-tong training institute last year, 
the DLP made up its deficit with the resulting interest income. 
DLP officials are not at ease about this, however, since it 
appears the tax on the sale of the training institute will 
amount to W30 billion. Details of last year's expenditures: 

  -  operating costs including labor costs, W23.5 billion; 
  -  organizational-activity costs, W8.6 billion; 
  -  policy costs, 
W7.5 billion; and 
  -  publicity costs, W700 million. 

  Paid employees of the DLP executive office are worried, not 
knowing when the may lose their jobs under the slogan, getting 
rid of the flab. Although party officials have said there would 
be no personnel reductions in the current reorganization of the 
executive office, this has not completely dissipated their 
worries. 
  At present, the number of paid employees is about 780: over 
three hundred for the central party, provincial, and municipal 
branch offices and 474 local-chapter chief secretaries and 
organization department chiefs. The party cut back 799 persons 
last March. And beginning last year, there is a continuous two 
year pay freeze in effect. 
  The funding sources needed for operating the DLP are 
national 
grants, designated trust funds, party membership fees, and 
party-support association support funds. 
  A national grant is money from the national budget for 
aiding 
political party activities. As provided by the Political Funding 
Law, the state divides among political parties a sum calculated 
at W600 per voter. 
  In the recent special session of the National Assembly, this 
was revised and raised to W800 per person. Last year, the DLP 
received W8.48 billion in national grants. That is close to half 
of the entire W17.4 billion worth of national grants given. 
  The term designated trust fund refers to a donation 
presented 
by a contributor to the CEMC after designating a specific 
political party. Of course, the CEMC conveys this trust fund to 
the appropriate political party in regular periods. 
  Last year, designated trust funds amounted to W19.9 billion. 
Inasmuch as the entire amount is to be given to the DLP, it is 
an important source of DLP funding. The DLP has commissioned a 
45-person finance committee. These finance committee members 
make designated deposits. During the parliamentary inspections, 
the opposition demanded that the list of designated depositors 
be made public, but this was not realized due to the opposition 
of the DLP. 
  There was also bickering between the ruling party and 
opposition over these designated trust funds in the six-man 
negotiations for the revision of politics-related laws. Entering 
the new year, these drew the extraordinary attention of the 
political world. Giving reasons such as that there could be 
favors given as the price of donation, the DP argued that 
specific political parties should not be designated, rather, 
that moneys should be distributed according to the number of 
seats a party controls and the percentage of the vote it 
obtains. The DLP violently opposed this, however. Their thinking 
was that it was only right that the will of the person or 
corporation donating the political funds be respected. Moreover, 
it even argued that these should not pass through the CEMC, but 
should be donated directly to the political parties. 
  Ultimately, negotiations concluded in the maintenance of the 
method now in effect, as was argued by the DLP. The CEMC's 
revision proposal, that 25 percent of designated trust funds be 
distributed to all political parties according to the number of 
seats and percentage of the vote they control and 75 percent be 
given to the party designated by the contributor, was not 
adopted either. After the negotiations were over, Floor Leader 
Yi Han-tong said, "These were the excessive demands of the 
opposition, which hide an ulterior motive of trying to 
obliterate the ruling party." This shows the situation of the 
DLP, which considers designated trust funds important. Besides 
this, party-membership fees and party-support association 
support funds amounted to W8.2 billion. 
  With the increased difficulty of the financial management of 
the party, expense accounts for party officials are less than 
expected. Beginning with the W20 million PP Kim Chong-pil 
receives every month, the secretary general gets W4.5 million; 
policy-committee chairman, W9 million; National Assembly floor 
leader, W18 million. The reason the expense accounts are not 
just given in W10-million increments is that party expenses this 
year were cut 10 percent across the board. 
  In the case of the secretary general, last year when Choe 
Hyong-u held the office, he cut his own portion, making it less 
than that of the other two of the three main party offices. 
However, the secretary general of the ruling party holds power 
said to match that of the ten ministers, such as having control 
of personnel and financial actions within the party, so the 
expense account provided by the party cannot be said to be his 
only source of funding. 
  The floor leader within the National Assembly has to deal 
with both ruling and opposition-party lawmakers, and so takes 
special care. He is also chairman of the House Steering 
Committee, and therefore can use an expense account of over W25 
million, which includes the over-W7-million expense account of 
the Steering Committee Chairman. 
  Of the three main offices, that of Policy Committee Chairman 
is the position with the most heartache over the expense-account 
issue. In the past, policy issues were completely dumped in the 
lap of the administration; this has resulted in relatively poor 
treatment for the Policy Committee Chairman. 
  The Policy Committee Chairman participates in various 
meetings being held practically every day. Although expenses 
associated with these meetings are not that great, dinner 
expenses are a problem. Combined dinner-meetings held in a 
restaurants are okay. Even though there be a fairly large number 
of participants, W200-300 thousand is enough to cover it. He can 
put in a claim for the expenses to the party administrative 
office, and no one says anything about it. 
  However, most meeting agenda's are hurriedly decided upon, 
so 
it is common for reservations to be made with a hotel 
restaurant. Dinning expenses are usually W30 thousand for lunch 
and W50 thousand for dinner. If a few rounds of drinks are added 
to this, no one will readily want to pay for it. This is because 
the cost could easily go over W1 million if to the expenses of 
the over ten participants are added those of their attendants,. 
  In this case, the Policy Committee Chairman has to help pay 
for it. Once may be okay, but if this happens frequently, there 
is no way he can handle it with only his expense account. "In 
short, I'm no different than a beggar," said Policy Committee 
Chairman Yi Ki-taek of the expense account. 
  Thus, to produce correct, realistic policy, he needs to 
visit 
hilltop neighborhoods, farming villages, factories, and remote 
islands, but this is impossible with the expense account 
allotted him by the party. In most instances, due to various 
circumstances, such activities end in sitting down to the table 
to listen to the opinions of the government or related 
organizations. 
  Of senior officials, it is the minister of state for 
political affairs who has the largest expense accounts for 
activities, etc. Last year, he received about W22 million, but 
this year it almost doubled. Together with his 
information-expense allowance, it reached over W32 million. This 
money all comes out of the administration's budget. This is out 
of concern for the wide range of people with whom the minister 
of state for political affairs has to deal: ruling and 
opposition-party lawmakers, government bureaucrats, and even 
opposition figures not presently holding office. 
  After taking his post late last year, Minister of State for 
Political Affairs So Chong-won even bought lunch for opposition 
reporters. These official activity expenses are not ample enough 
to be used for activities in their own constituencies, say these 
senior officials. Instead, they are aided in securing funding 
sources resulting from personal connections, they say. 
  Ordinary lawmakers raise official and unofficial political 
funds through their own career and school connections. Lawmakers 
who originally held high-level positions in former 
administrations use connections made through their past 
government posts to overcome difficult, political-funding 
circumstances. 
  Rep. An Mu-hyok, who had been commissioner of the National 
Tax Administration and director of the Agency for National 
Security Planning, feels no great difficulty in political 
funding. With a nationwide constituency, Rep. An runs the Korea 
Development Research Institute Hanguk Kaebal Yongukwon, and 
holds a monthly seminar sponsored by this institute. Expenses 
are sufficiently covered by the W10-thousand fee paid by each of 
the participants. 14 employees work at the research institute, 
and it even publishes a quarterly magazine called, Korean 
Development. 
  The research institute also has 22 directors. Of these 
directors, nine contribute from W500 thousand to W2 million 
every month. Many of the seminar participants and directors are 
either persons who formed connections with An while he held his 
past offices or are businessmen originally from the North who 
support conservative policy. 
  In the same way, Rep. Kang Kyong-sik, who long lived the 
life 
of a bureaucrat at the Economic Planning Board and was Finance 
Vice Minister and Chief Presidential Secretary, runs the 
National Management Strategy Research Center. 
  Lawmakers Ho Sam-su, Ho Hwa-pyong, and Yi Sang-chae, who 
boasted enormous power during the early 5th Republic, are also 
reported to have their own solid financial supporters. 
  Rep. Choe Pyong-yol too, who had been both Information and 
Labor minister, feels no difficulty in political funding due to 
his relationships formed up to now with relevant figures in 
academic circles. It is also said that those lawmakers with 
nationwide constituencies who show the potential for someday 
being selected to head a government ministry have no problems 
getting political funding. 
  Regardless of their faction, lawmakers having special 
relationships with the financial world seem to have money to 
spare. 
  Belonging to this group are Rep. Kim Chae-kyom, originally 
from the Ssang Yong Group and presently acting as group counsel, 
Rep. So Chong-hwa, who was Home Affairs Minister and is the 
father-in-law of the Korea Explosives Group's C.E.O, Rep. Na 
Ung-pae, who was Economic Planning Board Director, Finance 
Minister, and president of Haetae and Korea Tire, and Kang 
Sin-cho, who was president of Tongyang Investment Trust. 
  Because they solve their own political-funding problems, 
lawmakers with large assets do not worry over political 
fundraising. These wealthy men have considered the formation of 
support associations undesirable: they do not bring in much 
money anyway and result in annoying civil appeals. However, as 
the legal number of local-chapter support association members 
was increased from two hundred to three hundred with the recent 
revision of the Political Funding Law, they are now hastening 
the formation of support associations for strengthening 
localchapter organization. 
  "We formed a support association last year, but it only 
brought inW10 million in support funds. This is actually a loss 
when you think of the expenses incurred in recruiting people," 
says one wealthy lawmaker who in the private-assets registration 
ended up in the ranks of the richest in the party. "But I will 
continue so local chapter members will understand that this 
takes money," he says. 
  An example of a peculiar case is former television 
personality Rep. Yi Sun-chae. Completely depending on his 
support association of over twenty very close friends, he puts 
his "face" to good advantage, using his advertisement-modeling 
fees for his political funds. Rep. Yi, receiving W100 million in 
advertisement-modeling fees this year from W Publishing Company 
[as published], acquired the "live rounds" he needs for a year's 
political battles. 
  Rep. Pak Pom-chin, was the first ruling-party lawmaker to 
raise political funding by making use of newspaper advertising, 
Last year he received over W120 million from over 2600 people. 
Rare for a ruling-party lawmaker, he made public his expense 
details. It was revealed that he used W13 million a month, 
including over W1.2 million for congratulations and condolence 
costs. 
  Conducting parliamentary activities even while directly 
farming, Rep. Pak Kyong-su's average monthly expenses, even 
though a ruling-party lawmaker, are only a little over W1.5 
million. For weddings, funerals, etc., he sends telegrams of 
congratulations or condolence, without sending any cash or 
presents. As one part of the Farm-Village Bachelors Marriage 
Campaign he is conducting, when he sponsors unmarried, Korean 
women living in China for immigration to Korea, he receives in 
advance his annual pay as an Assemblyman and uses it to welcome 
them. 
  In the recent special session of the National Assembly, both 
the ruling party and the opposition passed the Public Election 
and Election-Irregularities Prevention Law. According to this 
law, in the event of excessive campaign spending as in the past, 
the election of the guilty party will be invalidated and he or 
she will be restricted from running for public office for up to 
a maximum of ten years, which could in fact end his or her 
political career. 
  Of course, enforcement of the law remains an issue, but it 
appears the "30-wins-20-losses" extremes of corruption seen in 
the last election will disappear. 
  However, just because election campaign expenses have been 
severely restricted does not mean political funding worries have 
vanished. Many lawmakers worry that everyday expenses will be 
greater than those at election time. 
  They say this is because if they have to recruit unpaid 
volunteers for most of their campaign workers, it will take a 
tremendous amount of effort. 
  Also, if, as in the past, they wait until election day draws 
near to appeal to voters for their votes, it is obvious that 
they will be thrust aside by political hopefuls who have been 
hitting the pavement in their districts. Therefore, no matter 
what, they have to go down to their districts one or more times 
a week, they say. 
  In these circumstances, even spokesperson Ha Sun-bong, whose 
face is often seen in the media, unhesitatingly goes down to his 
Chinju, South Kyongsang Province district on weekends as long is 
there is no special function going on. On Saturday morning, his 
pocket contains W1 million, but by Sunday evening, only two or 
three thousand-won bills are rolling around in it. 

