BFN 

<F P=106> [By Paul Mooney] </F>
  [Text] Mao Zedong, if he were alive, would be appalled; 
Deng Xiaoping, if he is still well enough to know what is going 
on around him, would perhaps be a little more understanding. A 
survey has revealed that only 7.7 per cent of Chinese youths 
have a firm faith in socialism, while another 14.2 per cent say 
they have no faith in it at all. Most young people are in the 
cryptic situation of "having faith, but also puzzled". 
  These were among of the findings -- some surprising, some 
not 
so surprising -- of an investigation into the attitudes of young 
people in China published in a rare show of candour in the 
official China Youth News last month. Graduate students were 
the most suspicious of socialism. More than a quarter said that 
they "have no faith" in socialism, compared with 9.3 per cent 
for scientists and technicians, and 5.4 per cent for 
undergraduates. 
  The survey, carried out between October 1992 and May 1993, 
concentrated on educated people between the ages of 18 and 35, 
including students, scientific and technological personnel, 
teachers, Communist Youth League cadres and people in other 
professions. When asked "What is the major worry in your life?" 
most chose too low an income, followed by lack of housing, poor 
interpersonal relations, not being able to apply what you have 
learned, difficulty in getting married and in love affairs, and 
difficulty in leaving the country. 
  While a 1988 survey showed that "random price increases" was 
the No 1 worry, the latest poll indicated this was less of a 
concern now, with 43.6 per cent of the respondents saying they 
"realise that this is required by the development of a socialist 
market economy", and 31.1 per cent saying their "ability to 
withstand price adjustments has increased". Another 21.2 per 
cent were "unenthusiastic", according to the report, choosing 
the answer that "there is nothing one can do even if one is 
dissatisfied". Four percent said the price increases "bred 
discontent". 
  Of the respondents, 42.5 per cent advocated strengthening 
the 
market economy. Most young people, 57.7 per cent, thought that 
reform of the political system had lagged behind that of the 
economic system. The survey showed that the better educated 
tended to have more liberal views toward student movements. 
  When asked the main reason for student movements in the 
years 
since economic reform was launched in the late 1970s, 41.6 per 
cent said they thought this trend was caused by "social 
problems", while 7.5 per cent pointed to patriotism. Another 
27.4 per cent said the movements were caused by "bourgeois 
liberalisation thoughts". Of those at the graduate level, 94.8 
percent had an "affirmative attitude" about student movements, 
while the number slipped to 65.9 per cent for undergraduates. 
While young people were polled on the causes of the 1985 
student movement, the survey avoided the delicate question of 
the 1989 democracy movement. 
  The survey showed rising dissatisfaction with corruption 
among party and government personnel. When asked their 
assessment of the extent of emerging corruption, 89.3 per cent 
felt it was very serious. Arranged in the order of "degree of 
hatred", young people listed bureaucracy, abuse of power for 
private interest, corruption, bribery and dissolute lifestyles 
as the five kinds of social phenomena hated most by young people. 
  Asked what the crux of the country's reform of the political 
system was, 50 percent chose the answer "eliminating corruption 
and establishing democratic decision-making and democratic 
supervisory mechanisms". A somewhat surprising 28.3 per cent 
said that they thought "China's democratic system is better" 
than that of capitalist countries, with the majority, 57.6 per 
cent, taking a more cautious stance, saying "each has its own 
advantages and disadvantages". The survey was carried out by 
the China Youth Research Centre, the School of Political Studies 
for Young Chinese, and other youth groups around China. 

