Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Seija Sartti: "Least Harmful Alternative: </F>
Elisabeth Rehn Is Neither Sanctimonious Nor a Psychopath"] 
  [Text] Elisabeth Rehn is an alternative for those who have 
no alternative. Those Conservatives who are unwilling to vote 
for Ilaskivi can vote for her. Any nonsocialist who dislikes 
both Ilaskivi and Vayrynen may vote for her. Some Social 
Democrats who would have voted for Sorsa may vote for her. 
  Those who favor joining the European Union, and for whom 
Ahtisaari leans too much to the left, may vote for Rehn. Those 
whose first language is Finnish and for whom slow, clumsy 
Finnish Aittoniemis are not good enough may vote for her. 
  Women who do not find even women's logic in Kuuskoski's 
speeches may vote for Rehn. Any woman who would never vote for a 
man or a centrist may vote for her. Those men who may vote for a 
woman may vote for her. As a defense and equality minister, Rehn 
is a suitable candidate for both majors and majors' widows too. 
  She is the least harmful alternative. Not even a political 
cynic (male) maliciously finds anything bad to say about Rehn. 
  They brag about how Elisabeth is a sweet, nice, and 
sprightly 
girl who is always in a good mood. Men especially commend the 
fact that Rehn is not a feminist. Some women are irritated by 
the fact that the equality minister is not a feminist. Rehn 
annoys many women because she is so feminine. 
  A few, more negative crumbs can be teased out of Rehn by 
picking away at her with a silver fork. Some are annoyed by the 
seductive tone of her speaking style and others by her 
exaggerated calm. Important and self-important gentlemen 
sometimes grow impatient with Rehn who is, in their opinion, 
naive and raises irrelevant issues. With a feeling of 
superiority, these men stress the fact that Rehn is no thinker. 
  If Rehn does not qualify as an intellectual, she is not the 
silly blonde portrayed in the jokes about her either. A leftist 
politician (male) praised Rehn for being the elite of her party. 
The man said that there are a lot of more mediocre male 
politicians in the Swedish People's Party (RKP). 
<H5>  Too Headstrong To Be a Puppet </H5>
  Rehn firmly entered national politics in a conservative 
campaign, but she is considered to be a typical Swedish-speaking 
Finnish liberal. This is not viewed as a contradiction in terms: 
Even the RKP right wing can hold liberal views. 
  It is easier to advance in a small party than in a big one. 
At the start of her career as a minister, Rehn was labeled 
politically inexperienced and superficially informed. It was 
thought that she would become a puppet of the generals to whom 
the big boys would explain a little about affairs. 
  Although Rehn smiles like a little doll, she knows how to 
fit 
the bits of information doled out to her into the right places. 
Furthermore, she behaves in a headstrong way, which puppets do 
not do. 
  From these men's point of view, she has made bad mistakes: 
She has ignored the self-important gentlemen, forgotten the "old 
boy" network, and bypassed official channels -- and there is 
probably no greater sin than that in the Army. They looked on in 
horror at the Ministry of Defense when the minister directly 
questioned recruits about their problems. They listened in 
horror at the Foreign Ministry when the minister spoke her mind 
out of turn to the ritually appointed representatives. 
  And worst of all: The minister began to doubt that all of 
these gentlemen's sauna evenings and expenses incurred as 
representatives were necessary for the defense of Finland. 
  The officers' initial horror changed to enthusiasm when they 
realized that no male minister would have gotten the Hornet 
[purchase] through. Their smiling girl did an incredible PR job 
for the Army and got the Defense Ministry to look like an 
important ministry. Before Rehn, politicians looked down on the 
Defense Ministry because they cannot curry favor by distributing 
money to voters there. 
<H5>  Rare Bird in Her Field </H5>
  Rehn's popularity could not have been foreseen. A woman as a 
defense minister was a small world-scale sensation who was of 
interest to news media everywhere. Rehn concedes that her sex 
has benefited her, but Finland too: The defense minister of a 
small country would not get to meet with such high-ranking 
politicians abroad if she were not "a rare bird" that aroused 
their curiosity. 
  In the opinion of her critics, Rehn has dumbfounded the West 
just as she had the East earlier. As Finland's defense minister 
was cooing with the U.S. defense secretary, those present 
recalled having seen similar closeness between two peoples in 
the past in connection with Eino Uusitalo (the Center Party's 
number-two man) and Vladimir Stepanov (the Soviet ambassador). 
  As defense minister, Rehn has rendered men largely 
defenseless. She regards security policy as her strongest area 
of expertise. 
  In the opinion of some, Rehn was lucky to get to be the 
Army's mascot: At the Defense Ministry she is served and well 
briefed; as minister of social affairs, she would have been in a 
real fix. One of the defense minister's subordinates (a man) 
denied that there was any backbiting: He thinks that Rehn is a 
good boss who can make decisions and steadfastly defend 
unpleasant decisions as well. He thinks that this woman does not 
make a poor defense minister at all -- quite the contrary, a 
better one than some old guy who had served in the Army 35 years 
ago and whose ideas concerning the Armed Forces go back to those 
days. 
  This subordinate also admires how naturally Rehn can relate 
to people without being ingratiating. In the face of opponents, 
she does not remain behind the walls of the ministry relying on 
its defenses. Once she attacked them from her office on the 
square, where demonstrators were protesting arms purchases. She 
vented her anger on them, saying how, as a mother and 
grandmother, she could under no circumstances consent to her 
children and grandchildren's being threatened and that an army 
capable of defending the country was necessary to keep that from 
happening. When the last of the earring-bedecked beatniks was 
verbally disarmed, a couple of spurgu [translation unknown] in 
favor of a strong defense clapped the minister on the back: 
"Good for you, Liz!" 
  When the government convened, not a single party was 
interested in the post of defense minister -- least of all the 
RKP leaders, who would not have granted Rehn an extension. But 
with the final murderous emotions of the evening bargaining 
sessions, the post went to the RKP -- and the post of minister 
of culture slipped out of reach of the party and Jorn Donner. 
  This is one reason why Donner, as a politician, wastes no 
love on Rehn. It was Donner after all who declared that all the 
publicity was going to the minister's head and that she also 
thought that she was fit to be president, although she is not. 
Rehn snapped that Donner is no one to talk of a fascination with 
publicity. Rehn also said that throughout her career she has 
gotten used to the fact that others doubt her abilities. No 
matter whether she became chairman of the laws committee, the 
head of the parliamentary delegation, or defense minister, they 
did not expect her to cope with the job: "A woman is never 
really taken seriously. Everyone is always just as surprised: 
Gee, she really did very well after all!" 
  Nevertheless, Donner is not quite alone in thinking the way 
he does about her. To the annoyance of other politicians too, 
Rehn has managed to incessantly and enthusiastically rejoice 
over her popularity and has begun to take herself seriously as a 
politician capable of serving in any post, no matter how high it 
may be. 
  One of the political doubters (a woman) does not doubt that 
Rehn is capable of occupying important posts, as long as those 
posts are not at the national level. She thinks that Rehn would 
be perfectly well suited to be the queen of an autonomous Aland: 
That way she could realize both the soft and the hard sides of 
her nature and get as many refugees and tanks for the islands as 
she feels are right for them. 
  Another doubter (a man) feels that Rehn's background for the 
post of president is too narrow: Rehn is just a Swedish-speaking 
Finn who does not know the real Finns and who has no contact 
with the provinces. He thinks that Rehn is only a representative 
of a small party who has no network in the official machinery: 
As president, moreover, she would be in big trouble without the 
strong support of administration professionals. 
  The RKP too had doubts about its own candidate at first, 
about whom they probably would not have complained, but whose 
campaign would cost a lot of money. After giving it some 
thought, they concluded that it would be good for the party to 
put in an appearance in the presidential elections and acquire 
Finnish-language voters. 
  But there are only a couple of little things that constitute 
a burden on Rehn's way to Mantyniemi [president's residence]: 
her first language, her party, her sex, her family background, 
and the prejudices associated with them. She has been 
pigeonholed as "Mrs. Rehn of Kauniainen." 
<H5>  Toucher, Hugger, Kisser </H5>
  The local doctor's Lilla was sent from her home in Mantsala 
to Kauniainen because there was a Swedish-language coed school 
there. Later, the Rehns also bought a house in Kauniainen, but 
they have not lived there for years, and Mrs. Rehn does not 
represent the typical "lady of the house." 
  When they lost everything when the family firm went 
bankrupt, 
the high society lady could not afford to appear in public. Rehn 
also remembers having held down two jobs, as women do: She 
looked after her home and worked. 
  Her job was not purely political, but she is not without 
experience as a politician. She was on the local municipal 
council seven years and spent 15 years in parliament. Still, not 
just anybody takes it into his head to become president. 
  "I didn't take it into my head either," Rehn denied the 
allegation. She assured us that it was her supporters' idea. 
Nevertheless, she is annoyed by the fact that a woman is always 
viewed as being exceptionally ambitious or somehow misdirected 
if she wants to advance in her career. 
  Elisabeth Rehn has been more successful than her husband -- 
and not without cause, people say. However, Ove Rehn knows how 
to poke fun at himself with funny stories in which the "prince 
consort" participates in a women's program of official 
ministerial visits (fashion shows) and receives small feminine 
gifts (perfumes) as a souvenir. So Ove Rehn has already had 
considerable practice as the consort of a president whose duty 
it is to socialize with the ladies and put in an appearance at 
culture salons. 
  Elisabeth Rehn would be a downright magnificent 
representative president. She would kiss and twitter at the 
gentlemen until they were dazed, as she has up to now. With a 
little bit of imagination, we can see her in the rooms of the 
presidential palace exclaiming "marvelous" and "my dear." 
  Rehn admits that she is an extrovert who willingly touches, 
hugs, and kisses people on the cheek. As president, she would be 
neither a quiet shillyshallyer nor a dreaded ruler holding court. 
  She is not afraid of the role of president, nor of its 
loneliness. She thinks that she can make the post look like her: 
The president does not have to greatly distance himself from 
others to preserve his authority. She remarked that she knows 
how to make a clear distinction between when it is appropriate 
to be familiar and when it is not. 
  Ambassadors recognize that Rehn is a master at behaving in 
public (more so than many ambassadors). As for her, we need not 
fear that a drunkard uncertain on his feet (Ahti Karjalainen) or 
a mass of wrinkles hanging onto a bag full of liquor (Vaino 
Leskinen) will get off an airplane to represent Finland. 
  Nor would Rehn make the mistake of pinching stewardesses 
either, although she does love to flirt. A common school chum of 
Elisabeth and Ove regrets that it never went any further than 
that with her either. The guys at school tried to vie with each 
other for the pretty Lillan and the school chum is still sore at 
Ove, who succeeded in conquering the girl on a skiing trip in 
Vuokatti. 
  Both of them were studying in Hankeni when she got pregnant, 
as often happened with mama's little girls of her generation, 
despite the fact that it was definitely improper. Later things 
went with her as is often the case with those who marry their 
early loves. When she publicly confessed that her husband had 
not been the only one, Elisabeth Rehn dumbfounded everyone in 
this country where it is customary for presidential candidates 
to appear to be perfectly irreproachable. 
<H5>  Like Any Normal Person </H5>
  Elisabeth Rehn is viewed as being courageous because she is 
not sanctimonious. We can well imagine her lapping up wine and 
babbling about men at merry women's get-togethers. However, she 
has been readily -- and groundlessly -- condemned for being a 
fast woman: "Claiming that I approve of little infidelities is a 
real whopper." 
  Rehn has merely learned from experience (58 years of it) 
that 
all sorts of things happen to a person in his lifetime and that 
it does not pay to conceal or embellish the truth. Since she has 
also recounted the dirty details of her life, she knows that she 
has relieved her opponents of juicy weapons and reprimanded 
those who have double standards of morality. 
  Politics corrupts many people, turning them into 
double-dealers and paranoids. Some are already completely 
disturbed or psychopathic when they find their way into 
politics. Rehn is commended even by her opponents for being like 
any normal person who has remained unchanged. 
  "Genuine" is also the word Rehn uses to define herself. 
While 
she loves to act (on stage), she says that she despises 
pretension and lying. She admits her mistakes and regrets some 
of the statements she has made. She confesses that she is a 
spontaneous person who gets angry and says things too bluntly. 
  This is why she does not understand why some regard her as 
false and affected. She certainly realizes that Elisabeth Rehn 
irritates other people, but the one who is doing the irritating 
is indeed the genuine Rehn, not an imitation. 
  This ends the series of Sunday articles on the presidential 
candidates. 

