BFN 

<F P=106> [By Jojo Moyes and Danny Gittings] </F>
  [Text] Governor Chris Patten last night warned that 
China's handling of the Xi Yang case was making Hong Kong people 
nervous about their future after 1997. Speaking on his return 
from London, Mr. Patten revealed Beijing had still not responded 
to the Government's request, through the British Embassy in 
Beijing, for further details about the fate of the jailed Ming 
Pao journalist. 
  "There is a degree of concern about the Xi Yang case here 
which, I think, raises a lot of anxieties, a lot of question 
marks, a lot of doubts in people's minds about the future," he 
said. "If ever anything confirms the importance of the people 
of Hong Kong standing up for the Joint Declaration, standing up 
for our values and freedoms, then this case is it, and I hope 
there aren't others like it." 
  But the Governor warned there were limits to what the 
Government could do to help Xi: "He is a Chinese citizen which 
means that there is a certain constraint in what we can do in 
international law, international practice, which wouldn't apply 
if he was a citizen of Hong Kong." 
  And Mr. Patten hinted the Government would adopt a 
relatively 
low-profile approach towards the case: "Our main concern has to 
be to avoid doing or saying anything which might make his very 
difficult position even more difficult." His comments came as 
journalists protesting Xi's 12-year jail sentence outside the 
Happy Valley headquarters of Xinhua (the New China News Agency) 
prepared to end their hunger strike tonight after 72 hours. 
  Meanwhile, under banners reading "Freedom for the press" and 
chanting "Release Xi Yang", more than 200 reporters and 
photographers marched to the news agency yesterday to hand in a 
petition signed by 1,315 journalists demanding justice for the 
jailed reporter. 
  "I'm here because I think the Chinese Government is very 
unfair to Xi Yang. As journalists we want to know what to do in 
future. Now we don't know what to report so we are pressing the 
Chinese Government to explain. There is so much uncertainty," 
said Anissa Cheng, a reporter with a local Chinese-language 
publication. Behind her a policeman moved through the crowd 
filming the protesters. Another one wrote down what was printed 
on the banners. 
  "The way I understand it is that what Xi Yang did was just 
normal news reporting," said Kevin Lau Chun-to, vice-chairman of 
the Hong Kong Journalists' Association. "A release from Xinhua 
yesterday implied China suffered serious economic loss, but they 
didn't give any evidence and we don't accept it." 
  "The message given by Xi Yang's sentence is very subtle and 
psychological," Lau said. "But it's very difficult. We want to 
cover news. We know there's a risk, but we still take that risk 
until something goes wrong." 
  From Xinhua there was little acknowledgement of the 
journalists. But at a window on the sixth floor three people 
could be seen behind the smoked glass, two of whom appeared to 
have binoculars, while above the main door, security cameras 
scanned backwards and forwards. 

