BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Yosi Torpstein] </F>
  [Text] The two problems most worrying Palestinians in the 
territories is unemployment and the worsening of their living 
standards and economic situation. This was stated by 86.2 
percent of 1,974 respondents who participated in a public 
opinion poll conducted on 31 May by the Nabulus-based Center for 
Palestine Research and Studies. The poll shows that more than 
half of the respondents view the Gaza-Jericho agreement 
favorably and points to an increase in support for Fatah and a 
decrease in support for Hamas [Islamic Resistance Movement]. 
  The Nabulus research center began conducting public opinion 
polls after the signing of the Declaration of Principles in 
September 1993, with the current poll being its ninth. 
  This poll was conducted after the IDF [Israel Defense 
Forces] 
withdrawal from Gaza and Jericho, the arrival of the Palestinian 
police force, the release of hundreds of prisoners from jail, 
the appointment of the members of the Palestinian Authority, and 
the implementation of the first steps to strengthen the 
Palestinian self-rule in the autonomy. 
  According to the poll, fear of chaos and of the inability of 
the Palestinian Authority to enforce law and order ranks second, 
with 66.7 percent saying they considered it the toughest problem. 
  Fear of the suppression of opposition groups by the 
Palestinian Authority and police ranks third, with 54.8 percent 
saying this is the issue most troubling them, and only 44.7 
percent saying they are worried about rivalry between 
Palestinians in the territories and abroad. 
  The poll shows that more than half of the population (57.3 
percent) views the Gaza-Jericho agreement favorably, with 39.6 
percent saying the agreement is excellent and 17.7 percent 
saying it is fair. Some 39.2 percent said the agreement is 
unsatisfactory or bad. Gaza Strip and Jericho residents were 
more prone to take a positive view of the agreement than 
residents of the West Bank. 
  The residents of the territories seem to take a sympathetic 
view of the Palestinian police and security troops, with 50.6 
percent believing they will treat all people equally and 16.8 
percent believing they will suppress Palestinian opposition. 
  A change was registered on this issue among Hamas supporters 
in the Gaza Strip. In the poll conducted in December 1993, 53 
percent of them believed the police would suppress the 
opposition, whereas only 12.3 percent of them held the same view 
in the current poll. 
  The pollsters note that most policemen in Gaza have 
relatives 
in the area and that this fact -- in addition to the warm 
reception accorded them by the local population -- made Hamas 
supporters change their mind. 
  As for the balance of power between the political 
organizations in the territories, support for Fatah increased 
6.6 percent compared with the poll in April 1994, whereas 
support for Hamas declined 4.3 percent, particularly in the Gaza 
Strip. In the last months of 1993, polls had been showing a 
constant drop in support for Fatah. 
  The current poll shows support for Fatah was highest in the 
Gaza Strip (an average of 53.6 percent) and in Jericho (50 
percent). Support for Hamas, the second largest political body 
in the territories, was highest -- when compared with other 
areas -- in Jericho (20 percent) and in Hebron (17.7 percent). 
  Nevertheless, a considerable number of respondents supported 
"independents" who are not identified with any political bodies 
but are believed to be pro-national or pro-Islamic. Support for 
these "independents" was more evident in the West Bank than in 
the Gaza Strip: 28.5 percent in East Jerusalem, 25.1 percent in 
Hebron, and 23.3 percent in Ramallah. 
  Asked how they would vote if general elections to the 
Palestinian council were held on the day of the poll, 44.4 
percent said they would vote for Fatah, 12.3 percent for Hamas, 
10.8 percent for pro- national independents, 4.7 percent for 
pro-Islamic independents, and 6.6 percent for the PFLP [Popular 
Front for the Liberation of Palestine]. 
  Support for all other organizations ranged from 1 to 3 
percent. The total of people who would vote for the main 
opposition organizations (Hamas, Islamic Jihad, PFLP, and the 
Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine) came to 23.7 
percent. 

