Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: Two Long-Duration Flights for </F>
European Astronauts on Board Mir] 
  [Text] Two space missions involving ESA astronauts are 
planned for 1994 and 1995. As they will take place on board the 
Russian station MIR, they have been dubbed the "EUROMIR 
missions". 
  Since August 1993, four astronauts have been training at 
Star 
City near Moscow in preparation for the missions: The first one 
will last 30 days and the other 135 days. Training has been 
particularly intensive because time is short. The astronauts 
working on EUROMIR 94 (30 days in orbit) and Ulf Merbold from 
Germany, and Pedro Duque from Spain. The Swedish astronaut, 
Christer Fuglesang, and the German, Thomas Reiter, are working 
on EUROMIR 95 (135 days in orbit). For each EUROMIR mission, 
one ESA astronaut will fly and the other will be the back-up. 
All four European astronauts recently completed their basic 
training and embarked on the second phase after the Christmas 
holiday period, which was a welcome break from the schedule of 
intensive activities on which they have been working with the 
Russians. During the break, on 17 December, Thomas Reiter, 
Christer Fuglesang and Pedro Duque, together with the Frenchman 
Jean-Francois Clervoy and the Italian Maurizio Cheli -- who have 
both been training as mission specialists for a flight on board 
a US Shuttle -- received their official European astronaut 
certificates at a ceremony held at the European Astronaut Centre 
(EAC), Cologne, Germany, to the great pleasure of Ulf Merbold, a 
spaceflight veteran who has been on tow missions aboard the 
Shuttle. 
  This has also been an appropriate time to take a closer look 
at these missions for which the go-ahead decision was taken at 
1992 Granada meeting of ministers responsible for space. Until 
then, the Member States of ESA had cooperated with the Russians 
on manned flights on an individual basis only. However, once 
the Russians had declared an interest in cooperation on a wider, 
more European basis, the European space ministers meeting gave 
ESA a remit to negotiate new areas of cooperation. 
<H5>  The Transitional Period </H5>
  Russia has built up a formidable space capability; increased 
international cooperations is a way of sustaining a using this 
capability more efficiently, to the benefit of all mankind. 
  But international cooperation on large programmes such as 
manned spaceflight is also a must for Europe, the United States 
and other space-faring nations, not only in terms of 
cost-sharing but also because cooperation pools technical as 
well as human resources. Generally speaking, the world today has 
nothing in common with the world as it was five years ago. 
Manned missions are now seen in a different light. Where there 
was competition, there is now international cooperation. What 
is taking place is in fact a merger of the Russian MIR station 
with the international space station concept, thus making it 
"global". Distinctions are no longer drawn between the West's 
Freedom station and the successor of the Russian MIR-1 station. 
  "We are moving into the age of manned flights on a worldwide 
scale", explains Jean-Jacques Dordain, Associate Director for 
Strategy, Planning and International Policy at ESA. "Europe 
intends to be a full partner in this development and this means 
that the plans drawn up in 1987 need to be adjusted to take into 
account the new situation that we have now." 
<H5>  The Deadline </H5>
  Since the MIR station was not planned to be operational 
beyond 1995/6, Europe could not wait for years before putting 
its astronauts into space. That is why this deadline prompted 
it to rapidly conduct negotiations with the Russians. The 
problem confronting ESA is the relatively short period available 
for preparation of the experiment programme and for training. 
The Russians assured that one year was sufficient training for 
a one-month mission such as EUROMIR 94. However, this assumed 
that the astronauts were of high calibre! The Russians have 
confirmed that the two candidates chosen for this flight fully 
meet the requirements for the type of mission involved. 
  "We have a little more time for EUROMIR 95", says 
Jean-Jacques Dordain, "even though this will be the first time a 
non-Russian will spend 135 days in space! This mission requires 
longer, more complex training but the Russians, who undoubtedly 
have more experience that us in this respect, have assured us 
that this is feasible." 
  One the political decision had been taken, a coherent 
science 
programme had to be drawn up rapidly. ESA took up the challenge. 
  Heinz Oser, the senior life scientist in the ESA 
microgravity 
programme says: "For the first flight we have chosen three main 
experiment themes in life sciences. The first will concentrate 
on studying changes in the cardiovascular system when an 
astronaut leaves Earth to go into space, and monitoring his or 
her readjustments to gravity on returning to our plant. The 
second theme concerns studies of the human neuro-sensory system 
to gain a better understanding of how certain internal 
mechanisms react when a human being is subject to near 
weightlessness. The third theme concerns the muscle system 
which will be measured before and after the one-month long 
flight in terms of muscle-strength and mass. It is believed 
that under weightlessness conditions, muscle-weakening 
mechanisms are different from those on Earth. ESA has also 
selected five materials science experiments, which will require 
the use of a furnace on MIR developed by the Czechs, and two 
technology experiments." 
  For the choice of experiments to be performed on MIR for the 
1994 mission, a factor to be taken into account was also the 
restriction on the weight of the payload to be brought back by 
the Soyuz capsule, which must not exceed about ten kilos. This 
limitation has obliged ESA to give preference to certain 
experiments and even cut down on others -- for instance, there 
will be fewer urine samples than scientists originally planned! 
  "Returning time-critical experiment products to Earth is one 
of the major problems of these missions" explains Wolfgang 
Nellessen, ESA EUROMIR Project Manager. "On Soyuz, there is 
only limited capacity for bringing back specimens and samples in 
addition to the cosmonauts. This means we have to decide which 
products should be brought back as a priority and, in the event, 
the biological blood, urine and saliva samples will return to 
Earth with the European astronaut on Soyuz. The materials 
science samples may have to stay on MIR until one of the 
US-Russian missions, when a Shuttle will dock with the station 
and could bring them back." 
  The Shuttle will visit MIR up to ten times over the period 
1995 to 1997, foreshadowing the development of a global station. 
Since EUROMIR 95 is to take place during the period in which US 
Shuttles will fly to MIR, it may be possible to use the Shuttle 
flights to carry equipment to MIR and return to Earth samples 
from some experiments carried out during the EUROMIR 95 mission. 
The Shuttle could therefore be used to considerably enhance the 
EUROMIR 95 operations. 
<H5>  135 Days in Orbit </H5>
  The most distinctive feature of the EUROMIR missions is the 
exceptionally long period that will be spent in space. This 
will be the first time European astronauts will be in orbit for 
so long -- 30 days for the first mission and 135 days for the 
second. 
  Heinz Oser: "This period, which will be far longer than 
those spent with the Americans on the Shuttle (8 to 14 days), 
will enable us to gather much more data. For the first flight, 
lasting 30 days, we have sought to make maximum use of the 
equipment already on board MIR. However, for the second 
mission, planned to last 135 days, there is more time to develop 
new hardware involving European firms. Experiments envisaged are 
a biokit, which will enable us to expose biological samples to 
microgravity and cosmic radiation, and an instrument able to 
measure changes in an astronaut's bone density as bones tend to 
become brittle during long-duration missions because of 
demineralisation." 
  Several research institutes, most of them attached to 
European universities, will be taking part in the experiments on 
the EUROMIR missions. 
  Heinz Oser: "With these experiments, European life 
scientists will be able to refine their analyses and statistics 
on how human beings react when they leave the Earth's gravity 
behind them to live under microgravity conditions in space and 
then return to Earth after periods of varying duration. The 
more people studied, the more reliable the results will be. In 
making preparations for the first mission, we have of course not 
been able to select all the experiments originally proposed by 
scientists." 
<H5>  Precursor Flights </H5>
  An astronaut frequently has a heavy workload given that it 
takes much longer to carry out an experiment in space than on 
Earth! 
  "During each EUROMIR mission, the ESA astronaut will work a 
daily shift of a maximum of twelve hours of which up to six 
hours are dedicated to scientific work", says Wolfgang 
Nellessen. "Saturdays and Sundays are rest days. By fixing the 
weekly work period for experiments at about 25 hours, and given 
that the European astronaut will work for four weeks on the 
EUROMIR 94 mission, a hundred or so hours will be spent carrying 
out the mission's scientific programme." 
  Around a hundred hours of scientific experimentation for the 
European astronaut on EUROMIR 94 and, by extension, about 450 
hours for EUROMIR 95, lasting 135 days, will be allocated. In 
addition, the Russian cosmonauts will provide support for the 
ESA programme of experiments. 
  In the words of Mr. F. Engstrom, ESA's Space Station and 
Microgravity Director: "These EUROMIR flights are considered as 
precursors of European participation (through the Columbus 
programme) in the global space station. Using such a station in 
space obviously means long-duration missions will be necessary 
so, clearly, you cannot change astronauts every week! At 
present, it is planned to change crews on a permanently manned 
space station every three to six months. With the two EUROMIR 
missions, Europe is therefore preparing its astronauts for the 
forthcoming global space station era. Furthermore, this is an 
excellent opportunity to perform scientific experiments as well 
as prepare the user community for that era." 

