Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Rain Ren] </F>
  [Text] The Chinese government yesterday demanded that 
Britain adhere to the principle of full consultation concerning 
the disclosure of details of the failed talks over Hong Kong's 
electoral arrangements. The deputy director of the New China 
News Agency (Xinhua) in Hong Kong, Qin Wenjun, said Britain must 
go through diplomatic channels with the Chinese government in 
order to release information regarding the issue. 
  Qin, who participated in all 17 rounds of the talks, said 
the 
notification of the Government's intention to release the 
contents of the talks ought to be made in the correct manner. 
"What is called prior notification?" Qin asked. "If we will 
have a meeting tonight and I let you know in the afternoon, that 
is notification. But it is not the right method. 
  "It is not through diplomatic channels. We hope the British 
side will give full consideration to this point." He would not 
say if the Chinese had been informed by the British about its 
proposal to release the details, nor would he say in what way 
China would respond. 
  Qin said firmly that the Hong Kong Government did not have 
the right to publish documents concerning the details of the 
talks, on the grounds that these were conducted between the two 
sovereign powers. "It is a matter between Britain and China. 
It is none of Patten's business," Qin said. He urged Britain 
to remember the two sides had agreed the contents of the talks 
should remain confidential. He said the Chinese government had 
always adhered to this principle. 
  Qin then criticised the Governor, Chris Patten, for inviting 
international support for his political ambitions during his 
trip to Australia. "Does he know what he is doing?" Qin 
questioned. "Perhaps he does not feel content just wandering in 
the streets, stretching his arms to a child or taking a sip of 
some local tea. So he goes out of Hong Kong," Qin said. "What 
he is trying to do is no more than to look for background music 
and to pave the way for his plan to table the remaining parts of 
the bill." 
  Patten has said that China's interpretation of 
"consultation" 
amounted to the British side giving Beijing the right to veto 
his proposals. He said this was unacceptable. 

