BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, April 14 (YONHAP) -- A collective sigh of 
relief is almost audible in the presidential office at 
Chongwadae these days as politically damaging issues are being 
brought under control. One of the most serious disputes 
threatening to disrupt the normal operations of the ruling party 
and the government was an opposition charge that a huge slush 
fund, set up by a construction company, may have been channeled 
into politics during the 1992 presidential campaign. 
  The threat was defused Wednesday when the ruling Democratic 
Liberal Party (DLP) and the main opposition Democratic Party 
(DP) agreed to invoke parliament's right to investigate the 
allegation on the "Sangmudae slush fund scam." Also on 
Wednesday, the Rev. So Ui-hyon announced that he would resign as 
the powerful chief administrator of the Buddhist Chogye order, 
opening the way for a peaceful resolution of the violent 
factional feud between So's followers and reformist monks. 
  These two developments apparently put President Kim Yong-sam 
at ease for the first time since he returned from a trip to 
Japan and China with the stated intention of concentrating on 
efforts to boost the nation's competitive strength. That is why 
"the atmospheric depression," as one Chongwadae official put it, 
seems to be clearing from the Chongwadae area and the chief 
presidential aides have also "brightened up." 
  President Kim has maintained that all controversial 
political 
issues must be resolved at the National Assembly and not 
"outside it," as the opposition party had been threatening to do. 
  The DP had said it would stage "outdoor" rallies and 
campaigns if the ruling party and the government ignored its 
calls for probes into the three major "suspicions" including the 
Samgmudae slush fund scam. The Democratic Party did join student 
activists and farmers at "outdoor" rallies last weekend, 
protesting against opening the rice market to imports and 
demanding renegotiation of the Uruguay Round [UR]. 
  While trying to turn public opinion against the Uruguay 
Round, the DP vowed that it would build a popular consensus to 
reject National Assembly ratification of the Uruguay Round 
accord. 
  Sensing that the opposition party has managed to generate 
little public support for its "outdoor" rallies, President Kim 
is said to be more confident of a breakthrough in the current 
political impasse. 
  Kim apparently felt so comfortable with the future political 
course that he even took time out to attend a professional 
baseball game in Seoul last Sunday and the Paris Bastille 
Opera's performance of "Salome" on Tuesday. 
  The ruling party's agreeing to a parliamentary investigation 
of the Sangmudae scam was also seen as an expression of the 
president's confidence, observers say. 
  President Kim instructed DLP lawmakers to "face the 
opposition squarely" and tackle the Sangmudae probe with their 
heads held high when the National Assembly convenes an 
extraordinary 20-day session for that purpose April 25. Kim 
wants to show the people that his administration has nothing to 
do with the Sangmudae scam and once again prove that the first 
democratically elected government in over 30 years stands on 
firm moral ground. The president hopes to demonstrate that all 
issues must be discussed and solved in the National Assembly -- 
the true arena for political negotiation by representatives of 
the people. 
  Various political and social woes, all of which threatened 
to 
cripple the Kim administration, have cropped up in the past 15 
days since Kim's return home, and one Chongwadae official called 
the period "a succession of nightmares for us." They included 
frequent "stalling accidents" plaguing a newly opened subway 
line and allegations of illegal electioneering by Kim's 
associates, in addition to the UR issue and the violent clashes 
at Chogye temple. But now the Kim administration is fully awake 
and in firm control, thanks to Kim's well-known political forte: 
Staging a frontal attack. 
  Ahead of the administration lie mountains of problems, none 
of which will be easy to resolve. Among them are the North 
Korean nuclear dispute, the question of what to do with escapees 
from North Korean logging camps in Russia, ratification of the 
UR accord and wage negotiations with labor unions. 
  The president and his aides at Chongwadae, brimming with 
regained confidence, are ready to tackle them one after another, 
according to Chongwadae insiders. 

