BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement issued by the ANC on the SAPA PR Wire Service on </F>
25 April] 
  [Text] The president of the African National Congress 
(ANC), Comrade Nelson Mandela, has on a number of occasions 
pronounced on the issue of indemnity for members of the security 
forces who have been involved in criminal activities in defence 
of apartheid. The most recent pronouncement was made in Durban 
on Sunday 24th April. 
  The National Executive Committee (NEC) of the ANC on 29th 
August 1993 called for a full investigation of all the abuses 
that occurred under the apartheid system, pointing out that the 
National Party (NP) government has never accepted collective or 
individual responsibility for the abuses of the regime. The ANC 
has always been of the opinion that the NP government has 
neither the moral right nor the authority to unilaterally 
indemnify itself or its agents for wrongs committed in the past. 
That right can only be exercised by a government representative 
of all the people of South Africa. Such indemnity shall occur 
subject to full disclosure of the violations committed. 
  Disclosure should not be viewed as punitive, but is a 
necessary precondition for national reconciliation. The ANC 
re-affirms that position. 
  The principle of indemnity has never been under dispute 
between ourselves and the NP government. Following the adoption 
of the Groote Schuur Minute in May 1990, the NP government and 
the ANC jointly arrived at a formula, which was translated into 
legislation, whose terms defined 8th October 1990 as the cut off 
date for all acts for which indemnity could be sought. That 
legislation remains operative. The ANC which was integrally 
involved in the conception and elaboration of the terms of that 
law, remains fully committed to its letter and spirit. 
  Comrade Nelson Mandela's reiteration of the ANC's position 
regarding indemnity in Durban on Sunday, implies that, subject 
to full disclosure, the ANC is fully committed to granting 
indemnity to all members of the security forces for acts of 
commission or ommission, that violated the rights of others 
committed before the agreed cut off date, 8th October 1990. 
  Sadly, numerous violations continued after that date. Hit 
squads, assassinations, covert operations, and para-military 
activities that wreaked havoc on our communities escalated. 
Thousands of people lost their lives, including entire African 
families. Respected judicial commissions and other official 
investigative bodies have repeatedly implicated members of the 
security forces in such crimes. The affected communities have 
also alleged that members of the security forces colluded and 
involved themselves in destabilisation activities. 
  It would be presumptuous of the ANC or any other party to 
seek to exonerate the perpetrators of these crimes unilaterally. 
In two days time the South African people will be going to the 
polls to elect a democratic parliament. That parliament, will, 
among other tasks, be charged with a thorough re-examination of 
the past, by setting in motion a process of national disclosure 
of all violations of human rights from all sides. A democratic 
parliament could then exercise its discretion as to how the 
matter is to be handled. 
  The ANC reiterates it commitment to the norms of democracy 
based on respect for human dignity and the rights of all persons 
irrespective of race, class, gender or creed. 

