BFN 

  [Text] Dear viewers, as you saw and heard earlier, the town 
of Gorazde, which has been declared a safe haven by the United 
Nations, has come under severe attacks from the Serbs in recent 
days and there is a possibility that the town may fall 
completely and all the town's residents may be in danger. In 
view of the importance of this issue, we invited the honorable 
foreign minister, Dr. 'Ali Akbar Velayati, to kindly come to the 
studio and grant us an interview in this regard. [passage 
omitted] 
  Dr. Velayati, I would be grateful if you could tell us about 
the Islamic Republic of Iran's stance on this issue and does 
Iran, by any chance, have any proposals towards ending the 
genocide of the Muslim people of Gorazde or not? 
  [Velayati] During the more than two years that have passed 
since the start of the Bosnian tragedy, the Islamic Republic of 
Iran has undertaken numerous steps -- both within the framework 
of the Islamic Conference Organization [ICO] and the United 
Nations -- and it is continuing to do so. Nearly all the ICO 
meetings that have been held have focused on the appointment of 
a contact group, representing the organization, with the purpose 
of making efforts at the United Nations. And the relatively 
positive steps that were taken at the UN General Assembly, I can 
tell you that all this was at Iran's initiative. 
  Iran has not confined itself to these political and 
international activities, but has also spared no effort in 
giving humanitarian assistance to Bosnian Muslims. However, 
efforts have been made, in various ways, to block the activities 
of Iran and sincere Islamic countries in this connection. For 
example, we suggested that we were prepared to put 10,000 of our 
forces at the disposal of the United Nations, so they could 
function as peacekeeping forces under the UN flag toward the 
implementation of Security Council resolutions and the 
protection of the honor and dignity of Muslims there. However, 
the United Nations, the Security Council and, specifically, the 
UN Secretary General have opposed our offer so far. 
  We have written letters and I have personally met Mr 
Butrus-Ghali, the UN secretary general, at least twice. 
Unfortunately, so far, permission has not been granted to Iran. 
We are determined to persevere so that, at least, the 
resolutions of the UN Security Council are implemented. So they 
put an end to their procrastination; so they refrain at last 
from trying to protect their own interests and further their own 
rivalries and try instead to safeguard the interests of the 
Bosnian people as members of the United Nations. I have to tell 
you that one of their most important aims is to prevent the 
establishment of an Islamic country in Europe. 
  [Announcer] Thank you. 

