BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, May 4 KYODO -- Foreign Minister Koji 
Kakizawa called on Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) 
leader Yasir 'Arafat on Wednesday [4 May] to open an official 
channel through which Japanese aid could effectively help 
establish a Palestinian homeland, Japanese officials said. 
  Arafat, who helped bring about an agreement whereby his 
group 
would lay down its arms in exchange for self-rule for 
Palestinians, told Kakizawa he will supervise the process of 
setting up such a channel, the officials said. 
  The two discussed the issue at a breakfast meeting before 
the 
signing of the historic self-rule agreement between 'Arafat and 
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin. 
  The elaborate signing ceremony was attended by Kakizawa, 
U.S. 
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Russian Foreign Minister 
Andrey Kozyrev and other foreign representatives. 
  'Arafat expressed high expectations for Japanese yen loans 
to 
help finance the construction of infrastructure for Gaza and 
Jericho, from which Israel agreed to pull out its troops for the 
first time since the 1967 Middle East war. 
  The two met at the guesthouse for foreign dignitaries 
attached to the office of Egyptian President Husni Mubarak. The 
Japanese minister flew to Cairo Monday night on a weeklong trip 
for talks with Middle East leaders and Christopher. 
  Japanese officials quoted 'Arafat as asking Japanese 
economic 
assistance to help transform the occupied land into a prosperous 
country that could be dubbed the "Singapore of the Middle East." 
  'Arafat also said he was willing to fly to Tokyo for foreign 
aid talks, citing such specific fields of infrastructure as 
communications facilities, ports, airports and water resource 
facilities, they said. 
  Meanwhile, Kakizawa issued a statement on the historic 
self-rule agreement between Israel and the PLO. The statement 
spelled out Japan's pledge to actively aid Palestinians and 
Israel's neighboring countries in view of the latest agreement. 
  The statement also said, "Japan will extend active 
contributions in such fields as environmental protection, 
economic development and water resources development under the 
framework of multilateral talks for peace in the Middle East." 
  The U.S. has asked Tokyo to expand its economic aid to the 
occupied territories and neighboring countries to consolidate 
its fledgling move towards peace. 
  Meanwhile earlier on Tuesday, Mubarak asked Kakizawa to help 
step up investment from Japan, the officials said. 
  Kakizawa praised Egypt for mediating as a peace broker to 
bring about the signing of the historic self-rule agreement. 
  Kakizawa apologized for forcing the postponement of 
Mubarak's 
planned visit to Japan in mid-April due to political turmoil in 
Tokyo, where parliamentary business was paralyzed amid a bitter 
policy row among ruling coalition partners over tax reform and 
security policies. 

