Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hiroshi Tanaka] </F>
  [Text] Declining Population 
  A review of the future of Japan's economy reveals a big pile 
of serious problems that can probably cause a weak-minded person 
to suffer a nervous breakdown. Let us deal with some of the 
representative problems. 
  The first problem is the conspicuous decline in the birth 
rate, and the number of births during the past 20 years has been 
reduced from 2 million to 1.2 million people. If the present low 
birth rate of 1.5 should continue, the population composition 
hereafter will suddenly shift in the direction of the aged and, 
moreover, the population will begin to decrease about 20 years 
from now. 
  In the year after next, the population of the labor force 
will begin to decrease, and 25 years later, the population of 
the aged over 65 years will constitute 25 percent of the 
country. When the number of working people decreases, it is only 
natural for one to suppose that economic growth will stop. At 
the same time, the social security expenditures will 
progressively increase because of the increase in the population 
of the aged, and if the transposition is made with the present 
tax system intact, the tax burden of the worker 30 years hence 
will likely be about 70 percent. At that time, the old people's 
welfare will probably be cut drastically, and along with it, a 
heavy consumers tax will probably have been introduced in order 
to equalize the tax burden. It seems likely that the era, in 
which everyone, both young and old, must lower the standard of 
living, is about to be realized in the not too distant future. 
  There is no way to protect against this, except either to 
increase the number of foreign workers or, as quickly as 
possible, to return the birth rate from the present 1.5 to close 
to 2.1. Sweden has succeeded in raising the birth rate from 1.6 
to as much as 2.14 through such child-care policies as granting 
maternity leave with pay until the child is a year and a half 
old, child-care allowance, reduced working hours until the child 
is eight years old, etc. 
  Under this system in Sweden, where by having just one of the 
two parents remain at home to babysit for a total of about two 
years, one person, who in the future will work for 45 years 
between the ages of 20 and 65, will emerge, and therefore, this 
is truly an advantageous calculation. 
  From the standpoint of economic statistics, Japan is a 
nation 
with an extremely high savings rate, but for the future, the 
number of young people who must shoulder Japan's economy has 
begun to decrease. Moreover, with the increase in the 
population of old people, consumption will increase more than 
savings and, therefore, the savings rate will unmistakably shift 
to a decline. If the working population should decrease and the 
savings rate should decline, Japan's economy will definitely 
enter a degenerative stage. 
<H5>  Lamentation of Trade Surplus </H5>
  The next problem is the expanding trade surplus. This means 
that the goods produced through hard work by the Japanese cannot 
be fully utilized domestically and have become surplus goods. 
When compared with the middle class of the United States and the 
former West Germany, the standard of living of the Japanese is 
woefully unequal. The workers of the metropolitan cities ride 
overcrowded streetcars and commute from faraway small homes for 
long hours. No decent resort areas are found in their 
surroundings. 
  If the trade surplus were to be spent domestically, the 
standard of living of the Japanese would improve spectacularly. 
The trade surplus for last year was about $130 billion. If an 
equivalent amount of goods were marketed domestically, it would 
be possible to complete two Tohoku bullet express railway lines 
and, in addition, to build seven Seto Grand bridges annually. 
And even all the homes in cities with a population of a million 
people could be renovated into mansions. 
  If wisely invested, a number of commuter bullet express 
railway lines and a network of freeways can be built on the 
periphery of the great metropolitan cities, and it would 
probably be possible for everyone to commute from the large 
residential districts located within the nearby countryside. And 
the idea of having the sewer systems in all parts of Japan 
completed and the water in the rivers and lakes purified can be 
realized. 
  In order to do so, forceful policies must be resorted to, 
such as restricting the private ownership rights of land or 
prioritizing its utilization if the objective is for public use; 
raising the cost of the private ownership of land by levying a 
land tax with a uniformly heavy tax rate or reforming the 
agricultural and fishery industries. Still, by raising the land 
tax rate, the taxable amount is not supposed to be high because 
land prices will decline. 
<H5>  Expansion of the International Burden </H5>
  The third problem is Japan's international position. The 
cold 
war structure has dissolved and the world has begun to move 
furiously toward the formation of a new order. For the United 
States, the objective of strengthening its anti-Soviet, 
anticommunist military organization has disappeared, and in its 
place, the focus of its policy is laid on strengthening its 
economic power in order to prepare its strength to manifest its 
leadership under the new order. The ills of the U.S. economy 
have appeared to be the two big deficits in finance and trade. 
The Clinton administration has resolved to reduce the financial 
deficits by a total of $500 billion in the next five years. It 
intends to accomplish this by increased taxation of business and 
the high income brackets, and through the reduction of military 
expenditures and subsidies. 
  The reduction of financial deficits will produce a 
deflationary effect on the economy. Trade expansion and 
reduction of imports are necessary in order to alleviate this 
effect. The U.S. Government is trying to reduce the trade 
deficit with a strong determination. At that time, the one to 
become the greatest target is Japan, which to the United States 
is the country with the greatest trade deficit. 
  At the recent U.S.-Japan summit meeting, Miyazawa rejected 
President Clinton's request of making the ratio of the 
international accounts surplus to the GNP below 5 percent in 
four or five years hence, but regarding the important industrial 
fields of automobiles and their components, space industry 
equipment, etc., they apparently agreed to decide on the open 
market of the numerical target value of each one. This means 
that, regarding the important fields, the Japanese government 
must assume the obligation of achieving the importing objectives 
that have been decided on. 
  The United States has forced unfair controls even against 
Japanese business, but apparently the Japanese government could 
not allude to them. Among the major unfair controls are the 
demand for self-imposed controls on exports to the United 
States, foreign investment controls in the United States, policy 
of prioritizing the purchase of domestic goods, place of origin 
controls of any business advancing into the United States, 
forcing the domestic production ratio, etc. 
  With the exception of oil-producing countries, Japan has an 
expansive export surplus in nearly all countries. This is true 
even with the United States. The United States is trying to 
prevent the increase of Japan's exports to the United States, is 
suppressing the activities of Japanese business in the United 
States, and, regarding the important industrial goods, is trying 
to ensure a part of Japan's market share. 
  Japan's best plan in countering these efforts is to expand 
the investments of the infrastructure, such as transportation, 
cities, homes, etc., through the reform of the land system or 
the withdrawal of various controls, and thereby reducing the 
trade surplus. But in reality, the plan is not possible. 
  If the trade surplus cannot be reduced on a large scale, a 
balance must be achieved by increasing capital exports. By this 
means, Japan's overseas activities can be stimulated, and as 
Japan's position in the world expands, then its international 
responsibility on a comparable basis will be demanded. Regarding 
the world's desired order for the future, Japan must establish 
its world strategy under a clear vision, endeavor in that 
direction and it must assume the economic burden for the above 
reasons. At times, the burden might become a political or 
military one. 
  Regrettably, the formation of this sort of vision is not 
possible in today's Japan. Already, despite Japan's 
international position being extremely high, it does not possess 
a world strategy. Despite the end of the cold war, the U.S. 
military forces are necessary for Japan. This is because North 
Korea might possess nuclear capability. In this situation, Japan 
is compelled to yield to the demands of the U.S. Government. If 
the worst happens, this situation might remain the same all 
through, even hereafter. 
<H3>  Will the Japanese Government Change Under These 
Circumstances? </H3>
  Come to think of it, Japan, indeed, has been playing a truly 
foolish role. We Japanese have reduced the number of children in 
our families, worked faithfully, and as a result, the goods we 
have produced cannot be utilized to the fullest and are exported 
abroad, and the people abroad, through high-quality Japanese 
goods, have been enjoying a convenient life. The foreign 
exchange derived from these goods is invested abroad, and it has 
served to expand employment and improve income, beginning with 
the East Asian countries, in the various foreign countries. 
  The standard of living of the Japanese people is really not 
outstandingly high and yet Japan has disbursed the largest 
amount of funds as overseas assistance, compared with the rest 
of the world. Japan donated $11 billion during the Persian Gulf 
war. 
  Despite all this, the fact is that Japan is not respected by 
the world. It appears that there are more countries critical of 
Japan. 
  The Japanese people are exasperated, but fortunately the 
world has changed recently and even the politics of Japan 
appears to be changing. As for the mechanism that checked the 
development of Japan's economy and the improvement of the 
standard of living, lowered the birth rate, and gave birth to 
the huge trade surplus, the expectation, although a mere trifle, 
that it might crumble has emerged. 
  Along with the end of the cold war, the need to fear 
socialism disappeared. And along with these developments, the 
basis for the existence of a dictatorial government in South 
Korea or Taiwan disappeared and both countries have changed to 
democratic governments. Even in Japan, the reason for the LDP's 
one-party rule disappeared. In the cold war order, the LDP, with 
one-party rule, strengthened military cooperation between the 
United States and Japan, while the Social Democratic Party of 
Japan fulfilled its function by curbing further involvement and 
rendered a sense of security to the people. 
  A long-term political regime is bound to deteriorate. Even 
the LDP control was not an exception. Under a long-term reign of 
38 years, various controls were strung within Japan's economic 
society and a system of protecting weak industries was built in. 
In that process, if the assertion was made that even the strong 
industries and even the strong persons are weak industries and 
weak persons, then that assertion went unchallenged. These types 
of industries and people functioned as the LDP's vote collecting 
machines. As a result, the landowner egotists, the regional 
egotists and the business world egotists masked their face of 
righteousness, and a society accepting them in their pomp and 
glory was formed. 
  At a time when Japan's economy was weak, the vertically 
oriented administration developed policies that considered even 
the smallest details and assisted in nurturing the infant 
industries and in promoting trade, but today Japan's economy and 
business are strong and the intervention or protection of the 
administration no longer became necessary. But despite becoming 
strong, the industries which are considered weak and the people 
who have asserted the various egotisms hope for excess benefits 
that can be fetched from the intervention of the vertically 
oriented administration. 
  Politicians protect old controls, establish new controls, 
then wisely adjust the coordination within the vertically 
oriented ministries and agencies, and collect fees from 
benefited groups, which are applied as political funds. In this 
manner, the collusive structure of 
politicians-businessmen-bureaucrats was formed and the 
corrupting phenomenon expanded. Under the one party rule 
organization, the extremely strong landowners' rights, the low 
rate of the fixed assets tax ratio, and the protection of 
agriculture, fishery, diverse retail and service industries 
continued, and the efficient utilization of land in Japan became 
impossible. 
  The standard of living of the weak people, who could not 
organize political pressure groups, hardly improved. Various 
problems, such as the heavy tax on the salaried workers, their 
destitute homes, the absence of long-term maternity leave with 
pay, the lowly social position of women, etc., remained. 
  As a result, the birth rate declined, the overpopulation of 
the metropolitan area advanced all the more, and the livelihood 
of the salaried workers' families, on the contrary, began to 
worsen. The depopulated areas kept depopulating. As a result of 
overprotection, rice cultivation is finally on the verge of 
collapsing. 
  The LDP's reason for existence as a one-party rule system 
has 
disappeared and, as a result of the successive expose of the 
decaying phenomenon of the politicians-businessmen-bureaucrats 
relationship, the LDP has fragmented, resulting in the formation 
of three new parties. The focal point of the election was 
political reform and the three new parties received strong 
support from the people. But regrettably, political reform 
signified first of all the revision of the election system, and 
following this, the subject of the transparency of political 
funds was to be raised. 
  However, there was no proposal for a determined policy that 
would eliminate the obstacles pressuring the favorable growth of 
Japan's economy and the improvement of the people's standard of 
living. The reason is that even the new parties, like the old 
party, are afraid of lashbacks from the pressure groups. For 
instance, all the political parties in Japan are regrettably 
opposed to the liberalization of rice. As a result, the Uruguay 
Round of talks ended in failure, the trend of protective trade 
gained strength, and there is no political party that will 
mention the fear of damage to Japan's economy becoming serious. 
And of course, none of them has expressed countermeasures to be 
taken when the time of damage occurs. Under these circumstances, 
there is no political reform. It is simply an act of "political 
change." 
  Hiroshi Takeuchi: Born in 1930. Graduate of 
Tokyo Unversity. Served as a managing director of the Japan 
Long-Term Credit Bank and presently is the director of the 
Chogin Comprehensive Research Institute. Served as director of 
the Shizuoka Comprehensive Research Organization. Among his 
writings is Back-Alley Economic Science. 


