Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Wu Yunhe: "More Aid for Rural Industry"] </F>
  [Text] The China Agribusiness Development Trust &amp; 
Investment Corp (Cadtic) is expected to introduce $100 million 
in foreign capital for rural firms this year. 
  Zhai Xinhua, general manager of the corporation, said Cadtic 
will strive to gain its goal by drumming up more loans from the 
World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and other international 
financial institutions. 
  This year got off to a good start when the Asian Development 
Bank agreed to lend the corporation $50 million to support 
township enterprises, he said. 
  Zhai noted that his firm had been under the jurisdiction of 
the State Planning Commission until this month, when the central 
government placed it directly under the authority of the 
Ministry of Agriculture. Government officials had pointed out 
that the decision was a formal attempt to financially back the 
ministry's rural work. 
  Backed by the State Planning Commission, the non-banking 
financial corporation has involved itself in the development of 
township industries, foreign trade and securities as well as 
real estate. Its profits last year surpassed 100 million yuan 
($11.5 million). 
  Zhai said that this year his firm is expected to raise at 
least 300 million yuan ($34.5 million) to help set up a 
development fund for township enterprises. 
  Because township enterprises are considered a major force in 
promoting the rural economy and in absorbing the huge surplus of 
rural workers, he said, they need steady financial support from 
the ministry, which administers rural areas. 
  Apart from introducing foreign loans to help rural 
industries 
update their manufacturing technology, Cadtic also plans to 
issue shares on the country's securities swap markets this year 
to raise money for the development fund. 
  Zhai noted that since Cadtic has gained experience in 
various 
financial fields, it can now help other companies under the 
ministry settle their accounts. 
  He suggested that all of the ministry's companies co-operate 
with each other by setting up an industrial group this year to 
contribute collectively to the rural economy. 
  Since it is already listed on the securities exchanges in 
Shanghai and Shenzhen, trading in Cadtic shares is expected to 
hit 13.5 billion yuan ($1.55 billion) this year, up 500 million 
yuan ($57.5 million) from last year. 
  Cadtic expects its profits this year to surpass those of 
last 
year -- which it would not disclose -- by more than 100 million 
yuan ($11.5 million). 
  While fostering development of its traditional businesses, 
Cadtic also plans to widen its scope. 
  Zhai said the corporation projects 1994 export earnings of 
$40 million, $28 million more than last year. 
  By diversifying, the corporation's gross assets are expected 
to expand by 1995 to 30 billion yuan ($3.45 billion), up 20.5 
billion yuan ($2.35 billion) from 1993. 

