BFN 

<F P=106> [By Andre Birukoff] </F>
  [Text] Cali, Colombia, 10 Apr (AFP) -- One of the attorneys 
for a confessed drug trafficker has told AFP that the process 
whereby Cali Cartel drug "barons" can surrender to justice has 
been "completely halted" because of the dispute between U.S. and 
Colombian justice officials. The process had started in March. 
  One of Julio Fabio Urdinola's lawyers, who spoke to AFP on 
the condition of anonymity, said: "There are no negotiations 
under way with authorities. The process has been completely 
halted." 
  The jurist made these statements in front of the main gate 
of 
Palmira Prison near Cali (490 km southwest of Santa Fe de 
Bogota), where his client has been detained since his 12 March 
surrender. 
  A high security pavilion that will house those drug 
traffickers who surrender is still under construction at Palmira 
Prison (40 km northeast of Cali). Construction is expected to 
be completed in June. 
  Julio Fabio Urdinola, 29, is considered one of the leaders 
of 
the Northern Valle del Cauca Cartel, which is closely linked to 
the Cali Cartel. U.S. and Colombian narcotics agents are 
accusing the Cali Cartel of supplying about 70 percent of all 
cocaine consumed in the United States and Europe. Urdinola's 
surrender, the first by a Cali drug "baron," took place 11 days 
after 28-year-old Yonier Espinosa surrendered. Espinosa is also 
a Northern Valle del Cauca Cartel member. 
  These two surrenders prompted speculation that Gilberto 
Rodriguez Orejuela, alleged Cali Cartel chief, could surrender 
soon. Rodriguez's lawyers were also negotiating with 
authorities. Urdinola's lawyer, however, pointed out that 
Rodriguez's surrender is now highly unlikely because of the 
dispute between U.S. and Colombian judicial authorities. He 
added: "The North Americans have created a tense situation, 
because they oppose the surrenders." 
  On several occasions, U.S. judicial authorities have accused 
Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff of being too lenient on 
confessed drug traffickers. The U.S. State Department stopped 
handing over evidence against drug traffickers, because it 
believes it has only led to light sentences. 
  In view of such criticism, the Colombian Government 
distanced 
itself from De Greiff, and Attorney General Gustavo Arrieta 
proposed a revision of the penal code. The current penal code, 
which has been in force for the past six months, indeed seems to 
be particularly tolerant of drug traffickers, because in some 
cases, it stipulates that those who confess are eligible to be 
put on probation. 
  Within the past few months, the U.S. State Department also 
admonished Colombian officials for failing to try a major drug 
trafficker and for doing nothing to confiscate the trafficker's 
large fortune. 
  A visit to Cali can underscore the scope of the wealth of 
drug traffickers. It is common knowledge that the most 
exclusive Cali neighborhood, Ciudad Jardin, is almost completely 
controlled by the local mafia. Ciudad Jardin is a row of 
beautiful mansions, most of which have pools. High walls 
protect the most opulent mansions, which are constantly guarded 
by security agents on permanent alert. 
  A somewhat nervous taxi driver said during a quick tour of 
the neighborhood: "You had better not take pictures here; you 
could be mistaken for a DEA agent." 

