Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Jono Waters] </F>
  [Text] Johannesburg Jan 9 SAPA -- One journalist died and 
two were injured when shots were fired at a tour group to the 
East Rand led by South African Communist Party head Joe Slovo 
and African National Congress General Secretary Cyril Ramaphosa. 
The dead journalist was identified as Abdul Shariff, a freelance 
photographer, by his colleagues on the scene of the shooting. 
He died of a bullet wound in the chest. His next-of-kin have 
not yet been informed. 
  Two SABC [South African Broadcasting Corporation] 
journalists 
were also injured in the shooting. TV news journalist Charles 
Moikanyang was shot in the hip and SABC radio news journalist 
Anthea Warner sustained a flesh wound. 
  Reporters at Natalspruit Hospital on the East Rand said 
another two civilians were injured in the shooting. 
  Witwatersrand police spokesman Brig Zirk Gouws said police 
had shot dead one man armed with an AK-47 and another armed man 
was wounded. One AK-47 assault rifle was recovered by the police. 
  Mr Ramaphosa and Mr Slovo were being briefed as they led the 
tour party, through the derelict Dikolale section of Katlehong 
when the shooting started at 3.45pm. A volley of shots appeared 
to come from the nearby Mazibuko and Kwesini hostels. 
  Bodyguards pushed the two leaders to the ground and then 
whisked them away. Some armed ANC members in the party returned 
fire. 
  Several journalists remained near the scene of the shooting, 
holed-up behind an abandoned house about 250m in front of the 
hostels. Local residents also taking cover behind the house 
blamed police and Inkatha hostel residents for the attack. As 
the gunfire appeared to come closer, the group of journalists 
were advised by residents to take cover about six houses further 
back. 
  The singing from a Zionist Christian Church service nearby 
could be heard above the sporadic bursts of automatic and 
handgun fire. But, after the service ended and the worshippers 
poured out from under their corrugated iron shelter, they also 
were fired upon. 
  The situation remained tense and sporadic shooting continued 
well over an hour after the initial shots were fired. 
  Residents believed a police helicopter flying overhead was 
responsible for the continuing gunfire and they continously 
dived for cover. 
  Several men were armed with AK-47 rifles. SABC radio news 
reports that five people were arrested and police also 
confiscated four AK-47 rifles after the attack. Brig Zirk Gouws 
said the men had been arrested after they had been observed 
carrying AK-47s by policeman in an overflying helicopter. 
  He said the police had not been approached by the SACP 
[South African Communist Party] or the ANC [African National 
Congress] to provide protection for the convoy before the 
shooting. 
  Law and Order Minister Hernus Kriel was quick to react 
expressing his shock at the incident. "It is is absolutely 
unforgivable that attacks should be made on the press, whose 
function is absolutely essential for the democratic process." He 
said this showed just how deeply the culture of intolerance and 
violence was rooted in certain East Rand townships. 

