Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Kunlachada Chaiphiphat] </F>
  [Text] Hanoi -- Further progress was made yesterday in 
settling the fisheries problem between Thailand and Vietnam when 
the two countries agreed to set up a joint ad hoc committee at 
deputy foreign minister level and to restore order on 
overlapping sea-lanes. 
  Foreign Minister Prasong Sunsiri, after discussions with his 
counterpart, Nguyen Manh Cam, said both sides agreed that the 
joint body should comprise members of government agencies 
responsible for fisheries, the management of national resources 
and restoring order in sea lanes. 
  Prasong said they had also agreed to accelerate negotiations 
to delineate territorial waters. 
  Both Vietnam and Thailand have declared a 200-mile exclusive 
economic zone. The subcommittee on territorial waters has met 
twice but has yet to agree on the criteria by which to define 
sea boundaries. 
  It is believed mineral resources and fossil fuels lie mostly 
in Thai waters while fishing resources are abundant in 
Vietnamese waters. 
  Prasong said each side agreed to form its own committee as 
soon as possible and will inform each other about progress 
through their respective embassies. Thailand earlier wanted the 
joint body to be at ministerial or higher level in order to 
hasten a conclusion to the issues. 
  The Thai side will call a meeting of agencies concerned, 
especially the Fisheries Department, to discuss the composition 
of the Thai side of the committee, he said. 
  Agencies to be included are the Foreign Ministry, National 
Security Council and the Naval Command and representatives of 
the Thai Fisheries Association. Pending settlement of 
overlapping maritime boundaries, Thailand will propose free 
access by fishermen of both countries to fish in the disputed 
areas, according to Fisheries Department Director General 
Plotrasop Suratsawadi. 
  Plotrasop said the Vietnamese authorities have agreed to 
free 
46 Thai fishermen arrested earlier this year. They are among a 
total of about 70 arrested since the beginning of this year. 

