BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Ayatollah 'Ali Khamene'i, leader of the Islamic </F>
revolution, on 13 April; place not given -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] In the name of God, the compassionate, the 
merciful. [passage omitted] In this prayer house I wish to talk 
to you about a subject that concerns all the people of Iran. 
Some years ago -- maybe 200 years -- a struggle was forced on 
the Iranian nation. By whom? By power hungry powers who wanted 
to take control of every part of the world where there were 
natural resources, cultural heritage, means of gaining 
knowledge, talents, and take them back place them in the service 
of the civilization and policy which was newly born in Europe, 
that is the industrial civilization and the political set-up 
prevailing over the industrial civilization. [passage omitted] 
  That struggle was forced on the Iranian nation. By whom? By 
what we now call arrogance. In those days when arrogance came 
in, it came in directly and took over countries. Today it uses 
more advanced means of conquering and controlling nations and 
their resources. [passage omitted] 
  That struggle was forced on the Iranian nation. And today, 
too, they are aggressive and offensive. Of course, we grab the 
world's big powers by the scruff of the neck where ever they 
are. Why do we do that? Because they are offensive and 
oppressors. We do not let oppressors go, and say let go and we 
will let go. No, they are aggressors, they are offensive, and 
are constantly oppressing nations. We are not such a government 
or nation as to leave an aggressor and oppressor alone. 
  So, my dear brothers and sisters, that fight was forced on 
the Iranian nation many years ago. It is not a new matter. Of 
course when the Islamic revolution was victorious in this 
country and the previous regime, which was under the total 
control of arrogant powers, was overthrown, they naturally 
became more angry and the fight became harder and rougher. 
[passage omitted] 
  There has been a revolution, it has thrown out that puppet, 
subservient regime, and a government has come into power which 
bows to nothing on earth. It did not yield for one moment to 
the combined powers of America and the Soviet Union. [Crowd 
chants God is Great, Khamene'i is the Leader, Death to America, 
Death to Hypocrites, Death to Counterrevolution, Death to Israel] 
  Well, America and the Soviet Union disagreed on a hundred 
issues and agreed on some. One, and the most important, was 
putting pressure on the Islamic Republic. Obviously it was not 
otherwise. Whoever was on the scene could clearly see this. It 
was not anything anyone would hide. This regime stood up to the 
two of them put together. And now, too, the American rulers 
naively and foolishly think that they are the bosses of the 
world. They talk as if they are the managers of the whole 
earth. And some people, out of fear and weakness, say yes sir 
to them. But the Islamic Republic has stood up in all strength 
and says who are you? You are a power, a strong government, go 
and run your own country. If you are right, go and rid the 
streets of New York, Washington, and Los Angeles of unrest. If 
you are right, go and get rid of racism and the terrible 
violation of human rights, which still exists between blacks and 
whites. What business is it of yours to interfere in the 
world's affairs? 
  When such a government came into power here the struggle 
became more serious and stronger. It is not a joke. It is a 
question of America's interests, America's political, economic, 
and propaganda power, which has been slaughtered here and 
crushed. That has made them angry. 
  It is true that the struggle has been going on for 200 
years, 
but then before the revolution the fight was against the Iranian 
nation from a position of strength on their side, and the 
Iranian Government was completely -- at least in the last 50 
years or more, since the end of the Qajar dynasty -- under the 
control of arrogance. It was Britain one day, Russia the next, 
and then America. During the eight year Iran-Iraq war, both the 
United States and NATO, and the USSR and Warsaw Pact, tried so 
hard to dismember Iran by arming Iraq. We saw they failed; and 
today, therefore, their attempt is more serious and they are 
more angry. This is because they failed and were slapped on the 
mouth. 
  You are the military personnel. You know that in combat, be 
it a political and economic struggle or a military conflict, 
each side must rely on its own strong points and take advantage 
of the opposing side's weaknesses. You should find out what 
your strong points are. [passage omitted] 
  The Iranian people's belief in religion and spritual matters 
created a strong point for them; and that was one of the 
greatest national tests, the biggest courageous uprising of the 
entire history, leading to our great Islamic revolution in a 
sensitive juncture. The nation stood with this revolution and 
formed a government based on the revolution. This is the 
government of the Islamic Republic. We owe this to our 
religious belief. [passage omitted] 
  Today a group of disgraced pen-pushers are seeking to write 
articles to please the U.S. security organization, which rewards 
them with a few dollars. They write: The Iranian nation made a 
mistake by staging a revolution. That is, they belittle the 
Iranian nation's greatest act of courage, which gave them pride, 
by writing such articles that the Iranian nation made a mistake 
and regrets its revolution. May they face the Iranian nation's 
hatred. May such pen-pushers face the Iranian nation's 
abhorrence. [passage omitted] 
  Praise be to God, those in charge of the government today 
are 
not making any claims and are not demanding anything for 
themselves. Even the imam [Khomeyni], with such illustrious 
status, considered himself a servant of the people and was proud 
of it. The state authorities are proud to be the servants of 
the people. They say this explicitly: We are the servants of 
the people and we have come to serve the people. At the same 
time they serve for a period and are replaced by others later. 
This is highly valuable. This is a big strong point and we 
have other points of strength which I do not wish to enumerate 
at the moment. 
  Our enemy has been engaged in a struggle against us for the 
past 200 years. The enemy, thus, is striving to destroy as many 
of our strong points as possible. They think it is possible to 
destroy the people's religious faith. They have opened the 
flood of the western decadent lifestyle, prostitution, lust and 
hedonism to inundate the third world countries. They intend to 
direct this flood into our country too. They have already 
started. Look at the smugglers who import pornographic video 
cassettes, sexually provocative pictures, sexually arousing 
books, and magazines filled with nude and erotic pictures. If 
you pursue the matter, you will find out that some try to make a 
living out of this job, but they will not make their daily 
bread. That is, they will lose their daily bread elsewhere. 
They have been tasked to open the floodgates from the quagmire 
of corruption and lust into Iran and among the Iranian nation, 
particularly among its youths and families. 
  This, of course, is one of our strong points. A strong point 
which they are trying to take away from us. They are, after 
all, our sworn enemies and they are only doing what is expected 
of them. As enemies, they want you dead and destroyed. They 
want to destroy all points of strength, such as our popular 
government. Of course, a few years ago they started to realize 
that they can never achieve this. For this reason, they are now 
merely intent on giving our government a bad image. [passage 
omitted] 
  Everyone, thus, should remain vigilant , as we have before 
us 
an enemy which has been trying unsuccessfully for 15 years to 
hurt and harm us. Despite its failure, however, the enemy has 
not given up yet. Praise be to God, we have many strong points 
which need to be made even stronger -- the strong points which I 
mentioned earlier, plus many others. Of course, we have a 
number of weak points which should be dealt with. We must be 
fully aware that the enemy is intent on taking away our points 
of strength. [passage omitted] 

