Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arafat, in </F>
Tunis, by 'Abdallah Zalatah, in Cairo, carried on the "Dialogue 
from Afar" program, date not given--recorded] 
  [Text] [Zalatah] Welcome, Mr. President. 
  ['Arafat] Thank you. 
  [Zalatah] Mr. President, what is the status of the 
negotiations following the recent discussions in Oslo, Paris, 
and Cairo? 
  ['Arafat] The situation, I am sorry to say, is nearly frozen 
because of the Israeli attitude, which seeks to impose 
conditions on the Palestinians outside the context of the signed 
agreement. When we speak of withdrawal from Gaza and Jericho, 
the term withdrawal must be respected. It must not be a 
redeployment [preceding word in English] but a withdrawal. And 
a second point: We do not want to live in a ghetto or a 
bantustan with the Israelis closing and controlling the existing 
roads. When they speak of withdrawal, it must mean exactly 
that. In security matters, they must understand that this is 
not a one-way street. Security applies both ways, our own 
security and their security. This must be understood. If they 
are trying to force an unsound interpretation of the agreement, 
they must know that such talk will not find willing ears among 
the Palestinians, Arabs, other free and honorable people in the 
world, or the sponsors of the peace conference who signed the 
agreement with us. 
  [Zalatah] Mr. President, what is Your Excellency's 
impression 
of Egypt's role in trying to surmount the existing obstacles? 
  ['Arafat] First of all, I wish to express my heartfelt 
thanks 
to His Excellency the struggler President Muhammad Husni Mubarak 
for all the worthy efforts he has been making to ensure that 
this agreement works. He worked to bring the agreement into 
existence and is now helping to see it implemented. We can 
never forget the role of his excellency the president. He has 
also instructed his foreign minister to devote his attention 
almost entirely to the Palestinian-Israeli Liaison Committee 
meetings. For some time he has been preoccupied with this 
issue, devoting himself to it. We thank him very much for this. 
  [Zalatah] President 'Arafat, what is the joint working paper 
to which Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin said he would 
accept no amendments? 
  ['Arafat] I am sorry to say that Rabin appears not to have 
been accurately briefed by his delegation on what happened. The 
understanding was that these points were points for discussion, 
not an agreement. The assumption is that these points will be 
submitted to the Israeli and Palestinian leaders. However, I 
was surprised--I regret to say--when they called them points of 
agreement. They absolutely must not circumvent the facts and 
the agreements. The Egyptian brothers, who have been following 
these developments, can testify that we agreed to state our 
views on these points, with the understanding that they would 
serve as an agenda for the discussions. The ideas were 
submitted by them, not by the Palestinians. 
  [Zalatah] Mr. President, if we summarize the Palestinian 
stance in several specific points, what would they be? 
  ['Arafat] I want to say one thing. The agreement mentions 
withdrawal. Withdrawal means exactly that, not redeployment. 
Regrettably, they are unable to understand what withdrawal 
means, or they understand it but are trying to sidestep it. 
This is impermissible. When we speak of withdrawal, it must 
mean exactly that. It is impermissible for them to turn the 
withdrawal from Gaza and Jericho into a redeployment. Another 
point is this: We are going back to liberated territory in Gaza 
and Jericho. What must be implemented in these areas is the 
final status, not the transitional phase. Therefore, just like 
any reasonable person, I cannot acquiesce to their attempt to 
make us live in a ghetto or a bantustan and to close the exit 
points around us. Is this reasonable? No Palestinian will 
accept such a situation. According to the Israeli administrative 
division, the area of Jericho District is 712 sq km. How can 
they offer us 27 sq km and then kindly condescend to offer us 55 
sq km? Regrettably, they view this as a great favor to us and 
act as if they are conceding to us our own land. 
  More than that, things reached the point of telling us that 
we are only entitled to hold [Christian] religious rites in 
al-Maghtis Christian area [where Jesus Christ was baptized]. 
Who could accept this? As for Muslims, their religious rites 
are to be held in Maqam al-Nabi Musa area. Who says this? Do 
they think they are doing us a favor? Is such a mentality 
acceptable? And they also do not want us to supervise the area 
between Jericho the three bridges [on the Jordan River]. What 
does that mean? Will we be entering a ghetto? This is really 
strange. We added Jericho to Gaza; Gaza because it borders on 
Egypt and is linked to our brothers in Egypt; and Jericho 
because it is connected to Jordan and the brothers in Jordan. 
But they [the Israelis] want to impose on us their own concept; 
and God knows from where they got this concept. As for the 
international presence, it is an "international presence" [last 
two words in English]. This means a temporary international 
presence during the interim period. Now they say that they 
cannot accept an international presence. This is really 
strange, because it is specified in the agreement. 
  [Zalatah] But the Palestinian side welcomes an international 
presence? 
  ['Arafat] Absolutely. I asked the brother Egyptians, brother 
Jordanians, brothers and friends in Europe, the Americans, the 
Russian cosponsors to come and be with me. I tell you my 
brother: I am ready to accept the force that is present in 
Sinai. But their logic is very strange. They interpret the 
agreement in a way that serves their interests, not a way that 
suits the interests of both parties. 
  [Zalatah] President 'Arafat: Could we say that a meeting 
between you and Rabin in the coming few days has become 
difficult to pull off? 
  ['Arafat] Of course it has become difficult, until he is 
convinced that the implementation of the agreement must be 
accurate, honest, and literal. 
  [Zalatah] What about a resumption of talks between you and 
the Israelis? 
  ['Arafat] At any rate, we are thinking about it now. There 
is a proposal to resume the talks of one of the committees in 
Taba. The Palestinian leadership will study this proposal, God 
willing, and respond to it. 
  [Zalatah] As we end our dialogue, would you like to send a 
message to the brothers in the occupied territories? 
  ['Arafat] I would like to tell our great people, the 
steadfast people struggling for the sake of Palestine, the 
valiant people of the intifadah, the heroes of confrontation in 
the territories and the diaspora, the patient and steadfast 
heroes in the detention camps and prisons, the valiant hawks and 
noble people being pursued in every camp, village, city, 
township, valley, and mountain on the beloved land of Palestine, 
and to the entire Arab homeland: I tell them on this day, the 
anniversary of the outbreak of Palestinian revolution and the 
anniversary of Fatah; on this day and in this month, the month 
marking the Prophet's journey to heaven; I tell them that we 
have an appointment with dawn. We have an appointment with 
victory. We have an appointment to write on the history books 
for our Arab world that nobody can obliterate the Palestinian 
people from the map of the Arab world and the Middle East. The 
Palestinian people have become a tough and fundamental factor in 
the political and geographical equation. In 1897, the Jews 
talked about Palestine as a land without a people for a people 
without a homeland. No. The Palestinian people are deep-rooted 
in their land. To all this, I say to all our noble brothers and 
comrade martyrs that the pledge remains the same and the oath 
remains the same. We have an appointment with dawn, we have an 
appointment with victory, we have an appointment with the state 
of Palestine. 
  "So lose not heart, nor fall into despair: for ye must gain 
mastery if ye are true in faith." "On that day shall the 
believers rejoice with the help of God. He helps whom He will, 
and He is exalted in might, most merciful. It is the promise of 
God. Never does God depart from His promise: but most men 
understand not." [Koranic verses] 
  God willing, a child from my country, a general from the 
generals of [word indistinct] will raise the Palestinian flag 
over the walls, minarets, and churches of Jerusalem. "And to 
enter your Temple as they had entered it before." [Koranic verse] 
  [Zalatah] President 'Arafat: We thank you very much and we 
welcome you always on the Voice of the Arabs. 
  ['Arafat] We will soon pray together in Jerusalem brother 
'Abdallah, God willing. 
  [Zalatah] God willing. Thank you. 

