BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by staff reporter Zhu Baoxia: "Small Town Model for </F>
Immunizing Children"] 
  [Text] The small town of Zhaohegou in Hebei has turned 
into a national model for vaccinating children against epidemic 
diseases through its immunization insurance effort, now in its 
10th year. 
  For several years, the town outside Sanhe City has not 
reported a single epidemic disease in its 2,800 children under 
seven. 
  It has one township hospital and 20 village clinics to 
support a population of 19,000. 
  In 1984 the town adopted a contracted responsibility system 
for preventive health care, a policy to supervise and urge 
village doctors to rededicate their efforts. 
  Each child is registered immediately after birth to ensure 
that no one misses the vaccinations. 
  Every household is charged seven yuan ($0.8) a year for 
immunization insurance. If an insured child gets an epidemic 
disease, the village clinic will be fined and is responsible for 
paying all medical fees. 
  The system has won over the town farmers. 
  "Seven yuan a month [as published] is not too much and most 
important we don't have to worry about our child's health," said 
Zhao Yuhua, 30, the mother of a 2-year-old girl in Zhaotuzhuang 
Village. 
  The town has attracted attention from the central government 
and some international organizations. 
  Representatives of the World Health Organization (WHO) and 
the United Nations Children's Fund (Unicef) called for the rest 
of China and other developing nations to follow Zhaohegou's lead 
by immunizing their children. 
  "Wiping out children's epidemic diseases like polio in China 
would be a great contribution toward the Asian and Western 
Pacific Region and the whole world as well," said Dr R.W.K.Gee 
of WHO. 
  State Councilor Peng Peiyun and Public Health Minister Chen 
Minzhang also want to spread the small town's success to other 
rural areas, where about 900 million Chinese live. Immunizing 
these areas is the critical portion of the national immunization 
programme. 
  If all the rural areas succeed like Zhaohegou, Peng said, 
China could wipe out polio next year. 
  Peng and Chen visited the town on Monday. 
  The ministry said its expanded immunization programme has 
dramatically reduced incidence and death rates of children's 
epidemic diseases by 89.93 and 88.78 percent. 
  Last year just 653 polio cases were reported, the lowest 
figure in Chinese history. 
  Measles cases dropped from more than 1 million in 1981 to 
last year's 117,800, and the incidence of whooping cough and 
diphtheria also dropped by 98.2 and 98.5 percent respectively. 
  But experts warned that each year there are 20 million 
newborns, requiring an astronomical number of vaccinations. 
Methods must be worked out to guarantee that all those children 
are immunized on time. 
  The ministry wants rural areas given top priority, and 
extensive publicity campaigns should be launched to educate 
farmers about disease prevention. 

