BFN 

  [Summary] In his article entitled: Vietnam's Economy and 
Its Investment Prospects, Mr. Graham Alliband, an Australian 
adviser and director general of Asia-Indochina Limited, analyzes 
Australia's opportunities for trade cooperation with and 
investment in Vietnam. 
  According to Mr. Alliband, Australia made its first inroads 
into the Vietnam market through the OTCI telecommunications 
investment program in 1987. Under this program, Australia 
pledged investment capital of 80 million U.S. dollars. By the 
end of 1992, Australia became the sixth biggest investor in 
Vietnam with 22 projects involving a total investment capital of 
280 million U.S. dollars. 
  Recently, BHP Oil Company won a product-sharing contract to 
exploit oil at the Dai Hung oil field Vietnam's continental 
shelf. This development may make Australia top the list of 
foreign investors in Vietnam. BHP's achievement has testified 
to Australia's high position in Vietnam and also to the 
attractiveness of BHP bidding procedures. 
  Australian companies have also taken the lead in helping 
their Vietnamese counterparts with the exploration of coal, 
gold, silicate sand, lead, tin, copper, manganese, and precious 
stones. Australia has also collaborated with the UNDP in helping 
Vietnam draft a new law on mining exploration. 
  Thanks to its rich agricultural and marine resources, 
Vietnam 
has created conditions for Australian investors to sell their 
agricultural and food processing technologies. Australia has 
also expressed its interest in relocating some of its textile, 
garment, and footwear manufacturing companies to Vietnam. 
Furthermore, Australia's service industries have made their 
presence felt in Vietnam. Australia's ANZ Bank was among the 
first foreign banks to open branches in Vietnam. Some 
Australian law firms have also provided legal advice to foreign 
investors in Vietnam. A number of Australian financial 
companies have also helped Vietnam with access to international 
financial standards. Recently, some of those companies allowed 
their branches based in the neighboring countries to operate 
directly in Vietnam. 
  Most of Australia's construction companies expressed their 
interest in Vietnam through the formation of joint ventures, 
setting up of representative offices, or signing of cooperation 
agreements. They also applied for the participation in major 
infrastructure building projects. 

