BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ambassador at Large Yuriy Dubinin under the </F>
"Diplomacy" rubric: "Presidents' Accords Will Be Implemented, 
Yuriy Dubinin, Ambassador at Large and Head of Russian 
Delegation to Talks With Ukraine, Believes"] 
  [Text] The objectives, overall direction, and course of 
Russia's policy on Ukraine are determined in an entirely precise 
and clear manner: They emerged back at the summit meeting in 
Dagomys. This being the course of friendship, cooperation, and 
partnership. 
  In proceeding to implement these objectives it is of course 
necessary to work like a sculptor who has to turn contours hewn 
out of stone into a statue: All the surplus elements must be 
removed from Russian-Ukrainian relations -- everything that is 
impeding the development of friendship between the fraternal 
peoples. In other words, it remains to resolve a quite small 
number of problems that are in one way or another complicating 
our relations. 
  I would say more: Means of resolving these problems have 
already been outlined during summit-level meetings. In 
particular, this applies to everything pertaining to the Black 
Sea Fleet. It is merely necessary to find the key to 
implementing and carrying out the plans. This became 
particularly clear following the Russian and Ukrainian defense 
ministers' recent talks in Sevastopol. 
  Why were they not completely successful? In my view because 
the presidents' directives enshrined in the Moscow agreement of 
15 April were not fully carried out during these talks. To be 
utterly frank, they were only partially carried out with regard 
to the future of the Black Sea Fleet's ships. Russia has done 
as much as possible to accommodate Ukraine on this, and 
prospects for the implementation of the presidents' accords have 
actually emerged. 
  Regrettably, there has been no countermovement on the 
Ukrainian side as regards the first point of the agreement, to 
whit separate basing for the two republics' naval forces. We 
still have to work on reaching agreement on this. Nonetheless, 
I am still optimistic, and I am convinced that the peoples of 
Russia and Ukraine expect the talks to come to a conclusion in 
the very near future. 

