Language: <F P=105>French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] President Alpha Oumar Konare has addressed the 
nation to mark yesterday's third anniversary of the 26 March 
Revolution. Here is Mahamadou Kone with a summary of the head of 
state's message: 
  [Kone] The head of state emphasized that the date of 26 
March 
should invoke in everyone a strong sense of remembrance and 
fellowship transcending differences, preferences, and beliefs. 
This is a day to remember the martyrs and and the democratic 
movement and underscores that no single person has the right to 
lay claim to the noble struggle waged by all the Malian people. 
The common struggle should guide us in working for the higher 
interest of the nation. The head of state also reiterated that 
the Third Republic is not the work of anyone in particular. The 
virtue of a republican form of government is that it allows 
different political parties to gain power in accordance with the 
Constitution, which is the basis of all democratic principles. 
  President Konare reiterated his determination to use 
dialogue 
and consultations to solve all problems facing the country. He 
said: If I have always tried to rally the people and shown great 
political sensitivity in running state affairs, it is because I 
have always been convinced that the democratic movement of 26 
March is one big family of patriots. 
  He also discussed the country's economic situation, which 
was 
exacerbated by devaluation of the CFA franc. This, he said, 
must make everyone more disciplined and committed. Mali's 
salvation lies in mutual assistance and solidarity. To face the 
many challenges ahead, young people must pull themselves 
together and become more conscientious, because it is they who 
are the hope of our country. The head of state expressed concern 
about the serious youth employment situation as well as the 
education problem, which, he said, calls for sober reflection. 
Finally, President Konare paid tribute to all martyrs from 
Africa and elsewhere who died for freedom and justice. 

