BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ciro Ortega from the "RPC Television News" </F>
newscast] 
  [Text] Panamanian Foreign Minister Jose Raul Mulino left 
this afternoon on an official mission to Moscow, Russia. Mulino 
is accompanied by Fernando Eleta Almaran, an industrialist and 
important member of the National Foreign Affairs Council. It is 
the first time in history that a Panamanian foreign minister is 
visiting Russia and is an attempt to increase the diplomatic 
rank between the two nations. Also accompanying Foreign 
Minister Mulino are Graciela de Eleta, Eloy Alfaro, and Juan 
Pablo Fabrega. While in the diplomatic lounge at Tocumen 
International Airport in Panama City, Russian Consul General 
(Anatoliy Kaskov) said that strengthening ties translates into 
many benefits for the two countries. 
  [Begin (Kaskov) recording] Our foreign minister and your 
foreign minister will sign very important documents that will 
facilitate our relations. This is why I can say this is a 
historic visit in relations between our two countries. I can 
also say they are going to study every aspect of our relations, 
including political, economic, and, above all, diplomatic 
relations. [end recording] 
  According to Panamanian Foreign Minister Mulino, this 
working 
trip to Moscow represents establishing diplomatic relations at 
the embassy level. Mulino said Flavio Mendez is the Panamanian 
ambassador to Moscow and now Russia must appoint its ambassador 
to Panama. 
  [Begin Mulino recording] We will also discuss immigration 
issues, the possibilities of establishing cooperation agreements 
in the struggle against drug trafficking, and trade matters, 
which I will discuss with the Russian trade minister. There is 
an essential matter to discuss with the transportation minister, 
and I have said this in a document I have presented to the 
consul general in Panama, and that is to get preferential 
treatment for Panamanian ships arriving in Russian ports. At 
this time they are being charged a surcharge that makes it 
difficult for our ships to take advantage of the markets 
existing in those ports. [end recording] 
  The visit of the high-ranking delegation to Moscow opens new 
diplomatic and trade horizons for Panama. Their work in Moscow 
will be intense and they will be returning to the country in 
early May. 

