BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, Apr 27, BNS -- Aliens who were permanent 
residents of Estonia as of July 1, 1990, will be granted 
permanent residence permits, Estonian Prime Minister Mart Laar 
said yesterday in Tallinn at a meeting with Russian journalists. 
  "Under the aliens law, those people are entitled to a 
permanent residence permit and nobody is going to deprive them 
of this right," Laar said. 
  Issuance of temporary three-year permits to that category of 
people stems from the need to observe international legal norms, 
Laar claimed. 
  "International legislation stipulates that a resident must 
have a temporary residence permit before he can be issued a 
permanent permit," the government head underscored. 
  Since this regulation "gives rise to concern" among aliens 
living in Estonia, the Cabinet plans to take some steps to 
alleviate it. 
  "To calm down the people, the government will allow those 
people to apply for the permanent residence permit immediately 
upon receipt of the temporary permit," Laar said. 
  The premier underlined that temporary residence permits 
grant 
aliens the same rights in privatization and the social sphere as 
Estonian citizens have. 
  "If somebody feels he is being discriminated against, he may 
fearlessly turn to the court," Laar said. 
  The Estonian premier emphasized in conversation with Russian 
reporters that Russia knows too little about developments in 
Estonia. 
  "Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev is lying when he 
says that Estonia is deporting Russians or that Estonia grants 
its citizenship on ethnic principles," Laar said. "Let Kozyrev 
come here and see for himself that he has more cause for anxiety 
about the situation of Russians in Central Asia." 
  The premier claimed the situation in Estonia is being 
aggravated by the some Russian citizens residing in that Baltic 
country. 
  "Being citizens of a foreign country resident in Estonia, 
they trumpet forth all over the world blatant lies, for example, 
about concentration camps for Russians being built here. 
  "Such people may become unwelcome in Estonia," the premier 
emphasized. 

