BFN 

<F P=106> [Aarticle by R.W.: "OBOP Poll; Government Does Not Keep Its </F>
Promises"] 
  [Text] The government's composition is good--so 
think 39 percent of respondents polled by the Public Opinion 
Research Center [OBOP] at the end of March. Exactly the same 
proportion of people think the government's composition is bad. 
As time goes by, the proportions are getting worse, from the 
standpoint of the current governing team. There are more critics 
now than in November (21 percent), when the government was 
beginning its term, whereas there are clearly fewer satisfied 
people (it used to be 51 percent). The view still prevails that 
Pawlak's government is better than Suchocka's, but there are 
fewer and fewer people who think that. Very few people are 
willing to defend the argument that the 19 September winners are 
keeping their election promises. 
  The current cabinet's composition is liked by farmers the 
most and by private entrepreneurs the least. People with 
left-wing views and those who voted for the Polish Peasant Party 
last year have more praise for the Cabinet (this applies even 
more to those who voted for the Democratic Left Alliance). 
  Those who think the current government is superior to the 
previous one are mostly people with high school diplomas, at 
most. They inhabit small towns and sympathize with the parties 
forming the governing coalition. Suchocka's Cabinet is evaluated 
more highly by people with a higher education, living in larger 
cities, and supporters of the Democratic Union and of right-wing 
parties. 
  Slightly over half the respondents (51 percent) agree that 
Pawlak's government has been introducing some changes, every 
25th person (4 percent) is of the view that the government is 
making a major breakthrough, and every third person (35 percent) 
thinks that the government contributes nothing new to the 
policies in effect before. In the fall of last year, many more 
people evauated Pawlak's cabinet as reform-oriented. 
  The view prevails in the OBOP poll that the government is 
not 
keeping its election promises--so think 63 percent of the polled 
(in November of last year, 26 percent). The opposite view--that 
promises are being kept--is defended by 25 percent of those 
polled (48 percent in the previous poll). There is no longer a 
single social, professional, or demographic group in which the 
view would prevail that the governing team is keeping what it 
promised during the election campaign. 
<H8>  * * * </H8>
  The poll of 23-29 March was conducted by using a 
1,197-person 
all-nation random sample of Poland's residents. 

