BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Pedro Ross Leal, secretary general of the </F>
Cuban Workers Federation, by unidentified reporter; place, date 
not given; from the "Evening Information Review" 
newscast--recorded] 
  [Text] [Reporter] We would like to hear about the Cuban 
Workers Federation's [CTC] expectations for the National 
Assembly of the People's Government [ANPP] general assembly 
scheduled for 1 May. 
  [Ross] We cannot talk about expectations, because an 
expectation is something that is not yet defined, something what 
one wants but there is still uncertainty about it. We believe 
we will discuss at the assembly issues related to the present 
and future life of Cuban workers and the people in general. The 
discussions will be based specifically on the workers' point of 
view, workers' opinions, workers' proposals, workers' doubts, 
and their aspirations about what should and should not be done 
and what they believe is feasible and should be done. In this 
light, one cannot speak about expectations. We are talking 
about specific facts, because even before the assembly several 
decisions have been taken based on proposals the workers made. 
  We cannot expect one single assembly meeting to adopt all 
the 
measures needed to clean up the country's finances, to correct 
certain economic problems, and to define new policies. We 
expect the assembly to make recommendations to the government so 
the government can study them, and later implement them. These 
decisions will not only be the reflection of what we discussed 
with the workers at the parliament in the workplace sessions, 
but they will return to the workplace for further study. 
  This is what we expect to get out of the ANPP sessions. It 
will be a public session, and all the foreign guests at the 1 
May celebrations will be present. It will be broadcast on radio 
and television so our people and the whole world can hear what 
we are debating. 
  [Reporter] We would like to know how the workers movement 
has 
welcomed the decision to hold this long-awaited assembly on 1 
May. 
  [Ross] The Cuban workers movement greatly appreciates the 
revolutionary government's decision to adopt Comrade Fidel's 
proposal to hold this specific ANPP session to discuss such 
important issues on such a significant date as 1 May. In so 
doing, they will honor and express respect for Cuban workers. 
  [Reporter] One last question. Radio Havana Cuba is 
celebrating its 33d anniversary on 1 May. What has Radio Havana 
Cuba meant to the world's union movement? 
  [Ross] Radio Havana Cuba is the vehicle by which we maintain 
contact with the workers of the world, as far as the radio 
signal of this Cuban radio station can travel. Radio Havana 
Cuba has allowed us to express our beliefs, our truth, and our 
information. Radio Havana Cuba has been a bridge and a channel 
that has shortened distances to keep us united with the other 
union movements in Latin America over the shortwaves bands. We 
would like to congratulate all the workers, technicians, 
journalists, support personnel, leaders, labor organizations, 
political organizations, and, in general, all of the workers of 
this prestigious Cuban radio station on this 33d anniversary. 

