CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Abida Allouache: "A Few Facts About Today's </F>
Algerian"] 
  [Text] Statistics paint a confusing picture of contemporary 
Algerians. They spend more money on food than clothing and 
medical care, but the great majority live in their own homes, 
and overcrowding has reached critical proportions. Most 
Algerians have potable water, electricity, refrigerators, 
kitchen ranges, and black-and-white televisions. While the rate 
of demographic growth remains high, it is beginning to come down 
a little. But do not jump to hasty conclusions: It is not 
because people are having fewer children, but because they marry 
later in life. Marriage is an endangered institution! Housing is 
in terribly short supply, and working women, although highly 
skilled, are a marginal factor in the work force. 
  "A statistical portrait of the typical Algerian" would have 
been too presumptuous a title for this report. First of all, 
because statistics in Algeria are not all that reliable. The 
record of recent development planning shows statistics have not 
always been properly taken into account either. 
  As the country moves toward a market economy, statistics are 
an indispensable foundation for implementation of any serious 
structural adjustment plan. 
  About the best one can say is that thanks to ONS [National 
Office of Statistics], some statistics do exist. They paint a 
sort of picture of the typical Algerian, and it is not 
altogether a portrait of underdevelopment! 
  The first stereotype that must be jettisoned concerns 
demographic growth rate: Algeria, which had an abysmal record in 
this area, with one of the highest growth rates in the world, 
has been making efforts. Whereas in 1985 growth was 3.1 percent, 
the rate had fallen to 2.4 percent by 1992. Could this represent 
the effects of the economic recession that has hit Algerians so 
hard? No, the statistics seem to point rather to a trend toward 
marrying later in life. Indeed, the figures show a veritable 
crisis for marriage as an institution here, with people marrying 
later and later (the average age now is almost 30) in a country 
and society that has always favored early marriage. Today, it is 
not unusual to find single women in their late thirties. 
  The most commonly advanced explanation for this phenomenon 
is the housing problem. Young couples that are married 
legally--on paper, that is--sometimes divorce with the marriage 
never having been consummated because the couple was unable to 
find lodgings. 
  A wilaya-by-wilaya breakdown of marriage statistics for 1992 
shows Algiers led with 13,466, followed by Setif with 6,957, 
while at the bottom end Illize had 77 and Tindouf only 100! It 
would be a mistake to deduce from this that people marry less in 
the South. We suspect rather that the nomadic lifestyle in the 
south is less conducive to scrupulous recording of vital 
statistics. 
  At all events, more marriages were recorded for 1992 
(159,380) than for 1985 (123,688). 
<H5>  800,000 Births </H5>
  Birthrates in Algeria have changed greatly over the last 20 
years. The adjusted fertility rate, or average number of births 
per woman, was 4.5 in 1990. But the absolute number of births 
remains very high at more than 800,000 per year. As for the 
decline in rate of natural population increase, it is too early 
to claim victory. The rate was 2.43 in 1992 compared to 2.41 in 
1991. We will have to wait for figures from the following years 
(1993-94) to see whether the downward trend is going to 
continue, stabilize, or reverse. 
  As of 1 January 1993, total population was 26,600,000. Mean 
projections are 27.3 million for 1994 and 31.5 million for the 
year 2000. (There are low, medium, and high projections.) 
  As for the age structure of the population, 55 percent are 
under 20; the youthfulness of the population is a factor not 
taken into account by those who criticize us for our growth 
rates! Crude mortality is only six deaths per 1,000 population. 
  According to a 1992 ONS national manpower survey of 11,300 
households from all parts of the country, there are 6,221,000 
persons in the labor market, representing 23.4 percent of the 
population. But there are only 364,344 working women--just 5 
percent of all Algerian women. By contrast, 41.4 percent of the 
male population is in the labor market. 
  The figures show women are still marginal factors in the 
labor market, notwithstanding statements or views to the 
contrary in certain misogynous circles. Another surprising fact 
about working women in Algeria is their high level of 
qualification: 22.22 percent of women workers are highly 
skilled, compared to 5.67 percent of the men. This spectacular 
reversal is also apparent in breakdowns by occupational 
category: 47.5 percent of the women are in liberal and 
quasi-liberal professions, compared to 10.74 percent of the men. 
The same thing is true for white-collar personnel: 23.33 percent 
of the women, compared to 9.76 percent of the men. Some 35 
percent of male workers are uneducated or illiterate, compared 
to only 14 percent of the females. 
  So much for the stupid argument that working women encumber 
positions that should go to unemployed males. At any rate, 
generally speaking, a close examination of the job market shows 
that in any given sector the proportion of women employed is 
very small compared to the total. 
<H5>  Employment Low </H5>
  In absolute terms, the number employed grew by more than 4.4 
percent between 1991 and 1992, in other words by 260,000, 
including persons working at home or satisfying their national 
service obligation. Job-holders represent 76 percent of the 
country's work force but only 17.8 percent of total population! 
In other words, only one-fifth of the population is working, so 
that for every employed person in the country there are more 
than five others not working. Despite the youth and structure of 
Algeria's population, the rate of employment thus remains very 
low. 
  The total number unemployed is 1,480,000, 83 percent of whom 
are younger than age 30. While unemployment undeniably hits 
young people hardest, our judgment about these figures must be 
tempered somewhat by the fact that a large part of the country's 
actual economic activity is in the informal or black-market 
sector. And many young people are involved in it. Trade in 
contraband food and cigarettes will doubtless continue to grow, 
and not just because of unemployment. Most young people involved 
in contraband earn a much better livelihood than they would if 
employed in white-collar jobs, for which moreover they lack the 
academic credentials. According to statistics, however, 92 
percent of the jobless are being taken care of by family or 
parents. Long live family solidarity and the extended family! In 
other parts of the world, the jobless are being retrained--or if 
not, they huddle shamefacedly on the margins and try to fade 
into the woodwork. Here, a goodly number of unemployed youth 
strut about in the most stylish jeans and basketball shoes, 
cigarette dangling from their lips, just "hanging out" as 
professional fashion plates--something of a national pastime for 
males. 
  Far be it from us to downplay the anguish of unemployment, 
but we must also recognize that if a survey were ever made of 
the number of hours employees actually spend on the job, one 
would find few Algerians actually work as much as 50 percent of 
their scheduled hours. 
  Whether it is a matter of conditioned reflexes or firmly 
established behavior patterns, most Algerians are not 
disciplined or efficient workers. And this is true at every 
level, starting at the top. Leveling down and mediocrity have 
taken an incalculable toll. Why such negative attitudes? Sure, 
the "system" has a lot to do with it. But that is a story in 
itself! 
  To return to our remarks at the beginning, with statistics 
from the 1992 manpower survey we can paint a portrait of the 
typical Algerian household. 
  Get ready for some surprises: The typical household is in 
owned, not rented, lodgings (64 percent), generally 
single-family housing (a category that includes traditional 
houses). When all types of housing are considered, the most 
typical domicile has three rooms (30 percent), while only 18 
percent are single-room units. Eighty-nine percent of households 
have electricity, 69 percent have potable water, and 65 percent 
are connected to sewer systems. 
<H5>  High Occupancy </H5>
  Some 84.51 percent of households have a kitchen, but only 35 
percent have a bathroom. Among household durables, refrigerators 
are found in the largest number of households (76.8 percent), an 
oven in 69 percent, and a kitchen range in 53 percent. Color 
television is becoming more and more common, now being found in 
32 percent of households. About 62 percent of households have 
black-and-white television. Some type of heating is found in 
57.4 percent of households. Sewing machines are found more 
frequently (22 percent of households) than knitting machines. 
There is an automobile in 17.3 percent of Algerian households. 
  Telephones (20 percent) and parabolic antennas (13.4 
percent) 
are still relatively uncommon in Algerian households. 
  About 5.55 percent of households were described as living in 
substandard housing in 1992, compared to 9.3 percent in 1977. 
Some 16 percent of housing units were rental, and 19 percent 
were rent free. 
  The per-room occupancy rate was 2.65 in 1987, and is close 
to 
3.0 now. According to international standards, overcrowding is 
acceptable when per-room occupancy is less than 2.0 and critical 
when the rate is 2.1 to 3.3; beyond that, overcrowding is 
unacceptable. In Algeria, therefore, residential overcrowding is 
now at a critical level! 
  It is interesting to note that Algerians spend more for food 
than clothing, rent, utilities, and medical care. According to 
the decennial consumption survey for 1988, our typical citizen 
spends 44 percent of his household income on food, 11.5 percent 
for clothing and shoes, and 11.49 percent for transportation and 
communication. Housing and other rental expenses take 5.6 
percent; education, cultural activities, and leisure together 
only come to 6.5 percent. A relatively small share, 3.3 percent, 
goes for hygiene and health, much less than is spent on 
furniture (6.8 percent). Average per capita expenses in 1988 
came to 8,873 Algerian dinars [DA], so that a five-person 
household spent DA40,000. With devaluation of the dinar and 
soaring inflation, you can imagine what the figures will be for 
1994. The ravages must be tremendous! 

