Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From 25 February POSTIMEES, pp 1,3; "News Bulletin" No. </F>
38/94] 
  [Text] Friday, February 25 -- The celebration of the 76th 
anniversary of the Republic of Estonia opened with the 
traditional hoisting of flag to the Pikk Hermann tower at 
Toompea at sunrise. Riigikogu Speaker lo Nugis, vice-chairmen 
Edgar Savisaar and Tunne Kelam, Prime Minister Mart Laar as well 
as foreign diplomats attended the ceremony. Speaker Ulo Nugis 
held a speech, stressing that Estonia's history has been the 
history of freedom struggle and pointing out the dangers of the 
continued Russian military presence. But he assured that the 
events of 1939-1940 will not recur. Nugis added that the 
Riigikogu had managed to pass approximately one fifth of the 
laws necessary for the functioning of a democratic state. 
  The celebrations continued with the military parade on 
Vabaduse Square in Tallinn. Almost one thousand men from the 
Defence Forces units stationed in Tallinn (the Kalev and the 
Guard battalions), the Border Guard training centre, the Police 
Regiment, the rescue units and the Defence League, as well as 
103 war veterans and 34 members of the Defence League youth 
organisation were lined up on the square. President Lennart 
Meri arrived to receive the parade, Commander in Chief General 
Aleksander Einseln addressed the soldiers, pointing out that the 
Estonian volunteers had crushed a Soviet bridgehead at Riigikala 
near Narva exactly fifty years ago. He stressed the role of 
youth in Estonia's military history, drawing parallels between 
the present Defence Forces and the soldiers of 1944. "The 
emergence of a new and energetic leadership is a guarantee of 
Estonia's future," the general said. 
  President Meri addressed a meeting and concert in the 
"Estonia" Concert Hall at 1700. He warned against the possible 
return of the Soviet mentality, caused by the economic and 
political difficulties, and, especially, by the weakness of law 
enforcement. The president dedicates a large part of the 
anniversary speech to this problem, reminding that he had 
pointed out the vital importance of this problem already a year 
ago. However, the task of guaranteeing public safety has become 
even more important during the year, he said. "Theatre shows 
start at five in the afternoon, since the audience fears to move 
in the streets in the dark. The people fear to walk in parks 
even in daylight. The people fear village roads. The people 
fear a knock on the door. The Estonians do not feel to be the 
masters of their state," President Meri said, warning that this 
may have a number of serious consequences. The foreign 
investors may be discouraged by the growing lawlessness, the 
reputation of Estonia as a reliable partner suffers 
internationally, he stressed. The president saw a third threat 
in the desire for anti-democratic measures, provoked by the 
impotence of the law enforcement agencies. He referred to a 
recent call to use "state terror against criminal gangs" by a 
nationalist meeting as shameful. However, the primary aim of the 
state leadership and the nation in 1994 must be to guarantee law 
and order, President Meri stressed. 
  The president echoed some critics of the government who had 
claimed that Estonia needs a strong police force and border 
guard rather than powerful defence forces. "Despite everything, 
we have preferred the rapid building of the army to efficient 
control of the border. Now we are experiencing its painful 
backlash, since the disappearing sense of security and the 
growing organised crime are a direct result of this 
miscalculation," he said. The president mentioned the delayed 
negotiations with Russia, but expressed his conviction that 
Russia will withdraw its troops by August 31. He pointed out 
that Russian President Boris Yeltsin had recognised Estonia's 
75-year historic continuity in his message of congratulation. 
  The president dedicated the last part of his speech to the 
pensioners who have borne the brunt of the economic 
reorganisation. He mentioned a 94-year-old woman who had knit 
socks for the Defence Forces soldiers and hoped that the present 
generation could be said to have done as much in 94 years time. 
  The celebrations ended with a presidential reception in the 
"Sakala" Centre at 19.00 and a firework at 20.00 

