BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on "special interview" by Tseng Hui-yen (2582 1979 </F>
3601) in New York; date not given: "Mainland Dissident Lin 
Muchen Discloses Details of His Detention in Shanghai"] 
  [Text] New York, 24 Jun (LIEN HO PAO)--Lin Muchen, one of 
the mainland drafters of the "19 Articles of the 1994 Political 
Program for Political Democratization," had planned to fly from 
Shanghai to the United States to pursue further education on 6 
May, but was unexpectedly arrested by the authorities before 
boarding the plane and detained for nearly 50 days. On 24 June, 
the mainland authorities, giving no sign of his release 
beforehand as they did in Wang Juntao's case, sent him in a 
police car directly from the detention center to a plane bound 
for New York and hinted that he had better not return home. 
  Lin Muchen's Korean Airlines plane arrived in Kennedy 
Airport, New York at 1945 on 24 June. 
  In a special interview with this staff reporter, he 
disclosed 
for the first time the entire course of his arrest and detention 
which lasted nearly 50 days. He said: The most useful weapon 
used by mainland pro-democracy activists at the present time is 
that they can use the mainland's laws for protection and that 
all resistance remains within the scope allowed by the 
Constitution. They are becoming increasingly open, legalized, 
and organized and are an acute headache for the authorities. 
  Lin Muchen said: On 6 May, as I waited to pass customs at 
Shanghai Hongqiao International Airport, someone standing on the 
other side of the channel suddenly filmed me with a video 
camera. I did not pay much attention to him because I thought 
that he would use the video for reference only. Then, several 
persons unexpectedly came up to me and brought me into a small 
room. They then produced a summons and got me to sign it. The 
reason for summoning me was that "I was involved in a case." 
Later, they brought me to a public security sub-bureau, 
searched me, and carefully inspected the baggage I was about to 
bring to the United States, but they found nothing unusual. 
  That night, the public security personnel arranged to have 
him stay in Lufeng Inn, which is near Shanghai Railway Station, 
and produced a document which subjected him to "living under 
surveillance." The next day, they brought him to another inn, 
which had been rebuilt from an air-raid shelter and was run by 
the Zhabei Public Security Sub-bureau. A dozen or more public 
security personnel worked shifts 24 hours a day to keep watch on 
him, four persons per shift. They followed him even when he 
went to toilet or took a shower. Lin Muchen said he did not 
know whether they feared he would escape or commit suicide. 
  He said that during the period of detention, the 
surveillance 
personnel would repeatedly ask him the same old questions about 
such things as the "Preparatory Committee for the Human 
Association," which he and the other Shanghai pro-democracy 
activists Yang Zhou, Wang Fuchen, and Li Guotao were preparing 
to set up in the summer of 1993. He was very frank about this 
because they did not violate the current law. The authorities 
only made a vain attempt. 
  He said: There is a huge potential danger behind the 
mainland authorities' nature of knowingly violating the law and 
not observing the law. The little pain I suffered was nothing. 
I have always clearly expressed my attitude of "being willing 
to endure it to the end." I am determined not to make any 
requests to the authorities nor agree to any of their terms. I 
guess from their conversations that Yang Zhou, Wang Fuchen, and 
the others have also been arrested. I even involved myself in 
matters and finally angered the surveillance personnel so much 
that they said "I was too brotherly" and blamed me for being 
"too bad to be corrected." 
  After repeated requests by Lin Muchen's wife, Mao Jianfang, 
she and Lin were allowed to see each other under surveillance on 
1 June. The authorities repeatedly warned her not to disclose 
anything about Lin Muchen to the outside. 
  On the morning of 24 June, after giving no signs beforehand, 
the surveillance personnel suddenly ordered him to pack two 
pieces of baggage, which were detained with him earlier, and 
told him that his wife had brought him a bag of clothes. When 
Lin Muchen heard this, he knew he was about to be released. 
Later, the surveillance personnel brought him out of the inn 
where he had stayed under surveillance for nearly 50 days. He 
hurriedly said goodbye to his wife, who had arranged to wait in 
the office of the public security bureau, and she was so sad 
that she had a good cry. 
  Later, Lin Muchen was escorted to a police car prepared by 
the authorities. The car ran smoothly all the way to the 
airport. Under "special care," he boarded a plane bound for the 
United States that same day. 
  Lin Muchen said that the public security personnel had 
repeatedly asked him whether he would return home in the future. 
He said affirmatively that he surely would not settle in the 
United States. However, they hinted that he had better not 
return home. He solemnly declared that he had both the right 
and obligation to return and that he would not easily give up 
under any circumstances. 

