Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] His Majesty King Husayn yesterday met with William 
Perry, the U.S. secretary of defense designate, at the U.S. 
Pentagon. His majesty was accorded an official reception and a 
21-gun salute upon arrival at the Pentagon. A band played the 
Jordanian and U.S. national anthems. 
  His Majesty King Husayn held a closed meeting with Mr. 
Perry, 
followed by an expanded meeting attended by officials from both 
sides. 
  At the outset of the meeting, his majesty congratulated 
William Perry on his designation as secretary of defense. His 
majesty underlined the depth of Jordanian-U.S. relations in 
general and the depth of relations between the Armed Forces of 
the two friendly countries in particular. He noted the need to 
support and develop the Jordanian Armed Forces to enable them to 
assume their significant role of protecting security and 
stability in the region and preserving the democratic march in 
Jordan. 
  His majesty reviewed with the U.S. secretary designate the 
positive developments in the peace process, stressing the need 
to achieve the just, comprehensive, and lasting peace in the 
Middle East region, which was for decades victim to conflict and 
tension. 
  His majesty voiced satisfaction with the progress of talks 
in 
the joint Jordanian-U.S. military committee and urged the U.S. 
side to show more understanding of the needs of the Jordanian 
Armed Forces and the need to develop them in order to enable 
them to bear their responsibilities in protecting security and 
stability in the region. 
  For his part, the U.S. secretary of defense designate 
stressed that his country understands and appreciates Jordan's 
prominent and important role in protecting security and 
stability in the region and contribution toward peace in the 
Middle East. He also voiced appreciation of the role played by 
the Jordanian Armed Forces in this regard and his country's 
interest in supporting and developing these forces to enable 
them to continue to shoulder their responsibilities. He 
stressed that the U.S. team on the joint U.S.-Jordanian military 
committee will work hand in hand with the Jordanian team to 
specify the means of backing and developing the Jordanian Armed 
Forces. 
  The meeting was attended for Jordan by Dr. 'Abd-al-Salam 
al-Majali, the prime minister; al-Sharif Zayd Bin-Shakir, chief 
of the Royal Hashemite Court; Marwan al-Qasim, his majesty the 
king's political adviser; Dr. Fayiz al-Tarawinah, Jordan's 
ambassador in Washington; and General 'Abd-al-Hafiz Mar'i 
al-Ka'abinah, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 
  The meeting was attended on the U.S. side by General 
Shalikashvili, chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff; Frank 
Wisner, deputy secretary of defense for political affairs; and a 
number of U.S. Defense Department officials. 

