BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Days With NATO..." -- punctuation as published] </F>
  [Excerpts] Ministers, diplomats, and military officials, 
who are able to decide on peace or war, met in Istanbul 
yesterday. The foreign ministers of 16 NATO countries met in 
Ciragan Palace and held bilateral talks. Meanwhile, the 
ministers of 20 countries that signed the "NATO Program on 
Partnership for Peace" were transported from Ataturk Airport to 
the Ciragan Palace. 
  Foreign Minister Hikmet Cetin was rather tense when he met 
his Greek counterpart, Karolos Papoulias. The Turkish and Greek 
foreign ministers agreed in principle the last time they met 
that "the sides should refrain from making provocative 
statements to the press and try to create a favorable atmosphere 
to inspire confidence." 
  The continuing clamor in the Greek press and the aggressive 
statements made by the Greek politicians placed the Greek 
foreign minister in a difficult position until recently. 
However, it was Foreign Minister Hikmet Cetin's turn to find 
himself in a difficult position this time. One of the Turkish 
newspapers quoted Prime Minister Tansu Ciller on its first page 
a few days ago as saying: "I will order troops to land on the 
Aegean islands within 24 hours of an initiative by Greece to 
extend its territorial waters in the Aegean Sea to 12 miles." 
  That was not a new development. Ankara's stand on that 
matter was established many years before Tansu Ciller was 
elected to serve as Turkey's prime minister. Greece was well 
aware of Turkey's approach. However, had Ciller made another 
mistake without any reason, particularly when preparations were 
being made for the NATO summit in Istanbul and the meeting of 
the Turkish and Greek foreign ministers? No, Ciller made that 
statement some time ago on the condition that it should not be 
published. [passage omitted] 
  Of course, the Greek foreign minister was informed of 
Ciller's warning. Consequently, that state of affairs had a 
bearing on his talks with his Turkish counterpart. 
  Greece has 3,049 large and small islands in the Aegean Sea. 
The military status of those islands has been established by 
international agreements. The most important among them is the 
Lausanne Agreement and that which was signed after World War II 
for the "demilitarization of the Dodecanese Islands." A move by 
Greece to extend its territorial waters to 12 miles will convert 
the Aegean Sea into a "Greek lake." Turkey disclosed in 1974 
that any attempt by Greece to extend its territorial waters 
would be regarded as a cause for war. Nevertheless, considering 
the Caracas Accord on the International Marine Law in 1982, the 
Greek officials have continued to reiterate their wish to extend 
their territorial waters. Greece, which has discovered oil 
close to Thasos in the northern part of the Aegean Sea, brings 
up the matter every summer and creates tension by arguing that 
it has the right to extend its territorial waters. In fact, 
Foreign Minister Karolos Papoulias informed Turkish and Greek 
correspondents yesterday that he had nothing to add to what 
Greece has said on the matter in the past. 
  However, a move by the Turkish newspapers and Turkish 
Government officials to act in a more responsible way would be 
very useful. Several high-ranking officials make statements to 
the correspondents on matters about which they have little or no 
information at all. That state of affairs has created unexpected 
problems in Turkey's foreign policy. Their statements are taken 
seriously by Russia, Greece, and other countries from time to 
time. However, our newspapers are only concerned with the 
number of papers they sell. So, they exaggerate developments and 
disclose statements that should not be made public. 
  The following proverb is in order at this point: "The 
suffering of the nightingale is due to its tongue." 

