BFN 

  [Text] An extended sitting of the collegium of Ukraine's 
Internal Affairs Ministry took place on 22 May, at which the 
situation in Crimea was examined. A statement to Crimea's 
Supreme Council, president, and internal affairs personnel, as 
well as an appeal to Ukraine's internal affairs personnel, were 
adopted. Militia Colonel Ivan Lepchenko, head of the main public 
relations center of Ukraine's Internal Affairs Ministry, is in 
our studio: 
  [Lepchenko] I am authorized to make public the statement by 
Ukraine's Internal Affairs Ministry, the heads of the main 
internal affairs directorates in Kiev and Kiev Oblast, the 
internal affairs directorates of oblasts and the town of 
Sevastopol, and internal affairs directorates in transport, to 
the Republic of Crimea's Supreme Council, president, and 
internal affairs bodies. 
  Recently, says the statement, an extremely unhealthy 
situation has emerged around the Crimean internal affairs 
bodies. The situation is continuing to deteriorate because of 
the unlawful actions by Crimea's bodies of authority. 
  Crimean President Meshkov, exceeding his authorities, is 
vigorously interfering in the activity of internal affairs 
bodies, violating the law of Ukraine on the militia. Back in 
February of this year the president, without the knowledge of 
Ukraine's Internal Affairs Ministry, subordinated to himself a 
quarter of the employees of the special militia speedy reaction 
subunit, Berkut, which, instead of engaging in the campaign 
against dangerous crimes, were allocated for his as well as his 
family's personal protection, although a special protection 
service exists for this. 
  On 11 April Meshkov, accompanied by armed bodyguards, 
together with retired General Kuznetsov, former commander of a 
motor rifle corps, gained possession of the official office of 
Major General Plyuta, Crimea's internal affairs minister, and 
produced a handwritten decree removing him from his post and 
declaring Kuznetsov the acting minister. 
  These decisions, taken individually and without the consent 
of the Ukrainian Internal Affairs Ministry, violate the norms of 
the Ukrainian Constitution and the law on delimitation of powers 
between state power bodies of Ukraine and the Crimea, as well as 
the Ukrainian legal acts regulating military service in 
Ukrainian interior bodies. 
  The above actions by Meshkov are in fact meant to take the 
Crimean interior bodies out of the unified system of Ukraine's 
interior bodies laid down in the Ukrainian legislation. The 
collegium and the Ukrainian internal affairs minister himself 
have addressed President Meshkov more than once with a proposal 
to revoke the illegal decrees and directives and resolve issues 
concerning militia activities jointly with the Ukrainian 
Internal Affairs Ministry on the basis of Ukrainian laws. At 
different times, the Ukrainian internal affairs minister and 
three of his deputies went to Crimea for a special meeting with 
the Crimean president, but they were not received by Meshkov, 
and all of the Ukrainian internal Affairs Ministry's proposals 
were ignored. 
  In this connection, the collegium of Ukraine's Internal 
Affairs Ministry sent similar written proposals to the newly 
elected Crimean Supreme Council on 6 May, but there was no 
reply. Today, we can observe destabilization of law and order 
in Crimea. The number of serious crimes is rising, including 
murders, robberies, burglaries, and thefts, especially in the 
streets. Often, these involve the use of firearms, including 
machine guns, by organized crime gangs who are frequently 
engaged in bloody settling of scores. 
  Notwithstanding this, Kuznetsov's actions in ensuring 
citizens' safety are unprofessional and are inappropriate to the 
crime situation in the Crimea. With the aim of not allowing the 
collapse of the unified system of Ukraine's internal affairs 
bodies, increasing the campaign against crime, and protecting 
the interests of citizens in the Crimea from criminal 
infringements, the Ukrainian president issued a decree on 18 May 
on reorganizing Crimea's internal affairs ministry into the main 
internal affairs directorate in the Crimea and subordinating it 
directly to Ukraine's internal affairs minister. 
  Ukraine's Cabinet of Ministers, in implementing this decree, 
introduced the post of deputy internal affairs minister of 
Ukraine and head of Crimea's main internal affairs directorate, 
to which Militia Colonel Chernyshov was appointed. He is a 
Russian born in the Crimea who has worked in the internal 
affairs bodies for over 20 years -- 12 of those in the Crimea -- 
in operational posts and as head of the Belogorskiy internal 
affairs department. 
  Unfortunately the Crimean Supreme Council and president 
disregarded the Ukrainian president's decree, appointing that 
same retired Army General Kuznetsov to the abolished post of 
Crimean internal affairs minister. Thus a dangerous precedent 
of disregarding the laws of the Ukrainian state has been 
created, which is negatively affecting the activity of internal 
affairs bodies in the Crimea, and above all the state of law and 
order. The operational subunits, instead of preventing and 
detecting crimes, have begun to join in implementing functions 
not intrinsically theirs -- the protection of television and 
radio broadcasting facilities, which will be seized supposedly 
on an instruction from Kiev. 
  Things have reached a point where Kuznetsov, to draw 
publicity to his person, deliberately encourages media 
speculation of alleged attempts by a thousand-strong detachment 
from Ukraine's Internal Affairs Ministry to seize the premises 
of the reorganized Crimean Internal Affairs Ministry. 
Meanwhile, only five senior and five rank-and-file employees of 
the Ukrainian Internal Affairs Ministry are there now with the 
sole task of providing practical assistance. Despite the 
complete absence of any grounds, which was later acknowledged by 
Kuznetsov himself, the Crimean militia were put on alert and 
given machine guns. Also surprising was the fact that Kuznetsov 
ordered to bar from the premises of the interior bodies 
representatives of the higher office, the Ukrainian Internal 
Affairs Ministry. 
  An explosive situation is being provoked and mounted. 
Suspicion and mistrust for the Ukrainian authorities is being 
planted. The collegium of the Ukrainian Internal Affairs 
Ministry places all responsibility for the developments in 
Crimea and possible unforeseen consequences on Kuznetsov and the 
forces that created conditions for this. As for the actions 
taken by Ukraine's Internal Affairs Ministry, those were 
prompted by concern for our ability to ensure reliable 
protection of the legitimate interests of citizens and the state 
from illegal infringement, and strengthen law and order in the 
Crimea. They by no means were and never will be aimed at 
restriction of the legitimate power and authority of the Crimean 
Supreme Council and president. 
  Ukraine's Internal Affairs Ministry constantly is and will 
be 
providing necessary assistance to Crimean interior bodies within 
the limits of Ukrainian legislation and taking account of the 
norms of Crimean laws that do not contradict the said 
legislation. 
  We understand the difficult situation in which the Crimean 
militia personnel is lately forced to work. We are grateful to 
them for their endurance, staunchness, and ability to preserve 
calm and prevent themselves from being drawn into dangerous 
political games. We hope they will maintain a similarly balanced 
position in the future and preserve the unity of our ranks in 
the name of our main task, our battle against crime. 
  We are following the road of building a law-governed state, 
which is not an easy one. Our joint efforts allowed us to 
preserve civil peace in complex situations, prevent 
confrontation, and, moreover, bloodshed. And that is our 
unchanging stance. 
  Appealing to the Crimean Supreme Council and president, we 
are counting on them to exercise foresight, wisdom, and 
consideration in their decisions concerning issues that relate 
to the functioning of such an important armed formation as 
interior bodies. We are expressing confidence that your earlier 
decisions will be revised. This would contribute to mutual 
respect and cooperation, as well as preservation of established 
good traditions. 
  This statement was adopted at a meeting of the collegium of 
Ukraine's Internal Affairs Ministry, the heads of the main 
internal affairs directorates in Kiev and Kiev Oblast, the 
internal affairs directorates in oblasts and the town of 
Sevastopol, and internal affairs directorates in transport on 22 
May 1994. 

