BFN 

<F P=106> [Text of "resolution by the Sixth Plenary Session of the </F>
Second National Council of the Party of the Democratic 
Revolution," issued on 17 April 1994; place not given] 
  [Text] The National Council of the Party of the Democratic 
Revolution, [PRD] taking into consideration the grave situation 
the country is enduring and the need for coherent proposals 
capable of unifying the party and contributing to a peaceful 
transition toward democracy in the country and taking into 
consideration that in spite of the efforts made by the 
negotiating commission and our congressmen, there has not been 
enough progress to guarantee that there will be a clean, 
authentic, and reliable electoral process in August 1994, has 
decided to summon the government, the political forces, and 
society to a serious dialogue to find ways of responsibly facing 
the current crisis and to offer citizens guarantees so they can 
freely elect the government that best suits their aspirations 
and interests, 
  PAN believes the country wants to see clear evidence that 
the 
government has the political will to guarantee a democratic 
transition and to endorse with deeds the commitments acquired 
through the Agreement for Peace, Democracy, and Justice. 
  It resolves: 
  1. To demand that the assassination of Luis Donaldo Colosio 
be cleared up as well as the creation of a special commission 
composed of independent attorneys of acknowledged honorability. 
The commission must be given all the necessary support and 
facilities to carry out its activities. Only this will give the 
investigations credibility. 
  2. To demand a continuation of the peace dialogue in 
Chiapas, a stop to the hostile climate against the Zapatist 
National Liberation Army [EZLN], and satisfying the demands from 
the EZLN and from the State Council of Indian and Peasant 
Organizations. 
  The government has the obligation of guaranteeing a halt to 
the provocations and aggressions against the Indian-peasant 
movement that are blocking the dialogue. 
  3. The immediate opening of the media, especially the XEW 
Television Network, under impartial and equitable conditions for 
all candidates and parties so the citizens may have truthful 
information and facts to draw electoral preference opinions. 
  4. To resolutely back the social and economic aspirations 
and demands that the various sectors of the population have 
presented in view of the ruin generated by the neo-liberal and 
excluding policies of this administration. 
  5. To promote the formation of the alternate social bloc 
and the recomposition of forces initiated by the National 
Democratic Alliance to forward, with citizen mobilizations and 
votes, the transition to democracy. 
  6. To review our elections campaign strategy to prepare a 
national plan with candidates to Senate and Chamber of Deputies 
seats; to harmonize and improve the propaganda effort as well as 
the organization of electoral structures to provide a convincing 
and distinctive message to the most important social sectors, to 
satisfy their demands through a viable government. 
  7. To enhance the unity of the people and to responsibly 
maintain links with society and the productive forces to 
strengthen the image that we represent the alternative that will 
make changes to make stability, peace, and development in the 
country possible. 
  8. To back the current process of political negotiations 
in the framework established by the National Council and to 
uphold the political initiative aimed at full compliance with 
the 27 January Agreement for Democracy, Justice, and Peace. 
  9. To establish the minimum legislative changes the party 
believes must take place so that the electoral organizations may 
enjoy full autonomy and independence and may engage in 
procedures and actions that will effectively permit free, 
authentic, and reliable elections. 
  It will be necessary: 
  a. To continue and to promptly conclude the review process, 
with the approval of political forces, electoral officials at 
all levels, including the members of the electoral tribunals as 
well as the people responsible for the Federal Electoral 
Registry, and to make the necessary replacements to insure the 
full independence of the government's Professional Electoral 
Service. 
  b. To satisfy the demand that credibility on the voting 
lists be enhanced by means of efficient correction-making 
procedures and the delivery to the parties of a definite list of 
names 60 days before election day. Among other measures, lists 
must also be exhibited at electoral districts and not just in 
the municipalities, to facilitate citizen inspections. 
  The National Council calls on the citizens to continue 
verifying the voting lists after 30 April to compare them with 
the Federal Electoral Registry. 
  To establish the obligation the electoral authorities have 
to 
deliver voting credentials to the citizens and to make 
corrections through the citizen committees for electoral 
guarantees that resulted from the first selection made, by 
census, of voting table directors. 
  c. To insure equitable access by the candidates to the 
media, by extending the free time periods, reducing party 
publicity, and establishing verification mechanisms to evaluate 
the impartiality norms of newscasts. 
  To condition radio and television concessions to the 
impartiality and equity demonstrated by these media while 
covering election campaigns, as well as to the respect shown for 
constitutional guarantees and freedom of expression. 
  d. To efficiently put limits on and supervise campaign 
expenditures and to prevent any undue utilization of government 
resources and programs in favor of the governing party and its 
candidates. 
  To adjust deputy and senator campaigns to the limits set for 
the presidential campaign and to limit private financing to 
contributions of no more than 9,000 new pesos per person. 
  To treat contributions above this amount as bribe crimes. 
  e. To satisfy the demands for respect for the fundamental 
rights of parties and citizens such as the right to have common 
candidates [candidaturas comunes], the immediate election of 
Federal District government officials, and the voting by 
Mexicans abroad. 
  f. The functioning of the Special Prosecutor's Office for 
Electoral Crimes [Fiscalia Especial para Delitos Electorales], 
which must be backed by a supervisory committee composed of 
representatives from the political parties as well as by 
independent citizens and national observers; and foreign 
visitors who satisfy regulations must be invited with the 
support of multilateral international organizations. 
  g. The suspension of all events that may establish links 
between the work of public offices and officials and the 
political decisions, campaigns, and propaganda of the governing 
party. A formal declaration by the president regarding his 
determination to submit to the mandate of the people and to 
peacefully transfer power to whatever candidate is freely 
elected by them. 
  10. If these demands are not met, the next plenary 
session of the National Council will decide what action the 
party will take. Meanwhile, the National Executive Committee 
will continue coordinating actions to promote these resolutions 
and, together with a group of congressmen, will decide on the 
position to be adopted with regard to the various legislative 
reforms proposals, especially those that deal with the Federal 
Code of Electoral Institutions and Processes. 
  11. The National Council has decided that the Executive 
Committee confer with the presidential candidate to form a 
plural and representative commission responsible for the 
negotiations. 
  Democracy now. A fatherland for everybody! 
  Resolution of the Sixth Plenary Session of the PRD Second 
National Council. 
  [Issued] 17 April 1994 

