BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Salamah Ni'mat: "Amman: Reactivation of </F>
Negotiations with Israel Was a Result of the Loss of Hope for 
Real Coordination"] 
  [Text] Amman -- An authoritative Jordanian political 
source said yesterday that Jordan's decision to reactivate its 
negotiations with Israel 32 months after the start of the peace 
process came after a comprehensive reassessment of its strategy 
on the negotiations and the loss of hope for any real 
coordination among the Arab parties concerned. 
  The Jordanian leading figure said that the campaign of doubt 
and criticism launched "by the Syrian and Lebanese media" 
against Jordan "are based on unjustified fears because Jordan is 
committed to the principle of a comprehensive solution on all 
fronts." He pointed out that the PLO's failure to coordinate 
with Jordan and the loss of hope for any such coordination two 
years after the start of the negotiations "makes it Jordan's 
duty to act to protect its strategic interests threatened by the 
repercussions of the Palestinian-Israeli agreement." He also 
said that "the problem of Damascus and Beirut" is that they view 
the progress on the Jordanian-Israeli track "as if it was 
something directed against them without any regard for Jordan's 
internal calculations or Jordanian interests linked to the 
future of the occupied Palestinian territory." 
  He added that it is "unreasonable for Damascus and Beirut to 
view the Jordanian moves from the angle of their own strategic 
interests in isolation from Jordanian interests ,which require 
containment of the likely results of the implementation of the 
agreement on Palestinian autonomy." He stressed that "Syria and 
Lebanon have no right to dictate instructions to us after we 
committed ourselves to a comprehensive solution and called for 
coordination a hundred times in vain." He wondered: "Are we 
supposed not to negotiate while they do? Are we supposed to 
give them trusteeship and let them negotiate our future on our 
behalf?" 
  In reference to Jordanian King Husayn's statements in 
Washington yesterday, the authoritative political source, who is 
close to the royal court, said that Jordan "is a sovereign state 
which only acts in accordance with its own interests and 
convictions, which are not in conflict with the other Arab 
parties," and that all that has happened so far on the 
Jordanian-Israeli track "is agreement to negotiate, not a peace 
treaty as claimed by some press reports. We started in Madrid 
together and we will only sign a peace treaty together." 
  On the fears that progress on the Jordanian negotiation 
track 
might isolate Syria and add to the pressures being brought to 
bear on it in Lebanon, the Jordanian leading figure said that 
his country was still suffering from Arab isolation since the 
Gulf war, and all the Arab parties are responsible for that 
continuous isolation, these doubt campaigns which only push the 
parties further apart, and steps such as the cancelation of the 
meetings of the Jordanian-Syrian Higher Committee.... Who is 
responsible for this distancing? Do they want Jordan to be 
weak, marginalized, isolated, or used by them as a negotiating 
card whenever they want to serve their interests without 
considering our interests?" He reaffirmed the need for 
"building balanced Arab relations based on mutural respect, 
mutual interests, and noninterference in internal affairs and 
matters of sovereignty." 
  He emphasized that Amman "will never give in to regional or 
international pressures, just as it did not give in to the Camp 
David or the Gulf crisis pressures." He recalled the 1973 
Geneva conference "which we attended and Syria boycotted and 
which in the end resulted in a disengagement agreement on the 
Egyptian-Israeli front and paved the way for the Camp David 
agreement and for disengagement on the Syrian-Israeli front, and 
we were left without any agreement because we insisted on the 
implementation of resolution 242." 

