CSO 

  [Text] Ryoichi Emura of the Osaka Economic Department 
reports, "Kyoei Steel (Maikata city, Osaka; Koichi Takashima, 
president), a Sumitomo Metal Industries-affiliated electric 
furnace operator, is engaged in an aggressive expansion 
strategy. Overseas, it purchased Florida Steel in the United 
States for about 44 billion yen in the year before last and has 
launched a joint venture with the Vietnam Steel Public 
Corporation. In Japan, it has purchased the H-shaped steel beam 
plant of Sumitomo-Kajima Steel Works and has contracted to 
handle the restructuring of the financially ailing Taiyo Steel 
Works (currently undergoing corporate reorganization 
proceedings) and Yasaku Steel Works. All of these firms will be 
used as stepping stones to expand Kyoei Steel's overseas 
operations." 
  Among electric furnace operators where the news is not very 
cheerful in recent days, the talk seems to focus on the vitality 
of Kyoei Steel to the effect that "Kyoei Steel has made another 
aggressive move." First, in early December last year, Vice 
President Shigemitsu Takashima assumed the position of 
administrator of the bankrupt Taiyo Steel Works with liabilities 
of 90 billion yen. In mid-February of this year it purchased the 
16.65 million share third-party placement of stock priced at 
2,497.5 million yen and absorbed raw steel materials maker 
Yasaku Steel as a subsidiary. 
  Then, one month later in the latter part of March, it agreed 
to buy the electric furnace plant of Soba Steel Company and 
succeeded in entering the Kanto market which it had targeted for 
some time. President Takeharu Nakamura of Nakayama Steel Works 
which is also a Kansai steel maker expresses surprise, as he 
says, "I wonder how they can afford to invest so much during 
this period." Kyoei Steel's expansion activities are such that 
even President Yasuo Niimiya of parent company Sumitomo Metal 
Works wryly smiles as he says, "It seems like he may be 
overdoing it." 
  Vice President Shigemitsu Takashima merely stresses "return 
of a favor" in connection with the assistance extended to Taiyo 
Steel Works as he says, "We merely wanted to repay Daiwa Bank 
for the favor that they extended to us many years ago." By 
"favor," they are referring to the fact that the bank extended 
an emergency loan to Kyoei Steel during the recession that 
followed immediately after the oil shock in the 1970's. However, 
a common viewpoint assumed by sources in the industry is that "a 
shrewd Kyoei Steel would not extend assistance to Taiyo Steel 
Works simply for a reason of that nature." 
  Initially, Daiwa Bank, which served as the principal banker 
for Taiyo Steel Works, made a list of machinery makers dealing 
with the bank in search of an administrator. However, all of the 
candidate administrator firms rejected the appointment, saying, 
"We might assume the administratorship if we were talking only 
about the parent company of Taiyo Steel Works, but assumption of 
such duties for all seven subsidiaries of the group would be 
difficult." And, just before the time limit for appointment of 
the administrator, Kyoei Steel which hardly had any direct 
dealings with Taiyo Steel Works was chosen to provide an 
administrator. The degree to which recognition of Kyoei Steel 
among Daiwa Bank officials rose can be seen in the words 
expressed by bank officials when Kyoei Steel was appointed to 
supply an administrator in the words, "Kyoei Steel is gaining a 
lot by just repaying an old debt to Daiwa Bank." Even for Yasaku 
Steel Works, arrangements had been made for loans to be issued 
by Yasaku Steel Works' main bank, The Industrial Bank of Japan. 
  Future operating plans which have been announced thus far to 
include the reorganization of Florida Steel and the joint 
venture in Vietnam, which is targeted for initial operations in 
the beginning of 1996, indicate that each project will require 
funding in the amount of several billion yen. Kyoei Steel, which 
expanded its relationships with financial institutions through 
the reorganization of Taiyo Steel Works and Yasaku Steel Works, 
has little to be concerned about in terms of procuring adequate 
capital. 
  Kyoei Steel is conducting itself as if it were the 
"assistance specialist" for its parent firm. In June 1994, Kyoei 
Steel Manufacturing Company (Wakayama city; president, 
Shigemitsu Takashima), a subsidiary of Kyoei Steel, will 
purchase Sumitomo Metal-Kajima Steel Work's large H-shaped steel 
beam plant located in Kajima machi, Ibaragi prefecture. The 
purchase price will be between 17 billion and 18 billion yen. 
  When Sumitomo Metal Industries transfers the sales function 
of H-shaped steel beams to Kyoei Steel Manufacturing Company, 
costs will be reduced by about 3,000 yen per ton and a system 
will be established that will make the H-shaped steel beams 
competitive with those produced by other domestic electric 
furnace operators such as Tokyo Steel Manufacturing Company and 
imported from overseas sources. 
  Kyoei Steel's domestic and foreign expansion strategy is 
backed up by President Takashima's skillful management 
capabilities and abundant overseas' experience which he uses to 
influence financial institutions and the parent company. 
Accordingly, he does not give the impression of being reckless. 
  Twenty years ago, Kyoei Steel established Auburn Steel as a 
joint venture with Ataku Industries in Auburn, New York. The 
joint venture served as a forerunner for the establishment of 
U.S. operations by Japanese businesses, but the bankruptcy of 
Ataku Industries caused Kyoei's share of the firm to drop from 
40 percent to 10 percent. President Takashima says, "Since 
expanding to the United States was a dream from my younger 
years, I wanted to make a second attempt at opening a plant in 
the United States." 
  The purchase of Florida Steel was strongly opposed not only 
within Kyoei Steel, but by Sumitomo Metal Industries, the parent 
company. The reason was that the purchase of Florida Steel 
represented a major purchase; its sales were equivalent to 50 
percent of those of Kyoei Steel. However, in the final analysis, 
a decision was made at the highest echelons of the parent firm 
to go through with the purchase. 
  Although President Takashima has a strong preference for 
expansionary policies, his outlook for the domestic market is 
gloomy. He is pessimistic to the point of saying, "It is only a 
matter of time before domestic production of steel crude drops 
below an annual rate of 90 million tons. I believe they will 
drop close to a level of 80 million tons a year." The reason for 
deciding to proceed with investments in Vietnam, which most 
Japanese corporations avoid because of concern for inadequate 
infrastructure, as the first among Japanese steel makers is 
based on the judgment that "We have no choice but to seek a 
means of survival overseas in order to look forward to future 
growth." 
  President Takashima, who considers the joint venture in 
Vietnam as the "president's last major project of a lifetime," 
is 71 years old. A strong replacement candidate is his eldest 
son Vice President Shuichiro Takashima, but he is only 36 and 
has only limited experience. Even if overseas production begins 
to run smoothly, there is the remaining major issue of how to 
establish a firm footing in the fiercely competitive Kanto 
market in Japan. 
  Kyoei Steel has persisted in maintaining a family-run 
business, saying "Steel is the family's business." The company 
will be faced with the urgent need within the next several years 
to find someone to take over from President Takashima who has 
exercised considerable managerial skills. 

