BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] Croatian President Franjo Tudjman 
received a delegation from the town of Daruvar led by Mayor Ivan 
Cegledi. The delegation informed the president about the crime 
committed by the chetniks in which five people from Vukovje were 
killed, including four Croatian refugees from Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The mayor of Daruvar spoke about the difficult economic, 
social, and security situation. He particularly stressed that 15 
people had been killed in the Daruvar municipality since the 
arrival of UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces]. Despite this, the 
local authorities, in cooperation with UNPROFOR, have created 
conditions for the return of some 500 people of Serb 
nationality, as a sign of good will in the search for a 
political resolution of the crisis and a peaceful reintegration 
of the Croatian areas under the UNPROFOR protection into the 
constitutional system of the Republic of Croatia. 
  The delegation delivered a petition from citizens of 
Vukovje, 
demanding adequate protection against possible new crimes and 
the immediate departure of UNPROFOR from the area. 
  President Tudjman expressed his condolences over the tragic 
deaths and stressed that relevant state organs would, in 
cooperation with UNPROFOR, do their utmost to find the 
perpetrators of the crime and provide full protection and 
security to the local population. The president stressed at the 
same time that this was yet more evidence for the international 
community of an undoubtfully difficult situation in Croatian 
areas under UNPROFOR protection and of UNPROFOR's inefficiency. 
He stressed the international community had to realize what 
crimes by the Serb terrorists and occupiers we had to face and 
the Republic of Croatia could not indefinitely tolerate this 
situation. The president warned if UNPROFOR's inefficiency 
remained unchanged the world would have to acknowledge the right 
of the Croatian state to -- after the expiry of the UNPROFOR 
mandate -- liberate and reintegrate all its areas using all 
means available to an internationally recognized state. 

