Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on an interview with Albert Chernyshev, Russian </F>
ambassador to Turkey, with Sirma Evcan in Ankara on 14 March] 
  [Text] "We need to trust each other. Suspicion is easy but 
it won't help either Russia or Turkey, both of which share 
common interests and a common house," Albert Chernyshev, 
Russia's ambassador to Turkey, said before his final departure 
for Moscow. 
  Chernyshev left Ankara at a time when certain problems were 
being openly voiced between Turkey and the Russian Federation. 
Turkey was suspicious that Russia was uneasy thinking Turkey 
may be encouraging the independence seeking of the different 
nationalities (which are of Turkic origins) within Russian 
borders. 
  Before leaving Turkey, which he said is a second home for 
him, Chernyshev discussed with the TURKISH DAILY NEWS the 
conflicts he believed were mostly the invention of those who 
know little about the 500-year-old relations between Turks and 
Russians. He said the fear of Russian expansionism is as 
unfounded as fear on the part of the Russians about Turkish 
expansionism. Starting with the recent Kurdish conference in 
Moscow and natural gas cut to Turkey, Chernyshev gave 
comprehensive responses to our questions on Russia's influence 
on the Caucasus and the Balkans, its views concerning the 
Turkish Straits, as well as the unwillingness of his country to 
reduce conventional arms in its border close to Turkey's Eastern 
border. Appointed to Ankara as ambassador of the Soviet Union, 
Chernyshev stayed in Turkey as ambassador of the Russian 
Federation after the dismantling of the USSR. He said he won't 
recommend this to anybody. Now he will be holding an important 
office in Moscow as deputy foreign minister responsible for 
Turkey as well as a substantial number of countries like the 
Turkic republics, Iran, Pakistan and others including the 
Maldive Islands, all of which the Russian Foreign Ministry has 
placed in the Eurasian context. 
  Russian President Boris Yeltsin's expected visit to Ankara 
made Chernyshev postpone his departure. Yeltsin was expected to 
pay an official visit to Turkey sometime in the first quarter of 
1994, as he had promised Prime Minister Tansu Ciller during her 
visit to Moscow in September 1993. However, the Russian 
president could not materialize his visit during this period and 
Chernyshev had to go, saying that his president would most 
probably come sometime in April or May at the latest. He said 
the local election atmosphere in Turkey plus urgent issues in 
Moscow have delayed the visit but "there is no other reason or 
problem that caused the delay." In fact there is the Friendship 
and Cooperation Agreement waiting for signature when Yeltsin 
arrives, plus about 10 to 15 other agreements between Turkey and 
Russia. The new Russian ambassador to Turkey should be expected 
around the same time, Chernyshev said, adding there are 
presently two candidates being considered for this post. 
Chernyshev explained his two ambassadorial stages in Turkey as 
follows: "I have to mention that relations between Turkey and 
the Soviet Union were indeed very active before the dismantling. 
They were on a relatively high level. After the dismantling, 
our relations had to be renewed. 
  ``I want to underline that the approach from both sides was 
very rational. In other words by using the best of our previous 
experiences, we added new dimensions to these experiences in 
accordance with the current situations both in Russia and in 
Turkey. 
  ``We are still going through radical changes in Russia, 
passing to the market economy, and we have in this respect 
similarities with Turkey. We just celebrated last year the 
500th anniversary of relations between our two countries. 
  ``Our relations have very wide and rich experiences and 
traditions. We have experienced good and bad relations, but in 
general our relations have always entered a positive path. 
Today, we are working to bring our relations to a level of 
strong friendship and partnership.'' Chernyshev said both the 
Turkish Republic and the Russian Federation want the relations 
between the two countries, in volume and quality, to be like 
Turkey's relations with the United States of America. But, he 
said, when taken into consideration that Turkey and Russia live 
in the same area, then these relations should have be [as 
published] richer in content. 
  ``We have to work a lot still for this aim. The real formula 
for this is written in the declaration to be signed when Yeltsin 
comes to Turkey. I want to say that our countries should 
increase confidence in each other. I mean a higher level of 
confidence should not only remain in words. We should look in 
each other's eyes and trust each other,'' he said. 
<H5>  Kurdish Conference in Moscow </H5>
  But Turkey's worries increased when a Kurdish conference was 
held in Moscow last month and news came to Turkey that the 
Russian Ministry of Nationalities and Regional Political Affairs 
was among the sponsors of this conference where the Turkish 
Government's treatment of Kurds was condemned. Is Russia 
playing the Kurdish card against Turkey? 
  "We shouldn't play those cards. Let me speak about the 
Kurdish conference in Moscow. The Kurdish people are a reality. 
The Kurds live in several countries. In the Soviet Republic 
there were about one and a half million Kurds. Today, within 
the Russian borders there are about 500,000 Kurds. There are in 
fact about 100 different nations living within the Russian 
Federation. The Kurds in Russia wanted to discuss their history 
and culture at a conference, and the ministry responsible for 
this gave the permission because other ethnic nationalities also 
hold such conferences. And an official from this ministry 
attended the conference as a guest. But when it was understood 
that this conference was being exploited for other means--which 
the Turkish side knows very well--it was immediately clarified 
that the Government had nothing to do with this conference. We 
also stated that such a conference was not acceptable. In our 
official statement it was also mentioned that if similar 
conferences with the same aims were to be planned in the future, 
no permission will be given. There are always the separatists, 
the extremists who exploit such occasions. We explained to the 
Turkish Foreign Ministry and discussed all these in Moscow with 
Foreign Ministry Undersecretary Bilgin Unan. We understood each 
other and Mr. Unan was satisfied with the discussions in Moscow. 
But certainly Turkey should also be careful not to play similar 
cards. The Kurdish conference, however, had nothing to do with 
any retaliation to Turkey. This should be known. These are 
sensitive issues," he said. It is evident that Russia is also 
suspicious of Turkey's playing certain cards. The autonomous 
Turkic-Muslim Chechen Republic, for example, is causing a 
headache to Russia, but is there a terrorist organization of the 
Chechens outside that of the Chechen people? 
  Chernishev said theirs is a different kind of terrorism. 
"They want separation. They say they are independent, can this 
be acceptable? It should be well understood that we support 
territorial integrity of all the countries in the region because 
all these countries are multinational and with multi sects. 
Territorial integrity is a basic principle. This should be 
preserved very carefully. And parallel to this the rights of 
these minorities should also be accepted and preserved. 
Otherwise there will be outbursts. The Yugoslav situation is a 
very sad but a very good example for all of us. Political and 
territorial integrity is threatened by three factors, extreme 
nationalism, religious fundamentalism, and separatism. 
Sometimes there is no nationalism or religious fundamentalism 
but separatism is there. For example, in Bosnia this is the 
case." He said both in Turkey and in Russia there are 
politicians who provoke these issues without really knowing the 
situation. For example, why should the ultranationalist leader 
Zhirinovskiy's statements be taken into consideration? The USSR 
was suppressing nationalism, there were no conflicts like today. 
Today, there are extremists in Russia, but they should be 
assessed within their own limits. "We are in a really bad 
situation. Our people suffer, their living standard is getting 
very low. So someone like Zhirinovskiy comes and says he will 
solve all the problems. `Just trust me and your living 
conditions will improve when I come to office,' he says in 
simple terms, easy to understand and gets votes. But his powers 
shouldn't be overestimated. We are not scared that the Russian 
parliament will go for his views. Plus his party, the Liberal 
Democrat Party, is a leader's party and there are no strong 
politicians in this party." But when Zhirinovskiy gives 
guarantee to Europe saying Russia's eyes are turned to the south 
and not the west, this is enough cause to suspect Russia's 
motives in the region where Turkey is. Chernyshev said it is 
correct in the sense that Russia, being a part of Europe is at 
the same time an Eastern country. "We are also a part of Asia, 
as is the case with Turkey. For thousands of years we lived 
together with the Asian countries. We are used to each other, 
we understand each other and we feel each other and therefore we 
should continue to live together." He gave an example of this 
and said he has been witnessing at receptions in the Russian 
Embassy that towards the end of each reception the Turks and 
Russians are seen conversing together while the Westerners are 
among themselves. 
<H5>  A Regional Common Market </H5>
  He said: "This region is our common home. There are four 
international formations here. The Commonwealth of Independent 
States, The Black Sea Economic Cooperation, The Caspian Sea 
Economic Cooperation, which is for the time being a weak 
organization but one which has the prospect of developing, and 
the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO). When we look at 
the memberships of these cooperations, we see that the majority 
of the members are the same in all four of them. In other words 
as an example Kazakhstan, a member of the Independent States, 
cannot be a competitor with Kazakhstan as a member of the ECO. 
So all four organizations should be in coordination, while each 
will continue in their separate fields of activities. And in 
the long run the cooperation between these four organizations 
will eventually come under a bigger umbrella which will be a 
single common market, a Regional Common Market. This is 
inevitable and other countries outside the region may also join 
this since it will be open to Europe, to the United States and 
others. This will be the Russian concept vis-a-vis our southern 
flank, and I will be the person responsible for the Southern 
flank of the Russian Federation." 
  Chernyshev will be working for this in Moscow, and he said 
this idea is getting positive response from the countries in the 
region, Turkey included. 
  "We need time, financial possibilities and hard work to 
establish this. I have talked about this with Iranian Foreign 
Minister 'Ali Akbar Velayati in Istanbul, and he also agrees in 
principle to this formation. Certainly, we have to understand 
each other better. I also spoke with President Suleyman Demirel 
on this subject, and he feels that it is possible too. It is 
not my project actually, but this is my approach that is finding 
support. I want other countries in this region to study such a 
possibility." 
<H5>  Natural Gas </H5>
  Chernyshev explained that Russia could not get from Ukraine 
the $1 billion for the natural gas they sold this republic in 
the last one and a half years. So Russia had to force them to 
at least give certain guarantees. "And we planned to reduce the 
flow of natural gas to Ukraine by one-third. But there was no 
plan to make any reductions in Russia's natural gas export to 
other countries through Ukraine. However, we realized that 
Ukraine was drawing natural gas from the export line. We had 
not thought about this, and the countries at the end of the pipe 
line which were importing gas from Russia suffered because of 
this. On March 10 before waiting for the result of our talks 
with Ukraine, we started increasing the natural gas flow, and 
starting from March 13, the same amount of gas will flow to 
Turkey. Turkey shouldn't worry, and the gas that Turkey could 
not get within these days will be compensated too. In 1994, 
Turkey will get as much as it wants from Russia, approximately 
5.5 billion meter cubes [cubic meters]. In accordance with our 
agreement, and within the limits of what Turkey will be 
consuming, this amount will go up to 7-8 billion meter cubes. 
There will be an additional 2 billion meter cubes towards 1996, 
and there will be two more increases made, each 2 or 2.5 billion 
meter cubes until the end of this century, within the framework 
of our new agreement," Chernyshev said. 
  He wanted to underline that it is not a matter of goodwill 
only, because Russia earns money from natural gas and they need 
this money. "Therefore we are aware of our responsibilities, 
and we do not want to lose our image as a trustable partner in 
this connection. I think such developments will not be repeated 
in the future," he stated. 
<H5>  The Caucasus </H5>
  Chernyshev stated that Russia and Turkey, even in the very 
sensitive issues such as Nagorno-Karabakh and 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, have similar approaches. "Our aim is the 
same. There may be differences in the means to reach the aim. 
In some issues Turkey has a harder line and in others Russia 
has. This is very normal. For example, not all the European 
countries share the same view regarding the solution to the 
Bosnian situation. Therefore we should not see these 
differences as unsolvable. Foreign Ministry Undersecretary 
Bilgin Unan and Mr. Adamishin (the Russian deputy foreign 
minister) had consultations in Moscow on these issues too, and 
both of them were very much satisfied with their discussions. At 
the end of these talks both sides found out that the aim is the 
same. I talked with Unan after his return from Moscow and he 
was really satisfied. I also heard President Demirel saying 
that he is also satisfied. So I think what comes out in the 
press is the result of limited information," he said. 
  On the subject of CFE, the reduction of Conventional Forces 
in Europe (from the Atlantic Ocean to the Ural Mountains) which 
Russia is against when its Southern flank is concerned, 
Chernyshev said Russia has applied for revision of the CFE. He 
said: "Before the dismantling of the USSR, we had a military 
unit in the Caucasus for defense purposes; this is important. 
After the dismantling this military unit was removed from here. 
A little further up during the USSR period we had logistic 
units. We now have only the logistic units in the North 
Caucasus. We had to reorganize the new border we have there. 
This border is about 1,000 kilometers, and according to the CFE 
agreement,, only 250 tanks are allowed here. This will not 
respond to any military standard in Europe or elsewhere. 
Therefore we brought on the agenda that there should be 
additional technical units there. We want to increase these 
limits to the essential limit. We do not want to place 5,000 
tanks there because we are not planning to attack anybody. Only 
for defense purposes we need a reasonable amount." 
  Chernishev said the existence of a Commonwealth of 
Independent States should not be forgotten when people speak 
about Russian soldiers in the region too. "Some do not want to 
see this, but it is there and within this framework there is 
also a defense agreement. This should also be seen. For 
example, the countries around Tajikistan thought there should be 
joint military units to defend the borders because they are 
under threat. These units comprise the Russian, the Kazakhstan, 
the Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan units. 
  ``We have some units in Georgia and Armenia within the 
framework of the defense agreement. They are not big units. 
This is also normal, because look, in Turkey you have American 
bases and why should this be considered normal while in our case 
it is seen a threat. Why different standards to different 
countries?'' he asked. 
  He also explained that neither Georgia, nor Armenia and 
Azerbaijan have armies in the true sense even if the USSR 
armament was distributed among these countries when the union 
collapsed. So from the angle of security they feel they are not 
sufficiently equipped. They demanded Russian soldiers for a 
temporary period and they are paying for these soldiers. 
Chernyshev thinks there is nothing wrong with this since they 
are there for defense, just like the Turkish Third Army in the 
East has no aggressive aims but is only there for defense 
purposes. 
  Chernyshev said if the Azerbaijan authorities also want 
soldiers, then Russia will assess that too. But so far no such 
demand came from the Azeri side "but I think they wanted Russian 
soldiers at their borders with Iran but this issue has not been 
settled. We have talked about this with Azerbaijan." Russian 
soldiers are present on Armenia's border with Turkey and also on 
Georgia's border because these two countries asked for such a 
presence, the ambassador said. 
<H5>  Russia Has Influence Over Armenians and Serbs </H5>
  Russia has a certain influence over the Armenians, this is a 
fact. Chernyshev said: "However, this doesn't mean we have 
absolute power over them and we cannot dictate certain things to 
them. There is a misconception that Russia can make Armenia do 
anything. Had the situation been like that then there wouldn't 
have been any conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan. We are 
mediating because both the Armenians and the Azeris accept our 
mediation. In order to have success in mediation, the 
conflicting sides should accept such a mediation. Turkey is a 
little bit different from Russia in this respect because Armenia 
does not accept its mediation. Certainly Turkey has influence 
over Azerbaijan, and what I am trying to say is that all sides 
should use their power in a constructive, productive manner." 
Chernyshev said that in the case of Bosnia-Herzegovina, the 
Russians have influence over the Serbs and Turkey over the 
Muslims so both countries should work together. He said Russia 
has never been against Turkish soldiers in Bosnia. Besides, he 
said, it is not a matter of Russian or Turkish armies there. It 
is the United Nations peace forces. He thinks peace in Bosnia 
is not far even if there are the extremists who continue to 
escalate the conflict. All sides should be pushed to the table, 
Chernyshev believes. In Karabakh too everybody has come to 
understand that this bloodshed is useless. 
  Russia's peace plan for the Azeri-Armenian conflict is a 
cease-fire and Armenian withdrawal. Then the CSCE-Minsk peace 
process should work, and the solution of the problem should be 
reached through political means. "Certainly we are supportive 
of the CSCE-Minsk process, and if other countries have 
additional contributions, then they should contribute. For 
example, in the Bosnian situation you know how it happened, the 
NATO planes were about to bomb, everybody was waiting for that 
and the Russians--in addition to its participation in the peace 
process here--made another contribution and convinced the Serbs 
to withdraw their heavy arms. If, let us say, Turkey or the 
United States have additional contribution then they should go 
along with it," Chernyshev contended. 
<H5>  The Turkish Straits </H5>
  The collision of two tankers that put the Bosphorus in 
flames 
took place a day after our interview with the Russian ambassador 
who left Ankara a day after the collision. So we could not get 
his views about the accident that justified Turkey's stance on 
the security of the straits. 
  To our question about Russia's present position concerning 
the bylaws Turkey prepared on the subject without changing the 
essence of the Montreux Agreement signed in 1936, Chernyshev 
said: "When you look at the map, Russia's only access is the 
Black Sea and the Turkish Straits. We cannot go to the 
Mediterranean from the Baltic Sea. And this is not only for 
Russia but all the Black Sea countries. Besides all of us 
should understand clearly a second issue connected to this. In 
Montreux, an international regime has been set for the Turkish 
Straits. This cannot be a matter of good will or bad will. 
There is an international agreement on this, and we support 
this agreement and want to preserve it in the future. Other 
countries in our position also share this view. And sometimes 
it seems as if it is forgotten, but I know that Turkey also 
wants to keep this agreement as it is." 
  Chernyshev added Russia understands that the Bosphorus and 
the Dardanelles are not elastic, and therefore they are not 
against measures for the security of the straits as well as 
measures to ease the traffic. 
  Meanwhile Chernyshev expressed his satisfaction with the 
results of his work in Turkey. He said, "Of course I was not 
the only one working to achieve good results. 
  ``Our respective administrations were in a constructive 
dialogue all the time, and I did what I had to do within this 
framework. When I arrived here everything was ripe, Turkey was 
ready and so were we and thus we started.'' He said he is 
certainly sad to leave Turkey but at the same time he doesn't 
feel that he is actually leaving this country for good since he 
will be dealing with Turkey in Moscow too. "I have grown very 
fond of Turkey as a country and its people, maybe because I am a 
Turkologue. Turkey will remain a `first love' for me all my 
life," he said. 

