Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Sanaa, Jan 29 (AFP) -- Negotiations were underway 
Saturday [29 January] to free three French tourists kidnapped by 
Yemeni tribesmen at odds with the government, with officials 
here saying the three were unharmed. 
  The tourists, including two women, were seized last Sunday 
by 
tribesmen in a bid to force the Yemeni government to build a 
road through their region, Yemeni sources and French officials 
said Friday. 
  They were being "treated like guests and their security is 
not in danger," an interior ministry source told AFP on 
Saturday. The ministry is negotiating their release. 
  Another source familiar with the negotiations and who 
declined to be identified said talks between the kidnappers and 
the authorities had still not made progress. 
  The three were abducted on Sunday in Hajjah province, 200 
kilometers (120 miles) northwest of the capital Sanaa, while on 
a tour organized by Club Aventure (Adventure Club), company 
director Yves Godeau said in Paris. 
  Terres d'Aventure (Lands of Adventure) denied earlier 
reports 
from Yemen that it was the tour operator involved. 
  Ahnum tribesmen were holding Henri Heslot and his wife, both 
retired agriculture professors, as well as cardiologist Brigitte 
Fontaine, 42, to press the government into building a road 
through their region. 
  The powerful Hashid tribes, whose land surrounds the Ahnum, 
have altered the direction of the road. 
  "The kidnappers don't want to endanger the lives of the 
three 
French (tourists), but are protesting against the chief of the 
Hashid tribes, Shaykh 'Abdallah al-Ahmar, who altered the 
direction of the road," the source said. 
  Al-Ahmar, who is Yemen's parliamentary speaker, heads the 
Islamic al-Islah Party, which is part of the government 
coalition. 
  In Paris, the French Foreign Ministry said the French 
embassy 
in Sanaa had asked the authorities to try to obtain their 
immediate release and said the three were in "good health and 
well treated." [passage omitted] 

