Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Lieutenant Colonel Kirill Petrov "Military Review": "At a </F>
Turning Point. The Conflict in Karabakh Could Escalate into a 
Large-Scale Regional War"] 
  [Text] The December-January offensive by Azerbaijani 
troops is a logical continuation of the events of last summer, 
as a result of which defense detachments of the NKR 
[Nagorno-Karabakh Republic] (according to Baku's version, an 
Armenian expeditionary corps) took several strategically 
important Azerbaijani population centers outside 
Nagorno-Karabakh (Agdam, Fizuli, Kubatly), while in Baku the 
political crisis had reached its peak and subsequently resolved 
itself in another change of leader in the republic. Back then, 
even before he had "legalized" his ascent of the Mount Olympus 
of state power by means of a general election, Geydar Aliyev had 
promised to resolve the Karabakh problem. 
  At that time NKR defense detachments had occupied 724 
Azerbaijani population centers, and only 215 of them were on 
Karabakh territory. Approximately 1 million refugees were 
homeless.... 
  The "summer campaign" of 1993 in Karabakh ended in total 
triumph for some and a nightmare rout for others. Never before 
in five years of war had NKR defense detachments "sunk their 
teeth" so deep into Azerbaijan: Occupying 25 percent of its 
territory, they set up several so-called "security zones" around 
the NKR and took control of a 170-km section of the 
Azerbaijani-Iranian border. 
  Never before had the Azerbaijani Army suffered such a 
crushing defeat as in last year's "summer campaign." Agdam, 
Fizuli, and Kubatly surrendered virtually without a fight -- 
cities for which, proceeding from strategic considerations, the 
army should have fought to the last bullet, but it withdrew 
essentially without firing a single shot, having evacuated the 
population in advance. 
  This circumstance gave certain observers grounds for calling 
the war in Karabakh "strange" and assuming, not without reason, 
in my view, that at the height of the power crisis the military 
thus assisted "the departure of Abulfaz Elchibey," then the 
Azerbaijani president. If this is really so and if precisely 
this was the strategic task of the Azerbaijani Army, then it 
should be recognized that it coped with it brilliantly. In any 
event Elchibey "departed" (true, this also required a thrust 
from Ganja to Baku by detachments of the rebel Colonel Surret 
Guseynov, who in the recent past, incidentally, was commander of 
an Azerbaijani corps in Northern Karabakh), Geydar Aliyev became 
president, and the army itself, despite claims to the contrary, 
has not only preserved but also augmented its potential during 
the four months of the truce. There remained, and remains, just 
one thing for Geydar Aliyev to do -- to carry out his election 
promise.... 
  If anyone had any hope that the third president of 
Azerbaijan 
would reject a strong-arm solution to the problem, it was 
dispelled in December, with the first shots on the Karabakh 
front. There is, of course, an explanation for this. It is 
difficult to hope for success in talks with an opponent who has 
occupied one-fourth of the country's territory and utterly 
ruined approximately 1 million of your fellow citizens. Yes, 
Aliyev, like his predecessors, has gambled on force, but it is 
appropriate to point out that neither Mutalibov nor Elchibey 
found themselves in such difficult conditions as he does. 
  So the guns started up in Karabakh once again in December. 
Never before had the front line of the Azerbaijani Army's 
offensive been so broad: from the north to the south of the 
republic. The fighting was fierce, and there were big losses on 
both sides. At the time these lines are being written, the 
Azeris have taken the border settlement of Goradiz near Iran and 
won back 40 of the 170 km of the border with that state 
controlled by Karabakhis. According to information from some 
sources, Azerbaijani detachments are advancing toward the 
enemy's rear from Iranian territory. 
  The attackers' strategic plan has become apparent during the 
recent days of fighting in the zone of conflict: with 
simultaneous strikes in the north of the NKR's Mardakertskiy 
Rayon and in the east -- against the cities of Askeran, Agdam, 
and Fizuli -- to develop an offensive against Kelbadzhar and 
Kubatly and cut the Lachin corridor. 
  In turn it has to be thought that the Karabakh defense 
detachments will not give up the "security zone" around the NKR 
just like that. A great deal in the winter campaign will, in my 
view, depend on whether the Azerbaijani Army has been able to 
reinstate itself sufficiently to endure a large-scale offensive 
over the entire front. Will it not be become a spent force when 
drawn into static fighting (the Karabakhis are hurriedly 
creating a second defense echelon in certain sections of the 
confrontation)? 
  However.... The conflict in Karabakh has approached the 
stage where it is no longer so important who will emerge the 
winner from the "winter campaign": There is no military 
solution to the Karabakh problem, and the mechanism of a 
peaceful settlement has not been worked out. The most the 
opponents are capable of, even then not without the assistance 
of intermediaries, is reaching agreement on a truce, which is 
used, as a rule, under cover of diplomatic maneuvers and 
blocking of the peace initiatives of those same intermediaries, 
to restore combat potential and prepare for a counterstrike. 
  But the more profound the Karabakh impasse, the more likely 
the threat of the conflict's internationalization. 
Incidentally, Afghan mojahedin, citizens of Turkey, Syria, and 
Lebanon, and "volunteers" from CIS countries are already 
fighting here. But something else is far more alarming. While 
war was being waged at a respectable distance from their 
borders, Tehran and Ankara admitted purely hypothetically the 
possibility of their direct participation in the conflict. But 
attitudes toward it have been under revision for some time. 
  When as many as several tens of thousands of refugees 
gathered on adjacent territory last summer, Iran held the 
largest combined-arms exercises involving aircraft on the border 
for 15 years. 
  According to data from various sources, during those 
exercises Iranian Army subunits crossed the border and guarded a 
reservoir near the village of Goradiz. Several more subunits 
were ready to cross the border. After this -- how tightly 
everything here is intertwined -- Ankara voiced alarm "in 
connection with the concentration of Iranian subunits near the 
Azerbaijani border," and on 6 September the head of a Turkish 
parliamentary delegation spoke in Baku of "his government's 
readiness to give Azerbaijan military aid in the event of a 
further escalation of hostilities by Armenia." Turkey's resolve 
was confirmed in Moscow last fall by Prime Minister Tansu 
Ciller, and former Premier Bulent Ecevit has called for air 
strikes against the Armenians. 
  It would not be out of place to remind you that, in the 
opinion of experts, the Turkish Army is the strongest in the 
region. Approximately 1,000 tanks, 1,100 armored vehicles, 2,500 
artillery pieces and mortars, 150 combat helicopters, and 300 
aircraft of the 2d Tactical Command are concentrated on 
territory bordering on Armenia. The "North" group of Iranian 
troops constitutes roughly the same striking force on the border 
with Azerbaijan. 
  Whereas just a few months ago movements of Iranian and 
Turkish units and subunits on the borders could be regarded as a 
final warning, today.... 

