Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] San Cristobal de las Casas, 6 Jan (NOTIMEX) -- Today 
in Chiapas State, the Mexican Army continued to pursue the armed 
groups which, during their retreat, launched a propaganda 
campaign. Meanwhile, the government provided food and supplies 
to the adversely affected population. The people who have been 
adversely affected by the violence in central-northern Chiapas 
over the past six days have begun to receive food, clothing, and 
water in the wake of the destruction of the infrastructure in 
the area, official sources said. 
  The government had announced that starting Thursday it would 
begin distributing those goods that are in low supply in the 
stores in the area of Los Altos de Chiapas -- the area from 
which the rebels emerged last Saturday. Just as in other towns, 
residents of San Cristobal de las Casas, located some 800 km 
southeast of Mexico City, are carrying out their daily chores 
under the protection of a large military contingent, according 
to eyewitnesses. 
  The Army is pursuing the armed groups, which began 
retreating 
to the mountains following the operations carried out by 
military forces, which have received air support in the place 
known as El Corralito, more than 4 km south of San Cristobal. 
The operations are limited to the mountainous region of Los 
Altos, where the takeover of towns and clashes with the Army 
have officially led to 100 deaths, 34 arrests, and an 
undetermined number of people wounded. 
  The armed groups of the so-called EZLN [Zapatista National 
Liberation Army] today launched a propaganda campaign with 
fliers handed out to the press, in which they claim a "right to 
speak," although they have rejected the government's proposal 
for a dialogue. The government requested on Wednesday an end to 
the attacks, the surrender of weapons, a return of hostages and 
those kidnapped, and the identification of the leaders of the 
armed groups as prerequisites for establishing a dialogue. 
  In their campaign, the armed groups assert that they are 
fighting to end the "violence of poverty," as well as in support 
of the lower classes and socialism, even though their leaders 
asserted in the beginning that "we are not communists or 
socialists." 
  The government reported on Wednesday that one of the 34 
rebels captured was the Guatemalan national Jesus Sanchez 
Galicia, who admitted he participated with the armed groups and 
that he received military training in Guatemala. The Mexican 
authorities are ruling out the possibility of the "organized" 
participation of the guerrilla Guatemalan National Revolutionary 
Unity, although they consider it possible that there has been 
personal participation of foreigners, especially from Guatemala 
and El Salvador. 

