Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Trifonov, chief specialist of the </F>
Ministry of Finance, and Yaroslav Tolstikov, journalist, under 
the rubric "Prompt Analysis": "Foreign Economic Operations of 
Estonia and Russia: What Is Behind the Numbers?"] 
  [Text] This article completes a series of presentations in 
our newspaper by Sergey Trifonov, chief specialist of the 
Ministry of Finance, and Yaroslav Tolstikov, journalist, on the 
topic of the comparative economic situation in Estonia and 
Russia. For previous articles, see the issues of the newspaper 
ESTONIYA for 22 and 29 December 1993 and 5 January 1994. 
  The status of foreign economic operations of the country may 
also be visualized. The assortment of goods in our stores keeps 
expanding. Everyone can see this; therefore, trade with foreign 
states is growing. Here are the numbers. Based on the results of 
the nine months of 1993, the volume of exports of goods 
from Estonia increased by a factor of 2.2 compared to the 
corresponding period of last year. In the first quarter the 
volume came to 1.9 billion kroons, in the first half of the 
year--4.3 billion kroons, and in the nine months--7.1 billion 
kroons. In other words, each subsequent quarter saw the 
increasing growth of exports. We can safely assume that growth 
also occurred in the fourth quarter. 
  Here are the statistics on imports of goods. The total 
volume of imports increased by a factor of 2.4 during the 
nine months. In the first quarter it came to 1.8 billion kroons, 
in the first half of the year--4.4 billion kroons, and in the 
nine months--7.5 billion kroons. This is to say that Estonia's 
foreign economic operations have been performed in a quite 
dynamic manner, although there are nuances. 
  In the first quarter, Estonia completed its foreign economic 
operations with a positive balance, that is, exports exceeded 
imports, but later the picture began to change. A growing 
surplus of imports of goods over exports was registered. 
(At issue are the numbers furnished by the Department of 
Statistics.) 
  The trend of the growth of imports compared to exports is 
an alarming factor. It is known that the stability of 
national currency largely depends on the ratio of export to 
import volumes. 
  However, we have been rescued by another circumstance. The 
above numbers concern only exports and imports of goods. Based 
on the balance of payments drawn up by the Bank of Estonia, we 
may also arrive at exports and imports of services. In this 
instance, the balance is positive, exports of services 
exceed imports. 
  Thus, we were 0.56 billion kroons in negative territory with 
regard to goods during the nine months. Yet the balance for 
services was positive; it exceeded 1 billion kroons and thus 
more than offset the negative balance for goods. 
  What do exports of services consist of? They 
include transportation services--maritime shipping and seaports, 
as well as the tourist sector--hosting guests from abroad. 
  Therefore, in total, including exports of not only goods but 
also services, the balance is positive for now. However, this is 
perhaps hardly a cause for joy. According to a projection 
by the Economics Institute, the negative balance of exports and 
imports of goods will increase in the two years to come, 
and it is not ruled out that by the end of 1995 this negative 
will not longer be offset by the positive from exports of 
services. This will threaten the stability of the Estonian 
kroon. However, it is possible that this is too pessimistic 
a projection. The correct trend is being projected, but the 
balance may remain positive, after all. 
  Now let us look at the state of affairs in Russia. 
Characteristically, exports there are being augmented 
intensively. During the nine months, exports increased by 10 
percent (primarily oil and gas), whereas imports declined by 53 
percent during the same period of time. The positive 
balance of foreign economic activities came to almost $15 
billion. An intensive process of the accumulation of money 
is underway in Russia. To be sure, it is not always clear where 
this money ends up and who administers it. 
  Currently, Russia ranks second as Estonia's trading 
partner in terms of both imports and exports, next to 
Finland. The volume of trade fluctuated and came to 
approximately 1 billion kroons in the third quarter. Russia 
accounts for 20 percent of all Estonian exports, and 18-19 
percent of Estonian imports. The balance in Estonia's trade with 
Russia is positive, although the surplus of exports is small. 
All of this is statistical data. However, the Bank of Estonia 
has corrections to make in it. 
  Nonferrous metals hold the fifth most significant 
position in exports from Estonia. In the first quarter, the 
volume of exports of these metals came to 102 million kroons, in 
the second quarter--227 million kroons, and in the third 
quarter--170 million kroons. During the same period of time 
Estonia imported such metals worth only a few tens of millions 
of kroons. Where do we get nonferrous metals for exports? 
First, from domestic theft, and second, from smuggling out 
of Russia. Both sides profiteer from this; to be sure, in 
Russia it is primarily individuals rather than the state. 
Indeed, smuggling is bad, but this fact means that the border 
between our countries is sealed poorly on the Russian side. 
  So, this contraband transportation to Estonia is not 
registered, but it shows up in exports, and the Bank of Estonia 
makes the relevant correction toward increasing imports and, 
consequently, worsening the trade balance. 
  Now a few words about the structure of exports. Strange 
as it may seem, in terms of significance, ground transportation 
vehicles rank first, or in simpler terms--passenger cars. 
In the first quarter this position came to 185 million kroons, 
in the second--230 million kroons, and in the third--320 million 
kroons. Estonian companies purchase cars in the West, keep about 
one-third of them, and sell most to the East at a profit. A 
small stream of cars goes to the West from the East (the Zhiguli 
and Moskvich cars). All of this is quite normal, legal business: 
Buy it cheaply, sell it expensively. 
  Exports of timber and products made of it 
rank second. Thus, in the third quarter their volume 
came to 215 million kroons. 
  Milk and dairy products rank third. In 
the third quarter this came to 208 million kroons. 
  Fuel (oil and coal) ranks fourth. In 
the third quarter it was 174 million kroons. This business is 
likewise quite legal. We purchase fuel in Russia and resell it 
in the West at a profit. We must note that Russian companies 
frequently ask us to provide such brokerage. 
  Nonferrous metals rank fifth, which has already 
been mentioned. 
  We should note in particular that Estonian milk and dairy 
products have come to rank third in exports. This is a good 
sign. The growth of ferrous metal exports from the East to the 
West is a new aspect. In this instance, Estonia also skillfully 
plays the role of agent. Besides, we have begun to trade in 
sugar going from the West to the East. In both cases these are 
quite legitimate transactions. 
  Now, a few words about imports. 
  The already mentioned cars rank first (430 million 
kroons in the third quarter). 
  Oil and refinery products and coal rank second 
(380 million kroons in the third quarter). 
  Equipment ranks third. The volume of these 
deliveries keeps growing (313 million kroons in the third 
quarter). 
  In summation, we shall say that the foreign economic 
operations of Estonia have developed very dynamically. Second, 
imports of goods exceed exports, and this is bad. Most 
importantly, Estonia is becoming a bridge in trade between the 
East and the West, and an important junction in exchanging goods 
and services. This is gratifying. 

