Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Petruska Sustrova: "Russian Intelligence on </F>
Russian Interests--Russian Intelligence Evaluates and Analyzes 
NATO Expansion"] 
  [Text] The possible extension of NATO's 
responsibility to Central and East Europe (CEE) is one of the 
key questions for determining the future look of European 
security and the distribution of forces on the continent in the 
postcommunist era. The shift of CEE countries toward NATO 
affects Russian interests and requires careful analysis. Russian 
intelligence prepared an extensive document, the second part of 
which, called "Russian Interests," follows. 
  From the standpoint of Russian interests, the expansion of 
NATO has several aspects that must be taken into account during 
the process of developing relations with NATO, Central and 
Eastern Europe, and the countries of the near abroad. ("Near 
abroad" is a term for the states on the territory of the former 
USSR--translator's comment.) [previous sentence as published] 
<H5>  NATO's Perspectives </H5>
  In the opinion of Russian intelligence experts, the analysis 
of the impact that an expansion of NATO will have on Russian 
interests requires, above all, a prognostic evaluation of the 
likely evolution of NATO after the end of the Cold War. The 
announced goals and political impulses, conditioned by the 
reality of the situation, affirm that NATO should change from a 
military-political grouping, oriented at repelling external 
threats, into an instrument for guaranteeing peace and stability 
on the basis of collective security. The task of expanding 
NATO's sphere of responsibility to the East is perceived in this 
context. According to the Russian intelligence experts, Russia's 
many concerns regarding the entry of CEE countries into NATO 
would be eliminated or lessened if there were guarantees that 
their entry would be preceded by a process of changing the role 
of the alliance or if the political functions and geographic 
scale of NATO were to be expanded simultaneously. But such 
guarantees do not exist. 
  First of all, however, the question of the prospective 
change 
of NATO has not been sufficiently clarified. The alliance has 
not created a precise concept of its role and place in the 
system of international relations in the postcommunist era. 
Debates on the issue of NATO's political strategy tend to be 
more of an evaluating and preliminary nature. At the same time, 
it is obvious that the Atlantic partners have different views of 
the role and authority NATO has in the security sphere and what 
role and authority other international institutions have. Also, 
stereotypes of "bloc" thinking still persist, which is true 
especially in the case of many representatives of the military 
leadership of Western countries as well as of the alliance as a 
whole. One of these stereotypes is that the USSR, of which 
Russia was the core, was for many years considered the main 
source of a military threat to the very existence of Western 
civilization. As a consequence, NATO is strategically directed 
at the "worst scenario," which is necessarily reflected in the 
character and details of its operational documents, in its 
military structure, and in the military readiness of the 
national as well as the coalition armed forces. The removal of 
these "residues" will obviously require some time. Also, this 
psychological turnaround cannot be painless and cannot but meet 
with resistance from important representatives of the governing 
circles, the military establishment, the academic community, and 
the industrial-military complex of the NATO countries. 
  We cannot expect a reduction of the scope and momentum of 
the 
arms race, which requires that, in the public consciousness, the 
"picture of the enemy," even if only a potential one, be 
maintained. This is moreover reinforced by the concerns of the 
representatives of the leading NATO countries about the possible 
reduction of the role of the economy and science in the military 
sector. Concern is often expressed in the West about the loss of 
the achieved technological level and economic resources if the 
industrial-military complex is weakened in the climate of the 
"postconfrontational euphoria." 
  The effort of CEE countries to compel the West by joining 
NATO to actively participate in solving their internal political 
as well as external problems could bring an unforeseen result. 
NATO, drawn into complicated processes marked by violent 
conflicts in East European countries, could be faced with the 
objective necessity of taking a harder line in its policy. The 
transformation of NATO into a universal peacemaking and 
stabilizing force could be prolonged. In any case, there is the 
danger that this process will not be synchronized with the 
expansion of the alliance. This poses a threat to the interests 
of the Russian Federation because such lack of synchronization 
could reduce the chances for finally putting an end to the 
division of the continent and could lead to a return of the 
"bloc" policy, this happening in a situation where NATO's zone 
of responsibility will move into the immediate proximity of the 
Russian Federation's borders. 
<H5>  Geopolitical Aspects </H5>
  The proponents of linking CEE countries to NATO understand 
that moving the zone of NATO responsibility to the Russian 
borders creates a certain unease in the Russian Federation, and, 
in an effort to blunt the edge of this reaction, they use the 
following arguments: 
  --The sphere of international stability guaranteed by NATO 
will include countries immediately bordering the territory of 
the former USSR, and NATO will thus assume responsibility for 
maintaining peace and forestalling conflicts in this region. 
  --If NATO adopts a course leading to its numerical 
expansion, 
it will be forced to take a clearer position on the fundamental 
issues of Europe's transformation after the Cold War, make an 
unambiguous statement about the goals and character of future 
cooperation with the Russian Federation and other members of 
CIS, speed up the process of reevaluating the political role of 
NATO, and adopt real measures for the transformation of the 
alliance into an instrument of universal security. 
  --Expanding NATO by the CEE countries will open up the way 
into the alliance for Russia as well. 
  The last argument is being emphasized especially now, on the 
eve of the NATO summit meeting. However, Russian intelligence 
experts reached the conclusion that the "probing" offers to 
Russia concerning a partnership with NATO do not imply any 
incentive for creating some mechanism for supporting 
international security, the composition and functions of which 
would accord with the conditions of the postcommunist era. The 
idea of such a mechanism is being discussed in the West. For 
example, specialists in the United States are exploring the 
possibility of creating at this stage an organization of 
collective security that would represent something between NATO 
on one end and the CSCE and the UN on the other. Understandably, 
of fundamental importance to Russia is which alliance it can 
join and in what function, or what kind of partnership relations 
with this alliance it can enter into. 
  On 20 October of this year, NATO Secretary General Woerner, 
in his speech at the conference "Supporting Peace in Europe" in 
Madrid, attended by experts from NATO, the WEU [Western European 
Union], the EC, and the CSCE, pointed out a number of instances 
that could bring about, if not exactly uneasiness, at least 
supplemental questions. He said that in the present situation 
the main goal of the alliance, besides joint defense of its 
members, is to maintain a strategic equlibrium in Europe. This 
second point can be interpreted as a situation in which NATO 
even in the new conditions performs one of the main functions, 
the kind it had during the confrontational period of the Cold 
War. If that is so, the shift of NATO borders to the Russian 
borders requires either a military strengthening of Russia, 
which, however, does not conform with the key tasks of economic 
development, or Russia's acceptance of an asymetry in the 
security sphere, which is also against Russian interests. 
  According to another statement made by Woerner, one of the 
main functions of NATO is to "project" stability into the CEE 
countries and Central Asia. If "partnership" or some other form 
of NATO expansion also includes the interest to bring the 
Central Asian countries into the zone of NATO responsibility, 
this expansion can be explained, not unjustifiably, as an 
alternative to the system of collective security within the UN 
framework. Expansion of NATO's zone of responsibility to two 
areas immediately neighboring the Russian Federation, in the 
west and in the south, can give rise to a reasonable suspicion 
that a new geopolitical situation is emerging that is extremely 
unfavorable to Russia. 
<H5>  Military Aspects </H5>
  At this time, we certainly should not be hearing flat 
assertions similar to those that were common during the Cold 
War--for example, about a hard confrontation between the West 
and the East, NATO and the Warsaw Pact, the United States and 
the USSR. It is difficult to imagine and would be incorrect to 
take as a point of departure that a geographical expansion of 
NATO would serve to create a staging area for striking a blow at 
Russia or its allies. This conclusion, however, does not mean 
that an extension of NATO eastward would not pose a threat to 
the interests of Russia's military security. 
  Lately, various kinds of conjectures about the position the 
Russian Army takes on this issue are commonly put forth in the 
West. In particular, assumptions were made about efforts by the 
generals to use their "growing influence" on the Russian 
Government and "force" it to follow a hard line in guaranteeing 
national security. Such assumptions are an overdramatization. It 
is impossible not to see that the very mission and professional 
tasks of the armed forces condition their particular view of the 
problems connected with the eastward expansion of NATO 
responsibility. Russia's military leadership obviously cannot 
disregard the following facts: 
  1) The fact that, as a consequence of NATO expansion, the 
largest military grouping in the world, which has at its 
disposal a vast potential for attack, will come into the 
immediate vicinity of Russian borders, requires: a fundamental 
reevaluation of all defense concepts, a regrouping of the armed 
forces, a review of operational equipment, the development of 
additional infrastructure, the relocation of large contingents 
of troops, and a change of operational plans as well as of the 
character of military readiness. These measures are from the 
military point of view inevitable and must be realized 
irrespective of the fact that, in NATO's political plans, Russia 
is no longer considered an adversary. In an analogous situation, 
the other side would undoubtedly take similar steps. 
  2) Implementation of the mentioned measures, moreover within 
a limited amount of time, undoubtedly will mean exceeding the 
state budget and result in lowering Russia's defense capability 
during the period of structural rebuilding and relocation of the 
main groupings of the armed forces. 
  3) It is impossible not to be aware that, under such 
conditions, danger will arise as a result of the failure to meet 
deadlines and that existing programs for cutting and 
reorganizing the Army and turning it into a professional force, 
as well as for equipping it with modern, expensive arms systems 
of high technological level, will come to naught. Lagging behind 
in this area means that the military potential of the Russian 
armed forces will be qualitatively limited in comparison with 
the level of the leading military powers. 
  4) If the Russian Government proves unable to guarantee 
normal financing, logistic support, and social security for the 
armed forces, it could create dissatisfaction among Army 
personnel, which certainly is not in the interest of Russia's 
political or military leadership or the country as a whole. 
  Nor can the fact be ignored that the expansion of NATO will 
mean that the zone of its responsibility will encompass that 
part of the European Continent where international borders were 
changed as a consequence of World War II. And this process is 
foreshadowed in a situation in which new states are coming into 
being in Europe, and, therefore, the results of the Helsinki 
negotiations, which established the status quo, cease to apply 
or are significantly weakened. It can therefore be assumed that, 
under the new conditions, the alternative guarantor of postwar 
European borders will be NATO. 
  There is, besides the positive aspects, a flip side to this. 
Many experts closely connect the "expansionary" trend in NATO 
with the growing importance of the FRG in this alliance. The 
"preparatory period" for the entry of CEE countries into NATO as 
full members is also related to the development of their 
bilateral military cooperation with Germany. Many foreign 
political scientists are coming to the conclusion that the 
numerical increase of the alliance will lead to a change in the 
status of the FRG on the European Continent: It will change from 
a "receiver" of security to its "exporter." At the same time, 
there is reason to assume that certain circles in the FRG look 
at the issue of NATO expansion from the viewpoint of further 
developments in the situation concerning the postwar borders. 
  The first set of problems in this area relates not only to 
Germany but also to other countries. For example, won't some 
forces in Romania that are promoting the idea of uniting with 
Moldova begin to carry out this process, in which they will lean 
on their membership in NATO and ignore the interests of the 
Trans-Dniester? One way or another, the opinion that membership 
of the CEE countries in NATO will raise the level of 
international conflicts, including territorial ones, is 
substantiated. 
  Expanding NATO by the Visegrad Group will also serve as an 
incentive to the Baltic States to join NATO. This could result 
in a situation in which the center of gravity of their 
cooperation with the West will be reduced to the military 
sphere. That could be considered a challenge to Russia because 
the military presence of third countries in this region is 
contrary to its geopolitical interests. NATO leadership 
emphasizes that it is not its intention to make the CEE 
countries into a cordon sanitaire that would separate Russia 
from West Europe. Nevertheless, that could happen, even without 
the subjective intentions of the leading NATO authorities. In 
any case, with the entry of CEE countries into this 
organization, a barrier will go up between Russia and the 
remaining part of the continent. It is essential to take into 
consideration the fact that a change in the membership 
composition of NATO will inevitably paralyze a whole number of 
international commitments of the alliance that ensue from 
multilateral agreements and treaties, particularly from the 
Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty, the compliance with which 
is the basis of stability and security of the entire continent. 
  As is known, this Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty was 
based on the concept of equivalent security, and its aim was to 
reach by the end of 1995 an equilibrium in conventional weapons 
between two groups of countries (NATO and the former Warsaw 
Pact) by establishing the same level in the quantity of combat 
equipment of land and air forces. If NATO is expanded by the 
countries of the former Warsaw Pact, the principle of 
equilibrium will be broken. That would call into question the 
quotas of conventional arms equipment not only of the potential 
new NATO members, but also of the CIS countries--above all, 
Russia. 
  In addition, in the countries of the Visegrad Group, a 
problem has arisen with monitoring compliance with the joint 
obligations, especially concerning the handing over of arms and 
the controlling of their numbers (Article VII), carrying out 
controls and inspections (Article XIV), etc. 
  It must be pointed out that any modification of the 
agreement, for which Russia strived during the past 
year-and-half to two years during bilateral as well as 
multilateral discussions, encountered hard resistance and 
negative reaction from NATO. President Yeltsin's message to the 
leaders of NATO (September 1993), which contained a proposal for 
a further review of the "side" limitations on Russian armed 
forces (Article V), was practically rejected by NATO 
representatives. Much evidence exists that this stance will be 
taken by the alliance until the end of 1995--that is, until the 
time when the restrictions on conventional arms according to the 
mentioned agreement come to an end. 
<H5>  Internal Political Aspects </H5>
  Not to be overlooked is the potential unfavorable impact of 
NATO expansion on the political situation in Russia and the 
psychological posture of the Russian people. For a long time, 
public opinion in Russia was formed in the anti-NATO spirit and 
cannot be changed overnight. In view of that, the extention of 
NATO's zone of responsibility to the former USSR allies will be 
seen at this stage by a significant part of the public as 
"danger coming closer to the Russian borders." That could act as 
an incentive for the anti-West forces in Russia, and it could 
provide them with arguments for goal-oriented efforts to 
discredit the government's course of action. In such 
circumstances, there could come about a revival of the 
"encircled camp" mentality and of isolationist tendencies and 
currents flowing from them, negative toward the existing 
reformist line. 
  Russian social consciousness should mature and understand 
NATO as a structure of European security and stability, not as a 
hostile force striving for political and military superiority 
over its main adversary from the time of the Cold War. 
  On the basis of the submitted analysis, which, of course, 
will be modified according to new information, Russian 
intelligence experts arrived at the following conclusions: 
  --In the conditions of the postcommunist period and in a 
situation in which the so-called bloc discipline, such as 
existed before the liquidation of the Warsaw Pact, does not 
exist, Russia has no right to dictate to the sovereign countries 
of CEE whether to join NATO or some other international alliance. 
  --It would suit Russian interests if the process of 
expanding 
NATO's zone of influence would proceed in concert with the 
change of its character and with the adaptation of its functions 
to the requirements of the present stage of historical 
development. 
  --The entry of CEE countries into NATO, its nature, timing, 
and the obligations and rights of the new members, must be 
fashioned in consideration of the viewpoints of all of the 
involved countries, of which Russia is one, and also of the 
prospects for reinforcing the foundations of collective security 
on the continent, the development of Europe-wide cooperation, 
and guarantees that all of the countries aspiring to NATO 
membership will adhere to the international commitments they 
have made. 
  --Only the sum total of the mentioned factors will help 
create the prerequisites and favorable conditions for mutual 
relations between the Russian Federation and NATO, as well as 
for the shift of their relations to the level of real 
partnership. 
  --At the present stage, it would be proper to pursue a 
multilateral policy of global development of cooperation with 
all of the international institutions that are able to 
contribute to the creation of a universal system of collective 
security in Europe. 

