Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Peace negotiations will again be in full swing 
this week. Tomorrow Israel and the Palestinians are to resume 
talks on the Gaza-Jericho First plan. Tomorrow night, the 
Israeli delegations to the Washington peace talks are to fly to 
the American capital for the resumption of those negotiations on 
Tuesday [15 February]. 
  Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres says Syria has not softened 
its demand for a complete Israeli withdrawal from the Golan 
Heights. On the Palestinian track, Peres says he continues to 
oppose a Palestinian state, and prefers a Palestinian-Jordanian 
confederation. 
  A senior Foreign Ministry official says PLO Chairman 'Arafat 
spoke bitterly of Jordan King Husayn in Cairo last week, and 
there is concern that the establishment of a Palestinian state 
will bring about a civil war. David Ze'ev reports: 
  The Israeli officials say the resumption of the negotiations 
in Taba between Israel and the PLO can be divided into two 
categories: issues that were agreed upon in principle in Cairo, 
that must now be finalized; and other matters less dramatic, 
which nevertheless must be resolved. The Cairo issues that must 
be worked out in greater detail include the administrative 
running of border crossings and joint patrols on roads in the 
area. [passage omitted] 
  A senior diplomatic official says Israel is inclined to try 
to ease the pressure on the Palestinians, saying there is no 
point, for example, in pressing the PLO to abolish the clauses 
in its charter calling for the destruction of Israel. The 
senior official said the Palestine National Council, which must 
take the step, is inoperative, and Chairman 'Arafat certainly 
does not have a two-thirds majority in the council, as required, 
to make the changes. [Jerusalem Israel Television Network 
Channel 1 in Hebrew at 1800 GMT on 13 February reports that 
speaking at the 13 February cabinet meeting, the foreign 
minister warned that 'Arafat must not be weakened too much, lest 
we render him unable to control Gaza and Jericho 
satisfactorily."] 
  As Israel's teams to the Washington peace talks prepare to 
set out for the American capital, Foreign Minister Peres has 
repeated that there will be no progress with Syria as long as 
Damascus refuses to raise the level of the talks. A high-level 
Foreign Ministry official says Jerusalem has complained to the 
Americans that when the Syrians say a comprehensive peace, they 
really mean a comprehensive price for Israel to pay. 
  Israeli and Jordanian negotiators were in touch directly in 
advance of their talks. Chief Israeli negotiator Elyaqim 
Rubinstein says the scope of those negotiations is widening. In 
the Foreign Ministry they would not comment on whether Jordan 
might sign a peace agreement with Israel once a final agreement 
is reached with the Palestinians on the Gaza-Jericho First plan. 

