Language: <F P=105> Macedonian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article including statement by President Kiro </F>
Gligorov: "Impetus Toward Peace and Stability"] 
  [Text] Yesterday the United States and the Republic of 
Macedonia established full diplomatic relations. Yesterday 
afternoon the president of the Republic of Macedonia received 
the chief of the U.S. Liaison Office in Skopje, Robert Norman, 
who delivered the letter from U.S. President Bill Clinton 
informing him that the United States recognized the independence 
of the Republic of Macedonia and that full diplomatic relations 
were thereby established. The meeting was also attended by 
Foreign Minister Stevo Crvenkovski. 
  Right after that, President Kiro Gligorov gave the following 
statement on the occasion of the establishment of diplomatic 
relations: 
  "This event is of exceptional importance for the Republic. 
With this act the United States has confirmed its principled 
stand and support for the independence and territorial integrity 
of the Republic of Macedonia, as well as our country's 
democratic orientation and the development of peaceful policy. 
It was done in the spirit of U.S. sponsorship for the admission 
of the Republic of Macedonia to the United Nations, of proven 
support for the inclusion of the Republic of Macedonia into 
international financial institutions and organizations, as well 
as the delivered humanitarian and technical aid to our country. 
  "U.S. recognition of the Republic of Macedonia represents a 
vital impetus for maintaining peace and stability in the south 
of the Balkans. The recent past has shown without a doubt that 
the independence and stability of the Republic of Macedonia 
represent the conditions for peace and stability in the region. 
  "On this occasion, I would particularly like to assert that 
the Republic of Macedonia will continue with its efforts for the 
creation of a climate of good-neighborliness, understanding, and 
stability in the region. We firmly believe that stopping the 
war on the territory of former Yugoslavia, instituting 
normalization of relations among the countries in the region, 
and opening a new era of full economic, cultural, and political 
cooperation in the Balkans are of singular importance. 
Good-neighborliness is of a vital interest to Macedonian 
foreign policy. 
  "Macedonia is ready to resume talks with Greece now, within 
the framework of the United Nations. We believe that we can 
reach an agreement on all open questions in our mutual relations 
as long as good will, preparedness for mutual understanding, 
respect of mutual interests for lasting good-neighborliness, and 
cooperation exist. Let me repeat, we are ready to view these 
questions with good will, in a constructive spirit, and with the 
required flexibility from both sides. Once again, I would like 
to reiterate that the Republic of Macedonia respects the 
territorial integrity and borders of the Republic of Greece, as 
well as those of neighboring countries. 
  "In accordance with the Constitution and its long-term 
defined policy of good-neighborliness and noninterference in the 
internal affairs of neighboring countries, we want to create 
conditions for mutual trust as an essential foundation for close 
and mutually profitable cooperation. 
  "Macedonia also remains open to all initiatives leading to 
peace, cooperation, and mutual trust in the Balkans. 
  "The establishment of diplomatic relations with the United 
States has been accepted with great warmth and support by the 
Macedonian public. It is an expression of the real feelings of 
friendship and the interest in general cooperation between our 
two countries and peoples." 

