CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tatyana Khomych, correspondent: "Does the MBR </F>
Have the Goal of Producing a President?"] 
  [Text] It is believable that yet another party will appear 
shortly in Ukraine. It will have a centrist leaning and adopt a 
course aimed at reviving Ukraine by way of energy and economic 
reforms. There would be nothing out of the ordinary in this 
information if it were not for the following detail: The 
founders of the new party are convinced that is specifically 
themselves would will bring the new president of Ukraine to 
power. 
  Such a sensational declaration was made a few days ago in 
Dnipropetrovsk by the coordinator of the MBR [Inter-Regional 
Bloc for Reforms] for Dnipropetrovsk Oblast--Gennadiy Balashov. 
He heads up the well-known businessmen's organization--the 
Center for Political Initiative--which was quite recently formed 
in this city and which is one of the regional groups supporting 
the Kuchma-Hrynyov tandem. Balashov also organized the Second 
Conference of te MBR, which likewise took place in 
Dnipropetrovsk. It was called an All-Ukrainian Conference, 
although there was serious geographic absenteeism among the 
delegates. But it is no secret among politicians nowadays that 
the MBR relies--first and foremost--on the southeastern region 
of our state, counting in its plans on support from the 
Russian-speaking population, as well as on the industrial and 
financial structure of the industrial region. A glaring example 
of the merging of certain interests of these presently dominant 
forces in the domestic politics of our state today was, indeed, 
the joining of the MBR--in the capacity of co-chairman of 
Ex-Premier Leonid Kuchma. At the presently time he is president 
of the Ukrainian Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs. 
  Despite the fact that Leonid Kuchma himself is not on the 
ballot for the new parliament from the Dnipropetrovsk region, 
these days he and Volodymyr Hrynyov are working quite hard to 
polish up his political image in this region. Speaking at the 
conference, both leaders made program statements with regard to 
future tactics and strategy. They spoke as candidates for the 
office of deputy and expressed the attitudes which prevail among 
the so-called reformers. "So-called" because nowadays it is hard 
to find anybody in Ukraine who would be against reforms; even 
certain points of the extreme right and the extreme left meet in 
unison. The principal thing which differentiates the MBR and its 
leaders from this modish political tendency common to everybody 
is certainly the desire to depict themselves as future reformers 
and unwavering centrists, along with their old tendency--now in 
different forms--toward an "economic union." Moreover, in 
Dnipropetrovsk the leaders of this bloc repeated their 
besmirched thesis that Ukraine is now maintaining a course 
headed for "self-isolation" and confrontation with the CIS 
[Commonwealth of Independent States], and that--of course--as 
soon as the MBR had sufficient strength in the new parliament, 
it would put a stop to this course. 
  The "reformers" themselves predict that they will win from 
20 
to 30 percent of the seats in the new Supreme Council as a 
result of the March elections. In their opinion, this will be 
enough to create a competent and effective parliamentary 
faction, which can influence the political balance of forces and 
thereby also the course of the state as a whole. However, such 
strivings do not exhaust the entire spectrum of political 
demands being made by the ambitious MBR leaders. It is foreseen 
that both leaders--provided that the pre-term presidential 
elections scheduled for June really do take place--will 
participate in them very actively. The only questions remaining 
then is which of them will prevail over the other; which of them 
will garner the most votes and influence among their partisans 
and functionaries; whether the bloc will split and the tandem 
cease to exist. 
  The answer to this last question will obviously be furnished 
at the Third Conference of the MBR, which is planned to be held 
in April. Perhaps it is there that they will decide to become a 
party rather than a block. But, as of today, the MBR leaders 
want to patch up their political squabbles for the sake of a 
certain togetherness. All the more so in that the platform 
combines the ideas of both men to a great extent: Both Kuchma 
and Hrynyov advocate giving the green light to the Russian 
language, a federative land system, and a "union" for Ukraine, 
as a country which--obviously--cannot exist independently. 
  Considerably less was spoken about in Dnipropetrovsk 
concerning everything else, including the most urgent economic 
reforms for Ukraine. This has given cause to local analysts to 
place a great many question marks after the assertions made by 
the MBR leaders to the effect that they know a solution to the 
economic crisis. Some of them, in this connection, thought that 
both of these leaders had a chance to show themselves on the 
field of a state being rebuilt. But they left no trace of 
blooming roses. Can this likewise be anticipated if one of them 
becomes president? 

