Serbs      Willing to Talk Despite Bluster 

                         SUMMARY 

While Serb leaders unleashed a storm of angry rhetoric following 
the 10-11 April NATO air at tacks on Serbian forces near Gorazde, 
they continue to participate in efforts to negotiate a peace 
agreement.  Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic, however, has 
announced that ending the conflict in former Yugoslavia will 
depend on lifting the UN embargo against the FRY. 
                             END SUMMARY 
   The Bosnian Serb leadership and leaders of the Federal Republic 
of Yugoslavia (FRY--Serbia and Montenegro) as well as the Serbian 
media--particularly the electronic media--sharply denounced the 
NATO air attacks and accused the UN and NATO of taking the 
Bosnian Government side against the Serbs in the Bosnian 
conflict.  Milosevic, setting the tone for the Serbian verbal 
attacks, claimed that the NATO action had "shattered the 
delusion" that the "international community" had an "unbiased 
attitude" toward the Bosnian crisis (Tanjug, 11 April).   Bosnian 
Serb "President" Radovan Karadzic bitterly complaining that the 
UN had "aided the Muslims before," described the air attacks as 
representing the "most direct form of support."  He went on to 
predict that now that "some circles in the United States" and the 
UN were "playing their last cards," they "will now have to send 
in ground troops" to fight the Serbs who are "prepared to fight 
to the last man."  Bosnian Serb army chief General Ratko Mladic 
warned that "anything that flies over" Bosnian Serb territory and 
"opens fire will be downed" (Tanjug, 11 April).  Belgrade 
television news repeated claims that originated with the Bosnian 
Serb military that the NATO aircraft had bombed an ambulance and 
killed two paramedics, hit a civilian's house with a bomb that 
did not explode, and dropped a bomb in the center of Gorazde that 
killed 160 civilians (Belgrade TV, 11-13 April).  (See Note 1) 
   (Note 1) Pictures of a damaged ambulance and a house with an 
unexploded bomb inside were not shown until 13 April and the 
evidence presented that they had been hit during the NATO air 
attacks was unconvincing (Belgrade TV, 14 April). 
   Despite the rhetoric, the Bosnian Serb leadership has signalled 
that it hopes to defuse the confrontation with the UN and NATO 
that culminated in the air attacks near Gorazde.  On 13 April 
Bosnian Serb assembly president Momcilo Krajisnik stepped back 
from earlier Serb threats to end relations with the UN and 
UNPROFOR and to negotiate with the international community only 
with Russian mediation (Tanjug, 11-13 April).  Krajisnik 
announced that the Bosnian Serbs would "leave the door open to 
talks" except with UNPROFOR commander for Bosnia-Herzegovina 
General Michael Rose and "others who have abused their positions" 
by ordering the 10-11 April air strikes.  Moreover, contradicting 
the threat issued by Mladic, Krajisnik indicated that Serb forces 
would not fire on NATO aircraft over Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
Attacking NATO would be a "double evil," he maintained, that 
would compound the "evil" done to the Serbs by the NATO bombing. 
While the NATO air strikes had "brought harm to the Serbian 
people," he argued that the effects had "remained inside the 
borders" within which it "pays to be patient in the interest of 
peace."  In a warning that appeared aimed at the Bosnian Serb 
army leadership, he added that if NATO aircraft were shot down, 
there would be "neither peace nor delimitation" of the conflict 
and "many plans would fail that way" (Tanjug, 13 April). 
Subsequently, the Serbs resumed talking with UN representatives. 
The Bosnian Serb armed forces "Supreme Command" issued an edict 
on 15 April declaring that, although "conditions are not yet 
ripe" for "normalization of relations" with the "military sector" 
of the UN Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Karadzic would "maintain contact" with UNPROFOR's "ciivilian 
department.  Karadzic met with UN envoy Yasushi Akashi the same 
day (Tanjug, 15 April). 
   Milosevic's Conditions for Talks 
   After a 13 April meeting in Belgrade with  Akashi, Milosevic, 
implicitly asserting the power to speak for all Serbs as he has 
on other recent occasions, announced his conditions for renewed 
peace negotiations.  He declared that the "Serb side" will enter 
"new negotiations without preconditions" after a "cessation of 
all hostilities" in Bosnia-Herzegovina.  However, he maintained 
that hostilities will not have ceased until sanctions are lifted. 
He argued that since talks can take place "only on an equal 
footing" and the UN sanctions constitute a form of hostile action 
against the FRY and Serbs generally in former Yugoslavia, the 
sanctions against the FRY must be lifted as part of a general 
ceasefire agreement in Bosnia-Herzegovina.  Moreover, he argued 
that the sanctions against "Serbia and the Serb nation" are a 
"constant impetus" for the Bosnian Government to continue the 
war," while lifting the sanctions is the "simplest way" to 
persuade the "Bosnian authorities to abandon their war policy" 
(Tanjug, 13 April).  Similarly, after an 11 April meeting in 
Belgrade with Russian envoy Vitaliy Churkin, Milosevic announced 
that further progress in normalizing relations between the 
Croatian government and the separatist Krajina Serbs of Croatia 
and between Zagreb and Belgrade will be "impossible" until the 
sanctions are removed (Tanjug, 11 April). 
   (AUTHOR: NASH.  QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF ANALYST, 
EUROPE AND LATIN AMERICA GROUP, (703) 733-6120.) 
ELAG/GILISON JEG 16/0020Z APR 

