BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The Agreement Is an Established Fact"] </F>
  [Excerpts] With the signing of the "Declaration of 
Principles" in Washington on 13 September 1993 a new era has 
dawned in Palestinian-Israeli relations, namely the "era of 
peace." This era has been characterized by a gradual 
transformation in Palestinian and Israeli concepts in the 
direction of achieving a "historic reconciliation." [passage 
omitted] With the signing of the "Executive Agreement of the 
Declaration of Principles" in Cairo on 4 May 1994, the era of 
peace has become a reality. The agreement has become a tool for 
the two sides to build this era with a spirit of understanding 
and with common faith that coexistence and mutual and balanced 
cooperation are the fate of the two peoples throughout this good 
land, the land of peace. [passage omitted] 
  Regrettably, the Israeli Government looks as if it is not 
ready to cope with the Palestinian readiness to expedite the 
implementation of the agreement. It has begun to speak with a 
loud voice from all the partners in its cabinet about its doubts 
about whether the Palestinians will adhere to the agreement. 
The Israeli Government has offered feeble excuses for these 
doubts and has begun to adopt stances relying on incorrect and 
convoluted interpretations of Palestinian President Yasir 
'Arafat's address in a Johannesburg mosque in which he made 
remarks about "Jerusalem" and the "agreement." The Israeli 
Government adopted similar stances when the Palestinian 
Authority dealt with the issue of the laws and administrative 
regulations that will be applicable in the autonomous regions. 
Yet a third time, the Israeli Government raised a hue and cry 
regarding the Palestinians' weapons following the Erez 
checkpoint operation on the crossing point between Israel and 
the Gaza Strip. The Israeli General Staff threatened to 
reoccupy the Gaza Strip after Rabin ordered the closure of the 
Strip's border for nine days. He followed this order with 
another one closing off the Jericho area on the pretext of 
Israel's security needs. 
  The excuses on which Israel has based its doubts regarding 
the Palestinian National Authority's commitment to the agreement 
are self-defeating. They are good reasons to contest Israel's 
adherence to the peace process and its commitment to the 
agreement. The Palestinians have not given up and will not give 
up Jerusalem. They have affirmed their adherence to their right 
to claim it for national, historic, and religious 
considerations. Because the solution of the Jerusalem issue 
would be the real guarantee of achieving and safeguarding peace, 
and as a result of the Palestinian stand on Jerusalem, this 
issue has been considered among the issues that will be put 
aside for discussion in the subsequent phases of the 
negotiations. Regarding the operation that was carried out 
against the Israelis at the entrance to the Gaza Strip, the 
Palestinian stand toward it has been clear, leaving no room for 
the Israelis to exploit it. The Palestinian Authority said that 
the target of the perpetrators of the operation was not only the 
Israelis but also and actually Palestinian national security and 
their direct responsibility for the Gaza Strip and those living 
there in accordance with the agreement. 
  Regarding the excuse of the Palestinian weapons, the 
Palestinian Security Command has stated that it is in the 
process of counting and registering these weapons. As for the 
Israeli demand that these weapons be collected at a time when 
Israel is insisting on the settlers' right to keep and carry 
their weapons in accordance with Israeli laws, this demand is 
illogical in that it does not achieve equality. Besides, the 
settlers in the autonomous region and their carrying of weapons 
must be subject to Palestinian law and not Israeli law. 
[passage omitted] 

