Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Shen Xuanxin (3088 5503 2450): "Li Zemin at </F>
Provincial Discussion Meeting on Journalism Calls For Fully 
Understanding the New Situation and New Tasks Faced by 
Journalists and Enhancing a Sense of Political Responsibility in 
Guiding Public Opinion"] 
  [Text] Li Zemin, secretary of the provincial party 
committee, recently pointed out at a provincial discussion 
meeting on journalism: This year's tasks will be very heavy and 
arduous because we will center our work on establishing a 
socialist market economic structure and promoting reform in an 
all-round way. In the face of the new situation and new tasks, 
journalists must fully understand their heavy responsibility, 
correctly guide public opinion with a new outlook and work 
style, do a good and meticulous job in media work, and create a 
favorable social and media environment to promote reform, 
development, and stability. 
  Since the begining of reform and opening up, media work has 
developed rapidly in Zhejiang. The relations between the mass 
media and society and the people have become increasingly close, 
and the influence of the mass media on society and the people 
has also become greater and greater. The comrades on the 
journalism front have persisted in correctly guiding public 
opinion. Good progress has also been made in reforming 
journalist work and relatively great achievements have been made 
in media reporting. Li Zemin fully affirmed those results. He 
said: Now we have seen a good situation of political stability 
and economic development in this province, which is inseparable 
from the hard work of comrades on the journalism front. On 
behalf of the provincial party committee, I wish to express my 
heartfelt gratitude and extend my cordial regards to all 
comrades who have been working hard on the journalism front in 
this province, including comrades of the central news units 
stationed in Zhejiang. 
  After analyzing the current situation, tasks, and some weak 
links in media work faced by journalists, Li Zemin put forward 
demands on doing a good job in media work in the new year. He 
said: Under the new situation of establishing a socialist 
market economic structure, newspapers and radio and tv 
broadcasting -- the mouthpieces of the party, the government, 
and the people -- must firmly adhere to the principle and spirit 
of the party, be responsible to the party and people, persist in 
carrying out the policy of undertaking positive propaganda on 
unity, stability, and motivation, and firmly keep to the main 
theme [zhu xuan lu 0031 2467 1774] in guiding public opinion. 
Meanwhile, it is necessary to continuously, actively, and 
boldly explore how to reform journalism work and enable it to 
develop in concert with the development of economic 
construction, reform, opening up,and the all-around progress of 
society. These basic principles and policies must not change at 
any time. 
  Li Zemin called on comrades on the journalism front to fully 
understand the new situation and the honorable tasks they face 
in this period of great change, and to enhance their sense of 
political responsibility in guiding public opinion. He said: 
The current reform, from the reform in a single field to the 
overall situation, is more profound and difficult than the work 
in the past in terms of scope and effort. To smoothly promote 
reform we must have a favorable public opinion as well as a 
stable economic environment and a good social, political, and 
ideological environment. Correct guidance in public opinion can 
encourage and inspire the cadres and masses, while incorrect 
guidance in public opinion can create trouble or even bring 
about serious consequences. Therefore, journalists have a great 
responsibility in guiding public opinion. Through their 
effective work, journalists throughout the province must guide 
the broad masses of cadres and people to show concern for 
reform, understand reform, support reform, and take part in 
reform. In this way they can help promote the smooth progress of 
each reform and of their overall work, reduce risks, and achieve 
certain success. 
  Li Zemin said: For this year's tasks in media publicity, 
it is necessary to abide by the demand of the party's basic line 
of "one center, two basic points." We must emancipate our 
minds, do practical work, seize opportunities, accelerate reform 
and development, and correctly understand and handle the 
relations among reform, development, and stability. We must 
strive to comprehensively publicize the series of reform 
measures and policies of the party Central Committee and the 
provincial party committee and government. We should do a good 
job in publicizing the use of the criteria "conducive to three 
causes" [conducive to developing the productive forces of our 
socialist society, conducive to increasing the overall strength 
of our socialist country, and conducive to improving living 
standards] for judging success and failure and for unifying the 
thoughts of cadres and masses. As economic construction is the 
focal point, we should first do an effective job in publicizing 
economic work. The tasks should include further correcting and 
controlling the guiding thought for economic workers; further 
deepening the role of agriculture as the foundation of the 
national economy; and further deepening rural reform, reform in 
macroeconomic regulation and control, enterprise reform, and 
other supplementary reform measures. We should give more 
publicity to and strive to make some in-depth and influential 
reporting on major issues in opening up to the outside world. 
Meanwhile, it is necessary to improve publicity in socialist 
spiritual civilization and party building, as well as in 
building socialist democracy and the legal system. We should 
vigorously publicize our main tasks, Comrade Jiang Zemin's 
64-character call for pioneering spirit, patriotism, 
collectivism, and socialism. We should attach importance to 
publicizing the advanced examples, ideas, and experiences of 
workers, peasants, and intellectuals in the course of promoting 
the two civilizations. We must do a good job in reporting the 
study of Volume 3 of the Selected Works of Deng 
Xiaoping, the study of the theory of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics, and the task of fighting 
corruption and promoting clean government. 
  Li Zemin asked propaganda departments and press management 
departments of party committees at all levels and various press 
units to build a professional press team. Editors and 
journalists should be mobilized to earnestly study Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, the party's principles and policies, and the 
knowledge and laws pertaining to the socialist market economic 
system, so as to understand the overall situation and 
familiarize themselves with all policies. In particular, we 
must strictly demand from them a firm and correct political 
direction. Journalists and editors should be regularly sent to 
reform and construction frontlines to make in-depth 
investigation and study and write significant reports, so as to 
continually upgrade their professional standards and writing 
skills. Meanwhile, to stamp out the unhealthy practice of 
seeking personal gain from news writing, we must steadfastly 
resist and ban writing news for a fee . 
  Li Zemin expressed his hope that leading comrades from press 
units will concentrate their primary strength and energy on 
effective newspaper publication and effective planning for radio 
and television programs. He said: We should concentrate more 
of our energy on good publicity the larger the organization, the 
heavier the burden, and the greater the job. In addition, he 
asked party committees and governments at all levels to 
strengthen their leadership and attach more significance and 
support to the media. They should create essential conditions 
for press units to understand the overall situation and do an 
effective job. 
  Liang Pingbo, standing committee member of the provincial 
party committee and head of the Propaganda Department, presided 
over the discussion meeting. Over 20 people, including Shen Hui 
and Ma Peiyun, deputy heads of the Propaganda Department, as 
well as responsible comrades from major press units of Zhejiang 
Province and Hangzhou City and major central press units 
stationed in the province, attended the meeting. 

