Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Quinton Chan] </F>
  [Text] The bell rings...children in designer blue uniforms 
rush to their parents, waiting by the sleek Mercedes-Benz, Lexus 
and Toyotas in the school car park. 
  But this is no mainland-based international school -- it is 
China's first school for the wealthy. Located in Conghua, a 
small county 90 kilometres from Guangzhou, Guangdong province, 
the Hero's China Primary School marks the wealth of the state 
after 14 years of the open-door policy and economic reforms. 
  "The setting up of the school has followed the change in 
society," school spokesman Chen Haihong said. "It's just like 
the emergence of five-star hotels in the city...inevitable." 
And this is a "five-star" school. Costing 100 million yuan 
(about HK$88.5 million), its facilities are beyond anything most 
mainland Chinese can imagine. 
  Its 4.5-square-kilometre campus compares with anything in 
Hong Kong, and includes a football pitch and stands, an 
international- standard swimming pool, two tennis courts, 
several basketball courts, a health club, a computer laboratory, 
a language centre...even a mini zoo. Teachers, students and 
ancillary staff live in a well-furnished three-storey hostel 
nearby. 
  The tuition fee for the whole primary education is 300,000 
yuan -- equal to the life wages of a worker earning about 500 
yuan a month. But the fees can be refunded after students 
finish their course, according to the school's spokeswoman, Yang 
Shaomei. "It is a new concept," she said. "We take the money 
for investment and then we can return money to parents." 
  Launched in September last year, the first private school in 
the country is owned by the Guangzhou Power Station and two 
private firms, Zhong Luan Enterprise and Lingnan Training 
Centre. With 750 students, the school raised more than the 100 
million yuan construction cost. 
  Most of the parents were senior officials, big businessmen 
or 
managers of large corporations, Mr. Chen said. "We are not a 
noble school since there is no noble class in China," he said. 
  A businessman with a nine-year-old son studying at the 
school 
said: "It is worth paying such a large amount to let my child 
study here. It is a very nice school. I hope my son can become 
a university graduate in the future and help my business to 
succeed." 
  Even children are discovering they are lucky to have a place 
at such an impressive educational facility. "I am very lucky, 
my family is rich," 12-year-old Li Chikang said. "Other 
children are not so lucky, they have to study in schools which 
have poorer facilities." 
  But the abundant facilities and pleasant environment do not 
mean students have an easy school life -- the primary course is 
tougher than in any other school in the country. Students have 
to take English lessons shortly after joining the school, 
whereas in other schools in China foreign languages are not 
taught until secondary level. 
  "As many of the parents are businessmen, our objective is to 
train their children to be the elite, and hope they can succeed 
them," Ms. Yang said. "It also fits our name -- Hero's China. 
In that sense, students have to develop a sense of belonging, 
awareness, independence and responsibility in the boarding 
school." 
  Those on the five-day residential course also learn 
independence, although there are 25 "family" teachers and 38 
nannies to take care of their daily needs. "Students have to 
clean their room, we won't help them," teacher Wang Oiwang said. 
  "Most of them have not done housework because they have been 
pampered since childhood. When they first arrive some even 
cried because they missed home. But they are happy now." 

