Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Prime Minister Dr. 'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali met in 
New York yesterday with the chairman and members of the UN 
Security Council Committee entrusted with implementing 
Resolution No. 661 of 1990 concerning the economic sanctions 
against Iraq. Al-Majali presented to them a report supported by 
ample studies and figures on Jordan's economic losses and 
difficulties and the negative effects on Jordan of its 
commitment to implementing this resolution. He emphasized his 
demands that the Council work for making good Jordan's losses, 
amounting to $300 million annually, as a result of its 
commitment to the Council's resolutions. 
  Backing his report with details and figures, the prime 
minister noted the complications and losses that affect the 
Jordanian economy, especially the sectors of transportation, 
transit, the free market, and the Gulf of Aqaba as a result of 
the inspection measures by international forces against all 
ships arriving and leaving the al-'Aqabah port. He explained 
the negative implications of this inspection for the Jordanian 
citizen who is living the stage of building democracy and 
peacemaking. 
  The prime minister answered questions by the committee put 
forward by the chairman who in turn promised to raise these 
issues and discuss them with all the committee members and give 
them priority consideration. 
  The meeting was attended by Information Minister Dr. Jawad 
al-'Anani, Finance Minister Sami Qammuh, and 'Adnan Abu-'Awdah, 
Jordan's permanent UN representative. 
  Last night, the prime minister met with UN Secretary General 
Dr, Butrus-Ghali and exchanged views with him on the peace 
process in the Middle East in light of the latest developments. 
The prime minister briefed the secretary general on the results 
and the course of the Jordanian-U.S. talks held recently in 
Washington between the Jordanian side under His Majesty King 
Husayn and the U.S. side under President Bill Clinton. The 
prime minister raised with the secretary general the issue of 
the negative effect on the Jordanian economy of Jordan's 
commitment to UN Security Council Resolution No. 661. 
  The secretary general expressed an understanding of the 
Jordanian complaint and of Jordan's suffering because of its 
commitment to implementing international legitimacy. 
  The meeting was attended by Information Minister Dr. Jawad 
al-'Anani, and Jordan's permanent UN representative 'Adnan 
Abu-'Awdah. 

