Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kaliningrad, Russia, Mar 21, BNS -- The arrest of 
Vladas Laurinavicius, president of the Kaunas-based Selma 
association, is a provocation and can be regarded as sabotage, 
former Lithuanian Defense Minister Audrius Butkevicius told BNS 
Sunday [20 March]. 
  Laurinavicius was arrested Thursday night when some 40 
searches were carried out in apartments of present and former 
Defense Ministry officials, including Butkevicius. The searches 
were carried out in relation to the investigation of financial 
violations in the purchase of weapons for Lithuanian defense 
forces in 1992-1993. Laurinavicius acted as a mediator in these 
weapon deals. 
  In Butkevicius' opinion, the arrest means that certain 
forces 
in Lithuania want to ruin the association's joint project with 
the Russian Baltic Sea Fleet to build housing in the Kaliningrad 
region for Russian military personnel withdrawing from the 
Baltic states. 
  The ex-minister said the project created 3,000 new jobs for 
Lithuania and the number was supposed to increase to 5,000 in 
the near future. Butkevicius said a new contract had to be 
signed Saturday during Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev's 
visit to the region, but Laurinavicius was arrested. 
  The former minister said the Lithuanian state budget already 
recovered 70 percent of the money that Lithuania invested in the 
Baltflot-Selma project. Butkevicius said the project would have 
been very useful to Lithuania because an agreement on oil 
supplies to Lithuania was supposed to be signed together with 
the new building contract. In his words, Grachev brought the 
agreement to Kaliningrad. 
  Butkevicius said during his service as defense minister he 
thought Lithuania should become "an intermediate point for the 
transit of goods from the West to the East." The best way to 
implement this concept is to maintain good relations with all 
neighboring countries, he said. "It's a pity that the present 
policy may deviate from the way we chose." 
  The ex-minister said the Lithuanian Government and 
parliamentary commissions carefully checked three times whether 
plans to build apartments for Russian servicemen are politically 
and economically useful to Lithuania. 
  In Butkevicius' words, people who disagree with his concept 
chose "the easiest way -- to defame the participants of the 
project." 
  The former minister said the supposed oil supplies to 
Lithuania were used as a pretext for a provocation. Butkevicius 
said Selma built houses in the region on credit for 1.5 years 
but oil would have rehabilitated the association in the eyes of 
the Lithuania public, as well as Estonia and Latvia. In his 
opinion, oil supplies would have become a basis for "further 
fruitful cooperation between Lithuania and Russia." 

