Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rita Nasheniyetse: "With Narcotics to Europe; </F>
The Baltic Today Is an Ideal Place for Transit of Narcotics"] 
  [Text] In September of 1993, the police in Olaine 
confiscated 8 kilograms of amphetamine pills. This was the 
paltry remnants of the Olaine "goods" which several years ago 
filled Europe. Around half of the amphetamines which ended up in 
the hands of the English police came from Latvia. There are 
hardly any other Latvian goods which are so abundantly 
represented abroad. However, the production of amphetamines is 
not our largest contribution to the international drug trade. 
<H5>  Latvia Is Integrating </H5>
  From the territory of the Near and Middle East, where opium 
and narcotics of the cannabis group are produced, from the 
countries of the Golden Crescent--Iran, Pakistan and 
Afghanistan--the goods, according to tradition, were sent to 
Europe along a relatively short transit route through Turkey, 
the Balkans, Greece and other Mediterranean countries. At the 
present time, the transport of narcotics has been shifted closer 
to the northern boundaries. Crossing the CIS countries, 
shipments of drugs make a huge circle and are re-routed in the 
direction of the Baltic. 
  The "goods" from Russia, the Transcaucasus and the southern 
republics of the former USSR also come through the Baltic 
(primarily through Latvia with its three ports). Narcotics 
intended for the Scandinavian countries are brought in from 
Poland. 
  Also not excluded is the particularly exotic transit (from 
some African country) or through Russia and the Far East from 
South America. The Baltic today is the ideal place for the 
transit of narcotics. A wonderful geographic position in 
combination with weakly guarded borders, an increasing influence 
of organized crime, legislation which has not yet been regulated 
and clearly expressed corruption have become the reasons why 
narcotics have begun to be distributed along the channels in the 
direction of the Baltic with an ever increasing intensity. 
<H5>  Latvia as a Market for Narcotics </H5>
  "Latvia as a market for narcotics does not yet have 
particular significance, but it does play a very important role 
in the transit of narcotics," says the deputy chief of the Main 
Police Administration of the city of Riga, Vilnis Kipens. Mr. 
Kostenko from the 6th section of the police department also 
agrees with him. However, this certainly does not mean that the 
drug business here is not a profitable endeavor. Such a point of 
view was expressed in the newspaper TEV in the issue for 15 
November 1993: "As strange as it may seem, the profits of the 
mafia obtained from trade in narcotics in Latvia are not great. 
As compared with the developed countries, the consumption of 
these substances here is rather insignificant. Therefore, trade 
in them is entrusted to dealers of a lower level--obviously, 
under the condition that they regularly hand over the 
appropriate part of their income to their bosses." 
  Trade in narcotics at street "points," perhaps, does not 
make 
an impression. However, this is merely the "enterprise" of small 
dealers who, in turn, rely on "wholesalers"--large dealers who 
rarely catch the attention of the police and are almost never 
detained by them. 
  Approximately 1,000 laty worth of goods pass through the 
hands of the large dealers in a 24-hour period. A large dealer 
always has at least 20 kilograms of poppy straw on hand, several 
liters of "khitkhanki" (raw opium--raw material for production 
of heroin, which is also used in the form of a semi-finished 
product) or goods which are analogous in their "value." Large 
dealers do not stand at the very top of the pyramid in the 
narcotics trade. They may conditionally be called the second 
degree workers in this business. 
  As to where the monetary relations with organized crime lead 
subsequently, we can only conjecture. We should remember that in 
Latvia the source of profit has become specifically 
transit, and the "informals" will certainly not let 
anything of theirs slip away. Although we must also remember 
that part of the goods pass them by. Although the drug business 
is that sphere of activity in which the representatives of 
organized crime find a common language, for some the possibility 
of getting a higher profit seems too tempting. 
<H5>  Couriers in the Drug Business </H5>
  The most significant moment in the work of the narcotics 
transporter--the courier--is to bring the goods over the border. 
The "spectrum" of courier cadres at the present time is rather 
broad--from "specialists" to drug addicts engaging in transport 
at their own fear and risk. During the operation of "closing" 
the channel for transporting drugs which connected Lithuania and 
Latvia, a family was detained which was transporting across the 
border drugs hidden in the diapers of an infant. 
  However, a trained courier does not travel holding a bag of 
hashish in his hands. The transport of narcotics may be 
organized with the aid of train conductors, locomotive 
engineers, long-distance truck drivers or aircraft pilots. In 
these cases, the courier merely provides the transport for 
shipment of the goods from one place to another, settles 
accounts with the sellers and arranges all necessary matters. 
  A more complex form is also practiced, when one other 
person--a manager--participates in the transport of the drugs. 
If the shipment is especially large or if new business contacts 
are being established, the negotiations at one end or the other, 
as well as the monetary arrangements, are handled by the 
manager. In this case, the courier is responsible for the 
technical aspect--to organize the transport. With the 
"specialization" of the drug business in Eastern Europe and the 
CIS countries, couriers are also becoming professionals. At the 
present time, the number of those couriers which themselves use 
drugs is declining. Among them you will rarely find those who 
use weak drugs for a prolonged period of time, or those whose 
bosses force them to refuse narcotics. A good courier is more 
valuable than gold. He is considered a small but necessary 
detail in the mechanism of the large-scale drug business. 
<H5>  Once Again About the Border </H5>
  Opinions vary as to what percentage of the drugs which are 
brought in are detained at the border. In any case, this is a 
trifle. Foreign experts in combatting the drug trade believe 
that at the moment of import-export, only about 5-6 percent of 
the amount of drugs brought in are actually confiscated in the 
West European countries. Nevertheless, it is specifically the 
border which is the place where the struggle of any state with 
the drug trade begins. A regulated border has not only the 
inspection and detainment of cargo and documents, but also a 
well-ordered system of information. Today there is no precise 
information about who is crossing the border and for what 
purpose. 
  A Bureau on Combatting Narcotics will soon be created in 
Latvia. At the present time, it is presumed that it will employ 
at least 30 persons. But perhaps this is not the indicator which 
we should consider as being decisive, determining the 
effectiveness of the work. Perhaps a more significant indicator 
is the measure to which its work will be supported by the state 
in a financial and juridical sense (with the aid of 
legislation). Ultimately, this is a question of prestige--how 
long will Latvia serve as the window to Europe? A broken window, 
through which anyone who wants to can climb. 
<H5>  Not Only Oaks Grow in the Baltic </H5>
  Opium poppies grow there too. The road to bright capitalism 
has had a heavy impact on the financial situation of the 
peasants. Neither the raising of livestock, nor grain growing 
bring them a decent income. Therefore, they are trying to make a 
living by growing poppies. What areas specifically are taken up 
by them, it is hard to say. However, in Lithuania, where this 
trade has become rather popular, law enforcement workers in 1993 
confiscated around 1 tonne of poppy straw of local production. 
It has been learned from certain unofficial sources that part of 
the opium poppy straw was brought in from Ukraine or from 
Lithuania. Latvia also strives to make its "contribution" to the 
field of poppy raising. The residents of Talsinskiy Rayon worked 
particularly well last year in this regard. 
  Aleksandr Kostenko, chief of the group for combatting drugs 
of the Riga police department's section for combatting organized 
crime, believes that Latvia should seriously undertake the 
struggle against growing narcotics raw material, returning to 
the control measures which were popular in the early 80's. 
  We might add that the opium poppies grown in the northern 
regions are especially highly valued by drug dealers due to 
their prolonged storage time. 
<H5>  The Community Does Not Realize the Full Measure of Danger </H5>
  -- So says Modris Krishyanis, deputy chief of the 7th 
Section 
of the Main Police Administration in the city of Riga. "We in 
Latvia have not yet realized the danger which threatens us. 
Today it seems to us that nothing terrible is happening, but 
this is the calm before the storm. Abroad, even acetone is 
strictly accounted for as a raw material for production of 
narcotics: Its transport, storage and application are under the 
strictest control. Yet here in our country one can buy narcotics 
at the drug store. `Solutan,' which has become a very popular 
medicine in Latvia, and which is prescribed even for children, 
contains ephedrine, which is classed as a stimulant. A drug 
addict needs 6-7 cubic centimeters of this substance, yet from 
two bottles of `solutan' one can get 22 cubic centimeters. All 
this is perfectly well known both to doctors and pharmacists, 
but if a person gets 30 laty a month, he can yield to temptation 
and write a prescription for money or issue the medication for a 
counterfeit prescription." 
  "Very many drug addicts want to get treatment. However, the 
medical institutions in Latvia have allotted only 70 beds for 
this purpose." 
  "At the present time, a drug market is being born in Latvia. 
`Ladies' narcotics--ephedrine and other `mild' pills, which have 
become popular among the young people, in fact create a base for 
the use of strong narcotics in the future." 
<H5>  Narcotics--a Tool for Manipulation </H5>
  Apartment robberies, store hold-ups, assaults in the 
street--these are all methods for desperate drug addicts to get 
money. A glass of pulverized poppy straw costs 4 laty. Young 
girls who offer their bodies for sale in the street, as well as 
certain "call girls," are puppets in the hands of their pimps. 
They have been "hooked." They are totally dependant on the next 
dose of ephedrine (a narcotic which increases the sex drive) or 
heroin. This is almost the only way in which the owner settles 
accounts with such girls. 
  Businessmen, as a rule, try to stay away from narcotics. 
  Nevertheless, a substance for entertaining "higher 
society"--cocaine powder--has appeared in Latvia. This is an 
expensive thing. Cocaine is brought in by transit route from 
Russia (through the Far East, from South America) or from 
Western Europe. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 1. Statistics on drugs for 1992-1993                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |1992                     |1993                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Drug-related crimes      |117                      |219                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Deaths from drug overdose|27                       |47                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Drugs confiscated in the |60 kg                    |167 kg                   | 
|city of Riga             |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Opium extract confiscate-|1.2 liters               |52.5 liters              | 
|d in Riga                |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



<FIG ID=JPRS-TDD-013L-57A>           Graphic </FIG>






