Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, March 5 KYODO -- The head of the Social 
Democratic Party [of Japan] (SDP) [SDPJ] said Saturday [5 March] 
that the party will promote ties with liberal forces in the 
coalition government to prepare for the next general elections 
to be held under a new electoral system. 
  SDPJ Chairman Tomiichi Murayama said that the party, the 
largest component in the coalition, will promote cooperation 
with the Democratic Socialist Party (DSP), Sakigake (Harbinger) 
and the Democratic Reform Party. 
  The Diet on Friday enacted amendments to a political reform 
package which calls for introducing a combination of single-seat 
constituencies and proportional representation for elections for 
the House of Representatives, replacing the current multiseat 
districts. 
  Cooperation with the liberal forces is indispensable to 
realize a tie-up of ruling coalition parties to fight off the 
main opposition Liberal Democratic Party in the elections, 
Murayama said. 
  He made the remark at a meeting of secretaries general of 
the 
party's 47 prefectural chapters. 
  "Similarities are increasing among the SDP, the DSP, 
Sakigake 
and the Democratic Reform Party on things such as political 
method," Murayama said. 
  Shinseito (Japan Renewal Party), a core party in the 
coalition, and Komeito [Clean Government Party], the third 
largest coalition bloc, have said the governing coalition 
parties must unite to create a two-party system, sustain a 
coalition government and prevent the LDP from regaining power. 
  Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, head of Japan New Party 
(JNP), is reportedly tilting heavily in favor of the 
Shinseito-Komeito line, diverging from his initial stance of 
pursuing a moderate multiparty system. 
  Murayama rejected the idea, saying that supporting the 
governing coalition does not mean the unification of the parties. 
  SDPJ Secretary General Wataru Kubo also referred to the 
possibility of forming a new party by the liberal forces, saying 
the time may come for the SDPJ to be born as a new party. 
  The ruling coalition is made up of the SDPJ, Shinseito, 
Komeito, the JNP, the DSP, Sakigake, the United Social 
Democratic Party and the Democratic Reform Party, a 
parliamentary group in the House of Councillors. 
  In a related development, Shinseito representative Kozo 
Watanabe said in a speech in Utsunomiya that the ruling 
coalition will strengthen its unity by the time of the upper 
house election next year. 
  "It is natural for us to consolidate cooperation among 
ruling 
parties in order to win in the House of Councillors election 
next year," he said. 
  Watanabe's remark indirectly criticized a call by Akira 
Yamagishi, head of the Japan Trade Union Confederation (Rengo), 
for formation of a united front by socialist and liberal forces 
by election time. 
  Hajime Funada, a Shinseito executive in charge of election 
affairs, told reporters the election will serve as a test for 
cooperation among ruling parties in the lower house election, 
which will follow the upper house polls. 
  He hinted that the topic of a cabinet shake-up may resurface 
after the passage in May of the fiscal 1994 budget. 

