BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Adrian Nastase, executive president of the </F>
Social Democracy Party of Romania and president of the Chamber 
of Deputies of Romania's Parliament, by Ion Pavelescu; place and 
date not given: "A Modern Social Democracy; A Normal 
Parliamentary Life"] 
  [Excerpts] 
<H5>  Human Rights, an End of Century Religion </H5>
  [Pavelescu] Mr. President, do you believe that the world 
should know more about one of the most important people in the 
leadership of this country? 
  [Nastase] To tell you the truth, for quite some time now I 
have not been approached with such questions as "What have you 
done in the past four years?" Still, if you wish to know more 
about me, I am ready to tell you. I was born in Bucharest on 22 
June 1950, under the sign of Cancer, a terrible sign for those 
who choose politics for their field of activity. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Pavelescu] Now, I will approach you in your capacity as 
president of the PDSR [Social Democracy Party of Romania]. 
Recently you have embarked fully on the activity of organizing 
this political formation. You have paid visits in provinces and 
attended symposiums. All this leads to the impending question: 
People said of your party that it was established 
instantaneously around the president of Romania Ion Iliescu, 
whose immense prestige permitted the party to achieve stability 
very quickly, on a somehow sentimental basis. What is left of 
the initial feeling and what are the current goals? 
  [Nastase] Certainly there is still immense sympathy for Mr. 
Ion Iliescu, who has assumed the responsibility to pull Romania 
out of the crisis and certain people, not able to discredit him, 
resort to the uncivilized means of insults. Only a person who 
possesses such qualities as the head of our state, democratic 
through his entire structure, tolerant and conciliatory, can 
continue untouched by these ignoble attacks. But since you have 
referred to the party and its destiny, I will give you a frank 
answer. No political formation can survive if it does not 
construct its structures and activity on modern bases. After 
the [December 1989] revolution, some associations were set up 
that were mostly against rather than in favor of something. The 
FSN [National Salvation Front] itself was against the past, 
super-centralized dictatorship in the economy, suffocated in 
politics, like a house that has not been aired for a long time 
and which the rejuvenating flow of life has not penetrated. The 
Civic Alliance was established in the same way. This is to give 
you just two examples. All these structures can no longer 
resist the new conditions. As far as we are concerned, the 
change of name that took place at our party's last congress, 
from FDSN [Democratic National Salvation Front] into PDSR 
[Social Democracy Party of Romania] was not only a formal 
modification but it was conceived as a fundamental change in our 
way of thinking and in our actions. We wished to establish an 
intelligent party that has its own message to promote. 
<H5>  We Have an Economic Concept That Is Capable of Inspiring </H5>
Dynamism and Efficiency in Our Society 
  [Pavelescu] Now, we are going to talk about a sensitive 
area, namely about ideas. On what doctrine do you base your 
activity? 
  [Nastase] It is definitely the modern social-democratic 
doctrine, that so many social-democratic parties in Europe and 
in the world follow. It has been emphatically stated that 
social democracy does not have its own concept in the economic 
area. This is a completely false idea. In Europe at least, 
social-democracy has formed its own school of managers and has 
experts capable of conferring dynamism to economic life and 
inspiring the motivating force that is necessary in our century. 
One should not assign a purely social component to 
social-democracy. This would look as if in the same society 
there were two models of society, one for production and another 
one for distribution of production. This could be compared to a 
car with two engines and two steering-wheels. This is absurd. 
We have one single concept, which we could call an integrating 
one, which is capable of incorporating the economic, managerial, 
and social-human progress in one and the same vision. In fact, 
we define more precisely the relationship between individual and 
the productive sphere. Likewise, we have an individual concept 
about economic areas or sectors and about the area of 
production, and services. The way in which we regard things 
allows us to introduce new, individual elements in our social- 
economic life and not elements borrowed from abroad. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Pavelescu] Thus, could we assume that the PDSR views itself 
as a party which, through its program and its activity, 
constantly wishes to ensure the economic and social 
modernization of the country, in order to eliminate the remnants 
of the excessive centralism of the past and to create new 
sources of dynamism in both areas? 
  [Nastase] This could be a good definition for a continuously 
changing reality. 
  [Pavelescu] But what are we going to do about those who 
dispute all this? They continue to accuse you of every possible 
sin or charge you with the most extravagant intentions.... 
  [Nastase] We have lived too long in the atmosphere of 
clashes between socialism and capitalism. Thus, we got used to 
answering questions about the future only with terms created in 
this confrontation. But this seems to me to be a simplistic and 
incorrect attitude. Socialism has an emotional impact on fewer 
and fewer people. On the other hand, capitalism still seems to 
us permeated with too many negative connotations at the 
political and social level for it to represent the miraculous 
key or the magic word with a strong magnetic force. Through our 
ideology, we have found solutions for the better organization of 
relations between individual and society. This is the essence 
of our concept. How do we regard this relationship? We cannot 
formulate it correctly without also referring to the role of the 
state. We believe that at least for the transition period, the 
state has an important role to play. We cannot pretend that all 
that is happening in the area of production relations does not 
concern us. 
  [Pavelescu] At a symposium organized at Poiana Brasov, Mr. 
Mircea Cosea [chairman of the Council for Coordination, 
Strategy, and Economic Reform] made a speech in which he drew 
attention to the fact that the concept of the market economy 
must be applied in such a way that the ordinary individual 
should regard it as a necessity. Was he speaking on behalf of 
the PDSR? 
  [Nastase] This is a rhetorical question. Certainly, Mr. 
Cosea included in his idea the party whose member he is. At the 
same time, referring to the market economy as if we had a 
choice, is wrong. The market economy has been implemented all 
around us. We cannot stay isolated. It would be as if we were 
to choose another rail gauge for our engines. This is 
inconceivable. The problem however is that we should work in a 
way that could make people perceive other effects, not only the 
negative effects of this economy, such as the increase of 
prices, inflation, and unemployment. 
<H5>  Optimal Conditions for Competition, for Contest </H5>
  [Pavelescu] Do you have a solution? 
  [Nastase] There are solutions. I was not the one who 
invented them. Optimal conditions must be created for economic 
competition. We should eliminate monopolies that generate high 
and disproportionate prices, bureaucracy, and corruption. 
However, we can see a vicious circle here. We need 
restructuring and financial sources to permit the development of 
industries, and they, in turn, can establish the framework for 
the operation of the laws of competition. This is our 
understanding of the way in which we can emerge from the current 
impasse. And we have to do it alone. Nobody will work for us. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Pavelescu] Mr. President, how do you explain that while you 
remain a party that is closely connected with the 1989 December 
revolution, thus not marked by the defects of the past, your 
influence in universities is still poor? 
  [Nastase] There is a very simple explanation for this. 
Certain university teachers, who were also part of the old 
structures, have repainted their past, have bluffed and continue 
to bluff, and attract students. This situation is anomalous. 
Students all over the world are basically left-oriented. Only 
in our country have the students' opinions deviated. 
  [Pavelescu] And God forbid that a basically right-wing 
concept should penetrate the students' world. 
  [Nastase] You are right. We are trying to get closer to 
this section. Basically, their interests are closely connected 
with those that we are fighting for. We are going to establish 
a Youth Forum. The university group will play an important role 
in this forum. 
  [Pavelescu] Considering that yours is such a young party, 
you have not had time to take care of other, important social 
strata of the electorate. Why, for example should so many women 
vote for the PD(FSN) [Democratic Party (National Salvation 
Front)] when, as a matter of fact, that party has brought them 
only disappointment? 
  [Nastase] I believe that in principle our viewpoints come 
quite close. We intend to organize a PDSR Women's Association. 
In general terms, due to past frustrations and due to our 
negligence -- I have to be frank here -- the proportion of women 
in the structure of our leadership is insignificant. By all 
means, we will correct this mistake. And you will see that the 
number of women ready to join us will increase. The days when 
people voted on the basis of feelings are gone. This is certain. 
  [Pavelescu] What type of organizational formula have you 
adopted? 
  [Nastase] Those that are included in our statute: local 
organizations, coordination councils, the executive bureau, and 
the standing delegation. We continually follow aspects that are 
gradually becoming our distinctive features: representation and 
democracy. 
<H5>  The PDSR Has Become and Will Remain a Political Force </H5>
  [Pavelescu] Therefore, can one say that the PDSR has become 
a powerful force? 
  [Nastase] One can say that. Why not? And it will continue 
to grow stronger. We need a few months to organize our 
strategy. We will increase our activity in the provinces. In 
the coming period, Mr. Oliviu Gherman [PDSR president] and other 
members of the party leadership will participate in activities 
that are aimed at enhancing the organization of our branches in 
the provinces, will hold theoretical debates with a practical 
character, and will disseminate our precise message. 
  [Pavelescu] Thus, those who consider the PDSR a party of 
pedants are mistaken!... 
  [Nastase] They are utterly mistaken. We are a militant 
party. If this characteristic does not take concrete shape in 
what Mihai Eminescu [Romanian poet] called "ugly street scenes" 
it is because we detest the idea of turning the street into a 
place where political disputes are solved. However, those who 
mistake our good manners for weakness are wrong. What is new 
and noteworthy in our activity is the combination of joint 
actions, with the participation of party cadres and, considering 
that we are the ruling party, with the members of the executive. 
This fact is beneficial for two reasons. The FSN made a 
mistake in leaving the government in charge of dialogue on all 
issues after the May 1990 election. The party felt in a way 
neglected. We wish to make good this error. Therefore, we 
approach the local party organizations with groups of people 
that include both members of the party and of the executive. The 
government members can only gain from seeing everything on the 
spot. The members of the party leadership can also only gain 
when they take over a part of the responsibility. 
  [Pavelescu] A modern party, with a clear message, and with 
viable structures, thus a party that is constantly increasing 
its mobilizing force -- is this the way you want to appear in 
the eye of the public? 
  [Nastase] This is more or less what we are and this is 
definitely what we want to become! 

<H5>    We Try To Find Ways for Cooperation With All Political </H5>
Forces in the Parliament 
  [Pavelescu] I am going to approach you now in your capacity 
as president of the Chamber of Deputies of the Romanian 
Parliament. Is it only our impression or are you really annoyed 
with the Chamber? 
  [Nastase] Annoyed might be a little too strong an 
expression. Dissatisfied, yes. And I have reason to be. An 
atmosphere that is at variance with the rules for a proper 
functioning of such an institution has been established in the 
Chamber of Deputies. There are deputies who are absent without 
any reason. Others ask their friends to sign the attendance book 
for them. Therefore, often we do not have the necessary number 
of deputies to adopt certain laws. However, I have to tell you 
something else. If you ask any president of a Chamber of 
Deputies, you will see that they have the same reasons for 
discontent. A parliament often looks like an undisciplined 
structure, a machine that is working to no avail. However, a 
very important aspect can be overlooked: We, at the level of 
parliament, absorb a great amount of tension which would 
otherwise overflow the streets with consequences that would be 
difficult to estimate. 
  [Pavelescu] I am not concealing the impression that a part 
of the public perceives things a little differently. The 
impression exists that we are witnessing two types of blockage: 
an economic and a legislative blockage, which fuel each other. 
What is your view on this issue? 
  [Nastase] This is an exaggeration. You should not forget 
that the parliament is also a sort of mirror of the nation's 
wishes, its symbol. If the nation had wanted a parliament in 
which the PDSR held 51 percent of the deputies and senators, the 
nation would have acted accordingly. But the nation chose the 
current situation and we have to respect its will. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Pavelescu] You have initiated a dialogue in which, 
willingly or unwillingly, virtually all political forces 
representing the parliamentary spectrum participated. Are you 
pleased with it? 
  [Nastase] Do you want a sincere answer? We believe that it 
was a good idea. As a matter of fact, dialogue should become a 
regular component of the public life in Romania. It is sad that 
some people considered it as an exceptional case. We tried to 
carry out a certain inter-party exercise of democracy. Because 
apart from our options, we are also duty-bound to cooperate in 
order to reach our well-defined goals and stop what used to be 
called the cold war after the elections. 
  [Pavelescu] Have you had any results so far? 
  [Nastase] I believe so. For example, we succeed in changing 
at least our way of approaching others. Therefore, when Mr. 
Dinu Patriciu [prominent leader of the Liberal Party '93] so 
rudely attacked the entire PDSR, it was easy for us to isolate 
him, to turn it into an example and not a rule. And please note 
that we have not identified for a moment the whole Liberal Party 
'93 with the respective deputy. In any event, we will not hold 
talks with him before he apologizes. However, the dialogue had 
exceptional results from another aspect. It changed the image of 
the PDSR. The party that has been labelled in every possible 
way, has proved that it has been accepted indeed. Thus, the 
effort was worthwhile. 
  [Pavelescu] The Democratic Convention of Romania [CDR] 
accuses you of preparing for early elections. To what extent is 
this affirmation true or false? 
  [Nastase] Certain parties -- for example the PD(FSN) -- have 
publicly announced their intention to induce early elections. 
Other parties, including the CDR, are preparing for those 
elections although they are apprehensive about the future. In 
these conditions we would be naive just to stand aside and wait. 
As we have declared, we consider this solution of early 
elections as the worst and the most uninspired one. It would 
block us for a while without offering anything to anybody in 
exchange. However, if we are faced with such an alternative, we 
will act accordingly. Nevertheless, I believe that the position 
we expressed publicly was not properly understood. 
  [Pavelescu] What are you referring to? 
  [Nastase] I am referring to the need that before early 
general elections early, local elections should be organized. I 
am saying this because a somewhat paradoxical situation has been 
created. At the last local elections we were not a party. 
Therefore, among the leaders of counties and of Bucharest 
sectors, many people who are members of the Democratic 
Convention or members of the PD(FSN) were elected. It is clear 
that early general elections will be organized with the same 
competing ideas, thus the results can already be anticipated. 
Therefore, we are going to propose a modification of the law on 
public administration and the electoral law, so that our 
representation corresponds to the proportion of the electorate 
that votes for us. Any form of action aimed at undermining this 
procedure will be interpreted only as a measure of "arrogant 
egoism" just to quote Roman [PD(FSN) leader]. 
  [Pavelescu] Mr. President, since you have been so patient 
with us, we cannot resist the temptation to ask you a question 
that will probably seem to you inappropriate. Do you believe 
that the UDMR [Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania] has 
committed itself to obstructing the leadership forever? 
  [Nastase] I am going to answer you truthfully. Recently in 
Cluj I addressed this formation and asked them to show a more 
reasonable attitude. Well, let me tell you that I received a 
number of positive signs. This means that your question was not 
exactly inappropriate. 

