CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel Le Ke Lam] </F>
  [Text] The southeastern coastal zone of the fatherland 
plays an important economic and national defense role. In this 
coastal zone, there are various islands and archipelagoes--huge 
defensive "battleships." The Con Son archipelago [Footnote 1] 
[This is still called Con Dao. It covers an area 72 square km in 
size and consists of 16 islands of various sizes. It's 
coordinates are 106.31 degrees to 106.45 degrees longitude east 
and 8.34 to 8.49 degrees latitude north. It is approximately 80 
nautical miles southeast of Vung Tau.] is located along an 
international navigational route. It has many deep bays 
protected from the wind that are very convenient for ships to 
drop anchor. Northeast of the Con Son archipelago is Phu Quy 
Island. [Footnote 2] [This is located 90 nautical miles from 
Vung Tau and 55 nautical miles from Phan Thiet.] East of Phu Quy 
are the Truong Sa [Spratly] Islands. Together, these three 
islands and archipelagoes form a strategic "triangle of islands" 
that is closely connected to the mainland and that make it 
convenient for developing the coastal economy and national 
defense, which is something rarely found anywhere else. 
  The oil and gas industrial zone in the southeastern coastal 
region of our country encompasses an area of hundreds of 
thousands of square kilometers. We have now formed two oil and 
gas exploration and mining zones. The Bach Ho field began 
operations in 1986. Next to go on line was the Rong field, and 
very soon, the Dai Hung field will begin supplying many millions 
of tons of crude oil per year to the country. This is an 
advantage for building and developing Vietnam's coastal economy. 
This will attract investment and cooperation from many 
countries. But this is also an area that various enemies have 
their eye on. 
  With the new plots and stratagems of the imperialists and 
other enemies, our coastal zones in general and our southeastern 
coastal zone in particular will always be "hot" and very 
"sensitive" zones. Other countries could and have encroached on 
our sovereignty in this coastal zone: 
  Agreements have been signed with foreign corporations to 
carry on oil and gas mining operations along our continental 
shelf. But their goal is to gradually occupy the entire eastern 
coastal zone. In the name of implementing the agreements, they 
will use their naval forces to perform defense tasks and 
regularly maintain strong naval forces in this zone with the aim 
of creating tension and turmoil throughout it. 
  "Scientific research" and defense flotillas will be sent to 
study and reconnoiter the situation along our coast. Ships and 
civilian forces will be used to extract marine products around 
the drilling zones, which will weaken security, interfere with 
our mining activities, and at the same time give them an excuse 
to start conflicts when necessary. 
  It will not be possible to eliminate the enemy's ability to 
use limited naval and air forces to surround and isolate our 
exploration and mining forces in coastal zones. They will then 
be in a position to use offensive weapons to force us to abandon 
our oil and gas exploration and mining activities. Although the 
forces and combat formulas depend on each enemy, they usually 
concentrate on having the advantage in terms of equipment and 
weapons, launching fierce and sudden attacks, having 
overwhelming strength, and presenting international opinion with 
a "fait accompli." 
  The above analysis means that we must strengthen our ability 
to defend our territorial sovereignty; protect our national 
interests, natural resources, and environment; and defend those 
who are living and working at sea. More specifically, we must 
build a strong national defense potential at sea and in each 
coastal area of the fatherland. We must mobilize the integrated 
strength of the entire party, all the people, and the entire 
military in the economic, political, national defense, and 
security sectors. There must be unified targets and action plans 
based on a common strategy and integrated macrocosmic plan of 
the party and state regarding building, developing, and 
defending our seas. There must be close coordination between 
building and developing the economy and resolutely and ably 
defending our territorial waters, protecting our natural 
resources, maintaining security at sea, and forming a strong and 
broad all-people's national defense and people's war front 
throughout our territorial waters and in each coastal zone and 
in each coastal locality. This front is a major process that 
must be carried on regularly and continuously. The contents of 
this process must be determined based on the situation and 
tasks. It must constantly be improved with respect to 
organizational structure, the forces must be deployed 
rationally, and capabilities for defending the seas must be 
strengthened with the cooperation of the forces existing at sea, 
on the islands, along the coasts, and on land in order to 
satisfy the requirements and complete the tasks. 
  In our coastal areas, there are more than 3,000 islands of 
various sizes. Some of Vietnam's islands and archipelagoes are 
located near the mainland, and others are located far away. 
There are 26 coastal provinces and cities, and almost half of 
the country's population and more than 6 million laborers are 
concentrated in these coastal areas. Almost 240,000 people are 
directly involved in making a living at sea in various sectors, 
and we have 80,000 ships. Our country's system of islands, in 
conjunction with the mainland, forms a multi-level defense 
structure. If the entire country and each coastal locality 
deploys forces and means rationally; coordinates economic, 
national defense, and security matters well; and coordinates 
activities at sea, on the islands, and on land closely, then 
this will create an unbroken and strong national defense and 
security front. This national defense front will be built using 
the integrated strength of the entire country and all the 
people. This is the basis for defending, protecting, 
controlling, and mastering the ocean areas and the precondition 
for scoring "Bach Dang military achievements" like our 
ancestors. The lessons in defending the oceans show that one of 
the most effective ways to affirm and implement sovereignty at 
sea is to have forces constantly present to defend and exploit 
the sea. At sea and on the islands, we must "gradually exploit 
the economic potential of the seas in all respects, develop the 
economy on the islands, become masters of our territorial waters 
and continental shelf, and exert our sovereignty over our 
special economic zones." [Footnote 3] [Strategy to Stabilize and 
Develop the Economy and Society to the Year 2000, Proceedings of 
the Seventh Party Congress] This is the direction for the entire 
country and a pressing need for our fatherland's southeastern 
coastal zone. 
  In building coastal defense zones, the state and many 
coastal 
localities such as Khanh Hoa and Ba Ria-Vung Tau have given 
attention to strengthening the presence of people and forces 
engaged in economic activities and scientific research at sea 
and on the islands in these coastal zones. The number of SRV 
citizens in the sea areas and in Truong Sa and Con Dao districts 
has increased. This is a correct orientation that is aimed at 
developing and protecting the economy in conjunction with 
solidifying and expanding the national defense and security 
front in our southeastern coastal area. But this population is 
not large enough to exploit the strengths that exist in the 
ocean and on the islands, and it has not really satisfied the 
present national defense and security requirements in this area. 
If the population of Con Dao District increases fivefold, the 
fishing and marine products processing sectors can be expanded 
greatly, the strengths concerning tourism and repair and 
maintenance services can be exploited, fuel and food can be 
supplied to ships, and the cultural and social spheres (schools, 
hospitals, theaters, and so on) can be brought into balance. The 
party and state and the sectors and localities should implement 
favorable policies and practical measures to implement this 
policy to enable Phu Quy, Con Son, and Truong Sa to develop in 
all respects. That will be both a force for socioeconomic 
development that is regularly present on the seas and that 
affirms and enforces sovereignty, and a basis for organizing 
militia and self-defense units and strengthening national 
defense strength. At the same time, this will create the 
preconditions for turning the islands and archipelagoes into a 
frontline base that our armed forces can use to carry on 
long-term operations at sea and to satisfy the combat 
requirements when the weather is bad or when the enemy imposes a 
blockade. 
  The state must soon promulgate "regulations on exploiting 
and 
controlling the sea" so that the people and forces at sea have a 
legal basis to rely on and can effectively participate in 
controlling the seas. 
  Building mass armed forces at sea is something that must be 
given attention in the process of building an all-people's 
national defense and people's war front at sea. 
  In the present multifaceted economic structure, we must 
continue to study the organization of coastal militia and 
self-defense forces in the economic elements in order to 
maintain broad capabilities. However, the militia and 
self-defense forces in the state and collective economic 
elements must continue to serve as the activists. The localities 
in these areas should study the experiences of Ba Ria-Vung Tau 
and a number of other coastal localities in organizing the 
militia and self-defense forces in the private economic elements 
so that their own militia and self-defense forces are of high 
quality. When organizing militia and self-defense forces, the 
special characteristics of the occupations must be studied 
carefully (day, night, seasonal activities), and the coastal 
zones (fishing grounds) and activities of each force must be 
determined so that the control zones can be organized and 
divided in a relatively rational manner. In the southeastern 
coastal zone, besides the fishermen from the six coastal 
provinces in the zone, many fishing boats from nearby provinces 
also come to fish in these waters. When organizing militia and 
self-defense forces, attention must be given to this special 
characteristic as well as to the fact that international 
transport forces are sometimes present in the area in order to 
regulate the fishing grounds, deploy the forces rationally, and 
prevent sea areas from being left empty. 
  The use of the equipment and technical means of the forces 
at 
sea must be studied so that when necessary, they can be equipped 
with the means to carry out their economic tasks and support the 
military and national defense requirements. This includes 
equipment to detect targets (fish), determine depths, fix and 
guide targets on and under the water, and information and 
observation means. 
  The naval, air, and other armed forces that are assigned sea 
duties must be suitably organized and equipped, and they must 
coordinate closely with the border units, coastal militia and 
self-defense forces, and local armed forces on the islands and 
on shore in accord with the economic and ocean control 
regulations mentioned above and the orders of the Ministry of 
Defense. The lessons in carrying on operations at sea show that 
in order to ensure that the surface warships complete their 
tasks, air defenses and electronic warfare must be strengthened. 
Concerning this, the experiences in previous wars provide 
valuable lessons that must be exploited and applied. The 
problems is, we must strengthen training and constantly improve 
the combat strength of each force in the joint front based on a 
unified plan. As for the coastal militia and self-defense 
forces, special attention must be given to providing training in 
recognizing shapes and distinguishing targets, and they must be 
given training concerning information technology and methods. 
Along with training each force, a suitable amount of time must 
be set aside for carrying on joint combat maneuvers between the 
air force and navy and the other armed forces, the localities, 
and the coastal and island defense zones based on determining 
what situations might arise and formulating combat operations 
plans based on those situations and based on each step from low 
to high and from joint operations between two forces to many 
forces. Then, the next step is to organize maneuvers involving 
all the contents and requirements of building an all-people's 
national defense front at sea. 

