Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Banking councils of the National Bank of 
Slovakia and the Czech National Bank met in Smolenice today. 
Finance ministers of both countries, Rudolf Filkus and Ivan 
Kocarnik, were present at the meeting. Martin Dorazin, Czech 
Radio special correspondent in Bratislava has more details: 
  [Dorazin] The most important items on the meeting's agenda 
were the payments agreement between the Czech Republic and 
Slovakia and the division of assets and liabilities of the 
former Czechoslovak State Bank. [passage omitted] 
  Slovak Finance Minister Rudolf Filkus stressed that the old 
bloc must be abolished in a way that will not have an impact on 
the state budget. He added that both republics naturally are 
continuing to use the clearing method. 
  The governors of the two national banks voiced satisfaction 
with the fact that the problem of the division of assets and 
liabilities of the former Czechoslovak State Bank is being 
depoliticized. 
  Josef Tosovsky, governor of the Czech National Bank, sees 
progress in the fact that the division of assets and liabilities 
will continue to be worked on by accountants. Rudolf Filkus 
pointed out that the economic dimension is a priority in this 
case. Josef Tosovsky described as the greatest progress in the 
talks the fact that the Slovak bank did not cast doubt on the 
financial statement of the Czechoslovak State Bank, which means 
that it also does not cast doubt on the opening assets and 
liabilities statement of the national banks. The division of 
gold and the question of currency taken out of circulation 
remains an unresolved problem. 
  Minister Kocarnik expressed his surprise over the fact that 
Slovakia refuses to recognize certificates for food products 
issued by Czech standardization authorities, despite the fact 
that these are recognized by Germany and Hungary, for example. 
In the minister's view, however, this is a war between 
bureaucrats. I want to believe that ministers and governments 
will not succumb to these bureacrats, Ivan Kocarnik said. 

