BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Christer Kallstrom: "War Over Cod Grows </F>
Increasingly Serious"] 
  [Text] Oslo -- Norway and Iceland are again at loggerheads 
over the cod in the seas around Spitsbergen. Yesterday 
Norwegian Coast Guard vessels cut the trawls of four Icelandic 
boats and fired a warning shot across the bows of a fifth. 
  In Iceland feelings about the Norwegians are acrimonious, 
and 
Icelandic Prime Minister David Oddsson is considering taking the 
matter to the International Court in The Hague. 
  Yesterday Norwegian Foreign Minister Bjorn Tore Godal 
summoned Eidur Gudnason, Iceland's ambassador in Oslo, to ask 
for an explanation of the behavior of the Icelandic fishermen. 
At the meeting Bjorn Tore Godal urged the Icelandic authorities 
to see to it that the country's fishing fleet respects the 
Norwegian protection zone around Spitsbergen. After the meeting 
Bjorn Tore Godal said that the gap between Iceland and Norway is 
smaller than expected, despite everything. 
  After the meeting Ambassador Eidur Gudnason said the 
following: 
  "In Iceland people are surprised by the aggressiveness that 
the Norwegians showed toward the fishermen. The most natural 
thing would have been to board the boats and take them into 
port." 
  Cutting the trawls of a fishing boat is considered to be a 
very serious action, as is firing warning shots. 
  The Norwegian side, however, believes that the Icelanders 
were intending to provoke a serious situation. On previous 
occasions fishing boats have drawn in their trawls when the 
Norwegian Coast Guard has approached. They did not do so this 
time. 
  Icelandic Prime Minister David Oddsson's comments also 
support this theory: 
  "Norway has no right to cut the trawls of Icelandic boats. 
We are now considering whether we should put the matter before 
the International Court in The Hague. We must have a judgment 
that will decide once and for all what status in international 
law the protection zone around Spitsbergen has." 
  The protection zone around Spitsbergen is a disputed area. 
It is a 200-nautical-mile zone and was set up by Norway in 
1977. So far only Finland has recognized the zone. 
  The old Soviet Union took the view that Norway has no rights 
outside the 3-nautical-mile limit of its territorial waters. 
The great powers in the West have adopted a reserved attitude 
to the fisheries protection zone. 
  Recently the Norwegian Coast Guard has noted a marked 
increase in illicit fishing around Spitsbergen. Yesterday there 
were nine boats in the protected zone from countries that have 
not been granted quotas there. As well as six Icelandic boats 
there were two boats registered in the Dominican Republic and 
one registered in Belize. 
  Yesterday the six Icelandic boats left the protected zone 
escorted by two Norwegian Coast Guard vessels. 
  This incident comes at a particularly bad time for Iceland. 
On Friday [17 Jun] Iceland will celebrate the 50th anniversary 
of its becoming a republic and among those invited is Norwegian 
King Harald. 

