Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yin Lian [1438 3550], senior engineer, Ministry </F>
of Electric Power Industry, Beijing: "Statutes, Issues, 
Countermeasures--An Assessment of China's New Energy Resource 
Strategy and a Discussion of Countermeasures"] 
  [Text] Editor's note: We cannot just sit idly by 
looking at the variety of actions that all countries of the 
world have taken to develop new energy resources and the 
strategic trends they have revealed. They show us that a large 
energy-consuming nation that basically has a single energy 
resource structure composed of coal must take notice of the 
prospects and significance of the new energy resources of the 
21st century from the perspective of strategic transitions, and 
must start early in making the corresponding policy decisions 
and deployments. For this reason, we have asked some experts and 
scholars to conduct a discussion. We are now publishing the main 
points of representative speeches given at the symposium to 
attract the attention of readers in all areas. 
<H3>  I. The Status of Developing New Energy Resources in Our 
Overall National Economic Situation </H3>
  I bring up this issue because very few people have mentioned 
new energy resources in the process of accelerating the 
development of China's national economy. On the one hand, people 
not in the energy resource trenches do not understand new energy 
resources very well, while on the other hand people in these 
trenches feel that new energy resources do not require the 
solution of major problems. A failure to resolve this problem of 
understanding may cause China's new energy resource industry to 
miss the favorable opportunity of the present time, slow our 
progress in developing new energy resources, and thereby affect 
China's future energy resource strategy of the 21st century. 
Therefore, it is necessary that I summarize here the important 
status and role of new energy resources in the development of 
our national economy, concepts that the Chinese people do not 
understand clearly and that people have not yet accepted. 
  New energy resources is the general name used 
internationally 
for solar power, wind energy, marine energy, geothermal energy, 
biomass energy, and fuel cells. Because solar power, wind 
energy, marine energy, geothermal energy, and biomass energy are 
characterized by being renewable, they are called renewable 
energy resources. At present, new energy resources are energy 
resources that mankind utilizes in a transition to a new state 
and they have been receiving growing attention since the 
petroleum crisis of the 1970s. The technology for their 
application has been developing quickly and they are moving 
toward greater maturity and the achievement of commercialization 
so that new energy resources are forming forces of production in 
energy resource systems and occupying a first-class status in 
the energy resource structure. For the past several years, many 
authorities in energy resources and economics have explained in 
scientific, technical, economic, and political terms that while 
the 20th century was the petroleum and hydrocarbon era, major 
changes will occur during the 21st century. Because of the 
effects of scientific and technological developments and 
breakthroughs, restrictions by the global environment, the need 
for sustained social development, economic and political 
factors, and so on, mankind is now starting to enter the era of 
renewable energy resources. At present, the total amount of 
energy resources consumed each year globally is only equivalent 
to the amount of energy irradiated onto the earth's surface from 
the sun in 40 minutes, which means that solar energy is 13,000 
times the amount of energy consumed in the world. Solar power is 
energy that causes absolutely no pollution, and all renewable 
energy resources including solar energy, wind power, water 
energy, biomass energy, and so on come from solar energy. In the 
next century, as we face the dual crises of conventional fuels 
becoming exhausted and the environmental pollution they cause, 
new energy resources will develop further. Thus, energy and 
economic experts and authorities with long-term views are 
calling for the entire world to take action in a major effort to 
develop and utilize new energy resources. 
  China is a big producer and consumer of energy resources and 
coal dominates our energy resource utilization, accounting for 
about 75 percent of primary energy resources. Within the 
foreseeable future, coal will continue to be China's main energy 
resource. China's coal output may reach 1.4 billion tons in 
2000. As our economy quickly grows, China's energy resource 
structure in which coal is the primary factor will face two big 
problems. One is the extremely uneven geographic distribution of 
our coal resources and the ever-growing pressure on 
transportation. Some 79.8 percent of China's currently proven 
coal reserves are concentrated in north and northwest China and 
most other regions rely mainly on railway transportation for the 
coal they use. A substantial portion of China's railway 
transportation capacity is used to haul coal, which has resulted 
in long-term shortages of railway transportation capacity that 
have been hard to change. The second problem is the increasingly 
serious atmospheric pollution and ecological destruction that 
results from burning large amounts of coal, which has attracted 
attention in China and foreign countries. China now generates 
about 15 million tons of carbon dioxide annually and is one of 
the largest sources of CO[.sup]2[/] in the world. Moreover, 
because of the effects, geographic restrictions, decentralized 
and fluctuating loads, the economy, and other factors, China 
still has several regions that will face difficulties in 
ensuring supplies of conventional energy resources for a 
relatively long period. These problems will vex China's energy 
resource industry and even development of our national economy 
for a period into the future. How can we resolve them? In the 
long term, one feasible method is to formulate and implement a 
development strategy for the diversification of our energy 
resource structure in a major effort to develop new energy 
resources (renewable energy resources). 
  In reality, China's energy resources are characterized by a 
diverse resource structure. Besides having extremely abundant 
coal, petroleum, and natural gas mineral energy resources, we 
are also very well endowed with renewable energy resources. 
Moreover, our renewable energy resources and mineral energy 
resources are also generally characterized by being mutually 
supplementary in the geographic distribution of all types of 
energy resources. During the past 10-plus years, under guidance 
by the overall policy of "adapting to local conditions, 
supplementation by a variety of energy resources, comprehensive 
utilization, and a concern for real results," new energy 
resource applications technology has moved from the scientific 
research stage to the application stage and some new energy 
resource technologies are capable of competing locally with 
mineral fuel applications technology. This is especially true of 
the role they have played in spurring economic development and 
social stability in the basic energy resource requirements of 
peasants and pastoralists in frontier, pastoral, and island 
regions. Practice has proven that new energy resources are 
energy resources with "long-term prospects and short-term 
benefits." Actively and rationally developing new energy 
resources is not something that we can take or leave in the 
development of our national economy. Instead, it is directly 
related to the development of China's energy resources and 
environmental improvement, and thereby affects the development 
of our entire national economy. Development and utilization of 
new energy resources is an objective necessity to meet this type 
of need. Still, in the current period of energy resource 
departments competing to "take the plunge" [into business 
activities] and move toward the market, if they are only 
concerned with short-term benefits and only take into account 
present-day requirements by neglecting construction and 
development of new energy resources and demote new energy 
resources by only treating them as small-scale energy resources, 
they will certainly miss an historical opportunity for rapid 
development of new energy resources and endanger the new trend 
of a major transition, major transformation, and major 
competition of China's new energy resources competing against 
the world's energy resources, and their status in the new 
configuration, which will in turn endanger China's future 
comprehensive strengths and development potential and reserve 
strengths. 
<H5>  II. Issues and Ideas in the New Energy Resource Field </H5>
<H5>  A. The Maturity of New Energy Resource Technical Economics </H5>
  The development of new energy resource applications 
technology poses challenges for traditional electric power 
supply concepts. Because of scientific and technical progress, 
changes in the energy resource structure, and the need to 
protect the environment, conserve energy resources, and improve 
energy resource efficiency, the traditional centralized and 
unified power supply arrangement of large grids and large 
generators will be challenged by applications of new energy 
resource technologies and by decentralized and locally balanced 
small-scale power generation equipment and energy storage 
facilities. For over 100 years, the traditional arrangement of 
large grids, large generators, and centralized power supplies 
has always been considered to be the safest and most economical 
power supply arrangement. However, because construction and 
development of large grids and large generators are restricted 
by a variety of conditions and because of the great difficulty 
in guaranteeing the safety and reliability of power supplies, 
decentralized power supply arrangements (called distributed 
utility in the United States) are continuing to display their 
superiority and vitality. Under the guidance of this idea, new 
energy resource development and application technology has moved 
toward commercialization and now attained applied levels that 
enable them to operate in connection with large power grids 
while also being capable of independently supplying electricity 
in a decentralized manner. As for the development and 
application of new energy resources themselves, international 
and domestic practice has proven that the technical economic 
prospects of new energy resources are determined by their 
ability to compete with conventional energy resources. The focus 
of competition is on power generation technology for new energy 
resources to convert new energy resources into an economically 
competitive high-grade secondary energy resource--electricity. 
Internationally, new energy resource circles in the 1960s, at 
the time when power was generated from new energy resources, 
only proposed small-scale equipment measured in watts. In the 
1970s, the discussion was of equipment of several kilowatts. 
This rose in the 1980s to several tens of kilowatts. As the 
1990s began, however, people were operating applied systems of 
the MW grade. One can see that the speed of new energy resource 
development has far surpassed people's imaginations. The costs 
of most new energy resource applications projects have declined 
over the years, and the construction costs for solar thermal 
energy power stations, photovoltaic power stations, wind-powered 
generating fields, and geothermal power stations have now 
declined to $1,000 to $1,500 per kW and power generation costs 
to $0.07 to $0.08 per kWh. Projections are that the power 
generation costs using new energy resources will drop to about 
$0.04 per kWh by the year 2000. 
  Regarding power generation technology, new energy resource 
power generation technology has just gotten off the ground in 
China and the problems we must resolve include: the need to 
improve the quality of miniature wind-powered generators and the 
need to raise standardization and systemization levels and 
further reduce costs; the need to import and absorb technology 
from foreign countries for the design and manufacture of 
medium-sized and large generators that can be connected to grids 
to form a substantial batch production capacity on a domestic 
foundation and to establish several large and medium-sized wind 
energy power generation fields that display technical benefits 
functions; and improvements related to the substantial lag of 
China's present photovoltaic batteries behind foreign countries 
in quality and efficiency. In addition, we must diversify and 
apply the associated matching applied technology; we must 
centralize specialized staffs and regularize starting points for 
solar thermal energy power generation; geothermal power 
generator urgently requires the development of high-temperature 
mine survey technology and scientific research on refilling and 
heat storage technology; the manufacturing technology for the 
tidal energy full through-flow water turbine generators that we 
have already successfully developed requires improvement; the 
development of biomass energy resources must develop toward high 
grades and thereby toward power generation, solidification, 
carbonization, and gasification technology. China's new energy 
resource development technology faces many important issues and 
has many objectives. We must gradually increase investments to 
solve problems in scientific and engineering applications. 
  In economic terms, new energy resource power generation 
technology is a new force of production in the electric power 
industry and its application is still in the initial stages. The 
economic problems it faces are: in the state's present economic 
structure and price system, the benefits from new energy 
resources in the short term will still mainly be social benefits 
and environmental and ecological benefits, and their economic 
benefits will not be that significant; in China, the capital now 
used for development and utilization of new energy resources 
holds no status to speak of in the overall investments in energy 
resources and it is very difficult to undertake more intensive 
comprehensive and systematic research. Because of seriously 
inadequate expenditures and too-small project scales, it is very 
hard for demonstration and applications engineering projects to 
achieve their objective of displaying technical economic 
benefits and guiding market development prospects. 
<H3>  B. The Impact of Reforms of the Energy Resource System on 
New Energy Resource Development </H3>
  For a long time to come, energy resources will still be the 
key restricting factor for China's national economic and social 
development as well as the focus for reversing ecological and 
environmental degradation. However, in a worldwide comparison, 
our acknowledgement and understanding of the role and status of 
new energy resources is still very poor. Under the heavy 
pressures of serious stagnation in system reform in energy 
resource departments, accelerated economic development, and 
serious shortages of energy resources, it is even harder for 
them to receive the attention that they should. In the process 
of shifting tracks from the traditional planned economy, new 
energy resources are facing a two-sided pincer attack from the 
traditional planned economy and the market on development of the 
new energy resource industry. The traditional planned economy 
has occupied the primary status in energy resource departments 
for a long time and the production, allocation, and utilization 
of energy resources are managed too much and too closely, with 
low efficiency, a serious detachment of prices and the trade 
system from the actual market, departmental segmentation, 
friction from regulations, and regional closures that impede 
market development as well as macro coordination. In this type 
of situation, it is hard to make quick readjustments in 
programs, investments, prices, and taxation to extend new energy 
resource applications technology and provide preferential 
measures. Furthermore, under conditions of incomplete market 
operational mechanisms, the unfavorable circumstances for the 
newly-born new energy resources industry are obvious. 
<H3>  C. The Impact of Energy Resource Development Strategies on 
New Energy Resources </H3>
  China has a relative insufficiency of energy resources with 
per capita energy resource reserves that are just one-half the 
world average. Moreover, nearly all are in a unitary energy 
resource structure in which coal is the dominant factor. Because 
of long-term low-price plundering exploitation and extensive 
consumption, the overall efficiency of the energy resource 
system is extremely low, so we must use comprehensive reform of 
the economic system to truly change the extensive development 
model of relying on the squandering of precious energy resources 
to support low results economic growth. This means that we must 
place improvement of the ultimate efficiency of energy resources 
in the primary position and truly and comprehensively implement 
a major energy conservation principle. 
  While we are comprehensively implementing major energy 
conservation measures and increasing energy supplies, we must 
have a broad and long-term view, look toward the future, and 
make major efforts to readjust the energy resource structure, 
accelerate the pace of new energy resource development, reduce 
the extraction of fossil fuels, raise the strategic status of 
new energy resources, and strive to make new energy resources 
account for a significant proportion of China's energy resource 
structure by the year 2000. Moreover, we must lay a solid 
foundation for accelerated development of commercial 
applications of new energy resource S&amp;T in the next century 
and 
thereby resolve the limitations of fossil fuels and foster the 
renewability of new energy resources. Increase the production of 
new energy resources to reduce discharges and pollution from 
CO[.sup]2[/], SO[.sub]2[/], NO[.sub]x[/], and dust from 
conventional fossil fuels and lessen the threat of acid rain and 
its negative impact on nearby countries and the global 
environment. This will also greatly benefit China's reduction of 
investments in technical upgrading to prevent pollution from 
conventional energy resources and improve overall investment 
results. 
  We must adopt the energy resource strategies and principles 
outlined above to be able to formulate energy resource 
development plans that conform to our national conditions and 
that are capable of long-term strategic action and thereby 
achieve sustained and coordinated development of China's 
population, energy resources, environment, and economy. 
Otherwise, an energy resource structure that fundamentally 
relies on coal will ultimately pull us into a disastrous 
situation. 
<H5>  D. The Goal Model for Reform </H5>
  It is precisely due to all types of profound ideas that new 
energy resource circles worldwide have proposed the slogan of 
"think globally, act locally." The member nations of the 
International Energy Agency (IEA) are setting aside 7 percent of 
their financial budgets for use in new energy resource R&amp;D 
and 
authorities are calling for all nations to place the work of 
developing and utilizing new energy resources in the primary 
position to adapt to the needs of the energy resource system of 
the 21st century. As a developing nation, China is a country 
with a large demand for energy resources as well as a major 
energy resource polluter, so during the process of economic 
reform and development we must formulate clear strategies and 
countermeasures concerning the question of new energy resources, 
and we must formulate the corresponding goal models for 
readjustment, transformation, and transition in our energy 
resource structure to be able to catch up with the enormous 
changes that will occur worldwide. 
  1. During the period of moving from a planned economy toward 
a market economy system, development of new energy resources 
must adhere to the principle of linking planning with the market 
and the development of new energy resources must mainly involve 
their conversion into electricity so that new energy resources 
become direct forces of production factors to meet market 
demand. Initially commercialized new energy resource technology 
can only foster its advantages of integrating planning with the 
market and make use of a relaxed policy environment to be able 
to seize the opportunity for new energy resources, accelerate 
their development, and create the conditions for China's new 
energy resources to enter self-reliant and market-oriented 
benevolent development in the 21st century. 
  2. In the long term, the new energy resource industry is a 
new force of production in that industry, and the new energy 
resource industry must boldly enter the market to develop itself 
and take a new route for the development of China's energy 
resource industry, through actively utilizing the market economy 
system such as raising capital through a variety of channels, 
implementing a shareholding system and shareholding cooperation 
system, and adopting an arrangement of joint administration for 
mutual benefit in management. As for the government's 
macro-management, it should create a benevolent environment for 
the development of new energy resources, adopt internationally 
accepted methods, and provide all types of policy supports for 
new energy resource investments, such as tax reductions and 
exemptions, preferential prices, and so on to propel new energy 
resources into the market, rely on themselves to develop and 
exist and grow, and thereby spur the comprehensive movement of 
China's new energy resources onto the track of international 
levels in terms of science and technology, development and 
management, economic benefits, and other areas. 
<H3>  E. Raising Our National Consciousness Regarding New Energy 
Resources </H3>
  It is now extremely evident that the development and 
utilization of new energy resources is an historical milestone 
in mankind's social development and scientific progress and that 
a consciousness regarding improvement of our entire nation's 
development and utilization of new energy resources has now 
become an extremely important epochal task. We must with impetus 
and attraction conduct regular and broad-ranging propaganda. We 
must make people at all levels as well as the masses understand 
the significance and role of new energy resources in terms of 
the fundamental status of energy resources and their impact and 
role on the economy and environment so that we spur the 
formulation of a state new energy resource development law and 
use legislation to guarantee the sustained development of new 
energy resources, transform the current management state of 
bullishness and lack of procedures regarding new energy 
resources and, with an overall program and goal model, rely on a 
multi-directional and multiple level market while also relying 
on policies to support the development of new energy resources. 
This is essential if China in the 21st century is to be able to 
participate in global joint development on a foundation of 
comprehensive and healthy development of S&amp;T, society, and 
the 
economy. 

