BFN 

  [Text] Russian Ambassador to Seoul Georgiy F. Kunadze has 
warned that the South Korean decision to resume its joint 
military exercise with the United States, Team Spirit, and to 
deploy the Patriot antimissile system might be taken by North 
Korea as "provocative" and therefore, lead it to misjudge the 
South's real intentions. 
  "If they do see these steps as provocative, won't they make 
some final conclusions on the basis of that kind of opinion?" he 
said in an interview with THE KOREA HERALD. 
  The envoy also doubted whether the decision to take the 
steps 
would be effective in ensuring North Korea's full acceptance of 
international nuclear inspections. 
  "From the viewpoint of a citizen of a third country, I would 
say that I wonder about the strategic value and military 
importance of these exercises and these missiles to be 
introduced into South Korea," he said. 
  Kunadze called for more efforts toward a peaceful solution 
of 
the problem, saying that related countries still have time to 
explore additional possibilities to persuade North Korea to be 
"reasonable." 
  He said efforts not to further isolate North Korea are as 
important as strong and decisive actions against it. 
  But he does not agree with the so-called package deal 
between 
North Korea and the United States, which implies a linkage in 
negotiations. 
  "Out of my personal conviction as a diplomat and also a 
student of international relations, I'm not in favor of package 
deals. I'm not in favor of a linkage as a tool of diplomacy." 
  Russia, however, would not oppose a U.N. Security Council 
decision to impose punitive actions against North Korea, he said. 
  He said the council needs a consensus among members in order 
to decide any measures concerning Pyongyang's nuclear program. 
  The Russian government is not going to stand in the way of 
consensus at the council, "whatever this consensus is," the 
ambassador noted. 
  Kunadze came here in January but had been well-known in 
Korea 
before then. He had visited here six times as a senior 
researcher of the Institute of World Economy and International 
Relations (IMEMO) and as a vice foreign minister later. 
  He was one of the Russians who arranged Moscow visits in 
1989 
and 1990 by President Kim Yong-sam, who was then a political 
leader. 
  "My modest part can be described as facilitating the 
meetings 
between Mr. Kim Yong-sam and Soviet leaders," he said about his 
role. 
  Kunadze said the President said he would like to visit 
Moscow 
this year when he met him at Chongwadae in February to present 
his credentials. But he did not reveal when Kim plans to go to 
Moscow. Earlier reports said the visit will occur sometime in 
June. 
  The ambassador hoped that Seoul and Moscow conclude 
negotiations on financial compensation for the land that was 
owned by the Russian Legation from the end of the 19th century 
but now belongs to the Korean government or individuals before 
the President visits Russia. 
  Kunadze reaffirmed that Russia, despite its friendship and 
mutual assistance treaty with North Korea, would not help it if 
the Communist country attempted some kind of attack on another 
nation. 
  But he made it clear that Moscow would not discard the 
treaty, saying, "Russia, being a successor state to the former 
Soviet Union, is not in the position to abrogate any kind of 
international agreements" that it had concluded with others. 
  The treaty signed between the former Soviet Union and North 
Korea in the 1960s provides a security guarantee for North Korea 
in case of unprovoked attacks from the outside. 
  Kunadze claimed that this pact would not encourage North 
Korea to commit itself to any irresponsible behavior. 
  Concerning the issue of North Korean refugees who fled from 
logging camps in Siberia, the ambassador said Moscow has never 
been formally consulted by Seoul on that matter. 
  He said Russia would not object if South Korea decides to 
accept the refugees. 
  He said Moscow does not consider this issue in a political 
context but sees it as a matter related to human rights. He 
said Russian laws do not restrict travel by foreigners with 
valid passports, and therefore the Seoul government is the one 
which should make a decision. 
  The envoy called on South Koreans to study the Russian 
offers 
to repay Seoul's $1.47 billion loans on a purely commercial 
basis. 
  He said in any commercial deal, what counts most are quality 
and price. That apparently includes deals in Russian weaponry 
provided it is competitive in price and good in quality. 
  "I do not think any political strings should be attached to 
the forthcoming deals either on the side of the Russian 
government or on the side of Koreans," he said. 
  He does not see any political obstacles to developing 
relations with Korea in any fields including military technology 
transfer, the envoy added. 

