Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Harald Schumacher: "Good Prospects; Manfred </F>
Brunner, Founder of the Anti-Maastricht Federation of Free 
Citizens"] 
  [Text] The lady behind the steering wheel of the dark blue 
BMW waves a friendly greeting to the man in the pedestrian 
crossing. He waves back and his plump face beams. An 
acquaintance? "No," replies Manfred Brunner, "it often happens 
that people greet me now." Balm for a wounded politician's soul: 
The trained lawyer headed up the Bavarian branch of the Free 
Democratic Party (FDP) when it fell far below the 5-percent 
hurdle in the Landtag elections of 1986. (Brunner: "That was not 
so great.") He gave up the land chairmanship and his membership 
on the national executive board of the liberals in late 1988. 
His new career--he accompanied EC Commissioner Martin Bangemann 
as his chief of cabinet to Brussels in 1989--ended dramatically 
in September 1992: Maastricht architect Helmut Kohl could not 
tame the unruly Maastricht critic and therefore saw to it that 
he was fired. 
  Brunner accounts for the fiasco that became his political 
rebirth with the words "I did not bow to pressure by the Federal 
Chancellor to keep my mouth shut." At first, he sued 
unsuccessfully in the Federal Constitutional Court against the 
Maastricht Treaty. Then, in late January, he founded the 
political party, Federation of Free Citizens. The 46-year-old 
says that he has never received as many letters as he has in the 
last year and a half. Their thrust: "Brunner, stay the course." 
He can hardly conceal his satisfaction when he says that--the 
cleft in his chin quivers and his brown eyes beam behind his 
green-framed glasses. Being in the public eye, according to 
Brunner, "sure is fun." 
  He was even allowed to give a speech this year on the 
periphery of the World Economic Forum in Davos, the world summit 
of the managers' guild. He explained to the managers and 
entrepreneurs why a single European currency will become a 
three-fold disaster: "The weak currency countries will collapse 
because they will not be able to devaluate any more; the strong 
currency countries will hurt themselves because they will lose 
their advantage of stability. Furthermore, we will seal off West 
Europe from Central and East Europe in this way." A listener 
asked how that then could be prevented. Brunner recommended "not 
voting for the single big Social Democratic Party of Germany 
(SPD)/Christian Democratic Union (CDU)/Christian Social Union 
(CSU)/FDP Maastricht Party," but for "people who are willing to 
revise this treaty in 1996"--that is, for him. 
  The fact that Brunner is an advocate of the internal market 
is nearly lost when he analyzes at length the weaknesses of the 
system: Resist "overregulation," the "principle of total 
harmonization," "European homogenized mush," and "Fortress 
Europe." It is scandalous that "Germany is single-handedly 
financing the four major recipient countries." Horst Nasko, vice 
chairman of the board of Siemens Nixdorf Information Systems AG, 
objected in Davos that the internal market without political 
union is not feasible. Yet Brunner regards the road to a 
European federal state to be a fundamentally incorrect one: "A 
democracy--that is, rule by the people-- requires the people, 
and there is no such thing as a European people." 
  The man, it becomes apparent, is certain of his cause. He 
gives all his speeches extemporaneously. Congenially corpulent, 
he gives the impression of total self-assurance and inner peace. 
His secretary--with him now for 12 years--has "never heard him 
yell even once." A man of rare unaffectedness: While drinking 
sweet Italian wine, he uninterruptedly consumes one radish after 
the other and nonchalantly gobbles up all the carrots. If the 
pasta absolutely will not stay on the fork, he gives it some 
help--presto--with his thumb. 
  Hobbies? No, he cannot come up with any. He once played the 
flute and he occasionally goes skiing. He is married and has 
three children ranging in age from 13 to 17. In the mornings he 
drives them to high school, drives back home again, and then 
takes the subway into the city where he shares a law office with 
a colleague. Half of his 12-hour working day is taken up by 
party work: giving interviews, looking for a residence in Berlin 
and a managing director, establishing land and kreis-level party 
branches. The other half is devoted to the legal profession with 
emphasis on European law: The Eurocritic ("Agricultural policy 
is the last island of existing socialism") earns his money by 
guiding companies to the subsidy flesh pots of Brussels. 
  Citizen Brunner is a source of concern to the established 
parties. He would like to garner 30 percent of the vote in the 
European election. He considers this target to be realistic 
because "85 percent of the Germans are opposed to the ECU. 
But, in the election for the Bundestag on 16 October and 
presumably in the Landtag elections in the latter half of the 
year as well, he wants to win the votes of those for whom the 
whole Republic seems like a "fashionable leftist taboo society" 
(Brunner). 
  The creature of acute public irritation with politics, 
Citizens Federation chief Brunner pleas for "more elements of 
plebiscitary democracy." All established parties are "ready for 
the museum" and incumbents should not be permitted to accumulate 
public offices at will. Yet the Federation of Free Citizens that 
has just turned four weeks old is producing posts like a rabbit 
does offspring: Of the approximately 100 members, 23 of them 
alone are members of the national board and an additional five 
are deputy chairmen. High-powered lawyers such as Nuremberg 
Prof. Karl Albrecht Schachtschneider and regulatory liberal 
economists such as Tuebingen Prof. Joachim Starbatty, who is to 
formulate the Citizens Federation's economic and social policy, 
are included in the list of functionaries. The ideal, according 
to Brunner, is "Mrs. Thatcher and her consistent free market 
economic principles." 
  In order to lure away voters from the right wing of the CDU 
and the liberals, the FDP dissident also cooperates with other 
parties. Thus, he is cultivating close relations with Viennese 
Freedom Party of Austria (FPOe) chief Joerg Haider, whose 
positions on policies relating to foreigners he would, to be 
sure, "not formulate in that manner." But Haider can go ahead 
and state them--as an election campaigner for Brunner. Brunner 
feels an affinity--politically and privately--with CSU 
right-winger and Bavarian Minister of the Environment Peter 
Gauweiler. He is also a friend of fired Dasa [Deutsche Aerospace 
AG] board chairman Karl Dersch who used to hoist the old 
imperial war flag in his front garden. 
  Thus, though Brunner could not be accused of right-wing 
extremism, everyone knows what is meant when he declares that 
"truisms must once again be permitted to be uttered." Of course, 
it was he who gave the formal address in early February to the 
Association of Silesian Aristocracy and the Association of 
Catholic Nobility who have certain difficulties in coming to 
terms with the German-Polish border. Obviously he regards Bonn's 
asylum law to be too generous--even in its trimmed-down form. 
And "social policy that only benefits claims specialists," who 
wants that? So nonchalantly does he take the label "Rep 
[Republikaner] light" in stride that opponents pin on him that 
it seems as if it were useful to him. To be sure, he would 
regard "middle class heavy" to be more appropriate. 
  And it is leading liberals who have problems with the former 
fellow traveler who did not leave their party until October 
1993. "Reactionary" and "a wolf in sheep's clothing" remain 
their nicest appellations. Presidential candidate Hildegard 
Hamm-Bruecher, for whom he long worked, knew him to be 
"politically gifted and a very good speaker" but extreme in his 
opinions: "The FDP certainly shifted, but never as far to the 
right as Mr. Brunner." 
  It would please the native-born Munich resident to show all 
of them who now revile him and who are already writing him off 
as a loser--in the European election, of course, but also in 
Bavaria where elections for the Landtag will be held on 25 
September. Brunner stands at his office window and looks 
pensively across splendid Maximilian Street to the parliament he 
was never a member of due to a lack of votes and asks--meaning 
the panorama or his political prospects or both: "Is that not a 
fine prospect?" 

