BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "US Drags Its Feet as Ethnic Madness Grips </F>
Rwanda"] 
  [Text] After months of dithering over what to do about the 
orgy of tribal bloodletting in Rwanda, the United Nations 
finally gave the go-ahead late Wednesday for the deployment of 
5,500 peacekeepers to guard aid convoys and protect civilians in 
special humanitarian zones inside the country. 
  Almost immediately, the governments of Ghana and Zimbabwe 
announced they were ready to deploy troops but the United States 
says it will be weeks before it can send long-promised 
equipment. This delay is intolerable. Each day that help fails 
to arrive, more Rwandans are being slaughtered and the food and 
health crisis gripping the country worsens. 
  On Friday, the head of the UN operation in Rwanda, General 
Romeo Dallaire said the deployment of more UN reinforcements was 
"already weeks late." 
<H5>  Priests massacred </H5>
  He said that he had been receiving desperate calls for help 
daily, including one from the archbishop of Kigali before he and 
other 12 priests were massacred last week. But with few troops 
and limited equipment, the general said he was powerless to save 
them from death squads. 
  Estimates of the number of people butchered in the small 
African state range from 200,000 to half a million but even 
these horrific figures may be under-representing the scope of 
the mayhem in the country. 
  In the black hole of government-held land to the west of the 
country, where Hutu death squads are continuing their rampage 
against the minority Tutsis, about two million refugees have 
"vanished." Aid groups which expected them to pour across the 
border into Burundi say they have simply not turned up. 
  Washington must take much of the blame for the tardiness of 
UN action. It repeatedly blocked earlier efforts to deploy UN 
peacekeepers, demanding that a ceasefire be agreed first. 
  The U.S. position sought to restrict the reinforcements to 
operating on border areas. The new resolution allows the mainly 
African extra peacekeepers to go to the capital Kigali, if 
possible, and fan out through the country to places where 
civilians are most at risk. 
  Washington's position has shown an appalling disregard for 
the lives of Rwandans. 
  Even as late as Friday, the White House was still trying to 
avoid categorizing the Rwanda killings as genocide out of fear 
the term might incite public calls for greater U.S. action. 
  A State Department spokeswoman told a disbelieving press 
conference: "Clearly not all of the killings that have taken 
place in Rwanda are killings to which you might apply that label 
(genocide)." 
<H5>  Slashing and hacking </H5>
  How the Clinton administration can classify the slashing and 
hacking of hundreds of thousands of Tutsis to death as anything 
but genocide is bewildering. 
  Nearly two million Tutsis, including an estimated 500,000 
unaccompanied children whose parents have either been killed or 
lost, are displaced and thousands are trapped in hostile zones 
under the constant fear of death. 
  UN officials says they are starting to see children in 
Kigali 
with bloated bellies, an early sign of starvation. 
Hunger-related deaths have already been reported in the south. 
  It is imperative that the US waste no more time in 
dispatching the equipment the UN needs to restrain the ethnic 
madness in Rwanda. 
  Washington must also bring whatever diplomatic pressure it 
can on Uganda, the main backer of the predominantly-Tutsi Rwanda 
Patriotic Front (RPF). Unless the RPF halts their offensive and 
agrees to a ceasefire, it will be difficult for the UN to make 
arrangements for the care of refugees. 

