BFN 

<F P=106> ["Great Optimism" -- KCNA headline] </F>
  [Text] Pyongyang, April 4 (KCNA) -- We will never abandon 
the road of truth, our own choice, but advance along it to its 
very end. This is the faith and pluck of our party and people 
and a great optimism of general Kim Chong-il", declares NODONG 
SINMUN Sunday in a political essay titled "Great Optimism". 
  The political essay quotes the dear leader Comrade Kim 
Chong-il as saying: 
  "We must derive a proper lesson from the setback faced by 
socialism in some countries and resolutely reject all the 
slander levelled by fools, and we must advance more vigorously 
towards the bright future of humanity, displaying such 
intelligence and courage as to turn misfortune into a blessing." 
  This proposition arms all of us with great optimism, the 
political essay says, and goes on: 
  Let us display such intelligence and courage as to turn 
misfortune into a blessing and more vigorously advance towards 
the bright future of humanity. 
  This is the unshakable faith and iron will of the dear 
leader 
Comrade Kim Chong-il that no matter what storm may rage and what 
adverse current may sweep the globe, the direction of the 
development of history can never be changed and justice and 
truth will win, so will socialism without fail. 
  We are watching with pride and optimism socialism, which the 
imperialists said met its "end", advancing with irresistable 
force through ordeals and adversity. 
  The signs of decline and downfall of imperialism which was 
bluffing and the throes and confusion of the doctrine of return 
to bourgeois past under the cloak of "reform" and peoples under 
the banner of socialism, the banner of independence, and 
socialist Korea making a long drive. What do all these stark 
facts show query [incomplete sentence as received] 
  They show the immovable historical law that justice and 
truth 
win while injustice and falsehood go to ruin, that socialism is 
sure to win while imperialism is fated to destruction. 
  The collapse of socialism in some countries and the end of 
Cold War are by no means "victory" of capitalism and imperialism. 
  True socialism does not suffer a setback or collapse. 
  The dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il is the incarnation of 
faith and will and of intelligence and courage and a great 
defender of justice and truth, who is defending the cause of 
socialism with such rare intelligence and courage as to turn 
misfortune into a blessing, possessed of iron will and faith 
that justice and truth are sure to win in whatever adversity. 
  The dear leader has further strengthend and developed the 
Workers' Party of Korea, the guiding force of the Korean people, 
into an ever-victorious revolutionary party and the Korean 
People's Army, which is the destiny of the people, into 
a-match-for-a-hundred revolutionary army and achieved the 
unbreakable singlehearted unity of the leader, the party and the 
masses, the eternal viability of socialism, thereby building 
Korean-style socialism centred on the popular masses into an 
impregnable fortress of socialism, the invincible bulwark. 
  Socialism is the ideal of mankind and great justice. 
  Unthinkable is a world without socialism and a world without 
justice. 

