Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Yelena Kolokoltseva report in the "Committees" column: </F>
"The Duma Wants To Recover the Budget Control Committee. The 
Government's Reaction So Far Is Not Clear"] 
  [Text] The Committee on Budgets, Taxes, and Banks and 
Finances, headed by Mikhail Zadornov (Yabloko), intends to 
return to parliament jurisdiction the Budget Control Committee, 
which was placed under the control of the Council of Ministers 
in September 1993 under Edict 1400 "On Phased Constitutional 
Reform," along with the State Statistics Committee, the Pension 
Fund, and a number of other organizations. In 1993 the Budget 
Control Committee, headed by Ms. Polunina, was under the Supreme 
Soviet's jurisdiction, playing an active role in the 
confrontation between Boris Fedorov and the parliament. At that 
time the committee accused the Finance Ministry and the 
government of manipulating the budget and "withholding" state 
revenues. 
  Aleksandr Pochinok said in this connection, "I am very 
grateful to Viktor Chernomyrdin for preserving this committee; 
otherwise the highly qualified people working in it would have 
simply gone away and the records would have disappeared... This 
committee was created as an analytical budget structure of the 
Supreme Soviet apparatus, and it can be transformed into a most 
efficient Accounts Chamber [Schetnaya Palata]. Therefore we ask 
the government to return it to us." 
  The position on this issue by Mr. Chernomorda, who currently 
heads this committee and who has prepared a plan for the Budget 
Control Committee's activity in the first quarter, is not known. 
  The Duma's Budget Committee proposed introducing in 1994 
changes and amendments into the budget and banking legislation 
or adopting new laws On the Foundations of the Budget System and 
the Budget Process in the Russian Federation; On the Russian 
Federation Central Bank, Banks, and Banking Activity; On the 
Limit of Foreign Loans; On the Federal Budget and the Budget 
System in 1994; On Demarcating the Budget Powers between the 
Components of the Russian Federation Budgetary System; and On 
the Basic Principles for Granting Subventions, Subsidies, and 
Financial Assistance from the Federal Budget to the Federation 
Components. 
  The parliament's Subcommittee on Central Bank Activity, 
which 
is now chaired by former finance minister Boris Fedorov, in its 
turn will hold -- after consultations with Duma deputies, the 
Banks Association, and individual commercial banks in February 
through March -- hearings in the lower parliament chamber on the 
Central Bank's money and credit policy and performance. The 
subcommittee intends to obtain explanations from the Central 
Bank on its operations on the money market, hard currency 
operations, its reserves and participation in other banks and 
international organizations, as well as about the Central Bank's 
interaction with the government and local power bodies. 

