Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Liliana Gutierrez, Alvaro Ayala, Azucena Lievano, </F>
and Raul Gutierrez for the "24 Hours" newscast] 
  [Text] While President Cesar Gaviria used strong terms -- 
offensive, according to some people -- when referring to the 
State Council, Magistrate Amado Gutierrez said the problem is 
not the fight; it is a matter of discussing a juridical issue. 
  [Begin Gutierrez recording] Our Constitution is called the 
political constitution of Colombia and, given that we are 
dealing with a constitutional problem, it is obviously a 
political problem. However, we are not talking about politicking 
or lowly actions that are sometimes given prominence. [end 
recording] 
  He added that members of the State Council do not work for 
drug traffickers, adding the important thing is that the country 
should be told the truth about what the U.S. troops came to do 
with their weapons in Colombia. 
  [Begin Gutierrez recording] They are not military advisers 
who came to teach us how to operate the radar or sophisticated 
modern airplanes. No, they are armed personnel who came to stay 
in the country. [end recording] 
  The State Council president insisted this is not simple 
patriotism. What happens is that there is a Constitution, and 
we must advocate adherence to this Constitution. Hence, it is 
necessary to state and discuss the issue. They have issued the 
report and the Chamber of Representatives' Investigation and 
Accusation Committee must now continue the process. 
  Moreover, Attorney General Carlos Gustavo Arrieta today 
asked 
the State Council and President Gaviria to handle carefully the 
debate surrounding the U.S. troops' presence in Colombia. 
  [Begin Arrieta recording] This is unfortunate, and I hereby 
issue an appeal. I urge them to please stop referring to each 
other in the terms in which they have been doing, and I ask them 
to treat each other with due respect. I believe they are 
engaged in a pointless argument; I think this debate has not 
been given the appropriate level required by juridical 
controversies between two institutions that are so important. 
[end recording] 
  The conflict has arisen after various months of 
misinformation about the U.S. troops' presence in the country. 
This was confirmed by a high-ranking government source. 
President Gaviria personally admitted today the information on 
Juanchaco was poorly handled. Narino Palace sources said the 
government refrained from assigning importance to the issue 
since its inception, when the media learned about the U.S. 
troops' presence on the Pacific coast. The military forces 
thought it was a political issue which they did not have to 
handle. The same source said the Defense Ministry answered the 
media's questions by reflex. 
  [Begin Admiral Hernando Garcia recording] The only murky 
thing here is the climate because it rains every day. [laughter 
in background] The rest is absolutely clear. You may wonder 
why there are so many machines. It is simple: The Americans are 
very cautious and they bring... [pauses] If a bulldozer breaks 
down they have another one to use because they have the means to 
do so. [end recording] 
  On that occasion, the government claims, things were not 
clearly explained, but it was not a matter of withholding 
information -- it only involved a small school, a health center, 
and the construction of a highway. The same source said the 
government had no intention of misconstruing things -- it simply 
grabbed the first thing at hand. The president initially tried 
to present it as a humanitarian action. 
  [Begin Gaviria recording] There are U.S. troops in Colombia. 
They are engaged in civilian actions and are fulfilling advisory 
duties. [end recording] 
  The president personally revealed the truth barely three 
days 
ago. It actually involved a joint military engineering corps 
exercise. The important thing was not the school; it was 
training for the Colombian public forces. The president thought 
the issue would quickly be forgotten. However, the topic has 
been in the news for a month; the truth has been withheld from 
the country for five months. 
  The controversy caused by the U.S. troops' presence, 
following the State Council's decision, has provoked a veritable 
flood of fax messages. Some of the opinions are thus summarized: 
  Liberal Party Senator Rafael Amador said the government 
cannot argue now that the foreign troops' presence is a result 
of technical cooperation plans, when the treaties and agreements 
on which it is based are strictly military. 
  Liberal Party Senator Humberto Pelaez deplored the fact that 
the government ignored the Senate's second committee, which is 
in charge of procedures for authorizing the arrival of foreign 
troops in the country based on international treaties like the 
TIAR [Inter- American Reciprocal Assistance Treaty]. 
  Colombian communists demand the defense minister's 
resignation, the replacement of high-ranking military officers 
with men of patriotic spirit, and the U.S. troops' immediate 
departure from the national territory. 
  Congressman Heverth Bustamante of the 19 April Movement said 
these violations of the political charter and sovereignty should 
be carefully investigated. 
  Ramiro Velasquez, a conservative and vice chairman of the 
Chamber of Deputies Foreign Relations Committee, said Gaviria 
betrayed the homeland and failed in his duty -- with the Liberal 
Party's support. 
  Former President Alfonso Lopez, member of the International 
Relations Advisory Board, said the State Council's statement 
failed to take into consideration certain aspects of 
international law, like the multilateral treaties which bind 
Colombia regarding the interpretation of what constitutes 
foreign troops and warships. 

