BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Stefan Prodev: "Undiplomatic and Insulting"] </F>
  [Text] I know that [U.S. Ambassador] Mr. Montgomery and 
[Russian Ambassador] Mr. Avdeyev will be insulted, but what can 
I do? I cannot ignore their meetings with Ahmed Dogan at the 
parliamentary office of the Movement for Rights and Freedoms 
[DPS]. The appearance of both ambassadors was so unexpected 
that even experienced parliamentarians such as Mr. Lyutfi began 
to stutter in their confusion in front of the journalists. The 
journalists, who know why, recalled a Latin American state and a 
Central Asian republic where, until recently, the ambassadors of 
the United States and Russia read the presidents' speeches. 
  The urgent visits of Mr. Montgomery and Mr. Avdeyev confused 
even further the already confused parliament. It became more 
than obvious that our man from Washington and our man from 
Moscow must tell the same person something very important. 
Moreover, the thing they had to tell him was so important that 
they had to tell it to him separately, in a provocative manner. 
First the journalists and then the deputies understood that the 
"invisible" Ahmed is one of the main "mailboxes" of certain 
foreign embassies in Bulgaria. It was not by an accident that, 
after the meetings, the DPS leader found himself in the focus of 
the political attention. Despite the fact that no one has 
precise quotations from the talks in the DPS office, it is 
certain that the two ambassadors utilized Dogan in order to 
obtain assurances or dividends from the last cabinet crisis. 
Unfortunately, the Turkish ambassador did not take place in the 
operational meetings, because then one would have seen even 
better the real essence of the "mailbox." 
  In this case we are concerned not so much with Dogan's 
discreet role, as by the open interference of the U.S. and 
Russian ambassadors in the game. We understand their desire to 
thoroughly comprehend the secrets of the Bulgarian puzzle, but 
nevertheless, a cabinet crisis is a purely Bulgarian affair, and 
every foreign interference, even through a straw man, cannot be 
accepted without alarm. This already is not an attempt to 
render a selfless help, but a most careless blow against our 
dignity as an independent state. What would have happened for 
example, if the Bulgarian ambassadors in Washington and Moscow 
would run to the Congress or the State Duma in order to learn 
their secrets at the time of an acute political clash? 
Undoubtedly, this would have been described as a scandal, and 
our officials would have parted with their diplomatic careers. 
Unfortunately, the American and the Russian are not threatened 
by such a fate. They not only feel themselves rather free under 
our conditions, but also demonstrate no sense of tact. 
Obviously, in their imperial awareness, the Bulgaria of today is 
a Balkan Haiti or a Balkan Ossetia, over whose destiny Russia 
and the United States have unlimited powers. I could be wrong, 
but the two ambassadors could hardly deny the fact that these 
scandalous meetings with Dogan under the roof of the parliament, 
at a critical moment for Bulgaria, contains certain colonial 
elements. 
  I am not writing these lines only as a journalist, but also 
as a deputy who was personally insulted by the two diplomats. 
This is so because their unexpected visits are political 
interference in the internal affairs of a sovereign state in any 
normal language. The two gentlemen emerged the parliament at 
the most unsuitable moment, as if they wanted to assure us that 
without them Bulgaria cannot resolve its problems. This is not 
concern or diplomacy, but a real inference with our own will. I 
feel uncomfortable having to say this, but what else could I say 
to them? 
  Apparently, Mr. Montgomery and Mr. Avdeyev are not bothered 
by scandals, and therefore they create them themselves. This 
might be an accepted style of behavior in diplomacy, but in 
Bulgaria, where nerves have been strained by the situation, such 
behavior could only be damaging. It repels and insults, 
something that evokes concern. This is what the two diplomats 
should know when they attempt to directly influence our 
political reality. Despite its current drama, Bulgaria is 
neither Haiti nor Ossetia. It is not an enclave or a strip. It 
respects the strong ones, but it also demands respect from them. 
People such as Dogan, regardless of how convenient they are for 
various maneuvers, are not the real face of Bulgaria. They are 
only a complex particle of our national landscape, which does 
not fully express our interests. Therefore, it is irresponsible 
of anyone to turn them into an important factor. If the United 
States and Russia want to indicate a position on certain 
Bulgarian problems, they must seek a more authoritative 
"mailbox." Otherwise they could experience disappointments. 
After all, the "mailbox" could always be blamed and produce a 
confusing message. This is especially important in Bulgaria, 
which has experienced everything, including a 500-year Turkish 
yoke, but has never been a colony, and will never be one! 

