Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Council of Ministers held a meeting in Aden, the 
economic and trade capital, today under the chairmanship of 
Prime Minister brother Haydar Abu-Bakr al-'Attas. During the 
meeting, the Council reviewed the results of the work of the 
committee formed in its previous meeting to prepare draft laws 
to implement the accord document. 
  The Council of Ministers made a number of decisions within 
this framework and formed a number of specialized committees to 
accomplish the tasks required by the accord document in 
accordance with the time framework defined in the document. The 
decisions call for presenting a plan to arrest fugitive 
suspects, prison escapees, and those abetting these suspects. 
The decisions also call for completing investigations on 
detained suspects and referring them to court. The decisions 
also call for the formation of a committee to search for camps 
or bases for training and preparing Yemenis and foreigners to 
carry out acts of violence. 
  The Council of Ministers also decided to form a committee to 
remove checkpoints from cities and to define the appropriate 
places to set up security checkpoints. The Council of Ministers 
also decided to form a preparatory committee to hold a national 
conference for general reconciliation among tribes, in 
accordance with which there will be no more acts of revenge. 
  Furthermore, the Council of Ministers formed a military 
committee to draw up plans to move military units from the 
so-called outskirts in some areas in the Governorates of Ta'izz, 
Lahij, Ibb, Abyan, Shabwah, al-Bayda', and Ma'rib, and to 
redeploy them in positions from which they can defend vital 
targets and the strategic defense requirements of the state. 
  The Council of Ministers decided to form a committee to 
prepare a draft law for establishing the intelligence department 
to defend national sovereignty, as well as another committee to 
prepare draft laws for security affairs. 
  The Council of Ministers charged the command of the Defense 
Ministry to present a plan to evacuate the Armed Forces from the 
cities and to redeploy them in preparation for their merger and 
for straightening out their affairs. 
  The Council of Ministers charged the ministers of interior 
and defense with the implementation of the tasks mentioned in 
Paragraphs 13 and 16 of the security and military part of the 
accord document. 
  The Council of Ministers decided to form a committee to 
supervise the first part of the accord document related to the 
security and military part. 
  The Council of Ministers also decided to form a committee to 
prepare draft laws and bylaws to (?determine) the relationship 
and define the powers and tasks of the chairman, vice chairman, 
and members of the Presidential Council in accordance with the 
Constitution. The committee will also review the Council of 
Ministers Law and the bylaws of the Presidential Council office. 
  The Council of Ministers decided to form a committee to 
prepare a draft law for the administrative division of the 
republic and a draft law for local governments. 
  The Council of Ministers also decided to form a national 
committee to prepare a draft law for the constitutional 
amendments and a draft law for elections. 
  At the end of the meeting, the Council of Ministers charged 
the prime minister, his deputies, and the committee formed under 
the chairmanship of Deputy Prime Minister Muhammad Haydarh 
Masdus with naming the members of the committees that the 
Council of Ministers decided to form in this meeting and with 
announcing the decisions of the Council of Ministers. 
  The Council of Ministers decided to hold its next meeting in 
Ta'izz after two weeks, God willing. 

