Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, March 21 (AFP) -- UN forces found heavy 
weapons including tanks, anti-aircraft guns and mortars inside 
the NATO-imposed exclusion zone around Sarajevo, a UN spokesman 
said Monday [21 March]. Calling it a "big violation" of the NATO 
demilitarization plan, Major Simon MacDowell, spokesman for the 
UN Protection Force [UNPROFOR], said Canadians troops had found 
the arms late Sunday [20 March] in the area where six 120mm 
howitzers had been found on March 4. He said: "They determined 
that there are a considerable number of weapons there, more than 
the six." The newly found weapons included four tanks, three 
anti-aircraft guns, one 405mm howitzer and 18 mortars, he said. 
  In Brussels, NATO said the weapons belonged to Bosnian Serb 
forces. 
  In Sarajevo, Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic said Monday 
he was not surprised at the weapons find. Izetbegovic, returning 
from Washington after sealing accords with Bosnian Croat leaders 
to create a Croat-Moslem federation, said: "We are not 
surprised. We think those weapons exist in much greater 
numbers." The Bosnian Government had made reports warning of the 
existence of Bosnian Serb weapons inside the exclusion zone, he 
said. 
  MacDowell added that local-level negotiations between the 
Canadians and Serb had "not achieved any results in getting the 
weapons moved out or put under UNPROFOR control." Although near 
the edge of the exclusion zone, the arms were very near the 
Sarajevo-Visoko road, which is supposed to be opened to limited 
civilian traffic on Wednesday [23 March]. Izetbegovic, asked if 
people would need permission to use bridges and the three 
corridors into Sarajevo being reopened Wednesday, said only 
those "charged with some offence" would have their movements 
restricted. MacDowell said the United Nations was trying to 
arrange a high-level meeting between Bosnian Serb leader Radovan 
Karadzic and top UNPROFOR officials at Serb headquarters in Pale 
near Sarajevo to resolve the arms violation standoff. "The Serbs 
cannot withdraw straight back out since they've backed up right 
to HVO (Bosnian Croat) [Croatian Defense Council] lines," 
MacDowell said. He stressed however that "these guns are not 
capable of engaging Sarajevo. We have them now under 
observation." The spokesman added: "But these weapons are where 
we say they shouldn't be. The situation is not satisfactory 
from our position. Absolutely not." 
  Meanwhile Izetbegovic expressed hope that opposition from 
the 
Bosnian Serb side to the Bosnia federation agreement signed 
Friday would be resolved at future talks. "There will be an 
attempt to find a peaceful solution on all the territory of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina with the Serb side," he said. The Bosnian 
president added that he would invite Croatian President Franjo 
Tudjman to Sarajevo to discuss a separate plan for a loose 
confederation between Croatia and the Moslem-Croat federation. 
  Meanwhile Bosnian Prime Minister Haris Siladjzic, who also 
made the Washington trip, said any negotiation with the Serbs 
would "start with the question of returning land and will always 
go back to this question." 

