Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Mark J. Valencia: "A Spratly Solution"] </F>
  [Text] At long last a solution to the vexing dispute over 
the Spratly Islands may be possible. Claimed in whole or in part 
bv China, Taiwan, Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia and Brunei, 
the geopolitical issues at stake here extend far beyond mere 
ownership of these scattered, fly-speck islands and any oil the 
area may harbour. How these contested claims are resolved will 
tell us much about the future economic and security arrangements 
in post-Cold War Southeast Asia. 
  The surprise agreement between China Petroleum (Taiwan), 
China National Offshore Oil (China) and Chevron (U.S.) to form a 
joint venture for oil exploration in the East China and South 
China Seas suggests a way out. Although the spectre of a 
China-Taiwan "united front" on South China Sea issues is not 
without its dangers, it may make an agreement easier now that 
the competition between them will be muted and other claimants 
will no longer have to choose between China and Taiwan. 
  For with the U.S. role perceived to be diminishing, China's 
longer term intentions are of particular concern. Partly in 
response, Asean has begun to consider security cooperation; 
Indonesia is attempting to assert some leadership in Southeast 
Asia; and Vietnam, isolated and vulnerable, is attempting to 
embrace Asean. All of these factors come together in the 
Spratlys. A major sticking point today is that despite Beijing's 
initial offer to put the sovereignty issue aside and to develop 
the area jointly, it now appears to insist that other claimants 
first recognise its sovereignty before joint development is 
possible. 
  This complicates a solution, but it does not make it 
impossible. The key is first to settle the outstanding 
grievances between Vietnam and China, which involve areas 
outside the core Spratly area -- on land, in the Gulf of Tonkin 
and at sea in the Vanguard Bank area, where China awarded a 
concession to Crestone Oil of the U.S. Certainly Vietnam's 
interests lie in coming to some kind of agreement. One way out 
would be for China and Taiwan to set aside their "historic" 
claim to most of the South China Sea in exchange for a combined 
share of 51 percent in a multilateral Spratly Development 
Authority, which would administer the core area and manage the 
exploration and exploitation of resources there. If Vietnam 
received a favourable settlement in the Tonkin Gulf and Vanguard 
Bank areas, it might consider settling for less shares in the 
Spratly area. Since Brunei claims only a tiny portion of the 
core area, its share would be very small. The remaining shares 
would be allocated among Vietnam, the Philippines and Malavsia. 
Although China and Taiwan might argue that their 51 percent 
share in the Spratly Development Authority constitutes tacit 
recognition by the other claimants of the validity of China's 
sovereignty claims, the other could rightly counter that, far 
from relinquishing their claims, all they did was agree to 
shelve them. 
  Indeed, under this cooperative regime the area would be 
demilitarised, sovereignty claims would be frozen and the 
Authority would resolve user conflicts, facilitate exploration 
and development of resources, manage fisheries and maintain 
environmental quality. The legitimate transit of vessels would 
be allowed. The authority might also promote international 
cooperation in scientific research and in protecting vulnerable 
ecosystems. 
  Since the core area would be removed from contention, and 
China and Taiwan would have set aside their historic line claim, 
the relevant countries could then focus their efforts on those 
areas outside the core area claimed by only two or three 
governments, e.g., the southwestern margin claimed by Indonesia 
and Vietnam; the southern margin claimed by Brunei and Malaysia; 
and the northern portion claimed by China, Taiwan, Vietnam and 
the Philippines. Eventually, sovereignty over the islands and 
rocks themselves might either pass to the occupants or be 
allocated among the different countries on an equitable basis. 
Either way, the involved countries would be entitled only to 
narrow territorial seas, could not use their respective areas 
for military purposes and would have to grant access for 
scientific research and -- more important -- any resources the 
areas might harbour. 
  Certainly this solution is not perfect. It is complicated, 
and the claimants would doubtless have various objections. But 
it deserves some consideration, especially given the general 
recognition that conflict would have far-reaching negative 
implications for regional and great-power relations. Indeed, 
already the governments involved continue to talk both 
informally (the Indonesia-sponsored meetings), bilaterally 
(China and Vietnam) and regionally (e.g., the Manila Asean 
Post-Ministerial Conference and probably in the Asean Regional 
Forum). In principle they all have agreed to a peaceful 
settlement. There is, moreover, wide support for the concept of 
joint development. Malaysia and. the Philippines, for example, 
have agreed to cooperate in fisheries in their area of overlap. 
  But the window of opportunity may be closing. Unless these 
nations move quickly, they may find that they have lost not just 
a solution to the Spratlys but the opportunity to take an 
important step towards a collective security arrangement that 
could guarantee the peace and development of the region well 
into the future. 

