BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 9 KYODO -- Some 150 House of 
Representatives members will before long rally behind a new 
parliamentary group set up by the Japan New Party (JNP) led by 
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, eyeing a political realignment 
in the wake of the premier's announcement Friday that he would 
resign, group sources said Saturday. 
  The new grouping will be the second largest in the lower 
house after the 219 seats held by the Liberal Democratic Party 
(LDP), the main opposition party. 
  Lower house members of the ruling coalition's two core 
parties Shinseito (Japan Renewal Party) and Komeito, and some 
independents will join the new group, called "Reform," the 
sources said. 
  Three of the seven coalition parties -- the Social 
Democratic 
Party (SDP), the largest force in the coalition, the Democratic 
Socialist Party (DSP) and new party Sakigake [Harbinger] -- 
have, however, criticized the movement. 
  The three parties, which favor a multiparty system, said 
they 
will not participate in the new group as it could ultimately 
lead to a new single party dominated by Shinseito and Komeito. 
  On Friday, Hosokawa established the new group comprising 38 
JNP members and two legislators of the United Social Democratic 
Party, a minor partner in the seven-party coalition. 
  Before establishing Reform, the JNP dissolved an 
eight-month-long alliance with Sakigake, headed by Chief Cabinet 
Secretary Masayoshi Takemura. 
  In its prospectus, the new group defined itself as a new 
base 
for establishing a group of politicians who aim to promote 
administrative reform, tax reform and Japan's international 
contribution following political reforms, the sources said. 
  The new group also aims to block a return to power by the 
LDP, which dominated the political scene for 38 years until it 
was ousted by the coalition last August. 
  The LDP still holds the largest portion of seats in the 
powerful lower house as a single party. 
  Shinseito secretary general Ichiro Ozawa, also known as the 
coalition's chief strategist, and Komeito secretary general 
Yuichi Ichikawa envision a new government comprised of parties 
with full accords on key policies such as tax reform and foreign 
policy affairs, the sources said. 
  They are calling on reform-minded LDP legislators to join 
their group. 
  Hosokawa, who was once an advocate of a multiparty system, 
is 
tilting heavily in favor of the Ozawa-Ichikawa line. The three 
key figures are trying to rally over 200 lawmakers of the 
511-member lower house to join the parliamentary group, 
including defectors of the LDP and the SDP, the sources said. 
  Some 10 JNP members, however, have refused to sign the 
prospectus and are expected to leave the party, possibly 
prompting a move to divide the coalition parties into two blocs, 
the sources said. 
  Some members of the Democratic Socialist Party (DSP), 
another 
coalition party, said Saturday they will also join the new 
parliamentary group, DSP sources said. 
  Their decision contradicts DSP Chairman Keido Ouchi's stand 
that the party will not join the group. 

