Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Wu Yi (0702 0308): "Give Full Play to the Role of </F>
Import, Export Trade Fairs While Developing the Socialist Market 
Economy"] 
  [Text] The seven chambers of commerce of importers and 
exporters that have sprung up along with the tide of reform and 
opening up: The China Chamber of Commerce of Importers and 
Exporters of Metals, Minerals and Chemical Products; the China 
Chamber of Commerce of Importers and Exporters of Machinery and 
Electrical Products; the China Chamber of Commerce of Importers 
and Exporters of Medicines and Health Products; the China 
Chamber of Commerce of Importers and Exporters of Textiles; the 
China Chamber of Commerce of Importers and Exporters of Light 
Industrial Products and Arts and Crafts; the China Chamber of 
Commerce of Importers and Exporters of Foodstuffs, Native 
Produce, and Animal By-products; and the China Chamber of 
Commerce of Foreign Contractors (hereinafter referred to as the 
"Chamber of Commerce") have been established for 5 years. On 
the occasion of the celebration of the fifth anniversary, it is 
necessary to earnestly sum up the working experience of the 
Chamber of Commerce, to further understand the nature, status, 
and role of the Chamber of Commerce in a socialist market 
economy, and to make clear the working task of the Chamber of 
Commerce both in the present and in the future. 
<H5>  I. </H5>
  The Chamber of Commerce is the inevitable outcome of our 
foreign economic and trade system reform. The progress of 
economic system reform in our country since 1978 has made a 
series of reforms on the original foreign economic and trade 
management system characteristic of the unified and centralized 
operation and the unified responsibility of the state for both 
profits and loses, and the two major reforms in 1988 in 
particular have brought about fundamental changes to the foreign 
economic and trade system. According to the requirement of new 
system operations, the competent authorities of the government 
will be responsible neither for the direct control of business 
activities nor for macroeconomic management. Instead, they will 
apply economic, legal, and policy instruments as well as 
necessary administrative means to exercise macroeconomic 
regulation and supervision on foreign economic and trade work. 
Enterprises are no longer an appendage to the government, they 
guide themselves with market changes and carry out business 
activities independently in light of the value. Nevertheless, 
in the course of economic reform, many new problems have 
occurred as the administrative restriction of the competent 
authorities of the government is weakened and the decisionmaking 
power of enterprises is strengthened and a large number of new 
foreign economic and trade enterprises came into existence. For 
instance, some enterprises competed with each other blindly, 
exporting at a lower price and importing at a higher price, 
resulting in commodity "war" here and there. Some enterprises 
sold adulterated and low-quality commodities, forged business 
licenses, infringed patent rights, and registered trade marks, 
or even smuggled and evaded taxes. They violated the laws or 
norms of administrative disciplines. "You have your policies, 
they have their counter-measures." 
  Facts have shown that liberalized business activities are by 
no means activities without any rule, and autonomous business 
activities are by no means the free activities without any 
restriction. Under the condition of liberalized business 
activities, the management, organization and coordination need 
to be further strengthened. Therefore, we must find a new type 
of management and managing organization which is not only in 
conformity with the development of the socialist market economy 
and helpful for the competent authorities of the government in 
carrying out macroeconomic control, but also able to standardize 
effectively the business activities of the foreign economic and 
trade enterprises and ready to provide service for these 
enterprises. The Chamber of Commerce is just such a new type of 
organization. 
  The Chamber of Commerce has served as a connecting link 
between the competent authorities of the government and the 
foreign economic and trade enterprises, providing horizontal 
coordinating services for many of the foreign economic and trade 
enterprises. While the competent authorities of the government 
are reducing their administrative interference in this region, 
the Chamber of Commerce will help to implement the government's 
macroeconomic intention and policy among foreign economic and 
trade enterprises, coordinate their business activities with 
nonadministrative means, exercise -- with the trust of the 
competent authorities of the government -- part of the 
management functions which are inconvenient or no longer easy to 
exercise, and assist the government authorities in providing 
various kinds of necessary services for enterprises. The 
Chamber of Commerce, as the mediator between the government 
authorities and the enterprises, will provide a synthetic 
linkage between the macroeconomic management function of the 
government and the operational function of the enterprises. The 
macroeconomic regulation and control of the government will be 
changed into the professional intention in the form of joint 
pledges such as the professional etiquette and public contract 
through consultation and democratic decision within the Chamber 
of Commerce and carried out effectively among the foreign 
economic and trade enterprises. 
  The diversified business activities of the foreign economic 
and trade enterprises will be corrected and regulated and put 
into healthy development by the Chamber of Commerce through 
self-management, self-restraint, and dual control of the 
enterprises. The purpose of the Chamber of Commerce function in 
coordination and service is to consolidate macroeconomic 
regulation and control and to ensure the healthy development of 
the microeconomic activities among the enterprises -- a positive 
role that the government departments or other economic 
organizations are unable to play. Facts have proven that the 
Chamber of Commerce is a new type of coordination and service 
organization which has come into being with the demand of 
economic reform and played an important role in the promotion 
and development of economic reform. 
<H5>  II. </H5>
  Under the concern of the party Central Committee and the 
State Council and with the support of the relevant departments, 
local governments, and foreign economic and trade enterprises, 
the Chamber of Commerce has achieved remarkable success since 
its founding with coordination and service as its main purposes. 
  1. To strengthen the coordination and management for export 
commodities. In accordance with relevant state policies and the 
demand of domestic and international markets, the Chamber of 
Commerce has laid stress on the coordination and management of 
the bulk export commodities, which are poorly managed in 
business activities. In the last five years 87 sets of 
coordination and management regulations on single products have 
been formulated and implemented by the Chamber of Commerce after 
the approval of the competent authorities of foreign economic 
and trade organizations. In the meanwhile, the Chamber of 
Commerce formulated price plans for 400 different kinds of 
commodities according to the situation of international market 
and based on the study together with the member organizations, 
thus providing the price base for transaction and management of 
some major sensitive export commodities. Entrusted by the 
competent authority of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and 
Economic Cooperation, some members of the Chamber of Commerce 
has also tried to coordinate the import of some commodities. 
  2. To investigate thoroughly the unfair trade practice and 
regulate foreign trade order. In accordance with the 
requirement of the competent authorities of the government and 
in view of the negative factors occurring in our foreign trade 
activities in recent years, we have launched the campaign of 
regulating foreign trade order and rectifying unfair trade 
practices. The Chamber of Commerce has sent teams to carry out 
deep investigations in the major place of origin and the 
principal place of business with the finding that some 
enterprises were competing with each other blindly, purchasing 
at a higher price and selling at a lower price, engaging in 
business activities that were not within their business scope or 
out of their planned targets or even employing trickery in 
falsely claiming as their own business license, in smuggling and 
in evading taxes. The investigation teams made timely reports 
to government authorities at all levels and forwarded their own 
opinions on the treatment, and thus rectified promptly the 
unfair trade practice. 
  3. To organize the defense in antidumping cases. In recent 
years, with the intensification of trade protectionism all over 
the world, antidumping cases against China have occurred 
repeatedly. In order to safeguard the legitimate rights and 
interests of our export enterprises and consolidate the external 
selling market for our export commodities, the Chamber of 
Commerce, in the spirit of "active defense and unyielding 
struggle," has organized relevant organizations to participate 
in the defense in antidumping cases against our export 
commodities. In the last five years the chamber of Commerce has 
taken up nearly 50 antidumping cases and retrieved a loss of 
about several hundred million yuan, having safeguarded the 
interests of the nation and export enterprises, as well as the 
credit of our export commodities in the international market. 
  4. To broaden contact and exchange with the outside world. 
From its founding the Chamber of Commerce has made consistent 
efforts in promoting the trade exchange and economic cooperation 
between China and other countries all over the world. The 
Chamber of Commerce has so far organized 693 enterprises to 
participate in 69 exhibits in 58 countries or regions with total 
deals reaching $100 million. The Chamber of Commerce has also 
organized 26 marketing or research teams going abroad to assist 
member organizations in understanding and developing a market. 
The Chamber of Commerce has established contact with 95 
economic and trade organizations in 69 countries with friendly 
intercourse and cooperation. The Chamber of Commerce has now 
become the bridge to bring together the commercial circles both 
at home and abroad. 
  5. To provide consultation and information service. The 
Chamber of Commerce has now established the consultation and 
information service department and maintained constant business 
contacts with many of the economic and trade information 
organizations both at home and abroad. The Chamber of Commerce 
has also formed its own information service team and an import 
and export information network has gradually come into being. 
The Chamber of Commerce has edited and published large numbers 
of books, periodicals, and other publications concerning foreign 
economic cooperation and trade. It is now preparing to 
establish the computerized information network, using an 
advanced information transmission system to provide enterprises 
with updated and practical information and to provide the 
consultation services as requested by the enterprises from time 
to time. Some other members of the Chamber of Commerce also 
provide external services for enterprises through their 
cooperation with the consultation and information service 
corporations in foreign countries. 
  While providing an active service for our economic reform 
and 
opening up, the Chamber of Commerce has matured and developed. 
In the last five years the function and business scope of the 
Chamber and Commerce have been expanded, its coordination method 
has been gradually consolidated, its operating mechanism 
optimized, and its organization structure further improved. The 
Chamber of Commerce has so far established 63 commodity branches 
with more than 3000 members all over the country, thus forming a 
broad link in business contact and working network domestically 
and internationally. The Chamber of Commerce, as an essential 
force in the development of foreign economic cooperation and 
trade, has preliminarily become a national chamber of commerce 
with Chinese characteristics. 
<H5>  III. </H5>
  The Chamber of Commerce has never stopped studying, 
practicing, and developing. We can say that the Chamber of 
Commerce is now getting more and more mature in the course of 
economic reform and opening up. However, it is still a newly 
emerging phenomena in our country as compared with the chambers 
of commerce with a history of hundreds of years in those Western 
countries with highly developed market economies. The 14th 
National Congress of the Communist Party of China has defined as 
the reform target the establishment of a socialist market 
economic structure. Under the new situation of accelerating 
reform, opening to the outside world, and development of the 
socialist market economy, the Chamber of Commerce is now 
assuming heavy responsibilities. Here, with regard to how to 
enhance the construction of the Chamber of Commerce and how to 
do a better job in the Chamber of Commerce, I would like to air 
some opinions of my own: 
  1. To have a clearer understanding of the nature, position, 
function, and role of the Chamber of Commerce. 
  What is the nature and position of the Chamber of Commerce? 
The Chamber of Commerce is not only an organization for 
coordination under the leadership of the competent authority of 
the government, but also an organization of self-management and 
self-service which was founded by the fellow-trade enterprises 
according to the requirements of their own development. On the 
one hand, the Chamber of Commerce will play the function of 
coordination and management on behalf of state interests in 
accordance with the authorization of the relevant government 
department. On the other, it will serve enterprises on behalf 
of enterprises to reflect their interests. Therefore, according 
to the present and real situation in our country, I believe that 
the Chamber of Commerce has a "dual role" to play: It 
represents not only the interests of the state, but also the 
interests of the enterprises. It serves as a link or bridge to 
connect the two sides. The Chamber of Commerce is neither a 
administrative organ in disguise, nor a nongovernmental 
organization in the general sense. It is an organization 
between the two, having a peculiar nature and a unique position. 
  In the countries with highly developed market economies, the 
chambers of commerce or similar organizations are occupying a 
very important position in national economic activities, as is 
the Chamber of Commerce in the foreign economic cooperation and 
trade operational structure. Generally speaking, under the 
market economy, the operational structure of national economy 
can be divided into several layers: Enterprises are the most 
basic layer, the layer for microeconomic activities, above which 
is the layer for macroeconomic management, the government. The 
Chamber of Commerce is in the middle of the two layers, serving 
as the link or bridge between the government and the 
enterprises. Working together, the three layers have formed the 
whole framework of our new foreign economic and trade system. 
  What is the function and role of the Chamber of Commerce? 
The most fundamental function and role for the Chamber of 
Commerce is to provide coordinating services. In more concrete 
terms, it involves the following three major aspects: First, 
the function and role of service is to establish the socialized 
service system, provide enterprises with high-quality services 
concerning policy, information, laws, consultation, public 
relations, etc., and help enterprises learn how to "swim in the 
ocean of market economy." Second, the function and role of 
coordination, in accordance with the government policies, laws 
and regulations, to coordinate enterprises in their productive 
and economic activities, maintain a normal productive and 
operational order and safeguard the interests of the state, the 
economic and trade sector, and the enterprises. Lastly, the 
function and role of linkage, that is, to provide a link between 
the government and the enterprises, carry out government 
intention among the enterprises and, at the same time, report to 
the government the demands and proposals of the enterprises. Of 
the three, the function and role of service is the most 
important. 
  Heavy and important tasks have been placed on the Chamber of 
Commerce in the work of foreign economic cooperation and trade. 
These tasks are mainly as follows: To study the principles, 
policies, strategies, and plans in expanding the line import and 
export of commodities and foreign technological and economic 
cooperation and to put forward proposals to the competent 
authorities; to carry out the macroeconomic intentions, 
policies, laws and regulations of the government among the 
enterprises and to report to the competent authorities the 
proposals and demands of enterprises; according to the 
development and changes of domestic and foreign markets, to 
coordinate among trade organizations the price, market, and 
client of import and export commodities; with the authorization 
of government authorities, to make suggestions, upon preliminary 
examination, concerning the allocation of export quotas and the 
issuance of export licenses, and exercise supervision over the 
fulfillment of the quota and license by the member 
organizations; on behalf of the trade organizations, to 
participate in international professional conferences so as to 
strengthen the relationship with the chambers of commerce of 
other countries and establish business contact with them; to 
gather information from the international market concerning 
major import and export commodities so as to provide relevant 
consultation services; entrusted by relevant government 
authorities and member organizations, to organize or represent 
member organizations in handling antidumping and antimonopoly 
cases; to organize member organizations to participate in 
various activities such as exhibitions, observation, and 
marketing both at home and abroad; to maintain the legal rights 
and interests of member organizations and mediate disputes among 
member organizations. 
  2. To do a better job, the Chamber of Commerce must have the 
support of all sides, most of all, the support of the competent 
authorities of economic cooperation and trade at all levels. 
The new economic and trade system consists of three parts: The 
macroeconomic management, the business operation, and the 
coordinating services. They supplement each other and 
coordinate with each other. As far as the work of the Chamber 
of Commerce is concerned, it is new and difficult and needs the 
support from every side, especially the forceful support of the 
government authorities. Government departments should give their 
active support to the Chamber of Commerce in its coordinating 
services so as to provide necessary working conditions for the 
Chamber of Commerce and make it the real link between the 
government and the enterprises and the capable assistant of the 
government. 
  3. To do a better job of its own, the Chamber of Commerce 
should formulate its own rules and regulations which all the 
member organizations are required to abide by. A market economy 
is the economy of law. In some of the developed capitalist 
countries, an important reason why their chambers of commerce 
can play their role is that there are rules and regulations for 
them to follow. Our Chamber of Commerce has met with a lot of 
difficulties in its work, the main reason of which is that there 
are no rules and regulations to follow. In order to bring into 
full play the role of the Chamber of Commerce in socialist 
market economy and to improve the authority and effectiveness of 
the Chamber of Commerce in its coordinating services, there is 
an urgent need for the Chamber of Commerce to formulate its own 
law so as to define clearly its own nature, position, function, 
basic task, organization structure and working method. 
  4. To do a better job, the Chamber of Commerce must firmly 
adopt the idea of serving the member organizations. The basic 
function of the Chamber of Commerce is to provide coordinating 
services. In the last few years, the Chamber of Commerce spared 
no effort in its coordination and management work. With 
deepening reform of the foreign economic and trade system, the 
Chamber of Commerce should make real efforts to shift the focal 
point of its work to providing services. With this aim in mind, 
the Chamber of Commerce should change its idea conscientiously, 
work enthusiastically to broaden the scope and raise the quality 
of its services, and, by so doing, to maintain the rights and 
interests of the state, the trade sector, and the enterprises. 
If it deviates from this aim, the Chamber of Commerce will have 
neither cohesive force for its members nor vitality of its own, 
no matter what kind of power, function, or role is granted to it. 
  5. To do a better job, the Chamber of Commerce will have to 
change its work method and operational mechanism. The Chamber 
of Commerce is neither the superior nor the "mother-in-law" of 
the enterprises, but something like the "parents' home of a 
married woman." Therefore, the Chamber of Commerce should adopt 
a new working method rather than the old style of administrative 
management. To express it more precisely, the working method of 
the Chamber of Commerce should be more democratic, fair, and 
open and characteristic of the "four selfs," that is, all the 
major issues shall be decided by the trade enterprises through 
democratic consultation; all major decisions shall be made by 
valuing the state interests above everything else and, at the 
same time, giving consideration to the interests of all other 
aspects; all the measures, methods, and working arrangements 
should be highly open; each enterprise should begin the practice 
of self-management, self-restriction, self-protection, and 
self-development. 
  6. To do a better job, the Chamber of Commerce should 
enhance 
its organization construction. At present, we must do a good 
job in the following three aspects: Firstly, to establish the 
association of the chambers of commerce. Nowadays, the import 
and export chambers of commerce are all trade organizations. In 
order to intensify the coordination among the chambers of 
commerce, facilitate the exchange with outside world and assist 
government authorities in settling trade disputes, we propose to 
establish a national association of chambers of commerce in the 
economic and trade section on the basis of the existing chambers 
of commerce so as to systematize the import and export chambers 
of commerce and make them more influential and effective. 
Secondly, to consolidate the chambers of commerce. We should 
decide the organization structure and staffing of the chambers 
of commerce, improve and consolidate organization structure of 
commodity societies and offices of the Chamber of Commerce and 
be active in recruiting new qualified members so as to build up 
their representativeness and authoritativeness. Thirdly, to 
built up a team of leading comrades in the Chamber of Commerce. 
We should make great efforts to cultivate a contingent of 
leading professionals for the Chamber of Commerce. While 
streamlining their organizations, the government authorities 
should also transfer some of the outstanding leading comrades to 
reinforce the leading body of the Chamber of Commerce so as to 
enable the Chamber of Commerce to be more prepared for the 
historical task of reform and opening China to the outside world 
and to make still greater contributions to the development of 
the foreign economic cooperation and trade in our country. 

