BFN 

  [Text] His Majesty King Husyan and His Highness Crown 
Prince Hasan received Egyptian Prime Dr. 'Atif Sidqi and his 
delegation today. Dr. Sidqi extended his condolences to his 
majesty and the Jordanian family over the death of Her Majesty 
the late Queen Mother Zayn. They then discussed developments in 
the peace process and stressed the urgency for policy 
coordination among the Arabs to further the cause of a just and 
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region. They also 
underscored the need to coordinate economic policies, given the 
changes sweeping the region, particularly in the economic area. 
Under such circumstances, Arabs must exchange views in all 
areas to advance economic and social conditions and, by 
extension, regional peace and stability. The meeting was 
attended by Prime Minister 'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali, Royal Court 
Chief al- Sharif Zayd Bin-Shakir, and the Jordanian-Egyptian 
ministerial committee members. 
  His majesty gave a statement to the Egyptian media team, 
visiting with Dr. Sidqi: 
  [Begin recording] [Unidentified correspondent] How does 
your majesty see future cooperation with Egypt? 
  [Husayn] There is a wide scope for that. I was happy to 
learn about the subjects that the joint committee addressed. I 
think the two sides are determined to further our cooperation 
and integration. I am impressed by the resolve the parties have 
shown to attain our joint objectives for our common good. 
  [Correspondent] How does your majesty feel about recent 
developments, particularly with reference to the peace process? 
  [Husayn] Our position is clear and has been so since 1974. 
We recognized the PLO as the sole legitimate representative of 
the Palestinian Arabs. Thanks be to God, the PLO is doing its 
job advancing the objectives of our Palestinian brothers and in 
this effort it has our full support. We hope the recent 
developments will before long yield positive results and advance 
the rights of the Palestinians on their national soil. 
  [Correspondent] Are you in touch with President Mubarak over 
the Jordanian-Israeli track? 
  [Husayn] Our coordination to advance the cause of a just and 
comprehensive peace that future generations can live with is 
ongoing. I hope we will have further meetings in Amman and in 
Egypt, our second homeland, so that we may work together for the 
good of our people. 
  [Correspondent] What kind of contribution will Jordan make 
to the consolidation of the self-rule authority? 
  [Husayn] We are doing what we can to help our kinsfolk and 
brothers. Of course, Jordan is in a special position in terms 
of its association with the cause and the kinsfolk. Also what 
is going on will have an impact on Jordan. I think that the 
same largely holds true for Egypt. President 'Arafat is 
visiting us today; we hope to find out what we can do to help 
out. [end recording] 
  Dr. 'Atif Sidqi spoke to our political affairs 
correspondent: 
  [Begin Sidqi recording] This is not the first time that I 
have met with his majesty the king. His majesty is a first-rate 
statesman in global, as well as in regional terms. I am 
impressed by his astuteness, experience, and familiarity with 
the ins and outs of Arab and world issues. We talked at length 
about regional developments and the peace process. He is as 
firmly committed as we are in Egypt to the peace process. We 
look forward to that process yielding out benefits for all the 
states of the region. We also discussed bilateral relations, 
which, thank God, are good, even though it is some time since 
the joint committee last convened. However, work had not really 
stopped as we noted at today's committee meeting. His majesty 
pronounced himself fully satisfied with the relations between 
Egypt and Jordan and the committee's work. He urged that we 
keep up the work to further these relations. [end recording] 

