BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with PUK Secretary General Jalal </F>
Talabani in Damascus, by 'Adnan Husayn in London; date not given] 
  [Text] Jalal Talabani, secretary general of the Patriotic 
Union of Kurdistan [PUK] who is currently in the Syrian capital 
Damascus, has stated that "foreign interventions" had fuelled 
the fighting between his party and the Kurdistan Democratic 
Party [KDP] led by Mas'ud Barzani. In a telephone interview 
with AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT, he said that he wanted to return to his 
headquarters in Irbil to contribute to the efforts to bring 
about a cease-fire and normalize the situation in the Iraqi 
Kurdish areas. 
  At the beginning of the interview he emphasized that calm 
has 
returned to these areas after Friday's [20 May] agreement 
between his party and Barzani's party. Following is the text of 
the interview. 
  [Husayn] What are your expectations? Will that calm 
continue or will it collapse again? 
  [Talabani] I am very hopeful that the agreements reached by 
our two parties will be implemented and that security will again 
prevail in Kurdistan. It is now clear that resolving issues by 
military means is neither possible nor useful. It only serves 
the enemies of the Kurdish people. The illusions of those who 
thought that they could force the PUK into anything have been 
shattered and it has been proved on the ground that that is 
impossible. 
  [Husayn] The question now is this: How could fighting have 
gone on for three weeks despite several agreements reached to 
stop it and despite the fact that all parties realize that the 
fighting is against the interests of the Kurdish people who are 
the losers in any case? Does it mean that the Kurdish 
leadership is incapable of controlling the situation or that at 
least one of the two parties, for some ulterior motives, does 
not want the fighting to stop? 
  [Talabani] What has happened was not just infighting between 
brothers. It was against the Kurdish people and their real 
interests; against the Iraqi people, the Iraqi opposition, and 
the Kurdistan Front; against the real interests of both the KDP 
and the PUK. It only serves the Baghdad regime. The PUK is not 
responsible for the continuation of the fighting. We have tried 
to stop the fighting since the first agreement but foreign 
intervention fuelled the fighting. Three attacks were launched 
from inside Iran with the participation of Islamists and some 
other brothers who had forgotten the disadvantages of 
cooperating with the foreigner. That caused complications. The 
outbreak of fighting in one area causes repercussions in 
another. Today I contacted my colleagues and reaffirmed to them 
the need for observing a cease-fire and adhering to the 
agreements reached in that connection. I warned against foreign 
plots to foment sedition and I urged them not to respond to 
provocations and to overlook them if necessary in the interest 
of internal peace. 
  [Husayn] Do you have any material evidence of foreign 
intervention? 
  [Talabani] Yes, our evidence is that the attacking forces 
came from beyond the borders and were seen by everyone. Some 
officials of the United Nations and humanitarian organizations 
operating in Kurdistan went to Halabjah and saw with their own 
eyes how artillery shells and missiles were fired from there. 
Some ammunition boxes were also left behind. Local inhabitants 
who were forced to leave these areas testified to officials of 
the United Nations and humanitarian organizations that they saw 
foreigners participating in the fighting. 
  [Husayn] Some people wonder why you have remained abroad. 
They believe that an early return to the region by you would 
possibly have changed many things in favor of stopping the 
fighting in the first few days. 
  [Talabani] I am grateful to the people who say that my 
presence inside would have improved the situation. That is a 
great honor. The truth is that on the first day of the fighting 
I sent a cable to brother Mas'ud Barzani authorizing him to head 
the political bureaus of both parties and to try to calm the 
situation and stop the infighting, but when the fighting spread, 
Brother Barzani contacted me and said that there was a need for 
me to be there. So we agreed that we would make efforts to 
secure my return by air via Turkey or by land via Syria provided 
Brother Barzani, Brother Ahmad al-Jalabi (chairman of the 
Executive Council of the opposition's National Congress), and 
others are present in the border area to ensure my safe return, 
particularly as in the areas of Bahdinan [as transliterated] (in 
the Dahuk Governorate through which passes the road to Irbil) 
there are many members of gangs which take their orders from the 
Iraqi regime. You must remember that several partisan figures 
where killed there by these gangs, including an official of the 
Communist Party, an Assyrian member of the parliament of 
Kurdistan, a member of the Political Bureau of the Kurdistan 
Toilers Party, and some of our colleagues and officials from the 
two parties. There were also several attacks on UN officials 
there. That is why it was necessary to take precautionary 
measures to ensure safe return. I personally have cancelled 
several important foreign engagements to expedite my return, 
including a visit to Japan, a visit to Australia, and a visit to 
Cyprus to attend minorities conferences. I cancelled these 
programs and went to Damascus in order to return to Kurdistan. 
I was accompanied by Iraqi National Congress [INC] leading 
members. Regrettably, however, the brothers did not come to the 
borders as agreed. We made efforts with the allies to secure 
our return by air but they informed us that after (last month's) 
incident in which two U.S. helicopters were shot down by two 
U.S. military aircraft, helicotper movements have been restrict 
and the only possibility was to secure my arrival in Zakhu (near 
the border with Turkey), but that was not enough as far as I was 
concerned. I also made efforts with Turkey and Iran for the 
same purpose. I must say that I am not the only member of the 
PUK leadership who is abroad. There are five other leadership 
members and our return is important not only as far as the 
fighting is concerned but it is also important for our party's 
work at this stage. 
  [Husayn] So when do you expect to return? 
  [Talabani] Before the end of this month, I hope. We have 
taken certain measures for that purpose but I cannot reveal them 
now. It may be useful to tell you that I am in constant and 
direct contact with Kurdistan by telephone and radio, and I am 
following the situation hour by hour and I talk to my colleagues 
there five to 10 times a day. 

