Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Brasilia--Minister of the Environment and the Legal 
Amazon Rubens Ricupero yesterday told members of the Amazonia 
Parliamentary Front that he thinks it is ridiculous to talk 
about a campaign to internationalize Amazonia and said this 
country should pay more attention to channelling foreign funds 
to finance large environmental projects in the region. 
  To Ricupero, the charge that foreign interests, with the 
support of missionaries who work in the area, are working to 
prevent the exploitation of the region's mineral reserves on the 
pretext of the need to demarcate Indian lands is "a fallacy." 
"It does not look to me like a hydra-headed monster," Ricupero 
said in response to the legislators' insistence that some action 
be taken. The minister recalled that the Constitution now 
permits exploitation of minerals in the region, and urged that 
the Congress give prompt approval to legislation that would 
regulate the mining and minerals prospecting in Amazonia. 
  According to one of the minister's advisors, Ricupero knows 
that powerful lobbies [preceding word in English] are active in 
these early stages of the constitutional revision, trying to 
hinder the demarcation of Indian lands. One of the proposals 
submitted would require each demarcation to pass through 
Congress, thus reducing Funai's autonomy. 
  In asking for a law that would regulate the use of Indian 
lands, Ricupero gave us an idea of what he would like to see 
passed. The minister said that when a permit to mine on Indian 
land is granted, the authorized company should be required to 
compensate the community with a percentage of the profits and to 
invest in social projects in the area, such as construction of 
schools and hospitals. 
  "If they are to survive, Indian communities need to receive 
something in return for the riches that they have on their 
lands," said Ricupero, who advocates a change in the Indian 
Statute. In his opinion, the Office of Government Attorney 
[Ministerio Publico] should oversee the entire process. 

