BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 14 (AFP) -- China is making every 
effort to uncover the true causes of a blaze aboard a pleasure 
boat last month that left 32 dead, including 24 Taiwan tourists, 
the foreign ministry said Thursday. 
  In the first official government reaction to the March 31 
disaster that caused an outcry in Taiwan amid accusations of 
foul play, the foreign ministry pledged that the findings of the 
investigation would be made public as soon as possible. 
  Chinese media reports have so far insisted that the boat 
fire 
on Qiandao Lake in the eastern province of Zhejiang was 
accidental, despite charges from relatives of the Taiwan victims 
that arson and robbery were the motive. 
  "The departments concerned are combining their efforts to 
deal with the aftermath of the incident, making further 
investigations into its cause and trying to find out the truth 
and make it public as soon as possible," a foreign ministry 
spokesman said. "We do not wish to see a repetition of this 
tragedy." 
  Taiwan has strongly criticised China's handling of the 
incident, especially the decision to cremate the bodies before 
they could be returned to Taiwan and their refusal to let 
relatives near the boat. 
  The Taiwan cabinet on Wednesday suspended sightseeing tours 
to China effective May 1, following on an earlier decision to 
suspend all cultural and educational exchanges and threats of 
sweeping economic reprisals. 
  The government in Taipei, driven off the mainland after 
losing a civil war to the Chinese communists in 1949, has banned 
direct, political contacts with China, but permitted private, 
non-political and indirect exchanges across the Taiwan Strait. 
  Tang Shubei, vice president of the China's semi-official 
Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits (ARATS) 
warned Taiwan on Wednesday against using the boat disaster as an 
excuse to impede exchanges between the mainland and the 
Nationalist island. 
  The foreign ministry also sought to reassure foreign 
tourists 
who might be wary of travelling in China in the wake of the 
incident. 
  "All tourist departments are carrying out overall safety 
checks and putting into practise all kinds of measures to ensure 
the safety of tourists," the spokesman said. "We believe that 
foreign tourists travelling in China should not and will not be 
affected by individual incidents." 

