Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [News commentary by station editor Yu Xin: "The Two Sides </F>
of the Taiwan Strait Accelerate Scientific-Technological 
Exchanges and Cooperation" -- from the "News and Current Events" 
program] 
  [Text] Recently, President of the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences [CAS] Zhou Guangzhao went to Taiwan to attend a 1994 
meeting between the two sides of the Strait on material, and 
iron and steel manufacturing science and technology. Both sides 
further realized that each side had its respective advantages 
with regard to resources and technology, and that if they could 
strengthen cooperation it would be beneficial to promoting their 
development. 
  In recent years, exchanges between the two sides of the 
Strait have been very active. In 1992, seven mainland 
scientists, including Tan Jiazhen, made their first visit to 
Taiwan, opening the door for two-way exchanges between 
scientists of the two sides, and receiving much attention from 
people of social and scientific circles in Taiwan. The recent 
visit to Taiwan by 24 scholars and experts, led by President 
Zhou Guangzhao, to attend the industrial science and technology 
meeting resulted in substantial exchanges. Addressing the 
meeting, Wu Dayou [Wu Ta-you], the outgoing president of 
Academia Sinica, said: The two days of discussions between more 
than 20 experts from the mainland and Taiwan's experts on topics 
from specific fields marked a well-planned, profound, and 
meaningful exchange. 
  Taiwan's first comprehensive research institute was 
officially inaugurated on 1 February. Its president Liu Taiying 
[Liu Tai- ying] said his institute's goal is to strengthen 
scientific, technological, and cultural exchanges among people 
of Chinese origin all over the world, and between the two sides 
of the Strait, adding that in March the institute will sponsor a 
1994 seminar on industrial science and technology cooperation 
between the two sides of the Strait. Liu Tai-ying said: The 
mainland will send at least 70 scientific and technological 
experts to Taiwan. The institute hopes to reach an agreement 
with the mainland on enhancing exchange of industrial scientists 
and technicians between the two sides. This goal will be 
included in the institute's working plans. 
  To gain a further understanding of the sea areas in the 
South 
China Sea and to use the knowledge thus gained as a foundation 
for carrying out regional exploitation and research in the South 
China Sea in the future, in April this year Taiwan will dispatch 
10 oceanographic scientists to join mainland scientists on the 
CAS's oceanographic experimental ship to begin a month-long 
survey of the South China Sea. This will be the first time for 
oceanographic scientists of the two sides to participate in a 
joint survey of the South China Sea. Joint cooperation by the 
two sides in surveying the South China Sea is of great 
significance. 
  A rapid economic growth rate definitely depends on science 
and technology. The planned exchange between scientists and 
technicians of the two sides to exploit each other's strong 
points, thus forming a mechanism to supplement each other's 
shortcomings, will be a great stimulus to the economic 
development of the two sides. Sun Yunxuan [Sun Yun-suan], 
senior advisor to Taiwan's Presidential Office, and honorary 
president of Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation [SEF], noted: 
Because the mainland has attached importance to research in 
basic sciences from the start, it is ahead of Taiwan in heavy 
industries such as electrical engineering, machinery, and 
materials. On the other hand, Taiwan has attached importance to 
increasing national income. Because the domestic market is 
small, it has attached importance to international market 
competition for its industrial products by developing consumer 
industries, light industries, and other industries related to 
daily life and information. The focus of development of the two 
sides is different. Each has its strong points. There are 
great prospects for mutual aid and mutual interest in the future. 
  Exchanges between the two sides have expanded to the field 
of 
science and technology. So an academic meeting is no longer 
called an economic and trade seminar because it is a seminar 
directly involving the materials, iron and steel, insurance, and 
navigation industries. Scientific and technological circles of 
the two sides have agreed that it is necessary to accelerate 
scientific and technological exchanges to invigorate the 
national economy. The time is ripe for the scientific and 
technological circles of the two sides to increase the exchange 
of visits. Zhou Guangzhao's visit to Taiwan demonstrates that 
the Taiwan side is gradually easing restrictions on visits by 
officials from the mainland. However, obstacles to personnel 
exchanges still remain. Many mainland scholars were absent at 
the cross-Strait scientific and technological meeting held in 
Taiwan. It was regrettable that when Wang Fosong, vice 
president of CAS, applied to go to Taiwan, his application was 
rejected by the Taiwan side on the grounds that he is a member 
of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress. 

