Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Guillermo Sotomayor, general manager of the </F>
National Railway Enterprise; place and date not given: "ENFE 
Capitalization Now Proceeding Like Clockwork"] 
  [Text] In 10 months a U.S. consulting firm will advise how 
ENFE [National Railway Enterprise] can best transfer 50 percent 
of its assets to private ownership. Governments of the United 
States and Japan are the first to be showing interest in the old 
worn-out enterprise. 
  Although ENFE has the appearance of a worn-out little old 
lady, there is no lack of interested suitors for her hand. 
According to the guardians of the enterprise, the Governments of 
Japan and the United States have requested information that can 
be disseminated to investors in their countries who might be 
interested in buying 50 percent of the enterprise's assets 
within the near term. 
  "ENFE is an attractive enterprise if one considers that it 
is 
the linchpin of the interoceanic export corridor," says ENFE's 
general manager, Guillermo Sotomayor, contradicting the view 
expressed by Minister of Economic Development Fernando Illanes 
who asserts that those interested in buying into an obsolete 
enterprise and squanderer of revenue such as ENFE would be very 
few. 
  Nevertheless, with or without formal bids in hand, the 
enterprise's executives have begun putting the house in order. 
  A Canadian consulting firm has begun appraising the 
enterprise's assets. Its findings will then be made available to 
a U.S. consulting firm that, between September and October, will 
recommend the manner in which ENFE is to form a mixed 
corporation with national and foreign investors. 
  ENFE General Manager Guillermo Sotomayor explained to 
PRESENCIA the steps the enterprise will take before 
incorporating. 
  [PRESENCIA] What features will characterize the capitalizing 
of ENFE? 
  [Sotomayor] In Bolivia, we have two geographically separate 
networks: the Western or Andean Network, which covers a distance 
of 2,275 kilometers, and the Eastern Network, with 1,377 
kilometers of track. Both operate at very high cost because of 
the excessive number of personnel, obsolete rolling stock, and 
the high cost of maintaining the rails. 
  ENFE's most profitable activity at this time is the 
transporting of bulk freight. In addition, our capital base 
differs from those of other enterprises, including as it does 
workshops, rails, real estate, and other fixed assets. 
  This renders ENFE's capitalization different from that of 
other enterprises. 
  The first thing we are doing is working together with 
foreign 
consulting firms and their domestic counterpart on the compiling 
of studies that are necessary for the planning of our 
capitalization strategy. 
  In this respect we are being aided by Canadian consultants 
who will appraise our fixed assets, real estate, and assets 
surplus to our railway activities. 
  It has been 30 years since ENFE's assets were last 
appraised. 
In many countries, the railways have a very strong potential in 
real estate, such as, for example, railway stations. What we 
want to determine in Bolivia is just what our railway 
potentialities are. 
  Once our Canadian consultants complete their basic studies 
with respect to this question, a U.S. consulting firm will 
prepare the capitalization strategy. It will recommend the best 
option available to us as an enterprise, and as a country, for 
tendering ENFE. 
  They may recommend offering it as a single package that 
includes both networks, or possibly in two separate packages 
because the Andean network's prospects are poor. Or they may 
even recommend that the rails be tendered but not the 
maintenance and repair shops and facilities. There are many 
options for tendering railways. 
  [PRESENCIA] What is the possibility that private investors 
would only operate and manage the rails? 
  [Sotomayor] There are a few countries, like Colombia and 
Chile, where the government has decided to retain full ownership 
of the property and lease the use of the rails for a specified 
number of years. 
  In the case of Bolivia, we are seeking to increase the 
enterprise's capital in order to facilitate some 
very-large-scale projects, such as the famous railway 
interconnection or the renovation of rolling stock. These 
require heavy investments. 
  But we must await the completion of all their studies before 
we can determine the course the enterprise is to take. 
  [PRESENCIA] How long will it take the consultants to 
complete 
their work? 
  [Sotomayor] Between September and October we shall already 
have a very close and definitive idea as to how ENFE will be 
capitalized. 
  [PRESENCIA] Will fresh capital be injected into the 
enterprise while its capitalization is pending? 
  [Sotomayor] No, we are not planning any considerable 
investment. No new investments will be made until we have the 
results of the consultants' work. 
  [PRESENCIA] Doesn't the government assert that ENFE is not 
an 
attractive enterprise to investors? 
  [Sotomayor] It is true that the cost of maintaining the 
rails 
is high, and that its rolling stock is of an outdated type. But 
ENFE's potential lies in Bolivia's potential for providing the 
Interoceanic Corridor. 
  Bolivia has railways that connect it with Peru, Argentina, 
Brazil, and Chile. We believe this is the main attraction to 
investors. 
  [PRESENCIA] Is there an enterprise interested in buying into 
ENFE? 
  [Sotomayor] No specific enterprise has contacted us 
directly, 
but we understand that there have been direct contacts with the 
government. What is definite is that the Governments of the 
United States and Japan have requested direct information from 
ENFE. They are interested in taking information back and 
attracting capital to the country. 

