Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [News Report: "Major Narco-Smugglers Being Arrested--Nasir </F>
Babar"] 
  [Text] Islamabad (JANG Correspondent)--The government has 
announced it is taking organized and comprehensive action to end 
the planting of poppy, stopping its movement, and to eradicate 
drug abuse. Under this plan, arrests of major drug smugglers 
around the country have started. This was announced by Maj. Gen. 
(Retd.) Nasirullah Khan Babar, federal minister of drug control, 
in a press conference here on Sunday. High officials of the 
Narcotics Control Board were also present. The minister said 
that arrests of the "big fish" in order to stop drug smuggling 
have started. Three major smugglers, Umar Khan Parvez, Iqbal 
Durrani, and Ghulam Mohammed, that were sought by the U.S. 
Government have been arrested. He said that two new agencies 
have been established to curb drugs. A policy review board has 
been established under the leadership of the home minister. The 
states home ministers, the four home secretaries, and health 
ministers of the four states will be included in that board. In 
addition a national committee to curb drugs is also established. 
It will be chaired by the federal home secretary. The four 
inspectors general of police, chief secretary of F.C. Rangers, 
Coast Guard, and heads of other law and order agencies will be 
members of this committee. He said that a major bill to give the 
death penalty to drug smugglers and to confiscate their property 
will be introduced in the National Assembly. The law ministry is 
reviewing its draft. This will also be sent to state governments 
for their input. He said that the government actions have 
resulted in the reduction of the poppy growing areas from 80,000 
acres to 15,000 acres. The production of poppy has come down 
from 800 metric tons to 150 metric tons. He said that in Sarhad 
there are only two places--Karo Darra and Naya Darra--where 
poppy is still cultivated. The home minister said that the 
Pakistan Government has sealed the Afghanistan border fully to 
stop the entry of drugs from Afghanistan. It is expected that 
the situation will improve now. A new program to stop drug 
production in tribal areas has started. Under this program, 
loans will be issued to tribals for starting industries. The 
banking system is being amended for this purpose. In addition, 
12 laboratories used for making heroin has been destroyed. While 
discussing the government's activities, he said that the 
government agencies have confiscated 398 kilograms of opium, 
1,965 kilograms of heroin, 61,755 kilograms of hashish during 
these 100 days. He said that a new comprehensive law, which will 
be a composition of the three drug-related laws, will soon be 
passed. The home minister said in answer to a question that the 
CIA report [not further specified] has helped in arrests of some 
major smugglers, and six of them have been handed over into U.S. 
custody. While discussing Qazi Hussein Ahmed's accusation, the 
home minister said that some drug smugglers were indeed present 
in the former Assembly, however, no member in the present 
Assembly has been identified as having relations with the Drug 
Mafia. He said that when the investigation is completed, we will 
learn which Assembly members have contacts with the Drug Mafia. 
Action will be taken against whoever is found to be involved in 
the drug trade. He said that it is very embarrassing for us that 
every Friday two or three Pakistanis are beheaded in Saudi 
Arabia. Screening machines are being placed in all airports to 
investigate and make the system of personal search of all 
Pakistanis going abroad more effective. In answer to a question, 
the home minister said that the list of drug smugglers has been 
given to the Senate committee and 15 of the smugglers have been 
arrested. The remainder on the list will be arrested soon. While 
talking informally with the reporters during lunch after the 
press conference, Home Minister Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Nasirullah 
Babar said that the federal government had decided to give the 
right to vote to all adults in tribal areas. Under the new law, 
FATA [Federally Administered Territories] will become totally a 
part of Pakistan and all our national laws will be imposed 
there. This will significantly reduce the number of crimes and a 
new chapter of progress in the tribal area will be opened. 

