Language: <F P=105>Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Arye Egozi] </F>
  [Text] What do Iran and South Africa have in common? From 
the point of view of the Israeli defense industry, these are two 
countries that stopped being excellent customers after going 
through changes of regime. 
  The tremendous arms purchases that Iran made under the shah 
were cut off when Khomeyni took power. South Africa is in a 
transitional period now, leading to transfering power to the 
black majority, and from being an important customer of the 
Israeli defense industry, it is turning into a serious rival. In 
this race, it is making wide use of Israeli advanced technology. 
  Over the years, foreign sources published many reports about 
the close ties that had been woven between the defense 
establishments in Israel and South Africa. Israel--so it was 
reported--helped South Africa to build an arms industry that 
produces everything from light weapons to warplanes and missile 
boats. 
  Not long ago, the president of South Africa announced that 
his country had also produced six atomic bombs. Foreign sources 
claimed that these weapons, too, were produced with active help 
from Israel, and that in return South Africa had allowed the 
Israelis to test their nuclear weapons within its boundaries. 
THE WASHINGTON POST also claimed that the South African 
authorities sent enriched uranium (which is used to produce 
nuclear weapons) to Israel, so that it will not fall into the 
hands of the blacks when they take power in April 1994. 
  But from a partner and an ally, South Africa has turned into 
a serious commercial rival. Today, at almost every international 
arms fair, it shows off the products of its defense industry. It 
does not even try to blur the source. 
  Its Cheetah jet is a perfect copy of the Israeli Kfir; the 
sea-to-sea missile it produces is the twin brother of the 
Israeli Gabriel; the assault rifle its soldiers carry is another 
version of the Israeli Galil; and even skilled professionals 
have trouble distinguishing between the Israeli pilotless plane, 
Pioneer, and the South African pilotless plane, Siker; or 
between the Israeli pilotless bomber, Harpy, which sails toward 
its target and blows it up, and the South African pilotless 
bomber, Lark. Air-to-air missiles of the Kukri type, 
manufactured in South Africa, are amazingly similar to the 
Israeli Phaeton missiles. And this is just a partial list. 
  Even the advertising the South Africans do for their weapons 
systems is Israeli in character. At the weapons fair that was 
held at the beginning of November in the Emirate of Dubai, there 
was an unusually large number of exhibitors from South Africa. 
The leaders of the South African arms industry explained to 
reporters covering the fair that the international embargo, 
which had been imposed on their country, and was in force until 
not long ago, forced them to develop many systems on their own. 
This kind of advertising has been characteristic until now of 
the sales representatives of the Israeli defense industry. 
  For many years, South Africa was not been able to sell the 
weapons its defense industry produced, because of the 
international embargo imposed on it in protest against its 
apartheid laws. Now, with both apartheid and the embargo lifted, 
markets have opened up for South Africa all over the world. 
  Sources in the Israel defense establishment say that the 
South Africans operating an aggressive marketing system in many 
countries around the world, and it seems that they are ready to 
sell "at any price"--mainly to establish their position as a 
country producing advanced systems. 
  Looking back, was it a mistake to cooperate so broadly with 
the South African arms industry? Opinions are divided on this. 
There are those who argue that South Africa was a good customer, 
and Israel also profited well from cooperation with it. 
According to foreign sources, over the years South Africa 
acquired weapons systems and know-how from Israel that were 
worth more than 5 billion dollars. Others argue that we should 
have taken into account the political changes that were going to 
come in this country, and to maintain our defense cooperation 
with it accordingly. 
  The reports about Israeli engineers who went to South Africa 
to work after the Lavi project was canceled were perhaps a 
little exaggerated, but for many years, South Africa absorbed 
not only finished products from the Israeli defense industry, 
but also much know-how. You see the results now at almost every 
arms fair. 
  "Although so far they have still not caused us any real 
harm, 
they are turning into more than just a mild headache," a senior 
source in the defense establishment said. 

