BFN 

  [Text] London, April 21 (AFP) -- European leaders Thursday 
[21 April] welcomed U.S. President Bill Clinton's stand on 
Bosnia as Moscow announced a joint U.S.-Russian proposal for an 
international summit on the crisis. 
  In Washington, the White House Thursday declined to confirm 
reports that Clinton and Yeltsin had agreed to hold an 
international summit on Bosnia. 
  But London and Paris both welcomed the call for a summit, 
also slated to include leaders of the European Union, the UN and 
parties to the Bosnian war. 
  A Foreign Office spokesman however expressed caution, 
saying: 
We "do not rule out a high-level meeting if it is going to 
advance the peace process, but we need careful preparation and 
clear objectives." 
  In Paris, French President Francois Mitterrand expressed 
satisfaction over the proposed conference which he said should 
be held as soon as possible considering the urgency of the 
situation, his spokesman Jean Musitelli said. 
  Russian President Boris Yeltsin and U.S. counterpart Bill 
Clinton were calling for the summit meeting to be held possibly 
as soon as next month, a presidential spokesman announced 
Thursday in Moscow. 
  Meanwhile, Germany expressed support for Clinton's proposals 
for a tougher military stance and economic sanctions against the 
Serbs, government spokesman Dieter Vogel said Thursday. 
  Speaking of the situation in the besieged Moslem enclave of 
Gorazde, Vogel said that "the aggression of Serb troops (...) 
openly violates the elementary principles of humanity and 
international law." 
  Vogel also welcomed Washington's efforts to associate Russia 
with endeavours to settle the Bosnian conflict. 
  French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe meanwhile said any 
extension of air strikes to protect UN safe zones "makes sense 
only if it is part of a political proposal" for Bosnia. 
  He said the month-long delay before the proposed 
international summit was "a bit long," but stressed any such 
meeting must be "conclusive" and therefore would need rigorous 
preparation beforehand. 
  Dutch Foreign Minister Peter Kooijmans, for his part, called 
on the U.S., Russia, the European Union and the UN to "close 
ranks and have a concerted action to solve the problem" of 
Bosnia. 
  Speaking at a news conference in Sofia, where he and Prime 
Minister Ruud Lubbers are on an official visit, Kooijmans also 
said that a signal had to be given to the warring parties that 
"flagrant violations of the (UN) Security Council resolutions 
will not be tolerated." 
  He was referring to the situation in the besieged 
UN-protected enclave of Gorazde. 
  In Denmark, both the government and parliament have declared 
themselves in favour of North Atlantic Treaty Organisation air 
strikes against Bosnian Serbs to protect the civilian population 
in the UN-designated "safe areas," parliamentary officials said. 
  "There is a clear need to resort to force, and to back the 
UN 
secretary general's call for an extension to the NATO scope for 
intervention, in order to protect the populations exposed to 
Bosnian Serb shelling, and also Danish troops deployed in 
Bosnia," Prime Minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen told the press. 
  Australia and the Czech Republic on Thursday also endorsed 
Clinton's proposal for intensified NATO air strikes in Bosnia. 
  The threat of air strikes should force warring parties back 
to talks, Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans and his Czech 
counterpart Josef Zieleniec told a press conference in Canberra. 
  Zieleniec, who spoke with Evans at the start of a two-day 
visit, said air strikes would not resolve the crisis but were a 
"promising step in the right direction." 
  Signs of cooperation between the United States and Russia 
within the United Nations were also positive, he added. 
  "It is clear that without cooperation among these key forces 
it was impossible to solve anything, let us hope this will be 
the step toward peace in whole Bosnia." 

