CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Steen Voigt: "The Baltic Sea Begins on Land"] </F>
  [Text] The Baltic Sea is something we sing about during 
international matches at Parken, something we think about when 
Bornholm fishermen sell cod at Christiansborg Slotplads, or when 
a Swedish court is asked to find elusive solutions to bridge 
projects. 
  But the Baltic Sea is actually closer to us than that every 
day. 
  After all, it begins on land, in Danish wheat fields, in 
Swedish fields, in the Russian taiga, and in Czech and Polish 
mining and industrial regions. 
  Thousands of water sources -- rivers, streams, and creeks -- 
carry toxic substances from industry, unpurified waste water 
from towns, and nutritive salts from agriculture out into the 
sea. 
  Thus, protecting and restoring the unique natural resources 
of the Baltic Sea is naturally a matter of national importance 
not only in Denmark, but in all nations surrounding the 422,000 
square meter saltwater sea. 
  Mobilization of the people is one of six points in a 
long-range plan of action developed by a special task force of 
the Helsinki Commission (HELCOM) to save the Baltic Sea. 
  This is also because environmental and nature-friendly 
thinking must gain understanding among the people, particularly 
in the formerly communist countries. 
  After all, it is mainly the local people who will have to 
pay 
for purification facilities and containers. In return, they will 
have better health, a better environment, and more plentiful 
nature. 
<H5>  Hot Spots </H5>
  The plan, which includes the years 1993 to 2010, will 
require 
total investments of over 130 billion kroner over the 18-year 
period. Of this amount, just under 80 billion will go directly 
toward a number of polluting "hot spots" such as industrial 
plants and cities that send untreated wastewater directly into 
the closest river. 
  Most of these "hot spots" are in Poland, the three Baltic 
countries, and the Russian cities of St. Petersburg and 
Kaliningrad. But investments will also be made deeper into 
Europe, in the Czech and Slovak Republics. 
  Air pollution, in the form of nitrogen compounds from 
constantly increasing auto emissions and from power plants, is 
another significant cause of the ecological imbalance in the 
Baltic Sea. 
  Along with nutrient wastes from households and 
overfertilized 
agricultural lands, this disturbs the ecological balance of the 
sea, resulting in algae growth, oxygen shortage, and the death 
of fish, bottom animals, and plants. In recent years, 
approximately one-fourth of the Baltic Sea has been affected by 
the death of plants and animals on the sea floor. 
  The plan points to three hot spots in Denmark. 
  Two of these are the Belt and Oresund, which are 
overburdened 
with nutrients from agriculture. The Danish clean water plan of 
1988 was unable to remedy these situations. 
  The third involves the release of wastewater from Copenhagen 
into Oresund. During heavy rains, Copenhagen County's sewerage 
and treatment facilities still have insufficient capacity and 
untreated waste from the sewers is released directly into 
Oresund. County plans for the region include investments of a 
half to a billion kroner. 
<H5>  Warnings </H5>
  The HELCOM plan comes 25 years after the first serious 
alarms 
about the sorry condition of the Baltic Sea began to be sounded 
for the general public. 
  Troubled researchers reported finding environmental poisons 
such as PCB and DDT in Baltic Sea seals, fish, and birds. Driven 
by the UN's environmental conference in Stockholm in 1972, these 
concerns were translated into action, culminating on 22 March 
1974. 
  At that time, at the invitation of Finland, the then seven 
Baltic Sea nations signed signed the Helsinki Convension on 
protecting the Baltic Sea environment. This was the first 
international agreement of its kind for regulating all pollution 
of the sea. 
  Since then, this convention and HELCOM have been the axis 
around which work involving nature and the environment in the 
Baltic Sea has turned. Through so-called recommendations, the 
commission has set guidelines for everything from permissible 
chemical emissions to environmentally sound harbor facilities 
for shipping traffic. 
<H5>  Good Tempo </H5>
  From the Finnish capital, where of course the commission has 
its headquarters, General Secretary Ulf Ehlin, a Swedish 
oceanographer, said that 20 years of work and cooperation had 
reduced pollution in the Baltic Sea. 
  It is difficult to say precisely where and how much, due to 
the poor data available from the beginning of this work from the 
Eastern countries during the Iron Curtain period. 
  But the general secretary pointed to the rapid effort 
against 
the environmental pollutants PCB and DDT, which threatened 
several bird species and seals with extinction, as an extremely 
positive experience in this body of water, which stretches from 
the Gulf of Bothnia in the north to Skagen in the west. 
  "The situation has improved in many places and many 
aspects," 
Ehlin told BERLINGSKE TIDENDE. 
  One positive surprise is that even now over 20 billion 
kroner 
have been appropriated for investments. 
  This includes major investments in purification plants in 
East Germany as a result of reunification, which have raised 
this figure considerably. But Poland alone is responsible for 
just under a third of the total sum, and that is good news, 
according to Ehlin, who also points to Estonia and Lithuania. 
  Several Danish companies have made preliminary studies in 
connection with the plan of action and since the breakup of the 
East they have examined possible projects and delivered 
environmental technology and know-how to the Baltic nations and 
Poland, in particular, in cooperation with both Danish and local 
authorities. 
  Denmark has made direct investments in many environmental 
projects in the Eastern countries, through the environmental 
assistance program of the Environmental Affairs Ministry and, 
beginning this year, through environmentally related sector 
programs, such as in the energy and agriculture sectors. A total 
of 300 million kroner has been appropriated for the Eastern 
countries in 1994, which will benefit the Baltic Sea as well. 
<H5>  More in Addition </H5>
  Private nature and environment organizations are also 
playing 
an important role in the restoration of the Baltic Sea. 
Greenpeace, the World Wildlife Foundation, and others were 
included in the commission's work at an early stage, receiving 
observer status at the meetings. 
  And in the formerly communist countries, grassroots 
movements 
have sprung up and they are working together with organizations 
and agencies in every way. 
  The World Wildlife Foundation, WWF, has been given 
responsibility for a key point in the plan, namely the 
restoration of important coastal wetlands and islands in the 
Baltic nations and Poland. 
  These areas have all been reclaimed and used for agriculture 
or abused with waste and pollution because they have not been 
considered important. 
  Since 1992 the chairman of the Helsinki Commission has been 
Fleming Otzen of the Environmental Board. He has been involved 
with work surrounding the convenstion for over 20 years. 
  He believes the Baltic Sea is in worse shape today than in 
1974. 
  "Things had begun to go downhill at that time and you cannot 
reverse that trend with a convention. That is not possible. The 
destruction will continue for a number of years." 
  Since then, a lot has happened that no one thought of in 
1974. 
  "Air pollution was incorrectly underestimated. And now there 
are all the nutrient salts that are the problem. The oxygen 
deficiency will continue until agriculture stops its 
overfertilization and until sewage is no longer emitted into the 
sea," he said. 
  Next Tuesday [1 March] Otzen will host the environmental 
ministers of the Baltic Sea nations at the 15th meeting of the 
convention, to celebrate its 20th anniversary. 
  But they will also evaluate the results of previous 
decisions, including the decision to reduce by half the emission 
of a long list of environmentally harmful substances into the 
Baltic Sea during the decade of 1985 to 1995. 
  This reduction by half will hardly be achieved, but they are 
working hard on the matter. 

