Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The regional conference on the work of league and 
city chief procurators opened this morning. In his speech given 
at the opening of the conference, Zhang Hesong, chief procurator 
of the autonomous regional people's procuratorate, pointed out: 
The major tasks of the region's procuratorial work for this 
year are to strengthen the function of legal supervision; to 
strictly enforce laws; to give great attention to handling of 
cases; to concentrate efforts on investigating and handling 
major and serious cases, especially the cases committed by 
leading cadres, law violation resulting from perfunctory law 
enforcement, and the cases committed by legal persons; to crack 
down on various criminal activities to protect the legal rights 
and interests of citizens; and to safeguard political and social 
stability. 
  In his speech, Zhang Hesong first reviewed and summarized 
the 
region's 1993 procuratorial work and spoke on his understanding 
of the past year's work. Zhang Hesong pointed out: This year 
is the crucial year for comprehensive implementation of the 
guidelines of the third plenary session of the 14th party 
Central Committee. In the new situation, important historical 
missions are entrusted to procuratorial work. Attaching 
importance to the interests of the party, the state, and the 
people, we should enhance our sense of missions and 
responsibilities, conscientiously perform the function of legal 
supervision entrusted by the Constitution, and fulfill all tasks 
in an outstanding way. We should continue concentrating efforts 
on investigating and handling major and serious cases to 
maintain the sustained, in-depth, and healthy developmental 
trend in the anticorruption struggle. We should further 
intensify the work of investigation, reinforce and improve the 
work to report crimes, and strengthen judicial work. We should 
strengthen our coordination with discipline inspection, 
supervision, public security, state security, and court 
departments and provide information to and support each other. 
Procuratorial organs across the region must fully perform their 
functions as the tools of the people's democratic dictatorship 
and continue strict and prompt crackdown on serious criminal 
offenses according to law, with the focus on violent and gang 
crimes on murder, robbery, rape, violence, and robbery with a 
weapon. They should continue to participate in the unified 
action to crack major cases, deal blows to criminal rings, and 
pursue escaped criminals; the special struggles to eliminate 
theft, bus and train marauding and waylaying, abduction and 
trafficking of women and children, corruption, pornography, and 
six vices; and particular public security improvement activities 
in the localities and road sections where public security is 
chaotic and problems are many, thus combining special efforts in 
crackdown on crimes with the efforts to tackle chaos. We should 
continue strengthening supervision over law enforcement and 
resolutely correct perfunctory law enforcement to ensure unified 
and correct enforcement of state laws. We should have the 
courage to exercise supervision, emphasize work methods, focus 
on areas where supervision should be strengthened, and, by 
handling cases, continuously strengthen and improve supervision 
over law enforcement and raise the legal supervision level. 
  In his speech, Zhang Hesong also gave opinions on stepping 
up 
efforts to improve the contingents to upgrade their overall 
quality and enhance their combat strength. 

