BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 28 (XINHUA) -- Governments at all 
levels should support trade unions to allow them to work 
independently within the framework of laws and related 
regulations so as to fulfill their role of bridging the general 
masses. 
  This was aired here today by Wei Jianxing, chairman of the 
All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU). 
  Speaking at a meeting celebrating International Labor Day, 
the official said that "relying on the working class is a 
fundamental guideline that our party has firmly adhered to. 
  "And it is even more important to do so now that the country 
is fully engaged in boosting development, expanding reform and 
maintaining stability. Any thinking or action that goes astray 
from the guideline is wrong." 
  Wei, who is also a member of the Political Bureau of the 
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, said that the 
working class is a decisive force in maintaining and 
safeguarding social stability. 
  The working class should hold the cause of reform as its 
sacred duty and support it unswervingly. It is obliged to 
contribute to the deepening of reform, the establishment of a 
modern enterprise system and the improvement of the large- and 
medium-sized state-owned enterprises, he said. 
  He noted that democratic management is an important symbol 
of 
the modern enterprise system. Workers are the masters of the 
country, whether they are with the public sector or with the 
non-public sector, and their legitimate rights and interests 
must be secured and protected. 
  Currently, more care and help should be extended to the 
workers in loss-making enterprises and enterprises operating at 
less than capacity, as well as to the retired or those with 
living difficulties. Measures should be taken to help them 
weather the difficulties, the union chairman said. 
  Also at the meeting, ACFTU called on workers nationwide to 
learn form the ten "'94 national outstanding workers", who were 
selected on the 11th of this month. 
  Official sources said that the ten, all national model 
workers or winners of the "May 1 Medal", have made nationally or 
internationally remarkable achievements in their work. 
  Today Wei also met with a group of representatives from Hong 
Kong and Macao who will participate May Day celebrations with 
Beijing workers. The visitors will also tour east China's 
Zhejiang Province. 

