BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Richard Sietmann, Physics World's German </F>
correspondent: "Are Niche Markets Europe's Last Chance in 
Semiconductors?"] 
  [Text] Last year the Heinrich Hertz Institute in Berlin 
completed the development of an electronic video projection 
system with a fully-fledged laboratory demonstrator. It works 
very much like the celluloid film in an ordinary movie projector 
-- albeit by reflecting rather than transmitting light -- and 
does not have any moving parts. The prototype is based on a 
sophisticated "light-valve chip" that electronically controls 
the pixels of a viscoelastic silicon-gel film and incorporates 
all the features needed for projecting digital high-definition 
TV (HDTV). 
  Independent experts confirm that the full-colour 
demonstrator 
outperforms conventional liquid-crystal light-valves in 
efficiency and brightness. It could replace today's enormously 
bulky large-screen TV projectors with portable desktop systems 
-- if only a company were willing to add some engineering and 
market the device. But the Heinrich Hertz Institute is still 
waiting for such a company and the project has been shelved. 
The story is all too typical of European microelectronics -- 
good research but not enough value-added commercial products. 
  Engineering and research are drifting apart in Europe. 
Engineers in industry struggle with managements and markets, 
process yields and cost-efficient equipment, in-house resources 
and external subcontractors. Researchers busy themselves with 
nano- and molecular electronics, and new semiconducting 
materials such as gallium arsenide, silicon-germanium compounds 
and polymers. Researchers are excited by change, engineers rely 
on some kind of stability over the design phase of a new product 
or application. 
  The current speed of innovation increases the lead of 
companies who can afford to take risks, and undermines the 
competitiveness of those who cannot. Companies without the 
profits generated by previous successful products find it 
increasingly difficult to compete and can get caught in a 
vicious circle. The Japanese semiconductor industry invested 
some $5.2 billion (about &pound;3.5 billion) on R&amp;D in 1992 
and the 
U.S. spent $3.5 billion, according to industry analyses 
Dataquest. European companies only managed $1 billion. The 
figures for capital spending on equipment and plant are equally 
bleak; Europe only invested $0.8 billion of the global figure of 
$10 billion. "The greatest shortfall is in capital," says 
Michael Glennon from Dataquest. "European chip manufacturers 
invest too little, stick to the wrong products and applications, 
and don't export enough. Even the Asian-Pacific rim (which 
excludes Japanese companies) has out-invested Europeans in 
plant, giving these companies the ability to out-produce 
Europeans. European companies start with a production 
disadvantage -- even before products are developed." 
  "Practically speaking, the European semiconductor industry 
has come to an end," says Lubomir Cergel from Motorola's R&amp;D 
group in Geneva. The U.S. chip manufacturer currently has a 
turnover of $1.3 billion in Europe, and expects it to almost 
double over the next two years. But is this prediction of 
Europe's prospects too pessimistic? 
<H5>  Strengths and Weaknesses </H5>
  According to Dataquest the biggest growth areas in the 
European semiconductor market over the next five years will be 
data processing, communications and industrial electronics. 
Unfortunately Europe's chip suppliers are strongest in slow 
growth areas like transport, consumer electronics and military 
applications. "European companies are losing their share of 
their own market," says Glennon. There are no European 
companies in the top 10 of Dataquest's latest ranking of 
semiconductor vendors (table 1). European chip users are also 
falling behind their competitors (table 2). 



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 1 -- The Top Ten in Semiconductors in 1993                             | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Company                  |Turnover (billion $)     |Market share (%)         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|1. Intel                 |7.95                     |9.6                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|2. NEC                   |6.17                     |7.4                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|3. Motorola              |5.97                     |7.2                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|4. Toshiba               |5.75                     |6.9                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|5. Hitachi               |5.04                     |6.1                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|6. Texas Inst.           |4.00                     |4.8                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|7. Samsung               |3.05                     |3.7                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|8. Fujitsu               |2.93                     |3.5                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|9. Mitsubishi            |2.80                     |3.4                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|10. IBM                  |2.51                     |3.0                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|The global market for semiconductors was worth $83 billion in 1993. Source:  | 
|Dataquest.                                                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  So what impact has the Joint European Submicron Silicon 
Initiative (JESSI), conceived in 1988, had on the European 
microelectronics industry? Some key figures like Pasquale 
Pistorio, head of SGS Thomson Microelectronics, a JESSI member, 
thinks it has delivered. Europe's decline, Pistorio said 
recently, has been "stalled and stabilized." However, this year 
NEC, Japan's leading chip manufacturer, will spend 50 percent 
more on R&amp;D alone than JESSI will on the whole "food chain" 
of 
chip production including materials, equipment and applications. 
Europe is also falling behind in the considerably smaller, but 
growing, gallium arsenide market. 
  "JESSI suffered from a shortage of support from Europe's 
major producers and, in particular, a lack of government 
backing," says Max Syrbe, former president of Germany's 
Fraunhofer Society. "As a pure research and technology 
programme deprived of an accompanying industrial policy, JESSI 
had little scope for major success." Klaus Knapp of Siemens 
Semiconductors agrees: "The race for standard products such as 
microprocessors and memories has been lost." 
  However, Europe does have what Syrbe calls a "second chance 
in microelectronics": niche markets with application-specific 
integrated circuits [ASICs]. ASICs combine the circuitry of 
memories and processors necessary for specific, complex tasks on 
a single chip. "Europe," says Syrbe "must establish a firm hold 
on the ASICs market." 
  Establishing a presence in new ASICs markets -- such as HDTV 
or broadband communications -- may be easier, and more 
profitable, than trying to wrestle a larger share of existing 
niche markets -- such as smart power devices and photovoltaics 
(see box 1). ASICs could be profitable in both small and large 
volumes. "The value added in production is much higher (than 
standard chips) due to their greater sophistication and hence 
lower exchangeability," says Knut Heitmann from Daimler-Benz. 
He expects the fabrication plants of the future to be small and 
that manufacturing will shift from large companies to small and 
medium-sized enterprises. "Mini-fabs" will speed up chip design 
and manufacture, and cut the critical "time to market." 
<H5>  Box 1: Semiconductor Sidelines </H5>
<H5>  Smart Power Devices </H5>
  Semiconductor power switches have long been known as 
thyristors. Modern power semiconductors are increasingly used 
for process and control and automation. When these devices, 
which control currents, voltages and frequencies in circuits, 
are monolithically integrated with signal processing 
capabilities, engineers speak of "smart power devices." 
  The world market volume for power semiconductors is 
estimated 
to be about $6 billion, roughly one-tenth of the total 
semiconductor market. Power ICs [integrated circuits] account 
for about $1.2 billion, smart power ICs for about $0.5 billion. 
SGS Thomson Microelectronics is the market leader in both these 
niches with an 18 percent share of the market. 
<H5>  Photovoltaics </H5>
  More than 100,000 homes in the U.S. generate their own 
electricity, with more than two-thirds of these using solar 
(photovoltaic) power. However, solar power is expensive (about 
one dollar per kilowatt-hour) and photovoltaic systems cost 
almost twice as much as other renewable-energy systems based on 
wind or hydro power. 
  Global sales of photovoltaic systems were about $431 million 
in 1992, according to analysts, Strategies Unlimited. This 
represented some 56MW of power and more than half a million 
square meters of solar panels. The leading companies were 
Siemens Solar (14 percent of the market), Solarex of the U.S. 
(11 percent), and BP Solar, Sanyo and Kyocera (7 percent each). 
Forecasts for the year 2000 are between 280MW and 440MW. 
  Whether photovoltaic systems can make it from a fringe 
economy to the mainstream will depend on politicians. Efforts 
to limit global warming could lead to carbon taxes which would 
raise fossil fuel prices and make investments in solar power 
more competitive. "It's all heading in the right direction," 
says Jim Skelly, who oversees solar research at Texas 
Instruments. "But there is a lot of science and engineering to 
be done to make it in the mass market." 
  The mini-fabs would also implement a new manufacturing 
concept in which large clean rooms are replaced by so-called 
"mini-environments," the semiconductor wafers are transported 
and handled in scaled boxes, and all the critical process steps 
(such as lithography, coating and plasma etching) are carried 
out very close to the wafer. Daimler-Benz's Temic subsidiary is 
about to establish a mini-fab at Heilbronn in Germany in a JESSI 
flagship project called Flexible Automated Wafer-handling. The 
Standard Mechanical Interface, developed in 1990 by the Taiwan 
Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, will be used to handle and 
transfer the wafers. 
  Temic plans to use very precise laser beams to "write" all 
the active and passive components of the ASICs, as well as their 
metallic interconnections, onto a large wafer. Although this is 
slower than conventional microlithography (in which the whole 
wafer is exposed at once through a mask), it removes the need to 
mount and interconnect several smaller chips on a mother board. 
If the demand arises, this serial processing approach for small 
numbers could be stepped up to a full parallel processing for 
volume production. 
  Heitmann is convinced that this approach represents a 
"quantum leap in technology and will create changes and 
competitive advantages for all the European microelectronics 
industries." But not everyone agrees. At Motorola, Cergel 
believes the ASICs strategy "shies away from the problem" and 
that it will not solve the basic issue of competitiveness. 
Another problem, he says, is that with the possible exception 
of a few companies like LSI Logic, "nobody has earned money with 
ASICs yet." Michael Glennon at Dataquest agrees: "It is a very 
competitive market and the return is very low in most cases." 
  Moreover, Europe is not going to have the ASICs market to 
itself. Texas Instruments is already planning a "single-wafer 
fab" in which each silicon or gallium arsenide wafer can be 
processed with different parameters. "With cost-efficient, 
small-volume manufacturing of logic chips," says Robert Doering 
of Texas, "the American semiconductor industry will keep its 
technological edge." 



  Table 2 -- The World Chip Market in 1993 

                   Volume (billion $)   Market share (%)   Growth on 1992 
                                                           (%) 

USA                24.7                 31.9               34.5 

Japan              23.7                 30.7               22 

Europe             14.5                 18.8               26 

ROW                14.4                 18.6               36 

Total                                                      77.3 

The highest demand for chips in 1993 came from the U.S. and Japan. The U.S. 
and the rest of the world (Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore) showed 
the largest growth on 1992. 

Source: Semiconductor Industry Association 


  ASICs allow companies to improve their products by making 
them with customized circuits rather than standard components. 
Although this costs more, the advantage, says Glennon, "is a 
more competitive piece of equipment." The benefit does not come 
from straightforward substitution but from extra functions and 
features. 
  "The trend is for more features at the same or lower price," 
says Ruediger Buerkel from ABB Ixys Semiconductors. In 
electronics, he says, there are now bigger profits to be made in 
systems than in semiconductor manufacturing. "Some people even 
say you cannot earn money with semiconductors," he adds, "but if 
you lose access to these driving forces, you will soon be out of 
business." Buerkel thinks the ASIC strategy might work if there 
are strong markets. 
  ASICs could be successful in some traditional markets but 
the 
big opportunities will be in new markets. These include: 
  -- Image processors for HDTV sets; 
  -- Ultrafast components for switching, multiplexing and 
compressing broadband communications signals; 
  -- Chips for the encryption of messages and digital 
signatures with chip-cards ("smartcards"). 
  For many years memory chips, notably dynamic random access 
memory (DRAM) chips, were a yardstick for progress in 
microelectronics: 1 Mb [megabyte], 4 Mb, 16 Mb, 64 Mb... Each 
new generation required smaller feature sizes on the 
semiconductor. The current generation of 16 Mb chips have 0.5 
micron features -- 64 Mb chips will need 0.35 micron features. 
But memory chips are now a bulk commodity and there is a 
widespread belief that they have lost their role as technology 
drivers. "The learning curve requires a high-volume product in 
the wafer-fab for an extended time period," says Knapp. "This 
may be DRAMs, or microprocessors, but analogue/digital 
converters for ISDN [integrated services digital network] 
telephones, for example, would also do if you could produce, 
say, five million pieces annually." 
  The cost of innovation has also increased as feature sizes 
have become smaller and more and more companies are 
collaborating on R&amp;D, and not always within the same country 
or 
continent (see box 2). 
<H5>  Box 2: To Collaborate or Not? </H5>
  France Telecom has been involved in a number of joint 
ventures through its research centre, CNET. SGS-Thomson and 
CNET have set up a silicon microelectronics research centre in 
Crolles, near Grenoble, to develop integrated circuit 
technologies and build prototypes for the 0.5 micron technology 
needed for 16 Mb memory chips. CNET had previously transferred 
expertise in 1 micron and 0.7 micron silicon technology to 
Matra-MHS. 
  CNET has also collaborated with Philips in the development 
of 
active-matrix liquid-crystal displays for low-cost flat-screen 
displays. It is also working with Alcatel Optronics on laser 
technologies for optical transmission and distribution. 
  At the inauguration of the Crolles centre in September, 
1992, 
the French industry minister, Gerard Longuet, suggested the 
possibility of other companies joining the centre. Longuet 
explicitly mentioned Siemens. Are they interested? "It depends 
on what is to be done in Crolles," says Klaus Knapp of their 
semiconductor division. "As long as basic research is the 
purpose, we are hesitant, since we already have a good research 
lab in Munich." 
  Siemens has since announced that it plans to establish a 2 
billion German marks [DM] factory for the production of 0.5-0.25 
micron chips in Dresden. Unconfirmed reports suggest that more 
than DM300 million of the funds will come from the German 
government. IBM and Toshiba have been invited to join the 
project. The three companies are already collaborating in the 
development of 256 Mb DRAM chips with 0.25 micron feature sizes. 
<H5>  High-Definition Problems </H5>
  ASIC chips will have major roles to play in high-definition 
television (HDTV), something which the microelectronics industry 
has been looking forward to for almost 10 years. It is still 
waiting as governments, TV and electronics companies try to 
agree on a global HDTV standard. Europe's original plan, known 
as EUREKA 95, was to go from conventional TV to fully digital 
HDTV via two intermediate steps that combined analogue and 
digital transmission techniques -- D2-MAC (multiplexed analogue 
components) and HD-MAC. 
  Originally it was thought that digital HDTV could only be 
delivered by optical fibres, but advances in video compression 
mean that it should be possible to transmit the signals similar 
to conventional TV. Broadcasters and governments now favour 
going direct to digital HDTV and electronics companies, in 
particular Philips and Thomson, have been forced to write off 
enormous investments in D2-MAC and HD-MAC. The total private 
and public investment is estimated to be several hundred million 
marks and some 100,000 D2-MAC receivers have already been sold. 
  Thomas Fischer, managing director of Intermetall, a German 
chip-maker involved in EUREKA 95, is angry about what has 
happened. "Europe's industry policy has completely failed in 
HDTV," says Fischer. "We have invested and now we say we'd 
rather wait a couple of years to get a licence from the U.S. to 
introduce the American technology." But even U.S. technology is 
not going to lead to products before 1996. Another problem, 
according to Fischer, is that "the Americans hold the 
intellectual property rights. We are going to cut our last leg 
in consumer electronics -- television sets." 
  However, late last year more than 80 European electronics 
and 
television companies joined together in the digital video 
broadcasting (DVB) project. Philips and Thomson are also part 
of a "grand alliance" with several U.S. organizations to set a 
digital HDTV standard. 
  The microelectronics industry is also targeting broadband 
communications networks based on the asynchronous transfer mode 
(ATM) as a growth area. With ATM, digital signals are packaged 
into 48 byte unit cells plus a header to direct each cell to its 
destination -- irrespective of whether the "payload" consists of 
speech, data, text or video information. The same format works 
for both narrow and broadband signals, making the service 
independent of the transmission technique. Therefore new 
broadband services will be possible on existing links. However, 
ATM will ultimately need a fibre-optic network to demonstrate 
its full potential, especially for multimedia applications. 
  Worldwide there are about 30 ATM pilot trials and 12 
European 
network operators have agreed to set up a transnational ATM 
network. In Europe, both Alcatel and Siemens have developed 
circuits to switch broadband signals at data rates of 155 Mbs-1 
[megabytes per second in the -1 power]. Alcatel's ATM chip 
contains 880,000 transistors and is being fabricated in-house by 
its Mietec subsidiary in Belgium. Siemens has already won 
contracts to deliver ATM systems to Japan's NTT telephone 
company. 
  "Intelligent" credit cards containing microprocessors -- 
which, for example, would allow the user to control access to 
various computer files and records -- could be another 
high-volume niche market for ASICs. "The chip card can become a 
new pillar of the European semiconductor industry," says Ulrich 
Hamann who markets smartcards for Siemens. The world market for 
credit card chips was estimated to be almost $100 million in 
1992 and is expected to rise to almost $600 million, equivalent 
to 400 million cards, by 1997. With some 30 percent of global 
smartcard sales, Siemens is joint market leader with Motorola; 
SGS Thomson and Philips are third and fourth. The top ranked 
Japanese manufacturer, Hitachi, is fifth with 6 percent of the 
market. 
  Signature cards for electronic mail messages could be 
another 
growth industry. These cards would raise the status of hitherto 
informal messages to the equivalent of paper documents, making 
them eligible for legal proof and litigation. The cards would 
be based on the Rivest-Shamir-Adelman (RSA) encryption algorithm 
which also seals an electronic document against subsequent 
changes. Signature cards are believed to be safer than 
handwritten signatures, which can be copied and manipulated with 
graphics software to forge paper documents. 
  However, a public authority would have to issue and 
administer the cards and the present system of four-digit 
personal identification numbers (as used at "hole-in-the-wall" 
cash machines) would have to be enhanced. One possible 
mechanism is a biometric check: A fingerprint sensor on the 
card would only allow the legitimate owner of the card to use 
it. Such a card would need an array of tiny pressure sensors, 
coupled to a signal processor, to compare the actual 
fingerprints with the stored sample. 
  A digital signature card would be what electronics engineers 
call a "microsystem" -- a device that combines microelectronic 
signal processing with sensors and actuators on a single chip. 
Other potential applications of microsystems technology include 
miniaturized surgical instruments, in-situ dosimeters in 
medicine, and micro-analyzers in bioengineering. 
  Hitherto, the gradual extension of precision engineering 
into 
the silicon microworld -- where manufacturing is governed by 
epitaxial laws rather than conventional cutting and turning 
techniques -- has essentially been a research activity. 
However, the market for micro-machines and microstructures was 
already worth $87 million in 1991, according to Market 
Intelligence Research Corp., and is expected to increase to $3 
billion by 1998. 
<H5>  Threats and Opportunities </H5>
  There are many promising technologies, and huge potential 
markets. But somehow they all hinge on infrastructure barriers 
beyond the scope of single manufacturers: 
  -- HDTV needs Europe-wide (at least) standards for digital 
transmission; 
  -- Likewise the success of ATM networks will depend on the 
setting of European broadband communication protocols. 
Furthermore, broadband multimedia services -- such as remote 
access to databanks and public libraries, video-on-demand and 
home-shopping -- all involve issues such as billing, pricing and 
copyright. A huge investment will also be needed to convert 
existing archives and connect them to the network; 
  -- Fingerprint sensors on credit and signature cards will 
need an appropriate legal framework to balance benefits and 
risks, otherwise the public will not accept them. 
  In an age when information is virtually free and globally 
available, it should be relatively simple to identify a large 
number of niche markets. The real challenge will be to exploit 
them successfully. Cost-efficient manufacturing and effective 
marketing are two important parameters. But unless scientists, 
engineers and managers work together to ensure that projects 
like the Heinrich Hertz Institute's video projector do not end 
up gathering dust on the shelf, no amount of top-quality 
research will suffice. Nothing less than Europe's ability to 
compete in the high-tech markets of the next century is at stake. 

