Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] London, AL-HAYAH -- Dozens of officers and soldiers 
from the opposition Libyan National Army [LNA] have issued a 
statement in which they said: "We have this week seen a 
statement addressed to public opinion and signed by two comrades 
in arms who are LNA officers. It contained a number of 
contradictions, prevarications, and false claims which, we know 
perfectly well, did not emanate from these two brothers or have 
anything to do with the code of honor, struggle, and military 
solidarity we committed ourselves to as far back as the first 
day we decided that confrontation with the unjust regime in the 
homeland was inevitable." 
  Colonel Salih al-Habbuni and Lieutenant Colonel 'Abdallah 
al-Shaykhi had issued a statement saying that LNA Commander 
Colonel Khalifah Haftar had lost all his leadership posts and 
that the army was one of the institutions of the National Front 
for the Salvation of Libya [NFSL], the opposition faction which 
has suffered a split. 
  Haftar, it should be recalled, had signed the secession 
statement and announced the withdrawal of all the opposition 
army's officers and soldiers from the NFSL. 
  The statement of the officers and soldiers said: "These two 
brothers were used by certain parties as a tool to break our 
fighters' unity of ranks and purpose.... We reject the plots 
hatched against our National Army and the fact that some of its 
members are implicated in cheap destructive attempts and are 
being used by an individual or a group as an instrument for the 
fulfillment of power ambitions and temporary selfish gains." 
  They also declared: 
  "1. The LNA rejects everything in the statement issued by 
these two comrades and see the issuing of that statement in 
their names as a cheap and failed attempt to undermine the unity 
of our patriotic forces. Despite that, we give them a chance to 
reconsider their position and to rejoin their comrades in arms 
in the same trench. We remind them of the military honor and 
the historic responsibility entrusted to us by our brothers and 
our people. They should, before it is too late, realize the 
seriousness of slipping into such cheap attempts perpetrated by 
power-mad individuals. 
  "2. The LNA reaffirms its absolute commitment as an integral 
military unit to the declaration made by Commander in Chief 
Staff Col. Khalifah Abu-al-Qasim Haftar, that the LNA has left 
the NFSL and severed all organizational links with it and would 
not abide by any decision or directive issued by it. 
  "3. The LNA declares that the statements made by the NFSL 
Secretary General (Muhammad al-Muqaryif) on the appointment of a 
new LNA command was but a link in the cheap plot against the LNA 
unity and cohesion in the service of his own personal aims and 
interests, and a manifestation of the autocratic and domineering 
spirit which was one of the reasons why many, including the LNA, 
have abandoned the NFSL. The LNA rejects all kinds of hegemony 
and blind domineering, refuses to be led by anyone other than 
its honorable sons, rejects the ignorant methods of charting its 
national struggle, rejects all the statements and decisions made 
by the NFSL's secretary general, considering them to be 
tantamount to interference in its affairs, and announces its 
adherence to its command, options, and struggle programs. 
  "4. The LNA is an integral part of the Libyan partriotic 
armed forces at home for it was born out of these forces and 
made of their strugglers, and it belongs to the entire homeland 
and to all the Libyan people. It declares to everyone that it 
will not relent nor will it stop fighting the corrupt regime 
imposing itself on our country and people, and will join hands 
will all honorable men to wage the battle of liberation. It 
most confidently, strongly, and unitedly renews the pledge and 
promise to its Commander Haftar that it will resolutely continue 
the struggle with heroic determination and patience until final 
salvation and definite victory." 
  The statement was signed by the following officers: Captains 
Nasr al-Din al-Sadiq Karmus, Salim 'Abd-al-Salam al-Zuyaghn, 
'Abdallah al-Asghar, 'Abd-al-'Azim Muhammad Yusuf, Salah 
Muhammad Shu'ayb, Sa'id al-Bal'azi, Musaddiq al-Fanidi, Sa'd 
al-Ghazal Madi, 'Ali 'Ashur, and Abu-Sha'alah Ibrahim; First 
Lieutenants al-Asmar 'Abd-al-Salam Ibridge, 'Adil Abu-Zayd 
al-Hajjaji, and Muhammad Tahir Rashid; and Second Lieutenants 
Milad Ibrahim Abu-Zahw and Misbah Mas'ud al-Farajani. 
  It was also signed by 59 warrant officers. 

