BFN 

  [Text] Potsdam/Bonn (DPA) -- The extreme-right "Dragon 
Military Sports Group," which operated out of the Prenzlau area, 
has been broken up in Brandenburg Land. The Potsdam Public 
Prosecutor's Office in response to a question confirmed a report 
in BERLINER MORGENPOST on Saturday [4 June]. Senior Public 
Prosecutor Ruediger Michalik from the Potsdam Public 
Prosecutor's Office said an arrest warrant has been issued for 
the chief of the group, a 33-year-old Bundeswehr noncommissioned 
officer. It is strongly suspected that a criminal organization 
was founded and that the law on arms was violated. 
  Four other members of the military sports group who were 
temporarily detained -- an adolescent and three young adults -- 
have meanwhile been released. They have to be categorized with 
the extreme-right scene, it was stated. In a raid by more than 
100 policemen from various police headquarters, the five had 
been arrested last Thursday. According to Michalik, 
extreme-right documents, neonazi propaganda material, weapons, 
ammunition, a bayonet, and a Third Reich war flag were 
confiscated when 15 objects in the area of Prenzlau were 
searched. 
  The objective of the military sports group had been attacks 
on foreigners and the homes of asylum-seekers. The group, which 
carried out military sports exercises in the woods, had been 
watched for several months, Michalik said. 
  Alfred Biehle, military commissioner of the Bundestag, said 
in a DPA interview that, despite some extreme-right phenomena, 
there is no shift to the right in the German armed forces. 
According to his information, this year 14 suspicious cases 
with 20 presumed perpetrators have been registered in the field 
of right-wing extremism and xenophobic behavior of soldiers. 
Last year, 53 suspicious cases with 63 presumed perpetrators 
had been ascertained in the Bundeswehr, he said. 
  Defense Ministry spokesman Hans-Dieter Wichter stated that 
extreme-right and extreme-left activities of soldiers are 
strictly prosecuted. This would also apply to the case reported 
from Brandenburg if the suspicion against the noncommissioned 
officer were confirmed, he said. 

