BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Pinhas 'Inbari: "Why Pique the Iranian </F>
Giant?"] 
  [Text] Israel's warning to Jordan regarding Hamas [Islamic 
Resistance Movement] activity there came as a surprise. Until 
now, the only Israeli threats to Jordan had come from those 
circles that consider the eastern bank of the Jordan River the 
alternative Palestinian homeland. For example, Ari'el Sharon 
used to take advantage of security incidents on the Jordanian 
border or terror acts planned at the headquarters of Abu-Jihad 
[Khalil al-Wazir] in the Jordanian capital to threaten to 
"bombard the terrorist headquarters in Amman." 
  Has Israel under Peres and Rabin begun to adopt such an 
attitude? The answer is necessarily negative. What, then, 
motivated the surprising Israeli threat to Jordan at a time when 
Jordan is in the midst of restoring its status in the West Bank 
and on the eve of the ceremony inaugurating the Dome of the Rock 
on the Temple Mount? In the not too distant past, Israel 
supported such developments. Has Israel changed its stand, and 
is it no longer interested in an improvement in Jordan's status 
in the territories? 
  The answer to this question, too, is negative. The fact is 
that Israel has helped Jordan rehabilitate its banking system in 
the territories and cooperated with it in frustrating 
Palestinian attempts to set up their own central bank and issue 
their own currency. Israel is coordinating the new arrangements 
at the Cave of the Patriarchs with Jordan, not with the PLO. 
  It may well be that the affair should be taken at face 
value. 
A bleeding Israel could not tolerate a situation in which Hamas 
spokesmen brag about their murderous acts from well-protected 
offices in Amman and even threaten to continue them. 
  And yet, with regard to Israeli-Jordanian cooperation on 
several issues pertaining to the negotiations with the 
Palestinians, it is hard to ignore several unpleasant aspects of 
the relations between the two countries, which culminated in the 
Israeli warning to its eastern neighbor. 
  In general, the rehabilitation of Jordan's status in the 
territories comes at the expense of the Oslo agreements. The 
less glamorous the agreements seem, the stronger Jordan's status 
becomes. 
  Israel has noticed that Jordan has been establishing 
alliances with Palestinian circles that oppose the agreements. 
Amman has become a center of conspiracy and intrigue against 
'Arafat. It is no accident that, for example, when the members 
of the PLO Executive Committee were summoned to Tunis last 
month, they preferred to meet in Jordan, thereby demonstrating 
that 'Arafat did not have a majority to ratify the Cairo 
agreements. Amman also hosted contacts the Palestinian People's 
Party and FIDA [Palestinian Democratic Federation] conducted 
with the Democratic and Popular Fronts for the Liberation of 
Palestine, headed by Habash and Hawatimah. The contacts sought 
to establish a new Palestinian political apparatus to replace 
the alignment of forces that supported the Oslo agreements at 
the outset. 
  The contacts failed, but Israel resented them nonetheless. 
Behind them lies the fact that although Jordan supports the Oslo 
agreements in word, it is very worried by them and is working to 
thwart them in deed. This is the reason for Jordan's 
cooperation with Syria. Israel views the tightening 
Jordan-Syria relations as conflicting with the approach Israel 
would expect Jordan to adopt at this time. 
  Jordan recently considered replacing the government under 
'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali with a new government headed by Zayd 
al-Rifa'i. Al-Majali has been identified with the Madrid 
Conference and the peace process since its early days, while 
al-Rifa'i, more than any other Jordanian politician, is 
identified with Syria. It can be assumed that one of the 
reasons Husayn eventually decided against turning the domestic 
tables around was U.S. and Israeli pressure. 
  Nevertheless, the pro-Syrian line is beginning to have a 
negative effect on Jordanian policy. For example, in the 
previous round of talks in Washington, Israel expected practical 
discussions on the water issue, while Jordan surprised it by 
raising impossible demands, such as determining the borderline 
at this time. Husayn's demand that the blockade on the 
al-'Aqabah port be lifted as a precondition for Jordan's 
participation in the next round of Washington talks coincides 
with the rapprochement between the Jordanian and the Syrian 
attitudes. At the same time, it seems that the blockade 
business also attests to a Jordanian attempt to counterbalance 
its rapprochement with Syria by reserving the option of striking 
an alliance with Iraq in due time. 
  A very special development in terms of the relations 
between Israel and Jordan is seen in Israel's relations with the 
Gulf emirates. It is worth noting that while Israel sent a 
large delegation to Oman, Jordan sent a small technical 
delegation, practically adopting the Syrian policy of boycotting 
the multilateral talks. This is a major negative development, 
because Jordan played an important role in convincing Oman to 
accept an Israeli delegation. Despite tension between the 
Hashemites and the oil emirates of the Gulf, Jordan and Oman 
have good relations. In principle, Jordan's retreat from the 
peace process according to its original parameters stems from 
its submission to Syrian influence. At the same time, one should 
study Jordan's policy toward the Gulf for signs of Jordanian 
fears of Israeli involvement there. 
  While living under a heavy Iranian threat, the Emirates 
cannot trust Iraq or Saudi Arabia. It is an unknown fact that, 
until the Kuwait crisis, some of the Gulf Emirates trusted 
Jordan as the military force that could, to some extent, help 
them in the face of the Iranian threat. Jordanian officers 
trained and advised the Armies of the Emirates, and several 
Jordanian Army units were stationed in the Gulf. Jordan's role 
there came to an end when it chose to strike an alliance with 
Yemen and Iraq, thus losing the trust of the Emirates. Jordan 
is currently engaged in an effort to bolster its status in the 
Gulf. At the same time, the Israeli connection with the 
Emirates began to take shape. 
  Obviously, the Emirates will seek to examine the extent to 
which the peace process' successful completion can provide them 
with Israeli protection against the Iranian threat. This is 
what lies at the very root of Iran's interest in doing as much 
damage as possible to the peace process: The real struggle is 
over security arrangements in the Gulf. 
  As will be recalled, the Gulf states rejected offers from 
Egypt and Syria to take part in security arrangements because 
they did not trust the two countries. 
  Jordan recently started exploring the option of reviving its 
old status in the Gulf, and along comes Israel as an undesired 
competitor. The way things look now, there appears to be an 
Israeli-Jordanian competition over the Gulf, but this may not 
necessarily lead to a crisis. The fact is that Jordan initially 
supported Israel's participation in the Oman conference. Should 
Israeli-Jordanian relations evolve into a joint confederation 
with the Palestinians, the emirates could be convinced that such 
a confederation is not against them. 
  Meanwhile, matters between Israel and Jordan have taken a 
negative turn, mainly because Israel is displeased with what it 
believes are Jordanian attempts to frustrate the negotiations 
with the PLO. Two negative landmarks are worth mentioning in 
this regard: One is the failure of Foreign Minister Peres' 
talks with King Husayn late last year. Husayn not only failed 
to speed up the talks, as Peres had hoped; he even held them up. 
The second is Jordan's evading pressure from Peres to convene 
the big "new Middle East" economic conference. 
  In November, Jordanian Crown Prince Hasan said in an 
interview to Beirut's AL-SAFIR that he felt humiliated by the 
White House public meeting with Peres, which had been forced on 
him. Peres became convinced that Jordan would not budge without 
Syria, but nevertheless, apparently still recommended putting 
pressure on the Jordanian-Syrian connection in order to remove 
an important bargaining card from al-Asad. 
  Another reference point was Husayn's failure to meet King 
Fahd two months ago when he had reason to believe that the Saudi 
monarch would receive him after the 'Umra pilgrimage, which he 
did not make during the hajj period. King Husayn was upset and 
returned to Amman deeply offended. He is convinced that the 
Americans, at Israel's behest, convinced King Fahd to rejected 
his outstretched hand. 
  Paradoxically, Husayn's humiliation might now promote his 
relations with Fahd. We should recall that the Saudi monarch 
had to settle with King Husayn for the Jordanian's support of 
Saddam during the Kuwaiti crisis. Now that he has offended him, 
Fahd will be better prepared to forgive Husayn. In the 
meantime, however, Husayn feels a need to get back at the United 
States and Israel. 
  The pressures and counter pressures endanger the peace 
process and the internal stability of the states in the region. 
The Israeli threat to Jordan revealed the basic dispute between 
Jordan and Egypt over the Islamic terrorist struggle. 
  We should note that compared to President Mubarak, who has 
come out openly against the Islamic extremists, King Husayn 
tries to appease them although they also threaten his regime. 
  Husayn has on several occasions come out against Islamic 
extremists and said that they are not true Islam, which is an 
enlightened and progressive religion. But the king did not hand 
down to the Jordanian Army orders like those Mubarak gave the 
Egyptian Army in its struggle against the Islamic extremists. 
The different approach by Jordan and Egypt on that matter makes 
it hard for Mubarak because Husayn presents a different example 
of how to treat the Islamic problem. We can assume that Mubarak 
tried to convince Husayn to adopt the Egyptian model of the 
struggle against the religious fanatics, but to no avail. 
  The Israeli threat forces Husayn to face a new challenge, to 
make a decision contrary to his judgment. Therefore, Israel 
must consider whether what is gained by the pressure might not 
be at Jordan's expense, since the struggle based on the Egyptian 
model might break up the Jordan vessel and sink it. 
  Israel is exerting tough pressures on Jordan: On the one 
hand, not to interfere with the implementation of the Oslo 
agreements, and on the other, not to sink too deep into 
al-Asad's strangling embrace. Both Israel and Jordan are 
therefore suddenly finding themselves competing for influence in 
the Persian Gulf, thereby annoying the Iranian giant, waiting on 
the other side of the sea. 
  Israel must not forget that despite the threats to Jordan 
that Iran is the real enemy of the peace process. The dangerous 
connection created between Iran and the Hamas leadership in 
Jordan is the real development but that is a different story. 

