Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Guiyang, January 30 (XINHUA) -- The burgeoning 
broadcasting and television education has eased a serious 
shortage of well-trained personnel in Guizhou, an interior 
province in southwest China. 
  According to Shi Hongzhi, president of the Guizhou 
Broadcasting and Television University, the school has had 
50,000 graduates in the past 14 years, about half as many as 
graduated from all the 23 Guizhou-based institutions of higher 
learning during the same period. 
  She also said that more than 200,000 people have received 
short-term and in-service training. 
  This kind of education, highly cost-effective, has found 
special preference in Guizhou, whose overall development has 
long been restrained by shortage of funds and a lack of 
well-trained professionals. 
  In one case, the poverty-ridden Miao-Bouyei Autonomous 
County 
of Ziyun presented little attraction for university graduates, 
and those who did go there soon left because of hardships. 
  The local authorities could do nothing but turn to 
broadcasting and television education for help and, moreover, 
they regard it as a short-cut. 
  To date the county has more than 200 graduates who 
specialised in a wide range of subjects. 
  In a large steel company of the province, 580 workers in 
various key positions have been given access to the province's 
broadcasting and television education program and now have 
become the backbone of the company. 
  According to President Shi, her university now has 22 branch 
schools scattered across the province, and teaching posts have 
covered half of the province's counties. 
  Shi Hongzhi added that the teaching programs have yielded 
initial success, citing for example that 66 graduates working in 
a field workplace of the ministry of aerospace industry have 
been awarded national prizes. 
  She also said that her university aims targets directly to 
the service of the local economic buildup, so it adjusts its 
syllabuses quite often in order to train and provide 
professionals that are most urgently in demand, such as people 
skilled in science, technology, economics and law. 
  The major subjects offered at the broadcasting and 
television 
university have soared from three to 90, including such 
important ones as the manufacturing of plane engines, railway 
electrification and tourism management. 

