BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Nadav Shragay] </F>
  [Excerpts] "Taking into consideration the circumstances, 
including the Israeli Government's recognition of the PLO, there 
is no public interest in taking administrative action against 
Orient House," outgoing Police Chief Rafi Peled wrote to Uri 
Ari'el, secretary general of the Council of Jewish Settlements 
in Judaea, Samaria, and the Gaza Strip. 
  East Jerusalem's Orient House is the center for PLO activity 
in the town and the West Bank. The building houses the various 
departments of the developing self-rule authority, and meetings 
between the PLO and foreign diplomats are held there. This is 
the first time that the Israel Police has officially confirmed 
that it does not take any action against Orient House because of 
Israel's recognition of the PLO. 
  Jerusalem Deputy Mayor Shmu'el Me'ir, who made Peled's 
letter 
public yesterday, retorted that "the large number of daily 
terrorist attacks against Jews on their way to the Western Wall 
and against vehicles belonging to Israelis and tourists in 
Jerusalem are initiated and funded by the PLO office in Orient 
House." He said a PLO flag flies on the building and it is 
guarded by the organization's private militia. 
  "The militia also serves as a police force. It receives 
complaints from civilians and deals with them by exercising its 
might in violation of the law. Orient House officially operates 
under the name Center for Arab Research and also distributes 
funds to some 30 organizations in East Jerusalem," he said. 
According to Me'ir, no action is being taken also against 
Nuzhah House, which is a center of activity for the PLO and the 
rejectionist organizations. The building houses two theaters and 
serves Hamas [Islamic Resistance Movement]. [passage omitted] 
  According to a report by the Mabat Leshalom [Look Toward 
Peace] organization, due to be published in the coming days, 
"Faysal al-Husayni, head of the PLO's office in Jerusalem, is 
preparing the ground to set up a Palestinian `shadow 
municipality' to be called the Jerusalem National Council. The 
council plans to replace all those dealing with the town's Arab 
population, to the extent possible, and will form ties with the 
self-rule's elected council during the interim stage." 
  The report says "the council will have a mayor, deputies, 
comptrollers, nine heads of municipal departments, and its own 
police force. It will have planning, economic, judicial, social 
welfare, cultural, political, religious, finance, and overall 
security departments. It will also have departments for foreign 
relations and ties with Israel." 
  According to Mabat Leshalom, al-Husayni said that the 
authority's establishment is partially aimed at improving the 
Palestinians' ability to bargain in negotiations over the 
permanent settlement. Al-Husayni's spokesman, Ma'an 'Urqayt, 
told Mabat Leshalom that al- Husayni prefers calling the 
authority the Jerusalem Committee. He said the committee's task 
is to provide the residents of East Jerusalem with services, 
because the PLO does not recognize the Jerusalem Municipal 
Council's authority. 
  Mabat Leshalom reports that the PLO announced the 
establishment of a population registry office for East Jerusalem 
called the Palestinian Center for Statistics and directed by Dr. 
Hasan Abu-Libdah. It also set up the Council for Palestinian 
Development and Construction. 
  Mabat Leshalom also claims that the PLO is demanding that 
Israel hand over to it control of 'Atarot Airport, claiming that 
it is situated in the territories occupied by Israel in 1967. 
The PLO has called on foreign airlines not to land at 'Atarot. 
  Referring to Israeli violations of the agreement [not 
further 
specified], Mabat Leshalom notes expansion of the settlement of 
Betar and the Ma'ale Adumim area, as well as the decision by the 
Jerusalem Municipality Planning Committee to build 395 
apartments near the village of Jabal al-Mukabir in East 
Jerusalem. 

