Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] U.S. President Bill Clinton received His Majesty 
King Husayn and Her Majesty Queen Nur at the White House 
yesterday evening. Afterward, the two leaders held a closed 
meeting, which was followed by an expanded meeting attended by 
several officials on both sides. 
  The conferees reviewed various regional and international 
issues and his majesty gave a detailed explanation of Jordan's 
position on the peace process, particularly concerning the 
recent developments of this process. He affirmed Jordan's 
commitment to achieving a comprehensive, lasting, and just peace 
in the region in accordance with the formula of the Madrid 
conference based on Security Council Resolutions 242, 338, and 
425. 
  They also discussed various aspects of relations between the 
two friendly countries and the need to consolidate these 
relations in order to reach the highest levels of cooperation in 
various fields. 
  In welcoming His Majesty King Husayn to the United States, 
the U.S. President stressed the deep historic relations between 
the two countries, and appreciated his majesty's continued 
efforts to achieve peace in the Middle East. 
  The U.S. President also commended the Jordanian democratic 
march and expressed appreciation for his majesty's efforts to 
entrench and enhance it. He referred to the great efforts he 
personally is making to reduce Jordan's economic difficulties 
and to help Jordan overcome these difficulties--the foremost 
being its foreign indebtedness--by supporting the Jordanian 
economy. 
  President Clinton affirmed U.S. interest in supporting and 
promoting the Jordanian Armed Forces, and stressed his 
appreciation of Jordan's prominent role in maintaining security 
and stability in the Middle East. 
  Accompanying his majesty at the meeting were Dr. 
'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali, the prime minister; His Excellency 
al-Sharif Zayd Bin-Shakir, chief of the Royal Hashemite Court; 
Marwan al-Qasim, his majesty's political adviser; His Highness 
Prince Talal Bin-Muhammad, his majesty's military secretary; and 
Dr. Fayiz al-Tarawinah, the Jordanian ambassador in Washington. 
  The meeting was attended on the U.S. side by Vice President 
Al Gore, National Security Adviser Anthony Lake, and a number of 
White House and State Department officials. 
  Mrs. Hilary Clinton also received Her Majesty Queen Nur at 
the White House. They exchanged views on several issues of 
common interest. 
  U.S. Vice President Al Gore hosted a dinner banquet in honor 
of His Majesty King Husayn and Her Majesty Queen Nur yesterday 
evening. 

