Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter: "Senior Officials Deny That China Will </F>
Return to the Old Path of State Monopoly for the Purchase and 
Marketing of Grain, and Stress That Private Businessmen Can 
Still Engage in the Business of Purchasing Grain"] 
  [Text] Chinese officials concerned yesterday told MING PAO 
that in the field of grain distribution, China would never 
return to the previous practice of state-monopolized purchase 
and sale (that is, all grain to be purchased and sold by the 
state according to unified plans). However, when obvious 
instability appears in the supply of grain and when the 
situation affects the national economy and the people's 
livelihood, the authorities will use the reserve grain in 
granaries to increase the market supply and stabilize and 
control market prices. 
  According to a recent report by a Hong Kong newspaper, the 
Beijing Municipal authorities drew a lesson from the sharp 
increase in grain prices late last year, and decided that grain 
could only be purchased by the State Council's Ministry of Grain 
at prices controlled by the state. No private businesses would 
be allowed to engage in grain purchase (but grain retail 
business would still be free). 
  However, a senior official of the State Council told MING 
PAO 
reporters yesterday that it was inaccurate to say that no 
private businesses are allowed to engage in grain purchase. 
  He said: On the open grain market, after grain prices were 
decontrolled, the state still seriously purchased grain. At the 
same time, however, the authorities did not prohibit or restrain 
any individual businesses from engaging in grain purchase. The 
official said that governments in all countries attach great 
importance to peasants' interests and to protecting the 
development of agriculture in their own countries. 
  Recently, peasants in Japan and South Korea staged protests 
against the importation of rice from foreign countries, but this 
did not mean that grain purchase should be monopolized by the 
state and individual businesses should not be allowed to engage 
in grain purchase. 
  A provincial official in Sichuan said that he did not 
believe 
China would return to the old practice of state-monopolized 
grain purchase and marketing. Last year, Sichuan's grain output 
reached 82 billion jin, and the free grain purchase and sale was 
welcomed by all parties concerned. 
  He added: At present, each 100 jin of rice is purchased at 
40-odd yuan in Sichuan, and the retail price of rice is between 
0.70 and 0.80 yuan per jin, and the prices remain rather stable. 
  Hunan is one of China's major grain-producing provinces. 
Last year, Hunan's rice output exceeded 50 billion jin. A 
provincial official in charge of agriculture said that so far, 
they had not received any central instruction on changing the 
grain purchase and marketing policy. 
  He said that even if the state sold part of the reserve 
grain 
on the market, this would only serve the purpose of stabilizing 
grain prices. He believed that in the future, the state and 
individual businesses would continue to be involved in grain 
purchase and marketing as at present. 
  He added that after Hunan rescinded the monopolized grain 
purchase and sale policy in November 1992, reactions from all 
quarters concerned were favorable. At present, the purchase 
price of rice is 45 yuan per 100 jin; and the retail price of 
rice is 0.75 yuan per jin. The price of rice is stable on the 
whole. 
  An official in Anhui Province said that local peasants did 
not want to see the return of the previous monopolized grain 
purchase and sale policy. Since grain prices were decontrolled 
in the first half of last year, grain prices have remained 
stable on the whole. At present, the retail price of rice is 
between 0.70 and 0.80 yuan per jin. Last year, Anhui's grain 
output was nearly 60 billion jin. 

