Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Patrick Bishop: "Adams Opens Door for Talks"] </F>
  [Text] Belfast -- The Sinn Fein president, Mr Gerry Adams, 
re-opened the possibility of dialogue on peace in Ulster last 
night when he declared that the Downing Street Declaration 
contained a "potentially significant development" on the central 
issue of Irish national self-determination. 
  In a speech to party activists in west Belfast he said: "If 
the British Government is prepared to co-operate with the Dublin 
Government to bring about Irish national self-determination in 
the shortest possible time, consistent with obtaining maximum 
consent to the process and in consultation with all parties, 
then there is a real possibility of progress." 
  He said that the declaration contained, "for the first time, 
a recognition by Britain, though heavily qualified, that the 
Irish people as a whole had the right to self-determination." 
  He added: "This right has never been acknowledged before by 
the British and this is a potentially significant development 
and an indication of the strength of this democratic argument." 
However he said that "partitionist solutions cannot create the 
conditions of peace and democracy." He called on the government 
to "make the exercise of Irish national self-determination its 
policy objective." 
  While endorsing the right of Unionists to be consulted he 
said "continued support for the Loyalist veto was a recipe for 
on-going conflict." 
  Earlier yesterday the British and Irish Governments moved to 
sooth Unionist anger following remarks by the Irish premier, Mr 
Albert Reynolds, which were interpreted in Ulster as pandering 
to the IRA. 
  A statement issued by Downing Street said there was no 
difference in the respective governments' positions on the 
interpretation of the Declaration. 
  The Irish deputy premier Mr Dick Spring, said there had been 
"some overreaction" to Mr Reynolds's statement. 
  The controversy was sparked by a statement by Mr Reynolds in 
which he called for the "demilitarisation of the Northern 
conflict" and spoke about the need for both governments and 
communities to "become persuaders for a new agreement on the 
future of the whole island." 
  He also said the declaration's stipulations for 
sel-fdetermination for all Irish people were in line with those 
revealed in public statements about the contents of the dialogue 
between the Mr John Hume the SDLP leader, and Mr Adams. 

