Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Riga, February 24 (LETA) -- February 23, an 
official visit of the Polish President, Lech Walesa to Latvia 
began. Lech Walesa and his spouse were met by the Latvian 
president, Guntis Ulmanis, and his wife. The high-ranking guest 
was also met by the Latvian prime minister, Valdis Birkavs, 
other officials and the heads of the diplomatic representations 
accredited in Latvia. 
  Without Latvia being free, there are no guarantees for the 
freedom of Poland as well, the Polish President Lech Walesa said 
at the signing ceremony in Riga castle. Earlier Walesa and 
Latvian President Guntis Ulmanis discussed a wide range of 
issues concerning the domestic and foreign policy of both 
countries, including privatization, foreign aid, security and 
defence problems. They agreed that the possibilities of 
cooperation had hardly been exhausted. 
  According to the Latvian president press report the Polish 
president said that other countries could view Latvia as an 
example in respect of the human rights. Speaking about the 
citizenship for the ethnic Poles in Latvia, Walesa also approved 
the suggestion to support Latvia in the international 
organizations as the human right situation in Latvia could be 
put forward as a positive example. 
  Then a joint declaration on strengthening the friendship and 
cooperation between Latvia and Poland was signed. 
  The document said that on the basis of historically friendly 
relations between the two nations and the re-establishment of 
relations at a state level in the early 1990's Latvia and Poland 
reaffirmed their commitment to continued development of these 
relations in compliance with the internationally accepted 
principles. They will support the settlement of conflicts 
through peaceful means with respect of the democratic principles 
and rights of ethnic minorities. 
  The parties agreed to maintain the bilateral relationship as 
well as to cooperate on the international level with the hope of 
resolving international problems in security, human rights and 
other fields. 
  They will continue the dialogue on the international issues 
of mutual interest and hold regular consultations at the highest 
level to achieve this aim. 
  Latvia and Poland agreed to coordinate their participation 
and initiatives within the framework of the NATO programme 
"Partnership for Peace" and said they were ready to develop and 
strengthen the CSCE process. 
  Both countries stressed in the declaration their recognition 
of the key role of the Council of Europe in strengthening 
democracy and human rights. Poland assured Latvia of its 
support in Latvia's attempts to join the organization. Both 
states suggested that more attention should be paid to increase 
the effectiveness of the cooperation between the Baltic States. 
  Another declaration that called to restore in effect the 
agreements signed between Latvia and Poland in 1922-38 and the 
agreement on legal assistance in respect of civil, marital and 
labour as well as criminal cases were also signed. 
  According to the governmental information agency, 
Latvian-Polish relations were discussed at the meeting between 
the Latvian prime minister, Valdis Birkavs, and the Polish 
president, Lech Walesa. Special attention was payed to the 
questions of cooperation in the spheres of economics and 
security. 
  It was admitted at the negotiations that the improvement of 
communication between the two states is very important for the 
development of cooperation between Latvia and Poland. In the 
near future, through bus service will be established between the 
two republics. Walesa was greatly interested in possible 
establishment of ferry service between Liepaja and Gdansk. The 
high-ranking guest spoke of the activization of negotiations 
among Latvia, Lithuania and Poland concerning the establishment 
of a railway corridor from Riga to the Polish frontier. Birkavs 
suggested that exhibitions of goods made in Poland and Latvia 
should be regularly organized in the two countries in order to 
promote the development of Latvian-Polish trade relations. 
  At the press conference after meeting with Lech Walesa, 
Valdis Birkavs said that Poland and Latvia are not satisfied 
with the partnership for peace program in respect of security 
guarantees for both states that the program does not provide. 
However, the sides find their participation positive, for it 
makes possible to introduce order into their armed forces. 
  Birkavs said the discussion also involved the issue of 
Kaliningrad area, with the numerous Russian troops stationed 
there as well as on the territory of Poland. On these grounds 
the future tackling the issue should be carried out on the 
international level. [passage omitted] 
  Today the Polish president continues his visit. 

