BFN 

<F P=106> ["ban."-initialed report: "Export Ban on `Antipersonnel </F>
Mines' Soon?"] 
  [Excerpt] Bonn, 6 Apr -- After coordination with 
humanitarian relief organizations, the Federal Government is 
planning to ban the export of "antipersonnel mines." According 
to information received from the Foreign Ministry, the Federal 
Cabinet resolution on the moratorium, which has an initial term 
of three years, should be adopted before the summer recess. The 
United States, France, and the Netherlands have already voted in 
favor of such a moratorium. The Federal Government is hoping 
that further export countries will join the initiative. 
  According to German Red Cross (DRK) estimates, at least 800 
people are killed or maimed by so-called antipersonnel mines 
every month throughout the world. In 62 countries, especially 
in the Third World, entire stretches of land are littered with 
such mines. This makes economic recovery and the food supply in 
these countries more difficult and often impossible. In a 
letter written in March and published on Wednesday [6 April], 
DRK President Sayn-Wittgenstein asked Federal Chancellor Helmut 
Kohl "to do everything you can to halt the murderous and cynical 
use of mines in many parts of the world." According to Red Cross 
estimates, 100 million armed mines are said to have been laid. 
  Sayn-Wittgenstein's and Foreign Minister Kinkel's initiative 
is also intended for a UN "reviewing conference," which will 
probably deal with revising the UN armament agreement of 1982. 
A meeting of experts on this has been scheduled for May. Yet, 
so far, no more than 39 countries have signed the UN Convention 
banning the use of conventional arms that affect soldiers and 
civilians alike and injure them excessively. The initiators are 
hoping that the planned export ban will contribute to an 
increase in the number of signatories and, at the same time, to 
extending the complementary protocol referring to the use of 
mines. 
  According to the Federal Government, the ban on the use of 
antipersonnel mines should be extended to intrastate conflicts. 
So far, it only applies to conflicts between two or more 
countries. Antipersonnel mines, which only affect people, being 
too weak for tanks or other vehicles, have been used in recent 
years mainly in conflicts in the nature of a civil war. The 
countries affected include Angola, Mozambique, Afghanistan, and 
Cambodia, and -- according to information of the Federal 
Government -- Bosnia-Herzegovina. The Federal Government is 
trying to establish a UN-controlled fund that could finance the 
clearing of mines. According to considerations in Bonn, claims 
for such resources could be made conditional upon the country 
joining the UN agreement. In the case of antipersonnel mines, 
the gap between the costs of production and removal is 
particularly wide. Certain products of this kind cost $3 
apiece, while the removal of each mine stands at $1,000. 
  The costs for removal are so high mainly because 
antipersonnel mines in many cases consist only of plastic and 
cannot be found by means of metal detectors. The Foreign 
Ministry has, therefore, suggested that a general ban on mines 
without metal components be imposed. The idea of banning mines 
that do not have a mechanism for self-destruction also stems 
from the objective of reducing the costs of removal. In the 
Foreign Ministry on Wednesday the criticism was expressed that 
the 1982 UN convention does not include a mechanism for 
sanctions. The parties to a conflict do not respect the 
obligation to clear the territory of mines after the end of 
hostilities. The agreement should be supplemented by the 
principle that he who lays the mine has to pay for its removal. 
Yet, even sources in the Foreign Ministry have indicated that 
they are skeptical whether this idea would be supported by all 
signatories to the agreement. [passage omitted] 

