BFN 

<F P=106> [Yelena Kolokoltseva report in the "Parliament" column: </F>
"The State Duma Will Hold Budget Hearings on Tuesday. The 
Majority of Factions Have Determined Their Positions"] 
  [Text] On Tuesday, 5 April, the State Duma is planning to 
hold parliamentary hearings on the draft budget, to be attended 
by Aleksandr Shokhin and Sergey Dubinin. In line with the Law 
"On Procedures for Considering and Approving the Budget," 
parliament hearings are not the final stage of parliamentary 
work on the budget. Nonetheless, most of the factions have 
already defined their positions. SEGODNYA reported earlier, in 
issue No. 60, that the 12 December group intends to support the 
budget. 
  The Russia's Choice faction is also ready to accept the 
budget in principle. Its leader Yegor Gaydar said in the Duma 
yesterday that "although it has some comments to make," his 
faction will support the draft. The remarks by Russia's Choice 
mostly relate to the estimated revenue volumes, on which point 
they are at one with Yabloko. Yegor Gaydar also thinks it 
necessary to redistribute appropriations on certain items. "We 
are for increasing allocations for culture, science and 
education, and limiting state expenditures and subventions to 
the territories," the former premier said. 
  Consensus on the revenue part of the budget is the sole 
instance where the positions of Russia's Choice and Yabloko 
coincide. As Aleksey Mikhaylov told SEGODNYA's correspondent, 
Yabloko intends to reject the draft budget. In Duma 
officialese, this means that the draft will be sent back "to be 
clarified by the government" and then a conciliation commission 
will return to its consideration, but not until new amendments 
have been introduced, in its second reading. Mr. Mikhaylov also 
believes that the "three-volume set" presented by the Finance 
Ministry does not correspond to the actual economic situation 
because it is "based on an outdated forecast of socioeconomic 
development." Furthermore, in his opinion, the budget does not 
spell out the revenue and expenditure items; it also lacks the 
requisite appendices. 
  Mikhail Zadornov confirmed his colleague's position in the 
State Duma yesterday. Unlike Mr. Mikhaylov, however, Mr. 
Zadornov, as chairman of the Budget, Taxes, Banks and Finances 
Committee, is in a fairly difficult situation because he is 
forced to confront the need to make a choice. On the one hand, 
he should obey the decision of his faction; on the other, he 
should expedite the passage of the budget through the State 
Duma. The role of an active budget proponent in the lower 
chamber, however, is being played by his deputy, Aleksandr 
Pochinok. Two days ago he held a prolonged discussion on this 
issue with Aleksandr Shokhin. It is not quite clear, though, in 
what capacity the latter acted -- either as a member of the PRES 
faction or as economy minister and vice premier. So far PRES has 
made no final decision but, it appears, in spite of a certain 
unpredictability in Mr. Shakhray's behavior, it is likely to 
make its additions to the budget and not go as far as turn down 
the draft as whole. 
  As for the agrarians, their positions is unequivocal: "No, 
no and never." Mikhail Lapshin, an agrarian faction leader, 
said this in conversation with SEGODNYA's correspondent in so 
many words. The Russian Federation Communist Party and the 
Liberal Democratic Party factions are expected to make a 
decision on this question in the next few days. 

