BFN 

<F P=106> [By Michael Anders] </F>
  [Text] Geneva, May 13 (AFP) -- Islamic nations stand ready 
to provide peacekeeping troops to defend the people of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina if Western UN forces are withdrawn, Pakistani 
Ambassador Hamad Kamal said Friday [13 May]. 
  Kamal was speaking after representatives of the 51-state 
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) [ICO] met in urgent 
session in Geneva and expressed "deep concerns" at the state of 
peace negotiations for Bosnia. 
  The Islamic gathering came as West European, U.S. and 
Russian 
foreign ministers also met in the city in a fresh effort to 
agree a workable peace, amid threats to withdraw UN forces if no 
formula is found rapidly. 
  Kamal read an OIC statement noting "the threat of certain 
countries to withdraw their peacekeeping contingents." France 
which has the biggest contingent has threatened withdrawal 
failing a rapid solution. 
  The OIC statement warned against such action without 
analysis 
of its impact on the situation on the ground and the drafting in 
of replacement troops, "for which adequate offers already exist 
from several OIC member states." 
  The Pakistani ambassador added that said while the OIC 
considered the lives of UN troops in Bosnia important, "we 
believe that the lives of the people in Bosnia-Herzegovina are 
even more important." 
  Kamal also said a Malaysian major killed in Bosnia Thursday 
had died "in defence of the principles the OIC upholds in 
Bosnia." 
  Paying tribute to the same officer, Bosnian Ambassador 
Mohamed Sacirbegovic distinguished between countries which 
provided UN troops "mandated to defend civilians under attack" 
and those which "mandated soldiers to remain neutral." 
  Sacirbey interpreted Thursday's U.S. Senate vote calling for 
lifting of the arms embargo on Bosnia as a sign of concern at 
the "failure to provide balance to the military situation" and 
as a result influence the negotiations. 
  "The Bosnians do not just have friends in the Islamic world. 
They have friends in the highest institutions that represent 
democracy in the U.S. and the world in general," he told the OIC 
press conference. 
  In its statement the OIC, which has called for the lifting 
of 
the embargo on arms supplies to Bosnia, "regretted the exclusion 
of OIC representatives" from the so-called "contact group" 
meeting on Bosnia in Geneva. 
  The statement reaffirmed that OIC representatives should 
participate on an equal footing with those of other countries in 
the peace efforts. 
  While maintaining their offer of active participation, it 
said that "continued rejection of this offer could adversely 
impact upon the credibility and sustainability of any solutions 
worked out in their absence." 
  The OIC statement warned that a durable and just peace could 
not be achieved without ensuring the sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of Bosnia-Herzegovina and the return of territories 
seized through aggression, ethnic cleansing or genocide. 

