CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jean de Galard: "The Italian Defense Industry Is </F>
Restructuring"--first paragraph is AIR &amp; COSMOS/AVIATION 
MAGAZINE INTERNATIONAL introduction] 
  [Text] Seven companies of the state-owned group EFIM 
[Manufacturing Industry Holding and Financial Company] are now 
under Finmeccanica's control. 
  In recent months, Italian manufacturers in the aircraft, 
aerospace, communications, land, air and sea weapon sectors have 
witnessed the formation of an incipient integrated 
defense-industry pole in their country. 
  In liquidation under court supervision since the summer of 
1992, the state-owned EFIM group had to allow Finmeccanica, the 
leader of the heavy mechanics activities of the IRI (Institute 
for Industrial Reconstruction) holding, to take control of seven 
of the companies that used to be part of the EFIM group: SMA 
(Naval and Air Signaling Company), Selsmar Italia, Galileo 
Vacuum, OTO Sistemi Civil, Microcontro, Officine Galileo, 
Galileo Siscam, Breda Meccanica Bresciana, OTO Melara, Agusta, 
and Elicotteri Meridionali. 
  Last year, the total sales of these companies amounted to 
the 
equivalent of nearly 8 billion French francs [Fr]. During the 
same period, Finmeccanica's military sales, especially sales of 
Alenia defense systems, represented the equivalent of Fr15 
billion. 
  One of the first consequences of this incipient 
restructuring 
was Finmeccanica's recent decision to pool the activities of SMA 
and Galileo with those of the radar manufacturer FIAR 
[IRI-Finmeccanica]. 
  The previous Italian government had marked its will to 
regroup the Italian defense industry around two poles: on the 
one hand, the IRI; on the other hand Fiat (with its 
affiliated/associated companies BPD [Fiat group] for missiles 
and ammunition, Valsella in the very specialized field of 
antipersonnel mines, and Gilardini for defense systems). To be 
successfully carried out, this restructuring implied that one or 
several companies belonging to the Finmeccanica group would take 
over the activities of Agusta and Elicotteri Meridionali (the 
only two Italian helicopter manufacturers), those of Breda 
Meccanica (guns and naval weapons), and those of Oto Melara 
(land and naval artillery, missiles). Since the previous 
government was unable to see the operation through, the new 
government will have to decide how to go about it--either in the 
near future, which seems unlikely when one reads the Italian 
press; or later. 
  Without waiting for this later stage, Alenia for its part 
has 
already reorganized the internal structure of its aeronautical 
activities with the dual concern of reducing costs and being 
able to react quicker and more efficiently on its markets. 
Headed by Nino D'Angelo and his assistant Ciro Cirillo, the 
aeronautical division of Alenia consists of three organic units: 
military aircraft, civil aircraft, and 
aerostructures--performing three operational functions: 
engineering, operations, procurement. As for the personnel 
division, it is divided into four branches: sales, quality, 
management and control, and data systems and computerization. 
  In the field of air traffic control, Alenia continues its 
worldwide expansion. Belarus supervising authorities 
(Balaereonavgatsia) just entrusted it with the construction and 
equipment of an air traffic control center (ATCR-33K approach 
radar and CDS-2000 display consoles, MARA computers to be 
manufactured in Russia by Buran, a company with which Alenia is 
cooperating). The first instalment of the contract covers the 
modernization of the Minsk airport. 

