Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lieutenant-General Yu. Krasnikov] </F>
  [Text] In connection with the end of the Soviet Union's 
existence, the destruction of its military-strategic space, the 
appearance of new sovereign states and armies, and the reduction 
of the armed forces of the Russian Federation, there is an 
urgent need to reform the engineer troops. The goal of such 
reforms is to create the most expedient organization and 
establishment both in peacetime and wartime; a substantial 
increase in the capabilities both of the engineer troops and 
combined-arms large units and units for carrying out engineer 
support missions and, above all, for field fortification 
activity and camouflage of troops and installations. The reforms 
will make it possible to provide the engineer troops with 
qualitatively new engineer munitions and equipment, including 
dual-purpose, with a simultaneous reduction in the nomenclatures 
of single-purpose models. And the most important thing is the 
advance engineer preparation of strategic areas and increasing 
the effectiveness of command and control systems of the engineer 
troops based on broad introduction of automated systems. 
  Today, large units, units, and institutions of the engineer 
troops of the armed forces of the Russian Federation are charged 
with complex and crucial tasks. Above all, these are: 

  -  maintaining combat and mobilization readiness of engineer 
large units, military units, and institutions; participating in 
cleaning up after accidents, catastrophes, and natural disasters 
and assisting the population; 
  -  clearing areas of explosive 
objects; 
  -  protecting bridges and other water engineering 
structures from drifting ice and floods; 
  -  and conducting 
defensive construction. 

    In wartime, the engineer troops carry out missions for 
ensuring the survivability and maneuver of troops in all stages 
of their combat activities. They pin down the maneuver of enemy 
troops and inflict losses on the enemy with engineer assets. The 
main missions: 

  -  are engineer reconnaissance of the enemy, terrain, and 
installations; 
  -  fortification of areas, lines, and positions 
occupied by troops and deployment areas of command 
posts; 
  -  setting up and maintaining artificial obstacles, 
including those installed by remote minelaying; preparing and 
maintaining troop avenues of advance; 
  -  equipping and maintaining 
crossings; 
  -  obtaining and purifying water and setting up 
water-supply points; 
  -  performing engineer measures for 
camouflaging troops; and others. 

    The main feature of the missions carried out by the engineer 
troops is the trend toward increasing the volume of work and 
complication of the conditions for carrying them out with a 
simultaneous reduction in the time periods. Here one cannot 
avoid changes in the organizational structure, development of 
military-technical policy, and determining the priority 
directions in the development of the theory and practice of 
engineer support. 
  As far as engineer munitions and equipment are concerned, 
they must correspond to the specific support missions inherent 
to each armed service (combat arm). The technical 
characteristics and properties of the combat equipment must be 
such that they make it possible to carry out any mission. In 
this regard, it calls for the development and series production 
of special engineer munitions and equipment intended only for 
the troops and dual-purpose engineer munitions and equipment (in 
the troops and the national economy); national economic assets 
taken for the troops for engineer support purposes. 
  One of the primary tasks is to achieve parity on the 
technical level with the engineer munitions and armament of NATO 
armies and superiority over them for the most important models 
by creating equipment on new physical principles. That is why 
the basic directions in the development of engineer 
reconnaissance equipment may become integrated multipurpose 
engineer reconnaissance equipment with automated information 
processing and transmission to automated command and control 
systems, which make it possible at various ranges to detect 
minefields and receive information about the terrain; creating 
engineer munitions with artificial intelligence components; and 
also developing remote minelaying engineer systems, including 
using rocket-propelled systems and airborne platforms. 
  This also includes the further development of means of 
camouflage of troops, armament, military equipment, and military 
installations from enemy ground, air, and space reconnaissance 
assets, integrated reconnaissance and strike systems and 
reconnaissance and fire systems; creating highly protected and 
robotized vehicles for laying troop movement routes in 
conditions of massive obstacles and destruction; performing work 
in areas of radioactive contamination of the terrain, including 
by the destruction of nuclear power plants; standardizing the 
bridge train equipment with the capability to set up bridge 
crossings and raft and ferry crossings on rivers having fast 
currents with a simultaneous increase in their traffic and 
load-carrying capacity. 
  Scientific research and experimental design work certainly 
will be conducted taking into account the creation of complexes 
(families) of vehicles on common base chassis, which will make 
it possible to standardize engineer munitions and equipment. 
  But, as we know, man runs the machines. Therefore, the 
following must be placed at the basis of operational training of 
engineer officers: 

  -  improving their knowledge in the area of military art and 
military engineering; 
  -  developing practical skills in planning 
and making sound decisions on engineer support of operations 
(combat) and communicating assignments to troops; 
  -  organizing 
coordination and comprehensive support of subordinate troops 
when they are accomplishing assigned missions; 
  -  arranging the 
work of bodies and control posts of the chief of the engineer 
troops (service) using modern equipment (automated command and 
control systems). 

    In the interests of reducing the decision-making time, as 
experience has shown, it is advisable to develop and introduce 
such methods which enable officers of the engineer troops to 
quickly conduct the necessary calculations and make sound 
decisions for organizing the execution of engineer support 
missions. It is to this end that the collective of authors under 
the direction of Lieutenant-General V. Vasilyev did a 
considerable amount of work, the results of which you will see 
in this issue of the journal. 

