Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Speaking Up For Xi"] </F>
  [Text] The Chinese authorities' silence over the fate of 
Hong Kong journalist Xi Yang continues to cause concern. He has 
been tried--in secret but is still awaiting a verdict on a 
charge of "espionage regarding state secrets on banking." And 
more than five months after his arrest, he has still not been 
allowed to receive visits from anyone except his father--who 
only saw him once last November. Since then, he has 
communicated with no one, including his employer, Ming Pao 
chairman Yu Pun-hoi. 
  The Hong Kong Journalists' Association's petition to local 
deputies to the National People's Congress and the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference to speak up on his 
behalf is therefore as welcome as it is timely. 
  Xi's treatment may be in accordance with Chinese law. But it 
falls far short of what Hong Kong people expect of their own 
legal system and fails to offer any reassurance that similar 
cases will not be treated with equal high-handedness after 1997. 
China's definition of espionage is not clear. For all Hong 
Kong media are aware, Xi may have been doing no more than a Hong 
Kong journalist regards as normal professional research. The 
harsh punishment handed out to a Chinese journalist who leaked a 
speech by President Jiang Zemin to a reporter from the Express 
is an indication of the different weight the two cultures place 
on particular kinds of information. 
  If our delegates to the CPPCC and NPC are brave enough to 
speak out publicly on Xi's behalf, they will be doing themselves 
and Hong Kong's interests more good than if they waste their 
time putting forward sycophantic motions supporting what China 
is already known to be planning for the territory after 1997. 
  There are indications that China may be influenced by 
whether 
the U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher raises Xi's case 
on his visit to Beijing this week. If so, it is vital that the 
importance of the case be impressed on Mr Christopher and his 
advisers as soon as he arrives on Chinese soil. 
  That message will come across louder and clearer if some of 
Hong Kong's most pro-Beijing voices are prepared to make a 
public stand on Xi's behalf than if the territory remains silent 
and cravenly accepts he is guilty as charged even before the 
verdict has been handed down. 

