BFN 

  [Text] Tehran, May 25, IRNA -- The Persian daily 
`JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI' here Wednesday [25 May] in a political 
commentary, termed partition of Yemen as a treachery to people's 
ideals. The paper said that the declaration of the break up of 
Yemen's unification by the Aden government and formation of a 
5-man Presidential Council was as deplorable as the undesirable 
performance of Sanaa leaders in running the state during the 
past four years. 
  This has proven the inefficiency of the Yemeni leaders, the 
paper said adding that the leaders both in the north and the 
south are not concerned about the country and the nation. The 
article criticized the northerners for following a policy of 
taking vengeance on the statesmen of the south, and added that 
the very same policy led to injustice, discrimination, unjust 
distribution of power and overlooking solutions offered by the 
experts from south during these years. 
  The organized propaganda against the political and economic 
performance of the southern rulers and unjustified criticism of 
the dismissed southern statesmen as well as aggrandizing the 
image of the Sanaa regime, indeed, are the main causes of 
discord, dissatisfaction and hostility between the two, added 
the daily. 
  Not only these factors but the foreign instigations 
including 
the destructive and seditious role of the corrupt Saudi 
Government made the southerners to seek separation and partition 
just on the anniversary of the unification of the country, it 
said. The paper further argued that if the northerners did not 
follow a proper policy in the administraton of the country 
during the recent years, the southerners too were not 
trustworthy elements for the Yemeni people. 
  Therefore, said the article, if one day the Yemeni nation is 
given an opportunity to freely participate in a healthy 
elections, they would not vote for the present leaders of both 
parts of Yemen. 
  However, the paper argued, Yemenis have realized that the 
leaders of their country never took into consideration the 
national interests in their diplomacy and administration of the 
country but merely focused their attention on gaining absolute 
power. 
  The paper concluded saying that the Yemenis think that the 
prosperity and stability of their country are subject to the 
preservation of unification, national sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of their country. 

