BFN 

<F P=106> [Studio interview with Foreign Minister 'Ali Akbar Velayati </F>
by unidentified correspondent; date not given; from the 
"Political Roundtable" program -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Correspondent] Your Excellency, Mr. Velayati: 
Once again I thank you for taking part in the program. As my 
first question, the concluding statement of the session of the 
foreign ministers of the member countries of the Nonaligned 
Movement [NAM] has stressed a number of points that show the 
movement's political activity. Before the recent session, the 
inactivity of the NAM raised a number of questions pertaining to 
the survival of the movement. Why did such activity take the 
form that it took? 
  [Velayati] In the name of God, the merciful, the 
compassionate, I greet the dear viewers and thank you for 
preparing this program. I should mention that your view is 
correct. That is, during a period after the collapse of the 
former Soviet Union and the so-called eastern camp, the NAM 
became confused for a while. As you mentioned, some people were 
doubtful about the continuation of an active life for the 
movement. [passage omitted] 
  During the recent Cairo session, as you mentioned, we saw a 
revival of the NAM. South Africa is the most significant 
African country, with its revolution against apartheid having 
recently succeeded and with a particular credibility throughout 
the world. South Africa's membership in the NAM and the active 
participation of its foreign minister in the Cairo session is a 
good sign of the revival of the NAM. The active participation 
of the foreign minister of Bosnia is the same. Also various 
other activities, which we will mention, all indicate that the 
movement is active. Active countries of the Third World -- 
revolutionary countries that have problems with the West and the 
current system that rules the world -- all speak about the fact 
that people have regained their optimism for the NAM. 
  [Correspondent] Numerous international issues were discussed 
by the movement, including a discussion on the Zionist regime. 
Would you please give some explanation on this? 
  [Velayati] The stance of NAM regarding the Zionist regime is 
a special stance, which has been so from the beginning. It 
began in 1358 [year beginning 21 March 1979], when the Islamic 
Republic of Iran joined the NAM, and has continued up to the 
present. I can tell you, the movement's stance regarding the 
Palestine issue has remained virtually unchanged. The NAM 
members have always laid emphasis on the implementation of the 
UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338. Those resolutions 
do not mean the liberation of all of the occupied territories 
but require, or, rather, guarantee the liberation of those 
territories that were occupied in the 1967 war. Naturally, we 
opposed that thinking, but I can tell you that in the movement 
we have been almost alone in this regard from the beginning. 
  The decision-making method in the movement is such that if 
90 
or more percent of the movement members agree on an issue and 
several states oppose it, then that issue is adopted and the 
states opposing it declare their reservation. Regarding 
Palestine, in the past, whether at the summit sessions -- where 
the honorable President Mr. Hashemi-Rafsanjani; Engineer Musavi, 
former Islamic Republic of Iran prime minister; and the exalted 
leader [Khamene'i], when he held the presidency, took part -- or 
at the foreign ministers' gatherings, the NAM stance concerning 
Palestine has always been different from that of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran. Therefore, they used to make a decision and 
we would declare our reservation. Not even once did they adopt a 
position that would coincide with the position we sought -- 
neither there, nor at the Islamic Conference Organization 
sessions, nor at the UN. 
  [Correspondent] You referred to Bosnia. What action and 
what coordination was undertaken in this regard? 
  [Velayati] It was the first time that the NAM unanimously 
adopted a resolution prepared by the IRI and Malaysia. It was 
first proposed by Malaysia after consultations with us. The 
session decided that the IRI and Malaysia should consult with 
each other and prepare a text. That is what we did and 
presented to the movement, and latter adopted it. That is the 
first time that a decisive stance has been taken in favor of 
Bosnia and against the Serbs, taking into account the fact that 
the Serbs consider themselves the inheritors of the former 
Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia was one of the founders of NAM and some 
of the older members of the movement had reservations regarding 
a condemnation of Serbia and Montenegro, or, as they called it, 
Yugoslavia Minor. But in the resolution the stance of the NAM 
movement was almost the same as that of the IRI and that was a 
positive development. 
  [Correspondent] The final statement of the NAM foreign 
ministers' session also considered issues such as disarmament, 
human rights and the environment. Would you make a statement on 
that? 
  [Velayati] I must say that the issues you referred to, that 
is disarmament, human rights and the environment, are several 
important issues at world level, especially in recent years. 
And the United Nations convenes independent sessions in 
connection with those important international issues or attached 
to others or other subjects [as heard]. If the states do not 
coordinate with each other -- third world states or developing 
states -- the wishes of the Western states or the permanent 
member states of the Security Council will be imposed on them. 
Among the IRI policies, whether in the Islamic Conference 
Organization [ICO] or in NAM, one is to coordinate these 
important international issues in those two organizations so 
that it can have the support of other states for those issues at 
commissions, committees, and forums where they are raised. 
  In the ICO we pioneered the human rights plan when it held a 
session in Pakistan, and following that the foreign ministry 
deputy for international affairs became the head of the 
Asia-Oceania human rights committee and the latter made 
decisions despite the presence of some states that supported the 
West. And that committee showed a great deal of efficiency, 
especially in the Vienna session. In the Vienna session the 
situation was such that Mr. Carter, the former U.S. president, 
was booed by those non-governmental organizations which had 
gathered there for human rights. And they failed to realize 
their points of view, which they intended to impose, because of 
the resistance of Iran and several other states. This time round 
we propagated that move into the NAM movement. And what was 
adopted there was almost what we had proposed in the specific 
committee. And that was a very good victory. That means that 
in international forums, those places where human rights are 
raised, 109 member states of the NAM movement have virtually the 
same stances and the crucial point which is common for all of us 
-- that common view has been achieved gradually. Some may have 
been -- perhaps under Western pressure -- against human rights 
in various countries being defined according to the traditions, 
values, and beliefs of those countries and communities, rather 
than being formed on the basis of Western beliefs which are 
mainly secular beliefs and are imposed on the rest of the world. 
That was good progress regarding human rights; and was adopted 
there. 
  Regarding disarmament the view of the movement is summarized 
in this sentence -- which is the same as our view. We are for 
disarmament, but against discrimination. It is not right that 
in the Middle East or various areas countries should be 
prohibited from possessing arms which are effective for their 
defense, while the arsenals of some countries -- which are the 
apples of their eyes, so to speak -- are brimming with nuclear, 
chemical, and conventional arms. That is not right. We are 
definitely against weapons of mass destruction but we ask why 
there should be discrimination in favor of some. Israel is a 
case in point. It is said that Israel has 800 nuclear weapons 
in its arsenals. That is the view of the NAM movement which 
coincides with our point of view. I was the person who first 
mooted that issue in the movement, in my speech. The rest 
followed suit and eventually it was adopted in a proper form. 
  [Correspondent] Also the issue of restructuring the system 
of 
international relations and the UN system was discussed. Which 
country raised the issue and, in principle, what does it entail? 
  [Velayati] Essentially the restructuring of the United 
Nations is being raised in all states, the international arena 
and the UN itself. Recently the U.S. President, in his visit to 
Europe, said that they support Japan and Germany's permanent 
membership in the Security Council. That in itself is, in 
reality, a disclosure about a part of a plan to restructure the 
United Nations. Then that issue, in its general form, is being 
raised in the whole of the international arena and all the 
states and all have come to believe that after the passing of 
about 50 years since the formation of the United Nations a 
restructure must be carried out. But debates differ as to how 
that restructuring should be. As developing countries and 
members of the NAM movement, we believe that a special place 
must be allocated to us in the United Nations so that these 
states can put forward, as well as implement, their point of 
view there. 
  [Correspondent] I have another question to ask your 
excellency and that concerns the venue of the NAM foreign 
ministerial session. Why did the NAM choose Egypt as the venue 
for its 11th session? 
  [Velayati] The choice of the country is based on a proposal 
made by a country that wishes to host the session followed by 
the approval of the NAM member countries. It does not work like 
this -- that the NAM decides to transfer the venue of the 
session to a certain country. Usually a country offers, and the 
offer is discussed and approved by the NAM. Egypt was also one 
of those countries; perhaps it was the only country that nearly 
the majority of the NAM members agreed upon as the location for 
the session. 
  [Correspondent] What was the reason for the Iranian 
delegation attending the recent session, bearing in mind that 
some people believe that perhaps the issue of Iran's relations 
with Egypt was also on the agenda? 
  [Velayati] I should mention that attending international 
sessions that are held at a certain country does not necessarily 
mean endorsing that country. Or it does not mean that efforts 
are underway to establish relations with that country, that is, 
if no relations exist. This is the international norm. Today 
so many international sessions take place in various parts of 
the world that this matter does not apply any more. If a 
country takes part in a session somewhere we cannot blame it for 
something that does not exist, unless, of course, other signals 
have been given. 
  We are members of more than 400 international organizations. 
Every day the officials from the Islamic Republic take part in 
meetings in one or several places in the world. This was not 
the first time that we took part in an international 
organization in Cairo. 
  The best example that supports this policy and shows that 
this policy existed in the past in the Islamic Republic -- 
whether at the time of the Imam, may he be admitted to God's 
paradise, or whether at the time of the esteemed leader 
[Khamene'i] -- that we take part in international organizations 
wherever they are held, with the exception of Israel; the best 
example for this is America. We go to New York to take part in 
the United Nations. Even more glaring than that, our economic 
and banking officials go to Washington to take part in the 
meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. 
Our presence in Washington to take part in the World Bank does 
not necessarily mean that we wish to establish relations with 
America. 
  Additionally, do the officials of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs not know that such sensitive political decisions would 
especially require the complete confirmation of the system? 
What policy do we wish to advance by doing this, or what are we 
trying to prevent? So, certainly, there has been no such 
intention. 
  These were some preliminary points in our discussion. 
However, on whether we should or should not take part in the 
Nonaligned Movement meeting even if it is in Egypt -- we 
certainly should take part. Today, everybody admits that we are 
one of the five or six most active members of the Nonaligned 
Movement. Our presence in the Nonaligned Movement is very 
decisive. I have enumerated some of the decisions that were 
adopted there as the result of the efforts of the Islamic 
Republic, and there are more cases. 
  In our absence, others will definitely not adopt policies 
that are in our interest. Whether we are present or not, the 
Nonaligned Movement will hold its session there. They will 
reach their decisions in our absence, but without taking our 
views into consideration. How would it be possible that we 
waste the results of our efforts over many years in the 
Nonaligned Movement through nonparticipation in these meetings? 
I should say that we cannot be absent from these meetings at 
the foreign ministers' level, which are held every three years 
and which perform a very basic role. 
  There have been these reasons. Therefore, the holy system of 
the Islamic Republic of Iran decided to take part in the 
Nonaligned Movement at the level of foreign minister, and we 
were authorized to take part. Of course, our own consultative 
view was also in support of this decision, but the final 
decisions on these sensitive issues regarding foreign policy do 
not rest with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. There are hardly 
any other areas in the decision-making process of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran that so much attention is paid to the decisions 
that are adopted. The source that adopts the basic lines of the 
foreign policy of Iran is definitely the highest decision-making 
source, which ultimately is approved by the esteemed leader. 
  [Announcer tries to interrupt, but Velayati continues] 
Therefore, it was the decision of the system that we should take 
part in the movement. It is also the decision of the system 
that we should even have international cooperation with Egypt. 
This decision had also been adopted in the past and it was 
reaffirmed and restated on the eve of the last session of the 
Nonaligned Movement. 
  Our presence in Egypt did not in any way mean the 
establishment of diplomatic relations. We had no such 
intentions. Our government is sincere with its people, and it 
informs the people about what it decides. The decision of our 
government, of the system of the Islamic Republic of Iran, was 
not to establish relations with Egypt by going there. As his 
excellency the president said in his remarks a few days ago, the 
decision was that we should take part in the meeting of the 
Nonaligned Movement. Let me add this -- and this has not been 
said before -- that we have been both allowed and indeed tasked 
to work with Egypt in the field of international activities. 
  [Correspondent] One of the issues mentioned in the final 
communique was the issue of Iraq. In the near future you will 
be visiting Iraq. Will the decisions taken by the NAM be 
discussed during this visit or not? 
  [Velayati] I should say that it is not definite that my 
visit 
will take place in the near future; but it is highly probable 
that it will be in the near future. The main aim behind the 
visit to Iraq is to remove some of the difficulties which exist 
in our relations. Some of the paragraphs of UN Resolution 598 
have not yet been implemented, or have not been implemented 
fully. We must continue our talks with Iraq, so that the 
paragraphs which have either not been implemented or which have 
been partly implemented will be implemented or will be fully 
implemented. 
  At the same time, these visits and talks will definitely 
result in improving relations between Iran and Iraq. One of the 
areas where we can cooperate with Iraq is definitely on the 
international stage and on the stage of the NAM. At the moment, 
Iraq's stance regarding the issue of Palestine is close to the 
stance of the Islamic Republic, based on what I heard and 
witnessed from their foreign minister in the recent session of 
the NAM. 
  [Correspondent] There are many other questions on Lebanon, 
on 
Yemen, and on the next NAM summit meeting and its venue, but as 
time is short I will leave them for now. If you wish to briefly 
say something in the form of summing up please do so. 
  [Velayati] I should say that today the national interests of 
the countries can be threatened from outside their borders much 
more than before. Therefore, it is the duty of governments, 
including our duty as those serving the holy order of the 
Islamic Republic, to reduce, diminish, or eliminate these 
threats as much as we can through our efforts. 
  Today, the international scene is the most important arena 
for reaching decisions for or against various countries. What 
is happening to Iraq today, what has happened to Libya, the 
pressure which is being exerted over North Korea, what took 
place in Bosnia, what happened in Somalia, the decisions on all 
of those were taken almost entirely on the international arena. 
If they wish to exert pressure on the Islamic Republic of Iran, 
today it is very unlikely that this can be done on a bilateral 
basis. What will be done will be on the international scene. 
  Our people quite rightly expect the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs to be present on the international stage and to defend 
the rights of the Islamic Republic of Iran. If we sit in the 
Islamic Republic and through various excuses refuse to attend 
various international organizations -- at times, some of these 
excuses which are recommended to us by certain circles are also 
very childish -- and if we are content with merely issuing 
statements...[pauses] If our Ministry of Foreign Affairs does 
not take part in, for instance, the nonaligned meeting, or the 
UN session, or the ICO session, each of them due to a different 
reason -- the ICO because it was held in Jeddah, the nonaligned 
meeting because it was held in Cairo, or such and such a UN 
conference has been held in some part of Europe -- if we say 
that due to this we will not attend them; if instead of going 
there, making an effort, accepting some risks, and fighting 
against conspiracies, we sit here and only issue very 
strongly-worded statements, such statements will definitely have 
no credibility on the international stage. 
  Definitely, our people would not be happy with that. The 
people wish the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to be active. They 
would like the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to find a way through 
the maze of the complex problems and difficulties and through 
all the interrelated and complicated difficulties and obstacles 
which exist in the present world, and which are specially 
imposed on us by our enemies. They would like us to find a way 
out of this maze and to resolve the problems. 
  Of course, it is much more difficult for us to be present in 
international organizations and to make efforts to take one step 
in the interest of the Islamic Republic, rather than sit inside 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and issue statements. Issuing 
statements and adopting harsh positions will not be very 
difficult for us, or for the employees of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. What is hard is to be present in international 
arena, it is to go to the centers of danger. 
  We will certainly take risks to advance our foreign policy. 
See, right now, the deputy minister of foreign affairs is in 
Afghanistan. At the moment, there is no other ambassador in 
Kabul except the ambassador of the Islamic Republic. Our 
embassy has been razed to the ground and our ambassador is 
living in a shelter. At the height of the crisis in Beirut our 
ambassador or charge d'affaires was there. The third embassy 
which was opened in Sarajevo was the embassy of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran. To go to those places is to face danger. 
Nevertheless, we will accept these dangers with open arms if we 
can untie a knot from the problems of the people. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Velayati, thank you for giving us your 
time. 

