BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 1 May (NOTIMEX) -- Osvaldo Martinez, 
chairman of the Economic Commission of the National Assembly of 
the People's Government, said that his country will implement a 
socialist economic model with private property, market laws, and 
the strong presence of foreign capital. 
  In an interview published this Sunday by the government 
weekly JUVENTUD REBELDE, Martinez said the island's authorities 
must find solutions in a capitalist market ruled by 
monetary-commercial laws. 
  The publication of this interview coincides with a special 
Assembly session during which Jose Luis Rodriguez, finance and 
prices minister, outlined a strict adjustment program which, he 
insisted, is not a neoliberal shock plan. 
  The Assembly member said the search for efficiency in the 
island's economy is "a matter of life or death", with only 31 
percent of the enterprises producing an income, according to 
official figures. 
  The official added that 1994 continues to be difficult for 
the Cuban economy, but the first signs of long-term recovery are 
being seen. 
  Martinez said tourism represents the first positive aspect 
of 
the Caribbean country's economic activities, with a growth rate 
of 30 percent per year; and, according to government sources, it 
will surpass the sugar industry as the country's main source of 
income. 
  The National Assembly leader said that increased production 
of domestic oil, with its high sulfur content, is expected to 
exceed last year's 1.1 billion tons in 1994. 
  The exploitation of new forms of state-owned lands, where 
former employees now organized in cooperatives have the right to 
use the land, has resulted in an increase in the production of 
food, he said. 
  The state has a monopoly on the marketing of new 
cooperatives 
that have replaced inefficient state-owned farms that were 
operated by agricultural workers for a salary. 
  According to Martinez, the measures adopted by the 
government 
to put its internal finances on a sound basis will have positive 
effects in the near future, although its essential effects will 
need no less than a year and a half to mature. 
  Martinez said Cuba will leave the crisis behind by the end 
of 
the century "by resuming the economic growth process but also by 
achieving a different economy -- qualitatively speaking." 
  It must be an economy in which we have a strong state sector 
that sets guidelines and operates more through decentralized 
mechanisms in which economic considerations play a more 
important role than administrative considerations, he explained. 
  The legislator said that plans for this model will involve a 
much more important role for the market and a strong presence of 
foreign capital, which Cuba has encouraged since the 
disintegration of the Soviet Union and the Eastern European 
socialist bloc. 
  In Martinez' opinion, these changes do not alter the 
essential basis of Cuban society, which is compelled to forge 
ahead in a world ruled by capitalism. 
  The economy will still be socialist, which means that 
political decisions will be made by the central government and 
that politics will rule the economy, meaning it will be 
subordinate and aimed at achieving the goals of socialism, 
Martinez said. 

