BFN 

  [Text] The Serbs have withdrawn from their positions around 
Gorazde, thus breaking the stalemate in the Bosnia-Herzegovina 
cease-fire negotiations in Geneva. A Croat-Bosniak delegation 
presented its views on the cease-fire conditions, and Federation 
President Kresimir Zubak commented on the UN proposals. 
Croatian TV journalist Jozo Curic has a report from Geneva: 
  [Begin recording] [Curic] Can you explain in brief which 
parts of the UN proposals are unacceptable to the Federation and 
what the essence of the Federation's new proposal is? 
  [Zubak] We do not consider acceptable the parts of the 
proposal offered to us setting out that the cease-fire ought to 
last for four months, with the separation of forces 2 km from 
each side of the current front line, and the withdrawal of heavy 
weapons, over 12.7-mm, to a distance of 20 km from the current 
front lines. We do not consider good the proposal that the UN 
Protection Forces [UNPROFOR] should be deployed between us. We 
believe, on the basis of Croatia's experience, that this may 
freeze the present situation for a longer period of time, and if 
a political solution is not reached, then this solution would be 
a preparation for some other political solutions. 
  [Curic] What is the essence of the new proposal put forward 
by the Federation? 
  [Zubak] We are proposing that this cease-fire period should 
be for four to six weeks, and that intensive political talks in 
that period leading to a comprehensive resolution of the crisis 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina, a political agreement, should continue. 
We have likewise proposed that heavy weapons should not be 
withdrawn 20 km from the front lines, but should be collected at 
several points, just as in Sarajevo, and that UNPROFOR control 
over these weapons should be secured. We also consider that 
personnel should not be withdrawn 2 km from the current 
frontlines, and think that UNPROFOR should not be deployed 
between us; instead, UNPROFOR should be behind our backs and 
behind our enemies, monitoring from there whether we are 
observing the cease-fire agreement and to what extent. [end 
recording] 

