BFN 

<F P=106> ["Standpoint" column by Mu'ayyad 'Abd-al-Zahrah: "These </F>
Iranian Claims and Calumnies"] 
  [Text] Iran has made claims about the arrest of several 
Iranian men of religion who live in Iraq. We will be revealing 
nothing new if we say the Tehran regime has told such obvious 
lies about Iraq before, told them during and after the war, and 
still tells them, up to this moment. Its various organizations 
are accustomed to making claims, telling lies, disseminating 
false reports, and distorting facts in order to level all kinds 
of accusations and to justify their instigation, subversion, and 
impertinent interferences. Their record in this field has a 
beginning but no end. It will apparently end only with their 
downfall and demise. This is probably because Iraq, which has 
exposed their aggressive tendencies, buried their criminal 
adventures, suppressed their well-known greed, and put an end to 
their calumnies, has confused them, uncovered them, and exposed 
their bankrupt policy and evil nature. 
  Iraq is accustomed to hearing these lies from the 
ayatollahs' 
regime. It expects to hear even more from time to time, because 
this is their way of avoiding the overwhelming political, 
economic, and internal problems threatening their overthrow. 
Therefore, we were not surprised when they readily announced 
that Iraq was behind the recent big explosion in the Iranian 
capital, although opposition Islamic Iranian groups in Pakistan 
claimed responsibility for the explosion. 
  Iraq has shown flexibility by expressing unlimited positive 
readiness to settle its outstanding problems with Iran by 
peaceful means, on the basis of noninterference in each other's 
affairs, and respecting each other's sovereignty. This 
flexibility expresses Iraq's great desire to end the dispute 
with Iran. It was and is met with more arrogance, evasion, and 
a continuing policy of treachery and interference in the 
internal affairs of Iraq. This is happening now in the northern 
part of the homeland and in other areas, via infiltration and 
sabotage. We have enough evidence to expose all these 
continuous evil and mean Iranian practices and tendencies. 
  Persisting in making these repeated claims against Iraq is a 
miserable old policy. It has lost any of its long since exposed 
currency, as in the case of the fact finding mission's recent 
statement refuting Iran's false claims about Iraqi use of 
chemical weapons in the marshlands. 
  These people had better hide in shame -- if they are ashamed 
of themselves -- now that their lies have been exposed to the 
whole world. We will not say that Iranians know the lies of the 
ayatollahs even better. But we advise Tehran's rulers, as we 
have often done, to tend to their own internal affairs and be 
sure about where they stand, instead of poking their noses into 
other people's business and making phony accusations. Their 
anxieties and misgivings are their own affair. They should try 
to cope with them, instead of resorting to the escapist policy 
that characterizes their crippled regime. 
  The policy of repeated claims and fabricated lies about our 
country, which the Iranian rulers handle so well, shows the 
major hatred and hostility harbored by that regime. It reflects 
their increasing fear of powerful Iraq, the only country that 
taught them a lesson, defeated their expansionist and aggressive 
policy, and exposed the fallacy of their resounding slogans. 

