Infant   Mortality Statistics 

<F P=102> 947C0270A Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI in Russian No. 28, 10 
Sep. 93 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> 947C0270A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by A. Demin, Consultant to the Russian Federation </F>
President Service; `Kalmykia Phenomenon Awaiting Analysis' under 
the rubric of ``For the health-conscious''] 
  [Text] The mortality of children under the age of one 
(infant mortality--MS) is conventionally treated as one of the 
principal integral indicators of the population health and 
survival status. In its democratic policy, the Russian 
Federation should treat it as a high priority item and attempt 
to decrease infant mortality, preserve the life and health of 
low- birth-weight and premature babies, and decrease the 
frequency of abortions. 
  We just received State Statistical Committee data showing 
that during the first six months of 1993, 14,690 infants died in 
the Russian Federation vs. 15,491 infants during the same period 
of 1992. Yet adjusted for 1,000 births, the infant mortality 
index amounted to 19.1 and 17.7, respectively (1993 as a 
percentage of the same period of 1992, i.e., 107.9%). 
Thus, the 
average figures for Russia reveal a certain deterioration in the 
situation in this field. 
  Yet the experts foresaw such an increase of these very sad 
indicators since one should keep in mind the effect of the 
implementation of the new concept of live and still birth in 
Russian practices according to the World Health Organization 
(VOZ) criteria. According to preliminary expert estimates, it 
may lead to a 20% increase in the infant mortality level 
by 
improving the comparability of the Russian Federation and 
foreign indicators. In the developed European countries, the 
United States, Canada, Australia, and Japan, the infant 
mortality rate is 5-9 per 1,000 live births. 
  There is one more issue which should be taken into account 
in 
analyzing the State Statistical Committee data: considerable 
discrepancies between the country's territories with respect to 
most health indicators, including the infant mortality level. 
  These distinctions were also maintained during January-June 
1993 (map 1). The lowest levels are noted in Khalmg-Tangch in 
the republic of Kalmykia and the highest--in the Chukchi 
autonomous district, the republic of Tuva, Jewish autonomous 
district, Chechen and Ingush republics, and the republic of 
Altay. A level of 23 or more cases per 1,000 births was also 
recorded in Krasnoyarsk kray and Kurgan, Irkutsk, and Ulyanovsk 
oblasts. 
  Map 1 [not reproduced]: Infant mortality in Russian 
Federation republics, krays, and oblasts in January-June 1993 
(cases per 1,000 births). 10.8 in republic of Kalmykia, 30.6 in 
Chukchi autonomous district, 16.2 in Moscow, 18.7 in St. 
Petersburg, and 29.4 in Jewish autonomous district. 
  It is also important to assess the infant mortality trends 
territory by territory. The most significant infant mortality 
decrease was noted in the republic of Kalmykia (60%). The 
proportion of decrease is so high that the Kalmykia phenomenon 
certainly calls for a thorough analysis. A considerable drop was 
also observed in Murmansk, Penza, and Kaluga oblasts. Yet in 
many territories, infant mortality rose. The developing 
situation in the Astrakhan, Ivanovo, and Orel oblasts, St. 
Petersburg, Kurgan, and Lipetsk oblasts, Kabardino-Balkar 
republic, and Ryazan oblast causes special alarm. 
  In analyzing the causes of the infant mortality pattern in 
Russia as a whole, one can note an increase in the mortality 
indicator during January- June 1993 relative to the same period 
in 1992 for the principal causes, most of which include the 
following: accidents, poisoning, and trauma (125%), 
digestive 
tract diseases (123.1%), and infectious and parasitic 
diseases 
(113.1%). 
  The noted increase in the infant mortality indices is seen 
against the backdrop of falling birth rates where mortality 
rates exceeds birth rates over most of the Russian territory and 
in Russia on average. Due to the aforesaid peculiarities, it 
would be expedient to analyze and assess the reasons for the 
increase in mortality, primarily in the most affected 
territories, in order to take immediate necessary and 
coordinated measures at federal and local levels. Of course, the 
experience of territories at which a decrease in infant 
mortality coupled with low levels of this indicator is noted is 
especially valuable. 
  Yet a coordinated effort is also necessary for the 
territories where a high level of infant mortality and an 
increase in the infant mortality indicator was noted in 
January-June of this year. The worst among these are the Chukchi 
and Jewish autonomous districts and Kurgan and Irkutsk oblasts. 


