BFN 

  [Text] Voting is reported to be going slowly at some of the 
polling stations in the six regions where voting has been 
extended. Reports say that some polling stations in Venda have 
closed and that voting is very slow at others. Several stations 
are expected to close before 7 PM this evening. Meanwhile, the 
Independent Electoral Commission has said that virtually nobody 
has turned up at some polling stations in Ciskei. Earlier this 
afternoon it was reported that there were problems in Transkei 
and that only 19 of the 52 polling stations in the (Indutiwa) 
district were opened. 
  Officials in the (Umgamakwe) district are apparently still 
waiting for ballot papers. However, voting is reported to be 
brisk in areas in Transkei where ballot papers have been 
delivered. Latest reports in Zululand indicate that voting is 
still continuing peacefully and very few voters are still 
waiting to cast their ballots. The first tally counts from 
counting stations across the country will be released tomorrow 
noon at the earliest. IEC commissioners said at Gallagher 
Estate, Midrand, that the counting of votes would begin at 7AM 
tomorrow morning, all being well. 
  IEC Commissioner Ron Gould said that ballots would be 
counted 
in batches of about 3,000. Before counting began, however, 
ballot papers would have to be sorted and spoilt ballots put to 
one side. Provincial and national ballots would be counted at 
the same time. Tally counts would be broadcast by the SABC 
[South African Broadcasting Corporation] as soon as they are 
made available. 
  The chairman of the IEC, Mr. Justice Johann Kriegler, says 
the election has been an outstanding success despite logistical 
hitches in some areas. Judge Kriegler and Commissioner Ron 
Gould appealed to the public to be patient while waiting for 
results as counting would be complicated by emergency decisions 
taken during the electoral process. Mr. Gould said that most of 
IEC officials doing the counting had never counted ballots 
before and that they were being trained to cope with unusual 
circumstances such as ballots with no IFP stickers on them. 

