BFN 

<F P=106> ["Joint Communique of the Heads of Government of the </F>
Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia, and the Republic of 
Lithuania" issued in Tallinn on 13 June; from the Latvian 
Foreign Ministry Information Bulletin No. 24/94 (55), 13-20 
June; received via Internet BALT-L] 
  [Text] We, the Heads of Government of the Baltic States, 
exchanged views on the troop withdrawal agreement signed by 
Latvia and the Russian Federation on April 30, 1994, and on the 
progress of the negotiations between Estonia and the Russian 
Federation. 
  We continue to demand that all military forces of the 
Russian 
Federation must be unconditionally withdrawn from the 
territories of Estonia and Latvia by August 31, 1994, and we 
urge the international community to continue to call on Russia 
to respect this deadline. We expressed our conviction that the 
Russian Federation's policy of linking unrelated bilateral 
issues with the implementation of most- favoured-nation status 
in trade relations with the Baltic States is in violation of 
principles of GATT and of good-neighbourly relations. 
  We exchanged views on our countries' negotiations on Free 
Trade Agreements with the European Union. We expressed our 
preparedness to proceed to Europe Agreements and called on the 
Council of the European Union to issue the mandate for 
negotiations of Europe Agreements with the Baltic States as soon 
as possible. 
  We expressed our particular satisfaction with the adoption 
of 
the status of Association with the Western European Union for 
the nine countries of the Central Europe which were partners in 
the Forum of Consultation. We expressed our conviction that 
this will contribute to the more coherent and balanced 
integration of the Baltic States into European structures. 
  We welcomed the progress made in the implementation of the 
Partnership for Peace programme, and reaffirmed the desire of 
our states to deepen cooperative relations with NATO on the 
basis of common values and principles, paving the way for the 
active and interested partners to play an important role in the 
evolutionary process of the expansion of NATO. We see 
implementation of the Partnership for Peace as a good basis for 
proceeding from partnership to membership in the Alliance. 
  We noted the importance of assistance given by a number of 
states, especially the Nordic countries, for the establishment 
of the Baltic Peacekeeping Battalion. In this respect, we noted 
that practical cooperation in the framework of Partnership for 
Peace would be an important contribution to the implementation 
and promotion of goals of the Partnership. We agreed to 
elaborate, as soon as possible, an agreement concerning the 
mobilities for the establishment and functioning of the Baltic 
Peacekeeping Battalion. We also discussed the situation in 
Ukraine and agreed that with regard to Crimea we fully support 
the Ukrainian Government in their efforts to reach a peaceful 
solution consistent with the national security requirements of 
Ukraine. We concurred that the stable development of Ukraine is 
of utmost importance to stability in Europe. 
  Tallinn, 13 June 1994 

