BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, April 26 (KCNA) -- Yi Song-ho, acting 
chairman of the C.C. [Central Committee], the DPRK Red Cross 
Society, in a telephone message to Kang Yong-hun, president of 
the South Korean Red Cross today, strongly urged that if the 
South Korean Red Cross is really interested in the solution of 
the humanitarian issue, it should return to the original stand 
of the Red Cross, though belatedly, and show an affirmative 
response to the North side's just demand for the repatriation of 
Kim In-so and Ham Se-hwan, prisoners of war. 
  Recalling that the South Korean Red Cross in its telephone 
message dated April 22 denied Kim In-so and Ham Se-hwan being 
prisoners of war, the message contends that, according to the 
Hague Convention on the articles and practices of war of 1907 
and the August 12, 1949, Geneva Convention on the treatment of 
POWs, they who were active as guerrillas (militiamen) during the 
Korean war are, strictly speaking, prisoners of war and so they 
should naturally be treated as such. 
  Refuting the South side's argument that Kim and Ham are 
"criminals who murdered innocent people", the message says they 
are patriots who fought with arms in hand against foreign 
aggressors and the reactionary ruling quarters and traitors of 
South Korea. 
  As far as their "acquisition of (South Korean) nationality" 
is concerned, they did so to eke out existence because the South 
Korean side detained them, not sending them back, notes the 
message. 
  It says: 
  "Moreover, your side came up with the `separated families 
issue'", the questions of the return of crewmen of the ship 
`Tongjin', the resumption of Red Cross talks and other issues 
that have nothing to do with the repatriation of Kim In-so and 
Ham Se-hwan. This is a far-fetched argument prompted by its 
intention to refuse our just request for their repatriation. 
  "All the issues raised by your side in the telephone message 
this time have nothing to do with the repatriation of Kim In-so 
and Ham Se-hwan. Yet, your side is trying to refuse our just 
request by connecting them with it in a far-fetched way even 
through the fabrication of things. This cannot be viewed as an 
honest stand of the Red Cross men." 
  The telephone message says the South side must realize that 
such act is contrary to the idea of the Red Cross 
humanitarianism, an act manipulated by the authorities seeking 
North-South confrontation. 

