Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] New DelhI, Feb. 11 -- The `life-line' of air 
defence is Pechora missile and the No. 7 Base Repair Depot at 
Tuglaqabad keeps the missile system at optimal operational 
capability by carrying out regular maintenance, according to Air 
Commodore P.K. Ghosh, Air Officer Commanding, Tughlaqabad Air 
Force base. 
  Explaining the working of the base to a group of journalists 
who were taken round the depot here today, he said, "In the 
present geopolitical scenario missiles are of paramount 
importance". 
  The one-ton, six-metre long Pechora missile which is the 
most 
sophisticated is completely stripped to its individual parts 
along with the launcher and the missile guidance radar (MGR) as 
also the instruments in its control cabin. 
  About 750 personnel of the 1,200 at the base work on the 
different parts which are divided into as many as 300 
sub-assemblies each having thousands of parts. 
  The guided missile can look onto the enemy aircraft and 
going 
at the speed of Mach-4 (four times the speed of sound) around 
13200 metre per second destroys enemy aircraft within 11 to 17 
kilometre. 
  The life of the missile is 49 second and if it does not hit 
the target within that time it goes straight up and destroys 
itself. 
  The launchers are so synchronised that the radar and the 
missile simultaneously point towards the direction of the enemy 
aircraft. 
  As the target (hostile aircraft) is tracked by the MGR, the 
missile is automatically pointed towards the target. The entire 
operations being controlled from the control cabin of MGR where 
one can spot the hostile aircraft as a 'blip' as soon as it 
comes within the range of the radar. After tracking the 
aircraft the missiles electronically home on to the target. 
  The missile's range is 25 kilometre but generally the hit is 
made at a distance of 11 to 17 kilometre. 
  Once the missile homes on to the target then a kind of 
electronic relationship is established between the missile and 
the target and the movement of the missile continues to be 
guided by that of the aircraft automatically by a command 
guidance system. So the question of the enemy aircraft 
manoeuvring and escaping does not arise, as the missile remains 
continuously latched on to it. 
  The decision to launch the missile is taken by the alert IAF 
[Indian Air Force] officers depending on the combat 
considerations and the 'launch' button is pressed when the 
aircraft is well within the kill zone. 
  At a time when the radio signals being received from the 
aircraft by the missile become very high crossing a 
pre-determined threshold (showing the missile is close to the 
target) the missile automatically explodes its warhead which 
consists of metal pieces. 
  The explosion which is caused about 300 metre away from the 
aircraft forms a kind of spherical cloudburst of metalic pieces 
which the aircraft cannot avoid and goes straight into it. 
Being hit by the shrapnels at supersonic speeds the aircraft is 
usually destroyed or severely damaged. 
  The kill probability of hostile aircraft is of the order of 
100 per cent. 
  The MGR has been provided with necessary anti-jamming 
protection to effectively function even when jammed. 
  Two generators supply the power to the missile system so 
that 
if one fails the system can function without disruption. 
  The radar also has a television camera which can visually 
track the aircraft even at distance of 25 kilometre and supply 
visual data on a television screen inside the MGR so that if for 
some reason the radars don't give the signals automatically then 
manually trackers can track the aircraft with the visual input 
and fire the missile. 
  First and second line maintenance is carried out by the 
Squadron in the field and the third and fourth line repair 
(medium repair) as well as defect repairs beyond the squadrons 
capabilities are carried out here. 
  On induction equipment is stripped, examined by specialist 
tradesmen at the production wings under close supervision of 
specialist officers and quality assurance inspectors to access 
the quantum of deterioration and the quantum of work spares 
required to carry out the medium repair as per schedule of 
repair technology prepared by the manufacturers. The logistics 
support wing caters for the timely provisions of the 
spares/materials to undertake repairs by production shops. 
  The components of stripped down equipment pass through a 
series of medium repair operation, which include cleaning, 
washing, painting, cabin repairs, repair of electrical and 
electronic components, replacement of mandatory items and 
defective components, assembly of panel and checks against 
standard equipment (Stand Tuning), assembly of main equipment, 
functional test for serviceability, and endurance test for 
reliability of the equipment. 
  On completion of all the operations, all self-systems of the 
Pechora Missile System is connected together and comprehensive 
test of the system as a whole is carried out. On successful 
completion of this comprehensive test, Directorate of Air Staff 
Inspection carry out a thorough functional check of the complete 
Missile System as it would be deployed and used in a Squadron 
and it declares it fit to operational use. 
  As the missile is of Soviet origin, efforts are also being 
made to procure spares of Indian origin. 

