BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by M. Abizanda: "Reform of Army of Year 2000 in Its </F>
Final Stage"] 
  [Text] The Army General Staff is putting the finishing 
touches to what will be its organization at the beginning of the 
year 2000, which will entail a considerable reduction of 
personnel, prompted by the Personnel Law, and of units, because 
of the current shortages of personnel and funds. The main 
discussions right now center on the final makeup of the Rapid 
Action Force (FAR), with the uncertainty about whether or not it 
will have armored cavalry vehicles assigned to it and about the 
Airborne Brigade. The final drafting of the "Master Plan" 
["Plan Norte"] will be completed over the next few weeks for 
inclusion in the new Joint Strategic Plan. 
  The idea of reducing the number of Army units came from the 
General Staff itself during Lieutenant General Ramon Porgueres 
Hernandez' time as chief of staff. The Army itself realized 
that with the number of brigades that it has right now -- 15 -- 
it could not have them all at full strength in personnel and 
equipment, and so it was decided to reduce them with the aim of 
rationalizing human and material resources. For this reason, 
the units' structure is divided into three levels of force -- 
Rapid Action, Reaction, and Territorial Defense -- reducing the 
number of brigades to a maximum of 15, although these would 
include the extrapeninsular units, with some of them at 30 
percent of full strength. 
  Sources consulted by this newspaper stated that one of the 
liveliest debates right now concerns the FAR's final makeup. It 
is clear that both the Paratroop Brigade and the future 
Legionnaire Brigade -- the Legion Command's replacement -- 
already form part of that new Army unit. However, the debate 
centers right now on who will accompany the paratroops and 
legionnaires. 
<H5>  Two Ideas </H5>
  Right now, there are two views of the FAR: the Army's more 
traditional view and that of the Defense Ministry and Defense 
Headquarters [EMAD], which seem to be in favor of including 
armored cavalry vehicles. The Airborne Brigade's future also 
depends on the outcome of this debate. 
  The Army holds a traditional view of the FAR, and so it 
believes that the third unit assigned should be the 
aforementioned Airborne Brigade. According to this view, a 
deployment of this kind must not be delayed by the movement of 
armored vehicles. Hence, the light infantry should be the first 
stage of that deployment, establishing and holding positions 
until the later reinforcements belonging to the Reaction Force 
arrive. 
  However, the Defense Ministry and EMAD believe that, on the 
contrary, an FAR should have the support of armored vehicles 
belonging to cavalry -- "one of the lessons of the involvement 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina," according to military sources. The 
reason for this stance is that the infantry units should have 
the support of armored vehicles, which provide greater 
firepower, until the reaction units arrive. "Moreover," they 
state, "as soon as the units that have been deployed need to 
carry out reconnaissance, they should have cavalry forces." 
  For this reason, the Defense Ministry and EMAD maintain that 
the FAR should have armored vehicles, although they point out 
that they would never make up a regimental unit, but rather, a 
maximum of two groups (battalions). 
  The presence of cavalry forces could cause the Airborne 
Brigade's exclusion from the FAR. This unit, with its 
headquarters in Pontevedra and with two regiments -- the Isabel 
la Catolica in that city and the Principe in Asturias -- have 
the handicap of not having airports sufficiently close, and 
those that do exist are not well suited to military use, 
according to the aforementioned sources. 
  Nor have the doubts been dispelled about the makeup of the 
Reaction Force, comprising the only division that will be left 
in the Army -- the First Mechanized Division. Although no 
decision has been taken as yet, this division would comprise the 
current 12th Brigade, the 21st Mechanized Brigade of Cerro 
Muriano, and the Castillejos 2 Cavalry Brigade. This division 
would also include the 42d Mountain Light Infantry Brigade, and 
the uncertainties center on the makeup of the other mechanized 
brigade that this division would have, which could be the 11th 
brigade of Botoa, Badajoz, or 31st brigade, of Betera 
(Valencia). This division will be assigned to take part in NATO 
missions, and one of its future brigades -- that of Cerro 
Muriano -- to the European Army Corps. 
  The Reaction Force will also include the FAMET (Army 
Airmobile Forces), although they will be at the disposal of the 
FAR's requirements for their deployment. 
  In any event, what does seem clear is that there will be 
substantial differences between the original draft of the 
"Master Plan" and the current one, although the sources 
consulted emphasize that there is nothing finalized as yet, and 
there could still be changes. These could include a change in 
the idea of leaving the existing garrisons in the Basque Country 
and Catalonia at a minimum, with reduced brigades of 1,500 men. 
<H5>  From 180,000 to 115,000 </H5>
  The reduction of human resources -- one of the causes of 
this 
new redeployment -- is prompted by the implementation of the 
Personnel Law, resulting from the approval in parliament of the 
model of the Armed Forces of the year 2000. This decision left 
the total number of Armed Forces personnel at 180,000 men and 
women, including troops, and at least 55 percent 
professionalized. 
  Hence the Army found itself forced to make that reduction 
effort, because the Personnel Law left its personnel at 115,000 
men. Nevertheless, in the event of a crisis or mobilization, 
recourse could be made to 100,000 reservists, who would be 
assigned to the above-mentioned future Territorial Defense 
Force, whose brigades, such as the Jarama Cavalry Brigade or the 
23d Motorized Brigade, will be at 30 percent of full strength in 
peacetime. 
  In any event, right now the Army has the problem of 
professional troops. Although the Defense Ministry has been 
making an effort since a couple of years ago to succeed in 
increasing the number of professional servicemen, the fact is 
that the shortcomings in this respect have been made clear in 
operation Alpha Bravo. 
  While the Legion and the Paratrooper Brigade have been able 
to manage with more or less whole units (the Fourth Corps -- 
Malaga Group, Third Corps -- Canary Islands, and the Third 
Company -- Madrid), albeit reinforced with members of other 
units, in the case of the Cordoba Group recourse has had to be 
had to a variety of units. Thus, in order to make up this unit, 
the southern operational command has had to have recourse to 
forces from the 21st Brigade and the 11th Brigade, assigned to 
the Brunete Armored Division and to the Third Special Operations 
Group of Rabasa, Alicante. 
<H5>  Level of Training </H5>
  A difference is also developing in the units' level of 
training, acknowledged by Defense Minister Julian Garcia Vargas 
himself. In this connection, the brigades that will be 
strengthened by the new "Master Plan" have an acceptable level 
of training and effectiveness, owing to the maneuvers that they 
conduct, although these have also been cut down over the past 
few months as a result of the fuel problems stemming from the 
budget cuts. 
  However, in the units whose future does not seem so clear 
and 
that will disappear or be left at 30 percent of full strength, 
the level of training is considerably lower, and in some of them 
servicemen are being discharged having fired no more than 20 
bullets during military service. While the main units have fuel 
problems, these units conduct virtually no field exercises in 
which vehicles have to be moved, exercises being confined to the 
level of company (alpha) or, at most, battalion or group (beta). 
<H5>  From Trucks to Missiles </H5>
  The Army is undoubtedly the service that has suffered most 
in terms of equipment over the past few years. Thus, while the 
Navy saw its request for an air-sea group met, or the Air Force 
was commissioning the F-18's, there was no project or program of 
that scale in the Army during the eighties. 
  Only one of the requests made most often by Army personnel 
has been partly met -- the renewal of the tank force. Partly, 
because the chosen solution was to commission M60 tanks that the 
U.S. Army decommissioned as a result of the treaty on the 
reduction of conventional weapons in Europe, and that they were 
giving free of charge. And even so reductions came, since the 
520 tanks initially envisaged have been cut to just 310, most of 
them being the A3 model -- the most modern, albeit outclassed by 
vehicles such as the Abrams M1A1, the British Challenger, or the 
German Leopard. 
  Thus the Army's tank force will be left with the 310 M60's, 
the 164 M48A5's (with the same engine and firing system as the 
foregoing), and 210 AMX-30's, allocated mainly to cavalry units. 
  The Army's main shortages right now lie in transport 
vehicles 
(both trucks and cross-country vehicles), artillery, a new 
armored vehicle, and attack helicopters. 
  The state of the transport vehicles has been a concern since 
the end of the last decade, since over half the fleet of 
vehicles would not pass the roadworthiness test because of their 
state. Accordingly, the Army is emphasizing the need to renew 
that fleet in order to prevent possible accidents. 
  Another preference is to renew the artillery with 155mm 
guns, 
in a long-standing project that seems never to take shape. 
However, the greatest emphasis is placed on missiles. As this 
newspaper has already reported, the Army wishes to replace its 
coastal batteries with mobile antiship missile systems, which 
would make possible much more effective control of the Strait of 
Gibraltar than the current system. In this connection, missiles 
have the advantage of mobility and the difficulty of detecting 
their firing positions, as well as greater accuracy than the 
coastal batteries. 
  In fact, the coordination agreements signed with NATO to 
establish the form of Spanish military participation in the 
Atlantic alliance give our country the responsibility for 
surveillance of the Strait of Gibraltar. 
  An infantry and combat vehicle to complement the wheeled 
armored vehicles, whose good performance in Bosnia -- especially 
in escorting convoys -- is emphasized, is another preference. 
Santa Barbara is currently developing this new vehicle, 
although, according to forecasts, it will not enter into service 
until the end of this decade. 
  Last, it must be pointed out that the lack of combat 
helicopters is another shortage that, according to the Army, 
should be reconsidered. Right now, these tasks are entrusted to 
the FAMET's BO-105's, although military sources have pointed out 
that this is a helicopter inappropriate for these tasks because 
of its lack of power. 

