BFN 

<F P=106> ["ban" report: "Criticism of Coalition's Crime Prevention </F>
Act"] 
  [Excerpt] Bonn, 11 Apr -- The presidents of the Federal 
Intelligence Office (BND), Porzner, and of the Federal Office 
for the Protection of the Constitution [BfV], Werthebach, have 
criticized the passages of the draft of the government 
coalition's 1994 Crime Prevention Act that apply to their 
powers, as insufficient. During the hearing of the Bundestag 
Internal Affairs Committee and the Legal Committee on the 
coalition's article law as well as on a draft law by the Social 
Democratic Party of Germany [SPD] on internal security, Porzner 
referred to proposals by the coalition that the BND should be 
able to pass on "accidental finds," gained within the framework 
of its strategic telephone monitoring abroad, to the German 
criminal prosecution authorities. Upon urging by the Free 
Democratic Party of Germany [FDP], the condition was included in 
the draft law that the BND must decide within three months 
whether or not it has to pass on relevant information; in 
addition, the possibility for the affected persons to complain 
to the administrative courts was included in the draft law. 
Porzner rejected the deadline for decisions on principle. 
  In many international arms trade cases individual pieces of 
information are just pieces of a mosaic, Porzner said. 
Concerning a poison gas factory in Libya, built by German 
companies, the BND collected information over a period of 10 
years. Porzner warned against forcing BND officials to make 
statements at administrative courts on findings from friendly 
services. There is the danger that foreign intelligence 
services will restrict their cooperation with the BND or stop it 
completely. Porzner welcomed on principle that in the future 
the BND will be permitted to utilize information, even if they 
do not belong to the actual assignment of the BND. 
  Werthebach said that he welcomes the crime prevention act on 
principle. However, it does not correspond to all BfV 
expectations. This includes the BfV's desire to monitor 
telephone conversations of militant groups, even if they do not 
have a firm organizational structure. Werthebach also pointed 
to the ongoing desire that the BfV watch not only political 
extremists but also organized crime. The president of the 
Cologne authority finally pointed to the consequences of the 
privatization of telephone networks. In contrast to the 
Bundespost, private operators of telephone networks (Werthebach 
mentioned Mannesmann) refused to answer inquiries by the BfV. 
Werthebach called for information rights and information duties 
for private network operators. 
  Mr. Jacob, the federal commissioner for data protection, 
voiced reservations against the expansion of intelligence 
service interference in the secrecy of telecommunications. 
According to his findings, the results of telecommunications 
monitoring are smaller than expected. In particular, organized 
crime will know how to protect itself. The draft law must be 
changed. With a view to the planned utilization of accidental 
finds by the BND, Jacob said "secondary interests must not 
influence telecommunications monitoring and the evaluation of 
BND findings." Passing on information must be examined by an 
independent institution. 
  Wiesbaden Police President Hoffmann warned against 
consequences of the BND regulations concerning criminal trials. 
While the principle of legality commits police and public 
prosecutor's offices to reveal all findings, intelligence 
services are permitted to make a selection, in order to protect 
sources, for instance. "The unavoidable selective passing on of 
information by these services could thus become an element that 
controls the trial," Hoffmann said. 
  As set down by the draft laws, the hearing dealt with a 
broad 
range of internal security issues. Representatives of lawyer's 
organizations complained about individual regulations during 
shortened proceedings. 
  Concerning the introduction of the "great bugging campaign," 
differing opinions were voiced, as were concerning the SPD 
proposal that it should be possible to impound assets gained 
from crime in specific cases of suspicion. Tightened 
regulations to combat "money laundering," envisaged in the 
coalition draft, were criticized by pointing out that the law, 
which has been in force since 1992, has not yet been tested. 
The planned regulation on turning state's evidence in cases of 
organized crime was mostly supported. [passage omitted] 

