BFN 

<F P=106> [Gennadiy Charodeyev report: "Moscow Disagrees With </F>
Partition of Caspian"] 
  [Text] Moscow regards as premature the conclusion of the 
Anglo-Azerbaijani memorandum on cooperation in prospecting for 
and extracting oil and gas in the so-called "Azerbaijani sector" 
of the Caspian, a high-ranking Russian Foreign Ministry 
spokesman told IZVESTIYA. 
  A note handed to the British ambassador in Moscow explains 
that there is no sectoral demarcation of the seabed in the 
Caspian. The Caspian is by its nature an enclosed body of water 
with a single ecological system and constitutes an object of 
joint use, within whose bounds all questions of activity, 
including the opening up, surveying, and utilization of 
resources, must be resolved with the participation of all the 
Caspian states (Russia, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, and 
Turkmenia). Therefore, as the Russian note to her majesty's 
official representatives stated, any steps by any Caspian state 
aimed at securing advantages in respect of the area and 
resources of the Caspian run counter to the other Caspian 
states' interests and cannot, in this context, be recognized. 
  Russian experts in the sphere of international law of the 
sea 
have specified that the idea advanced by Iran of commencing 
talks among the littoral states on formulating common 
international legal principles of the joint use of the Caspian's 
natural riches has still not been realized. At the time the 
Iranians proposed setting up a special commission for this, 
which would include all the interested sides. Moscow supports 
this idea. But Baku is evidently in a hurry to play its 
"Caspian card" by announcing the unilateral introduction of a 
special "Azerbaijani sector" in the sea. At a recent meeting 
with representatives of the British Petroleum oil consortium, 
who are reckoning on concluding a profitable deal, President 
Geydar Aliyev of Azerbaijan, while supporting in principle the 
idea of working out the Caspian's international status, 
nevertheless declared: "May this question not trouble you. 
Nobody has the right to deprive Azerbaijan of its national 
riches." 
  London has taken cognizance of the information forwarded by 
the Russian side and promised to investigate. 

