Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 26 Mar (INA)--Iraqi Foreign Minister Muhammad 
Sa'id al-Sahhaf has said Iraq is being subjected to something 
that has nothing to do with the issue of Kuwait or the 
implementation of UN resolutions. Instead, he said, it is a 
U.S.-led conspiracy with obvious political objectives. 
  Al-Sahhaf was addressing a news conference at Arab League 
headquarters today. It was attended by correspondents of Arab 
and world news agencies, television networks, and the press. 
Al-Sahhaf stressed that Iraq has fully cooperated with the 
United Nations and implemented its resolutions, especially 
Resolution 687. According to the mutual obligations outlined by 
this resolution, especially Paragraph 22, al-Sahhaf noted, the 
United Nations is supposed to unconditionally lift the blockade 
imposed on Iraq. 
  Noting the allegations and charges about the issue of Iraqi 
weapons, al-Sahhaf said: At present, Iraq does not possess any 
banned weapons. Iraq is completely free of the weapons covered 
by Resolution 687. Recalling the UN Special Commission's 
reports and confessions, al-Sahhaf said Iraq cooperated with the 
inspection committees and approved the long-term monitoring 
programs in order to expedite the lifting of the blockade 
imposed on its people. 
  In this regard, Muhammad Sa'id al-Sahhaf pointed out the 
major shift in the positions of many UN Security Council members 
in light of Iraq's great response and major strides in terms of 
commitment to and implementation of UN resolutions. 
  He said the UN Security Council's debates and sanctions 
review during its recent meeting saw a major shift in the 
positions of most of its members in favor of Iraq. He said 
France, China, and Russia -- in addition to nonpermanent member 
states of the UN Security Council, such as Brazil, Rwanda, Oman, 
and Spain -- demand that the blockade be lifted. 
  He expressed extreme regret that international resolutions 
continue to be drafted under U.S. influence, and that the U.S. 
Administration continues to besiege Iraq despite the 
far-reaching effects on society's public health, especially 
among children and women. He said that under U.S. influence, 
the Security Council has decided to maintain the sanctions, 
something intended to humiliate and annihilate the Iraqi people. 
  The foreign minister drew the attention of public opinion 
and the international community to the depth and seriousness of 
the crime perpetrated against the Iraqi people. He said the 
continuing freeze on Iraqi assets at Western banks and 
establishments robbed Iraq of the opportunity to employ the 
international resolution to use these assets to import food and 
medicine. 
  The minister stressed the fact that this reflects the 
illegal 
criminal and hostile campaign of annihilation waged against Iraq 
by well-known international powers. This has no precedence in 
history. He said: Reports by international bodies, the World 
Health Organization, and UNICEF clearly point out the crimes 
perpetrated against Iraq. 
  The minister refuted the Kuwaiti regime's lies and its 
claims 
about so-called missing Kuwaitis. He reemphasized that there 
are no Kuwaitis in Iraq. He said: Iraq has cooperated in a 
positive way with the Red Cross and the Arab League about this 
issue. 
  The foreign minister accused the al-Sabah family of 
continuing to exploit the aggressive U.S. position, instigating 
public opinion against Iraq, and preventing the lifting of the 
embargo against the Iraqi people by creating the lie about 
missing Kuwaitis. 
  Reinforcing his argument, al-Sahhaf said: The Kuwaiti regime 
has not responded to or agreed with all the Arab initiatives, 
including Gulf initiatives, intended to close the book on these 
allegations used to injure Iraq. 
  Focusing on relations between Iraq and the Gulf states, 
al-Sahhaf said: We follow a constant policy based on principles 
of promoting cooperation and activating ties with Arab countries 
. He stressed Iraq's permanent readiness to sincerely cooperate 
with the Arab group to serve Arab causes. He said: We now have 
good relations with Qatar, Oman, Bahrain and other brothers. 
  Touching on the issue of Arab reconciliation, al-Sahhaf 
said: 
Iraq supports every Arab effort to effect solidarity. He said 
such efforts and intentions should be based on the principle of 
preserving pan-Arab security and confronting threats directed at 
Iraq and the Arab nation, indicating in this regard Iraq's 
previous positions on this issue, particularly the pan-Arab 
declaration of President Saddam Husayn in August 1980. 
  Warning the Arab nation against the gravity of the 
U.S.-Zionist scheme against it, al-Sahhaf said: Those 
intentions are not aimed just against Iraq. Rather, the 
imperialist-Zionist scheme targets all Arab countries and seeks 
to incite direct and indirect problems in them. 
  The minister shed light on the aggressive U.S. practices 
designed to dismantle Iraq and harm its national sovereignty. 
He said the air exclusion zones in southern and northern Iraq 
are nothing but a U.S. plot, drafted in the form of a 
resolution, that contravenes UN Security Council resolutions. 
This has been admitted by UN Secretary General Dr. Butrus 
Butrus-Ghali, he noted. 
  He explained that from the time the no-fly zone was imposed 
in southern Iraq to the end of last year, U.S. and British 
aircraft carried out over 25,535 violations of Iraqi airspace in 
the south, using bases and facilities provided by the Saudi and 
Kuwaiti regimes. 
  Touching on imperialist-Zionist interference in northern 
Iraq, Muhammad Sa'id al-Sahhaf said the central government had 
been about to sign an agreement with Kurdish parties to promote 
self-rule. However, the U.S. Administration, as acknowledged by 
Barzani, prevented those parties from signing the agreement, 
which was in the interest of the Kurds of Iraq in the first 
place. 
  Al-Sahhaf accused Washington, Tel Aviv, and Arab parties, 
including the al-Sabah family, of conspiring against Iraq and 
supporting some gangs in northern Iraq in order to ensure the 
continuation of the abnormal situation there and to partition 
Iraq. He stressed that Iraqis are aware of the objectives of 
these schemes, and are very prepared to confront them. 
  The minister described the domestic situation in Iraq as 
very 
excellent. He said rumors propagated against Iraq are nothing 
but exposed and explicit propaganda campaigns pushed by the 
United States and other hostile parties. 

