BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 19 (XINHUA) -- The China National 
Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) today dismissed a Vietnamese 
accusation that CNOOC had violated its sovereignty and rejected 
its ensuing demands. 
  CNOOC Spokesman Chen Bingqian said at a press conference 
today that the "Wan'an Bei-21" contract, signed in 1992 by CNOOC 
and the U.S. Crestone Energy Corporation, over which Vietnam's 
claim was made, is "legally binding." 
  He said the contract block, located in the Nansha [Spratly] 
offshore area, falls within China's jurisdiction. "CNOOC and 
Crestone have the right to undertake normal operations in this 
area," he stated. 
  On April 25 a Vietnamese press release claimed Crestone and 
CNOOC had "violated" the sovereign rights of Vietnam by signing 
the contract for "Wan'an Bei-21" oil exploration. 
  It further demanded the termination of the contract and 
cancellation of all related activities. 
  "Our company will absolutely not accept the accusation, as 
well as the unreasonable demands," Chen said. 
  The "Wan'an Bei-21" contract covers an area of more than 
25,000 square kilometers in the South China Sea. The 
undersigner should be responsible for laying seismic lines and 
drilling exploratory wells during the contractual period of 
seven years. 
  "It must be pointed out that recently Vietnam Oil and Gas 
Corporation has set aside a batch of blocks of the Nansha 
islands for bids from foreign companies, and some foreign 
companies have entered into contracts for oil and gas 
exploration and exploitation, which constitute violations of 
China's sovereignty over the Nansha offshore area and also 
infringes on our company's interests," Chen warned. 
  "It is known to all that the Chinese Government has 
repeatedly called for shelving the disputes and participating in 
joint development before a solution to the Nansha issue can be 
reached," he said. 
  Therefore, he said, "CNOOC welcomes relevant parties, 
including Vietnam Oil and Gas Corporation, to cooperate with us 
and to explore the possibility of joint development." 

