Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Robert Minasov and Yevgeniy Skukin report: "Family Row in </F>
`Falcon' Camp"] 
  [Text] The 16 February morning plenary session of the 
State Duma began with a small but fairly loud sensation. Viktor 
Kobelev, member of the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia [LDPR] 
faction, expressed his indignation that deputies have for some 
reason not been given the statement signed by himself and 
another faction member Aleksandr Pronin saying that they are 
quitting the LDPR faction. Vladimir Zhirinovskiy did not hang 
around. He described his party "brothers" in brusque, insulting 
terms and even accused them of criminal activities, saying that 
they have both been expelled from the LDPR and will therefore be 
immediately replaced in accordance with the Statute on Elections. 
  But that was not the only emotional outburst while the 
agenda 
was being discussed. Sergey Baburin thought that the signing of 
the treaty between Russia and Tatarstan will do Russian 
statehood irreparable damage since, in the deputy's opinion, 
this is the first-ever case of this kind of treaty being 
concluded between the whole and part of Russia. Thus, Baburin 
said, a precedent has been set for Russia to slide into a 
confederative system. However, it turned out that by no means 
many deputies share Sergey Baburin's opinion, so they rejected 
his proposal regarding guarantees of Russia's territorial 
integrity. 
  We have already said that part of the corps of deputies -- 
that part, incidentally, which nominated Ivan Rybkin for the 
post of chairman of the chamber -- is now blatantly voicing its 
dissatisfaction with his actions. Yesterday (16 February) the 
selfsame Sergey Baburin tried to get a question regarding the 
work of the chairman of the lower chamber onto the agenda on the 
grounds that, among other things, Rybkin, regardless of the 
opinion of certain deputies, nominated Andrey Voykov, a man of 
whom they are not fond, for the post of head of the apparatus. 
  The proposal made by Vyacheslav Marychev (LDPR) from the 
microphone caused a lively commotion: He proposed banning the 
Russia-wide television relay and...activity of Radio Liberty. 
Yuliy Gusman ("Russia's Choice") very reasonably objected by 
saying: How can you jam a radio on television? 

