BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Christopher's Tour and al-'Aqabah Blockade"] </F>
  [Text] The U.S. Administration is trying these days to 
revive and rescue the peace process from the danger caused by 
Israeli procrastinations. U.S. Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher's tour due to begin next week is part of these U.S. 
efforts. 
  While Secretary Christopher is preparing for his tour, we 
would like to state an absolute fact, hoping he will take it 
into consideration, this fact is that abstract talk about 
Washington's support for peace efforts in the region no longer 
convinces anyone of the credibility of the U.S. Administration 
or its role as an honest mediator. There are serious doubts 
about the U.S. mediation, and developments of the past few years 
confirm Washington's bias toward Israel. The Arab parties to 
the peace process want to see practical measures on the ground 
and real U.S. intervention to advance the peace process. 
  Secretary Christopher's statements last night call for some 
optimism since he hoped to bring proposals that would help ease 
the results of the siege imposed on the Port of al-'Aqabah 
during his upcoming tour. 
  The U.S. Naval piracy peaked with the imposition of the 
siege 
on the Port of al-'Aqabah without any legal justification. 
These arbitrary measures worsened with the banning this week of 
two ships from entering the Port of al-'Aqabah and forcing them 
to go to other ports. Thus, the number of ships turned back by 
the U.S. Navy this month reached six, causing further losses to 
the Jordanian economy. 
  His Majesty King Husayn recently declared Jordan's decisive 
position on this subject when he drew a link between the peace 
process and reconsideration of the blockade imposed on the Port 
of al-'Aqabah by the U.S. Navy, especially since Jordan is 
precisely observing the UN resolutions. 
  This Jordanian decision, which stems from its national and 
pan-Arab interest and from its concern for its national 
sovereignty, should be an alarm that the U.S. Administration 
should hear while it is undoubtedly aware of the Jordanian 
central role in the entire peace process and in the achievement 
of security and stability in the region. 

