CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Louis Marie Horeau: "The superhoax of the </F>
Superphenix's Reactivation"] 
  [Text] The Creys-Malville machine is neither a laboratory 
nor an incinerator: It only produces electricity. 
  Although a firm defender of the Creys-Malville machine, an 
EDF [Electricity of France] engineer asks ironically: 
"Superphenix transformed into a research laboratory? Why not 
into a girl's boarding school?" Most nuclear specialists were 
incredulous of the government's announcement of a "conversion" 
of the supergenerator. Some believe that it is a camouflaged way 
of shelving it. Others lean toward a test balloon before a 
deceitful restart-up. But not one of them believes the fable of 
a "laboratory" crossed with a "waste incinerator" which [Prime 
Minister] Balladur tried to pass. 
  Moreover, if the various interpretations supplied by the 
press are to be believed, the glowing official explanations were 
not perfectly understood: 
  To believe LE QUOTIDIEN dated 24 February, it is a 
"restart-up" that the government is announcing: 
  On that same day, LIBERATION offered a different point of 
view, its article beginning with the words: "The Superphenix 
agony is beginning:" 
  As for LE FIGARO, it sees a rather happy old age and 
emphasizes the role of incinerator: The most controversial of 
the French nuclear projects will be converted into a nuclear 
waste incinerator. 
  Has anyone thought of turning it into an amusement park to 
compete with EuroDisney? 
  From now on, the first tasks entrusted to the Superphenix 
will be research and demonstration. Unfortunately, there already 
is a research laboratory devoted to breeding. It is called the 
Phenix and it has served as an experimental model since 1973, 
following the first studies carried out by another research 
reactor, Rapsodie, that went into service in 1967. Why not a 
third laboratory to corroborate the results obtained by the 
first two, and why not make preparation for a Hyperphenix? Thus, 
France could cover itself with research centers while waiting to 
find a machine that works. 
  But this wonderful project is coming up against a serious 
difficulty: In order to "experiment," the Superphenix must 
obviously be started. As soon as the reactor is in operation, 
even at a lower power, it produces an enormous quantity of heat. 
It is impossible to dissipate this heat by cooking soft-boiled 
eggs. The only solution is to produce electricity, which gives 
the "laboratory" the troublesome appearance of being a nuclear 
power plant. We will get over this by getting light from 
"experimental" electricity. 
  The incineration of plutonium, now qualified as a "waste," 
is 
the second mission entrusted to the Superphenix. An aside: For 
years, the eggheads of the Atomic Energy Commission and of the 
EDF have explained to us that plutonium is the wealth of the 
future. France even built the world's most expensive plant in 
The Hague; it produces plutonium. Today, the Superphenix, a 
machine costing more than 50 billion, is requested to destroy 
what The Hague produces. Logical? 
<H5>  Defective Core </H5>
  But the new and noble task of sanitary engineer entrusted to 
this jack-of-all-trade reactor poses a delicate problem. The 
core of the Superhenix is currently full of a nuclear fuel the 
composition of which does not allow it to function as a 
"sub-reactor" and therefore to consume plutonium. The reactor 
should first be unloaded. But a "fill-up" costs approximately 3 
billion francs. This is a little expensive to treat it like a 
lowly Kleenex. The only solution is to burn this first core. At 
full power, it will take 2 years. Since Superphenix, transformed 
into a laboratory, will only function at a lower power, 4 years, 
if not more, must be allowed. 
  For this deluxe trash can to be finally able to eat 
plutonium, a way must also be found to unload one by one the 
old-type fuel rods stored in the reactor. There are several 
hundred of them and it takes one day per rod; or, if everything 
goes well, one more year. 
  With a little luck, Superphenix will begin its new career as 
an incinerator in the year 2000. According to official figures, 
it could devour 200 kilograms annually if it were to operate at 
full power. Therefore, only 100 kilograms at 50 percent, etc. 
The French electronuclear pool is currently producing annually 
some 10 tons of plutonium. Building some 100 Superphenix is 
therefore sufficient to save France from plutonium 
superproduction. 
  Superheating in the brain of some nuclear officials is the 
one remaining danger. 

