BFN 

  LOT'S NEW ROUTES: This summer, Lot Polish Airlines will 
begin operating five new routes -- to Zagreb, Nice, Salonika, 
Beirut, and Manchester. The route to Zagreb will begin on 16 May 
and will be operated with an ATR-72 aircraft. A second new Lot 
route will begin on 2 June -- a Boeing 737-500 will fly on the 
Warsaw-Lyon-Nice-Lyon-Warsaw route twice a week (Thursdays and 
Sundays). On 26 June, a third route will begin, one to Beirut. 
Until 2 October, Polish aircraft will fly to Lebanon once a 
week. In the period 2 June-29 September, the Warsaw-Salonika 
connection will be in operation, with a Boeing 737-400 and 
weekly flights. And finally, the connection with Manchester 
will be activated on 22 May and will be in operation until 2 
October, with weekly flight on Sundays. Compared with last 
year, the number of charter flights will be increased by half. 
These will be 70 percent serviced by TU-154M aircraft, and by 
Boeing 737's in the other 30 percent. Talks are also under way 
with the airlines of Kazakhstan and China concerning the sale of 
Soviet-made TU-134's and TU-154's. (Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY in 
Polish 29 Apr 94 p 10). 
  AUTO PRICES: Effective 1 May, prices for all cars 
manufactured at plants in Tychy and Bielsko-Biala, will 
increase. In the case of a Fiat 126p, the price rise will 
increase by around 1.5 million zlotys, and when it comes to the 
Cinquecento and Uno -- by about 5 million zlotys. Here are the 
new prices for a Fiat 126p 650FL: Standard -- 69,906,000 
zlotys, Elegant -- 76,799,000 zlotys, SX -- 78,568,000 zlotys. 
A Cinquecento 704 ccm will cost 119,011,000 zlotys, Cinquecento 
899 ccm -- 141,520,000 zlotys, while a five-door Uno 45 in the 
Standard version will cost 165,000,000 zlotys. The increase in 
prices does not affect those vehicles which are already at the 
dealers, but only those that will be shipped for sale after 1 
May. FIAT Auto Poland justifies the increase by a rise in 
production costs, which in turn is caused by inflation. (Warsaw 
ZYCIE WARSZAWY in Polish 29 Apr 94 p 11) 
  TRADE WITH VIETNAM: A Polish-Vietnamese Economic Forum held 
a session in Warsaw on 28 April. The meeting was organized by 
the National Economic Chamber, the Society of Friends of Four 
Continents, and by the Indochina-Poland Foundation. Trade 
exchange between Poland and Vietnam has been falling since 1991. 
Last year, the amount of exchange was $20 million. Participants 
in the meeting admitted that the needs of both markets must be 
better researched. Polish-Vietnamese trade exchange is 
regulated by a 1991 treaty concerning trade and payments. 
Drafts of two more treaties are in the works -- one on 
prevention of double taxation and another on protecting mutual 
investments. (Warsaw GAZETA WYBORCZA in Polish 29 Apr 94 p 17) 
  EBRD PACT SIGNED: On 28 April, a framework agreement was 
signed in the Ministry of Ownership Transformations (MPW) 
concerning the Stabilization, Restructuring, and Privatization 
(SRP) program. The agreement was initialed by MPW Deputy 
Minister Ewa Freyberg and by Guy de Selliers, deputy of the 
president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (EBRD) who is responsible for the banking sector. 
The agreement is not legally binding until it is accepted by 
the Council of Minister and the EBRD Board of Directors. The 
draft was considerably modified. In the first version, only 
limited partnerships were treated as basic ones; right now 
participation in the program can also be extended to limited 
liability companies and joint-stock companies. In the present 
version, it is proposed that companies be transformed on the 
basis of Article 6, Paragraph 1, of the law on the privatization 
of state-run companies, and that stocks or shares be contributed 
to investment partnerships only with the consent of the Council 
of Ministers. Instead of creating a special managerial group, 
SRP Poland would manage the partnerships -- it was agreed that 
this would be decided by the partners of the investment 
partnerships. In the pilot version, it is envisioned that 20 to 
40 companies will be included in the program (initially there 
were supposed to be 180 participants) and two banks (previously 
12). However, if other banks express interest, the program will 
be expanded. The plan of the implementation of the program 
envisions two stages: EBRD and the banks will establish 
investment partnerships, and then the Treasury will contribute 
its shares or stocks to them. (Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 
29 Apr 94 p 5) 
  SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES: The Economic Committee of the 
Council of Ministers (KERM) has approved a draft law on special 
economic zones which includes principles and terms for 
establishment of areas which are supposed to serve to intensify 
economic development and reduce unemployment. In KERM's view, 
the draft law on special economic zones is supposed to be a 
"clear message to all concerned as to what kinds of breaks or 
preferential treatment they can expect," and it includes a list 
of maximum allowable breaks for enterprises active in the zones. 
If a zone is granted all possible beneficial treatments, then 
investors active there will be free from income tax for half of 
the period for which the zone was established, after which they 
will only be paying half of the taxes that would normally be 
due. For a special economic zone to be established, a business 
plan of the entire venture will have to be presented and the 
permission of local authorities will have to be obtained. 
KERM's assessment is that in the initial period, only a few 
places in Poland will have a chance to gain the status of 
special economic zones (Mielec, and the Szczecin-Swinoujscie 
harbor complex, among others). (Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY in Polish 
30 Apr-1 May 94 p 12) 
  MONETARY REPORT: The increased money supply did not have a 
significant impact on the accelerated rate of inflation over 
November and December of 1993 or on the resultant exceeding of 
the overall yearly inflation level -- this according to the 
Polish National Bank (NBP) in its "Report on the Implementation 
of Monetary Policies in 1993." According to NBP, what was 
important for the inflation rise instead, was external factors 
-- that is from beyond the monetary area -- such as changes in 
official prices, an accelerated increase in food prices, and an 
increase in the level of salaries. If money supply growth did 
in fact occur, it was of a secondary nature in relation to the 
above-mentioned phenomena which generated the economy's greater 
demand for money. (Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 30 Apr-3 May 
94 p 5) 
  PROSPECTS FOR TOURISM: Czeslaw Jermanowski, deputy chairman 
of the Office of Physical Fitness and Tourism, presented a 
program on the principles of developing the tourism industry, 
which is to be debated by the Council of Ministers' Economic 
Committee in mid-May. According to Jermanowski, for the first 
time tourism has a chance of achieving the status of an 
important sector of the economy. According to 1993 data from 
the Tourism Institute, 60 million foreign tourists visited 
Poland last year, spending in the neighborhood of $4.5 billion 
which amounted to as much as 30 percent of all hard-currency 
revenue for the country. "Revenues from tourism could be even 
higher and the industry could bring about more jobs" -- 
Jermanowski says -- "providing that the state finally begins to 
coordinate measures by the different ministries for the sake of 
tourism." This year, the Office of Physical Fitness and Tourism 
plans to spend $6 million on the promotion of Polish tourism 
(including $2 million out of a budget reserve). Next year, 
expenditures should increase to $11 million, in 1996 -- to $13 
million, and in 1997 -- to $15 million. (Warsaw GAZETA WYBORCZA 
in Polish 30 Apr-3 May 94 p 20) 
  COMMITTEE CHOOSES CONSORTIA: The Council of Ministers has so 
far approved two lists with 367 enterprises qualified for the 
National Investment Funds (NFI). Another list is being prepared 
which will probably include over 100 enterprises. The Selection 
Committee selected 19 consortia out of the 33 that had been 
submitted. The minister will make the final selection and he 
will sign agreements with the enterprises. He has at his 
disposal 19 consortia for 15 funds. The group of managing 
companies includes Polish-foreign consortia, most often foreign 
investment banks, Polish consulting companies, and Polish 
commercial companies. The members and chairpersons of NFI are 
still being selected. Offers have been submitted by 6,860 
people. Formal criteria were met by 4,840 individuals. The 
average age of the candidates who have passed the stage of 
formal evaluation is 47. After preliminary selection, the group 
includes 2,135 enterprise management specialists, 663 
scientists, and 359 accounting experts. (Warsaw TRYBUNA in 
Polish 4 May 94 p 4) 
  COMMENTS ON REPRIVATIZATION ACT: Representatives of former 
owners comment on a new, governmental draft reprivatization law 
which is scheduled to be debated by the Council of Ministers' 
Economic Committee today, 6 May. Tadeusz Koss, press spokesman 
for the Polish Union of Real Estate Owners, has told ZYCIE 
WARSZAWY: "This draft law completely legalizes a 
nationalization which was implemented 50 years ago, and it 
legalizes the violation done by the communists on owners of 
houses, factories, and real estate. The current government 
prepared a law which is a disgrace to Polish legislation and to 
the Third Republic of Poland, which calls itself a law-governed 
country. The only hope now is that the president will never 
agree to sign the law. I hereby inform you that the draft law 
is already being translated into French, English, and German. 
Right after that is done, we intend to send it out to all those 
institutions around the world which make sure that people's 
ownership rights are respected. Let us not forget that Poland 
is obliged to respect, for instance, the recently initialed 
European Convention Concerning the Defense of Fundamental 
Freedoms and Human Rights." Andrzej Karnkowski, chairman of the 
Committee for Defense of Private Ownership, says: "This draft 
law envisages an extermination of certain social groups because 
it deprives masses of people, once and for all, of the right to 
regain their property. That is why I say that it is the Polish 
equivalent to the Nuremberg Laws. I also want to point out that 
on 26 April, the government issued orders to the ownership 
transformations minister concerning the goal and extent of 
reprivatization, and three days later, a draft on 
'reimbursements' was ready. Can a document as important as a 
statute be written in such a hurry?! Apart from that, the law in 
this form, completely precludes the possibility for owners to 
execute their rights on the basis of Articles 156-160 of the 
Code of Administrative Procedure, which used to guarantee either 
a regaining of ownership or at least proper reimbursement." 
(Warsaw ZYCIE WARSZAWY in Polish 6 May 94 p 10) 
  BUSINESSWOMENS CONGRESS: Almost 150 women who run their own 
companies, perform political functions, and represent women's 
organizations from around the world, are taking part in a 
two-day international conference of female entrepreneurs. The 
organizer of the conference is the International Women's Forum, 
which operates as part of the Main School of Commerce (SGH) in 
Warsaw. The main topic of the conference is female 
participation in business, society, and in family life in the 
countries of East and Central Europe. In the period of 
fundamental transformations going on in this part of the world, 
do women have more chances and opportunities, or do they face 
more dangers? According to Professor Zdzislawa Janowska of Lodz 
University -- who is also a senator -- "the forum is a promotion 
of female entrepreneurs who, in the period of transformations, 
have found themselves on the outside. Being 35 years old, for 
instance, they were fired from their jobs for reasons which were 
not up to them, such as employment cuts or political changes." 
In her speech, Professor Janowska spoke about the need to 
educate unemployed women. So far, she has trained about 700 
women at special training sessions. Of those women, 70 
succeeded in establishing their own companies, including 
advertising agencies, boutiques, coffee shops, art galleries, 
saunas, tailor shops, and even a transportation company. 
Professor Janowska emphasized that more such enterprises could 
emerge if only women had better starting-off points. In the 
view of Professor Eufemia Teichmann of SGH -- who is a 
co-organizer of the meeting -- "women who are owners of 
companies need to have their positions strengthened through the 
creation of lobbying groups. The International Women's Forum is 
definitely such a place." Participants in the conference intend 
to organize an international entrepreneurship center -- under 
SGH auspices -- the main goal of which will be to teach women 
how to establish and run their own companies. (Warsaw NOWA 
EUROPA in Polish 6-8 May 94 p 4) 
  NFI MANAGEMENT CANDIDATES: From 33 prospective candidates 
that might manage the National Investment Funds (NFI), the 
Selection Commission chose 19 consortia. It decided that they 
might be recommended to the minister of ownership 
transformations. One of the candidates recommended by the 
Selection Committee is the Raiffeisen Atkins Consortium, which 
comprises Raiffeisen Investment AG (26 percent), WS Atkins 
Limited (25 percent), and three Polish companies: Idea Ltd. 
from Gdansk (9.5 percent), WIL Consulting House Ltd. from Poznan 
(9.5 percent), and ADIN Ltd. from Wroclaw (5 percent). Another 
consortium which has been selected is the Western Fund, whose 
shareholders are the Western Bank (33.67 percent), Central 
Europe Trust Co Ltd. (33 percent), Charterhouse plc. (22.22 
percent), and Credit Comercial de France (11.11 percent). The 
group of potential managing companies also includes a 
consortium, the greatest shareholder of which is the French bank 
Arjil; the greatest Polish shareholders will be the Warsaw 
Consulting Group and the Agency for Industry Development; the 
smallest shareholder -- the Bank of Socioeconomic Initiatives. 
Here are three more consortia: Polish Privatization Society -- 
Kleinwort Benson Ltd.: Kleinwort Benson Overseas B.V. (51 
percent) and Polish Group of Managing Funds (49 percent), which 
is the sole property of the Polish Bank of Development. Krakow 
Investment Firm: Industrial-Commercial Bank (40 percent), 
English company Invesco CEAM (4 percent), and the Boston- based 
Recovery Group. Eagle Management Company: 
Smith-Barney-Shearson Inc. (36 percent), Pro-Invest Intl. (26 
percent), Privatization Group Inc. (26 percent), and the Upper 
Silesian Economic Bank (12 percent). (Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in 
Polish 7-8 May 94 p 5; Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 10 May 94 
p 7) 
  APRIL ECONOMY: The economy still shows considerable 
liveliness, even though there are some symptoms suggesting that 
within the next few months, this level of activity may decrease. 
There are no signals suggesting that this would be a long-term 
decline. The indicator of production size increased in April, 
though less than in March; the percent of companies registering 
production increased (from 23 percent in March to 31 percent) 
and the percentage of companies registering a decrease in 
production decreased (from 36 to 24 percent). The indicator of 
the influx of new domestic orders in April remained at the same 
level as in March. However, the influx of export orders 
decreased considerably. Despite that, the indicator of the size 
of export production still increased. There was a slight 
decrease in the last three months in the indicator of the 
advantages from export production in relation to the advantages 
from production for the domestic market. The competitiveness of 
Polish products remained at the same level in April as in 
January. Over the last three months, there was a slight 
decrease in the indicator of the competitiveness of foreign 
commodities on the Polish market. This indicator started to 
drop quite considerably in July of last year; 20 percent of 
Polish manufacturers do not feel any foreign competition at all. 
In April, unemployment was higher than in March. A lot seems 
to suggest that the drop in unemployment in March was not a 
long-term trend. The present unemployment indicator dropped to 
the level of the last six months. Companies predict that this 
rate should be maintained for another three or four months. The 
rate of wage increases suggests most companies did not raise 
wages too much. In the April study, a considerable improvement 
in the financial situation was noted. The improvement trend was 
detected throughout 1993, however, this phenomenon appeared most 
noticeably in April 1994. This trend is expected to be 
maintained over the next few months. The same goes for the 
so-called optimism indicator. The report was prepared by Maria 
Drozdowicz from the Economic Development Institute of the Main 
School of Commerce. (Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 10 May 94 
p 7) 
  CENTRAL BANK'S ROLE: "The policies of the central bank 
(National Bank of Poland -- NBP) vis-a-vis endangered banks, and 
NBP involvement in commercial banking activities, raise a lot of 
controversy" -- says Wojciech Kostrzewa, chairman of Polski Bank 
Rozwoju SA, in a report which presents mutual relations between 
NBP and commercial banks in the first half of the 1990's. 
According to Kostrzewski, the problem concerns primarily 
situations where banks faced with bankruptcy try to use all 
available means to maintain their current financial liquidity. 
On the one hand, the bank's managers offer attractive terms of 
money deposits to potential clients without hesitation, while on 
the other hand, clients deposit their money in such a bank 
because they regard it as having guarantees from at least the 
NBP, if not the State Treasury. Another aspect is associated 
with special relations that arise between NBP and those banks in 
which NBP has capital participation. Regardless of the actual 
situation and public statements, doubts will continue to arise 
as to whether -- in situations of a conflict between NBP's 
interests as an owner, and its interests as the currency-issuing 
bank -- the latter interest will really prevail. The only 
effective method for a permanent resolution of the situation 
would be for NBP to sell its shares in commercial banks as soon 
as possible, to other banks or to interested investors. (Warsaw 
NOWA EUROPA in Polish 9 May 94 p 21) 
  WAGE CONTROL BILL: Finance Minister G. Kolodko said on 11 
May that he did not expect President Walesa to block new wage 
curbs when they are completed by the parliament later this 
month. Kolodko told a news conference the government plans to 
scrap the controls effective 1995 but first it needs to 
transform most state-owned enterprises into Treasury-owned joint 
stock companies. "I anticipate that the president will sign the 
wage control bill which the government has agreed to keep in 
force only by the end of the year" --Kolodko said. He also said 
changing the legal status of state-owned enterprises is 
necessary to replace wage controls in the public sector with a 
mechanism of collective bargaining between employers and unions. 
Walesa vetoed an earlier version of the wage control law saying 
it was anti-market but the government amended it along Walesa's 
suggestions and it was resubmitted to parliament. (Warsaw NOWA 
EUROPA in English 12 May 94 p 24) 
  BANK RESTRUCTURING OBSTACLES: "Common sense will prevent 
ideas coming from Sejm deputies, on restructuring cooperative 
banks [banki spoldzielcze], from materializing in practice, as 
the ideas do not solve anything. All they will do is lead to a 
further dispersion in the banking system. Implementing the ideas 
does not guarantee that better service will be provided to 
customers -- on the contrary, it will lead to a further 
breakingdown of the structure of cooperative banks and of the 
Bank Gospodarki Zywnosciowej [BGZ], and a decreased quality of 
service provided to agriculture and the entire economy," said 
Kazimierz Olesiak, chairman of BGZ's board of directors, during 
a conference of directors of BGZ's voivodship departments which 
took place on 20 May. Olesiak stressed that the government 
program for restructuring cooperative banks resolves the 
security problem of the entire sector. The proposed reforms are 
not intended to make cooperative banks state-owned but on the 
contrary, they are designed to render cooperative banks even 
more "cooperative." "Regional banks currently in operation, are 
not capable of providing a good future for cooperative banks. 
In my view, the regional banks fear for their own structures 
and posts," Olesiak said. The government draft law on 
restructuring cooperative banks and BGZ, envisages subsidies to 
cooperative banks through the State Treasury's restructuring 
bonds, additional financing coming from the National Bank of 
Poland, a conditional waiver of having to transfer mandatory 
reserves, tax breaks, a concentration of the financial means of 
cooperative banks (securing them against bankruptcy), and other 
types of measures. The draft law also speaks of a reduction of 
the debt burden of enterprises servicing agriculture and the 
food industry through a transfer of State Treasury bonds to BGZ 
for the purpose of reducing the debt burden of enterprises such 
as fruit and vegetable processing plants, state-owned grain 
plants, sugar mills, the State Treasury's agricultural units, 
and other units of food and agricultural processing. A draft 
coming from Sejm deputies for the Freedom Union (UW), is based 
on the principle of complete independence and self-governing by 
cooperative banks. In the view of Sejm deputies for UW, the 
government draft is not clear enough on the subsequent fate of 
voluntarily established regional structures of cooperative banks 
(apart from BGZ) operating in Wroclaw, Warsaw, and Poznan. This 
year, BGZ will initiate about 4 trillion zlotys' worth of 
credits for purchasing agricultural products. Out of a 
2.5-trillion zloty reserve in the state budget for the purpose 
of subsidizing agricultural credits, BGZ has received about 1.2 
trillion zlotys. The remaining amount will be distributed by 
the Finance Ministry among 30 other banks. There is 16 trillion 
zlotys reserved in the budget for restructuring BGZ and 
cooperative banks. Among other things, the financial means are 
devoted to enterprises servicing agriculture. (Warsaw NOWA 
EUROPA in Polish 23 May 94 p 18) 
  ILLEGAL INSURANCE OPERATIONS: Western insurance companies 
have been "stealing away" customers in great numbers, from 
Polish units. The Finance Ministry warns that their insurance 
policies, despite being cheaper, are illegal in Poland. 
According to the legal system in effect in Poland, one is not 
allowed to enter into an insurance contract with a company that 
does not have the finance minister's license to operate in 
Poland, the ministry's press office reminded on 20 May. "The 
problem applies mainly to Austrian and Swiss life insurance 
policies which are being illegally distributed by brokers," 
Miroslaw Kowalski of the Commercial Union company explains. "We 
have filed two motions for prosecution with the public 
prosecutors office, concerning a violation of the law by two 
Western insurance companies," Jozef Jakubowski of the Polish 
Insurance Chamber adds. Unofficial figures are that 10,000 life 
insurance policies have been sold to Polish people by firms from 
Austria, Switzerland, Germany, and Great Britain. The biggest 
number -- about 4,500 policies -- was sold by the Vienna-based 
Interunfal company. The Finance Ministry would like to 
emphasize that persons who purchase policies from insurance 
companies operating without a license, must take into account 
that in case of refusal to pay damages stipulated in the 
agreement, they will not be able to enforce their rights in a 
Polish court of law. The fact that a foreign company offers 
better terms than a domestic one, has no impact on the legality 
of the insurance policy issued by that foreign company. (Warsaw 
ZYCIE WARSZAWY in Polish 21-22 May 94 p 11) 
  POSITIVE APRIL FIGURES: According to the Central Office of 
Statistics (GUS), April was another good month for the economy, 
but what causes concern is the rise in prices which was the 
biggest since the beginning of the year. "We are just 
witnessing the second anniversary when for the first time, we 
were able to report an increase in output," said Halina 
Dmochowska of the GUS Analysis and Reports Department while 
opening a conference on 23 May devoted to April economic 
results. In April, output was 8.6 percent higher than a year 
ago but it was also 8.2 percent lower than in March. This kind 
of a decrease occurs every year, while in this case, there were 
additionally two fewer work days than usually. Among other 
seasonal phenomena, there is a decreased acceleration of 
salaries and a decreased volume of retail sales (this always 
happens after Easter). For four months now, salaries have been 
higher -- after adjusting for inflation -- compared with a year 
ago. The situation of enterprises has improved, as well as the 
state of investment, and their balances of payment (the negative 
balance is not as high). Unemployment decreased by 0.3 percent 
but this is most probably a short-lived effect since fresh 
graduates will be seeking jobs soon. What is particularly 
disturbing, is the rise in prices (by 2.9 percent) which is the 
fastest so far this year. Prices for services jumped the most 
(apart from hot water and central heating), followed by train 
and bus tickets, and fees for staying at convalescent homes 
(which tripled). Prices for food increased by quite a lot, 
relatively speaking (by 2.8 percent); this comprises potatoes 
and vegetables (by over 8 percent), dairy products (by 4 
percent), various kinds of cheeses (by as much as 9 percent), 
and eggs (by 4.6 percent). In the first quarter of 1994, the 
value of exports was $3.3 billion, while the value of imports 
was $4 billion. The negative trade balance amounted to $648 
million which is not as high as last year. (Warsaw GAZETA 
WYBORCZA in Polish 24 May 94 p 17) 
  CUP REPORT: Although industrial production was lower in 
March, it exceeded last year's level by 8.9 percent. Over the 
four months, its volume increased by one-tenth compared with the 
beginning of 1993 -- reports the Central Planning Administration 
(CUP). The financial situation of companies is favorable (the 
net positive financial result was 9 trillion zlotys), even 
though the financial reserves of "economic entities" were 
slightly lower in late April than in December last year. 
Results in the foreign trade area are better as well; for the 
first time in five years, there was an increase in the amount of 
money spent on investment in enterprises with more than 50 
employees. Despite the fact that the month was two days shorter 
and production dropped in comparison with March, wages in April 
(without the companies' profit pays) increased by another 1.9 
percent. Prices went up as well. The inflation rate in April 
was 2.9 percent and it was the highest so far this year. When 
asked to comment on these results, Tadeusz Chroscicki, director 
of the CUP Department of Information and Forecasts, said that he 
is not worried by the drop in production dynamics in April. He 
is more concerned about the lowering of discipline in wage 
policies -- and primarily, by the increase in inflation. The 
price increase in April did not exceed 3 percent, but, if this 
trend is not halted, it is increasingly more likely that it will 
reach 31 percent throughout the year, even though it was 
estimated that the year's inflation would not exceed 27 percent. 
Right now, it is fueled, among other things, by the lack of an 
enterprise tax on above-normative pays (in addition, there are 
no other mechanisms that would regulate wages). Trade unions 
are demanding higher wages; such an increase in wages must 
affect the production costs and consequently, cause prices to 
rise. The increasing costs of maintenance hits persons with low 
wages, disabled pensioners, and senior citizens the hardest. 
The June valorization of pensions may be very quickly nullified 
by an increase in prices. (Warsaw TRYBUNA in Polish 23 May 94 p 
4) 
  INSURANCE BUREAU PRIVATIZATION: The position OF current 
management of PZU SA (State Insurance Bureau) is that it is 
necessary to maintain the integrity of PZU SA as a national and 
financially strong Polish insurer. The company is able to 
supplement capital deficiencies that it suffers from, with its 
own means and ways and without resorting to foreign loans. For 
some time now, there was a difference of views between the 
company and its owner -- that is the Finance Ministry -- 
concerning the way that the company should be privatized and 
restructured. In its previous personnel composition, the 
ministry's leadership was in favor of an idea under which the 
first step would be to replace the missing capital of the 
company with means that would be loaned to the state budget by 
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, with the 
second stage being the symmetrical division of PZU SA into two 
companies, and the third and final stage comprising 
privatization of one of the companies followed by the other one. 
But PZU SA's management persistently opposes the Finance 
Ministry's concept. Management has submitted its own draft of 
the company's privatization, under which three stages would take 
place: The first stage would be another assessment of the value 
of PZU SA's assets and the introduction -- by the middle of next 
year -- of a new issue of the company's shares. In the second 
stage -- which should last until the end of 1995 -- shares from 
another issue would be distributed among the employees. The 
State Treasury would retain a majority of the shares after the 
two stages. The essence of the third stage would be domestic 
and foreign investors purchasing those PZU SA's shares which 
will have been retained by the State Treasury. (Warsaw NOWA 
EUROPA in Polish 24 May 94 p 1) 
  EXPORT CREDITS GUARANTEES: Companies that made a decision to 
conduct risky trade with the East, will be able to avail 
themselves of insurance against political risk, natural 
disasters, and the danger of a partner's delaying his payment 
for merchandise exported. Exports will be facilitated through 
long-term credits guaranteed by the State Treasury. On 24 May, 
the government decided to approve a draft law concerning 
insurance of export contracts. If it is subsequently adopted by 
the Sejm, it will be possible to conduct trade with partners 
from countries of the former USSR -- and with some others, too 
-- under more convenient circumstances. Insurance will be 
provided by the Corporation for Export Credit Insurance (KUKE 
SA) which up to now, has only been providing short-term credits, 
and those applied only to trade risk. KUKE SA will be insuring 
contracts on its own behalf but the Budget Law will specify a 
maximum limit which will have to be observed in insurance 
contracts. The limit for this year, will most probably not 
exceed 25 trillion zlotys. According to the draft law approved 
by the government, the state would also guarantee payment of 
damages. If partners turn out insolvent, KUKE will repay 85 
percent of the value of the contract, to the exporter. The 
insurance will be valid both before and after merchandise is 
sent or services are rendered. "We have submitted the draft law 
to be dealt with through so-called accelerated legislative 
proceedings. We hope it will become law before the end of June. 
If not, then it will return to parliament in September," said 
Deputy Finance Minister Ryszard Michalski. The draft law 
provides that long-term credits (from a few billion to more than 
10 billion zlotys) will be guaranteed by the State Treasury. 
Money for that purpose is to come from a special reserve in the 
state budget. The State Treasury will also provide guarantees 
for insurance from non-commercial risk. The Finance Ministry is 
to oversee KUKE SA's activities. In line with government 
strategies for supporting exports, only payments for exports of 
Polish merchandise will be insured. (Warsaw GAZETA WYBORCZA in 
Polish 25 May 94 p 17) 
  KERM DISCUSSES BANKS: At its session on 25 May, the Economic 
Committee of the Council of Ministers (KERM) discussed the 
condition of the banking sector in Poland. As Witold Kozinski, 
first deputy president of the National Bank of Poland (NBP) 
pointed out, the situation in this sector is not very good. It 
was also said that the criteria in line with which NBP provides 
money to improve this situation, are unclear. Cooperative banks 
are in the worst situation; three consolidation projects have 
been prepared. State-owned banks, which are in a better 
situation than the rest, have a powerful owner and they will 
receive additional capital sooner or later. KERM also accepted 
the draft of an ordinance of the Council of Ministers concerning 
the specification of a list of enterprises and Treasury-owned 
joint- stock companies which will be included in the program of 
National Investment Funds (NFI). Last August, the Council of 
Ministers accepted a list of 195 Treasury-owned joint stock 
companies, and in September -- 165 state-owned companies and 
seven Treasury-owned joint-stock companies. Ownership 
Transformations Deputy Minister Ewa Fryberg said that 12 
enterprises were crossed off either due to their bad economic 
situation or because there appeared a possibility of privatizing 
them more quickly on the capital path (there appeared a concrete 
investor). KERM also accepted a third list -- a list of 88 
state-owned companies which will be transformed into Treasury- 
owned joint-stock companies, and 17 companies whose shares will 
be introduced in the NFI. In all, 460 companies, transformed 
into Treasury-owned joint-stock companies, will participate in 
the program. The book value of the companies included in the 
program was initially estimated at 100 trillion zlotys. The 
concrete value is not yet known. The financial results of these 
companies will be known in approximately two months. Between 15 
and 17 funds will be set up which will manage their property. 
The plan is that they will contribute their shares as the 
funds' property in October or November, but it is not certain 
whether it will be possible to adhere to this schedule: The 
supervisory boards of the funds have not been selected yet and 
the Selection Committee is still testing candidates. (Warsaw 
RZECZPOSPOLITA in Polish 26 May 94 p 7) 

