Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by R. M. Murayev: ``Sprint Network Advances Into </F>
Provinces''] 
  [Text] Joint Venture "Sprint Set" began 
operation in 1991. It was set up by Central Telegraph (Moscow) 
and the U.S. corporation Sprint International Communications 
with annual income of more than 9 billion dollars, which has the 
world's largest data network and produces communications 
equipment. 
  ``Sprint Set'' in Moscow: telephone (095)201-68-90; fax 
(095)923-23-44; telex 414750 SOVSN SU 
  Those of us who have tried, especially from outlying 
districts, to fax a business letter or personal correspondence 
to another nation know what a headache it is to have to dial up 
the operator, place the order, wait in line... 
  At the same time, by using the ``Sprint Global Fax'' system 
that has just been introduced into Russia by the Russian-U.S. 
joint venture ``Sprint Set,'' even a provincial owner of a fax 
machine need only dial a Moscow number on a conventional 
telephone line, and his message will be automatically faxed to 
one or a hundred addresses in any nations of the world. 
  ``We are trying to do everything to make the level of 
communication services of developed nations accessible to 
ordinary people in Russia and other nations of the former 
USSR,'' says Henry Radzikowski, director general of "Sprint Set" 
joint venture. ``To do so, we have concluded agreements with 
major telegraph offices on Russian territory, and have installed 
modern communication nodes in such cities as St. Petersburg, 
Rostov-na-Donu, Novosibirsk, Samara, Yekaterinburg, Irkutsk and 
Khabarovsk. This equipment, produced by 'Sprint International 
Communications,' a U.S. telecommunications corporation, has 
become the main data network for computer communications in 
Russia.'' 
  ``The creation of structures in provinces in partnership 
with 
local communications enterprises and other investors that might 
participate in organizing and operating modern communication 
nodes is one of the top- priority goals of `Sprint Set','' 
continues Henry Radzikowski. ``In future, we will reach a point 
where we can install a minimum set of equipment in oblast 
centers, and even rayon centers; then people in the most remote 
province will be able to have reliable communication with the 
entire world. We are also supplying equipment to our partners 
who are setting up their own communication centers, but are 
connected to us. Among others, there are already such centers in 
Perm, Kiev, Riga, Tashkent, Vladivostok and other cities of the 
CIS and Baltic states. In the near future, there will be such 
centers in Novosibirsk, Yakutsk, Omsk, Tomsk, Barnaul and 
Volgograd. The communication services of `Sprint Set' are also 
proliferated through a network of distributors. In other words, 
we would like to facilitate creation of the most modern data 
utility network in cities of the CIS and Baltic states that will 
have an outlet to 110 world nations via the SprintNet global 
data network.'' 
  In the words of sales and marketing director Tatyana 
Prokhorova, the most popular service among clients is E-mail: 
``This is the exchange of electronic messages, transmission to 
the fax or telex of another subscriber at any point on the 
globe. Last year, `Sprint Set' finished work enabling E-mail 
subscribers to interact with 120,000 clients of the Russian 
AT-50 teleprinter exchange service.'' 
  ``Among our clients are the Ministry of Defense, the 
Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Security of Russia, the 
Russian affiliate of the World Association of Nuclear Plant 
Operators, Morflot, `Interfaks' Information Agency, and major 
world corporations like IBM, Texaco, 3M, and British Petroleum.'' 
  Tatyana Prokhorova emphasizes that more than 100 ``nearby'' 
and ``remote'' foreign banks have become clients, using ``Sprint 
Set'' to expedite handling of negotiable instruments and 
information both within their own system and among separate 
banks. The joint venture also assists them in organizing 
electronic correspondence with foreign partners. The system of 
communication services offered by the company, which is based on 
the capabilities of the data network, hardware and software for 
handling transactions, among other things enables banking, 
commercial and travel institutions within seconds to verify the 
credit of a customer using a charge card, and to automatically 
process data for clearing transactions for goods and services. 
  The rapidly developing package and complexity of services 
offered by ``Sprint Set,'' from furnishing communication lines 
to delivery of turnkey equipment in accordance with customer 
specifications, their exceptionally high quality and 24-hour 
customer support has made ``Sprint Set'' a leader in the 
development of modern technology of data transmission on the 
territory of the former USSR. 
  The joint venture has developed and put into service an 
extensive network for Bashkortostan, contracts have been signed 
and the development of republic-wide data networks has begun in 
Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. 
  The joint venture has made an announcement of production of 
advanced telecommunication equipment in Russia. 
  But still the basic attraction is that ``Sprint Set'' joint 
venture knows how to organize and conduct telecommunication 
business oriented toward customer needs. Under conditions of 
market development and the necessity of converting from 
antiquated to modern communication technologies, this factor is 
becoming decisive. 

