BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Release"] </F>
  [Text] Estonian Foreign Minister Juri Luik, who returned 
from an official visit to Brussels, on Thursday [7 April], told 
a press conference at the Tallinn Airport, that the main issue 
of his press conference, yesterday, in Brussels, was that of 
free trade negotiations between Estonia and the European Union. 
  During his two-day visit Luik had meetings with 
West-European 
Union Secretary General Willem van Eekelen, deputy Secretary 
General of NATO Sergio Balanzino and deputy President of the 
European Commission Sir Leon Brittan and he made a speech in the 
European Parliament foreign and security issues committee, 
Estonian Embassy in Brussels told ETA. 
  The relations of the Baltic states with the European Union 
were discussed in the light of current free trade negotiations 
and in connection with the possibility to continue these 
negotiations with the aim of concluding an association agreement 
with EU. Luik stated that taken into consideration the Estonian 
already very free foreign trade policy EU could express more 
benignancy, especially in the areas of trade, agriculture and 
textile. He stated, however, that Estonia will not unilaterally 
avoid limitations on textile and agriculture trade, if EU makes 
no concessions to Estonia. Luik stressed that the association 
agreement negotiations should start directly after the free 
trade agreement was concerted, which could happen as soon as the 
second half of this year. "If we can conclude the free trade 
agreements by January 1, 1995, Estonia will in reality pass the 
Visegrad states and be the first East European state to belong 
to the joint free trade zone with EU," Luik said today. 
  At the meetings in NATO and the West-European Union, 
security 
issues were discussed in connection with preparations to grant 
Central and East-European states a new status in the WEU. Luik 
expressed hope that in case of the new status, no differences 
should be made among the states that participate at the WEU 
consultation forum, a member of which Estonia is, together with 
6 Central- European states, Latvia and Lithuania. The details of 
the new status have to be approved by WEU and consultation 
partners foreign and defence ministers meeting on May 9 in 
Luxembourg. 

