Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] La Paz, 24 Mar (EFE) -- Former Bolivian President 
Jaime Paz Zamora and his party, the Movement of the 
Revolutionary Left (MIR), protected Isaac "Oso" Chavarria, who 
is considered Bolivia's top drug trafficker, and allowed him to 
intervene in the government, according to a police report 
submitted to Congress. 
  The main MIR leaders today said the Special Antinarcotics 
Force (FELCN) report is "a conspiracy" to destroy the party and 
the possibilities of Paz Zamora's presidential candidacy in 1997. 
  Paz Zamora ended his isolation at his ranch in El Picacho in 
the city of Tarija, in southern Bolivia, and arrived in La Paz 
on 24 March to meet MIR leaders. 
  The FELCN report includes a list of chronologically arranged 
events from 1978 to 1994 that proves the relations and meetings 
the MIR leadership held with Chavarria and another group of drug 
traffickers, in some cases for delivering money, and in others 
for analyzing "how President Paz Zamora could help them." 
  Some 10 traffickers agreed to surrender under the so-called 
"repentance decree," with which the government guaranteed that 
they would not be extradited to the United States, and are now 
jailed in Bolivian prisons. 
  The FELCN report, which the Chamber of Deputies 
Constitutional Committee has evaluated since 23 March, surprised 
several circles because of the magnitude of the network that 
operated within the Patriotic Accord government, which was 
headed by Paz Zamora. 
  Isaac "Oso" Chavarria, who was arrested by the FELCN on 25 
January, "used the methods of an `intelligence' agent to foment 
`narco-influence' [narcoinfluencia] within the `leadership' 
(executive board) of the MIR," the report says, adding that 
Chavarria used his training as a former Bolivian Army captain. 
  The report adds that "Chavarria turned the fear of MIR 
leaders into an instrument for blackmail," forcing them to 
commit illegal actions to protect him "from FELCN efforts" to 
capture him. 
  Paz Zamora's sisters Rosario and Edith, and his private 
secretary Susana Seleme, along with acting MIR leader Oscar Eid, 
and Lieutenant Colonel Jorge "Coco" Velasquez--the government 
house security chief, are mentioned in the report as the 
"liaisons" between the president and Chavarria. 
  The FELCN report says Chavarria tried to influence Paz 
Zamora--through aide-de-camp Velasquez--for the designation of 
high-ranking officers. The report mentioned the designation of 
Colonel Faustino Rico Toro as FELCN chief as one of the examples 
that reflected the alleged trafficker's intention to create a 
"narcostructure" [narcoestructura]. 
  Rico Toro, who was arrested in Cochabamba on 22 March and 
arrived on 24 March in La Paz, has been--according to 
FELCN--Chavarria's partner for 11 years. In 1983 he bought an 
apartment Rico Toro owned in Biscayne Bay, Florida, southeastern 
United States, and a house in the La Paz residential 
neighborhood of Irpavi. 
  In February 1991, Edith Paz Zamora and Lt. Col. Velasquez 
"arranged a meeting between Chavarria and the president at 
Edith's house in Obrajes (a residential La Paz neighborhood) to 
discuss possible replacements within FELCN, including the 
designation of Col. Rico Toro as commander," FELCN states in its 
report, which is attached to five case folders on the event. 
  The Constitutional Committee has asked FELCN to suspend all 
actions against MIR leaders until the conclusion of the 
congressional investigation. 

