Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 14 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Vice-Premier 
and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen today expressed the hope that 
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher's current visit to 
China will contribute to the enhancement of mutual understanding 
and the improvement and development of Sino-U.S. relations. 
  Qian, speaking to Chinese and foreign journalists at the 
Diaoyutai State Guesthouse, noted that in the past few days, the 
two sides have had meetings in a "candid, frank and 
business-like" atmosphere, which totaled more than ten hours. 
  Qian said that the two sides have agreed that the Sino-U.S. 
relations should be put in the bilateral as well as in the 
global context, and that the future and the 21st century should 
be kept in mind in handling the relations. 
  The three Sino-U.S. joint communiques constitute the 
foundation stone for the Sino-U.S. relations, Qian said, adding 
that both China and the U.S. are big countries with 
international influence and permanent members of the United 
Nations Security Council. The two countries have many common 
interests in global affairs and in maintaining international 
peace and security, he said. 
  The two sides also have much in common in their positions on 
maintaining regional peace and security, said Qian. 
  Qian said that during the talks the two sides have expressed 
satisfaction over the rapid progress in the economic and trade 
sector and believed that there are great potentials and broad 
prospects for the two countries's economic relations and trade. 
  The issues of human rights and the most-favored-nation (MFN) 
status were the major subjects discussed, Qian noted, adding 
that China is opposed to linking the issue of human rights to 
MFN. 
  The question of human rights involves two aspects, Qian 
said. 
On the one hand, China and the U.S. have different concepts on 
human rights, and this is the reality which will exist for a 
long time to come. 
  On the other hand, he said, China and the U.S. adopt 
different approaches in handling differences. 
  "We hold that the two sides can conduct dialogue on the 
issue 
of human rights on the basis of equality, mutual respect and 
non- interference in each other's internal affairs, " he said. 
  The Chinese vice-premier stressed that the Chinese side can 
only do what the Chinese law permits, and it is futile and 
harmful to apply pressure on China under the pretext of human 
rights. 

