Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladislav Drobkov report: "What Will Bill Clinton Bring to </F>
Moscow? Once Again the U.S. Delegation's Baggage Contains More 
Advice and Political Declarations Than Specific Economic 
Programs or, Most Importantly, Funds To Implement Them"] 
  [Text] Washington, 10 Jan -- U.S. President Bill Clinton 
will fly into Moscow on the evening of 12 January. The agenda 
for the greeting ceremony and for Clinton's entire first 
official visit to Russia has been prearranged in great detail. 
Supper with B. Yeltsin at the presidential dacha, talks in the 
Kremlin, a trip to the Danilov Monastery, a reception at the 
U.S. ambassador's residence.... The places and the exact times 
of all the meetings and talks have been decided. 
  In recent days the U.S. press has devoted considerable 
attention to the upcoming talks and to the whole package of 
relations between our two states. I have talked with many 
political experts, commentators, journalists, and entrepreneurs 
here and with "high-ranking representatives of the 
administration" who traditionally wish to remain anonymous. As 
a rule, they have all attached great significance to the 
upcoming visit and hoped that it will help to determine the path 
for the development of Russian-U.S. ties. 
  At the same time both official spokesmen and the press have 
been unable to conceal the existence of serious problems in our 
relations. They have said that many Americans are unclear about 
the details of the changing political and social situation in 
Russia. 
  Commenting on the results of the elections to the Duma and 
the Federal Assembly, Sovietologists and Russian experts here -- 
from journalists to scientists and officials -- have been 
obsessed, as it were, by the figure of V. Zhirinovskiy, who 
suddenly pushed President Yeltsin himself into the background on 
the Russian political horizon. Clinton promised in advance not 
to meet with Zhirinovskiy. But then he seemed to regret his 
blurted assurance, since U.S. mass information channels at once 
carried caustic retorts from Vladimir Volfovich accusing the 
U.S. President of cowardice. 
  It has to be said that, in general, the U.S. reaction to the 
Russian elections still bears the imprint of perplexity and 
vagueness -- leading, so it seems to me, to serious tactical 
errors. Such, in my view, was Clinton's recent statement that 
Russia should not put the brakes on but "continue the policy of 
reforms" with the same persistence. And the United States in 
turn should "redouble efforts" to assist these reforms. 
  Such provisos can only reinforce suspicions that the 
reforms, 
in the form in which they have so far been implemented, are 
advantageous to the United States rather than to Russia. This 
is not to mention the fact that Clinton's statement struck a 
discordant note against the statements by Yeltsin and by V. 
Chernomyrdin, who are receiving him in Moscow, on the need to 
revise the reforms' course and speed of implementation and 
urgently amend the "shock therapy." 
  To judge from this and certain other statements by leading 
figures in the Washington administration, people in the United 
States still find it difficult to answer the question of where 
Russia is going. 
  The NATO Council session in Brussels, preceding the Moscow 
talks, will have been a factor of considerable importance 
determining the substance and tone of this top-level meeting. 
The attempt which Clinton made there to direct the evolution of 
the North Atlantic alliance into the channel of the "Partnership 
for Peace" doctrine, which has still not been formulated 
sufficiently distinctly, attests that Washington does not wish 
to offend Russia too overtly by hastily receiving into the bloc 
the East European and even certain Baltic countries which are 
knocking on its doors. 
  The picture of Russian-U.S. cooperation in the security 
sphere appears far from brilliant. Because of continuing 
sabotage by Kiev, the START I Treaty has still not been ratified 
by all the parties to it. This in turn is blocking the 
fulfillment of the next important agreement in the sphere of 
reducing strategic arms -- START II. 
  One more problem could arise because of the alarm caused in 
the United States by Russia's new military doctrine, which 
provides for the maintenance of an army of more than 2 million 
men and the possibility, so it is believed here, of its being 
used to protect Russian interests in the former Soviet 
republics. The United States is really concerned about such a 
manifestation of the "imperial ambitions" of Russian generals, 
although the White House and the State Department are trying to 
damp down this alarm. Attempts have even been made here to 
essentially repudiate certain statements by Russian Defense 
Minister P. Grachev. 
  It is not entirely clear how and at whose expense the 
program 
of joint maneuvers by U.S. and Russian military units will be 
implemented. The money allocated by the U.S. Congress to assist 
in the matter of destroying the nuclear arms being reduced under 
joint treaties and agreements is not being used. A derisorily 
small sum -- just a few million dollars -- has so far been spent 
on the widely publicized U.S. assistance in the sphere of 
constructing housing for Russian servicemen and their families. 
It is noteworthy that U.S. companies have refused to construct 
houses in Russia for such a pittance. True, there are now 
reports of the future allocation of considerably larger sums.... 
  It is obvious that both in the case of the "Partnership for 
Peace" within the NATO framework and in cooperation with Russia 
on questions of security Washington does not yet have a 
definite, clear-cut program or a clear strategy. There is only 
the desire to secure the U.S. leadership position, as the only 
military superpower, and to accelerate the nuclear disarmament 
of its former "No. 1 rival." 
  Now, so it seems to me, only decisive, major, and effective 
steps by the U.S. Administration for the specific revival of the 
Russian economy are capable of saving the pretty-well undermined 
prestige of U.S. and Western "aid" in general to Russia. 
  Matters have reached the point where last year Russia found 
itself unable to pay even for subsidized U.S. grain, which for 
long years was the most impressive heading under "aid" from 
abroad. In the opinion of many economists, it is precisely this 
"grain fix," like a narcotic, that has shattered the health of 
Russian national agricultural production. 
  Once again the U.S. delegation's baggage contains more 
advice 
and political declarations than specific economic programs or, 
most importantly, funds to implement them. 
  New aid initiatives for Russia should not be expected from 
the visit, THE WASHINGTON POST warns. Impressive new economic 
aid programs will hardly be announced in Moscow, other 
newspapers echo it. 
  In vain have I spent several weeks asking "high-ranking 
representatives" to report on specific new initiatives or 
agreements which have been prepared and which will be discussed 
by the U.S. and Russian presidents at their talks in Moscow. 
Nor have I managed to obtain a detailed answer to the question 
of how the large-scale joint projects already announced are 
being implemented. Although it is maintained here that the 
first $1 billion of the "Vancouver package" of $1.6 billion has 
already been distributed. 
  Nevertheless, we know that it has not yet been possible to 
start implementing even many of the financial aid programs 
already promised to Russia. This applies in particular to the 
ambitious $3 billion privatization aid fund. U.S. 
Administration staff admitted recently that this fund has not 
yet secured the necessary money. Nor has Russia succeeded in 
obtaining much of the $2.5 billion in additional aid allocated 
by Congress after the Clinton-Yeltsin Vancouver meeting. 
  I would like to hope that in the talks the two presidents 
and 
the other participants in the dialogue between the two great 
powers will be able to find the way to really fill their 
relations with specific, businesslike substance. 
  It seems to me that this alone is capable of ensuring the 
long-term interests of Russia's cooperation with the United 
States. The United States still has to prove that the 
statements frequently proclaimed in Washington about our 
relations' shifting from the period of coexistence to an epoch 
of partnership will be backed up by specific deeds and decisions. 

