Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on regional guerrilla activities and clashes with 
government military units monitored through 28 February. Source 
is cited in parentheses following each item. 
<H5>  Colombia </H5>
  One policeman and two women were killed in a terrorist 
attack 
staged by the Guerrilla Coordinating Board, CNG, against a 
police patrol in Antioquia Department. According to reports, 
suspected guerrillas of the Army of National Liberation, ELN, 
activated a dynamite charge as the police patrol was passing by 
the "El Mico" curve, in Yondo, Antioquia. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL 
NUEVO SIGLO in Spanish 19 Feb 94 p 15a) 
  Two policemen and one soldier were killed, two citizens, two 
policemen, and five soldiers were injured during the occupation 
of the municipal offices in Cucutilla, Norte de Santander, by 
150 ELN and Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, FARC, 
guerrillas. The incursion began at 1830 on 18 February and 
ended at approximately 0200 on 19 February. The rebels also 
stole more than 10 million pesos from the Agrarian Fund, burned 
documents, and damaged the building; communications between 
Cucutilla and the rest of the department were cut off as 
terrorist destroyed the Telecom offices. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL 
TIEMPO in Spanish 20 Feb 94 p 24a) 
  A police officer and two criminals were killed, 13 suspected 
guerrillas were arrested and weapons, communications equipment, 
and subversive propaganda were confiscated as a result of an 
operation carried out on 19 February against a presumed ELN 
commando in Granada, Antioquia. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in 
Spanish 20 Feb 94 p 24a) 
  One subofficer and three policemen were injured, a 
communications tower and a toll booth were blown up, and two 
police stations were partially destroyed as a result of four 
guerrilla actions on 19 and 20 February in Cundinamarca 
Department. In addition, four political offices and the 
Venezuelan Consulate in Medellin were targets of bomb attacks by 
CNG terrorists. In another action in Icononzo, Tolima, two 
persons were killed and eight injured in an ambush against the 
police. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 21 Feb 94 p 3a) 
  FARC guerrillas kidnapped Congressman Thomas Devia Lozano, 
who was campaigning in Guaviare Department. Meanwhile, in 
clashes in Norte de Santander three policemen and one soldier 
were killed, nine were wounded, and six were kidnapped. (Santa 
Fe de Bogota EL NUEVO SIGLO in Spanish 20 Feb 94 p 8) 
  Military operations in Middle Magdalena, Santander 
Department, resulted in the recovery of stolen goods worth more 
than 150 million pesos and the dismantling of seven FARC camps 
in the sector of Las Lajas, near the oil port of 
Barrancabermeja. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL NUEVO SIGLO in Spanish 
24 Feb 94 p 13a) 
  Guerrillas attacked the town of Caparrapi on 26 February, 
injuring a police subofficer. As a result of this action, 
Senator Enrique Gomez Hurtado suspended his political activities 
in that area. Two policemen were killed during an incursion by 
FARC guerrillas in Soacha, south of Santa Fe de Bogota, on the 
night of 25 February. There were also clashes on 25 February in 
the rural area of Ovejas, Sucre Department, between a Navy 
patrol and a guerrilla group that attacked a Navy post. (Santa 
Fe de Bogota Inravision Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 1800 GMT 
26 Feb 94) 
  Hector Duran Lopez, mayor of San Vicente de Cauan, Deputy 
Antonio Abad Rojas, and a police agent were kidnapped on 27 
February in Caqueta Department. Authorities have blamed FARC 
guerrillas for this action. (Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision 
Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 0130 GMT 28 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Guatemala </H5>
  A propaganda bomb placed by unidentified individuals 
exploded 
in the central market in western Department of Totonicapan, it 
was officially reported on 26 February. The bomb contained 
propaganda leaflets for the Guatemalan National Revolutionary 
Unity. In addition, on 23 February unidentified individuals 
hurled a grenade at the offices of the Association of Engineers, 
causing serious property damage. (Mexico City NOTIMEX in Spanish 
1824 GMT 26 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Peru </H5>
  The National Police reported on 25 February that 23 Shining 
Path activists were arrested in Ancash Department, in northern 
Peru. They carried a list of persons who were going to be 
killed, including Transportation and Communications Minister 
Dante Cordova. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 1406 GMT 25 Feb 94) 

