Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Anatol Johansen: "Flying High Without Much </F>
Money -- Europe's Astronauts Will Go Into Space in a Capsule on 
Board the Ariane Rocket"] 
  [Text] Europe is running out of money in space. The 
European research ministers agreed last year that the 13 member 
states of the European Space Agency (ESA) were to spend about 40 
billion German marks [DM] on space up to the year 2000. The 
talk later was of DM35 billion, but even this sum can no longer 
be scraped together. In particular Germany, which has paid an 
annual contribution of DM1.2 billion to ESA to date, and Italy 
wants a further cut in their dues. 
  The European space planners thus find themselves forced to 
change course: The Hermes manned space transporter, which has 
already cost over DM1.75 billion to develop, has been officially 
struck off the ESA program. 
  The "Proposal for a New ESA Strategy" that has now been 
submitted to the ESA member states in Paris recommends a manned 
capsule by the name of the "crew transfer vehicle" (CTV). The 
CTV will be able to convey at least four astronauts into space 
and cost "only" DM2.5 billion. The investment required for 
Hermes is put at DM12 to 15 billion. 
  The capsule will be borne into space on the new European 
launch rocket, Ariane-5, which is scheduled to enter service in 
1995. The planned space vehicle could provide transport to and 
from an international space station and would render Europe 
independent in manned space flight, even without Hermes. 
  The new proposal that ESA has put to its member states also 
envisages a further reduction, to only six meters, in the length 
of the manned Columbus cabin, which is designed to form part of 
an international space station. The module would thus not only 
be cheaper, but would weigh in at about 10 tonnes: Light enough 
for launch on the Ariane-5 rather than the American space 
transporter, as previously envisaged. 
  As late as the November 1992 meeting held in Granada, 
expenditure amounting to about DM5 billion had been sanctioned 
for the Columbus module over the 1994-2000 period. The 
foreshortened model is now expected to be almost DM1.5 billion 
cheaper. ESA also intends to design the Columbus module in such 
a way that, should the need arise, it could serve as the basis 
for a small ESA space station. 
  Last but not least, a space tug will also be built to carry 
manned space vehicles and other payloads from low orbit to the 
space station. 
  The ESA Council is due to meet in Paris on 14 December to 
discuss the new European space program. 

