Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 14 Jan (MENA)--The final touches are 
currently being put to the provisional Palestinian constitution 
that will be enacted during the transitional period as soon as 
power is transferred to the Palestinians in accordance with the 
Declaration of Principles signed in Washington in September. 
Jamal al-Surani, PLO Executive Committee member and supervisor 
of the Constitution Drafting Committee, stated that the most 
important features of the new constitution is that the system of 
government in the Palestinian state is republican and democratic 
and it emphasizes the freedoms of individuals and that the 
establishments, not individuals, rule. 
  In a statement to MENA, al-Surani said that the new 
constitution emphasizes the necessity for complete separation of 
powers and for granting individuals full freedoms, ruling out 
exceptional laws and nonroutine judiciary. He said that the 
Palestinian constitution also stresses the need to elect a real 
parliament to govern and to represent the people. It provides 
for the election of a head of state for a limited period and 
through free and direct elections. 
  Al-Surani pointed out that the committee enacting the 
provisional Palestinian constitution, which comprises seven 
senior Palestinian lawmakers, began its work four months ago, 
noting that the committee sought guidance from numerous 
constitutions around the world. He noted that the provisional 
constitution consists of 50 articles. He said that the 
permanent constitution of the Palestinian state will be enacted 
by the Palestinian people themselves on their land. He noted 
that the new constitution emphasizes individual ownership, a 
market economy, and the gradual provision of social and medical 
guarantees to the Palestinian people. He noted that it is not 
easy for a nascent entity to provide for all its people's needs. 
The constitution, he said, also emphasizes the principles of 
political plurality and the establishment of diverse political 
parties to compete in legislative elections. 
  Al-Surani said that the number of representatives in the 
Palestinian parliament, according to the constitution, will be 
in proportion to the population, noting that a system for the 
election of the legislative council is being prepared to 
determine the conditions that parliament members should meet. 
He noted that the formation of the Palestinian government will 
be the responsibility of the political party that wins the 
largest number of Parliamentary seats. If no party wins a 
majority of votes, a coalition will be set up from several 
political parties. He pointed out that the Palestinian council 
of ministers will be responsible to parliament and not to the 
president of the republic and that the council's responsibility 
will be collective and not individual. 

