Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Xinmao [3769 0207 5399] of the Water </F>
Conservancy and Hydropower Planning and Design Academy] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Abstract </H5>
  Water flow in the Jinsha Jiang is abundant and steady. The 
drop is huge and concentrated. A total of 75.12 million kW of 
installed capacity is possible, capable of producing 355.5 
billion kWh of electricity per year. This corresponds 
respectively to 20 and 19 percent of the capacity and power 
production to be developed nationally. It is the most 
concentrated water resource in the world. In the past, this 
"lode" was not developed due to its geographic location and 
regional economy. As our economy grows, speeding up the 
development of the Jinsha Jiang Hydropower Base will have a 
major effect on alleviating the severe power shortage in the 
southeast, improving our energy structure, industrial structure, 
and ecology in the upper reaches of the Chang Jiang, and 
promoting economic growth in southwest and southeast China. 
  In response to a recommendation made by the Southern 
Electric 
Utility Corporation, the China Electric Power Association and 
the China Society of Hydropower Engineering organized a visit to 
the middle and lower reaches of the Jinsha Jiang. Experts and 
top officials of different departments from the central, 
regional and provincial government and in the area of survey and 
design, participated in this effort. The primary purpose of the 
visit was to invite our comrades from the southeast, where a 
severe energy shortage exists, to take a first-hand look at the 
energy resources available on the Jinsha Jiang and to explore 
the possibility to jointly develop this resource to supply 
electric power from west to east. 
<H5>  (I) Jinsha Jiang Resources Are Abundant and Easy To Develop </H5>
  The Jinsha Jiang is a branch of the upper reaches of the 
Chang Jiang and flows from Yushu, Qinghai, to Yibin, Sichuan. It 
flows through Qinghai, Xizang, Sichuan, and Yunnan, and is 2,290 
kilometers long. It covers a basin of more than 490,000 
km[.sup]2[/]. The flow is abundant and steady and the head is 
huge and concentrated. The average flow is 4,920 
m[.sup]3[/]/s and the mean annual discharge is 155 billion 
m[.sup]3[/]. There is not much fluctuation in the annual 
discharge. The ratio of the wettest to the driest year is merely 
1.38. The main stream has a drop of 3,280 m and the mean drop is 
1.43 percent. It can accommodate a total installed capacity of 
75.12 million kW and produce 355.5 billion kWh of electricity 
per year, corresponding to 20 percent of the capacity to be 
developed nationwide and 19 percent of the electricity to be 
generated. The amount of electric power generated per year is 
equivalent to 128 million tons of standard coal. It will play a 
pivotal role in balancing our primary energy resources. It ranks 
first in the world in terms of abundance and concentration of 
hydropower resource. 
  The middle and lower section of the Jinsha Jiang, from Shigu 
to Yibin, is the focus of research and development. After 
repeated surveys, proofs of concept, and planning in the past 30 
years, according to the "Briefing on Comprehensive Utilization 
of the Chang Jiang Basin Plan" and the development plans 
prepared by the Kunming Institute and the Chengdu Institute, the 
middle and lower reaches of the Jinsha Jiang can be developed in 
10 stages. Figure 1 is a schematic diagram of the cascade 
development. Figure 2 shows the cross-section view of the 
cascade development. Major specifications of the power stations 
are shown in the table. After additional surveys and studies 
done in 1992, the Kunming Institute proposed to build at 
Jinanqiao instead of Zhili and at Yanke instead of Hongmenkou. 
The accompanying table illustrates that this development project 
will result in tremendous benefits. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-CEN-002C-16A>           Figure 1. Plane View of Cascade Development of the Jinsha Jiang </FIG>







<FIG ID=JPRS-CEN-002C-17A>           Figure 2. Cross-Section of Cascade Development of the Jinsha Jiang </FIG>








  Major Specifications of Hydropower Stations Along the Middle and Lower Reaches of the Jinsha Jiang 

Item           Upper        Lower        Hongmenkou    Zhili     Pichang    Guanyinyan    Wudongde    Baihetan    Xiloudu        Xiangjiaba 
               Hutiaoxia    Hutiaoxia 

Normal water   1,950        1,800        1,620         1,390     1,259      1,128         950         820         600            380 
level (m) 

Total          17.95--      8.58         1.22          5.92      3.37       4.00          19.50       12.06       4.77 
capacity 
(100 million 
m[.sup]3[/]) 

Regulating     12.95        --           1.85          0.21      2.22       0.77          1.60        9.30        6.62           0.91 
capacity 
(100 million 
m[.sup]3[/]) 

Installed      3.00         3.00         4.00          2.00      2.50       2.50          7.40        12.50       10.08/14.48    5.00/7.20 
capacity 
(million kW) 


Annual power   12.242       16.251       23.892        13.129    14.349     13.723        32.00       55.00       53.16/64.00    26.18/30.85 
production 
(100 million 
kWh) 

Guaranteed     12.131       17.266       24.289        13.618    14.143     12.756        28.79       49.26       34.6/58.68     13.67/28.89 
capacity 
(100 million 
kW) 


<H5>  1. Tremendous Power Generating Capability </H5>
  On the basis of the plan that the water level at the 
Hutiaoxia Reservoir is 1,950 m, 51.98-58.58 million kW of 
generators can be installed to produce 263.7-275.4 billion kWh 
of electricity annually. If the 2,012 m scheme proposed by the 
Kunming Institute is adopted, an extra 1.5 million kW of 
generator capacity can be installed at the Upper and Lower 
Hutiaoxia hydropower stations and an additional 11 million kW of 
capacity can be built downriver to produce an extra 21 billion 
kWh of electricity a year. 
<H5>  2. Excellent Regulating Effect </H5>
  The "spigot" reservoir at Upper Hutiaoxia and two additional 
huge reservoirs at Baijidu and Xiluodu will regulate the river 
flow to ensure good power-generating quality. 
<H5>  3. Good Overall Benefits </H5>

  The development will also result in other benefits such as 
flood control, silting, irrigation, navigation and soil 
preservation. 
<H5>  4. Better Geologic Condition </H5>
  Although the region is frequently struck by earthquakes, 
dams 
can be built in relatively stable sites with better geologic 
conditions. Each cascade has the geologic condition to build a 
tall dam. 
<H5>  5. Superior Technoeconomic Indicators </H5>
  The hydropower station at each cascade has superior 
technoeconomic indicators such as the amount of engineering 
work, construction cost, flooding loss, and population 
relocation. 
<H3>  6. Major Improvements in Transportation at Most Hydropower 
Station Sites </H3>
  National or provincial highways pass through sites such as 
the Upper Hutiaoxia, Jinanqiao, Guanyinyan, Xiluodu, and 
Xiangjiaba. Lower Hutiaoxia and Baihetan are accessible by local 
roads. In addition, most hydropower station sites are located 
near towns and villages. 
<H3>  (II) Development of the Jinsha Jiang Has Major Strategic 
Significance </H3>
<H3>  1. Deliver Electricity From West to East To Alleviate Energy 
Shortage in the Southeast </H3>
  Energy resources are in short supply in the eastern, central 
and southern regions. The shipping of coal produced in the north 
to the south puts a tremendous strain on transportation. With 
sustained economic growth, there is a rising demand for energy 
and electricity. If we continue to rely upon coal alone, it will 
be difficult for our production and transportation system to 
meet our demand. Pollution is a major problem and it is 
impossible to build a large number of costly nuclear power 
plants to solve our energy shortage problem. The abundant water 
energy resource in the southwest, especially the delivery of 
electric power generated from the Jinsha Jiang eastward, is an 
important energy resource for the southeast. On the basis of our 
analysis, if the cascades of the Jinsha Jiang Hydropower Project 
are completed in 2040, 50 million kW of power can be supplied to 
the east. This will have a major impact on alleviating the 
energy shortage and improving the primary energy structure in 
the southeast. 
<H3>  2. Developing Hydropower To Lead Economic Growth in the 
Southwest </H3>
  Since the reform, although there has been some economic 
growth along the Jinsha Jiang, with the exception of a few 
cities such as Panzhihua and Yibin, the growth is still very 
slow, particularly in minority areas. Nevertheless, there is an 
abundance of hydropower, mineral and biomass resources. Speeding 
up the work to develop the Jinsha Jiang can drive up the 
development of other natural resources in the region and improve 
the local economy and cultural standard. It will convert its 
resource advantage to economic advantage and can improve the 
layout of our industrial structure. Developing the Jinsha Jiang 
can also improve the ecology in the upper reaches of the Chang 
Jiang. In addition, it will bring a fortune to our minorities. 
This helps solidify us as a nation to secure our southwestern 
border. It carries a great deal of political and economic 
significance. 
<H3>  3. Development of the Jinsha Jiang Hydropower Base Will Make 
the Three Gorges More Economically Beneficial </H3>
  The completion of the Jinsha Jiang cascades will produce a 
total water storage capacity of 77 billion m[.sup]3[/], a 
regulating capacity of 36 billion m[.sup]3[/], and some flood 
control capacity. By regulating the reservoirs, the flow 
downstream will increase in the dry season and decrease during a 
flood. Furthermore, it will also block sand from washing down 
the river. 
  (1) After the Xiluodu reservoir is constructed, by way of 
regulating the flow, the city of Yibin will have the capability 
to deal with a 100-year flood, instead of the current 20-year 
flood. In addition, it can also reduce the flow of floodwater 
into the Three Gorges to improve its flood control capability. 
  (2) After the Xiluodu reservoir is completed, the dam will 
block the movement of suspended material from upstream. In 30 
years, it can intercept 67 percent of the suspending materials, 
the equivalent to reducing the suspension at Yichang by 30 
percent. As a result, it will slow down the rise of flood levels 
at the end of the Three Gorges caused by silting. 
  (3) According to an analysis done by the Chengdu Institute, 
regulation provided by the Xiluodu reservoir can produce an 
additional 880,000 kW of capacity to the hydropower stations at 
Xiangjiaba, Three Gorges, and Gejiaba and generate 1.6 billion 
kWh of electricity per year. 
  (4) By the regulating power of the Xiluodu reservoir, the 
minimum flow during drought season can be increased from 1,060 
m[.sup]3[/]/s to 2,000 m[.sup]3[/]/s to improve the 
navigation conditions down the Jinsha Jiang and along the upper 
reaches of the Chang Jiang. 
<H3>  (III) Progress in Early Stage Work on Jinsha Jiang 
Hydropower Base </H3>
  1. Hutiaoxia Cascade. The Hutiaoxia gorge is approximately 
22 
km in length and has a 200 m drop. It has numerous shoals and 
rapids and steep cliffs on both banks. Most exposed rocks are 
marble and quartzite. Some geologic survey and planning work was 
done by the Chang Jiang Water Conservancy Commission in the 
1960s. The South China Institute has established a hydrology 
station at the Longpanba site in Hutiaoxia to conduct planning 
stage survey work. As for the development of Hutiaoxia, the 
schemes studied in the past include a two-stage approach, 
building two tall dams at upper and lower Hutiaoxia, and a 
hybrid approach, building a tall dam at upper Hutiaoxia and 
leading water from the right shore to a power plant in lower 
Hutiaoxia. Specifically, with reference to the fact that the 
original upper Hutiaoxia dam site is too narrow, designers also 
proposed to move the dam upstream to Longpan where the river is 
wide. These approaches are being studied as a part of the 
planning work. 
  Normal water level should be selected primarily based on 
Yunnan's ability to absorb flooding of farmland and relocation 
of people. Presently, Yunnan is leaning toward a high water 
level plan. This not only can generate more electricity along 
different stages but also can bring water to irrigate 
approximately 1.2 million mu of farmland in central Yunnan. 
These are issues to be investigated in the planning stage. The 
next step is to study and demonstrate the scale and method of 
development at Hutiaoxia and to determine the normal water level 
in the Upper Hutiaoxia reservoir. This front end work needs to 
be accelerated to ensure that it plays a "lead" role after 
hydropower stations at Xiangjiaba and Xiluodu are put on line. 
  2. Jinanqiao Cascade. With the support of Yunnan, on the 
basis of a comparison of terrain, geology, transportation, and 
construction conditions, the Kunming Institute proposed to 
replace Zhili with Jinanqiao. It has also completed a planning 
survey. The dam site is primarily covered with dense basalt and 
a small amount of tuff. It is a better site. The station is to 
be built behind the dam. Initially, a 2.5 million kW station 
with a guaranteed production of 1.273 million kW is planned. The 
scale appears to be appropriate. If possible, this early stage 
development proposal by Yunnan should be supported. 
  3. Guanyinyan Cascade. This dam site, primarily covered by 
quartzite and silt, will be developed with a power plant behind 
the dam. The Kunming Institute has completed the planning survey 
work. The plant is of an appropriate size and has the necessary 
conditions for development. The city of Panshihua hopes that 
construction can begin as soon as possible. Regardless which one 
of the three proposed sites is chosen, Huaping County in Yunnan 
will be flooded by the reservoir. A comprehensive technoeconomic 
analysis should be done in the early stage to choose the most 
appropriate site. 
  4. Baihetan Cascade. As early as the 1950s, under extremely 
difficult circumstances, the Kunming Institute conducted survey 
and design work with experts from Czechoslovakia on this site. 
The East China Institute has built roads and erected cable 
bridges to conduct surveys for the planning stage. This site is 
primarily covered with hard basalt. It stands on solid bedrock 
that offers an excellent geologic condition. Other conditions 
for development are also outstanding. It is a key project to 
deliver electric power from the Jinsha Jiang eastward. Moreover, 
it regulates the flow downstream at Xiluodu and Xiangjiaba. 
  5. Xiluodu Cascade. Here, the river channel is straight in a 
V-shaped valley. Bedrock, mostly basalt, is exposed on either 
bank. It is hard and solid. Geologically, it is perfect for the 
construction of a tall dam and underground buildings. Developing 
conditions such as construction and transportation are good. 
Xiluodu is the largest hydropower station on the Jinsha Jiang. 
Its reservoir has the ability to regulate the river flow year 
round. The Chengdu Institute has conducted a great deal of 
survey and design work for several years. If the front-end cost 
is assured, a dam site selection report can be prepared by the 
end of 1993. A feasibility report can be finished in 1995. 
Development of Xiluodu is an ideal first phase project for the 
delivery of electricity from the Jinsha Jiang eastbound. Local 
global governments want an early development. 
  6. Xiangjiaba Cascade. The Chengdu Institute began site 
surveys in 1975. These were followed by geological surveys done 
by the Wujing Hydropower Survey Team. In 1985, the design survey 
responsibility was switched to the South China Institute. In 
1990, the Institute of Water Conservancy held a site selection 
meeting for the dam. Site VII is preferred and site III is the 
alternate. The dam site base is sandstone. The South China 
Institute is working on the hub layout at the selected site, 
performing hydraulic model experiments, conducting geologic 
survey work, and mapping navigation channels. This station has 
the best conditions for construction and transportation. In 
addition, cities such as Yinbin and Shuifu are close by. The 
overall benefit of the power station is substantial. 
Furthermore, it works as a reverse regulating reservoir for the 
Xiluodu hydropower station. It will benefit both the power grid 
and navigation. If the preliminary phase funding can be secured, 
a feasibility report may be completed in 1984. 
  Xiangjiaba and Xiluodu are sister power stations. They 
should 
be included in the first phase of construction on the lower 
reaches of the Jinsha Jiang. 
<H3>  (IV) Preliminary Understanding of the Development of the 
Jinsha Jiang </H3>
  Since the 1950s, organizations such as the Chang Jiang Water 
Conservancy Commission, Kunming Institute, Chengdu Institute, 
South China Institute, East China Institute, and the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences have conducted a great many surveys and 
planning and design work on the Jinsha Jiang and acquired a 
tremendous amount of data. In 1981, the Chengdu Institute 
prepared a plan to develop the lower reaches. Since feasibility 
studies of Xiluodu and Xiangjiaba are in progress, as time goes 
by, many new findings will surface. As for the middle reaches, 
the Kunming Institute is conducting full-scale planning work. 
The survey and design work in the planning stage for the 
Hutiaoxia cascade is being conducted by the South China 
Institute. In recent years, the China Electric Power Association 
and the China Society of Hydropower Engineering have also done a 
great deal of work on the development of the Jinsha Jiang. The 
following is a discussion on strengthening the early-stage 
effort. 
<H5>  1. Sticking to a Basic Construction Process </H5>
  We must stick to a basic construction process despite the 
fact that our economy is growing at a fast pace and the depth of 
reform is getting deeper. Preparation of a hydropower planning 
report is an important stage. It determines the scope, phases 
and sequence (selection of first stage work) of the development 
effort. It is the foundation required for a feasibility study of 
every hydropower station. We must do a good job to prepare a 
hydropower planning report for the middle and lower reaches of 
the Jinsha Jiang. 
<H5>  2. Study Major Technoeconomic Issues in Depth </H5>
  The Jinsha Jiang is China's largest hydropower base. We must 
rigorously perform the front-end preparation work and study 
related major technoeconomic issues in great detail. 
  (1) On the basis of the overall development plan of the 
Chang 
Jiang Basin, the Jinsha Jiang is supposed to be developed for 
hydropower, navigation, irrigation, water supply, and flood 
control for areas downriver. There are different requirements 
for the different cascades. Various industries also have 
different requirements for the development of the Jinsha Jiang. 
Some of them are extremely demanding. It makes the planning and 
early stage work very difficult. 
  (2) Although there is an abundance of resources along the 
Jinsha Jiang, there is only a limited amount of land available 
for development. This makes the relocation of people more 
difficult. Furthermore, the region belongs to minorities. We 
must clearly understand the degree of difficulty in relocating 
the population. 
  (3) The Jinsha Jiang valley is narrow and the river is 
swift. 
It also contains a great deal of mud and sand. The riverbed has 
a thick overburden layer. It is located in a high earthquake 
frequency zone. In addition, there are problems such as high 
slopes and reservoir bank stability. Individual reservoirs may 
leak. These natural conditions make the engineering design and 
construction more difficult. 
  (4) From the standpoint of the scale of the project, all 
hydropower stations are more than 2 million kW. Technical 
requirements for tall dams are very stringent. Many issues such 
as tall dam construction, high capacity water turbine 
generators, ultrahigh voltage power transmission technology and 
diversion in high-flow situations must be investigated. Some 
issues may require considerable development. 
<H3>  (V) Suggestions on Accelerating Jinsha Jiang Hydropower 
Development </H3>
  The rapid growth of our economy, particularly in the 
southeast, presents an urgent need to resolve the power shortage 
problem. Developing the Jinsha Jiang is a way to actually 
deliver electricity to the east. Moreover, development of the 
Jinsha Jiang is an important component in the control and 
development of the Chang Jiang and the economic strip along the 
Chang Jiang. To this end, the author has the following 
suggestions. 
  1. Stronger Government Leadership. Development of the Jinsha 
Jiang is a strategic project that will have a significant impact 
on the economy. It should be treated as serious as the project 
to divert water to the north from the south. Under the guidance 
of the State Planning Commission and the Ministry of Electric 
Power Industry, a Jinsha Jiang development office should be 
established to study major policy issues such as hydropower 
development schemes, capital-raising approaches, electricity 
pricing policy, rights and benefits related to provinces that 
own the resources and those that consume power (plus power 
station ownership and distribution of benefits of hydropower 
stations bordering two or more provinces), and shouldering 
investments for overall utilization, and provide its finding to 
the government in the decision-making process. 
  2. Expanded Publicity. In order to accelerate the Jinsha 
Jiang, the project should be more aggressively promoted through 
a variety of channels by different means to make more people in 
more departments and industries aware of the significance of 
building a hydropower energy base in the southwest to allow the 
appropriate authorities and departments to adopt the necessary 
economic, legal and administrative measures to help implement 
and support this project. This will bring more organizations and 
more people to support the development of hydropower along the 
Jinsha Jiang. 
  3. Securing Early Stage Funding. The scale of the project to 
build the Jinsha Jiang hydropower stations is enormous. There 
will be a great deal of work at the front end for a considerable 
period of time. If construction is to begin in the year 2000, 
early stage work should start now, otherwise it will be too 
late. It will seriously impact the development effort. To 
accelerate the development of the Jinsha Jiang, the focus now is 
to begin early stage planning work of key hydropower stations 
and sites along the river. To speed up this early stage work, we 
need to increase the level of funding. The Planning and Design 
Academy is very much concerned about the early stage work for 
the Jinsha Jiang project and has scheduled several design units 
to get involved in the early stage work on the river sections 
and hydropower stations at Xiangjiaba and Xiluodu. Nevertheless, 
progress is hampered due to a severe shortage of funds. To solve 
this problem, a special request was submitted to the State 
Planning Commission, the Ministry of Electric Power Industry and 
the National Energy Resources Investment Corporation. In 
addition, based on the principle of a market economy, the 
authority should negotiate with the electric utilities in 
central, eastern and southern China to invest in the project for 
future consumption in order to raise money to cover the front 
end work and the construction cost. 
  Furthermore, the suggestion that the Three Gorges 
Development 
Corporation invests in the Jinsha Jiang project should also be 
followed up and nailed down. Upon completion of the Three Gorges 
project, it is a natural for the cooperation to immediately 
develop the Jinsha Jiang. If this suggestion is accepted, early 
stage funding will be secured and ownership of the project will 
be clear. It will further facilitate the progress of early stage 
work. 
  Under the premise of increased funding, through strengthened 
leadership and coordination, requirements on quality and 
progress can be further defined. Different tasks can then be 
assigned and various units can relatively quickly produce 
quality planning design reports. If funding cannot be increased, 
then all our efforts on proof of concept and schemes will be in 
vain. 
  4. Speeding Up the Planning Report. This report should 
include details such as voltages of eastbound electricity, stage 
development plan, and development sequence. It should be 
officially reviewed by the government to serve as the basis for 
the design of various stages of hydropower stations. It should 
be pointed out that an approved river hydropower planning report 
is a necessity to attract capital from other provinces and 
countries. 
  Development of the Jinsha Jiang is a monumental task that is 
going to take place between this and the next century. As long 
as the government provides stronger leadership, increases the 
level of funding for early stage work, relies on science and 
technology, takes control over planning and design, formulates 
appropriate policies, and obeys the principle of a socialist 
market economy in raising construction capital, there is a 
possibility that the Jinsha Jiang Hydropower Base project may 
start in 2000. By 2010, electricity will be transmitted 
eastward. The Jinsha Jiang Hydropower Base will be completed by 
2040. 

