Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Gurvich; under the title RA Global </F>
Information System Is Not a Utopia: Its Design Has Been 
Developed by International Scientists, under the rubric 
Perspective] 
  [Text] The International Academy of 
Information-Disseminating Technology [MAI] was established in 
1991. At the present time it has 80 regional divisions in 
Russia, the countries of the CIS [Commonwealth of Independent 
States], Europe and America, where its 1,200 members and 
corresponding members work. The Academy has set as its principal 
aim the objective of promoting in every way possible the 
construction of a society in which each individual may freely 
use the information resources accumulated by mankind. Right now 
the International Academy of Information-Disseminating 
Technology is actively preparing to hold an International Forum 
on Information-Disseminating Technology. It will take place in 
the Hall of Columns of the House of Unions from 23 through 26 
November. 
  I was talking to the First Vice-President of the 
International Academy of Information-Disseminating Technology, a 
leading scientist in the field of computer technology, Eduard 
Evreinov. As far back as the 1950's he proposed principles for 
increasing the output of computer processes that have been 
widely recognized throughout the world. 
  The line I am working along is the construction of a system 
of high-output facilities which use the model of the collective. 
Its essence resides in the fact that the calculations are not 
done by one person, but by several. The summation of common 
efforts increase the power of the operations being performed 
many fold. The President of our Academy, Ivan Yuzvishin, has 
advanced the following theory on the basis of these principles: 
let us build a society consisting of small cells, for example, 
microregions, and let them interact with one another, and agree 
on their relationships with one another. That is, the entire 
society will acquire the structure of a honeycomb. What I am 
saying can be illustrated by the situation which has developed 
between Russia and Tatarstan, in which just such an interaction 
model has been used. When I told the President of Tatarstan, 
Shaymiyev, that he was acting in the vein of YuzvishinUs model, 
he had not known this, but he was pleased that the correctness 
of his policy has been confirmed by science. In this case the 
issue is not self-isolation, but the fact that each country or 
sovereign republic itself determines the internal regulations of 
its life. When, on the other hand, the issue relates to problems 
whose solution exceeds the capacities of the republic, it 
delegates a portion of its plenary powers to whomever it wishes. 
  You are in favor of the creation of a unified global 
information space. So, your activity should be of the same 
world-wide character. 
  The International Academy of Information-Disseminating 
Technology is now on the threshold of joining UNESCO; the 
question of our recognition as an independent organization is 
being considered by the UN. Our centers, in addition to Moscow, 
are located in Washington, Riga, and Kazan. I think, as far as 
Washington and Riga go, this is more or less understandable. But 
why Kazan? We want to use this region as an example, to create a 
model of an information community, all the more so since, as I 
have already said, President Shaymiyev is using its principles 
in his activities. He has been granted, in this connection, an 
honorary diploma of our Academy. 
  All that's fine, but I would like to know what the Academy 
is 
engaged in specifically, since it has taken on itself such a 
serious mission. 
  First we need to talk about our means of existence, since 
everyone knows how science is financed here. We have taken 
earning our own money as our principle. In practical terms we 
have the possibility of developing all kinds of projects, since 
we bring together scientists and practitioners working along the 
most diverse lines. Let me cite an example. A scientist who has 
six discoveries to his credit is a member of the International 
Academy of Information-Disseminating Technology. There are no 
other scientists of this level in the world. He invented a 
system which makes it possible to measure the flow rate of a 
liquid with a precision exceeding the contemporary level by two 
orders of magnitude. This permits achieving a substantial 
reduction in the consumption of energy resources. 
  We are attracting member organizations to this work. The 
chairman of a cooperative came to us one day and said: I want to 
work with you, using the AcademyUs resources, and to return the 
profits towards its development. 
  If we accept an organization or group of scientists into the 
International Academy of Information-Disseminating Technology, 
and they don't have the resources to do the work, the Academy 
offers them credit. 
  Eduard Vladimirovich, the situation relating to information 
science in the USSR, and now in Russia, has always been 
complicated; in this field we have seriously lagged behind the 
advanced countries. What can the Academy do to change the 
situation? 
  I must say that the information science situation in Russia 
can't be looked at apart from the rest of the world. Information 
has become the main product of society. And it is everywhere; to 
use it effectively we need unified means of transmitting it. The 
International Academy of Information-Disseminating Technology 
has worked out a design for a global computer system. A model 
that brings together individual users and consumers of 
information into a single common system lies at its base. I have 
called it provisionally an information enterprise. But 
information is a product which does not require people to be 
near one another while they are using it. That is, this 
information-distributing enterprise should function both in a 
single-user mode, and when the need arises, as an 
all-encompassing global structure. It should encompass the 
entire world. Of course, such a system cannot be made 
immediately on a world-wide scale; one can start with fairly 
small units, such as a single city. However, so far there are 
not enough resources either in Russia or even in the West to 
bring all this about. 
  So that's the system. But, domestic computer technology is 
also not at an advanced level. 
  As far as theoretical developments go, there we are not 
behind. Transputers have been produced in England since the 
beginning of 1980's. They work on principles that I proposed in 
the 1960's. Now the capacity of transputers has reached 100 
billion operations per second. People are working on transputers 
here as well, and more improved models are being developed than 
are produced in the West. We are behind in technology; we don't 
have plants which are capable of producing the equipment. But we 
cannot fail to get our manufacturing in order, because a country 
like Russia cannot get by only with imported machines. And the 
Academy is ready to provide assistance in the resolution of this 
problem. 

