CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aleksey Kirichenko and Azer Mursaliyev under the </F>
heading "Projection": "A Gas Embargo Will Seem Like Nothing: The 
Environmental Undercurrent of the Military and Political 
Situation in Central Asia"] 
  [Text] Most dependent on external water resources is 
Uzbekistan, whose economy is almost completely dominated by a 
single crop: cotton. It is that monoculture that actually got 
the country "hooked" on the "water habit." Though it won "cotton 
independence" for the whole country, Uzbekistan itself fell into 
"cotton dependency." It is hardly likely that it will be able to 
get rid of it any time in the coming decades, as the peasants of 
Turkmenistan attempted to do in 1916 by refusing to plant cotton 
and going back to farming traditional crops. Over the years of 
its uncontested dominance, cotton monoculture has brought about 
significant changes in the very structure of society and even in 
people's way of thinking. Too many things in this republic, from 
agricultural to industry to politics, are connected with cotton. 
And the phrase "a monoculture requires a monogovernment" also 
works in the other direction. 
  The rivers that bring water to Uzbekistan originate in three 
neighboring countries: Tajikistan, Afghanistan and Kyrgyzstan. 
Today all these are much more dependent on Tashkent than 
Tashkent is on them. It is through Uzbekistan's territory that 
vitally important lines of communication to Kyrgyzstan, 
Tajikistan and the northern part of Afghanistan pass, and it is 
from there that they get the majority of the energy resources 
they consume. This in turn allows Tashkent to exert a certain 
amount of pressure on them. Yet theoretically these countries 
could put the neighboring giant in a much more dependent 
position. And they could do it the same way the khan of Khiva 
once did against the rebellious Turkmen: by building dams across 
the canals that flowed to their lands. Or the same way that 
Turkey is doing at this very moment as it carries out a 
grandiose irrigation project in southeastern Anatolia. By 
building a network of dams and hydroelectric power stations on 
the upper reaches of the Euphrates and Tigris rivers and 
creating a chain of reservoirs in that region, Ankara now has a 
fairly powerful tool for exerting pressure on its southern 
neighbors -- Iraq and Syria -- and is now planning to export a 
new kind of raw material: water for the arid Persian Gulf 
countries and Saudi Arabia. 
  Uzbekistan's southern neighbors could utilize their water 
resources in precisely the same way. If that were the case, 
Tashkent could find itself in a situation in which Russia's "gas 
embargo" against Ukraine might seem like nothing by comparison. 
That fact is objectively transforming Uzbekistan's southern 
"near abroad" into a zone of strategic interests. And it is 
urgently forcing and will continue to force the government in 
Tashkent to pursue an active policy in the region to prevent the 
emergence there of hostile regimes that might be tempted to step 
on Uzbekistan's water lifeline. 
  Incidentally, it is precisely in that region and in that 
manner that the Tashkent government is operating as it maintains 
close contacts with Gen. Abdulrashid Dustum, the de facto ruler 
of northern Afghanistan, who has blocked attempts by the Tajik 
opposition to regain power. For fairness' sake it should be 
noted that even before the start of the civil war, in which 
Uzbekistan has intervened in various ways, the Tajik opposition 
held views that were, to put it mildly, definitely not friendly 
toward Tashkent or President Islam Karimov. This in turn made 
Uzbekistan's support for their opponents in the Tajik civil war 
quite logical. 
  However, the political situation in this complex region does 
not depend solely on the presence of Uzbekistan. And in view of 
that the presence of Russian troops and border guards in 
Tajikistan and its retention in the ruble zone, on the one hand, 
and persistent efforts to gain control over major Tajik and 
Kyrgyzstan hydroelectric power stations, on the other, appear in 
a completely different light, and not one favorable to 
Uzbekistan. 

