BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Hookup" program] </F>
  [Text] On the question of our country's diplomatic 
relations with the Republic of South Africa [RSA], Foreign 
Minister Chien Fu yesterday [17 May] said at the Legislative 
Yuan that, after President Li's visit to South Africa, it has 
been proven that bilateral relations between our country and 
South Africa are very solid. He said that, in the future, our 
country would not interfere with South African Government's 
selection of friends. Our country would not voluntarily sever 
diplomatic relations if South Africa establishes diplomatic 
relations with Communist China. Even if it creates the issue of 
dual recognition, it would benefit our side because other 
countries might then be prompted to follow suit. 
  Minister Chien Fu said: [Begin recording] Are we going to 
sever relations with South Africa if South Africa wants to 
establish diplomatic relations with Communist China but 
continues to maintain diplomatic relations with us and does not 
sever relations with us? Concerning this question, I wish to 
provide an explanation. The foreign relations of the Republic 
of China are always based on one principle -- that is, we 
sincerely want to establish relations with all peace-loving 
countries in the world. What is important to us is our 
relations with individual countries. As to the handling of 
other diplomatic affairs by those countries, they are within the 
sovereign rights of that country and we cannot interfere with 
the diplomatic affairs of that country. Therefore, we attach 
importance to South Africa specifically in terms of our 
bilateral diplomatic relations with that country. We should not 
interfere with South Africa's choice of friends in its foreign 
affairs. We will definitely not sever diplomatic relations with 
South Africa if it establishes diplomatic relations with a 
certain regime or country. [end recording] 
  The above remarks were made by Minister Chien Fu when 
answering interpellations at the Legislative Yuan. 

