Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] Today Minister of Interior Antoni 
Asuncion met democratic political groups to inform them about 
anti-terrorism policy. For state security reasons, this meeting 
was held behind closed doors and what was said is secret. 
However, after the meeting, some of the data the minister put 
forward, data about ETA's infrastructure, became known. 
  The terrorist group now has 10 active commandos: five of 
them 
are of the so-called illegal type, that is people already known 
to the police; four of the legal kind, that is people without 
police records; and one support commando who is active in 
Guipuzcoa. This information was leaked by one of the deputies 
present at the meeting. 
  The Ministry of the Interior has refused to confirm or 
comment on the leak because the issue was dealt with at a secret 
meeting linked to state security. Over to our reporter (Blanca 
Zabala). 
  Zabala: Right now the terrorist organization ETA 
has a total of nine commandos of which five carry out the 
attacks. According to the police, they are located in Madrid, 
Barcelona, Guipuzcoa, Vizcaya and along the southeast coast. 
Three commandos collect information in Guipuzcoa and Navarre. 
And finally one commando providing logistical support. This one 
is located in Guipuzcoa. Furthermore, the commando in Alava is 
in the process of being reorganized. 
  This data about ETA's current strength was provided by 
Minister of the Interior Antoni Asuncion to the meeting of the 
representatives of the political parties which signed the pact 
against terrorism. Normally what is said at such meetings is 
considered secret but today the press was given this information 
by one of the parliamentarians who attended. 
  At the end of the meeting, the minister said that revulsion 
towards terrorism grows day by day. 
  [Begin Asuncion recording] There is a very marked difference 
in the civil society environment around Herri Batasuna [ETA's 
political wing], KAS [Patriotic Socialist Coordinating 
Committee], and platforms that have organized themselves as 
associations which oppose violence. [end recording] 
  Zabala: Both the minister and party 
representatives said the anti-terrorist pact has been 
strenghtened by this meeting and there is still a consensus on 
this issue. 
  Referring to the rehabilitation of ETA prisoners, Asuncion 
added there will not be a blanket solution for all the 
prisoners, each case will be treated on its merits as it has 
been done until now. 

