Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The cargo ship Tequila reported to have been 
hijacked by armed men from a speedboat inside Hong Kong waters 
on Sunday [20 March] is being held by Chinese authorities at 
Zhuhai, it was revealed last night. 
  A shipping agent, Leung Kam-hung, said that he had been 
assured by Chinese officials that the ship, the 14 crew and its 
cargo of second-hand cars would be released within three days. 
  "I have been told that they [the mainland officials] are 
checking the legitimacy of the cargo and will then release the 
ship," Leung said. "That cargo is clear and properly 
manifested. There is no problem." 
  How the Honduran-registered ship was "seized" south of Hong 
Kong island on Sunday evening is a mystery. "There are a lot of 
things about this which do not add up," one Hong Kong security 
source said. 
  Marine Police sent two launches to the aid of the Tequila 
after a distress call which said the vessel was under attack, 
apparently by armed men from a speedboat. Analysis of Marine 
Department and Marine Police records of radio messages and radar 
surveillance had shown no evidence of any incursion inside the 
territory's marine boundary by any speedboat at the time the 
Tequila disappeared. 
  The crew of another ship near the scene of the "incident," 
about 2.4 kilometres from Waglan Island, saw and heard nothing, 
the source said. "Smuggling is known to be a big problem and 
causing a lot of concern for China," he said. "The Chinese are 
known to blacklist certain ships. It could be that they had an 
agent on board who forced the ship to change course." 
  Leung, managing director of the Tequila's Hong Kong agents, 
Fitter Marine, said: "I do not know who exactly is holding the 
ship. 
  "I know they are officials. I cannot tell you more. There 
was a report from the ship that there was a speedboat and armed 
men. Otherwise, why would it have changed course?" Leung, who 
flew to Bejing this week to negotiate the release, said the 
Tequila was carrying 36 second-hand cars worth a total of $1.2m 
to Taiwan. 
  "This is the third trip the ship has made. We have had no 
problems before." Leung said the ship's captain was helping the 
mainland officials with their investigation. 
  The crew were still on board and being treated well. 

