BFN 

    [Editorial Report] London ITV Television Network in English 
at 2000 GMT on 13 April in its ``Dispatches'' program carries a 
45-minute report entitled ``Pocket Neutron,'' in which 
correspondent Gwyn Roberts reviews the findings of an 18-month 
investigation he conducted into red mercury, a chemical compound 
allegedly used by the Russians to develop a smaller, more 
efficient nuclear warhead. 
  The program opens with various shots of a border crossing in 
Como, northern Italy, and goes on to include a brief interview 
with Italian Magistrate Romano Dolce on the smuggling of red 
mercury through Italy. Asked about its final destination, 
Dolce, speaking in Italian with English subtitles, says: 
``Israel, Iraq, Iran, South Africa, and the rest of the world. 
Even Western countries like the United States seem interested 
in red mercury. Why should it be top secret? Why this silence? 
Why this fear of talking about it?'' 
  Brief clips are then shown of Vladimir Zhirinovskiy during 
his visit to Serbia in February this year, followed by various 
street scenes in Moscow. Roberts then introduces a recording 
of an interview he conducted with an unidentified Kremlin 
official who, he says, has access to full government 
intelligence. 
  Roberts asks: ``What proof do you have that there is such a 
substance?'' The official replies: ``The hardest evidence is 
the report prepared by the first chief directorate of the KGB. 
This report was prepared especially for Boris Yeltsin. The 
conclusion of this report is that there is no doubt that red 
mercury exists.'' 
  Roberts asks: ``What military applications of red mercury 
are 
listed in the KGB report?'' 
  The official states: ``The production of fuses of high 
precision for conventional bombs. The production of fuses for 
nuclear bombs. The production of military equipment coating to 
avoid radar detection, production of warheads for self-guided 
missiles of high precision.'' 
  Asked whether red mercury represents new technology, the 
official replies: ``I think it does.'' He goes on to say that 
Iraq, Libya, Israel, and South Africa all wish to purchase red 
mercury because they all want nuclear weapons. 
  Roberts is then seen at the Moscow metro where he meets an 
unidentified former nuclear chemist who worked at a secret plant 
in the Urals. They are then seen in an apartment where the 
chemist is interviewed. Roberts asks why everyone denies that 
red mercury exists. The chemist replies: ``Because of reasons 
of secrecy.'' Roberts asks: ``Why should they want to keep it 
secret?'' The chemist says: ``Because it is the latest 
technology. If it is available to the Third World it may be a 
serious danger to existing order.'' 
  Still photographs are then shown of containers labeled RM 
2020, followed by clips of diagrams of how red mercury can be 
used and a government document on the existence of the 
substance. A person described as the head of the Promocology 
company exhibits what purports to be the raw material for RM 
2020. Scenes of the Moscow White House siege of 1993 are then 
shown. 
  Roberts then interviews an unidentified military scientist 
in 
Moscow, who he says worked as a nuclear physicist producing RM 
2020 for five years. 
  Roberts asks: ``Why is red mercury such a mystery?'' 
  The scientist replies: ``The fact is that it is the latest 
technology which allows an atom bomb to be made very simply.'' 
  Roberts asks: ``So you are saying that with red mercury and 
nuclear materials an atom bomb could be easily assembled by 
Third World countries?'' 
  The scientist replies: ``Yes, that could happen.'' 
  Asked how red mercury would be used, the scientist states: 
``It can reduce the critical mass and increase the power of the 
explosion.'' 
  The program continues by showing extensive shots of the 
nuclear research center at Dubna, including close-up clips of 
the accelerator and other equipment, followed by footage of the 
military scientist meeting with British nuclear expert Frank 
Barnaby. The program then shows U.S. nuclear expert Dr. Ted 
Taylor videotaping questions to be put to the Russian military 
scientist, cutting to shots of Russian elections. 
  The program then shows street scenes in Ekaterinburg and a 
meeting with former nuclear physicist Yevgeniy Korolov, who 
replies to Dr. Taylor's questions. 
  Korolov says: ``This technoloy is one of the most complex 
and 
one of the most dangerous. It enables you to create 
micro-nuclear charges. This means it can be used for nuclear 
terrorism.'' 
  The program continues with more shots of Ekaterinburg, 
followed by a meeting with another nuclear scientist willing to 
talk about red mercury who is shown Dr. Taylor's videotape 
questions. The scientist is then seen driving Roberts into the 
Urals to a plant where red mercury powder is said to be 
manufactured, showing medium and long shots of the plant against 
a snow-covered backdrop, followed by footage of a covert meeting 
with a weapons designer willing to answer Dr. Taylor's 
questions. His typewritten answers are shown to maintain his 
anonymity. 
  The program concludes with a visit by Roberts to a security 
company near Bonn, which trades with Russia and has business 
links with secret military plants producing radioactive 
isotopes. A document acquired in Ekaterinburg is shown which 
demonstrates that this company wishes to purchase 1,000 kg of RM 
2020, cutting to what is described as a list of the chemical 
properties of RM 2020. 
[Note From The Editor] You can order this videotape from 
the FBIS TV Center by calling in Virginia 1-800-822-5115 or 
outside Virginia 1-800-542-8660. Ask for videotape number LIT 
94-050. 

