BFN 

  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota, 27 May (EFE) -- Presidential 
candidate Ernesto Samper favors maintaining an open policy, 
initiated by current President Cesar Gaviria, toward Cuba, 
indicating he will not sponsor measures against the Cuban 
people. "I will not sponsor measures that go against the Cuban 
people such as the embargo provided for by the Torricelli Bill. 
I will continue relations with Cuba, initiated by President 
Gaviria. Although we may not agree, as we do not with some 
aspects of the Cuban political system, while the island's 
government does not meddle in Colombia's internal matters, we 
will support these relations." 
  During an exclusive interview with EFE, Samper, one of the 
two candidates leading the polls for the up-coming presidential 
elections, expressed his opinion on some current international 
issues. Here are some excerpts. 
<H5>  Guerrillas </H5>
  The guerrilla top brass is still politically motivated. We 
must seek a dialogue because we cannot accept this being used to 
engage in political proselytizing. The day I sit down at the 
negotiating table it will be because I am certain the process 
will achieve something. In the past few years, there were six 
attempts to negotiate that ended in nothing. I will not make 
this error. The peace I achieve will be permanent. 
  Meanwhile, my peace proposal is based on continuing the 
modernization process in the Armed Forces, complemented by a 
greater effort in the intelligence field and conceived within 
respect for human rights. Likewise, some minimum commitments to 
humanize the war must be established with the rebels in order 
not to adversely affect the civilian population. Peace will be 
achieved, not only with the persuasive presence of weapons, but 
also with the state's dissuasive presence, jobs, and agriculture 
development in the areas of violence. 
<H5>  Human Rights </H5>
  I will not say that there are no human rights violations in 
Colombia, because there are. Nevertheless, we are the country 
that made more institutional efforts to control these, as is 
acknowledged by international organizations. We have a 
Presidential Advisory Human Rights Committee; we have human 
rights departments in the universities and schools; we have 
developed within the Army a profound campaign with regard to 
human rights.... The nation is concerned and conscious of the 
problem. One must not forget that we are at war with the 
guerrillas. In a war, the rights of those who are against the 
government, as well as the rights of the government forces, can 
be violated. The violations carried out by the guerrillas must 
be investigated. 
<H5>  Economic Opening </H5>
  We will not do an about face; we will not eliminate the 
reduction of barriers; we will not change the regulations on 
foreign investment; and we will not give up what has been gained 
in the field of mobilization in the labor market. We must 
progress in infrastructure and technology as necessary 
supplements to the internationalization process of the economy 
and make a great effort in social investment. 
  The model of radical opening applied several years ago is 
being revised in all Latin America in the wake of the events in 
Chiapas. This set off an alarm, sounding an alert on the 
neoliberal model of savage capitalism. Neoliberalism was causing 
enormous social devastation; Chiapas is the clearest indication 
that the pendulum is returning. Although we are not going to 
return to the old protectionism models of the 60's, we are 
currently in a situation that forces us to preserve the social 
damage of the neoliberal model. Either the powerful nations 
create jobs, apply controls on development and subsidy policies 
for the agriculture sectors, or we will be condemned to 
outbreaks of violence as in Chiapas, Caracas, or Peru. True 
social outbreaks could occur that could do away with all the 
democratic systems. 
<H5>  Drug Legalization </H5>
  Fifteen years ago when I proposed drug legalization, this 
problem was reduced to the marijuana plantations in the Sierra 
Nevada of Santa Marta. At that time, my theory was to give the 
peasants the possibility to substitute their crops and leave 
behind drugs. What was done was to increase the pressure and to 
spray the plantations. From marijuana, we went to cocaine, from 
cocaine to drug trafficking, and from drug trafficking to 
narcoterrorism. Currently drug legalization is not feasible in 
Colombia. It would be seen as an amnesty, as a pardon for all 
that has occurred in the nation in the past 15 years. This does 
not mean that the international arguments I then outlined do not 
continue to hold true. Drug consuming nations are not making 
significant efforts to reduce drug consumption nor to control 
money laundering. Until there is world-wide legalization, 
Colombia's obligation is to more firmly demand that the consumer 
nations make a greater effort. 
<H5>  Drug Trafficking and Economy </H5>
  Drug trafficking is what makes the opening process in 
Colombia difficult. It is being used to destabilize the source 
of capital, and it is also destabilizing the opening and 
importation process. We cannot ignore that with these mechanisms 
of free exchange and free trade, some hot money from drug 
trafficking, seeking to become legitimate, have infiltrated. 
  One must be careful with regard to the issue of exchange 
revenues, and we must partially reestablish customs because we 
have practically dismantled them. An opening process is very 
simple. Imports are allowed, with the monetary margin obtained; 
the use of dollars is created; exports are devaluated and 
stimulated; and with this more imports are purchased. Here we 
only went halfway. We allowed imports and the entrance of 
capital. Large amounts of speculative capital arrived forcing 
us to revaluate our currency. With this revaluation we have held 
back exports. This adversely affects jobs, agriculture, and 
industries, because in an open economy revaluation does away 
with everything. 
<H5>  Latin American Integration </H5>
  I am convinced that in the coming years, we should pass from 
the stage of free trade agreements to the stage of attempting 
the integration process once again. It is fine to sign free 
trade agreements, but the time has come for integration. Not 
the integration we had 20 years ago, toward the inside, creating 
a sort of wall so that no one could come. Rather, it is an 
integration toward the outside, as is being seen in other parts 
of the world with the forming of trade blocks, such as the 
European or Asian blocks. Latin America must take up the 
integration issue once again if it wants to negotiate in 
conditions of comparative advantage all the free trade 
agreements ready to be signed, not only within the hemisphere 
but also in other economic regions of the world. Here is where 
I see the important advantage of integration. 

