BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Peter Weiss, chairman of the Party of the </F>
Democratic Left, SDL, and SDL Deputy Chairman Milan Ftacnik by 
Martin Krno; place and date not given: "Opening for the Heart of 
Europe"] 
  [Excerpt] Immediately after the return of the two-member 
Party of the Democratic Left [SDL] delegation from the United 
States, we asked SDL chairman Peter Weiss and SDL deputy 
chairman Milan Ftacnik to share with us their immediate 
impressions from their almost week- long talks with 
representatives of political and economic circles in Washington. 
  [Weiss] Our meetings with high-level U.S. politicians, who 
included George Mitchell, leader of the Democratic majority in 
the Senate, and Strobe Talbott, deputy secretary of state, were 
an opportunity to present the policy of the present Slovak 
Government, in which the SDL is the biggest coalition partner. 
The talks demonstrated growing interest in Slovakia, also on 
the part of foreign investors, following the change of 
government in our country. It has been confirmed once again 
that the SDL is an internationally recognized political party. 
U.S. politicians realize that Slovakia's further political 
future depends, to a decisive degree, on the SDL as the second 
strongest political force in the Slovak Republic and on the 
result that the left-wing coalition will achieve in the 
forthcoming elections. 
  [Krno] When the then prime minister returned from Washington 
last year, he declared in public several times that he could not 
enter into a coalition with Weiss' party because that would halt 
the influx of U.S. capital to Slovakia. Has the Americans' 
attitude toward the SDL changed? 
  [Weiss] If I wanted to be malicious, I would say something 
similar about the previous government. But I would rather stick 
to the facts. Deputy Prime Minister Brigita Schmognerova's 
talks in the United States, with the IMF and the World Bank, 
clearly earned her the image of a competent economist who 
represents a certain personal guarantee of economic 
transformation in our country. U.S. politicians accept her 
view, which she expressed also at the meeting of an IMF 
commission, that transformation must be carried out in a way 
that is socially sustainable. Our discussions included, for 
example, talks with representatives of the Chemical Bank, the 
third largest U.S. bank, who are seriously interested in 
becoming involved in Slovakia. 
  [Ftacnik] The visit confirmed that the doors for the SDL in 
U.S. political and business circles are open. The former prime 
minister's fabrications of one year ago are turning out to have 
been false. 
  [Krno] Does the United States not fear that there might be a 
setback in our political development after the early elections 
to the National Council of the Slovak Republic? 
  [Weiss] It transpired from our talks that, after the new 
government assumed office, Slovakia has really joined the 
category of interesting countries. There can be no talk of our 
isolation. The views of U.S. politicians could be summed up in 
the statement of one of our interlocutors: "We realize that 
Slovakia is the heart of Europe. If it became sick, the serious 
question would arise what will become of the whole of Europe." 
  [Krno] How did you interpret during your talks the term 
socially sustainable reform? Where is the limit that the United 
States is ready to accept without accusing the government 
coalition of populism? 
  [Weiss] U.S. politicians regard as such a limit the 
endangerment of social peace and the creation of an explosive 
situation. No one in the United States wishes to see that 
because it is also in their vital interest that Central Europe 
be a stable region. They realize the complexity of 
transformation but they also realize that, if it is not carried 
out in a socially tolerable way, conditions will arise for the 
emergence of authoritarian, populist, and nationalist regimes. 
That is what they fear most of all. 
  [Ftacnik] The credibility of Slovakia in international 
business and financial circles has increased and there is hope 
and a chance that, when we lead our budget and economic policy 
in a reasonable direction and conduct it in a justifiable way, 
we may in a relatively short time obtain major foreign credits. 
This would help us tackle the debt inherited from the previous 
government, especially in the spheres of education, health 
services, and some other branches. [passage omitted] 

