BFN 

<F P=106> [Passage within italic in Creole] </F>
  [Text] Minister of Commerce and Industry of the resigning 
government, Louis Dejoie, has recommended the clean sweep 
solution to the situation's stalemate. Invited on 16 April to 
the program "Meeting on Metropole," the president of the 
National Agricultural and Industrial Party, PAIN, proposed 
option zero, the only means, according to him, of solving the 
crisis in view of the refusal by the protagonists to meet around 
the table. Let us listen to Louis Dejoie: 
  [Begin recording] [Dejoie] As a leader of a political 
party, I have said that the power is in the streets. If we 
cannot find a solution, well, gentlemen, we should have a clean 
sweep, send everyone home and start at zero, as the CNG 
[National Government Council] did. It is the only way, because 
as I said... [pauses] I believe that President Firmin Jean-Louis 
confirmed what I said -- that elections will soon be held. The 
people will thus hear about all the crooked dealings during 
those two years, and will go to elections because in November, 
there will be no Chamber, no communal mayor, no CASEC [Communal 
Section Administration Council]. No political or administrative 
institution will remain in the country. What are we therefore 
going to do? We have no constitution. 
  [Reporter Renois] Mr. Dejoie, you recommend the clean 
sweep. Does that not refer to the application of Article 149? To 
whom should power be given for the holding of general elections 
in the country if we must choose this path? 
  [Dejoie] We had already done something by putting Mrs. 
Trouillot in power. I believe that if all the democratic 
political parties meet around a table and we realize that the 
solution lies in reshuffling the cards, in restarting at zero so 
the people can resume participation -- but this time, in a 
methodical way, not by worsening a situation [mete abce sou 
clou]: To tell me a month before elections a man is chosen as a 
presidential candidate who, became president like a chance 
mishap -- it is a mishap in Haiti's history to have Aristide as 
Haiti's president -- he came with no political project, no 
political party. He was put up as president because he found a 
hat called FNCD [National Front For Change and Democracy], a 
rooster was placed before him, and a month later he was 
president. 
  [Renois] I see you with a booklet with President 
Aristide's picture. This contrasts with your position? 
  [Dejoie] No, on the contrary. I even told the president that 
the reason I participated in this concord government was my 
reading of this booklet called, "For a New Start," which 
included proposals for a program's general framework, and for a 
government of overture. I found in it 90 percent of the social 
projects PAIN supports. Everything that he wrote there are 
formidable, extraordinary things. If everything included 
in this booklet could be achieved, we would no longer have 
problems in Haiti. 
  [Renois] What prevents those things from happening? 
  [Dejoie] It could be the ambitions of one man, who 
wants everything for himself. 
  [Renois] Could one believe that there is a curse on 
this country and on the political men of this country? 
  [Dejoie] Oh, yes! There is something like a curse, 
despite all the prayers. I myself am a very fervent Catholic. 
Every morning, every Sunday, I kneel before my bed and pray. But 
still, I can find no solution. Perhaps God does not want... 
  [Renois, interrupting] Or should one think like this 
American diplomat who said that Haitians have a chromosome more 
or a chromosome less? 
  [Dejoie, laughing] Frankly I would not want to fall 
into a controversy right now, but I can tell you simply that we 
political leaders are missing something because we still cannot 
agree with one another. 
  Agreement is easy, gentlemen: Gather the 16 political 
leaders around a big table -- whether they are neo-Duvalierist, 
PAIN, Aristide, or anyone else -- there is only one common 
denominator: Haiti. We were saying the other day that even we 
have lost enthusiasm. The people do not understand what is going 
on. They are dying of hunger because two people are fighting, or 
four Haitians got together and are oppressing us. The 
international community worsens the situation, adding fuel to 
the fire until we cannot agree with one another. 
  I must tell you that the Americans are looking for 
something that we do not know about. Is it uranium that we have 
in our ground? I do not know. Why is it that they keep annoying 
us and that we cannot find a solution? Everytime we are close to 
the solution, something else comes up. 
  [Announcer] Louis Dejoie, minister of commerce and industry, 
was the guest of the broadcast, "Meeting." It should be noted 
that the minister of commerce defended himself in a letter to 
the president-in-exile. Louis Dejoie asked Father Aristide for 
rectification after Aristide called Dejoie a traitor, accusing 
him of selling or renting a part of the national territory in 
the case of Port-Tortuga S.A. Dejoie confessed, however, that 
Prime Minister Robert Malval had reproached him for not 
submitting the Tortuga case to the Council of Ministers of the 
resigning government. 

