BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy: </F>
"Czech Trade and the GATT Uruguay Round"] 
  [Text]The Czech Republic is a country with an 
economic potential that has always been and certainly also will 
be greater than the absorption ability of the domestic market. 
If we want to achieve an economic growth that makes use of 
production capacity to the utmost, the ability of our 
enterprises to gain access to other markets and export is of 
principal importance. At the same time, our economy is facing 
major restructuring and modernization, which means a demand for 
investment in quality technology, currently mostly from imports. 
The participation of the Czech economy in international trade 
is, however, of almost decisive significance for future economic 
growth. That is, above all, why we welcomed the conclusion to 
the GATT Uruguay Round. 
  The Uruguay Round of multilateral trade talks certainly was 
the most universal negotiation process in the history of the 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). A total of 125 
countries, which are responsible for more than 90 percent of 
world trade, took part in the Uruguay Round. The much wider and 
more active participation of the developing countries and 
countries in transition from central planning to a market 
economy, which assumed very respectable undertakings in all 
spheres discussed, was a completely new phenomenon. 
<H5>  Results of Multilateral Talks </H5>
  The universal nature of the Uruguay Round is evidenced by 
the 
expansion of the previous framework of multilaterally regulated 
spheres of trade by new sectors of international trade -- e.g., 
services, intellectual property rights -- and those spheres of 
trade that for decades have remained outside the GATT system 
(agriculture, textiles). The uniqueness of the Uruguay Round 
lies in the fact that all the participating countries had to 
accept practically all its results in the form of a so-called 
single undertaking. In this the Uruguay Round differs 
fundamentally from all previous rounds of multilateral trade 
talks. The principle of a single undertaking was projected to 
an obligation on the part of all participants in the talks to 
contribute with their work to the general liberalization of 
world trade and concurrently subordinate the development of 
their trade political systems to the agreed regulations and 
discipline. 
  The results of the Uruguay Round can be divided into three 
basic planes. The first level is the achieved degree of 
liberalization of world trade resting on the average 40-percent 
reduction of the import duty on industrial goods, the transfer 
of all non-tariff obstacles implemented by agricultural products 
to customs and their subsequent reduction (together with the 
customs presently in effect) by 36 percent on average. At the 
same time, the predictability of the trade political systems 
increases, as most of the participants of the round took on the 
obligation not to raise import duties without discussion with 
the partners beforehand (the so-called consolidation). These 
reductions of customs protection do not, however, affect all 
industrial and agricultural spheres with the same intensity. In 
some traditionally sensitive sectors, like textiles and garment 
or footwear production, for instance, the degree of 
liberalization is lower than the overall average. 
  On the other hand, in many other sectors, the Round 
participants from the most advanced countries agreed on the 
complete removal of import duties or harmonization of them at a 
low level. They include construction, agricultural, and medical 
equipment, steel, beer, paper, toys, furniture, pharmaceuticals, 
and chemical products. With some other categories of goods, the 
liberalization undertaking was assumed by only a small number of 
the most advanced partners; that applies to scientific 
equipment, for instance, nonferrous metals, wood, electronics, 
fish products, and other types of goods. The customs reduction 
will be implemented gradually over a period of four to 10 years 
(by industrial products) and six years (by agricultural 
products). Hence, we will enjoy the effect of the 
liberalization already in the 1990s, and completely in the next 
century. 
  A part of the Uruguay Round is the General Agreement on 
Trade 
in Services (GATS), which, for the first time in the history of 
world trade, multilaterally defines the basic rules and 
responsibilities in the trade in services. In addition to the 
general principles similar to those applied to trade in goods 
(most-favored-nation clause, protective measures), the Round 
participants accepted initial obligations to open their markets 
and offer national treatment to foreign services and their 
suppliers. These obligations are included in the so-called 
national principal, and regulate the imports regime in the 
individual branches of services. 
  This section of the outcome of the Uruguay Round is 
apparently the most important one for the Czech exporters, 
because it gives them better access to markets. We are a 
country with important short-term comparative advantages, and 
that is why precisely the improved access to markets is 
beneficial to us. This is the basis for the claim that the 
Czech Republic is one of the countries that are in a position to 
benefit most from the conclusion of the Uruguay Round. 
  The second plane concerns the considerable reinforcement of 
the multilateral framework of the regulations for international 
trade that was obtained by perfecting the existing GATT text, by 
a revision and improvement of the existing specific conventions 
and agreements on antidumping, subsidies, protection, and many 
other spheres, and, last but not least, by expanding the GATT 
powers to new spheres of international trade (services, 
investment, intellectual property protection). 
  Czech businessmen are also well aware of instances when 
technical obstacles to trade, sanitary and phytosanitary 
regulations, customs and other procedures may be abused and lead 
to protectionist practices and a decline in exports of Czech 
goods. The objective of the agreed regulations is therefore to 
prevent a misuse of these measures for other purposes than those 
generally sanctioned. 
  The third level has to do with a breakthrough of an 
institutional character, which should result in the 
establishment of the third pillar of the Bretton Woods system -- 
in addition to the World Bank and IMF, the World Trade 
Organization (WTO). That organization will become the universal 
forum for solving all trade- policy problems, the legal 
regulation of which is enshrined in the outcome of the Uruguay 
Round. Thus, the WTO will replace the previous rounds of 
multilateral trade talks and will render this liberalization 
process a permanent phenomenon. 
  An integral part of the new institutional framework, one 
that 
will lead to its having greater legal power, will be the 
so-called integrated system of settling disputes. The integral 
role of the new system consists of the right of each member of 
the WTO to indicate any point of contention in the trade-policy 
practices of its partners that it believes to be in conflict 
with assumed obligations. The integrated system of settling 
disputes is a tool that makes it possible to better and more 
effectively protect the interests and rights of the smaller WTO 
members in particular. 
<H5>  The Ratification Process Will Not Be Simple </H5>
  The results of the Uruguay Round are not a panacea, and in 
themselves will not lead to the settlement of all problems of 
world trade. Nevertheless, the WTO can be considered a very 
promising guarantee of an effective removal or at least 
amelioration of the protectionist pressures and tendencies 
towards controlled trade and unilateral measures. In many 
areas, the fundamental objective was reached of launching the 
integration of certain sectors that have stood outside the GATT 
multilateral regulation framework so far. 
  In agriculture and textile trade, the parties to the General 
Agreement are only at the first stage on the road. The 
obligation to reduce domestic assistance and exports subsidies, 
for instance, will not a priori remove all the deformations 
resulting from the very existence of the subsidy policy, which 
often demonstrate themselves on world markets. This applies 
also to textiles, where the full integration and multilateral 
frameworks can in fact be expected only in 10 years. Hence, the 
next decade will still be "burdened" by the previous trade 
regulations. 
  In many countries, the signatures of ministers on the 
document in Marrakesh only start the ratification process, at 
the end of which, most of the participants of the Uruguay Round 
should become the founding members of the WTO. At this time, it 
is necessary that the governments of all participating countries 
submit the agreed results to their appropriate national 
authorities. It depends on the speed of the ratification 
procedures how long it will take before the results of the 
Uruguay Round take effect. The date frequently mentioned in 
this context is 1 May 1995. Only the Implementation Conference, 
however, which is to take place at the end of the year, will 
determine how feasible this date is. 
<H5>  Benefits for the Czech Republic </H5>
  The successful conclusion to the Uruguay Round must be seen 
as a mosaic of partial national assessments of this process. It 
is a demanding task to express the results of the Uruguay Round 
in numbers, one with set natural limits based on the restricted 
possibility of extrapolating the hitherto development and 
predicting the extent of the effect of the unprecedented opening 
of markets on the economic growth, trade, and employment, and 
the extent to which it will lead to necessary structural changes 
in the world economy. These observation apply doubly to the 
Czech Republic in its dynamic process of changes. 
  It can be expected that at the turn of the millennium, the 
improved access for the Czech exporters to foreign markets could 
lead to an additional growth in the Czech Republic's GDP of 1.5 
to 2 percent. This estimate is based on the model prepared by 
the OECD Secretariat, according to which the net global effect 
of the Uruguay Round for all its participants should amount to 
more that $270 billion. The real benefit resulting from 
improved access to foreign markets could mean, on the basis of 
the extrapolated contemporaneous data, an increase in Czech 
exports in 2005 of approximately 1.5 billion korunas (assuming 
the current exchange rate does not change). This data is based 
on the expectation by the GATT Secretariat of an approximately 
12-percent growth in international trade by the end of the 
aforementioned year 2005. 
  The weighted average of the customs burden for the Czech 
exporters of industrial goods will decline most in exports to 
New Zealand (by 57 percent), Canada (45 percent), and the United 
States (37 percent). The decline of the weighted average of the 
customs burden for the Czech integration partners (EU, EFTA, and 
CEFTA countries) is only a hypothetical quantity merely 
indicating the extent of the setback in the preferential margin 
that the Czechs obtained by the signature and gradual 
implementation of these agreements. After all, thanks to 
bilateral arrangements regarding the creation of free trade 
zones, the Czech reciprocal trade with the EU, EFTA, and other 
integration partners is, or soon will be, completely 
liberalized. The improved access to the market comes about also 
in many developing countries. 
  In the OECD member countries, which are the traditional 
target of Czech exports, the protection will be reduced most 
significantly by metals (62 percent), products made of wood and 
paper (57 percent), machines and equipment (approximately 50 
percent), and by chemical products (43 percent). A lower than 
average reduction of the custom tariffs will be recorded by 
transport equipment (22 percent), fish and fish products (21 
percent), and the least reduction will be introduced to textile, 
garment products, footwear, and leather (approximately 20 
percent). 
  In its turn, the Czech Republic will reduce its customs on 
industrial goods by 22 percent. It is necessary to emphasize in 
this context that the Czech import duty on industrial goods is 
already among the lowest in GATT, and therefore the Uruguay 
Round participants accepted a smaller reduction than the rate 
agreed. The rate of reduction of the Czech customs tariffs 
moves between 18 and 25 percent for most industrial goods. The 
Czech Republic also joined the liberalization initiatives in the 
sphere of chemical products, pharmaceuticals, fish and fish 
products. It spread the reduction over 10 years in the first 
two categories, and this also applies to the generally sensitive 
textile and garment products. 
  In agriculture, the achieved degree of liberalization will 
be 
reflected on Czech relations with all countries not excepting 
even the preferential partners. Moreover, the Czech negotiators 
obtained in bilateral talks a number of valuable concessions in 
such traditional or sensitive export commodities as malt, hops, 
and cheeses. On the other hand, the Czech Republic submitted a 
valuable list of concessions in agriculture, which puts it among 
the countries whose customs and trade-policy regime is 
considered predictable and transparent. In the process, 
however, the appropriate customs protection for the most 
sensitive agricultural products has been established. It can 
also be considered favorable that the assumed obligations 
regarding domestic subsidies and exports support do not require 
in the case of the Czech Republic any reduction of the subsidies 
provided in the past years. On the contrary, the resulting 
amounts offer sufficient room for the creation of a realistic 
agricultural policy. 
<H5>  The Problems of Minimum Work Standards </H5>
  The work agenda of the new World Trade Organization became a 
topic of lively discussions already during the Marrakesh talks. 
The most controversial issue apparently is the revival on the 
part of the United States and some EU countries of efforts to 
link the problems of the so-called working standard with the 
issues of multilateral trade policy. At first sight, the 
connection seems logical: In countries where it is possible 
from the political point of view goods can be manufactured and 
exported at a "disproportionately" low cost -- using convict and 
forced labor, child labor, longer than average hours, violating 
basic labor safety rules, low wages, or a combination of these. 
In fact, however, the logic is lacking. The problem of 
convict, forced, and child labor should be dealt with, above 
all, by other institutions (particularly the International Labor 
Organization) and only in some aspects might the WTO have to 
accept some steps within the framework of its agenda. We will 
reject attempts to include these problems in the WTO agenda in 
all other instances. For several decades now, for instance, 
experts have many times been trying to define various wage 
concepts: appropriate, fair, substandard, nonstandard, etc. 
None of these concepts has been accepted, or can be accepted, 
because each is open to abuse by an accusation of dumping. Most 
of these accusations are simply false for they are used against 
the countries where the cost of wages is lower because of the 
temporary comparative advantages (one reason is also that the 
population of these countries does not enjoy the excessively 
broad social advantages that are enjoyed in the advanced 
countries). The same argumentation applies to the length of 
working time, labor safety, etc. 
  The argumentation is, however, myopic also from the vantage 
point of the advanced countries. The imposition of minimum 
working standards on the developing countries will not reduce 
their comparative advantages (as competitors in the advanced 
countries hope) because the cost of wages is only a part of the 
total cost. For the same reason, employment in the importing 
countries will not increase, as is sometimes argued in the EU 
countries. Wages in the less advanced countries will remain low 
as long as these countries are poor, and there is not a supply 
surplus. The claim is hypocritical that the arguments on 
minimum working standards also have a humanitarian framework. 
On the contrary, the poorer and less advanced countries can 
gradually grow rich only if they gain access to the markets of 
the advanced countries and are able to export more. 
  It is apparent that the Czech exporters are potentially 
threatened by the abuse of the working standards in 
international trade. We admit that these are very broad and 
sensitive problems. Nevertheless, the Czech Republic will 
closely follow the progress of the discussion on these issues. 
In the creation of rules in new areas, the Czech Republic will 
take a firm stand against any conceivable abuse of these 
initiatives that would result in a reinforcement of the 
protectionist tendencies in international trade and an attempt 
at a reduction or even a removal of natural comparative 
advantages of the participants in international trade, including 
the Czech Republic. 
  For those active in international trade, the Uruguay Round 
has opened the gates of the next century. It has revealed, much 
more clearly than any of the previous ones, the possibilities of 
how the liberalization of trade in all its forms and spheres can 
contribute to the growth of the world economy. The generation 
of stricter and better rules, according to which international 
trade will develop, can already now be described with certainty 
as the greatest contribution for the Czech Republic, but also 
for other lesser Uruguay Round participants with a high degree 
of involvement in the world economy. Without the appropriate 
legal framework, even the best concessions in access to the 
market would soon lose a lot of their attractiveness and corrode 
under the pressure of often very refined protectionism. 
Therefore, we consider the improvement of the existing 
principles and regulations of the General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade, and the emergence of the new World Trade Organization 
as favorable steps towards increasing the overall predictability 
of developments in the world economy and, at the same time, a 
significant guarantee for our own economic growth. 

