BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "In statement to AL-MUSLIMUN, Two </F>
Salvation Front Leaders Say: Algerian Crisis Can Only Be 
Resolved by Referring to Islamic Law, People"] 
  [Text] Jeddah, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT -- In their first press 
statement to a publication since their release from prison, Ali 
Djeddi and Abdelkader Khamkham -- members of the Algerian 
[Islamic] Salvation Front [FIS] who are authorized by their 
leader Abassi Madani, currently in Bleda prison, to make 
statements -- have told our sister [London weekly] AL-MUSLIMUN 
that the only way to resolve the crisis in Algeria is "to refer 
to the Shari'ah and the people." In an interview to be 
published by AL-MUSLIMUN in its next issue, they stressed that 
allowing the people to have their say would result in nothing 
but what is compatible with the Shari'ah. And that would not 
conflict with the principle of freedom of human rights advocated 
by others. 
  On their proposals on how to make a start, Djeddi and 
Khamkham said: "We have not yet reached the stage of proposing 
a solution, and the ground is still not paved. Nevertheless, 
there is still a big hope." 
  On the dangers threatening the course of dialogue, they said 
that "the authorities' deviations must be corrected first, and 
the other side must correct the deviations in some people's 
understanding of Islam. That is the only way to stop the 
bloodshed." On the issuing of certain statements by the two 
sides advocating violence, Djeddi and Khamkham said: "True, 
there are criminal actions. But these can only be eliminated by 
upholding the legitimacy of the Islamic state." 
  On the fear that some groups may get out of control, even 
after matters return to normal, they said: "Then any deviation 
must be denied any legal or polical cover. If we refer to the 
Shari'ah and the people and open the door of hope, no one is 
going to separate from us. If it happens, it will not be very 
serious." 
  On what was said about their pledge to the authorities, 
specifically to President Liamine Zeroual, who met with the 
seven FIS leaders in prison to contribute to calming the 
situation, and what was said about their denial of this pledge, 
Djeddi and Khamkham said: "We did not lie, nor did we deny that 
pledge in our recent statement." 

