BFN 

<F P=106> [Video report by "reporters" identified by caption as Cai </F>
Wenxiang (5591 2429 4382) and Liu Gang (0491 0474); from the 
"National News Hookup" program] 
  [Text] While inspecting Hubei 28 May-2 June, Li Lanqing, 
CPC Central Committee Political Bureau member and vice premier 
of the State Council, said: Our country is a developing 
country, and it has to run the world's largest educational 
system. It faces a lot of difficulties in this respect. 
Governments at all levels should gradually increase their 
investment in education. However, the fundamental way out is 
through reform. [Video begins with long shots of Li Lanqing 
walking in front of a group of unidentified people in civilian 
clothing] 
  At a discussion meeting with responsible people of 
institutions of higher learning in Wuhan, Li Lanqing pointed 
out: The goals of reforming institutions of higher learning are 
to improve the quality of teaching and our efficiency in running 
the institutions. We should adapt to the needs of the socialist 
market economy, and fully and rationally utilize existing human 
and material resources and facilities. We should not duplicate 
things that are small and all-inclusive but of low quality. We 
should promote many and varied joint efforts to run the 
institutions. The highest form of such joint efforts is the 
merger of various institutions of higher learning. We can also 
use various other forms of joint efforts to run the 
institutions. 
  Li Lanqing also said emphatically: Joint efforts to run 
institutions of higher learning should be conducted step-by-step 
and in a safe and sure manner. We should not promote formalism 
but should stress actual results when conducting such efforts. 
He asked leading party and government comrades to squeeze in 
some time to take a look around schools, talk to people there, 
and brief these people about relevant situations. [Video shows 
medium long shots of Li Lanqing with a group of unidentified 
people in a room equipped with a computer work station and some 
other unidentified box-shaped equipment] 

