BFN 

  [Text] Foreign Minister Muhammad Sa'id al-Sahhaf has warned 
against the danger of the U.S.-Zionist scheme against the Arab 
world. He noted that this ill will is not directed against Iraq 
alone because the imperialist scheme is targeting all Arab 
states. 
  In an interview with AL-'ARABI, al-Sahhaf said that proof of 
this scheme is that the Iraqi Government was about to conclude 
an agreement with the Kurdish parties to promote autonomy but 
the U.S. Administration, as Barzani has admitted, prevented 
these parties from concluding the agreement, which was in the 
interest of Iraq's Kurds. 
  Al-Sahhaf accused Washington, Tel Aviv, and some Arab 
parties, including Kuwait, of backing gangs in northern Iraq to 
maintain the abnormal situation there, partition Iraq, and 
conspire against it. He stressed that the Iraqis are aware of 
the goals of these schemes and are prepared to confront them. 
  Al-Sahhaf revealed the U.S. hostile acts that seek to shake 
Iraq's unity and undermine its national sovereignty. He noted 
that the no-fly zones in northern and southern Iraq are nothing 
but a U.S. conspiracy concocted by a decision that runs contrary 
to the Security Council resolutions, as UN Secretary General 
Butrus-Ghali himself has admitted. He pointed out that between 
the time that the no-fly zone was enacted in southern Iraq and 
last year, U.S. and British aircraft have made more than 25,535 
violations of the Iraqi airspace in the south, using the bases 
and facilities provided by the Saudi and Kuwaiti regimes. 
  The Iraqi minister stressed that what Iraq is being 
subjected 
to is not related to the issue of Kuwait or the implementation 
of the international resolutions but is a conspiracy led by the 
United States to achieve obvious political goals. He pointed 
out that Iraq has fully cooperated with the United Nations and 
has implemented its resolutions, particularly Resolution 687. 
Under the mutual obligations included in Paragraph 22 of this 
resolution, the UN is supposed to lift the economic blockade 
unconditionally. 
  Al-Sahhaf refuted the allegations and accusations about the 
existence of Iraqi weapons. He stated that Iraq does not 
possess any prohibited weapons and that it has gotten rid of any 
of the weapons mentioned in Resolution 687. Referring to 
reports by the UN special committee, al-Sahhaf noted that Iraq 
has cooperated with the inspection committees and has agreed to 
long-term monitoring programs to speed up the lifting of the 
embargo. 
  The Iraqi foreign minister referred to the great change in 
the stances of a number of Security Council members in light of 
the great strides made by Iraq in complying with and 
implementing the international resolutions. He said that the 
Security Council debates and the review of the blockade at its 
recent session indicated a great change in the stances of the 
majority of the member states in favor of Iraq. He noted that 
France, China, Russia, and other nonpermanent member countries 
such as Brazil, Rwanda, the Sultanate of Oman, and Spain 
demanded that the blockade be lifted. 
  The Iraqi minister regretted deeply the continued U.S. 
influence in formulating international resolutions. He said 
that the United States pushed the Security Council to continue 
the blockade despite its effects on public health, especially 
women and children, to achieve its objectives of bringing the 
Iraqi people to their knees and annihilating them. He warned 
the world of the gravity of the crime against the Iraqi people. 
He said that keeping Iraq's funds frozen in Western banks and 
institutions has deprived Iraq of the opportunity to use these 
funds to import medicine and food. The minister added that this 
collusion reflects the hostile and criminal campaign of 
annihilation unprecedented in history to which the Iraqi people 
are being subjected and that is being led by known international 
parties. He said that the reports of the international bodies 
WHO and UNICEF very clearly point to the U.S. crime in Iraq. 
  Al-Sahhaf denied that there are Kuwaiti prisoners or missing 
persons and reiterated that there are no Kuwaitis in Iraq. He 
said that Iraq has cooperated positively with the Red Cross and 
the Arab League on this issue. He accused Kuwait of continuing 
to exploit the issue, pointing out as evidence that Kuwait has 
not approved or responded to all the Arab initiatives, including 
a Gulf initiative that tried to close the file on these claims 
that are used against the Iraqi people. 
  Referring to Iraqi-Egyptian relations, Foreign Minister 
Sa'id 
al- Sahhaf said that his country has a sincere desire to develop 
the relationship that transient crises cannot destroy, although 
they have "frozen" them for a short period. He added: This is 
why we were anxious to maintain "interest section" offices in 
the two capitals. 

