BFN 

<F P=106> [By Annie Thomas] </F>
  [Excerpts] Kigali, 14 Apr (AFP) -- Kigali Airport was 
shelled Thursday [14 April] and Belgium decided to withdraw its 
peacekeepers as Rwanda's rebels and military were to open talks 
on restoring order after a week of ethnic slaughter and chaos. 
Two salvoes of mortar shells were fired at the airport as 
Belgian and French paratroopers prepared to leave, but there 
were no casualties or damage, a Belgian Defence Ministry 
spokesman said in Brussels. 
  Guerrillas of the Front, dominated by the minority Tutsi 
tribe, meanwhile continued battling government troops, mostly 
from the majority Hutu group, for control of the blood-steeped 
capital Kigali. It was unclear who was responsible for the 
shelling of the airport, but the rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front 
(RPF) on Tuesday gave foreign forces 24 hours to leave the 
airport or face attacks. "This is a serious incident which 
endangers the evacuation of foreigners," the Belgian spokesman 
said. 
  The rebels and government forces accused each other of 
attacking the airport. A senior government officer told AFP the 
RPF had set up mortars on a hill overlooking the airport, where 
he said the government had troops stationed. He also said his 
troops were currently battling rebels for control of a fuel 
depot about three kilometers (two miles) from the city centre. 
"The depot is strategic, we must maintain control of it or 
we'll be strangled," he said. 
  Rebel commanders were to meet government military officers 
to 
discuss ways of ending the bloodletting that has claimed 20,000 
lives since the deaths of Rwanda's and neighbouring Burundi's 
presidents last week. The senior Army officer said the talks, 
to be held under UN-control, would go ahead despite renewed 
fighting between the two sides, but the meeting had not begun as 
of 2:00 P.M. (1200 GMT). [passage omitted] 
  The rolling green hills on the outskirts of Kigali echoed 
with artillery and small arms fire Thursday. But there was no 
sign of a breakthrough by the rebels, who have announced that 
they will soon win control of the body-strewn capital, and 
military sources said government forces were trying to retake a 
rebel-held area. 
  Meanwhile the rebels reinforced their positions in Kigali 
and 
remained in control of an eastern area which they have held for 
the past six days. The rebels failed to capture a Gendarmerie 
base in northern Kigali on Wednesday, sources said here. 
  Wednesday's announcement by the UN Security Council that the 
rebels and government forces were to open talks was hailed as 
"the first glimmer of hope" by government radio on Thursday. 
The Front had earlier refused to negotiate with the government 
and had rejected its truce offers. 
  Rebel radio said Thursday that the talks would not be about 
a 
ceasefire but about uniting against the "clique of killers" 
which it blamed for the bloodshed. 
  The two sides were to meet at the UN headquarters here at 
the 
Amahoro Hotel in eastern Kigali. 
  UN chief in Rwanda, General Romeo Dallaire, said the meeting 
would be a chance for the warring parties to talk face-to-face, 
but stressed that it was probably too early to open ceasefire 
negotiations. [passage omitted] 

