Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone report by Jose Eduardo Campos from San Cristobal </F>
de las Casas, Chiapas State, from the "24 Hours" newscast -- 
live] 
  [Text] The Chiapas State Congress has approved the amnesty 
bill proposed by Governor Javier Lopez. The state amnesty law 
includes only common crimes punished by the Chiapas State Penal 
Code and committed strictly in connection with the violence that 
has occurred starting on 1 January. 
  The amnesty law is made up of seven articles, the first of 
which states that amnesty will be decreed in favor of all 
persons against whom penal actions have been taken or may be 
taken in Chiapas civilian courts for crimes perpetrated in 
connection with the events that occurred in several Chiapas 
State municipalities starting on 1 January. The implementation 
of these provisions will be handled by a special commission to 
be appointed by the Chiapas governor. 
  The second article states that individuals will benefit from 
the amnesty law provided that they turn in their weapons and 
hostages. 
  The third article deals with the suspension of all penal 
actions and sanctions decreed for crimes described in the law. 
  The fourth article involves the cancellation of arrest 
warrants that have already been issued, thus releasing people 
already sent to trial or sentenced to prison. 
  Article five states that the recently approved amnesty law 
will only be effective when the commission appointed by the 
governor issues a cease-fire declaration. The amnesty law 
cannot be implemented if the commission does not announce a 
cease-fire. 
  The sixth article states that persons who opt for the 
amnesty 
law cannot be arrested for previously committed crimes from now 
on. 
  The seventh and last article of this amnesty law states that 
the benefits will also apply to minors. 
  There is a provisional article in the amnesty law which 
specifically states that the law will become effective tomorrow 
when it is published by the official newspaper in Chiapas. 

