CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Howard Foster: "Mystery Illness Hits Gulf </F>
Troops"] 
  [Text] The Ministry of Defence (MoD) faces a &pound;25m 
compensation demand from hundreds of Gulf war veterans who claim 
they are suffering from a medical condition known as Desert 
Storm syndrome. 
  Solicitors acting for the veterans will lodge claims on 
behalf of 250 serving and retired personnel in the next few 
weeks. They are supported by the Royal British Legion and the 
Gulf Families Crisis Line. 
  The two organisations, frustrated at the MoD's refusal to 
acknowledge veterans could be suffering from long-term illnesses 
linked to war service, have asked Raymond Donn, a Manchester 
solicitor, to co-ordinate the claims. 
  Donn said he was surprised by the reaction to newspaper 
advertisements he placed three weeks ago. "So far there have 
been 250 servicemen past and present who have given details of 
physical illness still suffered after three years," he said. 
  Mick Darlow, a former Signals corporal, typifies the 
experience of the British veterans. A former army cross-country 
runner, he is now capable of working only three days a week as a 
lorry driver before exhaustion and pain confine him to his home 
in Skelmersdale, Lancashire. 
  Darlow, who is married with three young daughters, was sent 
to the border of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait on January 2, 1991, as 
part of a six-man team running a satellite communications 
system. By the time he returned home on March 23, he was 
suffering from severe body pains, diarrhoea and a strong 
aversion to noise. Army doctors who ran tests on him concluded 
that he had a virus and problems with his lymphatic system. 
  He is convinced his stint in the Gulf war is responsible. 
"There are hundreds like me. Why won't the MoD acknowledge 
something happened to us out there?" he said. 
  The MoD said it did not recognise the syndrome. "We have had 
11 individuals referred for medical inspection," said a 
spokesman. "All have been assessed and found to be suffering 
from recognised medical conditions incompatible with their 
service in the Gulf." 
  COPYRIGHT: TIMES NEWSPAPER LIMITED, 1994 

