Germany 

<F P=102>   944Q0272A Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 25 Mar 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 944Q0272A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Lapskiy: "We Will Have To Resign </F>
Ourselves to the Loss of the Amber Chamber, and the Treasure of 
Tsar Priam, Possibly, Will Be Returned to Germany"] 
  [Text] The assertion that Russia has nothing to 
return to Germany from among the cultural treasures taken from 
its territory during the war years does not correspond to the 
truth, said Minister of Culture Yevgeniy Sidorov at the first 
session of the joint Russian-German Commission. Russia is by no 
means obligated to return museum exhibits unilaterally, without 
receiving something in exchange. 
  FRG Minister of Foreign Affairs, Klaus Kinkel, agreed: The 
return of cultural treasures is not a one-way street. In Russia 
it is hoped that Germany will take measures in regard to the 
search for and return of what was stolen during the time of the 
war. 
  There is no commmon opinion, for example, what to consider 
lost and illegally transferred. If the export of cultural 
treasures from Russia to Germany during the years of the war may 
be considered illegal, many German cultural treasures found in 
Russian depositories were exported legally, on the basis of 
decisions of an ally's administration. But, it goes without 
saying, there were many that were acquired as the result of 
robbery and looting. For this reason it is necessary to 
determine the legal status of every object that has turned up in 
Russia. 
  What objects are we talking about? Several months ago, the 
Russian Ministry of Culture acknowledged that the so-called 
Treasure of Tsar Priam, which was taken from the Berlin Museum 
during the last days of the war, lies in the store-rooms of the 
Moscow Museum imeni A. S. Pushkin and the St. Petersburg 
Hermitage. In the words of Sidorov, the treasures found by the 
German amateur archaeologist Schliemann in the place of the 
legendary Troy require expert opinions; then, possibly, they 
will be shown at an exhibition. Not long ago, approximately 
6,000 books of the famous Gotha Library were discovered in the 
library holdings of the Russian Academy of Sciences. The greater 
part of the collection of almost 330,000 volumes that had been 
taken to Moscow was returned in 1956 to its former place, to the 
castle Friedenstein in Gotha. Obviously, soon the remaining 
volumes will also be returned. Sidorov made a nice gesture--he 
handed Kinkel five 16th and 17th century folios from this 
library. 
  According to available data, in our country there are 2 of 
the 12 Gutenberg Bibles, more than 1,000 prints from the Bremen 
Art Gallery, and a collection of drawings by Duehrer removed 
from Germany. All in all, in Russia there are some 900,000 art 
objects and cultural artifacts that were taken from Germany. 
  It is much more complicated with valuables removed to 
Germany. Where are they, what about them? Tragic is the fate of 
the Amber Chamber stolen from Pushkino near St. 
Petersburg--Kinkel said that no traces of it have been found in 
Germany. Hundreds of thousands of museum exhibits, items of 
church utensils, and old icons have disappeared. The FRG 
government, Kinkel said, is promoting the search and return of 
the lost valuables, it has appealed to German citizens for 
support of its efforts. 
  Meanwhile, a list of the losses is being prepared in Russia. 
For the time being, we are talking about what was stolen in the 
suburbs of St. Petersburg--in Tsarskoye Selo, Peterhof, 
Pavlovskoye, Pushkino, as well as in Pskov and Novgorod. There 
is little hope that the German owners will bring the Russian 
icons and paintings in their possession to the FRG Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. Moscow is proposing compromises. One of them is 
the redemption of any valuable Russian cultural artifacts from 
the collections in the West at international auctions and their 
return to Russia. 

