BFN 

<F P=106> ["It Seems to Me" column by Zheng Defang: "Fighting for </F>
Rights in Sea of Corruption"] 
  [Text] Spring has suddenly come to Beijing. 
  Last winter registered higher temperatures than usual. So, 
without the almost inevitable and uncomfortable spring cold, 
Beijing residents find peach blossoms, magnolia, and forsythia 
blooming with a vengeance. 
  For us, Chinese spring is the time for "planning the 
livelihood of the year." Since our forefathers were mostly 
peasants, agricultural production is of prime importance. Even 
today, a good plan in spring largely brings about bumper 
harvests in autumn. 
  But, of course, all walks of life need early planning each 
year. 
  As usual, it was in early spring this year that the National 
People's Congress (NPC), our highest legislative body, and the 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference convened to 
work out their annual plans. 
  This is doubtlessly much more complicated than ruling over 
agrarian China. But certain time-honoured principles for 
running the government still apply. For instance, if officials 
are clean and public funds are used for the benefit of the 
common people and if there is social stability, prosperity would 
come easily. 
  So this year's new budget law interested me greatly. It 
establishes the NPC's overall control of the state budget and 
places local budgets under NPC scrutiny. 
  Complicated as the new budget law seems, it does not really 
need much expertise to decide if the people's money is used 
correctly. 
  For one thing, farmers want real payments for selling what 
they produce, not IOUs. So the first thing the NPC deputies 
will do in examining local budgets is to eliminate IOUs. The 
next thing they will try to eliminate is feasting at public 
expense. Then they should raise teachers' pay and increase 
funding for college education -- astute farmers certainly would 
like to see their children go to university. 
  As to the rest, they can argue it out among themselves. 
  All this seems very well, if the local officials are honest 
and decent. What if they are not, or worse, if they become 
local despots riding roughshod over the people? We must resort 
to something which the Chinese people do not like to do. They 
do not like to go to court, trying to avoid public notoriety. 
But with a growing sense of self-protection, more people are 
going to court to seek justice. 
  Last year, 118,400 bureaucrats were found guilty of 
corruption and more than 237,000 offenders were convicted of 
violent crimes. 
  Our top prosecutors and judges have announced the battle 
against corruption, murder, robbery, and organized crime remains 
a top priority for judicial departments in 1994. It was 
revealed at the NPC session that a vice-minister of the State 
Science and Technology Commission, Li Xiaoshi, was convicted for 
embezzlement and accepting bribes and Shen Taifu, the gang 
leader of the Great Wall Machinery and Electronic Company bonds 
scandal, was sentenced to death. 
  Prior to his sentencing, rumours flew about that the scandal 
would be swept under the rug. I told these people that 
Shakespeare mentioned "the law's delay" as one of the vices 
suffered by humans so we must allow for its delays. 
  Now that law-breaking vice-ministers have been mercilessly 
brought to justice, we can be prepared to fight for our own 
rights if local despots turn ruthless. 
  Democracy and justice do not drop like "gentle rain from 
heaven"; they should be fought for with consciousness and 
tenacity. 

