Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] A major Slovak daily has suggested that 
Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar and Deputy Prime Minister (and 
Finance Minister) Julius Toth, through their leading positions 
in the Fund for National Property (FFNP), have been trying to 
replace the managers of large industrial enterprises with 
stalwart supporters of their own party, the Movement for a 
Democratic Slovakia (HZDS). In an article entitled "Meciar's and 
Toth's Personal War With the Giants: Who Covets Economic Power 
in the State?," the editors of the independent SLOVENSKY VYCHOD 
asked, "Could it be that...the HZDS wants to install `its own 
men' at the highest management level in these enterprises," 
replacing managers who "are not completely loyal" to Meciar? The 
paper goes on to suggest that the prime minister and the finance 
minister had "other than populist" reasons for trying to deal 
with the management shortage that besets many of the large 
Slovak industrial enterprises. 
  "It is generally known," says the 20 December issue of the 
Kosice daily, that "the Slovak economy was not (and could not 
have been) prepared, particularly at the managerial level, for 
the developments that followed November 1989. There are simply 
not enough experienced people around, with high professional 
qualifications, capable of coping with contemporary challenges." 
While the government has for some time been looking for a way 
out of the situation, the HZDS immediately after its 1992 
election victory "prepared a plan for carrying out its personnel 
policies." This plan, according to the daily, "extended 
practically to all levels of Slovak society--from top to bottom, 
from Bratislava to the last district town, and from there down 
to all kinds of individual offices, including even cultural and 
sport offices." The paper claims that Meciar, who is not only 
the prime minister but also the minister of privatization and 
administration of national property and chairman of the 
Presidium of the FFNP, along with Toth, who is not only deputy 
prime minister but also minister of finance and chairman of the 
Supervisory Board of the FFNP, have recently taken a direct hand 
in "preparing personnel changes in 21 large enterprises in which 
the FFNP holds, as a percentage of the whole, an important 
number of shares." 
  "Why," asks the daily, "do V. Meciar and J. Toth want to go 
through with these fundamental personnel changes with such 
haste--as early as the beginning of January 1994? Why are they 
calling for extraordinary general meetings and changes in the 
bylaws?" After all, declares SLOVENSKY VYCHOD, "such a quick 
job" cannot lead to the desired stabilization and invigoration 
of Slovak industry and can only produce "a shock that will bring 
about more insecurity" in an economy that is "already short on 
stability." 

