BFN 

<F P=106> [Viktor Ivanov report in the "Government Structural Policy" </F>
column: "Economic Restructuring Began With Creating a 
Commission"] 
  [Text] The Russian Government has returned to the idea of 
economic restructuring: That much is obvious from the decree On 
Forming the Russian Federation Government Commission on 
Structural Policy, which was officially disseminated yesterday. 
The commission is headed by Vice Premier Aleksandr Shokhin, and 
has become his first step as the main developer of Russia's 
economic strategy. 
  The government's special attention to structural policy is 
natural. Economic restructuring -- that is to say, ending 
support for economically hopeless branches and redistribution of 
resources for the benefit of efficient enterprises -- is a key 
element of market reforms in any country. Intensification of 
government efforts in this sphere is long overdue: Up to now, 
in spite of protestations about the need for economic 
restructuring, everything has been confined to a rather vague 
decree On Selective State Structural Policy in 1993 (it was 
adopted exactly a year ago). Since then no discernible moves in 
implementing the structural policy have been made, with the 
exception of last December's decree on stimulating the creation 
of financial industrial groups. Therefore the appearance of a 
special government commission on structural policy should 
demonstrate that the authorities have not forgotten the idea of 
restructuring Russia's economy. 
  It is also perfectly natural that the new commission has 
been 
initiated by Economy Minister Aleksandr Shokhin who headed it. 
Recently it became especially noticeable that having become 
economy minister, Shokhin still had to concentrate his main 
efforts not so much on internal economic problems as on talks 
with Western creditors and international financial organizations 
on the issue of Russia's foreign debts. Meanwhile Shokhin's 
reinforced positions in the government and the fact that Premier 
Viktor Chernomyrdin assigned him the actual role as chief 
developer of economic strategy called for unorthodox moves from 
him: so as to prove that he can cope well with his new role. 
The creation of a structural policy commission has become the 
first such step. 
  Even so the mere fact that the commission has been set up 
does not indicate yet that the Russian Government has a clear 
perception of how this policy should be implemented. In theory 
this is precisely what the commission is to decide (the decree 
in particular tasks it with preparing within a month proposals 
on volumes and sources of funds necessary for conducting 
structure policy). It is clear already at this stage, however, 
that the commission intends to proceed from the principle of 
"selectivity:" In other words, stress in every way that state 
financial support will be provided not to all industries but 
only to a chosen few. Likewise it is clear that the commission 
will recognize the fuel and energy complex, which was recently 
promised such assistance once again, as one of the main 
recipients of state financial assistance. Finally, (given 
Shokhin's experience in contacts with Western creditors) it is 
quite likely that the commission will work out proposals on 
financing economic restructuring with Western aid. It is 
noteworthy that recently an idea has been increasingly popular 
in international financial circles that no country can 
restructure its economy without massive financial aid from 
abroad. 
<H5>  From regulations on the structural policy commission </H5>
  the commission's tasks are: to develop a federal program for 
restructuring Russia's economy for 1994-1995; define priorities 
in developing the economic branches; work out forms and methods 
of implementing state selective structural policy; and prepare 
proposals on selecting enterprises needing assistance and 
sources to finance this assistance 
  the commission coordinates the work of the Economy Ministry 
and other power bodies in pursuing structural policy 
  the commission provides assistance to enterprises on a 
special- purpose and repayable basis 
  representatives of entrepreneurial circles and commercial 
banks may take part in the work of the commission's 
scientific-methodological council. 

