Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Majles met in open session yesterday and Mr. 
Khatami, Mr. Qazipur, Mr. Rashidi, Mr. Ja'fari, and Mr. 
Movahedi-Saveji, deputies from the cities of Borujerd, Ardebil, 
Darab, Urmia, and Tehran, gave pre-agenda speeches. The Majles 
then took up its agenda, and we direct the attention of our 
respected readers to the detailed proceedings. 
<H5>  Majles Highlights </H5>
<H5>  Speeches </H5>
  Movahedi-Saveji, deputy from Tehran, discussed dealing 
decisively with agents of corruption and deviation. He said this 
will reform the nation's affairs. 
  Beytollah Ja'fari, deputy from Urmia, asked the government 
to 
allocate subsidies for social justice, so that the low-income 
classes can make use of them before the prosperous classes do. 
<H5>  Legislation </H5>
  Dr. Raja'i-Khorasani spoke in favor of increasing the 
Islamic 
Republic of Iran's share in the World Bank's IMF [as published]. 
He said: Contrary to what has been said, this bank is in the 
service of Third World people and it takes the side of the 
private companies. Continuing, he said ironically: If they were 
going to dissolve the World Bank, we would vote to dissolve it. 
<H5>  Hadi Khatami, Deputy From Borujerd </H5>
  If executive policies and programs are not compatible with 
planning, it will not be practical to reach the goals in the 
Second Five-Year Plan. 
  Hadi Khatami was the first pre-agenda speaker at yesterday's 
open Majles session. During his speech he discussed the arrival 
of the middle of the month of Sha'ban [14 January-11 February] 
and offered congratulations on the birth anniversary of His 
Holiness Qa'em. Continuing his remarks, he said: God forbid that 
tomorrow the shame of ingratitude, lack of steadfastness, and 
ignoring the principles and provisions of the Constitution, or 
breaking the pact and tie with the people should be written on 
one or two of our foreheads. 
  Because the Majles consideration of the Second Five-Year 
Plan 
has been moved to the year 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995], 
and on the other hand next year's national budget will also 
differ from that of previous years in view of the new 
guidelines, and will be studied and approved in two 
consultations, this bill will be approved by the end of the 
month of Esfand [29 March] this year. 
  In view of the current political and cultural conditions, 
the 
economic changes and the new foreign exchange structure, it is 
appropriate to take a profound look and make a careful study of 
the goals, policies and programs of the next four years in the 
context of what will be approved in the Second Five-Year Plan 
Law. The strengths, weaknesses, and experiences of the last four 
years and the strengths and weaknesses in the First Five-Year 
Plan must also be studied to remove the executive obstacles, 
because it cannot suffice to consider only the theories and 
experiences of the last four years and the projections for the 
future. 
  He emphasized: Unfortunately, the lack of skills and 
familiarity on the part of some officials with the 
responsibilities assigned and existing problems and their causes 
was in conflict with the policies of the previous Five-Year Plan 
and the promises its executive officers made for the future. 
This inevitably demands an appropriate and hopeful atmosphere 
concerning the policies and programs of the Second Five-Year 
Plan. 
  Of course, the previous accomplishments of those carrying 
out 
society's policies and programs have prepared society for 
acceptance. However, a basic requirement for attracting public 
confidence and consequently the success of each economic and 
political program and also for meeting basic needs, is faith on 
the part of the executive officers in their policies and the 
firmness of the measures they take. 
  If executive policies and programs are not compatible with 
planning and if the basic obstacles remain unrecognized, we must 
believe that it will not be practical to make the expenditures 
and investments and employ manpower desiring to meet the goals 
established in the Second Five-Year Plan, and it will also waste 
the resources and abilities of the nation's skilled manpower. 
Therefore, efforts to achieve the goals in the Second Five-Year 
Plan must be accompanied by taking the following measures: 
  Strengthening the foundations of faith among the executive 
officers, spreading Islamic morality and culture, increasing 
policymaking abilities, increasing specialist abilities, making 
efforts to hire knowledgeable manpower, expanding research units 
for the best application and utilization of specialist manpower, 
encouraging cultural units and raising the quality and quantity 
of knowledge, making efforts to prepare the environment and 
create the necessary facilities for private sector investment, 
teaching new management concepts, expanding manpower resources 
compatible with the nation's values and cultural principles, 
emphasizing studies and applied research, creating and expanding 
foundations and organizations, creating a suitable atmosphere 
for the growth and development of investment to increase the 
nation's economic ability with emphasis on public participation, 
increasing policymaking abilities, planning and persistence in 
meeting public needs, spreading Islamic morality and ethics and 
spreading the new moral concepts. 
<H5>  Morteza Qazipur, Deputy From Ardebil </H5>
  To achieve social justice, the path to waste, excess, and 
extra expenditures is closed, and we will deal with violators 
through full supervision and earnestness. 
  The next speaker was Qazipur, deputy from Ardebil. During 
his 
speech he offered congratulations and felicitations on the birth 
anniversary of His Holiness Mehdi (peace be upon him). He said: 
The Fourth Majles, which has performed its duties successfully 
so far, has done its basic work and is about to consider the 
Second Five-Year Plan and the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] 
budget. May it demonstrate the worthiness of the children of the 
Islamic revolution. 
  Continuing, he said: As the exalted leader of the Islamic 
revolution emphasized, social justice is the most essential 
issue to be considered in writing programs and preparing the 
budget. 
  He said: To achieve social justice, the path to waste, 
excess, and extra expenditures is closed, and we will deal with 
violators through full supervision and earnestness. We must give 
more attention to the nation's deprived and remote areas, which 
have been treated unkindly throughout history and are still 
faced with many problems now, and we must pay more attention to 
their malfunctions and problems. 
  In the era of reconstruction, serious attention must be paid 
to agriculture. In this regard, the speaker thanked the minister 
of agriculture for the Ministry of Agriculture's planning in the 
First Five-Year Plan, and called for basic change in this area. 
  The deputy from Ardebil also said: In view of the fact that 
it has been 10 months since the final approval and announcement 
of the formation of the province of Ardebil, I thank the first 
vice-president of the republic and ask that serious measures be 
taken to expedite implementation of this law and divide the 
resources and assets between the provinces of East Azerbaijan 
and Ardebil. 
  Continuing, he said: Although it has been three years since 
the opening of the Ardebil airport, the flights are still 
irregular and the airport is yet to be equipped with 
navigational equipment and other necessities. I ask the minister 
of roads and transportation to pay more attention to this 
matter, and I consider it necessary that special priority be 
given in the Second Five-Year Plan to studying and implementing 
the project for the railroad through Khalkhal, Ardebil, Meshkin 
Shahr, and Moghan. 
  At the end of his speech Qazipur asked the relevant 
officials 
to issue the orders necessary to begin construction on the 
Ardebil Province Power Plant and Petrochemical Factory. 
<H5>  Hoseyn Rashidi, Deputy From Darab </H5>
  It is necessary to do basic thinking about the government 
companies, whose budget is 67 percent of the total government 
budget. 
  The next speaker was Rashidi, deputy from Darab. He offered 
congratulations on the middle of the month of Sha'ban [14 
January-11 February] and the joyous birth anniversary of the 
savior of humanity, the Imam of the age (may God hasten his 
joyful advent) and the anniversary of the triumph of the Islamic 
revolution. During his speech he said: 
  We are on the eve of the anniversary of the flowering of the 
Islamic revolution, the revolution that saved the country from 
the domination of foreigners and which made our society 
glorious. Today the Islamic Republic of Iran is the only 
government that has stood up manfully against those who rule 
with oppression and force, those who use the international 
organizations as a means to put down freethinkers and seekers of 
independence, and those who support human rights as a way to put 
down oppressed nations, especially the world's awakened Muslims, 
and which has given them the sweet taste of victory. 
  Continuing, the speaker emphasized the need for the nation 
to 
follow the late Imam (peace be upon him) and the exalted leader, 
and cited a few statistics about the revolution's achievements. 
He said: Comparative statistics for some activities in the years 
1357 [21 March 1978-20 March 1979] and 1371 [21 March 1992-20 
March 1993]: Capacity of the universities increased from 175,000 
to 852,000, the number of students increased from seven million 
to 17 million, the number of classes increased from 206,000 to 
515,000, the number of educational sites increased from 48,000 
to 87,000, the production of electrical power increased from 17 
million kilowatt hours [kwhr] in the year 1356 [21 March 1977-20 
March 1978] to 63 million kwhr in the year 1371, and the number 
of villages with electrical power increased from 4,000 to 26,000. 
  The number of working telephones increased from 858,000 in 
the year 1357 to 3.48 million in the year 1372 [21 March 1993-20 
March 1994], wheat production increased from 3 million to 10 
million tons, rice production increased from 700,000 tons to 
4.55 million tons, sugar beet production increased from 3 
million tons to 5.8 million tons, and sugar-cane production 
increased to 1.64 million tons. 
  The statistics mentioned bespeak the sincere efforts of our 
officials and people to achieve self-sufficiency and make use of 
existing resources, which have been followed by outstanding 
growth and commendable development. The hope was that with 
comprehensive planning and making the best use of talents, we 
would not need to be dependent on foreign technology and raw 
materials. 
  Rashidi then said: In view of our nation's special situation 
and the problems the superpowers and bullies have created for 
our nation, I call upon the deputies to consider carefully the 
articles in the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget, and 
not to forget the effects of their decisions in bringing 
pressure on the low-income classes, on the wages of workers and 
salaries of staff and on the growth of currency in circulation 
and inflation. 
  Continuing, the speaker said: Pointless price increases made 
without calculating their negative effects on society must be 
earnestly avoided. Any kind of increase must be proportionate to 
the livelihood of low-income people, worker wages and staff 
salaries, in order to achieve social justice. 
  The deputy from Darab called for investigation and 
supervision of the budget for government companies, whose 
numbers are undetermined, in the year 1373 [21 March 1994-20 
March 1995]. Despite the use of 7,000 billion rials[R] in 
banking facilities, they will put the pressure of almost R4,000 
billion in losses on the public budget. The question for the 
government companies is, in selecting the investment projects, 
have the effects of their implementation been studied in social 
and economic terms? 
  It is necessary that basic thinking be done for the 
government companies, whose budget is 67 percent of the total 
government budget. 
  The speaker also added: In studying the budget bill, one 
cannot trust the work of the executive organizations preparing 
it, because they have no logical answer or justification for 
some of the numbers and figures they have put in the bill. This 
multiplies our responsibility and investigative task several 
times over. 
  Continuing, he issued the following memos to the government: 
The nation's main problem is its administrative structure, and 
until this system changes there can be little hope of improving 
the administrative, economic, and social situation. Another 
matter is the failure to use committed, specialist experts who 
toil for the Islamic Republic of Iran. Why are knowledgeable and 
capable managers not used? Why are most managers chosen based on 
the recommendations of personal connections or based on 
government relations, rather than on worthiness, competence, 
commitment, piety and work knowledge? How long will our noble 
and honorable nation be subjected to bad management? 
  In conclusion, he issued several memos concerning his 
electoral district. 
<H5>  Beytollah Ja'fari, Deputy From Urmia </H5>
  The next speaker was Ja'fari, deputy from Urmia. During his 
speech he said: Let us not forget that our belief in the 
imamate, the vice-regency and our faith in God and our national 
unity triumphed over world imperialism and despotism. Let us, 
therefore, work together on the Second Five-Year Plan so that a 
livelihood may be provided for the deprived classes, the 
workers, the farmers and the staff workers. Let us prevent price 
increases, and let us revise the government's economic policies, 
especially from this point of view. Instead of insisting on the 
inflationary course of the past, let us stop waste, bad 
management, ostentation, and embezzlement. 
  He then discussed his electoral district. He said: The 
shipment of kerosene to Urmia has declined since 1 Dey [22 
December], and something must be done quickly to send kerosene. 
The request from the noble teachers is that the bill on the 
retirement of government employees and to lift the current 
ceiling on pensions be approved in such a way that it provides a 
minimum livelihood for retirees. 
  Continuing, the speaker discussed the outstanding victory at 
the Asia boxing matches by our nation's athletes, who were 
championship finalists. He expressed regret at the cold and weak 
coverage of this provided by the Voice and Vision organization. 
  At the end of his speech he called upon the zealous people 
and especially the youth of Urmia to show their firm faith in 
Islam, the Imam's path and that of the exalted leader of the 
Islamic revolution on God's Day 22 Bahman [11 February] by 
turning out for the enemy-defeating demonstrations. 
<H5>  'Ali Movahedi-Saveji, Deputy From Tehran </H5>
  During the Second Five-Year Plan and the period of 
reconstruction we were unable to bring the people into public 
affairs in place of the government. 
  The final speaker was Movahedi-Saveji, deputy from Tehran. 
He 
discussed the beginning of the 10 Days' Dawn Celebration and the 
birth of His Holiness Mehdi (may God hasten his joyful advent) 
and offered congratulations. He said: It has been almost 15 
years since the triumph of the revolution. The experience prior 
to the revolution was one of brave resistance. After the 
revolution our nation learned the lesson that as long as our 
nation's leaders, officials and workers have faith, sincerity 
and good intentions and are working to serve Islam, the nation 
and the revolution, it is certain that no danger can threaten 
our nation and revolution. 
  He added: For us to achieve our lofty revolutionary and 
Islamic goals, one of which is to spread the Islamic revolution 
in the world and another of which is to establish social justice 
inside the country and make Islam and the laws of Islamic 
justice prevail in our own country, we must have several 
elements. One is strong and authoritative leadership, another is 
to make use of all experiences and to understand weaknesses and 
shortcomings, and finally we must compensate for the weaknesses 
of the past. 
  He emphasized dealing with agents of corruption and 
deviation. He said: It makes no difference if corruption and 
deviation are moral, political, economic, social or cultural. In 
order for us to take care of these people, I think a change must 
be made in us. Praise God, at the head of the nation we have at 
our disposal pure, sincere, serving and toiling people. Not only 
are we not hopeless about the nation's future, but we are also 
moving forward with faith and complete hope in God and in the 
believing revolutionary forces in our country, and we believe 
that we can be successful. 
  Movahedi-Saveji continued: I believe that since the period 
of 
the imposed war, during the Five-Year Plan and the nation's 
construction and reconstruction and during the period when we 
tried to bring the people into public life instead of having the 
government rule over every person and every thing, we have not 
had great success. 
  The correct and proper experiences of the nations that have 
advanced in science, economic affairs and industry, though they 
do not share our goals and beliefs, can be instructive for us. 
One of their experiences was that no country can advance 
industrially, economically, scientifically, and socially without 
a strong and authoritative government that deals decisively with 
corruption, deviation, abuses, theft, bribery, and embezzlement. 
Likewise, we must make use of public participation and 
involvement in public affairs, we must make use of valuable and 
worthy manpower, and we must make use of the resources and 
abilities of the people. Unfortunately, we took steps in this 
area in the Five-Year Plan, but we were not successful. 
<H5>  Legislation </H5>
<H5>  With Majles Approval </H5>
<H3>  Investment by the Islamic Republic of Iran in the World Bank 
To Increase </H3>
<H5>  Motion To Amend Articles of Majles Internal Guidelines </H5>

  The first item on the agenda at yesterday's open Majles 
session was the report from the Majles Internal Guidelines 
Commission concerning the Motion To Amend Articles of Majles 
Internal Guidelines, which was rejected after talks by opponents 
and supporters and a member of the commission. It is worth 
mentioning that this bill was tabled for six months. Under this 
motion, the number of Majles commissions was to decrease from 25 
to three. 
  Concerning this motion, a member of the Majles Internal 
Guidelines Commission said: Now when the second consultation is 
held for bills and motions, the commission meets with nine 
people and the motion will pass in the second consultation with 
five votes. In open session, 18 deputies can eliminate it. At 
least 91 people should vote to reject the decisions of the five 
people. Among this motion's other messages is the replacement of 
the sector perspective with the general perspective. What is the 
need for us to have both a Labor and Social Affairs Commission 
and an Employment Affairs Commission? These two can be 
consolidated, and we can consolidate the Foreign Policy and 
Defense Affairs commissions. 
  After this speech a vote was taken and this motion was 
rejected. 
<H3>  Increasing Iran's Investment in IMF Affiliated With the 
World Bank [as published] </H3>
  The next item on the agenda was the bill to increase the 
Islamic Republic of Iran's investment in the IMF, affiliated 
with the World Bank. Concerning this, the deputy minister of 
finance said: Increasing our investment in this company will 
increase our financial credibility and prestige at the 
international level and will increase our country's vote in this 
international organization. This company has nothing to do with 
governments that take loans from the World Bank, because this 
company has relations only with the private sectors in member 
nations. 
  In this regard, Mr. Rashidi of the Economic and Financial 
Affairs Commission said: We became a member of the fund in the 
year 1370 [21 March 1991-20 March 1992]. We now have shares of 
$816,000, and another $818,000 is to be added to our share. This 
fund provides financial and technical assistance to member 
nations for their development. 
  Then Mr. Jabarzadeh said in opposition: The nations that 
have 
used the World Bank's resources have destroyed their agriculture 
and the farmers in those countries have become unemployed. The 
World Bank's conditions include the elimination of subsidies for 
necessary consumer goods and no control of prices, which will 
cause inflation. Another disadvantage is that small local 
companies will go bankrupt. 
  Speaking in support, Mr. Raja'i-Khorasani said: Under the 
policies of the World Bank, total disasters do not happen. In 
the Rudbar earthquake, the World Bank loaned us $250 million, 
and the projects that were carried out immediately in this 
connection were from this very bank's loans. Raja'i said we must 
not weaken ourselves and the people of the Third World. Then a 
vote was taken and the motion was approved. It is necessary to 
mention that if this bill is approved in the second consultation 
our nation's investment will increase from $817,000 to $1.444 
million. 
<H3>  Appending Note To Law Exempting the Municipality of Tehran 
From the Owners and Renters Law </H3>
  Another item on the agenda was appending Note 1 to the Law 
Exempting the Municipality of Tehran From the Owners and Renters 
Law With Regard to the Transfer of Some Parks, Squares and 
Public Assets, which was not approved by the deputies. 
  This bill provides that if the municipality transfers parks 
and squares to the people, first of all, after the termination 
of the contract a key deposit will not be taken by the municipal 
side and second the Owners and Renters Law will not apply in 
case of the eviction of a renter and if evacuation is requested 
by the municipality through the Tehran public prosecutor, the 
evacuation will take place within two months. With the rejection 
of this bill, such cases will be subject to the Owners and 
Renters Law. 
<H5>  Majles Notes </H5>
  At yesterday's open Majles session Mr. Movahedi-Saveji, 
deputy from Tehran, cited Note 2, Article 1 of the Law on 
Procedures for Dealing With the Budget Bill, which has to do 
with amending the Majles Internal Guidelines. He said: The joint 
Plan and Budget, Economic Affairs and Cooperatives Commissions 
are required within one month of the submission of the budget to 
submit a report on their first consultation to the Majles for 
study, to include the revenues section. However, it has been 
more than one month since the budget bill was submitted to the 
Majles and the joint commissions still have not submitted the 
report on their work to the Majles. In answer, deputy speaker 
M.r Movahedi-Kermani said: We are studying. 

