Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] As of 14 January, several foreign diplomatic 
sources in Tokyo revealed the emergence of a plan to form a 
Middle East-version of the CSCE, following recent progress in 
the Middle East peace talks. According to the sources, Middle 
East nations, such as Israel and Egypt, and nations concerned, 
such as Japan, the United States, and Russia, are to 
participate in the planned council -- which will be modeled 
after the CSCE -- to discuss security issues. Japan has shown a 
positive attitude toward this plan. Should it materialize, it 
would be an epoch-making event for the establishment of 
long-lasting peace in the Middle East. 
  The plan was taken up at a meeting of the Multilateral 
Negotiations Steering Committee [MNSC] on peace in the Middle 
East that was held in Tokyo last December. The participating 
nations agreed the plan is "a valuable second phase in the 
Middle East peace process," (as stated by a Foreign Ministry 
source,) and therefore it should be given due consideration. 
  Among the expected participants in the planned council are 
nations and organizations concerned, such as Israel, Egypt, 
Syria, Jordan, and the PLO, and major nations and organizations 
participating in the Middle East peace talks, such as Japan, the 
United States, and the European Union (EU). 
  The CSCE was officially established in November 1990 [year 
as 
published] when member nations signed the "Charter of Paris for 
a New Europe" to discuss security issues in Europe in the 
post-Cold War era. A total of 48 nations, including European 
and American nations, belong to the organization which, in 
addition to holding summit meetings once every two years, has 
made achievements in such aspects as the successful exchange of 
military information through setting up a center for preventing 
conflicts. 
  A working group on arms management under the MNSC is to hold 
a meeting in Qatar after April to discuss the specifics 
concerning the "Middle East-version CSCE" plan. However, the 
historical background of the Middle East nations is more 
complicated than that of Europe. For the time being, therefore, 
the plan calls for placing emphasis on "brewing trust" among the 
member nations -- a task that the CSCE has been successful at -- 
and building a "communications network" to prevent the 
accidental occurrence of emergency situations through such means 
as the exchange of information on military deployment and 
movements. 
  Japan has gained influence as the chairing nation for a 
working group on environmental issues under the MNSC. Thus, it 
would be expected to play a leading role, should the planned 
council be established. 
  However, for the plan to materialize, it is a prerequisite 
that a comprehensive peace be established in the Middle East. 
For example, the declaration on provisional Palestinian 
self-rule in Gaza Strip and Jericho must be completely 
fulfilled, and there must be progress in peace talks between 
Israel and Syria. Much public attention has been focused on the 
outcome of upcoming talks between Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad 
and U.S. President Bill Clinton set to be held in Geneva this 
month, as this is considered to hold the key to the 
materialization of the plan. 

