BFN 

<F P=106> [Natalya Gorodetskaya report under the "Hopes" rubric: </F>
"Oleg Soskovets Promises To Liberalize Arms Export"] 
  [Text] Oleg Soskovets, Russian first deputy prime 
minister, who is on a three-day tour of the Volga and Urals 
regions to visit local military-industrial enterprises, has 
attempted to ease tension in the regions over the government's 
failure to pay for defense production manufactured in 1993-94. 
On Monday, in Udmurtia, where the military-industrial sector 
accounts for 80 percent of overall industrial production and 
employs half of all workers, Mr. Soskovets said at a meeting 
with the personnel of the Izhevsk Engineering Plant that some 
problems facing defense enterprises could be resolved by 
liberalizing the export of military goods. 
  "Of course, political objectives must be taken into account, 
but nonetheless we will enable the enterprises to export their 
products on their own," the deputy prime minister said. In his 
words, the state plans to restrict only the export of high-tech 
products that could affect the country's defense capabilities. 
Otherwise, "we will sell whatever they will buy," Mr. Soskovets 
promised. The deputy prime minister also promised on behalf of 
the government that debts to the defense industry will be repaid 
once the federal budget is approved. 
  Also on Monday, a joint meeting of the Russian Federation 
State Defense Industry Committee and the Udmurt Government was 
held. As a result, Viktor Glukhikh, chairman of the State 
Defense Industry Committee, and Udmurt Prime Minister Aleksandr 
Volkov signed an agreement on cooperation in the conversion and 
development of military-industrial sector enterprises. The 
document, which will be in force until 1998, defined areas of 
the development of management, economic, financial, and legal 
ties. The Udmurt government believes that the obligations 
undertaken by Russia will help the republic's economy remain 
more or less stable when converting the defense enterprises for 
civilian uses. 
  Yesterday, Oleg Soskovets arrived in Cheboksary, where he 
met 
with Chuvash President Nikolay Fedorov and visited a number of 
plants -- Khimprom, Promtraktor, and Dieselprom. Today, in 
Ulyanovsk, he is scheduled to visit Russia's largest aviation 
enterprise -- the Aviastr plant. 

