BFN 

  [Text] On 18 April, the Environment Agency's "Study Panel 
on the Promotion of Low-Pollution Vehicles and Their Widespread 
Use in Local Districts" (with Waseda University Professor 
Yasuhiro Daisei as its chairman) compiled its final report in 
which it recommended that "to promote the widespread use of 
low-pollution vehicles, public agencies such as the national and 
local governments should set specific targets and try to 
actively promote the introduction of such vehicles." For the 
first time, the report shows in concrete figures that, in 
reality, there have only been a few cases in which these 
environmentally clean vehicles have been introduced even in 
cases where the opportunities were very good. On the basis of 
the report, the Environment Agency plans to consult with the 
relevant government ministries and agencies and then include in 
the basic environment program on which it is currently working 
the specific number of low-pollution vehicles it hopes to 
introduce within a certain period. 
  Currently, there is not enough demand to warrant 
manufacturers' mass production of low-pollution vehicles. This 
is reflected in the high prices of such vehicles, and this in 
turn impedes their widespread use. Thus, as a last resort to 
improve the ever-worsening air pollution in metropolitan 
districts in Tokyo and six prefectures, the government has 
spelled out a plan to introduce 300,000 environmentally clean 
vehicles by 2000. These are vehicles which produce no or very 
little exhaust emissions, such as electric cars, those powered 
by methanol or natural gas, and hybrid cars combining a 
conventional engine with electric power. It is feared, however, 
that the government's plan may not be carried out successfully. 
  Late last year, the Environment Agency's study panel 
surveyed 
government ministries and agencies, and prefectures, as well as 
cities with at least 500,000 inhabitants, and questioned 
officials at such public agencies as to what extent they could 
introduce low-pollution vehicles. The panel subsequently 
analyzed the results of the survey which showed that although, 
with proper management, approximately half of the 68,000 
vehicles officially used by such organizations could be replaced 
with low-pollution vehicles, only 268 such vehicles are 
currently in use. 
  In particular, although approximately 4,000 electric cars 
could definitely be used by central government ministries and 
agencies, only two, as a matter of fact, are being used as 
official vehicles for senior officials at the Environment Agency 
and the Ministry of International Trade and Industry. Survey 
results also showed that although hybrid vehicles could replace 
all 40 trucks and buses currently being used, not even one has 
been replaced. 
  The report compiled by the Environment Agency's study panel 
also touches on the issue of how government ministries and 
agencies and local governments ought to use official vehicles 
for transporting senior officials. In its report, the panel 
urges public agencies to further strive actively toward 
promoting the widespread use of low-pollution vehicles. For 
example, it suggests employing a combination of railway systems 
using electric railcars. 

