BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Issues and Events" program] </F>
  [Text] The symbols of the rebellious and secessionist gang 
indulge in the hope that they will achieve their separatist 
objectives with the presence of international forces. 
Therefore, they, as well as their supporters, propagate this 
issue to the sides that they contact. However, they forget an 
important fact; namely, this will never happen. This is because 
what is taking place in our country is a conflict between 
constitutional legitimacy and the separatists, the minority that 
is rebelling against constitutional legitimacy and violating 
laws and the national Yemeni consensus. 
  Needless to say, those who (?will try) to bring in 
international (?forces) to Yemen must be aware that Yemen is a 
unified political entity, the Republic of Yemen was recognized 
by all countries in the world, and what is taking place in Yemen 
is a purely Yemeni affair. We accepted Security Council 
Resolution 924 calling for a cease-fire and abided by it. 
Meanwhile, it was violated many times by the separatists. And 
we accepted the idea of dialogue with the nonseparatists in the 
[Yemeni] Socialist Party to tackle [words indistinct] 
differences out of respect for the Security Council, which aims 
at stopping the bloodshed, tackling the Yemeni problem within 
the framework of Yemeni unity, and underscoring the fact North 
and South Yemen are one. Accepting dialogue does not mean at 
all that it will be with the separatists under any circumstances. 
  The government of constitutional legitimacy reiterates its 
commitment to the cease-fire. However, the band of separatist, 
which is shedding crocodile tears and [word indistinct] calls 
for stopping bloodshed and ending the fighting, is the one which 
never abided by the cease-fire. It aims, through the 
continuation of fighting, at bringing in international forces, 
as it wishes. It depends in this on its active supporters. 
However, all permanent members of the Security Council and all 
countries in the world know full well that adopting such a step 
will not approved under the UN Charter or the rules of the 
international law. (?Dispatching) international forces is 
required to stop a war between two or more countries. [sentence 
indistinct] However, the Republic of Yemen is a sovereign state 
which enjoys (?stability). The deviation of a gang from 
constitutional legitimacy and it defiance of the will of people 
and national consensus are not an excuse (?for foreign 
interference,) including by UN forces. 
  As we have said, the UN forces did not intervene [words 
indistinct] the forces of any country chasing and fighting the 
rebels from its own sons [words indistinct]. The gang of 
rebellion and secession should [words indistinct] there will be 
no international forces in Yemen. The separatists believe that 
the presence of such forces will help them achieve their 
criminal objective; namely, separation. 
  We would like to say that the UN Charter and international 
law do not permit in any case sending any foreign forces to the 
Republic of Yemen, the unified political entity, because what is 
taking place in it are legitimate operations by the forces of 
constitutional legitimacy against a gang of [word indistinct] 
traitors, and outlaws who worked to undermine security and 
stability in exchange for destructive money so as to divide 
Yemen -- land and people. This is certainly impossible. 

