BFN 

  [Text] Harbin, April 3 (XINHUA) -- Wild Siberian tigers, 
which were thought to be on the verge of extinction until 
recently, are being sighted more and more frequently nowadays in 
northeast China, due to expanding local forest coverage and 
meticulous human protective measures. 
  Miao Liping, a worker with the Dongfanghong Forestry Bureau 
in Heilongjiang Province, and other passengers on a bus saw a 
female Siberian tiger and three cubs drinking from a spring near 
the Qiyuan Forest Farm not so long ago. The cubs were each 
about one m long and 50 cm tall. They were so leisurely as if 
they knew that they were specially protected by the government 
and people. 
  There have also been reports that the endangered animals 
were 
recently seen in the Xiao Hinggan Mountains, Wanda Mountains and 
Laoye Ridge, also in Heilongjiang Province. 
  The tiger used to be regarded as the ``king'' of the animal 
world in China but human beings proved to be more powerful. As 
human activities expanded, the number of tigers was reduced 
drastically until the government and people in the country 
urgently adopted measures to protect the tiger and other 
endangered animals in the past decades so as to maintain 
ecological balance. 
  The Siberian tiger has also been listed as the most 
endangered of ten species of wild animals by the World Wildlife 
Fund International. It is the largest among all the ten species 
of tigers in the world. 
  A group of wildlife experts from the northeast China 
Forestry 
University confirmed that the number of wild Siberian tigers in 
China has increased to nearly 100 from the 1990 figure of 30. 
The experts have been keeping tract of the animal since 1980. 
  There are now less than 300 wild Siberian tigers in the 
whole 
world, exclusively in northeast China and Siberia. More are 
being bred in captivity. 
  According to experts, a Siberian tiger usually needs an area 
of a dozen sq km of forest to survive. It lives alone and is 
particular about selecting a spouse. An estrous female Siberian 
tiger has often to wander a vast distance before finding a male 
tiger. If the two tigers do not get along with each other, the 
female tiger has to look for another male tiger. Very often, 
before the female tiger finds a spouse, her estrum has passed. 
The difficulty for the animal to mate limits its number in the 
wild. 
  China has listed the tiger as a first-class protected animal 
since the early 1950s. Hunting of the tiger and trading in 
products made from tigers have been banned. In 1989 Zhang 
Guojun and two other farmers were sentenced to six years in 
prison for killing a Siberian tiger. In January this year 50 kg 
of tiger bones confiscated from smugglers and destined for use 
in traditional Chinese medicinal recipes were burned. 
  The country has also set up several nature forest reserves 
with a total acreage of 100,000 ha. The oldest one was 
established in Heilongjiang in 1958. 
In 1986 the China Administrative Office in Charge of Endangered, 
Rare and Precious Animals and the Heilongjiang Provincial 
Government invested over 10 million yuan (about 1.2 million U.S. 
dollars) to establish a breeding center in a mountainous forest 
at Hengdaohezi in Hailin County, Heilongjiang, to raise Siberian 
tigers in captivity. The annual expenses for feed, equipment 
and medical treatment in the center surpasses three million 
yuan. The initial population of five male and 15 female 
Siberian tigers at the center were collected from zoos in 
Beijing, Shanghai, Chengdu and Guangzhou. 
  Tigers at the center are fed at 3:30 p.m. in the spring, 
fall 
and winter, and at 4:00 p.m. in summer. A total of three head 
of cattle are slaughtered to feed them daily. In addition, 
nutritional materials such as milk, eggs, liver, mutton, pork 
bones, racoon meat, yeast, multivitamins and dog meat are added 
to their food. 
  However, feeding is withheld on Sunday to increase their 
ability to endure the torments of hunger, as in the wild. On 
Fridays they are fed live food, mainly chickens and rabbits, to 
maintain their preying ability. ``This is to pave the way for 
their return to the wild,'' said Liu Xinchen, director of the 
center. 
  It has been reported that the estrus, mating and whelping 
phases of the Siberian tiger are strongly seasonal. However, 
Director Liu said, this seasonal behavior can be changed by 
using scientific management and nutrients. The tigers can be in 
estrus, mate, be pregnant and whelp in every season, with the 
peak birth rate occuring from June to August. The gestation 
periods of 12 pregnancies at the center so far has been 107 to 
108 days. 
  Scientists at the center also noted that when a male tiger 
was permitted to mate with five females at will, it mated 333 
times over 35 days, resulting in three whelpings. By adopting a 
managed mating method or separating the male and female tigers 
for 12 hours after each mating, however, all five females 
whelped, although merely 51 matings were allowed in 24 days. 
Moreover, eight cubs were produced from the natural method and 
14 from the managed method. 
  The tiger in captivity also selects its spouse carefully, 
Director Liu stressed. The technicians have to transfer a male 
tiger to the neighboring shed of a female tiger to let them get 
familiar with each other first. Even so, many of the 
neighboring tigers fail to mate. 
  A male tiger called ``Beijing Prince,'' which was 
transferred 
from the Beijing Zoo to the center in 1986, refused to mate 
female tiger no. 001 in 1987. Later, it was introduced to 
female tiger no. 014. Since then, ``Beijing Prince'' has never 
shown any interest in any other female tiger. 
  After seven years of effort, the center has succeeded in 
increasing its initial tiger population to 73. During this 
period 67 cubs in 28 litters have been born, and 58 have 
survived. Female tiger no. 010 has given birth to 25 cubs in 
seven litters, with the largest litter size being five. The 
tiger has been honored as a ``Heroic Mother.'' Both the litter 
size and the survival rate are records and the center is now the 
largest of its kind in the world. 
  Director Liu revealed that the center has mapped out a 
program to send the tigers raised in captivity back to the wild. 
It is expected to return some of them to nature by the year 
2003. 

