Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Washington (Agencies)--His Majesty King Husayn 
said Wednesday [26 January] that Israel should focus more on 
negotiating the issues of conflict and arrive at just and 
comprehensive solutions rather than seeking to sign a peace 
accord with Jordan first and then negotiate the issues. 
  The King, addressing a press briefing here on the final day 
of a visit to Washington, said while Jordan was indeed involved 
in sorting out the issues on the table with Israel, it was not 
losing sight of its objective of a comprehensive settlement to 
the overall Middle East conflict. 
  The King's comments effectively quashed media suggestions 
that Jordan and Israel were close to finalising a peace 
agreement. 
  The King said: "We are working in regard to our own sphere, 
we are trying to see at the same that we encourage movement on 
all other tracks and I believe problems elsewhere are probably 
less than they are as they affect us because Jordan has borne 
the brunt of every disaster that has occurred over the years and 
the heaviest of weights. So we have a long way to go, but I 
hope that with goodwill on either side--Israeli and 
Jordanian--we will see rapid progress. I hope it will come 
together some time." 
  King Husayn called for an "interfaith dialogue" to determine 
sovereignty over the Christian, Jewish and Islamic holy places 
in Jerusalem. 
  King Husayn suggested it was time to move the issue "outside 
the political equation." 
  The King repeated the Arab position that Israel must return 
the Arab portion of Jerusalem to their control. 
  He said there was a "need to consider maybe for the first 
time in our history in the region, the possibility... of an 
interfaith dialogue... on possibly the sovereignty over these 
holy places." 
  "Maybe the followers of the three great religions can come 
to 
realise what the signififcance of Jerusalem is to all of them 
and move it outside the political equation," he said. 
  Asked for his concept of the fruits of a Middle East peace, 
King Husayn said it holds "the promise of an entirely different 
future." 
  "The talents that are available, the resources that are 
available, the opportunities that are available, I believe will 
transform the entire region," he said. 
  He also said that peace could bring about the removal of 
many 
barriers particularly to trade saying it could produce what he 
called "Middle East NAFTA." 
  The King said he has "no hangup" about meeting with Israeli 
Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin. 
  "I hope that an opportunity will arise," he said, but added 
that he did not expect such a meeting to take place "in the 
immediate future." 
  "Our people are meeting, we are negotiating. It is only 
normal that such a meeting will take place," the King said while 
posing for photographers with U.S. Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher. 
  Earlier, at the press briefing, the King said the meeting 
would have to be properly prepared so that it could accomplish 
something. 
  "It's normal when moving toward peace that people meet," he 
said. 
  On Jordan's relations with the Gulf states, particularly 
with 
Saudi Arabia, he said: 
  "As far as Jordan is concerned we have always had... if you 
take it that way, I have been a follower of my grandfather, and 
his Late Majesty King 'Abd-al-'Aziz Bin-Sa'ud who came together 
and settled their differences and left us the responsibility to 
work together as members of one family in the interest of our 
nation. Our relations have passed through a period... I think 
that there are so many aspects that have to be addressed and 
could be addressed when we are able to meet face to face as I 
have tried since the outset. 
  "As far as we are concerned, we are most anxious to see the 
relations return to their warmth and to be based on mutual 
confidence and trust and to be based on the desire to cooperate 
in the interest of the Arab Nation as a whole. 
  "I hope the time will come, and I think we are moving in the 
right direction and I believe when we have a chance to meet we 
will discover that it was a very serious storm in a teacup, and 
I hope that our brethren in Saudi Arabia will realise that we 
never meant them any harm nor did we cause them any harm at all." 
  On Iraq and the continuing U.N. sanctions on that country, 
the King said: 
  "I have always said that I hope that this nightmare will 
come 
to an end sometime very soon, and particularly as it impacts on 
the Iraqi people and their continued suffering under the 
prevailing conditions. Somehow I hope we will get out of the 
area of Iraq not being an active, constructive part of the Arab 
world and the community of nations as soon as possible. 
  He said his version of peace was "peace, a real peace, a 
peace that gives everybody the opportunity to work together and 
to achieve their hopes for the future. And I spoke in detail 
about some of the problems that we have to address. 
  "(A) [as published] The problem of occupied territories, and 
I am talking of Jordanian occupied territories without prejudice 
to what our Palestinian brethren are talking about right now. 
And I have stated categorically that in that regard we feel 
very, very strongly that these areas--the small problem in the 
north of the Jordan Valley but there is a considerable area in 
the southern Jordan Valley that needs to be looked at in the 
sense of the urgency of our demand that Jordanian territory be 
returned to us. So there is the suggestion, and hopefully 
movement, on creating a group that will look at delineation and 
demarcation of the borders. And I hope that the coming days 
will see some progress here and people can move on the ground 
there. Once that is settled--and it has to mean the return of 
Jordanian territory to Jordanian sovereignty--then we can look 
at the entire rift valley and look at what can be done in the 
context of looking at it as a complete economic unit--in terms 
of resources, in terms of all the potential that there is to 
develop into the best way possible to the benefit of all. 
  "So the question of borders and territories and sovereignty 
over our territories is one of the aspects that has to be 
addressed. Another area is water, and there again, I believe 
that all the available resources might not be adquate for the 
needs of all concerned in the future, but certainly we have to 
work out the distribution of these waters in a satisfactory way 
in terms of the percentages that are peoples' rights. Beyond 
that, hopefully in a context of peace, we can look at what can 
be done beyond that to secure needed water for all concerned and 
obviously the third dimension--and this is not all because there 
are many other items on the agenda--is the human dimension. 
[sentence, punctuation as published] There has to be a 
qualitative change of life. I would hope that the priority will 
be given to people in the occupied territories, but beyond that, 
the region, for everybody to feel what peace is, to know that 
peace is, to realise what transformation there is as we progress 
along to its attainment." 
  "I am really optimistic and that is my tendency, of course I 
can never be absolutely certain that things will work the way we 
wish. But I think that there is a general concensus amongst the 
overwhelming majority of people that we move towards resolving 
problems. I hope Palestinians on their soil will enjoy 
democracy and pluralism, respect for human rights and a chance 
to live and work with us and I hope that Jordan and Palestine 
eventually can be an example to others in the entire region." 
  In reply to a question on an assertion in a book written by 
an Israeli general in which he said that the King went to Israel 
before the war of 73 and he warned the Israelis that the 
Egyptians and Syrians will attack them. 
  "Sir, when the war of 1973 occurred, we were not informed. 
It was kept from us. It took me totally by surprise. You know 
that and the world knows that. As far as the subject of 
contacts between Jordan and Israel, the ground rules had been 
that nothing should be said about these contacts but they have 
existed since the ratification of Security Council Resolution 
242 in an attempt to implement it in the context of Arab 
agreement until '74. After '74 it became the PLO's 
responsibility in accordance with an Arab summit decision and we 
have tried to persuade all to move in that direction. Only the 
Palestinians could speak for themselves. It has taken us since 
'74 to '93 to '94 to arrive at that point. Now things have 
moved. But any other suggestions are totally--in reference 
specifically to that question of yours, which I hope you 
wouldn't have asked in the first place--that is totally untrue, 
sir." [passage omitted] 

