BFN 

  [Text] Marrakesh, Morocco, April 13 (YONHAP) -- They are 
here to sign the new multilateral trade accord, but it was first 
things first when South Korean and U.S. trade officials met 
Wednesday to work on bilateral trade issues. 
  Korean Trade, Industry and Energy Minister Kim Chol-su and 
U.S. Trade Representative [USTR] Mickey Kantor immediately took 
up the issue of Korea's motor vehicle market. 
  Kantor presented the unbalanced picture of Koreans exporting 
over 600,000 cars a year while American exports totaled a mere 
1,300 units. 
  He called for tax cuts and elimination of Korean consumers' 
prejudice against foreign cars. 
  Kim responded that Korea's 10-percent tariff on car imports 
is the lowest after the United States and Japan, and that his 
government is trying to erase the stigma attached to foreign 
automobiles by announcing that foreign car owners need not fear 
tax investigations in February. 
  He said inter-ministerial discussions were under way on 
problems concerning car market opening and proposed bilateral 
negotiations as soon as Korea finalizes its plans. 
  Kantor demanded that the harmonized tariff rate of 13 
percent 
on dye and petroleum resin products offered in the UR [Uruguay 
Round] schedule be cut to 6.5 percent. 
  Kim said he would study the harmonization tariff offers 
again 
and offered to discuss the matter afterward. 
  Kantor showed an interest in the court battle between 
Korea's 
Tongyang Confectionery Corp. and America's Warner-Lambert Co. 
over the "clorets" chewing-gum brand name. 
  Kim advised that the two governments wait for the trial 
results as the matter is pending before the Supreme Court. 
  The row over trademark registration was determined in favor 
of the American company at the appellate trial board of the 
Korean industrial property office and now awaits a decision by 
the Supreme Court. 
  The two discussed Korea's intellectual property rights 
status 
with Washington, which is poised to newly designate watch 
countries later in the month. Korea wants to be removed from 
the priority watch list. 
  Kantor promised to acknowledge Seoul's efforts in 
intellectual property rights and other trade practices in the 
USTR National Trade Estimate (NTE). 

