BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature: compiled by </F>
Nikolay Zherebtsov and Andrey Petrovskiy; edited by Vladimir 
Shishlin] 
  [Text] An aide of the Russian president, Georgy Satarov, 
has granted an exclusive interview to Vyacheslav Terekhov of 
Interfax [IF]. 
  IF: Does it not seem to you that the abundance of 
organizations signing the Pact on National Accord as well as the 
nature of some of them (athletic, children's) diminish the 
political weight of the document? 
  SATAROV: I do not think so. One of the purposes of the pact 
was to promote the strengthening of a civic society through 
involving public institutions in the conciliatory mechanisms 
provided for by the document. Through these mechanisms public 
organizations can discuss their problems and work out 
recommendations which allows them to influence the government 
increasing the status, the weight of these organizations. Taken 
together they form institutions of a civic society confidence in 
which is a necessary element of democracy. 
  IF: In other words: the more, the better. Do you think the 
number of signatories makes the accord stronger? 
  SATAROV: Yes, because the nearest task is to invite all 
these organizations to round-table meetings to resolve concrete 
matters. These round-tables should not be formed only of 
government representatives. 
  IF: Can you sum up any results of signing the pact? 
  SATAROV: It is too early to speak of results. I would 
compare that to asking about the results of family life after 
wedding. The main thing is that people live together, have 
children and raise them. Still no one is cancelling the wedding 
ritual, and the attitude to it is more or less serious. In this 
case we can speak of a similar ritual. 
  It is not over, of course, as there is a big group willing 
to 
join the pact: associations of workers of culture, science and 
the media as well as major manufacturing amalgamations and 
employers, a big number of parties and organizing committees of 
parties. The process of signing will not be closed after they 
join, though it will evidently become less pompous. Still if 
new parties appear and wish to join the pact in, say, six 
months, they will be given the chance to do that. 
  IF: The irreconcilable opposition has recovered from its 
shock last October and made a number of harsh verbal attacks on 
the regime. Do you think that these attacks launched by 
judicial bodies is an attempt of the authorities to remind their 
opponents that if they continue their radical line, they are 
going to land in prison again? 
  SATAROV: No. In this case there is only one consideration: 
the need to observe acting legislation. 
  IF Note: The office of the Moscow Prosecutor has started 
checking the unlawful actions that took place during an 
opposition rally in Lubyanskaya Ploshchad in Moscow on May 9. 
Investigators are studying video-tapes of the rally and 
procession. The former Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoy, the 
leader of Working Russia Viktor Anpilov, the head of the 
National Salvation Front Ilya Konstantinov and others have been 
invited to the office to offer explanations. IF: The law 
prohibits calls for overthrowing the regime by force. However, 
when Aleksandr Rutskoy spoke of celebrating the 50th anniversary 
of V-E Day under a different regime, he did not mention armed 
struggle. 
  SATAROV: There were also other speeches. For example, calls 
were made to the army, the security forces and so on. I would 
want to remind you that immediately after the amnesty on 
February 23 the chairman of the Duma Ivan Rybkin made a 
statement imposing certain obligations on the amnestied. It did 
not mean the restriction of political activities as such, but 
they should be within the framework of law. 
  IF: You mean that calls for changing the system or president 
are part of normal political life? 
  SATAROV: Yes. They were made earlier too. 
  IF: Let us imagine an impossible situation that someone of 
the "irreconcilables" wishes to join the pact. What will the 
presidential team do? SATAROV: The question is within the 
competence of the conciliatory commission of the pact that is to 
be set up in the nearest future. 
  IF: In other words will they be able to sign the document, 
if they wish? 
  SATAROV: Theoretically speaking, yes. Why not? 

