CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with former Fujimori cabinet Minister of Economy </F>
Juan Carlos Hurtado by Luis Jaime Cisneros H. and Pilar Davila; 
place and date not given: "With an Eye on 1995?"; first 
paragraph is DEBATE introduction] 
  [Excerpts] Juan Carlos Hurtado Miller (Lima, 1940) is a 
potential candidate for president of the republic in 1995. The 
former prime minister and economy minister in Alberto Fujimori's 
government admits that he might run in the 1995 presidential 
election with or without Fujimori but not against him. Hurtado 
portrays himself as a consensus-builder and acknowledges that 
the nation will need an agreement with the Armed Forces in order 
to ease the critical relations between civilians and the 
military; he also proposes wiping the slate clean to prevent 
revanchism that would jeopardize the country's modernization. 
[passage omitted] 
  [DEBATE] Your term of office as a minister lasted seven 
months. Don't you think this is a short relationship between a 
president and his prime minister? 
  [Hurtado] My job was a very special one. It was my 
responsibility to lay the groundwork for the process of 
stabilization and reincorporation. I had disagreements about 
social development. I wanted to decentralize the municipalities, 
but Fujimori did not. My term of office was very different from 
Bolona's or Camet's; each one of them completed a stage. 
  [DEBATE] Did the government have a pacification strategy 
from 
the beginning? 
  [Hurtado] On the issue of pacification I attended three 
meetings of the Pacification Council that we created. Fujimori 
deserves all of the credit for the gains. 
  [DEBATE] Putting our trust in God at the close of your 
message announcing the "shock therapy" made you "famous".... 
  [Hurtado] The words "God help us" were extremely important. 
Although it may have seemed melodramatic, this was a sincere 
invocation. We did not know how the country was going to react 
to such harsh measures. And we had to create feelings of 
solidarity, unity, and faith in our country's destiny. 
  [DEBATE] What do you see as Fujimori's virtues? 
  [Hurtado] All Peruvians must acknowledge three extraordinary 
virtues in him. He rose to the occasion when he took over as 
president of the republic, bearing in mind that he went from 
running a university to running the country. Fujimori began his 
political career as president of the republic. Second, he was 
able to accept change. He entered a field that was unknown to 
him, economics in particular, and after a landslide election he 
risked his entire political capital overnight and implemented 
change by calling for a harsh program of economic stabilization. 
His third virtue is that he had the courage to head up the 
battle against terrorism. The Armed Forces have always had a 
strategy, but they complained that civilians were neither 
responsible nor determined enough to implement it and end the 
war. 
  [DEBATE] Are you a political sniper for Fujimori? 
  [Hurtado] The description bothers me. I would not take part 
in any electoral movement that might be organized against 
Fujimori, out of loyalty and, moreover, because I find it 
absurd. I think that if Fujimori's popularity declines, the big 
danger in 1995 is that the country will have dozens of 
presidential candidates. 
  [DEBATE] Would you support a neo-Fujimori candidate? 
  [Hurtado] That is a little like continuity within the status 
quo. It is what Fernando Belaunde Terry once said: "We need 
continuity in the government, but not the status quo." Today the 
architect has raised the same banner. Continuity means 
continuing the reforms, stabilization, pacification. What 
worries me about this course of action is that since we are a 
country with unmet needs, fulfilling them may come to be 
identified with one man, one leader. 
  [DEBATE] Do you think that what happened in the case of the 
"Cantuta law" lessens Fujimori's reelection chances? 
  [Hurtado] Yes, but Fujimori is an extremely practical man. 
He 
posits his theorem, sets forth his premise, develops his 
theorem, draws his conclusions, and puts "QED." He does not use 
modern mathematics; he is not a set-theory man. He analyzes the 
La Cantuta theorem as the La Cantuta theorem. The same thing 
will be the case with his reelection. He will consider his 
chances on the basis of the polls the National Intelligence 
System and private firms provide him; he will add and subtract, 
and if he senses that he has no chance, he will not run. Others 
say that he will do whatever he can to win, but I do not think 
that he will commit fraud to get reelected. 
  [DEBATE] Is Decree Law 776 on municipal budgeting a sign of 
a 
government campaign to limit the chances of Fujimori's major 
rivals? 
  [Hurtado] I think that the election campaign will be 
aggressive, but I do not see the municipalities law as a move 
against Ricardo Belmont. The mayor of Lima is wrong there. There 
may be another kind of confrontation with politicians that 
complicates the electoral atmosphere. It is not to the 
opposition's advantage if support for Fujimori weakens; instead, 
it is in their interest for him to remain at a reasonable 30 
percent. If the political parties do not run candidates, their 
tone will be less aggressive towards Fujimori and vice-versa. I 
do not see any new candidates emerging either, besides Perez de 
Cuellar, who I think is the most serious one. Belmont is not the 
right man in terms of training, but he is an alternative, like 
Daniel Estrada and Luis Caceres. 
  [DEBATE] Do you share Belaunde's opinion that Perez de 
Cuellar lacks the heart to wage an election campaign? 
  [Hurtado] If that were true, if he lacked heart, then his 
huge contribution to Peru through his international prestige 
would offset any perceived personal shortcoming. I would not go 
so far as to say that Perez de Cuellar is not a good 
presidential candidate. We do not know Javier as a politician; 
we know him in the international arena, where he did an 
excellent job. Let's wait and see. 
  [DEBATE] You are speaking as though you were a potential 
pro-Fujimori presidential candidate.... 
  [Hurtado] People say that because I have been a politician 
and have worked with Fujimori. But what kind of political 
support could I get? 
  [DEBATE] You seem to be assessing it.... 
  [Hurtado] Look, someone has to put the idea in your head or 
nominate you as part of a presidential ticket. 
  [DEBATE] Would you accept a neo-Fujimori presidential 
nomination? 
  [Hurtado] I do not know. I have worked for 17 years in the 
public sector. I could do it five more years with or without 
Fujimori but not against Fujimori. 
  [DEBATE] How long has it been since you spoke with Fujimori? 
  [Hurtado] Two years, when he was kind enough to nominate me 
as a candidate for director general of the UN Food and 
Agriculture Organization. 
  [DEBATE] Do you think that Fujimori ought to run again? 
  [Hurtado] He should not because he will find it hard to free 
himself from his presidential duties and use all of the 
resources of the State. I do not think that he should be 
reelected. One reason is that the makeup of the next Congress is 
going to be very heterogeneous. How is Fujimori going to govern 
in 1995 if he is rejected by the political parties? In a 
Congress that is one-third pro-Fujimori, one-third political 
parties, and one-third independents, the two latter groups will 
likely join sides against Fujimori. So there could be another 
coup. This is why a consensus-building president is needed. In 
this connection, Perez de Cuellar could very easily carry on 
talks with the opposition to implement a minimal program. 
  [DEBATE] If we assume that the Armed Forces have a 
long-range 
agenda, beyond Fujimori, how can they be depoliticized? 
  [Hurtado] All of the candidates in 1995 will be under the 
Armed Forces' magnifying glass. I do not think that the military 
has an agenda; rather, they are committed to a program to move 
the country forward. An annoying but valid comparison is being 
made with what the Pinochet government represented in Chile, 
which with all of its defects put the country on the road to 
development. In contrast, the disaster began in Peru in 1968. I 
think that the Armed Forces are committed to an institutional 
agenda for the country's development rather than to the 
political manipulation or control of top echelons. So, the 1995 
candidates will necessarily have to be close to the Armed Forces. 
  [DEBATE] Will the transparency of the electoral process be 
in 
danger if a candidate who does not have the approval of the 
Armed Forces is elected? 
  [Hurtado] A good candidate has to talk with the military; 
that is a national necessity. The transition from pacification 
to democratization in the country has to involve the Armed 
Forces. 
  [DEBATE] The election will be between a pro-Fujimori 
candidate and a neo-Fujimori candidate.... 
  [Hurtado] If Fujimori is not a candidate, I do not think 
that 
the option of the designated successor will work. It has already 
been shown that the president does not have the ability to 
endorse anyone. 
  [DEBATE] What would you propose to do with the 1993 
Constitution that Fujimori pushed? 
  [Hurtado] I would amend some of its basic articles. 
  [DEBATE] Do you think that the educational reform that the 
government will begin this year is constructive? 
  [Hurtado] Privileges in education have grown stronger in 
recent years, but I see no reform. I see only school 
construction. If Foncodes [National Compensation and Social 
Development Fund] does not have a program to protect pregnant 
mothers and children from birth to age five, then of what use is 
a reform? The social-development programs of Bolivia, Chile, and 
Colombia emphasize development between those ages because that 
is when brain capacity develops. This government's major 
shortcoming right now is its lack of vision in social 
development. I do not know whether the government has basic 
knowledge about social development. It may know something about 
the proper management of funds and organization. But by and 
large it has not outlined a program, its connection with 
social-development planning, and the complementary and 
substantive reforms such as decentralization. 
  [DEBATE] What items should be on a presidential agenda for 
the 1995-2000 period? 
  [Hurtado] Resolving the civilian-military and 
civilian-civilian relationships. Fujimori could do the first 
part well, but has had too many confrontations with civilians. 
So, what we need is a consensus-building president, and to 
forget about revanchism. Differences have to be narrowed, not 
widened. Peru needs solidarity, unity, and hard work by all. 
  [DEBATE] A clean slate? 
  [Hurtado] The only ones with whom I would not do that are 
the 
terrorists and the people who get rich through government. 
  [DEBATE] What items should be on a national government 
agenda? 
  [Hurtado] In my opinion, the next government has four basic 
tasks, and I think that Fujimori ought to bring them up right 
now. First, move from stabilization to development. Second, move 
from pacification to democratization. Third, move from 
reincorporation to integration. And finally, move from social 
development to the creation of productive jobs and inward 
integration by creating a grass-roots economy that brings the 
informal sector into the economic mainstream. 
  [DEBATE] Would you be Perez de Cuellar's running mate? 
  [Hurtado] That would be a great honor because I have great 
respect and personal admiration for him. 
  [DEBATE] What has been your most gratifying moment in 
politics? 
  [Hurtado] When I was sworn in as minister of agriculture on 
4 
September 1983, and my father was still alive but mentally and 
physically impaired. Nonetheless, I showed him the ministerial 
sash before I took the oath, and he smiled at me. I then 
inferred what he would have liked me to do and went to Dr. 
Bustamante y Rivero's home; I spent a long time talking with him 
about what a ministerial post means. It is a moment that I 
recall with the greatest satisfaction. I would have liked for my 
father to be there. 
  [DEBATE] And your most unpleasant moment? 
  [Hurtado] From 5 to 8 August 1990, when we became convinced 
that there was no choice but to implement a harsh stabilization 
program. We looked at the poverty figures and were dismayed 
about the impact that it was going to have on the poorest of the 
poor. Those were the most difficult and distressing moments of 
my political career. 
  [DEBATE] Do you admire any Peruvian politician? 
  [Hurtado] I have admired Bustamante since I was a child for 
his political integrity. As for the ones with whom I have had 
daily contact, there is Belaunde, who developed a very profound 
doctrine in Peru and who showed me new horizons for development 
that the university never did; Bedoya, because of his political 
drive and well defined personality; and Fujimori, for the 
aforementioned virtues. 

