BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 25 KYODO -- A senior leader of new party 
Sakigake said Wednesday [25 May] the next general election must 
be contested under a new electoral system so as to elicit the 
trust of the people correctly. 
  "We firmly believe in the notion that the election must be 
contested under a new system," Hiroyuki Sonoda, the party's 
representative secretary general, said at a news luncheon. 
  Touching on mounting expectations of an early election, 
mainly within the two largest opposition parties, Sonoda noted 
that voters will have trouble envisaging the shape of a new 
government if the next election takes place under the current 
system. 
  "I think it is difficult for us now to ask for the people's 
judgment," he said. 
  Sakigake, a splinter group of the main opposition Liberal 
Democratic Party (LDP), left the ruling coalition last month. 
  The Diet legislated in January a package of electoral reform 
bills replacing the current multiseat system for the House of 
Representatives with a combination of single-seat voting 
districts and proportional representation. 
  But it requires the passage of a bill that demarcates the 
boundaries of a new electoral map to allow the next election to 
be lawfully contested under the new system. 
  Speculation is rife that the administration of Prime 
Minister 
Tsutomu Hata, the first minority government in 39 years, will be 
forced to resign en masse or call a snap general election after 
passage of the long-overdue fiscal 1994 budget through the Diet. 
  Questioned on Sakigake's stance on tax system reform, one of 
the most pressing tasks for the Hata government, Sonoda said 
hikes in indirect taxes will be inevitable to revamp the current 
system. 
  But he also spoke of the need for the government to seek 
broad public understanding of tax raises and carry out 
administrative reform to restructure itself. 
  On the breakthrough in Japan-U.S. trade talks, Sonoda took 
an 
optimistic stand that the current political confusion in Japan 
will not affect the negotiations to set up a new framework for 
bilateral trade. 
  While saying a stable political situation is desirable in 
resolving such a key issue, he said the current turmoil "will 
not be a stumbling block" because all political forces can 
easily reach a consensus in the face of national challenges. 

