Magnetic   Field Measurement Using DC-SQUID 

<F P=102> 94FE0283B Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO in Japanese 2 Dec 93 p 4 
--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0283B </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO </F>
<F P=105>  Japanese </F>
CSO 

  [Text] From April 1994, the Superconducting Sensor Research 
Institute (in Inzai-machi, Inba-gun, Chiba Prefecture; Tsuneo 
Nakahara, Chairman) will begin experimental measurement of very 
weak magnetic fields in the brain, using a direct-current 
superconducting quantum interference device (DC-SQUID) in the 
world's most advanced super high performance magnetic shield 
room. Initially, magnetic fields in the brain and heart will be 
measured with a system that has 64 channels using SQUID and 16 
channels using high-temperature superconduction; the 
interrelationship of this with data from imaging diagnostic and 
other equipment will be studied; and the goal will be to 
complete a 200-channel biological magnetic field measurement 
imaging system. 
  The Superconducting Sensor Research Institute will begin 
experimental measurement of magnetic fields in the brain and 
heart from FY94. With the goal of completing a SQUID clinical 
testing system by the end of March 1994, a metal-base SQUID and 
high-temperature superconducting SQUID system will be introduced 
and a maximum of 20 types of permanent magnet MRIs (magnetic 
resonance imaging diagnostic equipment) will be set up in a 
magnetic shield room that was recently installed in a Tokyo 
Denki University laboratory in Inba-gun, Chiba Prefecture. 
  The external form of the magnetic shield room is a 6-meter 
pseudo-sphere with 32 sides that is made up of a 20-sided 
hexagonal form exactly like a soccer ball and a 12-sided 
pentagonal form. It is made of a total of five layers (four 
permalloy magnetic shield plates developed by NKK Corporation 
and one aluminum shield plate). It is the first in the world to 
succeed in weakening magnetic fields in the external environment 
to less than one-fifteenth. It was decided to go a step further 
to clinical data measurement experiments with the SQUID system. 
  Biodata already is demonstrating a major effect on 
diagnostics now that techniques such as x-ray CT and MRI have 
been put to practical use. The biological magnetic field 
measurement imaging system, by measuring the magnetic fields as 
they exist in the body, will further aid in the estimation of 
the state of activity of nerves and muscles that generate the 
magnetic fields and the diagnoses of minute functional 
abnormalities of the brain or heart. However, magnetic fields 
generated by the body are extremely faint, from .01 to .00000001 
of geomagnetism, so development of a SQUID flux meter for 
measurement as well as environmental adjustment to shut out 
environmental magnetism were essential. 
  Hereafter, the Superconducting Sensor Research Institute 
plans to use the already developed 64-channel metal-based SQUID, 
which operates at the temperature of liquid helium, the 
16-channel high-temperature superconducting SQUID, which works 
at the temperature of liquid nitrogen, and the magnetic shield 
room to discover the interrelationship with clinical data. It 
also plans to work on software development. 
  The Superconducting Sensor Research Institute is an R&amp;D 
company that was formed in March 1990 through investments by the 
Basic Technological Research Promotion Center and 10 private 
firms -- Hitachi, Sumitomo Electric Industries, Yokogawa 
Electric, Shimadzu Corporation, Daikin Industries, Seiko 
Electronics Industries, Takenaka Komuten, Ulvac Corporation, 
Toshiba Corporation, and Shimizu Corporation. 

