Language: <F P=105> Indonesian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Why Can't the Blockade on Cuba Be Abrogated If </F>
the Embargo on Vietnam Can Be Lifted?"] 
  [Text] The visit by Cuban Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina 
was an eventful one. Apart from signing a cooperation agreement 
on economy and trade with Indonesia, Foreign Minister Robaina 
also briefed Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas on his 
country's problems. 
  It can be said that the Republic of Cuba is one of the five 
communist regimes left in the world. Situated in close proximity 
to the United States, the regime under Fidel Castro's 
leadership, has been under the U.S. economic blockade for almost 
three decades. The Republic of Cuba has withstood the stringent 
economic blockade all this while. Undeniably, Cuba was able to 
weather the blockade due to the Soviet Union's huge subsidies. 
  Apparently, subsidies to Cuba terminated with the collapse 
of 
the Soviet Union. Cuba's economic situation was unquestionably 
threatened due to the termination of the subsidies. Moreover, 
observers believe that Fidel Castro's days are numbered due to 
this reality. 
  That is the reason for Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina's 
visit to several Asian nations -- Indonesia, Laos, Cambodia, 
Myanmar [Burma], India, Malaysia, and Vietnam. 
  Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina's diplomatic tour is aimed 
entirely at mustering sympathy and clarifying Cuba's economic 
situation. Cuba considers the U.S. economic blockade as totally 
unjust. 
  Indonesia, which has close relations with Cuba, is currently 
interested in further upgrading its economic and trade relations 
with Cuba, apart from further improving bilateral political ties. 
  As another developing country in the Nonaligned Movement, 
Indonesia is showing its concern for Cuba. Foreign Minister Ali 
Alatas stated strongly that Indonesia will never accept the 
imposition of the philosophy or ideology of one country on 
another. 
  He said: "We have never accepted the blockade against Cuba. 
Every country has the right to determine its own political 
system." The foreign minister also stated that Indonesia's basic 
foreign policy provides for the right of one country to 
determine its own destiny. That is why Indonesia will never 
accept the United States' economic blockade against Cuba. 
  The blockade against Cuba should give rise to several 
questions, considering the fact that the United States itself 
experienced great resentment over Vietnam. In fact, the United 
States lifted its economic embargo on Vietnam last month. 
  Why does the United states still want to carry on with such 
a 
practise -- the residual heritage of the Cold War, which lasted 
for 34 years? 
  Looking at the historical perspective, the U.S.-Cuban 
conflict reached its climax when the issue of Soviet SS-4 and 
SS-5 missiles was brought to the fore. The United States then 
announced its economic blockade against Cuba in 1962. 
Presently, there are no more missiles in Cuba and the Soviet 
Union has ceased to exist. Therefore, animosity should not exist 
between the two countries anymore. 
  But according to a statement reported by Carlos Batista of 
the INTERNATIONAL PRESS SERVICE, even though Cuba is not 
considered as an offensive "enemy," there are no indications 
that Washington will not change its attitude toward this island 
nation in the Carribean. Besides, John Shalikashvili, commander 
of the U.S. Armed Forces, reiterated that the "rival regime" 
still exists in Havana -- the reason why the U.S. military will 
always remain constantly on alert. 
  We are in no position to study the United States rationale 
in 
detail. Besides, it is our fervent hope that with the present 
changes taking place, the United States will reconsider its 
decision on the economic blockade against Cuba. 
  As a result of the conflict, the United States has to bear 
the responsibility of accepting the flow of emigrants from 
Havana. But Cuba considers the embargo as an "incurable and 
invisible disease which brings along destruction anywhere it 
settles." 
  According to analysts, the embargo has caused Cuba to suffer 
an economic loss of about U.S. $40 billion -- more than five 
times the amount of loans which Cuba has taken from the West. 
The amount is also 20 times more than the total amount of 
Cuba's imports. 
  Certainly, Cuba has blamed the United States for the 
embargo, 
which has caused its people to suffer. There are others who 
share such an opinion, particularly after former U.S. President 
George Bush intensified the blockade through what he termed the 
Torricelli Laws. 
  It is possible that the U.S. decision to prolong the 
blockade 
against Cuba is probably due to the opposition by the 
Miami-based Hispanic and conservative communities. In other 
words, domestic politics have a role in the question of imposing 
the economic blockade. 
  The United States will definitely stress -- as it has 
clarified to the other developing nations -- that the decision 
to lift the embargo will solely depend on Cuban leader Fidel 
Castro's willingness to embark on reforms in his country. 
  But whatever the case may be, Indonesia will definitely 
extend its support to Cuba. It is hoped that similar support 
will be extended by the other Asian countries visited by Foreign 
Minister Robaina. 

