CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aleksey Novikov, under the rubric "Analysis": </F>
"Borders Are Open--So Far, Only for Mafia"] 
  [Text] "A few years ago Moscow was advertised as a 
city of intellectual and cultural blossoming, compared to Paris 
of the 1920's and New York of the 1940's. Today it frequently 
seems that Moscow more resembles the Chicago of Al Capone's 
times... Moscow has turned into a menacing 
city."--THE WASHINGTON POST 
  At a time when the president of Russia, like the beloved 
leader Kim Chong-il, "provides a hands-on leadership" for 
Russian intelligence, counterintelligence, and border guards, 
conducting meetings with them and mapping the milestones for 
future victories, it looks like our American comrades are 
increasingly losing faith in the ability of our "competent 
organs" to at least get somewhat of a handle on the criminal 
situation on one-seventh of the dry land. 
  It has always been believed, and justly so, that the regular 
American Joe does not give a damn about anything that has no 
direct bearing on him personally and his country. Therefore, it 
is symbolic that recently articles on the subject of runaway 
crime in Russia appear weekly in American newspapers. It means 
that this problem, which has already drove us to frustration by 
its "urgency," is already perceived there as something almost 
close to home. And judging by headlines, is even treated with a 
shade of panic. 
  "...American politicians are discovering that they will have 
to battle a threat to national security that is perhaps much 
more serious than the ill-fated Ames' espionage case," writes 
Martin Anderson in THE WASHINGTON TIMES, and goes on to warn: "A 
situation where the authority in the second world nuclear power 
of significance may end up in the hands of criminal and 
nationalist fanatics no longer appears inconceivable." He is 
echoed by an equally perplexed Steven Erlanger in THE NEW YORK 
TIMES: "Few could foresee that crime will be so large-scale and 
so well organized, so strongly linked with the weak government, 
and that it will create the real prospect of the emergence of a 
superpower run by criminals, a sort of Sicily stretching over 
two continents." 
  Perhaps these are just journalistic "embellishments" for 
better effect? Far from so. A serious "word" in this respect has 
already come from the most competent people in Washington (and 
not only there). Appearing in April in the U.S. Senate, CIA 
Director James Woolsey spoke of the threat of a "criminal 
politburo" emerging in Russia, which will become a "strong and 
ingenious adversary," while a high-ranking London police 
official David Winess warned directly that "unless Russian 
organized crime groups are treated with all due vigilance, you 
are not going to be able to cope with this problem--so fast it 
exacerbates and such is its scale." 
  As for Americans, they certainly keep up their vigilance. It 
is not accidental that a few days ago there was a report that 
the FBI intends to open its representation (or whatever it may 
be called) in Moscow in the nearest future, although in the past 
they have rejected this idea "because of budget paucity," and 
the CIA had been against it as well. 
<H5>  * * * </H5>
  Articles filed by foreign correspondents accredited in 
Moscow 
resemble reports from a country at war: the number of 
casualties, grisly details of crimes, nearly daily bombings, 
"the atmosphere of rage and cruelty in which it seems 
aggressiveness has become a norm"--in short, everything that for 
Russia means "rampant gangsterism here." And actually, Western 
colleagues hardly exaggerate. 
  On 20 April, some touches to this gloomy picture were added 
by CIA Director James Woolsey, who spoke at the hearings in the 
U.S. Senate on the subject of international organized crime. 
Speaking of the largest in the world criminal groups, Woolsey 
separately identified four: Latin American drug syndicates, the 
Italian Mafia, Chinese "triads," and organized criminal groups 
in the former USSR. He said that there are approximately 5,700 
criminal gangs currently operating on the territory of Russia, 
and another 1,000 similar formations on the territory of the 
former Soviet republics. "Approximately 200 of them," said the 
CIA director, "are large, far-flung criminal organizations, 
which are involved in criminal activities across the entire 
former Soviet Union and 29 other countries." 
  In the opinion of the chief American chekist, the Russian 
mafia is currently at the stage of formalizing its 
organizational structure. So far there is no single center 
directing the entire criminal infrastructure, but it may appear 
in the form of the aforementioned "criminal politburo." At least 
underground "obkoms" [oblast committees] and "gorkoms" [city 
committees] are already functioning. 
  James Woolsey states authoritatively (and we have no reason 
not to believe him) that "to a considerable extent the might of 
Russian organized crime is the result of its ties with corrupt 
government officials. Right now organized crime probably does 
not control the Russian Government, but it has tremendous 
influence in some of its segments." "Without any doubt, there 
are links between the leaders of the main criminal groups and 
some prominent political figures," said the CIA director. 
"Keeping in mind the number of companies that are under the 
influence or control of organized crime, it would be difficult 
for government bureaucrats in Russia, even high-ranking 
government officials, to avoid close contact with it." According 
to Woolsey, criminal groups in Russia spend between 30 and 50 
percent of their profits on bribing "government employees with 
good connections, first and foremost in customs and in the 
militia." 
  One can only regret that James Woolsey did not provide at 
least a partial list of these "figures"--as part of humanitarian 
aid, so to say. By doing this he could save the West billions of 
dollars, which arrive in Russia with fanfare in the form of 
credits, and then quietly flow into foreign banks. 
<H5>  * * * </H5>
  So how can our tattooed compatriots present a threat to 
world 
civilization? 
  First, in the opinion of the West, the rampant crime in 
Russia is a direct threat to its internal stability. The same 
James Woolsey quite logically believes that because of 
activation of organized criminal formations "a considerable 
number of people in Russia lose faith in their government's 
ability to function, which revives their nostalgia for a 'strong 
hand' that will bring order back to the streets." "There is a 
real danger that a rapid growth of crime will turn people away 
from Yeltsin's program of reforms and throw them into the 
embrace of political forces, of supporters of a hard line," he 
says. 
  In other words, the West is very much afraid that the 
Russians, driven up against the wall by gangsters, will demand 
the "iron fist" for a curtain call and then they, the West, will 
have to deal not with the compliant Boris Nikolayevich but with 
the unpredictable Vladimir Volfovich. The results of 
parliamentary elections in Russia showed that these concerns are 
not groundless and it is not accidental that Zhirinovskiy has 
made fight against crime one of the central points of his 
program. And presidential elections are still ahead for us.... 
  The second point that causes great concern in the West is 
that organized crime in Russia threatens to weaken its control 
over the stockpile of tactical nuclear warheads and nuclear 
materials in general. "There is serious evidence," writes the 
American magazine ATLANTIC MONTHLY, "that organized crime in the 
former Soviet Union is constantly trying to find access to the 
nuclear stockpile for the purpose of deriving giant profits." 
And the former U.S. State Department official Paul Goble 
maintains: "I am convinced that if I had $25 million, I could 
buy a warhead and the codes for launching it." 
  TIME magazine reports that many traders in Moscow offer for 
sale small quantities of radioactive substances, which, however, 
are not suitable for making a nuclear bomb. "But nobody has any 
doubt that a market of real nuclear materials does exist." The 
proof of this is last year's incident when an employee of a 
Moscow nuclear materials research center fled, taking with him 
one and a half kilograms of highly enriched uranium. True, the 
stolen material was soon recovered, but perhaps we simply do not 
know of other such cases with a less happy ending? 
  And finally, the entire world community watches in horror 
cooperation processes within the framework of international 
organized crime. Unlike proletarians of all countries who never 
did get around to uniting, the gangsters implement the famous 
Marxist slogan quite successfully. 
  According to CIA data, Italian and Russian mafiosi have 
already held two "symposiums"--in Prague and in Warsaw. In 
keeping with the agreements reached there, the Italians share 
their "expertise" in the area of acquisition and distribution of 
drugs, while the Russians ensure safe routes for their 
transportation and make a distribution network available. "Our" 
gangsters have already begun cooperation with the Colombian drug 
barons from the Cali cartel as well. As is known, the trail from 
a huge consignment (one tonne) of cocaine confiscated by Russian 
customs led to Colombia. In addition, the CIA maintains that the 
Russian mafia moves drugs from Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and 
the Central Asian countries to Europe and North 
America--naturally, through the territory of Russia. 
  As for foreign gangsters, they see our country as an 
excellent place for money laundering. According to Luciano 
Violante, who heads the Italian parliament's commission on 
combating the mafia, just recently Calabrian mafiosi invested 2 
trillion lira in a small bank and an oil refinery in the 
outskirts of St. Petersburg. Which brings to mind an old 
journalistic joke: "Sodom and Gomorrah are sister cities!" 
<H5>  * * * </H5>
  In the past, our newspapers regularly published the rubric 
"Soviet Man Abroad." It usually featured tales of various heroic 
deeds by our compatriots: one rescued a foreign old lady from a 
fire; another resolutely rebuffed the intrigues of foreign 
intelligence; still others responded to a desperate SOS by 
Japanese fishermen. Such things did happen, of course, but 
mainly all of us remember what a sad sight a Soviet man actually 
presented abroad on an official trip or as a tourist: the 
intimidated penniless creature, afraid of every shadow, seeing 
CIA agents in every trash can, and therefore preferring to move 
around exclusively in groups--like baboons. 
  There have been blessed changes in this respect, too: Former 
comrades with foreign travel privileges have turned into 
citizens without travel privileges, while corpulent herds of 
those who in the past most often had a lot of practice 
addressing others as "Comrade Warden" currently have found their 
grazing pastures at Champs-Elysee. 
  The monstrous magnitude of the illegal "flight" of capital 
from Russia has already been written about many times, but it 
may still be worth reminding that at the time when our 
leadership kneels before the West and begs with an outstretched 
hand for a couple of billion, about $40 billion have flown 
abroad from Russia since 1992, and about $1 billion now flows 
there every month. 
  According to the British company Control Risks Group, which 
consults Western businessmen on matters of security, most of the 
almost 2,000 commercial banks currently existing in Russia are 
used to launder money and transfer it abroad. Now another method 
of exporting money abroad has become fashionable: Ingenious 
crooks buy tickets by the hundreds for the Air Canada airline, 
take them to Canada by suitcase and once there, return them for 
hard currency as "unused." And in April, the work of 
Sheremetyevo customs was paralyzed for an hour: Its staff was 
counting the million dollars one of the passengers was taking 
with him to London. 
  Therefore, as the reader may guess, our "Japs" 
["Yaponchik"--nickname of a Russian mafia "kingpin" who lives in 
the U.S.] are not destitute in the far abroad. According to a 
specialist from the same Control Risks Group, "in London a 
considerable number of luxury items are being purchased by 
Russians with suitcases of cash at the price of up to $3 million 
per item. By comparison, what is a check in an expensive 
restaurant--1,000 pounds "per nose?" With satisfaction, the 
owner of one such establishment told a SPIEGEL [as published] 
correspondent: "They spend much more than Arabs." 
  London bankers have calculated that the Russians already 
have 
deposited in British banks at high interest yield more than 3 
billion pounds. They buy up homes and land lots in such 
aristocratic areas as Chelsey, Mayfair, and Kensington, have 
formed a waiting list for prestigious Jaguars, and have placed 
their children in the most expensive colleges and boarding 
schools. "They always demand the best and most expensive," says 
a London real estate agent. "You can recognize these gentlemen 
first and foremost by diamonds," says the manager of a Tiffany 
jewelry firm. He is upset, though, that Russian visitors 
themselves wear "poor quality jewelry, while buying from us 
expensive stones the size of a pigeon egg." Well, this is just 
too bad--they do not teach good taste in the zone... 
<H5>  * * * </H5>
  Right now--against the background of our endless references 
to the "civilized world" and the splendor reigning there--one 
may get a false impression that corruption, gangsterism, and 
street crime are problems of a purely Russian "vintage," unknown 
to Americans, Italians, or British. It is silly to argue that 
this is not so. As is known, only two things provide more or 
less secure protection from crime: either a dictatorial regime 
with its "iron fist," as it was under Stalin or Hitler, or a 
highly stable and socially-oriented economy, such as exists, for 
instance, in Sweden. 
  As for most industrially developed countries in the West, 
which we tirelessly point to as an example for ourselves, I dare 
to assure you that their citizens--much as ours--bemoan day and 
night the rise of all varieties of crime. Italy has long become 
famous for its Mafia, corruption, and political terrorism. In 
far-from-bloodthirsty England, where capital punishment was 
repealed 30 years ago, now 75 percent of the population demand 
it be restored. The United States of America spends $90 billion 
annually fighting crime, and nevertheless the national loss 
resulting from it--with the same enviable regularity--amounts to 
more than $400 billion. 
  And the statistics in this area do not depend at all on the 
country's operational socioeconomic model. In China, despite the 
preservation of political dogmatism, the development of market 
relations also produced a tremendous number of new stimuli for 
theft and corruption. In the beginning of this year XINHUA 
reported that more than 300,000 bribe-taking bureaucrats were 
"netted" in China's Anhui province alone. 
  Nevertheless, although we cannot claim a strictly Russian 
monopoly of crime, the situation in our country fundamentally 
differs from that in the rest of the world. While the situation 
there is difficult, in our country it is atrocious. We have 
neither Chinese nor Arab cruelty, nor American money, nor--least 
of all--Scandinavian stability and wealth. What we have is a 
complete mess, demoralization, and anarchy, where gangsters and 
bribe-takers multiply like bacteria in a Petri dish. While "over 
there" a line still exists between honest people and criminals, 
"here" it is already so washed out that soon we will be 
completely unable to distinguish one from the other. 
  Criminality has permeated the masses so much that the 
expression "a criminal state" no longer appears to be a 
journalistic exaggeration. And the saddest part is that the 
"masses" are not really that much at fault. Pseudo-reforms have 
pushed them into a corner, and the only way out often is unclean 
conscience. 
  I recently happened upon an article by an American author, 
who naively berated his country for not aiding former Soviet 
republics more in the fight against crime. This is laughable for 
at least two reasons. First, the Russian leadership got the 
Americans used to the idea that the latter, like the Communists 
in our past, "are responsible for everything," from winter crops 
to suppression of crooks. Second, equally laughable per se is 
the assumption that crime in the CIS or just Russia can be 
defeated by monetary infusions into the decrepit organism of law 
enforcement organs--they will end up precisely in the place 
where infusions usually end up.... Criminal rampage in the 
Russian expanses is the result not only and not so much of the 
weakness of our militia and special services. This is precisely 
the case where the problem cannot be solved without dealing with 
the economic base. Had we not had "shock therapy," we would not 
have crime epidemics. Because it is widely known that under 
normal circumstances it is still much more profitable and 
comfortable to be an honest man than a bribe-taker and gangster. 

