Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Bozena Wawrzewska under the "Observations" </F>
rubric] 
  [Text] As the date for granting a license for the 
all-national television station is drawing closer, emotions are 
soaring higher and higher. All kinds of speculations are 
emerging; we can see people not really taking understandable 
measures related to the possibility of getting the future 
license. The council suggests mergers, even though people did 
not establish their companies to merge them with others. 
Reuter, for one, joined TV-7, and it is not at all certain 
whether it would like to merge with the Association of 
Entertainment Enterprises, for instance. At any rate, there is 
a lot of bustling activity around this issue. 
  However, even though private television has not started 
operating yet, certain behavior of the public television seems 
to be a little strange. Directly before airing the 
interrogation of the National Council of Radio and Television 
[KRRiT], our television showed the studio of one of the 
candidates--POLSAT. In a report on the KRRiT press conference, 
aired on the main "Panorama" newscast, there was the following 
statement: There are rumors that POLSAT has quite a big chance. 
Wieslaw Walendziak, president of the public television and 
former POLSAT director, at a meeting with students at the 
Journalism Center, in which he participated along with the 
present POLSAT Director Boguslaw Chrabota, expressed hope, as 
the SIS agency reports, that POLSAT would soon obtain the 
license for an all-national television. On the following day, 
he made the following statement exclusively for SIS: "There is 
no precise view as to who should obtain the license for an 
all-national television; however, I would not be very worried or 
surprised if one of the fundamental elements of commercial 
television were POLSAT television, where I worked for a year." 
  Anyone who has worked in television is aware of the power of 
this medium and of the various interests that cross with each 
other there. He also knows all the influences and 
interdependence in television. The state-run television as well 
as its previous managers were often accused--frequently not 
without cause--of yielding to political influence and pressures. 
Public television is supposed to be the guarantee of 
objectivity and impartiality. Therefore, I do not think it 
would be good if right at the beginning it made people think 
that political influence was replaced by other kinds of 
influence. 

