BFN 

<F P=106> [By Lew Elias] </F>
  [Text] Johannesburg April 24 SAPA -- Buckled balconies, 
twisted aluminium building facades and an overturned and 
burnt-out car were the most prominent features of a glass-strewn 
Bree Street in central Johannesburg on Sunday [24 April] in the 
wake of a carbomb that exploded in the central city quiet. The 
overturned wreck was in front of a store that had been 
completely blown away by what police estimated to be between 70 
and 90kg of explosive material. 
  Four people died and at least six were injured in the blast, 
that could have been targetted at black political organisations. 
The national and regional headquarters of the African National 
Congress and the regional office of the Pan Africanist Congress 
[PAC] are all within a block of the site of the explosion. 
  Police are still combing the glass-covered streets and 
bombed-out buildings for signs of futher unexploded devices. 
  Sapa took a walk across the blast site with PAC 
Secretary-General Benny Alexander, who was on the phone to the 
regional secretary Musi Zwane when the blast occurred. "I 
thought it was something wrong with the line and then he said, 
`there has been a terrible explosion, I'm getting out of here'," 
Mr Alexander told SAPA as he inspected the outside of the PAC's 
new office in SA [South Africa] House, Bree Street, a block away 
from the centre of the blast. 
  "Benny, is everything all right?" regional police 
commissioner Maj-Gen Koos Calitz asked as the PAC party [as 
received] walked through the debris. Witwatersrand Police 
liaison officer Col Steve Senekal said four people had been 
killed in the blast and a SAPA reporter saw paramedical staff 
treating at least six people on the pavement outside the 
Johannesburg Garden Court Inn about a block away from the blast 
site. At least two of the patients were badly cut in the face 
and body. 
  In Bree Street between Von Williegh and Kruis the 
devastation 
was the worst. Windows were blown out up to four blocks way, 
however, and the entire central city area was physically rocked 
by the blast. The Monte Carlo Hotel, across the road from the 
centre of the blast, had balconies on the second floor buckled 
and hanging down supported only by metal concrete reinforcing 
rods. The hotel building was severely damaged on the side with 
bricks blown out of the wall. The shop across the road, where 
the burnt-out Audi lay on its roof on the pavement, was 
completely empty and gutted by fire. Windows frames in the 
upper stories of the adjacent Queens Court building were twisted 
and glass littered the streets for up to five blocks. 
  Merchants were already removing grilles and sweeping glass 
out their store windows in preparation for the expected squads 
of glazers, while five full SA [South African] Defence Force 
Ratel troop carriers prepared to disgorge personnel to prevent 
possible looting. 
  Shops in the small street mall including a branch of a fried 
chicken outlet had their all-glass storefronts blown away. 
  Police under the supervision of Gen Calitz were combing 
through the debris, videotaping and photographing the damage, as 
the bomb squad with sniffer dogs searched nearby buildings for 
more unexploded devices. 
  Meanwhile, ANC department heads were early Sunday afternoon 
on their way to Shell House to "secure their offices" after a 
number of windows in the building were blown out. 
  ANC spokesman Carl Niehaus said earlier the building across 
the road in Plein Street had protected the building up to the 
10th floor but the windows in the upper stories were damaged and 
papers were blowing into the street. 
  A crowd of about 200 people who had gathered to debate the 
blast scattered and ran when a police car drove through it. 

