Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with National Assembly Chairman Philippe Seguin </F>
by Denis Jeambar; place and date not given] 
  [Text] [Jeambar] You have spent recent months reflecting in 
depth on Europe, the republic, unemployment, and the role of the 
National Assembly, but you have not mentioned the issue of the 
presidential election. Political life, however, is about to 
transform itself into a Balladur-Chirac clash. What do you 
think of this acceleration in the presidency race? 
  [Seguin] What worries me with regard to the presidential 
election is not the fact that the race has started early, but 
the mediocrity of the debate. This two-speed rhythm and 
oversimplification are unfortunately habits of ours. I would 
even say that they unfortunately summarize French politics. 
Everything is a pretext to maintain this supposed clash between 
two figures. Everything is brought down to this one level. Even 
the funerals of foreign heads of state! What more can you say 
without it being immediately interpreted as support for one or 
as an attack on the other? 
  [Jeambar] You must admit that neither man is making much of 
an effort to have it any other way! 
  [Seguin] The climate is such that I think they must find it 
hard not to give in to the temptation to take some pleasure in 
it. 
  [Jeambar] Apart from this competition, what is your main 
concern for the presidential election? 
  [Seguin] In actual fact, I am not sure that we are preparing 
for the right election. After two periods of office by Francois 
Mitterrand, it seems to me to be a good opportunity to return to 
an image of a presidency more in line with the spirit of the 
institutions. 
  [Jeambar] Do you think that spirit has been betrayed, even 
in 
this period of cohabitation? 
  [Seguin] Indeed, some of the misunderstandings between 
myself 
and the prime minister have resulted from this difference in 
opinion concerning the role of the presidency. Cohabitation is 
a period when, unwillingly, the head of state returns to the 
essence of the presidential office. However, the pretenders to 
that office seem more than ever to confuse the presidency with a 
kind of "super prime ministership." 
  [Jeambar] Are you interpreting there the thoughts of the 
prime minister? 
  [Seguin] He is not the first to do this, nor will he be the 
last. It is true that, when you talk of five-year laws, we seem 
to be viewing the presidential election as changing banks -- 
moving over from the prime minister's residence on the left bank 
to the presidential palace on the right bank. But the 
presidential election is about more than that! It is a time 
when a new impetus is given and new directions are indicated for 
the next seven years. It is a decisive renewal which reflects, 
whether you like it or not, public opinion. The president of 
the Republic is not the hierarchical superior of the government. 
The president of the Republic is the continuity of the state, 
representing impartiality and an authority that should be 
recognized by each and every French citizen without exception. 
  [Jeambar] Of course, but the presidents of the Fifth 
Republic 
have always made sure their party was in the majority... 
  [Seguin] There is no link, and there should be no link, 
between the president of the Republic and a parliamentary 
majority. I even abhor the idea of the presidential majority. 
I loathe that notion which lies at the root of the drift of our 
institutions since the demise of General de Gaulle. 
  [Jeambar] We are on the slippery slope, then! 
  [Seguin] If we were not capable of running these 
institutions 
as General de Gaulle wanted them, it would be better to embrace 
a presidential regime. I very much fear that we are preparing 
for the election of a president who will be a kind of super 
prime minister, which would then make the post of prime minister 
totally superfluous. 
  [Jeambar] Does Jacques Chirac favor General de Gaulle's 
approach to the institutions? 
  [Seguin] I hope he will show this to be the case. I would 
like his campaign to be organized in that way, for him to aim 
for the most important aspect. 
  [Jeambar] All that is at stake in the presidential election? 
  [Seguin] The prime minister is right to mention the 
difficulties he is encountering in promoting reform, but this 
has nothing to do with personal inability or cohabitation. 
Quite the contrary for, as he himself recognizes, never before 
has a prime minister had so much room for maneuver. In fact the 
government remains -- legitimately -- within the framework of 
the fundamental choices that were made, or dodged, at the 1988 
presidential election. There is no getting away from it. The 
presidential election is the most important thing. The 
legislative election does not provide the means of effacing that 
fact. 
  [Jeambar] So a period of cohabitation is just a transition 
phase... 
  [Seguin] Indeed, that is the expression I used. There was no 
ill will behind it. I merely meant that, if the prime minister 
was entering the presidential race, he would not be a candidate 
on the strength of his achievements but on a project that he 
would have to present. To speak of achievements as an element 
in the presidential debate -- for Edouard Balladur or anyone 
else -- would be to betray the spirit of our institutions. The 
only one who will have to present a list of achievements in 
1995, to history and to the French people, is Francois 
Mitterrand. I really do want to insist on that point. Jacques 
Chirac -- between 1986 and 1988 -- and Edouard Balladur -- 
between 1993 and 1995 -- were Francois Mitterrand's prime 
ministers. There is no escaping the fact. Yes, we have already 
seen prime ministers with some room for maneuver or who set 
themselves apart by their style, prime ministers who made their 
mark or whom circumstances placed in opposition to the 
president. But, at the end of the day, they all had to tow the 
presidential line or resign, like Jacques Chaban-Delmas in 1972, 
Jacques Chirac in 1976, and Michel Rocard in 1991. 
  [Jeambar] If this idea you have of the presidential election 
does not win the day, could you yourself be drawn to defend it 
in 1995? 
  [Seguin] Now, what could you be driving at? 
  [Jeambar] Would you make sure your voice was heard? 
  [Seguin] That is what I am starting to do with you. 
  [Jeambar] Since the RPR [Rally for the Republic] and the UDF 
[Union for French Democracy] have decided to draw up joint 
voting lists, will you make your voice heard in June's European 
elections? 
  [Seguin] I think it would have been useful to continue the 
debate that began with Maastricht. I try to promote ideas: 
first, the organization of Europe on the continental level; 
second, the reform of the European institutions to ensure a 
better involvement of the national parliaments. That is why I 
am going from capital to capital. Europe has to face up to a 
real challenge. Will everything that happened in the eighties 
simply have the effect of putting the iron curtain back in the 
same position it was in 1938 or 1940 [as published]? We will 
not have made much progress if that is how we end up! Must 
Europe be the last continent incapable of organizing its own 
security? We are still a political dwarf. We must become a 
major continent that can do without outside help. The conflict 
in the former Yugoslavia, coming in the wake of the Gulf war, 
showed our impotence. 
  [Jeambar] Once again, you are going to bring criticism 
raining in on you! 
  [Seguin] Above all, I think I am shaking out a conceptual 
blockage that has taken a crazy turn! In the guise of 
ideological modernity, this country remains restricted by the 
same old plans. On the European level, above all we refuse to 
understand what has happened since 1988. Decentralization and 
local autonomy are another conformism. We fail to realize that 
we have broken down everything that made us strong: the 
coherence and solidarity of this country. I am astounded when I 
hear people talking about a regionalized minimum wage or about a 
decentralization of national authorities that neither lays down 
a direction nor redistributes. 
  [Jeambar] In fact, you always come back to the Republic... 
  [Seguin] What is the Republic but the search for a certain 
level of equal opportunity between men, and between territories? 
It goes without saying that the current practice of 
decentralization is ruining this equal opportunity. It is 
obvious that developments in education risk calling into 
question the equal opportunities of the people. We French are 
molded in such a way that personal happiness is not 
traditionally sought out just by personal growth but also by our 
participation in a collective adventure. 
  [Jeambar] Who is proposing such an adventure? 
  [Seguin] That is just it. As far as adventure goes, we 
cannot say that there is an abundance of it on offer today. Yet 
we feel the need for it, especially young people. We feel that 
something is missing. We are involved in a logic which makes 
politics -- the political choice -- run behind a number of more 
or less written rules, especially financial and economic rules. 
  [Jeambar] In the National Assembly, do not these political 
choices which you mention take a back seat, in other words, do 
they not come second to electoral interests? Charles Pasqua's 
proposal to hold primaries is an example of this which you 
yourself denounced when you said in LE JOURNAL DU DIMANCHE that 
"one does not make legislation to settle problems involving the 
parties." 
  [Seguin] As far as Parliament is concerned, we have moved 
beyond the stage of malfunction! The national mandate has 
become the secondary mandate for the local mandate. At the 
local level there is a decisionmaking capacity, a margin of 
autonomy, a genuine status, and social recognition -- whereas 
there is increasingly less of this at national level. This 
means that we are becoming an Assembly of representatives of 
local interests, an assembly of feudal lords who come to defend 
the interests of the fief that is their prerogative. 
Nevertheless, I continue to believe that there is a place for 
the national interest and the national debate. 
  [Jeambar] But on what conditions? 
  [Seguin] We must stop believing that our role consists 
solely 
of passing laws. It is primarily a role of controlling the 
government's and the community's actions. There is also a 
debating function aimed at dislodging general guidelines. This 
function can be very useful and positive as long as we have the 
means available to encourage the government to take action. 
  [Jeambar] At the end of the day, what is at stake is the 
future of representative democracy. 
  [Seguin] Of democracy, period! The representative bodies are 
malfunctioning, but the executive bodies themselves are being 
contested. In order to respond to the difficulties, they 
aggravate the problem by passing the buck to authorities which 
supposedly have jurisdiction in the matter, to technocratic 
structures, to committees or communities of wise men, such as 
the CSA [expansion not given], the independent Bank of France, 
and I do not know what else... This movement is aggravated 
further at European level, with a Parliament in Strasbourg 
which, in my opinion, is stillborn. Its multinational nature 
means that it will not be attributed with any democratic 
legitimacy in the foreseeable future. Thus, we are heading 
toward a world in which specialist people -- i.e., the people 
who meet the twin criteria of supposed competence and financial 
means -- will hold the power to the detriment of the legitimate 
representatives. 
  [Jeambar] Hence the obliteration of the political aspect and 
the criticism of politics? 
  [Seguin] Indeed. What amazed me the most in the prime 
minister's reaction to the "social Munich" -- because I did not 
point the finger at him -- was his spontaneous statement: All 
that is just politics. However, politics is the essence of 
democracy! The crisis in our democracy stems precisely from a 
deficit, and not a surfeit, of politics. 
  [Jeambar] Let us continue on this issue of the social 
Munich. 
Nevertheless, you are a supporter of another kind of politics? 
  [Seguin] When I speak of another politics, I do not mean a 
politics which is different from that of the prime minister, I 
mean a politics which is different from that practiced at the 
end of this seven-year presidency. That is completely 
different. It is not Edouard Balladur's politics with which we 
must break in 1995, it is with the choices made by Francois 
Mitterrand. 
  [Jeambar] That is subtle! 
  [Seguin] Not at all. I am thinking more or less that the 
prime minister currently has no other choice, even if at the 
beginning -- in April 1993, as regards interest rates and 
currency -- there was, in my opinion, an alternative. As for 
the rest, I have trouble seeing what one could reproach in 
Edouard Balladur's politics. On the other hand, I would not 
allow someone to say to me: We are going to continue with the 
same policies after the presidential election. No, after that, 
we have to build different foundations. 
  [Jeambar] We are not going to ask you for a program, as we 
would of a potential presidential candidate, but what are these 
foundations? 
  [Seguin] We must finally accept the idea that unemployment 
lies at the heart of everything. It is the cause of all our 
troubles. Will people understand this? Just as there was an 
external constraint that was taken into account very logically 
in the seventies and eighties, there is now the internal 
constraint of unemployment. This is a fundamental datum for the 
equilibrium of France's economy and society. The fight against 
unemployment must take priority. Hence the absolute need to get 
people back to work, even if in jobs that are not spontaneously 
profitable. Then you will actually have a chance of making 
schools efficient again, with children whose parents no longer 
neglect them. 
  [Jeambar] Does that mean that we must not set ourselves a 
goal of economic profitability to create jobs? 
  [Seguin] Of course! 
  [Jeambar] But whom are we going to ask to make this effort? 
Only the local authorities can stand this, not businesses. 
  [Seguin] There is such a thing as the people's business, but 
businesses are also exposed to international competition. They 
must have the means to tackle it and to tackle it victoriously 
in order to bring the product of its victory to all of the 
national collectivity. On the other hand, there is a whole 
series of activities which are not directly exposed to 
international competition and which are so many gold-mines of 
jobs. I would also add that investing today in activities which 
are not spontaneously profitable creates added value for society 
as a whole, while at the same time easing social tensions. I 
think this is glaringly obvious in the education sector. We are 
caught up in a number of vicious circles: schools with sliding 
performance; businesses which lay people off yet must bear more 
and more charges due to the effects of laying people off; etc. 
All of this is taking place in a climate of euphoria! 
Everything must be going well because inflation is under 
control, our currency is stable, and we have a trade surplus... 
  [Jeambar] Are we back to the conformist thinking which you 
already mentioned? 
  [Seguin] Indeed. They tell us: The fundamental economic 
parameters are going well, so therefore the economy is fine, and 
therefore employment is better. 
  [Jeambar] Do you no longer believe in the formula: Growth 
equals full employment? 
  [Seguin] You would really have to be blind to believe that. 
  [Jeambar] Yet many people still believe it. 
  [Seguin] That has not escaped my notice. It is 
inconceivable! 
  [Jeambar] The prime minister is expecting a lot from the 
return of growth. 
  [Seguin] A conceptual effort has been made. It looks as if 
we have rejected it. It is true that there are other countries 
where things are happening in the same way, especially in Europe. 
  [Jeambar] If none of these problems arises, what will you do 
in 1995? 
  [Seguin] I already told you: Do not try and make me say that 
I will raise them if others do not. No! They will end up 
raising these issues, but we will have to insist they do. So I 
am insisting. We must return to being a state worthy of the 
name, in other words an impartial and strong state which is a 
guarantor of the general interest and national solidarity... 
  [Jeambar] Why, is it not currently like that? 
  [Seguin] ...an unassailable state in which everyone can 
recognize themselves, a state which is something other than a 
partner for the local authorities or one local authority among 
others. We must return to a demanding vision of the nation. 
This is not a question of withdrawing into ourselves but a 
question of solidarity and the republican principles of equal 
opportunity and secularism. One state, one nation, and 
necessarily one Republic. It is not simply a matter of doing 
things in such a way that people can live together and support 
each other. It is not a question of policing or organizing. It 
is the willingness to take one's own destiny in hand, and that 
is done through political action. 
  [Jeambar] In this context, how do you view the role of the 
parties? 
  [Seguin] I must say that they have become fan clubs. A 
party, however, is something completely different: It is a 
place where one goes to try and build something. Here we come 
across another problem: ideologies have crumbled. This is true 
but it does not mean that there is no longer any room for 
politics. It only means that there are no more turnkey systems. 
The parties must act as laboratories, and places for debate, 
research, proposals, and preparation for teams likely to 
subsequently implement certain solutions which have been thus 
defined and sketched out. However, today, the parties are 
evolving between uselessness and encroachment. Indeed, they are 
seeking to carry weight in areas where they should not carry 
weight. During the formation of the 1986 and 1993 governments I 
was shocked that the systematic participation of party leaders 
was sought out. I feel that this is an aberration. There was 
only one which was not in the Balladur government: the Radical 
Party. That is it. It is done! We have elected an acting 
minister -- quite a nice man incidentally -- as chairman of the 
Radical Party. 
  [Jeambar] Let us get back to the presidential election, in 
other words to Edouard Balladur and Jacques Chirac. Who will 
you back? 
  [Seguin] I do not deny the legitimacy of either one. With 
widely different styles and temperaments, they have the personal 
ability to take on the supreme job. It is up to both of them to 
calm things down. This transitional phase must be managed in a 
way that is best for the interests of France alone. In 
addition, the thought needed for tomorrow and the strength of 
convictions must in no way yield to tactical concerns. In 
short, I hope that neither Mr. Balladur nor Mr. Chirac 
misunderstand what is at stake. 

