BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Anwar Haddam, exiled leader of the Islamic </F>
Salvation Front, by Gilles Millet in London; date not given: 
"Islamic Salvation Front Must Be Recognized as Political Party" 
-- first three paragraphs are LIBERATION introduction] 
  [Text] On Sunday [8 May] there will be a demonstration in 
Algiers "for dialogue and reconciliation." So far, the dialogue 
wanted by President Liamine Zeroual seems to be deadlocked. We 
met in London with Anwar Haddam, one of the leaders of the 
Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) and an elected member of 
Parliament since 1991. Currently a refugee in the United 
States, he gave us his views on the prerequisites for a 
successful dialogue. 
  Like most exiled FIS leaders, Anwar Haddam finds it 
difficult 
to voice an opinion on the various actions perpetrated in 
Algeria by the armed islamic groups. While he confirms that 
assaults against police forces are indeed part of the strategy 
of fundamentalist leaders, his answers are much foggier when it 
comes to the murders of intellectuals, journalists, and 
anonymous civilians. He does condemn the killing of "innocent 
people." However, as he himself puts it, "we need to agree on 
the meaning of the word `innocent.'" In his opinion, 
"pseudo-intellectuals or pseudo-democrats for whom democracy 
ends where their failure begins" are not "innocent." In other 
words, they deserve being fundamentalist targets. 
  To a direct question on the murders of Algerian journalists, 
he answers: "I will not get into this. We suggested to our 
mujahidin brothers that they might hit on those who backed the 
coup. These are a group of extremist secularists who reject the 
choice of the Algerian people. It so happens that among them 
are a number of academics, journalists, politicians, 
soldiers..." And when the murders appear "dubious" to him, he 
rather expediently puts the blame on military security forces. 
  [Millet] Algeria seems to be in a dead end. Do you think 
talks are still possible between the authorities and 
fundamentalists? 
  [Haddam] From the very outset we have asked for a political 
solution to be found through serious negotiation. Trouble is, 
those who forcibly seized power have no clear policy on the 
matter. The FIS is a political party. Therefore, it was not 
ready to go into armed conflict. After the December 1991 coup, 
we were faced with a new situation. This is why orders were 
given to people to organize locally and target all those who 
were illegally clinging to power, including security forces, 
which were supposed to preserve the institutions and respect the 
people's choice. We made good headway and the mujahidins 
(freedom fighters) now are an organized entity which will abide 
by FIS decisions in case of serious negotiations. 
  [Millet] What do you mean by "serious negotiations"? 
  [Haddam] We asked those currently in power to clarify their 
position. To begin with, they must acknowledge the fact that 
political authority may only spring from the choice of the 
people. Unelected, self-styled "decisionmakers" cannot play a 
part in the talks. Then they must agree to implement a genuine 
separation between the three powers: Parliament, the executive, 
and the judiciary. This means that we reject any encroachment 
on political power by the Armed Forces or intelligence services. 
Moreover, Algeria's sovereignty and unity must be preserved. 
Those in power should not be allowed to stir up trouble in 
areas such as Kabylia, for instance. These prerequisites tie in 
with another, basic one: All decisions made since the 
interruption of the democratic process must be repealed, 
including the ban on the FIS. The FIS must be recognized as a 
political party. 
  [Millet] Does this mean that no real negotiations will take 
place as long as the authorities have not committed themselves 
to organizing elections? 
  [Haddam] Indeed it does. Not only must the FIS' legitimacy 
be recognized, a formal statement must be issued with respect to 
the reactivation of the electoral process, and international 
assurances must be obtained, especially from France. And last 
but not least, all jailed islamists must be released. 
  [Millet] Who has been or must be involved in the talks? 
  [Haddam] The FIS, with the mujahidin's assent, decided that 
only Abassi Madani, the party's president, and Ali Belhadj, its 
vice president, are mandated to participate in potential 
negotiations with those in power. This is what happened. The 
talks have now ground to a halt because Zeroual (the president 
of the Republic) has his hands tied and therefore cannot 
recognize the FIS as a political party. 
  [Millet] Should the negotiation be successful, will FIS 
leaders be able to put an end to the violence? 
  [Haddam] Yes. The FIS leadership, taken as a whole, will be 
able to do this. 
  [Millet] And yet, it seems that in the field armed groups no 
longer recognize the FIS political leadership as legitimate. 
  [Haddam] Over 80 percent of combatants are now part of a 
single entity. We share the same objective and same strategy. 
Now, I do not intend to be more specific; nobody was mandated 
by the mujahidin to talk about their structures. 
  [Millet] What do you think of France's current position with 
regard to Algeria? 
  [Haddam] On both sides of the Mediterranean there are people 
who find it hard to shed their colonial mentality. In Algeria, 
it is a group of soldiers supported by extremist secularists, 
while in France it is the intelligence services, which have a 
big hand in your country's foreign policy. France needs to 
admit that there have been changes in the Maghreb. We can no 
longer accept the idea that a country still thinks of itself as 
the colonial power in the region. France has been trying in 
good faith to help Algeria economically. However, this aid does 
not reach the Algerian people; only those in power have been 
benefiting from it. It is time to stop urging the European 
Union to support Algeria. In any case, we shall not recognize 
any economic agreement between the current Algerian Government 
and the international community. In addition, it is intolerable 
that French authorities should persist in refusing the FIS the 
right to be represented in France while they accept other 
Algerian political parties. Some of our followers have been 
arrested, jailed, or put under house arrest even though they had 
committed no crime. It is time for the international community, 
including France, to be able to listen to us directly instead of 
dealing with people who are in power only because they took it 
forcibly. 

