Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by L.V. Vasilos, A.F. Vasilos, P.M. Stratulat, A.V. </F>
Gorshkov, A.P. Maksimchuk, G.Sh. Voronko, Scientific Research 
Institute of Maternity and Childhood Protection and Scientific 
Research Institute of Preventive and Clinical Medicine, 
Kishinev; UDC 614.7:615.285.7]-074] 
  [Abstract] The issue of the real danger posed by chemical 
compounds used in agriculture, especially in areas whose 
agricultural production structure determines their high 
territorial pesticide burden per unit of arable land, is 
addressed against the backdrop of the use of chemicals on an 
increasing scale, and an attempt is made to examine the 
dependence of the child health indices on the territorial 
pesticide burden, investigate the likely mechanisms of its 
pathogenic action, and develop preventive measures. To this end, 
the state of child health in three rural settlements with very 
different pesticide usage rates (1:6:13 or 3.74, 22.1, and 49.0 
kg/ha for the active ingredient) is assessed, and the child 
health status is evaluated by a complex of basic indicators. 
Morbidity data are obtained by examining diagnoses for the past 
three years for 5,363 children, including perinatal infant 
pathology. The child complex physical development indices from 
base villages, the child health group distribution in villages 
with equal agricultural chemicalization rates, and the metabolic 
status of lipid child health systems in base villages 
(M+/-m) are summarized. The outcome of cytochemical 
studies of the peripheral blood leukocytes' enzymatic activity 
attests to unfavorable structural and functional shifts under 
the effect of various pesticide burden levels. Parallel studies 
of the metabolic status of the lipid systems and lipid 
peroxidation attest to profound changes at earlier immune 
response stages under the effect of pesticide burdens. The 
findings confirm that in the areas of high chemical usage, the 
physical development of children lags while the incidence of 
development disharmony and retardation is high. The percentage 
of healthy children in these zones is lower and the number of 
children with chronic diseases is higher. An increase in the 
chemical use is directly related to the total morbidity and 
perinatal pathology as well as latent impairments in the 
protective and adaptation functions of the organism. Tables 3; 
references 6. 


