Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Maria Victoria Cristancho] </F>
  [Text] Senator Pompeyo Marquez, member of the Presidential 
Negotiating Commission on maritime and underwater boundaries and 
other matters with Colombia, was annoyed by the contents of the 
diplomatic note which Colombian Foreign Minister Noemi Sanin 
sent to Venezuelan Foreign Minister Fernando Ochoa Antich. He 
said that for the past four years "none of the assumptions and 
discussions which have taken place ever contemplated what Sanin 
has stated." 
  In the diplomatic note Sanin emphasized that the demarcation 
of the territorial sea should be undertaken in the following 
way: "Starting from the point where the land border between the 
two countries reaches the sea at the place called `Los 
Castilletes,' an equidistant line should be drawn between the 
points farthest out from the adjacent coasts of the two 
countries, and a point equidistant from the coasts facing each 
other." Furthermore, she denied that the Los Monjes Archipelago 
creates any kind of rights in the demarcation of the border. 
  Senator Marquez emphasized that, "There is no agreement on 
this matter." At the same time he referred to the memorandum 
which the Binational Commission will send to Presidents Ramon J. 
Velasquez [of Venezuela] and Cesar Gaviria [of Colombia] and to 
President Elect Rafael Caldera, certifying "that there was no 
agreement on this matter." 
  The senator stated that "this position of Foreign Minister 
Sanin has nothing to do with the facts of the negotiations 
because, as stated in the note in reply to her from Venezuelan 
Foreign Minister Ochoa, and which completely reflects Venezuelan 
feelings, "that view was never expressed in the negotiations." 
  The Sanin note on the dispute, which expresses the "official 
position of Colombia," was a "document kept secret" even from 
Alberto Casas Santamaria, Colombian ambassador to Venezuela. He 
admitted that, "He had no knowledge of the text of the note." 
  Ambassador Casas stated: "I have to congratulate those who 
prepared that news report, because they really got a story which 
I believe is worthy of an international prize. They succeeded in 
publishing a secret document of which I have no knowledge." 
  Casas said that he has no knowledge of the contents of the 
note in question because it was sent before his appointment as 
ambassador to Venezuela. 
  Vice Admiral Radames Munoz Leon, Venezuelan minister of 
national defense, preferred to decline comment on the exchange 
of notes between Sanin and Ochoa. He said, "That is a matter for 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, not for me." He added that he 
hoped that the Venezuelan Ministry of Foreign Affairs would 
continue to support the policies which President Ramon J. 
Velasquez approved on that matter. 
  Isabel Carlota de Bacalao, the former adviser to the 
Venezuelan Negotiating Commission, called the note sent by 
Colombian Foreign Minister Sanin a particularly uncompromising 
repetition "of maximum Colombian positions on the subject of 
border demarcation and a clear statement of the position of her 
country." 
  She stated that Colombia has stated once again that, in 
addition to the Agreement of San Pedro Alejandrino, there are 
other means for settling the negotiations, such as the Treaty of 
1939, which covers the intervention of third parties, a position 
which Venezuela has always rejected. 
  She added that, "In its reply Colombia has rejected the view 
that `Los Monjes' are islands and does not mention at any time 
the name of the Gulf of Venezuela." By contrast Bacalao called 
the reply of the Venezuelan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, "very 
weak," since, "although it points out that the Los Monjes 
Archipelago creates a territorial sea, a contiguous zone, a 
continental shelf, and an Exclusive Economic Zone, it did not 
occur to the ministry that Colombia, in its border dispute with 
Nicaragua, claimed the island benefits generated by Roncador, 
Quita Sueno, and Quintanilla Islands." 
  She considered that "this inconsistency of Colombia is a 
weapon in the hands of Venezuela. It would seem that to prevent 
relations between the two countries from deteriorating further, 
the Venezuelan Ministry of Foreign Affairs is not emphasizing 
this point, which supports the Venezuelan position." 
  She said that Sanin set down the exact dimensions of the 
battlefield in which she hopes the negotiations will take place. 
Venezuela is trying "to slip away weakly" from the realities of 
the Colombian note. 
  Bacalao emphasized that the note sent by Colombia is "an 
impeccable reaffirmation of the Colombian position, presented by 
a country which has very clearly in mind the dividing line 
between the state and the government, and which has never 
confused the interests of the state with personal interests." 
  She continued: "In Venezuela these are confused. Our country 
does not distinguish between state and government and has no 
clear awareness of the legal and political consequences 
generated by every word, every error, every omission, and every 
action not properly performed." 
  Bacalao concluded by pointing out that, while the Colombian 
note is forceful, the Venezuelan note is inadequate. 

