Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Resolution of the Second Session of the Eighth National </F>
People's Congress on the Work Report by the Standing Committee 
of the National People's Congress -- adopted on 22 March 1994"] 
  [Text] The Second Session of the Eighth National People's 
Congress [NPC] has deliberated the work report submitted by Vice 
Chairman Tian Jiyun on behalf of the NPC Standing Committee. 
The session holds: According to the requirements set by the 
First Session of the Eighth NPC, the NPC Standing Committee has 
conscientiously performed its duties; accelerated legislation, 
especially economic legislation; improved supervisory 
mechanisms; and made progress in other fields of endeavor. The 
report realistically summed up the work done in the past year 
and set forth major feasible tasks for the coming year. The 
session has decided to approve this report. 
  The session points out: Developing socialist democracy and 
improving the socialist legal system are important components of 
the cause of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
To meet the needs of economic development and economic 
restructuring, it is necessary to actively push forward the 
development of socialist democracy, uphold and improve the 
people's congress system, and effectively protect the people's 
rights to be masters of the country and administer state affairs 
according to law; to strengthen the socialist legal system and 
advance and safeguard the development of the socialist market 
economy and promote all-around social progress with complete 
sets of laws; and to conduct extensive education in the legal 
system to enhance people's awareness of the law and to create a 
favorable environment for the legal system. 
  The session sets these requirements: The NPC Standing 
Committee should continue to guide itself with the theory of 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics and the party's 
basic line, develop socialist democracy and strengthen the 
socialist legal system as its basic task, and play its role 
better as the permanent body of the highest organ of state 
power. It should give first priority to economic legislation, 
conscientiously implement the "Eighth National People's Congress 
Plan for Legislation," and pay close attention to building the 
framework of laws for the socialist market economy. The NPC 
Standing Committee should strengthen its supervision in law and 
work, give priority to its supervision and inspection of law 
enforcement, and resolutely rectify the phenomena that laws are 
not fully observed or strictly enforced and that lawbreakers are 
not investigated and prosecuted. It should strengthen its ties 
with the masses of people, further improve its organizational 
and work systems, vigorously explore new ways, keep forging 
ahead, and do all its work well in order to make a due 
contribution to promoting reform and developing and maintaining 
stability. 

