Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, February 17 (BTA) -- Goods, vehicles and 
foreign currency assets worth 50,882,919 leva were detained at 
Kalotina Border Checkpoint in 1993 in compliance with the UN 
Security Council resolutions on sanctions against the former 
Yugoslavia. Some 361,235 litres of diesel oil, 171,712 l of 
petrol, and 6,863 l of industrial oil were detained. 
  These figures were released at a meeting of the Government 
Commission on UN Sanctions Against Serbia and Montenegro last 
night. The Government Press Office told BTA that the Customs 
Chief Department referred to the Prosecutor's Office 13 attempts 
at sanctions violation. Seventy-two criminal-administrative 
proceedings were initiated. 
  Reports on sanctions enforcement were made by Deputy Finance 
Minister Khristo Kulishev, head of the Customs Chief Department, 
Deputy Transport Minister Kharalan Kharalanov, and the secretary 
of the Interior Ministry Petko Angelov. They said investigators 
and the Prosecutor's Office had studied material on attempted 
violations provided by the Interior Ministry. 
  The Commission on Sanctions heard a joint order of the 
ministers of the interior, finance and transport, dated February 
2, introducing additional measures for strict sanctions 
enforcement. All wagons bound for Serbia and Montenegro must 
stop at Dragoman Station and the shipping documents must be 
submitted for inspection in the daytime, says the statement of 
the Government Press Office. 
  The commission assigned the competent authorities to 
establish the culprits in all cases of embargo busting. 
  The commission discussed a draft decree amending Council of 
Ministers Decree No. 90 of 1993 on Bulgaria's implementation of 
Resolution 820 of the UN Security Council. The amendment 
regulates a package of control measures in transit shipments 
across the territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 
(Serbia and Montenegro). 
  Land transit shipments across the territory of the former 
Yugoslavia can take place only in the presence of a special 
permit issued by the UN Sanctions Committee. Such shipments 
will take place along the route Kalotina-Nis-Belgrade-Novi 
Sad-Subotica-Tompa Roeske and back in convoys of 10 to 15 
vehicles. Following customs inspections, the vehicles shall be 
sealed and those with constructions inappropriate for sealing 
shall not be allowed to leave the customs territory of the 
Republic of Bulgaria, after which the vehicles are weighed, 
their documents are stamped showing their exit gross weight and 
on the basis of the transit permit the customs authorities shall 
issue a one-time validity sticker handed to the person in charge 
of the transit shipment. The monitors approved by the Sanctions 
Committee shall report to the Sanctions Assistance Mission upon 
the completion of the shipment. 
  Mr. Kiril Velev, deputy minister of trade and head of the 
Working Group for Measures Alleviating the Negative Consequences 
of the Yugo-Sanctions, reported on the participation of 
Bulgarian companies in humanitarian deliveries to the FRY. A 
total of 4,416 applications for humanitarian export have been 
filed by Bulgarian companies since the UN resolution came into 
force (May 1993), of which 2,260 applications by 558 Bulgarian 
companies were approved. The humanitarian deliveries by 
Bulgarian companies amount to U.S.$7.193 million. Goods 
estimated at U.S.$21 million were exported till the beginning of 
December. 

