BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Mekhman Gafarly in the "Cooperation" column: </F>
"Turkmenia Revises Tactics Toward Foreign Investors. Now They 
Cannot Participate in Developing Old Oil and Gas Deposits"] 
  [Text] Mamed Beknazarov, Turkmenian [Turkmenistan] deputy 
oil and gas minister, has announced Ashkhabad's [Ashgabat] 
intention to revise the tactic of inviting foreign investors to 
exploit the country's oil and gas deposits, POSTFACTUM reports. 
According to Beknazarov, in the next few years foreign firms 
will be able to participate only in developing new, not 
exploiting old, oil and gas deposits, as has been the case up to 
now. 
  This August, he said, a tender will be organized in 
Ashkhabad 
for the right to set up a joint venture to prospect and develop 
oil deposits on the right-hand bank of the Amu-Darya and in the 
northern part of the Caspian. In the fall, a tender will be 
announced for the license to prospect and develop oil deposits 
on the shelf of the South Caspian basin. Beknazarov reported 
that more than 20 different companies have shown an interest in 
these projects, including Japanese, U.S., and British ones 
(Chevron, Arco, Exxon, and Enterprise Oil). 
  The Turkmenian side intends to offer tender participants 
"model contracts," i.e., agreements with unchangeable terms. In 
all likelihood, they will be concluded for 31 years and envision 
the payment of a bonus in the amount of $5 million for 
prospecting an area of 4,000 sq km, profit sharing between the 
joint venture and the state in the proportion of 65 percent and 
35 percent respectively, and the payment of a profit tax of 25 
percent and an export tax of 10 percent. 
  Furthermore, if over six years the company does not begin 
development of an area, then under the contract it will be 
returned to the state without any compensation. 
  According to Beknazarov, as the requisite geological 
materials are prepared, seven blocks will be presented for 
international tenders with overall resources of 12.64 trillion 
cubic meters of gas and 5.735 trillion tonnes of oil. 

