BFN 

<F P=106> [Passages within quotation marks in Creole] </F>
  [Excerpts] The unofficial Senate office received the 
minister of justice of the provisional government, attorney 
Louis B. Toussaint, on 7 June within the format of its planned 
consultations with officials of the new provisional government. 
Restoring the authority of the government, reforming justice, 
and reducing the cost of living will be the priorities of the 
Ministry of Justice, according to attorney Louis Toussaint, who 
also discussed the Ministry's currently meager resources. Let us 
listen to a report by Jean Luckenson. 
  [Begin recording] [Luckenson] "Within the scope of the 
series 
of meetings with the family [as heard] on 7 June, it was the 
turn of Louis B. Toussaint, justice minister of Emile 
Jonassaint's provisional government, which is not recognized by 
the international community. Toussaint, who was accompanied by 
his general director Yves Barbot and his head of cabinet, 
Jean-Claude Jean-Jacques, responded to the invitation of the 
unofficial Senate office presided over by Senator Bernard 
Sansaricq, legitimate son of the Alliance for Parliamentary 
Cohesion, in the company of the contested family of 18 January 
senators. 
  ``Following the speech by Sansaricq, who is president of the 
unofficial Senate office, Senate Justice Commission president, 
Sen. Romel Manigat, drew a portrait of Haitian justice, which he 
believes is not only on crutches, but is paralyzed, in a 
five-page speech in French. He pointed an accusing finger at 
judges who he said are selling justice by caprice. In his 
speech, he congratulated and did not forget to flatter the 
provisional government's justice minister, who had been his 
teacher at the Philippe Guerrier Public High School, and at the 
Faculty of Law in Cap-Haitien, the country's second city.'' 
[passage omitted] 
  "For his part, Louis B. Toussaint thanked the president of 
the unofficial Senate office. He did not hesitate to turn the 
pages of Haitian history. He said the country finds itself today 
in the gravest moment of its history. The minister summarized 
four points on which they should work so the justice department 
can function properly to reach a state of law." [passage omitted] 
  "The justice minister said they will work to reform the 
judicial system in Haiti, although the task will not be easy. 
Toussaint launched pointed remarks while Sen. Yves Rousseau 
napped in his seat. Sen. Dupiton had a quiet laugh when 
Toussaint said that the one who had asked that 10,000 people 
rather than 7,000 enter Haiti within the scope of the UN Mission 
in Haiti [MINUHA] should be arrested. Improving salaries, 
reducing the cost of living, stabilizing the country's economy, 
and restoring the government's authority are priority points for 
the ministry he is leading. But unfortunately, he said, mud 
stops the current. It is a provisional government, not a 
definitive government." 
  [Toussaint] I heard this same individual, who pretends to be 
Haitian, saying that when they proposed to send MINUHA here with 
1,500 men, he prided himself on having answered the foreigners 
that 10,000 were needed. I heard with dread that same individual 
saying they are ready, the people are ready to receive the 
foreigners, and the Army will be absolutely helpless against the 
invasion. His words say he hopes for the invasion with all his 
heart. The duty of the Ministry of Justice would be to have this 
traitor -- I publicly call him a traitor -- arrested 
immediately, but we understand that this is just a provocation. 
  [Luckenson] "Those who were listening to the minister were 
greatly surprised because he did not speak of the cases of 
disappearances and arrests made without warrants everyday in 
both Port-au-Prince and the province cities, or of the fate of 
those who have been in jail for a long time. 
  ``We should tell you that this series of meetings began 
during the week of 23 May among members of the provisional 
government of President Emile Jonassaint and the second Senate 
office, which is not recognized by the international community. 
We must tell you that the justice minister of the provisional 
government, attorney Toussaint, is the one who was proposed as 
provisional president of the provisional government formed under 
Article 111 of the country's fundamental law, following the 
congress of the Group of Citizens of the Greater North, which 
lasted three days at the National Theater. Jean Luckenson for 
Signal FM.'' [end recording] 

