BFN 

  [Text] His Majesty King Husayn will hold summit talks with 
U.S. President Bill Clinton at the White House today. High on 
the talks, which will be attended by senior Jordanian and 
American officials, are Jordanian-U.S. ties and regional issues. 
  Earlier today, his majesty visited the Congress, and met 
separately with Speaker of the House of Representatives Thomas 
Foley, and the House Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Lee 
Hamilton, and 23 committee members. 
  The committee had asked for the meeting for a briefing from 
his majesty on the latest developments related to the Middle 
East peace process. Members of the House Committee said 
Jordanian-U.S. relations had developed after the Gulf war. They 
said they understood problems facing Jordan and many committee 
members said they would support Jordan in view of its positive 
stand toward the peace process and the democratic climate 
prevailing in the Kingdom. 
  His majesty told the committee that Jordan would act 
according to the agenda with Israel on the agreement two weeks 
ago on border demarcation, water, and security issues. His 
majesty said the agreement was progress towards peace, and added 
that Jordan will demand completion of other items on the agenda. 
His majesty told the House Committee it was premature to talk 
about the proposed confederation between Jordan and the 
Palestinians, and both peoples could choose the sort of 
relationship between them when the Palestinians gain their 
rights on their national soil. 
  Asked if Jordan would sign a peace treaty with Israel after 
the border and water issues are resolved, his majesty said 
Jordan would act according to the agenda, noting that Jordan is 
a sovereign country and an advocate of Arab coordination. 
  His majesty said a speedy peace treaty primarily depended on 
Israel's response to the requirements and conditions of peace. 
His majesty said lifting the Arab boycott against Israel 
depended largely on the results of negotiations ending the 
blockade of Jordanian goods bound for the occupied Palestinian 
lands, and a reconsideration of Israel's protectionist policy. 
  His majesty told the House Foreign Relations Committee that 
Islam is a religion of moderation, and fundamentalism was not 
restricted to Islam, but there were other extremist religious 
movements, and Islam should not be viewed through fundamentalism. 
  His majesty said Jordan would offer all possible support for 
the Palestinian administration in the autonomous areas. 
  Yesterday, his majesty met U.S. Secretary of Defense William 
Perry following talks with Secretary of State Warren Christopher 
and other U.S. administration officials. 
  During their meetings, both sides have underlined the 
closeness of bilateral relations. 

