BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Kresimir Zubak, president of the Federation </F>
of Bosnia-Herzegovina, by S. Lovrenovic, place and date not 
given: "The Solution Has Not Been Forced on Us"] 
  [Text] After his election as the first president of the 
Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina, we asked Mr. Kresimir Zubak to 
give his first interview to VECERNJI LIST in his new post. 
  [Lovrenovic] You have just been elected president of the 
Federation. What is your first task in your new post? 
  [Zubak] The first thing is that, in the capacity of 
delegates of both the Federation and the state delegation of the 
Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina, we are supposed to negotiate in 
Geneva with the representatives of the Serbian people regarding 
the cease-fire, and then on 6 and 7 June, in Talloires, to 
continue negotiations on the political part of resolving 
relations in Bosnia-Herzegovina, that is, establishing a final 
peace. 
<H5>  Two Initiatives </H5>
  [Lovrenovic] Why have the negotiations now been split 
between Geneva and Talloires? 
  [Zubak] Two initiatives are involved here. One, in Geneva, 
conducted by Mr. Akashi, has as its aim the establishment of a 
cease-fire, while the other is an initiative of the contact 
group member countries, whose aim is to mediate between the 
warring factions in Bosnia-Herzegovina in order to attain a 
final peace, that is, to finally define the political and legal 
relations in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  [Lovrenovic] What are the tasks connected to the functioning 
of the Federation? 
  [Zubak] As far as the Federation is concerned, Mr. [Vice 
President Ejup] Ganic and I -- within the framework of our 
authority -- should undertake everything to commence the 
implementation of the provisions of the Federation Constitution, 
and that concretely means that we should launch an initiative 
for the establishment of bodies of authority. In this respect, 
one of the first tasks is the establishment of the Federation 
Government. 
  [Lovrenovic] Are we essentially talking about a 
reconstruction of the existing Bosnia-Herzegovina Government? 
  [Zubak] At the last meeting of the Constituent Assembly, 
when we adopted the Constitution of the Federation, we also 
adopted a constitutional law in which we stipulated that, 
instead of two governments, the government of the Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina -- which should have continued working -- and 
the Federation Government -- as a new body of executive power in 
the Federation -- should be reconstructed as the government of 
the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina so that it is, at the same 
time, the government of the Federation. 
  We agreed that Mr. Ganic and I should appoint the government 
within 15 days, and then the Constituent Assembly, acting 
pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution, should ratify it 
and proclaim the Federation Government. 
<H5>  Changes to the Federation Constitution </H5>
  [Lovrenovic] Will the new "Vienna maps" be staunchly 
insisted upon and the Constitution of the Federation changed, or 
will you wait for the development of negotiations with the third 
side? 
  [Zubak] At the last session of the Constituent Assembly, an 
initiative was launched for the amendment of the Federation 
Constitution, since the present solution -- that is, the 
solution that we achieved in the course of the Vienna 
negotiations on the establishment of two mixed cantons -- 
requires that the Constitution is first amended, because we have 
envisaged that in the cantons, authority should be organized 
according to the principle of the organization of authority on 
the level of the Federation, which presupposes amending the 
Constitution. That is why we launched the initiative yesterday. 
According to the Federation Constitution, a period of 15 days 
must elapse during which the Constitution is amended, and only 
then can a new session of the Assembly be convened and the 
amendments to the Federation Constitution either adopted or not. 
  [Lovrenovic] The Vienna maps caused quite a stir, there were 
protests; how do things stand now? 
  [Zubak] The Constituent Assembly passed a decision on the 
adoption of the Vienna agreements. This means that on the basis 
of the Vienna agreement, in addition to the Constitution 
amendments, we also need to pass laws on the cantons, grand 
duchys [velezupe] that is, their territory, and so forth. This 
is a long process and I believe that we will be able to define 
the territory of the cantons only after the entire peace process 
is completed, that is, when an agreement is reached with the 
Serbian side. 
  [Lovrenovic] You and Vice President Ganic have called on the 
Serbs to join you either within the framework of the Federation 
or some other union. What other variants exist? 
  [Zubak] We have several variants. One of them involves 
establishing a loose, very loose community -- based on a 
constitutional arrangement -- between the Federation and the 
part of the territory on which the Serbs are now a majority. 
According to another variant, on which we insist, we are 
offering that the Serbs join us under the same conditions as the 
Croats and the Bosniak-Muslims. Between these two extremes 
there exists the possibility of several variants. 
<H5>  I Am Against Haste </H5>
  [Lovrenovic] With your election, the Federation should begin 
to function, but authority is still divided on the ground, there 
are refugees, expelled persons; not much seems to have changed. 
  [Zubak] Although they insisted that a six-month limit should 
be allotted for the complete implementation of the Federation 
Constitution, I was skeptical about this. I had quite a few 
reserves because I know and I believe that I can objectively 
assess the situation on the ground. The most essential thing 
for me is to maintain the established cease-fire, to avoid fresh 
conflicts, and to gradually implement each segment of the 
Federation. I am against haste. This means that the Federation 
will not cease to exist if we do not implement everything that 
we have envisaged within six months. 
  [Lovrenovic] Who is going to represent Bosnia-Herzegovina 
before the international community? 
  [Zubak] This is a somewhat complicated situation. Namely, 
in transitional periods everywhere, and in similar situations, 
there is always duality and quite a vacuum in the legal system. 
It was simply impossible to cut short the situation, to say 
this that has existed until now is no longer valid, and 
something new is valid now. This novelty cannot immediately 
come into effect because the legal system and the bodies of 
authority need to be introduced gradually. The provisions of 
the Constitution clearly state that the Presidency and the 
Government of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina retain all 
authority in accordance with the existing Constitution until the 
final peace agreement in Bosnia-Herzegovina is implemented, 
providing this authority does not influence any of the 
government's authority established by this Constitution. The 
formulation is a bit clumsy, but it is obvious that the 
Presidency and the bodies of authority of the Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina should not encroach on the authority of the 
Federation's bodies of authority that have been organized 
according to the Constitution of the Federation. This is 
somewhat complicated, but we must solve all these problems 
through agreements, negotiations. After all, the agreement on 
the compositions of the delegations for negotiations is one such 
concrete example of how things should be done. Namely, this 
delegation is simultaneously the delegation of the Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Bosnia-Herzegovina Federation. We 
shall have to do many things in this way in order to secure 
legitimacy in accordance with both constitutions and to avoid 
possible fresh conflicts. 
<H5>  Herceg-Bosna Until the Establishment of Cantons </H5>
  [Lovrenovic] There was specualtion in a part of the press 
that this Federation has been imposed on the Croats and the 
Bosniaks. What is your view of this? 
  [Zubak] Some people claim that these agreements are 
exclusively to the advantage of the Croatian people. Others 
believe that they are exclusively in the interest of the 
Bosniak-Muslim people. I believe that the Washington Agreement 
is, objectively, in the interest of both peoples. We have 
accepted it as such, therefore, the solution has not been forced 
on us, we only had a mediator, the U.S. Administration in this 
case. This is not a forced solution, but the U.S. 
Administration did apply certain pressure to achieve the 
agreement as soon as possible. 
  [Lovrenovic] You have mainly been negotiating with Dr. 
[Bosnia-Herzegovina Prime Minister Haris] Silajdzic. Now Dr. 
Ganic has been elected vice-president. Have you had any 
contacts? 
  [Zubak] I have talked to him on several occasions. I had 
some contacts earlier and based on this I can say that I have 
concluded that this is a person who knows how to argue and 
defend his position and represent the interests of his people, 
but at the same time I believe that he is a person who wishes to 
and knows how to take into account the interest of the other, in 
this case, the Croatian people. 
  [Lovrenovic] You are also the president of the Presidential 
Council of the Croatian community of Herceg-Bosna. Will you 
remain in this post? 
  [Zubak] Yes. This will continue to function as a 
transitional solution, until the cantonal bodies of authority 
are established. 
  [Lovrenovic] Will relations with the Serbs be solved at the 
"green table" or on the front? 
  [Zubak] I believe that we should try to negotiate with the 
Serbs as well, because it is in our interest not to have any 
more casualties and losses. It is in everyone's interest. 
However, if we propose solutions and such solutions are 
accepted by the international community as objective, realistic, 
and suitable for the third people, yet their leadership rejects 
them, then we have the legitimate right to employ other ways and 
means -- including arms -- to protect, that is, realize our 
rights. 

