Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Studio interview with Croatian President Franjo Tudjman by </F>
correspondents Mirjana Rakic, Denis Latin, and Darko Herceg in 
Zagreb; correspondents not individually identified -- live] 
  [Text] [Correspondent] Mr. President, let us begin with the 
world. What is the greatest achievement of Croatia's foreign 
policy in 1994 [as heard]? 
  [Tudjman] I think that we could agree that the passing of UN 
Security Council Resolution 871 -- which contains all previous 
resolutions and whereby the UN's most authoritative body 
confirmed as never before Croatia's territorial integrity and 
its right to Croatian territory under the protection of the 
peacekeeping forces, and directly linked the solving of the 
crisis in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the sanctions against Serbia, 
which caused everything that is going on in the UN protected 
areas and Bosnia, and the solving of the crisis not only in 
Bosnia, but also in Croatia. It seems to me that this is the 
most important event in the sphere of foreign policy. 
  In internal affairs, I think that we could agree that the 
most important event was the Maslenica operation with which we 
linked northern Croatia with Dalmatian Croatia, as well as the 
latest successes of the Croatian Government in curbing inflation. 
  [Correspondent] These were the achievements. However, what 
have we not managed to do in 1994 [as heard], primarily in our 
contacts with the world? 
  [Tudjman] Obviously, we have not managed to solve our main 
problem -- that is, the problem of the territories that are 
under occupation -- to integrate the Croatian areas into 
Croatia's constitutional and legal system. Of course, we have 
not managed to do that because of the overall international 
situation; due to the crisis in the territory of the former 
Yugoslavia, the war in Bosnia, and the current circumstances in 
the world. 
  [Correspondent] Speaking about the world and conditions on 
the international scene, hasn't the international community 
shown a lack of understanding? 
  [Tudjman] The international community has shown not only a 
lack of understanding, but also disunity. Europe does not know 
what to do with the crisis in the territory of the former 
Yugoslavia and the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina. The world does 
not know either, including the main world power -- the United 
States. We could say that they mishandled this hot chestnut of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, which is objectively a very complex issue. 
But it is still surprising to see how disunited Europe and the 
United Nations, and the United States, were, and with how much 
disunity and unresourcefulness they tackled the problem of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Therefore, that is the reason why we have to this day found 
no solution, and this is why we are still uncertain as to who 
will say the final world in solving the crisis. 
  [Correspondent] From the point of view of the international 
community in general, Bosnia-Herzegovina is the main problem and 
especially Croatia's attitude to this neighboring state. Our 
attitude to Bosnia-Herzegovina has changed during the war and, 
in general, as time passed. Mr. President, what are the 
relations between Zagreb and Sarajevo at present? 
  [Tudjman] I would not say that our attitude to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina has been changing. Right from the beginning 
we advocated the preservation of a single Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
However, we were aware of the fact that Bosnia-Herzegovina 
could not survive as a unitary state. If Yugoslavia could not 
survive in the period of the collapse of not only socialism but 
also multinational state creations, it is obvious that a single 
Bosnia had no chance of survival -- a Bosnia in which 
differences are even greater than those in former Yugoslavia. 
Our policy has been consistent. We favored the preservation of 
Bosnia. We advised Croats there to take part in the referendum 
on Bosnia's independence. We were willing to accept the 
cantonal, confederal organization that was proposed by 
Ambassador Cutilheiro. We were also willing to accept a 
division of Bosnia into provinces, i.e. the Vance-Owen plan, and 
finally a proposal on the union of Bosnia-Herzegovina republics, 
hoping to develop cooperation with the Muslims. We exerted 
special efforts by signing agreements -- the ones known to the 
public and even those yet to be revealed when the right time 
comes. 
  Izetbegovic's leadership in Bosnia-Herzegovina has given 
consent to these agreements, but Sarajevo, its Muslim 
leadership, has continued with the policy of the continuation of 
the war against the Croats and for the conquest of those areas 
envisaged, for instance the Croat-majority province that later 
became the Croat republic of Herceg-Bosna. Unable to recapture 
the areas they lost in the Serbian aggression, they wanted to 
take the Croat territories and they are now even threatening the 
Croatian enclaves in central Bosnia. This is where the problem 
lies. For our part, we tried to involve the Turkish Government 
in influencing Muslim policy. None of this has had any result 
so far, and for us it is a sensitive issue: Croats in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina are threatened by a Muslim offensive, even 
genocide, while we in Croatia are looking after hundreds of 
thousands of Muslims, among others. We have to exert special 
efforts to make our people understand this, and we shall 
continue to do everything in our power to achieve friendship 
with the Muslims for the sake of the future and for the sake of 
joint strategic interests. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. President, a short while ago you said 
that the greatest task we have not managed to perform is the 
full integration of all parts of Croatian territory. It is 
evident to everyone that this is a very complicated process 
which will probably continue. Tell us about the results of your 
policy. Should one have perhaps have opted for some other 
policy, either a more radical policy or a softer one? 
  [Tudjman] Understandably, whenever any kind of problem is at 
issue there are various attitudes and differing views. I 
believe that, if our past experience is anything to go by, we 
can conclude -- this will be certainly confirmed from a 
historical perspective -- that we have been pursuing the sole 
effective policy, the only purposeful policy. Despite the 
unfavorable circumstances surrounding the creation of an 
independent and democratic Croatia, we have nevertheless managed 
to create an independent, democratic, and sovereign Croatia. We 
managed to resist Serbian aggression at a time when this Serbia 
and its greater Serbian programs had the entire armed forces of 
the Yugoslav communist army at its disposal. 
  You know, since you raised this question, I have read in our 
newspapers about views to the effect that a more resolute plan 
should have been applied in tackling this Serbian aggression led 
by the Yugoslav Army. I have recently come across a book by 
General Kadijevic, the [former] Yugoslav secretary of national 
defense, who openly reveals that the Yugoslav Army, that 
Belgrade planned to conquer at all costs both Zagreb and 
Varazdin while waiting for an excuse. They needed a pretext. 
Consequently, this policy of ours, this policy of negotiations 
-- while simultaneously creating our police and military forces 
out of nothing, and of accepting internationalisation, i.e. the 
Vance plan -- was the only viable one. In this way we prevented 
Croatia from being completely destroyed. 
  We reconciled ourselves, temporarily, to having one fourth 
of 
Croatian territory -- at that time it was one third of Croatian 
territory -- placed under the peace force's protection although 
our adversary was also dutybound to agree to have these 
paramilitary Serbian formations disarmed and to the 
incorporation of these areas into Croatia's constitutional 
system. This was not done because this disunited world 
tolerated the Serbian aggression. In this world there are very 
influential, responsible factors, not only factors but forces, 
too, which did not want to see an independent Croatia, which, 
toward the end of 1991, even desired Croatia's defeat in the war. 
  Therefore, in those circumstances we could not have achieved 
more than we did. We obtained Croatia's international 
recognition and the international community's consent -- in the 
form of the most authoritative resolutions, as I said in answer 
to the first question -- that at any cost all areas currently 
held by Serbia are part of Croatia's territorial integrity, and 
that a solution should be found for them to be integrated by 
political means. Of course, we accepted this policy to prevent 
the war from spreading and to avoid further destruction and more 
victims. Therefore, if one looks at the current situation on 
the territory of former Yugoslavia, in Europe and in the world, 
and if one looks at the search for a way of establishing 
international order in this region, I think that we can conclude 
that we have conducted a good policy. 
  [Correspondent] What the opposition holds against you most 
often are your talks with Milosevic. Would it not have been 
better had you not held talks with him, and what would have 
happened if you had not held talks with Milosevic? 
  [Tudjman] First, it was not only I who held talks with him, 
but all European and world diplomatic factors, including those 
who were trying to replace [Serbian President Slobodan] 
Milosevic with King Karadjordjevic, [former FRY Prime Minister 
Milan] Panic, and other opposition politicians, and also with 
[former FRY President Dobrica] Cosic and [Serbian Renewal 
Movement leader] Vuk Draskovic. But at the end, they reached 
the conclusion that he is the only politician who has power in 
Serbia today, and who should be talked to. Therefore, that was 
not my own decision, but the true state of affairs which did not 
depend on me. And, of course, one talks with one's opponents to 
achieve peace. 
  Our orientation, of course, could not have been only war 
because in terms of weapons we were inferior. As I have said, 
the Yugoslav Army -- the third or fourth strongest military 
power in Europe -- was against us, and we were disarmed, I mean, 
without an army, without arms. Therefore, both because of the 
situation and because of the influence of the international 
community, we had to turn to talks. 
  To those who say that I should not have talked with 
Milosevic: Isn't the Israeli prime minister holding talks with 
'Arafat; aren't all of them, including the French president, not 
only the cochairmen of the European conference but also such 
statesmen as the French president, talking with Milosevic? This 
is a shallow political approach, because our meeting aimed at 
creating prerequisites for a peaceful political solution and the 
absence of talks would lead to a deepening of the conflict, of 
the war, which the world was not willing to accept. The world, 
responsible international factors, have demanded, drawn our 
attention to the need to reach a political solution and 
normalize relations between Croatia and Serbia. 
  [Correspondent] I would be interested to hear some of your 
assessments. First, is there any likelihood that Serbia might 
provoke a new war and attack Croatia? 
  [Tudjman] I think not. During the talks we had on the basis 
of the present situation in which Croatia has already developed 
its own armed force, its own army, and in which the 
Yugo-communist army abandoned or was forced to abandon most 
Croatian territory, including Prevlaka and the whole of the 
Adriatic. [sentence as heard] 
  You see, one of the first European observers, Ambassador Van 
Hauten, the observer of the European Community, told me once in 
reference to the situation in former Yugoslavia, in Croatia: 
President, I cannot understand some of your people. They do not 
seem to see what is happening. You have succeeded, you have 
disarmed barracks, entire garrisons, and the Yugoslav Army; the 
Yugoslav Navy is leaving Pula and Rijeka -- they were still on 
Vis at that time. This is something that rarely happens in 
history. 
  In other words, in the situation we found ourselves the only 
way of gaining our own state, of preserving it, and achieving 
international recognition, was of course by resisting the 
aggression, by not allowing ourselves to be subjugated, and at 
the same time by aligning our policy with the policy of world 
factors to show them that we in Croatia are not a bunch of 
irresponsible people who wanted to set either the Balkans or the 
world on fire. Rather we wanted to achieve freedom, democracy, 
and sovereignty, in line with current international views. 
  [Correspondent] In your opinion, are the rebels in Croatia 
prepared to wage some kind of a war and is Croatia today 
prepared to respond to absolutely every attack? 
  [Tudjman] I haven't finished answering your first question, 
which is linked to this one. In such circumstances -- given 
present developments -- we have reached a stage in which today's 
Serbia or their Yugoslavia are no longer capable of starting a 
large-scale war against Croatia for many reasons: it was not 
capable of conquering Croatia in the initial period, it faced 
international isolation and sanctions, its economic situation is 
catastrophic, and finally, because all levels, even the most 
responsible ones, of the Serbian political leadership and also 
of society have realized that they should work on the 
normalization of Croatian-Serbian relations on the basis of 
mutual recognition, as a prerequisite for emerging from the kind 
of crisis which has befallen Serbia. Hence there is no direct 
threat of some Serbian offensive. Even if it took place it 
would be no threat to Croatia. Today, Croatia has an armed 
force which is capable of deterring this. There is no threat 
either of Serbs in Croatian areas under peace protection 
launching some kind of offensive. 
  Let me reply to something our people abroad are interested 
in. We have opted, we have resolutely opted for finding a 
solution in a peaceful way by guaranteeing the Serbian ethnic 
community not only all civil rights but all ethnic rights too, 
territorial autonomy in the two districts, Knin and Glina, where 
they are in the majority. We also advocate their gradual 
integration into the restoration of the infrastructure and the 
entire economic and legal system of Croatia. We have also made 
it clear that if this is not accepted we will be able to resolve 
this by other means today. 
  [Correspondent] The Croatian Army is entirely prepared for 
this. You have recently said that in the army there must be 
neither leftwing nor rightwing tendencies. The army must 
strictly implement state policies. Are there any tendencies 
within the army toward political interference in the 
organization of some parts of the Croatian Army? 
  [Tudjman] First of all, the military system of every 
country, 
including Croatia, is such that the army is an instrument of 
state policy. We must assume this point of view, particularly 
so in a young state, a young emerging army, in a country which 
is also subjected to the presence of foreign aggression, foreign 
occupation, as these Croatian areas placed under the protection 
of the peace force are in fact under Belgrade's occupation. 
Belgrade is sending in not only arms but personnel, too, 
including officers and even generals and admirals. 
  Consequently, there is a great deal of justifiable 
discontent 
among the Croatian people, and even among the ranks of the 
Croatian Army because these formations of ours know that they 
would be capable of settling accounts with these Serbian 
occupation formations as they demonstrated in the Maslenica and 
Gospic operations. There is also impatience. Understandably, 
in my capacity as a head of state and supreme commander, I 
demand that the army implement policies. 
  It means that they are implementing a policy of uging a 
peaceful resolution in order not to cause further destruction of 
Croatia and further casualties, and because, as you already 
know, the international community demands from us such efforts 
aimed at a peaceful resolution. You know that an atmosphere was 
created as if Croatia were preparing an all-out offensive 
against those areas; we received open threats, these threats 
being well-founded, that they would introduce sanctions against 
Croatia as well. Of course, we wanted to avoid that and 
therefore we are pursuing a policy of the kind we are 
discussing, and therefore we are not going to allow any 
different, separate policies. This would be detrimental to the 
interests of the Croatian state and of the Croatian people. 
  [Correspondent] Let us return to the Serbs in Croatia. Are 
you ready to offer something more to make them part of the 
constitution? 
  [Tudjman] First of all, in this regard, I consider our 
constitution to be at the level of the most advanced 
international constitutions. In the preamble to the 
constitution we said that Croatia is a national state of the 
Croatian people, but also a state of its citizens of all other 
nationalities, ethnic communities, minorities living in Croatia. 
We said this in order to show that after many centuries, the 
Croatian people have achieved their sovereignty. 
  But in the first article of our constitution we said that we 
do not speak of some kind of a national state, but we say that 
Croatia is a state of its citizens. Therefore, there is no need 
for us to change anything in our constitution, particularly in 
our constitutional law. In accordance with demands set by the 
international community and the international conference on 
former Yugoslavia, we passed the constitutional law in which we 
guarantee civil and ethnic rights to ethnic communities and 
national minorities, including the Serbs in Croatia. We also 
say there that the Serbs have the right to cultural autonomy, 
but also to territorial autonomy in those areas where they are a 
majority -- in Knin and in Glina. 
  Therefore, there is no need for constitutional changes, but 
there is a need for implementation. Implementation of these 
principles can only come after an agreement has been reached not 
only with the so-called local Serbs, but also with Belgrade 
because, as I have just said, Belgrade advocated the joining of 
these areas with greater Serbia and it is still controlling 
these local Serbs, who are no longer united, but it is still 
using them as an instrument of its policy. 
  Therefore, I think that we have reached a situation whereby 
these areas will gradually be incorporated into the 
constituional and legal order of Croatia under the pressure of 
their position in general and the balance of military forces and 
everything that results from the political isolation and 
economic collapse of Serbia and efforts by the international 
community to create conditions for peace and the restoration of 
international order. 
  [Correspondent] Let us return to Bosnia, Mr. president. Back 
in July this year you said in Geneva ahead of the conclusion of 
one of many agreements on Bosnia-Herzegovina that the side that 
did not honor the agreement would be exposed to pressure by the 
international community. This was a period when 
Bosnia-Herzegovina was proclaimed a union of republics. 
However, the war continues. What has happened to the pressure? 
Was there any pressure by the international community at all? 
  [Tudjman] There has been pressure and there still is. But, 
as I have just said, the Bosnian problem, the Bosnian crisis, 
objectively speaking, is very complex, the most complex in the 
world nowadays because there is no single standpoint in Europe 
and in the United States. Within Europe different countries 
have different approaches, there is no pressure that would be 
effective. It seems to me that in this respect we are following 
a positive trend in the sense that the European Union has taken 
over the initiative and is not leaving it only to the 
cochairmen, to Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg, to conduct 
negotiations on the settlement of the crisis on the territory of 
former Yugoslavia and Bosnia-Herzegovina. Now the European 
Union is more united in its approach. 
  In this context, I believe that we can conclude with every 
right that after the Geneva conference which was organized by 
the European Union, and after the Brussels conference, the 
position of Croatia has strengthened; that international factors 
have seen for themselves that Croatia's approach really does 
proceed from the standpoint of searching for objective ways out 
of the crisis, ways to restore peace. 
  There has been intensified pressure on Serbia, because it 
has 
been intimated on one side that if Serbia accepts a political 
solution then the sanctions will gradually be suspended; but on 
the other hand, there have been indications that under certain 
conditions, if everything that Serbia pledges to do is 
fulfilled, this could happen [as heard], otherwise the sanctions 
could even be intensified. 
  But, I would say that, apart from such an approach to the 
pressure on Serbia, it is even more important that Europe and 
the world have finally understood that Muslims are no longer 
only victims of Serbian aggression, which has actually been 
completed -- and they are hardly fighting each other any more -- 
but that the Muslims have turned against the Croats, and that 
the Muslims are now those who are carrying out aggressive 
operations, even threatening physical survival, perpetrating 
what the Serbs used to perpetrate -- ethnic cleansing of Muslim 
population. Now the Muslim extremists are perpetrating the same 
against the Croatian population in central Bosnia; the Muslim 
are on the offensive against areas of the Croat republic of 
Herceg-Bosna, planning and aspiring to gain access to the sea, 
to divide Croatia, in which the Muslim plans to seize not only 
Neum, but also areas east of Metkovic, which coincides with 
Serbian imperialistic plans. 
  At the conferences that I have mentioned, but also in the 
developments following the signing of the Christmas truce -- 
with the Muslims continuing these offensives -- the world 
understood that it is now Muslims who can no longer be 
identified as victims, and that a hypocritical policy, I dare 
say, which allowed the Serbian aggression -- and the excuse that 
the Croats also bore responsibility for the alleged 
disintegration of Bosnia-Herzegovina -- can no longer be 
justified and be hidden behind unrealistic assessments by some 
powers. Therefore, I maintain that we can expect the world to 
exert more effective pressure on the Muslim leadership. 
  As far as I know, Willy Claes, president of the Council of 
Europe, has sent letters not only to Karadzic but also to 
Izetbegovic, asking them to observe the European Union's demands 
on ending the war. I can also say that we have achieved, at the 
highest level, full convergence of views regarding the Bosnian 
crisis with the Turkish Government. Representatives of the 
Islamic world as Turkey, and not only Turkey, are dissatisfied 
with the behavior of the Bosnian Muslim leaders who are 
continuing hostilities against the Croats. 
  For this reason, it is to be expected that such pressure, on 
both sides -- on the Serb side which is trying to keep as much 
of the occupied territory, and on the Muslim side which is 
trying to take from the Croats what it cannot from the Serbs -- 
will be more effective and that it will eventually bring an end 
to the war. 
  [Correspondent] Today we are giving peace a chance and 
saying: Enough, enough of blood and tears. These were the words 
of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin, when he extended his 
hand to Yasir 'Arafat. This was seen in the world as the 
absolute event of the year, the greatest sensation. But a 
sensation does not last very long unless it is very soon 
followed by concrete steps. Is such a sensation to be expected 
in our areas? Do we have a Yasir 'Arafat? 
  [Tudjman] You see, we do not have a Yasir 'Arafat in the 
Croatian territories occupied by Serbian units. As you know the 
Serbian ringleaders bicker mutually to the point of isolation. 
They cannot agree over the elections or after the elections, 
from Knin to Baranja. There is no serious man there with whom 
we can discuss the political resolution of the problem. 
Therefore, regarding our Croatian areas under Serbian 
occupation -- 'Arafat is in Belgrade. And for this reason we 
have conducted the kind of talks that we did, within the 
conference, not only of our own volition but also initiated by 
the cochairmen of the conference on former Yugoslavia and 
Bosnia, who, in agreement with the most influential European and 
world states, invite to the talks those who are most responsible 
for the situation and who should bring peace. 
  [Correspondent] You mentioned numerous meetings, 
conferences, 
talks. How should the proposals and the things that have been 
agreed be put into practice? 
  [Tudjman] Clearly, the first problem is that Europe should 
reach an internal agreement on what it really wants. The 
contradictions within Europe, to do with attempts to secure 
spheres of interest in the former Yugoslavia -- the former 
Yugoslavia was created after World War I because of some spheres 
of interest of the western forces, France and England on one 
side, Germany on the other, and also the then Soviet Union. 
Today, again, there is not enough unity in Europe although we 
must not fail to notice a significant change. For the first 
time, [French Foreign Minister Alain] Juppe and [German Foreign 
Minister Klaus] Kinkel's proposal has presented a more unified 
European view of the crisis. Certain proposals indicate that 
the viewpoint is gaining ground in Europe that everything 
possible should be done to bring an end to the war. 
  It should also be noted that there is still no necessary 
unity between Europe and -- if we say the United Nations, that 
is really only a formal description, we should be saying the 
United States to be completely clear. But there are still joint 
efforts to bring an end to the war that are not only posing a 
threat to peace and preventing international order from being 
established but also creating a danger of conflicts between 
different civilizations in the area. 
  With regard to the involvement of the Islamic mojahedin 
volunteers on the Muslim side and the volunteers from the former 
Soviet Union and today's Russia from the old Bolshevik or 
radical Orthodox ranks, if the war is not halted there is a 
threat of a civilizational conflict. For this reason, the 
international community has shown increasing appreciation of 
Croatia's constructive policy which, while not abandoning the 
real, essential interests of the Croatian people and state, is 
still making a contribution to the international community's 
efforts to achieve peace and create preconditions for 
establishing international order in this part of Europe, on the 
territory where the former Yugoslavia disintegrated. 
  It is clear that those forces in international politics 
which 
have a decisive influence over the creation of international 
order believe that the future international order in this area 
can be built with Croatia and with Serbia, and of course with 
the other states that have been created. But nobody really 
counts on the survival of Bosnia-Herzegovina any more. And this 
situation was not created by Croatian policy. As I have said, 
we supported the preservation of Bosnia-Herzegovina as one state 
but it was clear to us that Bosnia-Herzegovina could not be 
preserved as a single, unitary state. Proposals for a 
confederal organization have not, to this very date, been 
accepted by the Muslims. This reveals to Europe and to the 
world their simplistic approaches to the crisis in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  All in all, from this very complicated situation and 
horrible 
war in Bosnia-Herzegovina we have finally reached a stage in 
which there are no unknown factors. Consequently, the 
international community will have to take steps without any 
illusion that it should, for example, please the Muslims, as 
some have advocated at all costs -- not just because of the 
situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina but because of the influence of 
the Islamic states in the world. At the same time, while 
discovering the present Muslim position, the international 
community has not disregarded the fact -- and neither have we 
ever -- that Serbia was the one which caused the war with its 
aggression. One of the greatest successes of our policy lies in 
our succeeding -- on the basis of Resolution 871 and at every 
single meeting and at the international conference -- in drawing 
attention to the fact that the aggression in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
must be linked with Serbian aggression in the occupied areas, 
now UN Protected Areas [UNPA]. 
  Regardless of our primary interest in resolving the UNPA 
issue, objectively this problem is linked with 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and we cannot resolve it on our own, without 
help from the international community. However, our success 
lies in arousing the desire of the international community to 
put pressure on Serbia to end its aggression and to accept a 
solution which is acceptable to other nation. Thus, we have 
succeeded in linking the sanctions -- the only means which have 
an effect on Serbia -- with a solution not only for Bosnia, but 
also for Croatia. 
  [Correspondent] We come across the international community 
at 
negotiating tables. You mentioned constructiveness. You are 
now a statesman with considerable negotiating experience. What 
are the other important factors in negotiations? Resolve, 
inflexibility, support of the international community? What 
about interests? 
  [Tudjman] Indeed, interests guide both individuals and 
nations. I could give you many examples of world politicians who 
said that there were no friends, allies, or enemies for 
eternity, but it is interests which direct and influence our 
behavior. 
  One should recall that the Scandinavian countries -- 
Scandinavia is today an example of democracy and international 
and interstate relations -- that they were at loggerheads until 
as recently as the beginning of this century. They even waged 
wars against each other in earlier centuries. One should recall 
that in Europe the two largest nations, Germany and France, 
waged a great deal of war against each other in this century, as 
well as in the last century, whereas today they are the mainstay 
of a European union, an alliance. 
  Consequently, I believe that the former Yugoslavia -- which 
collapsed because it was an artificial creation, that it was 
composed of nations which did not only have different national 
identities, but which also belonged to different civilizations 
-- that Yugoslavia disintegrated in a period when its 
disintegration was imminent, during the collapse of Communist 
socialism and multinational countries in Europe. 
  It was not only Yugoslavia that disintegrated, it was also 
the democratic Czech and Slovak Republic and the Soviet Union. 
Almost all multinational creations disintegrated during the 
collapse of Communist socialism. Therefore, Bosnia-Herzegovina 
was also unable to avoid such a destiny in that historical 
period, even if other individual policies in many aspects had 
been pursued. Consequently, it is expectable -- and I have to 
say that I could recall having predicted even 20 years ago that 
a united Europe of nations would be created, a Europe in which 
small nations would find their solution, their sovereignty, 
their independence. 
  The Yugoslav idea originated on Croatian soil. The idea 
was based on the premise that Croatia could have hegemony, that 
it could be the leader of the Yugoslav community because of its 
more advanced culture, because of its higher civilizational 
level. On the other side, the Serbian side, were the people who 
understood the Yugoslav idea as merely a greater Serbia. And to 
this very day they have done everything possible to create a 
greater Serbia out of Yugoslavia, that is why Yugoslavia has 
disintegrated. And now they are trying to occupy the Croatian 
areas which have never been a constituent part of Serbia. 
  But it has been shown in practice that they cannot achieve 
this, both because of the balance of forces between Serbia and 
Croatia and because the international community will not allow 
it. Therefore, I anticipate that the war will end, relations 
will be normalized, and a certain Scandinavization will take 
place as a precondition for establishing international order in 
this part of Europe, because the warring parties themselves 
cannot permanently remain at war and the world cannot allow it 
either. 
  [Correspondent] What is the price of this? What is the price 
of peace? 
  [Tudjman] Even the greatest price paid for peace is lower 
than the cheapest war -- war in the sense of human casualties, 
material destruction, and the deepening of hatred. Every nation 
has at some stage understandably achieved peace through the 
defeat of one side, and of course with the understanding that 
conditions must be created to sustain peace, to make coexistence 
possible, if not as friends then as tolerant neighbors. It 
seems to me that this region is now witnessing the final act of 
one such perception. 
  [Correspondent] What should really happen for Croatia to 
accept a change to its borders or for an exchange of 
territories? Could this happen in order to achieve peace? 
  [Tudjman] Regarding Croatian borders, on more than one 
occasion I told all European, world, and U.S. diplomats and 
statesmen who asked me if we could perhaps compromise that 
Croatia cannot make any territorial concessions because Croatia 
entered the former Yugoslav community with much more territory 
than the territory within the Croatian borders in federal 
Yugoslavia and also more than the territory of Croatia within 
its current internationally recognized borders. Therefore, 
there is no reason why Croatia should make any territorial 
concessions. 
  Apart from this, regarding the demands made by Belgrade that 
the Serbs in Croatia should have the right to 
self-determination, I have told them and others in the world 
that according to international law and according to the real 
situation in the world it is nations and not national minorities 
that have the right to self- determination and to their own 
states. The Serbs were a national minority in Croatia, formed 
in the 16th century. Let us not go into that now. While the 
Yugo-communist army was here, that minority amounted to as much 
as 12 percent. After the army's departure this fell by further 
2 or 3 percent, and then fell again because of the war. 
  Therefore, there is no reason why Serbia should fail to 
understand that the Serbs in Croatia can and must enjoy things 
and that Croatia is ready to grant them all civil and ethnic 
rights, but they cannot enjoy the position of the herren-volk, 
of the ruling nation in Croatia. The problem not only of 
Albanians in Kosovo, but also of the Hungarians and Croats in 
Serbia, is even greater than the problem of the Serbs in 
Croatia. That issue cannot be analyzed as an isolated issue, 
but Serbia must understand that peace can be achieved on the 
basis of mutual recognition in the existing borders, not only on 
the basis of reciprocity but also on the basis of international 
conventions on national minority rights. 
  You mentioned concessions. There is still the problem of 
what kind of demarcation. As things stand now the crisis in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina can be solved. A union of republics is no 
longer mentioned as a solution because, well, we favored a 
union, we signed an agreement with Izetbegovic, I personally 
signed it, under which the Muslim and Croatian republic within 
the union would develop ever closer relations and friendship 
with each other and with Croatia. However, two days later 
Izetbegovic signed an agreement with the Serbs, thus practically 
agreeing on the seperation of the republics, on the 
disintegration of the union, but with the Muslim state 
inheriting the right to UN membership and other international 
rights enjoyed by Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The Muslim leadership is now categorically demanding to have 
Neum, to such an extent that the international community has now 
demanded that Croatia secure access to the sea for the future 
Bosnian Muslim republic. The Muslims are demanding territorial 
sovereignty. When I categorically refused this and said that 
under no circumstances could we agree to Neum becoming part of 
the Muslim republic, i.e. that part of the Croatian national 
territory be divided, with the separation of the southern-most 
part and of Dubrovnik -- and in this respect the Muslim demand 
coincides with the imperialistic and aggressive Serbian policy 
since the last century. [sentence as heard] In this war, too, 
they wanted to take Dubrovnik. We cannot agree to that. An 
idea was thus born in Europe and among the Muslims that we would 
give them access to the sea at Prevlaka and in return Neum would 
immediately go to Croatia, i.e. that Croatia would get the 
Dubrovnik hinterland in return, which would be more than 
compensation for Croatia, according to some international 
circles. 
  In our quest for peace, as I have said, we can also take 
such 
a solution into consideration, as we have offered the Muslims a 
free zone in Ploce and the possibility of building a port on the 
Neretva River as their access to the sea. We have offered them a 
free zone in Rijeka, having in mind western Bosnia -- Bihac and 
Cazin Krajina. We have also taken into consideration the issue 
of granting them access to the sea in the area of Prevlaka. 
  I have told the most responsible people in Europe and the 
United States that we are willing to consider every suggestion 
which is in the interest of peace without being damaging to 
Croatia, i.e. which is beneficial to Croatia. I have also 
pointed out, though, that at the same time, the problem of 
Prevlaka is a rather wider problem since the promontory of Ostri 
Vrh, the tip of Prevlaka, controls access to Boka Kotorska. 
Hence, it might represent a strategic interest, not merely a 
Croatian, Serbian, or Muslim interest, within wider developments 
given the fact that Russia -- regardless of whether it is ruled 
by Peter the Great, Ivan the Terrible, Stalin, or Yeltsin today, 
or someone like Zhirinovsky tomorrow -- such as it is, will 
always remain a Eurasian power and it will always aspire to 
gaining access to the Mediterranean. 
  This problem is thus linked to Croatia's interest to protect 
Dubrovnik and its integrity and to make the territory of the 
Croatian republic of Herceg-Bosna as compact as possible so we 
can achieve peace as well as the most compact territory in order 
to strategically secure Croatia's borders. Consequently, we 
approach this issue with a great deal of tact. We are willing 
to consider it from the point of view of Croatian historic and 
strategic interests and to reach agreement with our allies, with 
our friends in the world, not just from today's point of view 
but from the point of view of potential relations in the future. 
  [Correspondent] Mr president, when do you think the UN 
Protection Forces [UNPROFOR] will leave Croatia? 
  [Tudjman] The moment we reach a political solution on the 
integration of these Croatian areas in the constitutional system 
of Croatia by peaceful means or -- if we are forced, i.e. if 
Serbs [words indistinct] -- by military means. But I hope we 
are on the road to signing a general cease-fire agreement and 
the end of hostilities and on gradual integration by way of 
opening up roads, railways, power lines, gas pipelines, etc, 
which is not only in the interest of Croatia but also in the 
interest of the currently occupied areas, of Serbia, and of all 
neighboring countries which means Europe as well. 
  [Correspondent] Last year was a year for reexamining almost 
all international organizations, above all with regard to the 
settlement of the Balkan crisis, to the United Nations and NATO. 
In September, at the opening of the UN General Assembly [UNGA] 
session, you warned of the power of national interests in the UN 
Security Council [UNSC] whenever major decisions were being 
made. Has anything changed since? 
  [Tudjman] I do not think so. All the major components, [word 
indistinct], of this policy have remained the same. National 
interests, you see, there is a political periscope, a problem of 
approach to national interests and the national issue and also 
in practice [sentence as heard]. 
  Namely, the western world, both Europe and the United 
States, 
often approach the national problem in a one-sided way. They 
understand that the disintegration of both socialism and 
multinational countries has even led to national expansionism, 
but they forget that national democratic movements were the main 
force in toppling the Stalinist-type communism, and that the 
creation of national states which is now taking place is the 
process which in Western Europe and Scandinavia took place in 
the last century or at the turn of the century. 
  Therefore, the creation and national interests themselves 
and 
the efforts to secure national interests are not negative by 
nature. They become negative at the moment a nation starts 
pursuing an expansionist program, as is the case in Serbia with 
the program for the creation of greater Serbia. However, the 
settlement of interethnic relations and protection of national 
interests is a precondition for the creation of a normal and 
stable international order. 
  [Correspondent] Of course, this was all about 
decision-making 
in the UNGA and the functioning of the entire system of the UN, 
i.e. the peace forces. It is a fact that in almost all hotbeds 
of crisis in the world the peacekeeping forces are in some way 
experiencing the same fate. The message coming from those whom 
the UN is supposed to protect is: Go home. Is the main role of 
the UN understated or is this protection of peace being carried 
out incorrectly? 
  [Tudjman] You see, we must be realistic in this respect. The 
crisis on former Yugoslav soil, especially in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, is one of the most overt, exacerbated, and 
convoluted ones, but it is not the only one. There are such 
crises elsewhere in the world: if not 20 there are at least 10 
of them. Therefore, the United Nations is frustrated in many 
ways: first, there is no effective international instrument 
which could be used to impose UN Security Council [UNSC] 
resolutions. There is no effective international instrument 
that could be used to impose UNSC Resolution decisions. Our 
people are rightly embittered about UNPROFOR -- rightly so and 
for the most part -- because UNPROFOR failed to accomplish its 
mission. However, the agreement on the involvement of UNPROFOR 
was based on the sides in conflict, i.e. both Croatia and 
Serbia, accepting a political solution and disarming the Serbian 
paramilitary units, while Croatia was to ensure political rights 
for the Serbian ethnic community in Croatia. The Serbs rejected 
this and UNPROFOR, with the mandate it received from the UNSC 
and the forces and equipment it had at its disposal, was not set 
a task of imposing the Vance-Owen plan by force. Consequently, 
the demand [for UNPROFOR] to go home is justified. However, one 
tends to forget the fact that the Serbs, i.e. Belgrade, were 
responsible for UNPROFOR's failure to carry out its duties, as 
Belgrade put up a resistance to UNPA being integrated into the 
constitutional and legal system of Croatia and is still 
maintaining the idea that these areas could one day be included 
in some kind of a federation of Serbian states, i.e. a greater 
Serbia. 
  [Correspondent] The UN on its own cannot impose peace, but 
there is another organization which can do that -- NATO. Its 
function is to protect safety in Europe. What is the role of 
NATO generally if its activity boils down to verbal duels and 
warnings that peace is necessary for the stable development of 
Europe? 
  [Tudjman] Our people are rightly embittered about UNPROFOR. 
Rightly so for the most part because UNPROFOR failed to 
accomplish its mission. However, the agreement on the 
involvement of UNPROFOR was based on the sides in conflict, both 
Croatia and Serbia, accepting a political solution and disarming 
the Serbian paramilitary units, while Croatia was to ensure 
political rights for the Serbian ethnic community in Croatia. 
The Serbs rejected this and UNPROFOR, with the mandate it 
received from the UNSC and the forces and equipment it had at 
its disposal, was not set the task of forcefully imposing the 
Vance-Owen plan. Consequently, the demand for UNPROFOR to go 
home is justified, but one tends to forget the fact that the 
Serbs, Belgrade, were responsible for UNPROFOR's failure to 
carry out its duties, as Belgrade put up resistance to UNPA 
being integrated into the constitutional and legal system of 
Croatia, and is still maintaining the idea that these areas 
could one day be included in some kind of a federation of 
Serbian states -- a greater Serbia. 
  [Correspondent] The United Nations on its own cannot impose 
peace. But there is another organization which can do that -- 
NATO. Its function is to protect safety in Europe. What is the 
role of NATO generally if its activity boils down to verbal 
duels and warnings that peace is necessary for the stable 
development of Europe? 
  [Tudjman] Well, we must again bear in mind that NATO came 
into being at the time when on the other side constituted the 
Warsaw Pact, in other words, the bipolar division of the world, 
and that under its internal principles NATO is not expected to 
intervene outside the NATO countries. This is one point. 
  We are faced with a lack of unity in Europe and in the 
United 
States. Until unity is achieved as to what they want and who 
decides there can be no NATO involvement. 
  I have proposed to European and U.S. factors, both at 
conferences and in written form, the involvement of NATO because 
this is an efficient organization from the technical point of 
view and with its own leadership. I even said that I thought if 
NATO were to get involved we would not need any more forces than 
the UNPROFOR has at present. UNPROFOR is disorganized. Both in 
Croatia and Bosnia we have units from Canada, Kenya, Ukraine, 
Russia, France, and England. All these forces are not adequately 
equipped technically, there is not enough unity among them and, 
understandably, their approach is different. If NATO were to 
become organized as a forceful military organization, then this 
would have a psychological impact on the warring parties and, 
contrary to what is happening today, would force them to adhere 
to what they have agreed upon. 
  For NATO involvement to be possible Europe and the United 
States should know what they want to achieve politically. An 
armed intervention can only be effective if its goal is 
well-defined. 
  [Correspondent] There were times when it was known that 
decisions on the issues of war and peace were made in either 
Washington or Moscow. Where are these decisions being made 
today? 
  [Tudjman] The problem is in the fact that today the European 
Union or alliance is coming into existence, but it is obvious 
that within it there are different views coming from Paris, 
London, and Bonn. The issue is who in the Union will have the 
upper hand, both when it comes to the state and, 
obviously...[pauses] I was told by one, and not just one state 
president but by many others, that Europe today should be more 
united about having a more decisive leadership, and that the 
world is in a state of turmoil without a more determined 
leadership, without a vision of what the new world order should 
be after the disintegration of the Soviet Union. There is 
anxiety in the world over the fact that about dozen states still 
possess nucelar weapons, and there is a need for a balance of 
powers and that the main world powers are trying to secure their 
own spheres of influence -- the world is as it has been since 
time immemorial. We must not delude ourselves by thinking that 
it will be easy to establish a new world order. 
  [Correspondent] What is the main threat to peace in the 
world at present? 
  [Tudjman] The hotbeds of crisis in the world and, as far as 
we are concerned, the ones in Bosnia-Herzegovina and in UNPAs. 
However, in this regard I think that in our conversation today I 
mentioned the fact that there is a serious danger of a conflict 
between civilizations. This is what is worrying, especially 
regarding the example of Bosnia-Herzegovina. But precisely for 
that reason, as a conflict between civilizations could bring 
into question human civilization itself, it is realistic to 
expect that reason will prevail in the world, and that they 
would gather around a program by which a new world order would 
be restored on this disarray that we are witnessing, so that a 
world catastrophe could be avoided. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. President, we have many more questions 
for you, but questions from our viewers are pouring in. We have 
to reply to them. I think that our viewers' questions are the 
most important. Let us reply to questions that have been asked. 
Please be brief and to the point as people lay great store by 
it. A viewer from Zagreb: Why doesn't the president -- that 
means you -- tell Izetbegovic that, if he [Izetbegovic] does not 
stop the offensive against Croats in Bosnia we will send all 
Muslim refugees in Croatia back to Bosnia? 
  [Tudjman] Because the world would then say that we are 
acting 
in an inhumane fashion. If the war were to continue, of course 
we would be forced to take such decisive steps, but we are first 
trying all we can together with these people [Muslims] to end 
the war and reach a political solution. 
  [Correspondent] Branko Vrbanc from Zagreb: Mr. President, 
thanks to you the Croats in Croatia and worldwide have united as 
never before. Now that we have achieved sovereignty and foreign 
acclaim, some opposition party leaders are trying to break up 
that unity by all means. I do not think any democratic state 
would allow any such agitators who make public statements to go 
unpunished. What can you do to prevent that? 
  [Tudjman] I think the Croatian people is politically mature, 
it has accomplished the creation of its own state, and it can be 
proud that in Croatia we have established a more stable 
democratic order than in any other former communist country. 
Therefore, the opposition -- and not only the opposition, as 
there are opposition parties with serious political approaches, 
but there have been some anarchic phenomena particularly in 
journalism, which requires other measures; however, Croatia's 
democratic order is sufficiently strong to resist all that. 
With this crisis our policy will be even better affirmed before 
our people and the world as the correct one, and therefore 
opposing views will not be threatening. 
  [Correspondent] Another viewer would like to know how long 
will we have to delude ourselves that the world and Europe will 
resolve the UNPA issue? 
  [Tudjman] Not for one moment did I have any illusion that 
the 
world would solve our problems for us, but we have had to 
coordinate efforts to resolve the problems with our forces with 
international factors -- and that remains to be our problem -- 
because we do not live in a vacuum, but in the world such as it 
is. 
  [Correspondent] How does Mr. President intend to achieve an 
integral Croatia by pursuing such a peaceloving policy when, in 
the daily news today, we heard a statement by [Bosnian Serb 
assembly chairman] Momcilo Krajisnik that the Bosnian republic 
of Srpska and occupied territories in Croatia, the so-called 
Krajina, that they would join their mother country, Serbia, by 
next year. 
  [Tudjman] I intend to resolve the Krajina problem by 
political means, but I have said -- if necessary -- by military 
means. However, if Momcilo Krajisnik keeps repeating such 
statements on the unification of Serbian republics -- as he said 
it, or whatever he said -- we should tell him that for the first 
time lately, after the Geneva and Brussels conferences, Serbian 
President Milosevic himself said that we should work on the 
normalization of relations and the gradual settlement of the 
UNPA problem by opening up roads and other problems. 
  Serbian Foreign Minister Jovanovic has also recently stated 
that problems ought to be resolved in that sense. In opposition 
to such statements as those made by Krajisnik, there are those 
which are much more authoritative, showing that it is necessary 
to reach a political solution within Croatia. 
  [Correspondent] Does urging a peaceful resolution of the 
crisis in occupied areas of the Republic of Croatia come as a 
result of Croatia's military inferiority as it has recently been 
said in foreign press commentaries? 
  [Tudjman] No, it is certain that in the beginning, in 1990 
and 1991, we were militarily inferior, because we had the entire 
Yugoslav Army against us -- Serbia and Montenegro. We were 
militarily inferior then, but not today, in relation to Serbian 
forces between Knin and Baranja. 
  However, it is also certain that if we were forced to seek a 
military solution then we would suffer casualties and further 
destruction, and that would delay our economic development, and 
so on. Therefore, it is in Croatia's interest, and also because 
of coordination with the world, and even with those in the world 
who are Croatia's honest friends -- we also have those. 
Therefore, we should try to do everything to find a politically 
based resolution. We did not forget for a moment that we would 
not tolerate such a situation contravening Croatia's interests, 
and that we would, should it become obvious that a political 
solution is not possible, that, with the armed forces we have 
created, with the unity of the Croatian people, and not just of 
the refugees but also with the unity of the entire Croatian 
people, that we would most certainly take measures to liberate 
every inch of Croatian soil. 
  [Correspondent] Jure Madjar from Sisak asks: Is there an 
example in history whereby someone waged a war of conquest and 
then returned occupied territories following negotiations. 
  [Tudjman] There are. When they were forced to do so. 
  [Correspondent] A refugee from Vukovar: What is the Croatian 
Government intending to do regarding the missing defenders of 
Vukovar? 
  [Tudjman] We have been doing everything possible. According 
to details at hand, 6,800 people have been registered as killed. 
A year ago we still had around 13,500 missing people. That 
list of missing people has gradually decreased and today there 
are 7,000 people on the list of missing people. We have 
exchanged hundreds of POW's with Serbia. We reached an 
agreement to exchange those about which we know, for instance 
the Croatian group held in Sombor -- they are demanding the 
Karlovac group -- and on this we reached an agreement. This was 
all worked on previously by Vice Premier Mate Granic; now it is 
worked on by Vice Premier Kostovic. 
  In the course of my talks with Milosevic, this was one of 
the 
reasons behind these talks -- to solve this question as well. 
He said in the presence of witnesses that he was ready, that 
they would release those who are being held in their prisons so 
we would release prisoners here. He claimed that in Serbia 
there are no others. 
  Consequently, we are working on the final resolution of the 
problem of Vukovar and not only Vukovar but that of all those 
other people who are still registered as missing. 
Unfortunately, we must be certain that most of those who we 
still regard as missing are probably dead or have been exposed 
to a massacre, terror, and death. This is one of the reasons 
that I have always pointed out that I will do everything to 
avoid paying for Croatian freedom, Croatian sovereignty with 
more casualties unless they are necessary. 
  At the same time I am aware -- I have said this too -- that 
no people have ever in their history acquired freedom without 
casualties. No people have had their freedom served on a plate. 
I am therefore aware that if need be one should be resolute 
enough to wage a holy war for the homeland. Before this we will 
indeed do everything so our policies aided by the international 
community reach the final goal in a peaceful way without further 
casualties. 
  [Correspondent] Croatian police and judicial authorities 
held war criminals Hadzic [Goran Hadzic, former Krajina 
president], Arkan [Zeljko Raznjatovic, Serbian paramilitary 
leader] and others? 
  [Tudjman] Well, from this point of view that act is 
unjustifiable. However, one should remember that not only the 
Serbs in Croatia and Serbia but also the international public 
are blaming the Croatian authorities for not having a correct 
attitude toward the Serbs, implying that they were forced to 
rebel and fight for secession because of our terror. It is 
clear that this is not true. After we established our democratic 
government I was the one who initiated talks with the most 
radical Serbs -- with the late Professor Raskovic. The Serbs at 
that time did not accept the communists, the Serbian communists 
in our parliament as their representatives. Therefore, we 
wanted a political solution. Our policy was to talk to all 
Serbs, even the radical ones, in order to find a political 
solution. 
  I was not informed that Arkan and Hadzic would be released. 
On one hand individuals decided in Hadzic's case because he was 
held by the police while Arkan was brought to court and the 
court let him go. The court did not consult the Croatian 
authorities and it made an independent decision. This is an 
example of how the judicial authorities should be independent in 
reaching their verdict, but this decision also must be in 
accordance with the state policy. Arkan was known for his 
terrorist actions even in former Yugoslavia. 
  This is my reply to your question. On one hand there was a 
political effort to create preconditions for normal life with 
the Serbs in Croatia by avoiding cases like these. On the other 
hand as you can see a wrong decision was made by the judicial 
authorities as they independently made their decisions. 
  [Correspondent] Were you, in the capacity of the president 
of 
the state, informed about a newspaper report on alleged crimes 
perpetrated in the course of 1991? Further, how is it possible 
that a document, whose existence Minister Jarnjak confirmed in 
his assembly address saying that it was a state secret, has 
leaked into the public? 
  [Tudjman] I was not informed about it. I first read about it 
on Christmas, on 25 December, and I wrote about it -- actually 
after it was published. 
  This report was submitted to the office for the protection 
of 
constitutional order, which was then chaired by Josip Manolic. 
It did not reach me, but we had clear....[pauses] Both the 
government was tasked and the council of defence and national 
security examined that issue and said -- not only said, but gave 
the following guidelines, orders to all competent bodies of 
state administration -- every crime, every robbery should 
relentlessly be not only curbed and prevented, but the 
perpetrators should also be called to account and punished 
accordingly. 
  We also said that neither can we tolerate vengeful actions 
by 
people in the course of combat. Therefore, what the report says 
should have been prevented, and people should have been called 
to account. Why and how it happened that the report was 
published is a task for the state prosecutor and our national 
security service of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to find 
out. This was either lack of responsibility in dealing with 
state documents or even an attempt to compromise our democratic 
authorities and the leadership. 
  These are things that we cannot tolerate. I am particularly 
interested in not only why and how the report was published, but 
also what happened to all those people who are listed in the 
report as having perpetrated criminal acts. Therefore, I have 
set a task to examine all this, and I am pleased that the 
Assembly has begun discussing these issues, and hence the public 
and the Croatian Assembly can be informed about it. 
  [Correspondent] Why doesn't Croatia insist on a deadline in 
connection with the implementation of Resolution 871? 
  [Tudjman] We certainly wanted and sought this, but we are 
faced here with an international situation and international 
factors that are making a connection between the resolution of 
the UNPA zones in Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina. And our 
demand could only be as it is -- i.e., we are seeking a 
departure, and after this we will take responsibility for the 
renewal of the war or its expansion. Here -- as we have been 
told not only by those international factors who do not go along 
with us but also by our friends -- we would be exposed to the 
renewal of the war and also to international sanctions. [as 
heard] So we did not want to get ourselves into a situation in 
which (?Serbia)....[sentence incomplete as heard] 
  [Correspondent] (Pane Brtic) from Pula asks: Some say that 
the building of the tunnel through Cicarija and the tunnels 
through Velebit and Maslenica bridge are white elephants, or 
were these merely election promises? If not, when will these 
projects be finished? 
  [Tudjman] They will be completed in a year or so. I think 
that at that time we said, did we not, that the work had begun 
and would be continued, and it is quite clear that both through 
Velebit [as heard] and the tunnel through Ucka are of vital 
interest not only in terms of linking Istria with Croatia in a 
political sense -- a national-political sense -- but also in an 
economic sense. 
  I will tell you now what you may not know -- neither does 
our 
public know: Croatian politicians from Istria -- such as Ante 
Mandic, who was one of the members of the Yugoslav Committee and 
who was in favor of unification of all south-Slavonic countries, 
for the creation of Yugoslavia, and who was also a participant 
of the anti-fascist war -- immediately after the war he proposed 
to Tito, after Istria had joined its Croatian homeland, that a 
tunnel be made. Tito agreed with Mandic that this should be 
done, but Croatian and Yugoslav political circles turned a deaf 
ear to it, saying that this would be too expensive. Later only 
a road tunnel was made, while the rail tunnel was left 
to...[pauses] Not only railway line, but it was also the airport 
in Pula that was organized by the Slovenes. Therefore, it is 
natural that with the establishment of an independent Croatia we 
should adopt a decision that we would also build a rail tunnel, 
in order to realize the idea which the revivalists in Istria 
advocated back in the last century, and which as I have said was 
mentioned as a necessity for Istria, for Croatia, even by such 
people as I have mentioned, despite all those aspirations toward 
Istria. 
  [Correspondent] After Istria, someone from Slavonski Brod. A 
viewer from Slavonski Brod has put this question: Is Croatia 
going to help the Croats in central Bosnia before it is too late? 
  [Tudjman] Croatia has been doing everything to help the 
Croats. Primarily we wanted to help them in the way of having 
friendly relations with the Muslim leadership in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. We said that the survival of the Croats 
living in Vares, Kakanj, and Zepce is a guarantee that the 
Muslims will likewise enjoy the same rights in those areas that 
were envisaged to be Croat provinces, which is now the Croat 
republic of Herceg-Bosna. Therefore, we wanted to secure their 
future in a political way, but on the other hand we aided them 
in their defense, first from the Serbian aggression, then from 
the Muslim one as much as we could. 
  We will do so in the future as well. Not only in those areas 
that I have mentioned, but also in the entire area that the 
Muslims are now trying to occupy: Novi Travnik, Vitez, Busovaca, 
Kresevo, Kiseljak, and so on. Therefore, not only through 
direct negotiations, talks with Izetbegovic and Silajdzic, but 
also through the involvement of those international factors that 
are interested in restoring peace and friendship between the 
Muslims and Croatia as soon as possible, such as Turkey, 
Austria, Germany; I even invited European Council President 
Claes to attend our meeting with Izetbegovic in Vienna in order 
that we could achieve all that. Unfortunately not very 
successfully so far, but most certainly we are not going to give 
up the protection of the Croat people in Bosnia for a single 
moment or the protection of the strategic interests of the 
Croatian state in relation to the resolution of the crisis in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  [Correspondent] A viewer from Sisak asks whether there has 
been a change in Croatia's official policy in respect to the 
resolution of the crisis in Bosnia-Herzegovina, having in mind 
some confusing statements by high-ranking Croatian officials. 
  [Tudjman] No, there has been no change because there is no 
need for it. We have conducted a consistent policy: If it is 
possible to preserve Bosnia as a whole, independent state, that 
is possible only on a confederal basis. But if there is a 
split-up as Izetbegovic agreed with the Serbs, it is normal that 
-- if Izetbegovic agreed for the republic of Srpska in Bosnia to 
join Serbia -- the Croat republic of Herceg-Bosna should join 
Croatia, while the position of the Croat population remaining in 
other republics should be safeguarded on the basis of 
reciprocity and with international guarantees. 
  [Correspondent] Ana Vulic from Split asks if you are aware 
that Alija Izetbegovic signed a secret agreement with the Serbs 
on the day he was held in captivity. Should we not ban him from 
entering Croatia? 
  [Tudjman] Croatia has a strategic interest in maintaining 
friendly relations with the Muslims in order to keep as large a 
part of Bosnia-Herzegovina as possible, out of the reach of 
Croatia's main enemy. The West is also interested in this. You 
are aware of the differences between eastern and western Europe; 
since the breakup of the Roman Empire and Christianity. We had 
a situation in which the Serbs were so numerous in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina that they could impose their republic and 
secession. The West did not prevent this, they did not prevent 
the Serbian aggression. Why? It could even be that they wanted 
to prevent the creation of an Islamic state in Europe. At the 
same time, many factors would like to make the Bosnian Muslims 
accept Western Civilization through cooperation with Croatia. 
In that sense Croatia and the western world have common 
interests, and that is why we are doing everything we can to end 
hostilities between Croats and Muslims, to create normal 
relations in the interest of Croatia and the West, which above 
all takes care of its own interests and its relations with 
Islamic states. 
  As you know there are 51 Islamic states in the United 
Nations 
and they possess not only oil, but they also have capital in 
many European states and throughout the world. This is why we 
cannot look at this as relations between the Croats and the 
Muslims alone. Of course this aspect is the most important one 
but we also have to coordinate our interests with the most 
important international factors. 
  [Correspondent] Let us return to the international 
negotiations. Milan from Zagreb asks why do you not make your 
presence at negotiations on Bosnia conditional on the withdrawal 
of Serb forces from Croatia and is it not naive to negotiate 
with the Muslims about their access to the sea? 
  [Tudjman] Who can say that I have not demanded this from the 
Serbs [Tudjman laughs] and who could imagine that we have been 
naive even for a moment. If we had been naive we would not have 
achieved our independent and internationally recognized Croatia 
despite all opposition. Our people can trust us and we can make 
our state even stronger based on our achievements. 
  [Correspondent] A viewer from Split: After the fall of 
Bugojno [Bosnian town disputed by the Croats and the Muslims, 
currently held by the Muslims] Muslim refugees [in Croatia] 
celebrated this event in Hotel Neptun in Tucepi [Croatian resort 
on the Dalmatian coast]. Of course, this caused a clash with 
Croat refugees and local people. Hundreds of thousands of 
Muslim refugees are in Croatia today and at the same time their 
sons, husbands, and brothers are attacking Croats in central 
Bosnia. It seems that in this way Croatia is indirectly helping 
the aggression against the [Bosnian] Croats. 
  [Tudjman] Yes, this is a paradox. I spoke about this on many 
occasions with Izetbegovic and Silajdzic. I spoke about it at 
the European conference on Bosnia. I said that it costs us 
dearly; this situation in which we provide shelter for Muslims 
here [in Croatia], we provide education for their children while 
at the same time Croats are being killed there [in central 
Bosnia]. I explained that this cannot be tolerated and that we 
can hardly control the justified anger of the Croatian people. 
Unfortunately even these arguments failed to persuade the 
Muslim leadership to end the aggression. They accepted the 
Christmas truce; but they continued the aggression. They also 
attacked the White Path humanitarian convoy. However this 
convoy, led by Slobodan Lang, helped to make the world see, even 
those people who do not support us, I mean that part of the 
world which now wants to lift the sanctions against Serbia, to 
shift the responsibility for the situation in Bosnia on Croatia 
too [as received]. With the example of the White Path convoy 
[Croatian aid for central Bosnia, attacked by Muslims] the world 
realized what is it all about: that the Muslims are truly using 
violent means, that they did not allow doctors to enter Nova 
Bila, and that the doctors came under attack. This showed that 
the Muslims are now carrying out a genocide against Croats. 
  All this has created a situation where either the Muslims 
will abandon this policy or the world will have to understand 
the steps that we will have to take to defend the Croatian 
people there [in Bosnia] and for possible steps that we will 
have to take in relation to the Muslim refugees in Croatia. 
  [Correspondent] Is Islamic fundamentalism at work in Bosnia, 
a viewer from Pula asks. 
  [Tudjman] Of course, to a certain extent it is. You can find 
mojahedin there, from various Islamic countries and from Sandzak 
[Muslim populated area in Yugoslavia]. We have also received 
alarming reports about efforts to establish an Islamic state, 
about songs being sung such as: From Istanbul to Trieste There 
Will Not Be Any Christians. It is also worrying that this 
Muslim [Izetbegovic] leadership has begun a war against those 
Muslims who really support friendly relations with Croatia. 
Many Muslims feel like this; it is not just Fikret Abdic in 
Western Bosnia or Cazin Krajina. Hadziosmanovic, Pohara [Muslim 
leaders loyal to Fikret Abdic], Zulfo Robovic, who is a member 
of the [Herceg-Bosna] government, and others also belong to this 
group. Many Muslims are like this but they do not have the kind 
of influence on Bosnian politics that Izetbegovic, Silajdzic, 
Ganic, and others have. 
  [Correspondent] A viewer from Zagreb asks where the Muslims 
got their weapons. 
  [Tudjman] The Muslims partly control military factories in 
Bosnia. Above all, we also gave them weapons at the beginning 
when we fought jointly against the Serb aggressor; we also gave 
them weapons. They also armed themselves by using humanitarian 
convoys [to smuggle weapons]. We have also received reports 
that they have been giving large sums of money, as they say fat 
wads of dollars, to buy weapons from the Serbs. They even rent 
[Serb] tanks to use them against the Croats. So this is a 
chaotic situation in which not only common interests and 
contradictions are intertwined but also in certain areas local 
commanders are creating various and sometimes even hellish 
situations. 
  [Correspondent] We have quite a few questions from our 
viewers which are identical to those that we were planning to 
ask. For instance, a Zlatko from Zagreb is asking you, and this 
is what I was planning to ask you, whether Croatia is planning 
to further the process of privatization. This is also linked to 
the fact that we have all noticed that the influx of foreign 
capital into Croatia has been insufficient. Can some changes to 
the process of privatization be expected in this regard? 
  [Tudjman] The problem of privatization in all former 
socialist countries is a very complex problem. However, Croatia 
has made a huge step also in that respect. Today we have got 
around 79,000 private enterprises. With reference to foreign 
investments last year and this year: last year there were 2,187 
foreign investments and opening of foreign enterprises, I think. 
This year some more 1,000 to 1,100 independent or mixed 
enterprises were opened. Last year more than 600,000,000 German 
Marks was invested either in the form of direct capital or in 
the form of machinery. This year around $300 million was 
invested. This means that privatization is going ahead and that 
despite the war foreign business circles have got trust in 
Croatia; capital is steadily flowing into Croatia. 
  Another thing in connection with privatization: private 
enterprises employing up to 200 workers earn around 35 per cent 
of the income. That process which is very complex and 
convoluted is going on, and obviously, once the war situation is 
over it will undergo a turnabout, gain a momentum; there are 
foreign studies saying that Croatia will be of the most 
prosperous countries, particularly in the light of results that 
the Croatian Government has achieved in slashing inflation, 
which was met by almost disbelief in the world, and by the most 
serious financial circles, such as IMF, the World Bank and other 
business circles: how did we succeed to [slash] this inflation 
which was inherited in Croatia from former Yugoslavia. 
  Having taken over the power in spring, in May 1990, we 
inherited huge inflation which was 45.8 percent -- it was 46 
percent back in January 1990. 
  Despite the war and all the plight caused by the war, 
declining production, destruction of industrial facilities, we 
succeeded in reducing it. However, this year [1993], right up 
to September, it nevertheless fluctuated from between 25 and 28 
percent. And now Valentic's government and steps we have 
taken--if you remember in March this year, in my speech in the 
Assembly, I outlined the program of economic revival and 
forecast our economic revival and a fall in inflation as 
precondition for making national currency convertible. The 
previous government of Prime Minister Sarinic drew up a 
stabilization program, Valentic's government took it over and 
took efficient and effective steps which helped us to reduce the 
inflation from 38 per cent to 1.4 percent in November. During 
the current month of December the inflation has been slashed, we 
even have a negative inflation of minus zero percent [as 
received]. The world is absolutely amazed at this and this has 
created foundations for implementing our plan for introducing 
convertible national currency next year on Statehood Day. 
  Allow me to say in this context that even the most competent 
international experts, theoreticians and those who apply it in 
practice, for instance I have an opportunity to talk to such 
people as deputy in a company such as Ford responsible for the 
entire Eastern Europe who told me that he had been in all those 
countries, Poland, the Czech republic, Hungary, Slovakia, 
Russia, Ukraine, and he told me: I was amazed at how you in 
Croatia, I thought there was war in Croatia but what I found is 
the situation better than in any other country except perhaps 
the Czech Republic. Or in our talks here with Professor 
Dihibuchi, he is an expert of international reputation who 
played the most important role in bringing economic stability in 
Chile, on his mother's side he is a Croat but born there--and he 
said, what you have done--and not only he, others have also said 
it--you were able to achieve this because you knew what you 
wanted, because you had the right leadership. This is possible 
only in the countries with the majority government and with a 
leadership that knows what it wants. And where the situation is 
not like in Croatia--he cited the examples of Poland and others 
-- where there is no such leadership and where coalition 
governments are in power that argue over what to do--there will 
be no results in the economic sphere. 
  In other words, as far as the world is concerned, in this 
sphere too we succeeded in achieving a miracle. Of course, all 
problems have not been solved. We are yet to expect a great 
deal of sweat, of effort in both the process of privatization 
and in restructuring, in general, and the transformation of the 
socialist system but we should be more than satisfied with the 
results achieved so far. 
  [Correspondent] Does this include the problem of 
denationalization? 
  [Tudjman] Absolutely! At one of the meetings of the National 
Security Council I announced that I personally will ask both the 
Assembly and the government to begin to tackle the problem of 
denationalization in a more effective way. In other words, I 
shall ask them to pass the law on denationalization despite the 
fact that the experience from other countries shows that this is 
a very complicated process which cannot be approached in a 
simplified way. We must not make mistakes that would be greater 
than the ones we are trying to rectify. We must not jeopardize 
the current level of production, etc. In other words, this is 
something that foreign citizens, foreign countries also [?face]. 
This is a very complex issue but we must approach it primarily 
by passing relevant law and in practice by denationalizing 
wherever possible or by providing relevant compensation. 
  [Correspondent] A question on internal policy. Some have 
criticized us for the violation of human rights mentioning the 
destruction of Serbian houses, eviction of Serbs from their 
flats. It is sufficient to mention the village of Cicak. Are 
these only exceptions or is it our big guilt as some people have 
put it? 
  [Tudjman] These are neither exceptions nor guilt. These are 
results and consequences of an aggressive war that was imposed 
on Croatia. In such a war, which assumed characteristics of a 
life and death struggle in some areas, obviously despite all our 
efforts to prevent lawlessness we could not achieve that. This 
could not be achieved by any country in any war. From the 
Americans in Vietnam, the French in Algiers, you can see what is 
happening after the Jews in Israel and Palestinians reached the 
agreement, what is happening in Northern Island. 
  As long as the war situation is continuing some anarchic 
phenomena cannot be avoided. It is completely certain that we 
have demanded the observance of human rights, no vengeful 
actions should be allowed, and people should be called to 
account. It is completely certain that as regards human rights 
and freedom of media under war conditions we permitted some even 
anarchic phenomena to take place, which no state, even under 
more favorable conditions would permit. 
  There have been such phenomena. We will do everything to 
eliminate them and those who perpetrated them should be called 
to account, particularly if some robberies have taken place. 
However, it is important to say that this happened during the 
war on the territory of Croatia under the conditions when 300 
[figure as heard] Croatian people were not only evicted from 
their homes but also were forced to watch crimes from Vukovar to 
Skabrnja; the killing of their relatives, women, children, 
elderly people; and that this created a situation whereby all 
our attempts to prevent phenomena that are abnormal have not 
been effective so far. However, we will do everything on our 
part for Croatia to be a law-governed state and to prevent such 
phenomena. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. President, you probably know that the 
citizens of Croatia who live in the UNPA zones are watching us. 
What do you think the people in the media and you people in 
politics.... [pauses] how should we best establish contact with 
them? 
  [Tudjman] I am glad you have asked this question so that I 
might say to you that really one significant part of this common 
people from Knin to Baranja has beed deluded. They have been 
deceived along the lines.... [pauses] Here we have some ustashas 
who have come to power who have no other task than to kill you. 
So there are a small number of these Serbian extremists who 
have been nurtured on [this propaganda] and are doing everything 
to unify these areas with a greater Serbia. 
  People who have had negotiations with the Serbs from all 
these areas -- from Knin to western Slavonia and so on -- have 
told me how these people were amazed when they were told that 
the Serbs were living normally in Zagreb and other areas; what 
was it that we were offering them? Slavko Degoricija has had a 
series of talks with these and other people. So this ordinary 
Serb in Knin is being deluded. 
  The task for you in radio and television, as well, in a 
technical sense -- we set ourselves such a task -- is to 
establish possibilities for us to be heard so that the truth 
about Croatia might emerge, [and so that the Serbs might learn] 
what we are offering them, and that this is in their interest, 
so that they might find a way out of this [word indistinct] 
situation and the terror that is being perpetrated by those who 
are even imprisoning those people who are normal and who want a 
political solution [sentence as heard]. 
  You should to a greater extent include in your radio and 
television broadcasts topics on this normalization of relations 
in Croatia and guide Serbs who know the situation and know what 
we want sincerely for the sake of Croatia and the Croatian 
people and Serbs in Croatia and for the sake of the 
normalization of relations about which I spoke in this 
conversation when I referred to the normalization of relations 
between Croatia and Serbia for the sake of the world and peace 
and for the sake of international order. 
  [Correspondent] Experienced diplomats have said that what we 
do not expect always happens. Precisely for that reason, do 
heads of state have the right to fear? Are you afraid sometimes? 
  [Tudjman] No. [long pause] I am a man who steeps himself in 
living history, who takes part in history, and in creating this 
history, if I can say so. From my early youth, as a 
ten-year-old boy I took part in carrying messages during the 6 
January dictatorship [dictatorship imposed on 6 January 1929 by 
Yugoslav King Aleksandar Karadjordjevic] when people were 
imprisoned and even killed for it. My father introduced me to 
that. 
  However, by analyzing history I have come to the conclusion 
that if someone is a head of state he has to be ready to do what 
is in the interest of the people. I will give you an example: 
On 24 January 1991 a session of the then Yugoslav presidency in 
Belgrade was convened. We were in the [Croatian] Assembly. A 
vast majority of my closest associates and deputies to the 
assembly told me not to go, that I would be assassinated. I 
went, being aware that it was necessary for me to go, regardless 
of what happened to me. If I had not gone to Belgrade then, the 
army machinery of the Yugoslav People's Army would have been 
moved to carry out an all-out attack on Croatia. The Croatian 
Government would have been toppled. Hence, we would not have had 
democratic Croatia. So, I was ready and aware what could happen 
to me, what happened to Radic [Stjepan Radic, a Croatian deputy, 
was shot dead in the Yugoslav Assembly in 1928]. However, 
courage is to do what has to be done in the interest of the 
people when you are at the head of a people's movement or a 
state. 
  [Correspondent] At that time many were against your decision 
to travel to Belgrade. Now when these talks end, certain 
documents are signed and certain decisions are made. Many 
people say you should not have done it that way, you could have 
done it this way, you could have done it in a better way, and so 
on. To what extent are you personally affected by criticism? 
  [Tudjman] Well, you know, human stupidity has never been 
dear 
to me [laughs]. Nevertheless, I have confidence both in my own 
judgement and in the fact that people are following not only my 
programme but -- I can cite a thousand examples of how people 
from all strata, from ordinary women and schoolchildren to 
university professors -- and they have said to me personally and 
written to me saying how they spontaneously sensed that what I 
am implementing is what they, too, want [sentence as heard]. 
  Several days ago a local official visited me and said 
something along the lines of: I travelled a long way and came 
home and said to my old mother, you know what, mother, I am now 
with the HDZ [Croatian Democratic Union], and then she replied 
-- to cut the story short -- Thank God, son, you are not 
separate from the people [Tudjman laughs]. 
  I think there are in what we have achieved... [pauses] we 
have achieved a national-democratic rebirth of the Croatian 
nation and most people, regardless of political differences, 
live for this freedom and democracy in Croatian that we have 
created. This gives me the basis for being sure of my actions. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. President, all of us have some kind of 
expectations of Croatia. If you want to get something from 
Croatia you have to give something, too. So you should, 
therefore, love Croatia. In your opinion what is the best way 
to love Croatia? 
  [Tudjman] To do everything you can for Croatia, for your own 
satisfaction, for your families and for the satisfaction of the 
people and in the interests of the people. 
  [Correspondent] [Words indistinct] a question of a personal 
nature. What is it like to be head of state? 
  [Tudjman] Perhaps you will not believe me when I tell you I 
did not want to be a politician. I wanted to be an academic. I 
wanted.... [pauses] I have, I think, three or four books, which 
will be of significance not only in Croatia but also in world 
literature -- from my "Rat Protiv Rata" [War Against War] to 
"Velike Ideje I Male Narode" [Great Ideas and Small Nations] and 
"Nacionalno Pitanje u Evropi" [The National Question in Europe], 
in which I predicted these events, and "Bespuca" [Wasteland]. I 
have two manuscripts that I would be happier to finish and 
publish than anything else. 
  I am probably somewhat to blame for this freedom and 
sovereignty of Croatia, but personally I am a slave of Croatia 
-- from dawn to dusk [laughs]. However, that is how it is. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. President, you have made predictions -- 
we think your prognoses are valuable. What do you expect of 
1994? 
  [Tudjman] You never need to predict things when you have 
your 
judgments and assessments, but I believe that in 1994 we will 
achieve the incorporation into Croatia of Croatian territory 
under Serbian occupation or under the protection of peacekeeping 
forces. I believe that the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina will end 
and that in this way the Croatian state, the Croatian people, 
and all the citizens of Croatia will have the final 
preconditions for a peaceful life and normal development. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. President, finally, you are at the 
moment 
in the homes of all Croatian citizens. What would you like to 
tell them? 
  [Tudjman] Have confidence in yourselves -- each Croatian 
person in himself or herself -- and in your own people. And 
bring up your children to be decent people in the service of 
their own people, to the benefit of their families and their 
state, because the state is the home for the whole people, as an 
apartment or house is a home for the family. I believe that 
this people -- the Croatian people -- have something to be proud 
of. We have realized our freedom and democracy -- people have 
fallen in battle for centuries to achieve this -- and we should 
not miss this opportunity or bring into question in any way the 
very thing that we have realized. As a result, if I am in the 
homes of Croatian -- not only Croatian people, but all citizens 
of Croatia -- prove to me that we have been worthy of this 
freedom and of our state. 

