BFN 

<F P=106> [First of three-part report on interview with Peace and </F>
Reconciliation Commissioner Manuel Camacho Solis by special 
correspondent Miguel Angel Granados Chapas; place and date not 
given] 
  [Text] On the eve of issuing a communique for his Zapatist 
interlocutors, Peace Commissioner Manuel Camacho Solis explained 
his assessment of the causes of the conflict and outlined the 
strategies he will employ during the second round of 
negotiations. 
  He asked us "not to get bogged down" between the 
revolutionary and fundamentalist position and the reactionary 
and controlling position, both of which are understandable. Let 
us go on and devise the strategies for the second round of 
negotiations, he said. 
  "I would like to divide the strategies into three key 
issues. 
I believe this division is where the secret of today's peace 
lies. I also believe this division would bring bountiful results 
to the rest of the country." 
  He pointed out that the three key issues will have 
"instrumental" and "institutional" contents, as well as a 
"positive change of mind." 
  The commissioner said that the three issues are essential to 
achieving peace. 
  "It is a big mistake to think that we can achieve peace by 
brandishing rifles. The two parties involved will fail to reach 
a complete military or political victory. Thus, let us forge a 
worthy, just, and serious peace," he added. 
  [Granados] What would the instrumental content be in two of 
the conditions? 
  [Camacho] The first one involves avoiding belligerence; that 
is, to avoid the internationalization of the conflict. I 
believe this is a cost that Mexico must never pay. Should such 
a cost mean the division of Mexico, I would reject it, because 
we have taken care of the country for 150 years; it is the only 
legacy we have. 
  We cannot allow the dynamics of the conflict to lead to 
eventual U.S. intervention in our domestic conflicts and direct 
control over the Mexican political process. 
  This is a limitation. The other limitation is that we must 
look at the arms issue responsibly. No insurgent army can be 
disarmed overnight. Disarmament processes take years and must 
be guaranteed. 
  It is very clear to me that there cannot be peaceful 
conditions should the arms buildup increase in the region 
controlled by the EZLN [Zapatist National Liberation Front]. 
  This cannot happen. Such instrumental guarantees must 
prevail to achieve peace. Should there be more arms or should 
we internationalize the conflict, peace would not be possible in 
Chiapas. Therefore, peace would not be possible in the rest of 
the country, thereby bringing more consequences. 
  Here is where we begin. It is nothing more than taking into 
account concerns and establishing a framework of guarantees 
acceptable to everyone. 
  [Granados] How do you define change of mind? 
  [Camacho] It is a change of mind for everybody; that is, a 
change of mind for all of us directly involved in the conflict. 
  In other words, if discriminating against Indians is one of 
the factors that worsened this conflict, then people who 
discriminate against Indians must change their minds as a 
condition for establishing peace. 
  A change of attitude, behavior, and values with regard to 
the 
government's relations with Indian communities is needed; 
however, these cultural changes take too much time. Therefore, 
we need institutional changes. 
  Institutional changes fail to change minds completely, but 
they uncover opportunities quickly and guide things in a new 
direction. This is the new framework for the construction of 
peace. 
  [Granados] Can you tell us about your participation in the 
negotiations? 
  [Camacho] We proposed that the agenda for the peace and 
reconciliation talks that are to be held in San Cristobal de las 
Casas be limited to the subjects of Chiapas and the Indians. The 
EZLN people wanted very much to include on the agenda election 
subjects, changes in the IFE [Federal Electoral Institute], a 
special term to guarantee an impartial election, and 
nonexclusive governmental control of the country's electoral 
structure. We found a practical, common sense, and efficient 
solution. We did not make it into a decision-dependent subject. 
We gave it a political solution because that is what mattered. 
There was great concern here, because we in Chiapas talked about 
the desirability of a special term, a political reform, a change 
in the IFE, and citizens' participation in the IFE. We did not 
want to intervene in congressional decisions. We were endorsing 
the agreement for peace, justice, and democracy that the 
political parties and the candidates had signed, all of which 
appears right to me. We took into consideration what had been 
done at the chamber, but we also were making a commitment to one 
of the political options that would facilitate finding a 
solution to the current Chiapas conflict. 
  [Granados] Was there a personal position? 
  [Camacho] Yes. That was the advantage of having a 
commissioner. I was not speaking as a secretary of state, but in 
my own name. I was a representative of the president and 
therefore had to be very careful. But that was all. 
  [Granados] Is there a similar framework in the institution? 
Is there a limit that the president of the republic has set or 
that has been suggested to him by his own perception of the 
matter? 
  [Camacho] Our proposal was a response to a sort of petition. 
This petition, however, was not a sleight of hand or something 
we drafted while writing on our knees. Through this response, 
we extracted everything possible from the fragile balance of the 
economy and the country's constitutional order. It was a big 
response to a very big demand. From this viewpoint, the room for 
additional subjects is limited. I also think, however, that it 
would be a very serious error to say that everything has been 
said. Rather than entering a second negotiation, which would 
lead nowhere because it would create additional conflicts 
everywhere, conflicts that would have prevented the most 
important point from being complied with, the important thing is 
for us to regard what we have proposed as a beginning. These 
are actions that would be carried out anyway, because the 
response is fair. It is the government's duty to meet the new 
terms. But that is a beginning. Whether or not additional 
responses can be constructed in due time and proper political 
conditions cannot be decided at present. This is to say, the 
question of whether or not there can be an additional 
Constitution reform cannot be settled on a short-term basis, 
such as by June 1994. 
  [Granados] How can the rest of the country, where there is 
dissatisfaction, be told: Be patient; do not rise up in arms; we 
are solving this problem? The Chiapas people did rise up in 
arms and required answers. 
  [Camacho] I do not think they will take up arms. People do 
not rise up in arms just like that. There are people who speak 
of taking up arms. This decision, however, is a complex one, 
and requires a long time and organization. I think we should 
not fall for either the threat that someone will take up arms or 
the shortsightedness of a government asking people to be patient. 

