BFN 

  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota, 31 May (DPA) -- The Colombian 
Government today issued a decree restricting the possession and 
consumption of narcotics in public places. This practice was 
recently authorized by a Constitutional Court ruling, which 
concluded that it is illegal to apply jail sentences and fines 
to individuals found to be in possession of personal doses of 
drugs. 
  Today's announcement was made by Justice Minister Andres 
Gonzalez, who said the decree includes several provisions 
designed to challenge the high court's controversial ruling. 
The decision was rejected by the government, political circles, 
economic groups, the media, and several social circles. 
  Gonzalez indicated that the authorities will prohibit the 
consumption of drugs in public places. Those who violate the 
measure will be removed from the premises. The owner of the 
establishment will be punished with the closure of his or her 
business and the suspension of his or her operators license. 
  The minister said the use of drugs will not be permitted in 
places such as schools; cultural, recreation, and amusement 
centers; on board ships and airplanes; in restaurants; or on the 
street. 
  In the realm of sports, Gonzalez said the decree, which was 
signed by President Cesar Gaviria, also prohibits the use of 
drugs by athletes attempting to improve their performance. The 
authorities will apply stiff penalties to violators, their 
trainers, and the doctors who endorse such consumption. 
  Gonzales added that operators of motor vehicles and airplane 
pilots found to be under the effects of narcotics will have 
their licenses suspended. Those appearing for work under the 
influence will be fired. 
  The decree is the first practical measure adopted by 
President Gaviria to head off the Constitutional Court ruling, 
which legalized the possession and consumption of drugs. The 
court based its decision on the right that all Colombians have, 
as outlined in the Constitution, to freely develop their 
individual personality. The ruling annulled an article of the 
Drug Law that mandated jail terms of 30 days to one year and 
fines equivalent to $62 for those individuals caught carrying 
quantities of less than 20 grams of marijuana, 5 grams of 
hashish, 2 grams of methaqualone, and 1 gram of cocaine. 
  In rejecting the ruling, Gaviria said the Constitutional 
Court was mistaken to call drug consumption a "right" and to 
establish the supremacy of individual interests over public 
welfare. Several days ago, Gaviria indicated that his 
administration will promote a referendum to have Colombian 
people decide for themselves whether or not to reform the 
constitutional article that provides the right to individual 
personality development, which would automatically annul the 
court's decision. To this end, Gaviria signed a law on 
mechanisms for a popular consultation. The law authorizes the 
government to promote and present motions that are signed by 
several million citizens before Congress to request referendums. 
  Several justices of the Constitutional Court have criticized 
the president's attempts to prevent the legalization of drug 
use. They say their decisions are not subject to appeal and must 
be upheld. Meanwhile, an association of criminal lawyers has 
complained before Congress about the president's alleged 
"contempt" of court. 

