BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, May 9 (CTK) -- The division of 
Czechoslovakia is irreversible and the most important question 
of the present is to ensure the best possible representation of 
right-wing forces in the Slovak parliamentary elections, former 
Czechoslovak Interior Minister Jan Langos told CTK today. He 
pointed to the important fact that the division of the 
federation was not supported by the majority of the Slovak 
population and that from the point of view of economic 
transformation and the development of democracy the separation 
was definitely unprofitable for Slovakia. 
  "Nevertheless, the division on which the winners of the 1992 
parliamentary elections agreed, separated the two nations 
irreversibly. Realists cannot cherish any illusions about a 
return," said Langos, who is a representative of the Permanent 
Conference of the Civic Institute (SKOI). 
  "The questions are quite different nowadays. An independent 
Slovakia is a reality. What is essential today is to ensure 
that the right wing is represented in the elections in the best 
possible way. That is why we welcome the proposal from the 
Christian Democratic Movement (KDH) and are ready to fulfill 
certain conditions which they might set," Langos said. 
  He was reacting to a statement by Anton Hrnko, deputy 
chairman of the National Democratic Party-New Alternative 
(NDS-NA), who said that accepting the offer to fill vacant 
positions on the KDH election slate with representatives of the 
right-wing parties would threaten Slovak politics with the 
return of "creatures from Jurassic Park," that is of people who 
are consistently returning to the idea of a common state in 
their thoughts. 
  "These emotional statements are characteristic of weaker 
political entities and their representatives," Langos said. 
Their authors should rather think about what parties they 
represented in the past and what their place in history would 
be," he said. Hrnko was formerly a member of the Slovak 
Communist Party (KSS) and of the Slovak National Party (SNS). 
  "Our defense of Czechoslovakia has never stemmed from the 
idea of Czechoslovakism but from the view that the federal 
state, in the period of the transition from communism to 
democracy, was much more advantageous for Slovakia," Langos 
said. "We should offer a clear, concrete, and distinct 
alternative, now only for Slovakia, based on an acceptable 
program. The quality of the program is proved or disproved by 
concrete results," Langos said. 
  Many parties lack realistic programs, he said. "This is not 
only the problem of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia 
(HZDS) of ex-premier Vladimir Meciar. The policy of all parties 
today is seen only from the point of view of their "effective 
anti-Meciar orientation" which conceals the political inability 
of these parties. "Many anti-Meciar coalitions also have their 
weak points," he said. 
  After the Civic Democratic Union (ODU) ceased to exist last 
autumn, some of its members established an informal group which 
named itself the Civic Institute. They gather regularly to 
formulate their views and positions and inform journalists of 
them. 
  After the early parliamentary elections in Slovakia were 
announced (to be held on September 30-October 1), individual 
members from the SKOI were given offer of running on the slate 
of the KDH and to thus contribute to the unification of the 
right wing in Slovakia. 

