BFN 

<F P=106> [Pavel Felgengauer report in the "Maneuvers" column: "The </F>
Russian Army Is Ready for Battle. Exercises To Repulse Attack 
on Former Koenigsberg"] 
  [Text] At the end of April, from the 24th through the 
29th, the forces of the Leningrad Military District, jointly 
with the troops of the Kaliningrad Special District, held large 
scale military exercises called North-West. On the small 
territory of the Kaliningrad enclave substantial forces are 
concentrated today: the command and the main base of the Baltic 
Fleet, the 11th Combined-Arms Army, Air Force and Air Defense 
units, and so forth. Russia's armed outpost in the west still 
appears a strategically vulnerable point on the map, however, 
separated from the main territory of the Russian Federation by 
two independent states. 
  If any serious adversary were to attack what remains of the 
former west Prussia, now populated by Slavs, it would have to be 
defended just like Sevastopol in its time, by uniting the forces 
of the Baltic Fleet, the Army, the Air Force, and the Air 
Defense Force under single command. It was to test in practice 
the possibility of such "territorial" unification of forces and 
fire to repulse air, ground, and sea (with the landing of 
assault units) attack that the North-West exercises, 
unprecedented in scale, were conducted, given the financial 
squeeze on the Russian army (11,000 servicemen and 2,000 pieces 
of equipment). 
  According to General Staff Chief General Kolesnikov, "on the 
whole, the exercises have passed successfully." Only Baltic 
Fleet Commander Admiral Yegorov did not act confidently enough. 
Mikhail Kolesnikov, however, believes that following the 
experience of World War II, navy leaders should not be appointed 
commanders in ground defense operations. 
  At the same time, a new territorial principle of organizing 
air defense on the military operations theater was tested, as 
was the troops' capabilities to repulse a limited missile 
attack, for which purpose an early missile attack warning system 
was used. Apparently the principle of single theater air 
defense will be adopted as fundamental, but speaking at a 
briefing in the Defense Ministry, Gen. Kolesnikov specially 
stressed that "the Air Defense Force will remain the fifth 
branch of the Armed Forces; at any rate, until 1996." 
  In the course of the maneuvers the Russian military did not 
interact -- nor was such interaction planned -- with the newly 
raised small armies of the Baltic countries. The Russian 
military leadership is seeking independence. In particular Gen. 
Kolesnikov promised that in 1996 the first launching will be 
made from the Svobodnyy space center in the Far East and as a 
result the Armed Forces will have no further need for Baykonur. 
"This will not call for any additional resources." The Russian 
Space Agency can use Baykonur independently, without Defense 
Ministry assistance (20,000 servicemen of the Space Forces will 
be evacuated to Russia). 
  Yet the military department is seeking independence, not 
full 
isolation. The campaign in the Duma against joint U.S.-Russian 
peacekeeping command and staff exercises on the Totsk test site 
only annoys the top military leadership, owing to the 
politicians' total incompetence in military matters. The 
General Staff chief believes that "public opinion is being 
provoked deliberately by people who do not know or pretend not 
to know what command and staff exercises are." 
  The General Staff continues to downsize the army. According 
to Gen. Kolesnikov, by early 1995 the authorized strength of the 
Armed Forces will be under 2 million people. In the context of 
manpower and money shortages, the limited resources are directed 
"selectively" to the Strategic Nuclear Forces and Airborne 
Forces units. However, if only the Strategic Nuclear Forces, 
the Early Missile Attack Warning System, and the Airborne Forces 
remain in the army, further troop and budget cuts can sharply 
lower the threshold of a nuclear conflict. 

