Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Yi Song-yul] </F>
  [Text] Following North Korea's repeated intimidation of 
going to war against the South and the United States, the 
pro-con debates on the resumption of Team Spirit military 
exercise and deployment of Patriot anti-air missiles in the 
South seem to have almost ended. 
  During the months leading to an inter-Korea contact last 
week 
when a North Korea official said that "Seoul would turn into a 
sea of flames," not a few South Koreans had opposed or sounded 
notes of caution about any military approach toward the issue 
surrounding North Korea's nuclear issue. 
  But now, such voices of caution or opposition have nearly 
disappeared in the South. 
  Those who had called for "prudence" are now silent to the 
argument that "North Koreans already possess Scud and Nodong 
missiles, some of which can even hit Japan and Taiwan, so we 
should not oppose deployment of the defensive Patriot 
antimissile missiles to U.S. Forces Korea." 
  They previously suggested that the deployment may 
"unnecessarily irritate" North Koreans, calling for continued 
dialogue with North Koreans in settling the North Korean nuclear 
issue. 
  The opposition Democratic Party also called for prudence on 
the part of Seoul and Washington in deciding deployment of 
Patriots and resumption of Team Spirit, the annual joint 
military exercise. 
  Others who welcome Patriot missiles say that deployment of 
the anti-air missiles to the U.S. forces in South Korea "is the 
minimum defensive gesture Seoul and Washington can and should 
take at this moment." 
  "Patriots are a purely defensive weapon, and what's wrong 
with the defending forces having them?" said a Defense Ministry 
official. "And is it okay that jingoistic and bellicose North 
Koreans develop and possess offensive Scud and Nodong missiles?" 
  Regarding resumption of Team Spirit '94, "we have crossed 
the 
Rubicon," as a Defense Ministry official puts it. 
  Six Patriot batteries and 850 U.S. Army soldiers have 
already been shipped from Fort Bliss, Tex., most probably to 
take part in Team Spirit, which, previously scheduled for late 
March, should be rescheduled. 
  Shortly after the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
decided that its recent inspections of nuclear sites in the 
North had been unsatisfactory, U.S. President Bill Clinton 
announced he had approved shipping the Patriot batteries to 
South Korea. Before that, President Kim Yong-sam in Seoul 
announced agreement to the Patriots deployment and resumption of 
Team Spirit. 
  But the military move will be slow--the six missile 
batteries 
will take four to six weeks to reach South Korea. That leaves 
plenty of time for Seoul and Washington to try diplomatic and 
economic pressure to pry open North Korea's suspected nuclear 
sites for full-fledged international inspection. 
  North Korea, which has intentionally broken inter-Korean 
dialogue, fervently condemned the move to send Patriot batteries 
to the South and resume Team Spirit joint military exercise. 
  The North Korean ambassador to China said holding the 
exercise and deploying the missiles could lead to war. 
  But Defense Minister Yi Pyong-tae said Wednesday that 
resumption of the exercise had become inevitable since North 
Korea has not met two preconditions Seoul and Washington 
officials set for its suspension. 
  "When the exercise timetable is set after President Kim's 
return from state visits to Tokyo and Beijing March 30, it 
cannot be suspended again since that would have a negative 
effect on troop morale," Yi said before a National Assembly 
Committee. 
  Now it seems certain that Team Spirit for this year will be 
conducted, with the participation of Patriot missiles, more 
South Korean and U.S. troops and more warships. 
  Defense Ministry officials said the Patriots being sent here 
are an improved version of the missiles used during the Gulf War 
and can effectively counter North Korean Scuds. 
  The 48 launchers being sent are capable of intercepting as 
many as 54 targets simultaneously, the officials said. 
  A typical Patriot battalion is comprised of three to six 
batteries, with eight launchers each. Each launcher has four 
missiles. 
  So far, the only shots fired have been verbal, if 
incendiary, 
but much seems to depend on Pyongyang's attitude before real 
shots are fired. 

