Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Christine McGourty report: "Sea Fails To Soak Up Greenhouse </F>
Gases"] 
  [Text] An ocean process that absorbs 20 per cent of 
man-made emissions of carbon dioxide has broken down. 
  Oceanographers on a three-month expedition to the Greenland 
Sea have found a significant reduction in "deep convection" -- 
the process by which the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide is 
transported to the sea bed. 
  Dr. Peter Wadhams of the Scott Polar Research Institute, 
leader of the expedition, said yesterday the decline was 
"disturbing and surprising." 
  "Convection in the Greenland Sea has virtually stopped in 
the 
last decade," he told Oceanology International, a marine science 
conference in Brighton. 
  "It is a process that has been going on for several thousand 
years and when you see it decline sharply over a decade it gets 
you worried." 
  The process was "a plughole" for carbon dioxide and its 
decline could leave more of the gas in the atmosphere, 
increasing global warming through the greenhouse effect, he said. 
  It occurs in only four places -- the Greenland Sea, the 
Labrador Sea, the Weddell Sea in Antarctica and in the western 
Mediterranean. 
  Dense surface water sinks to the sea bed, taking carbon 
dioxide with it. 
  Except in the Mediterranean, the process begins when ice 
sheets expand in the winter. As ice forms, salt is rejected 
into the water, making it more dense and forcing it deeper. 
  On last year's expedition, oceanographers studied the 
process 
at the Odden Ice Tongue -- an unusual ice sheet about 100 miles 
long and 50 miles wide in the Greenland Sea. 
  "Convection there is dependent on ice forming," said Dr. 
Wadhams. "But in recent years not enough ice has been forming." 
This itself could be a result of global warming, he added. 
  Measurements of salinity and temperature taken from the 
expedition's four research ships showed that convection took 
place to a depth of only 3,000 feet last year, compared with 
6,000 feet five years ago. 
  Ten years ago convection took place all the way down to the 
sea bed -- 12,000 feet. 

