Language: <F P=105> Norwegian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jan Gunnar Furuly: "Supporters: Convince </F>
Undecided Voters"] 
  [Excerpts] "Our greatest potential for growth lies in those 
who are undecided on the European Union [EU] issue," said Inge 
Lonning, leader of the European Movement. 
  Increased participation in Europe, better opportunities for 
rescuing the environment, and a stronger Norwegian economy are 
among the most important arguments of Union supporters. Lonning 
will not guarantee, however, that unemployment will go down. 
"That will always depend upon the international economic 
situation," he said. 
  A scant week before the deadline runs out on Norway's 
membership negotiations, the supporters of the EU can feel 
confident that things are finally going their way. A new public 
opinion poll showed a small majority in favor of membership 
provided that Sweden and Finland join the EU. 
  "The numerous still-undecided voters are beginning to hop 
down from the fence. I am convinced that it is the pro-EU side 
that will gain most from now on. Provided the deadline is met, 
the national referendum could, I believe, take place as soon as 
next fall. On the other hand, the deadline could get moved back 
several months. Then, the referendum could not take place before 
the first half of next year," Lonning predicted. 
  He conceded that No to the EU currently has an 
organizational 
advantage over the European Movement. EU supporters have 
enrolled far fewer members (22,000) and thus far have succeeded 
in setting up only four district offices. 
  "We depend upon big appropriations. The goal should be to 
have an organization in every county. I am confident the 
Storting will allocate enough funds to enable preparations for 
the national referendum to proceed as they should," he said. 
  Lonning compares the current tug-of-war between Brussels and 
the Norwegian negotiators to wage negotiations: 
  "In recent weeks we have been witness to a series of 
tactical 
maneuvers. It is virtually certain the two sides will find it 
necessary to hold out until the midnight hour has passed before 
wrapping up their negotiations. The moment most critical to 
Norway's chances of joining the EU will surely come in the 
exchanges between the 12 EU nations," said Lonning. 
  "We have the mass media against us but the masses behind 
us," 
said Kristen Nygaard, leader of the No to the EU organization. 
  Nygaard saw the issues of independence, employment, and the 
environment as some of the most important arguments for not 
joining the EU. The leader of No to the EU denied that the 
movement is on the defensive, but conceded that the EU 
opposition has been asleep for a while. 
  "Quite simply, many of our supporters were confident of 
victory after so many favorable Gallup polls last fall. The most 
recent public opinion poll, in which the pro-EU forces jumped 
ahead, woke us all up," said Nygaard. 
  At No to the EU headquarters in Olso, hectic preparations 
were in progress for a mass mailing of brochures to each and 
every household in the nation. The brochure, to be sent out by 
the members at the beginning of March, is intended as a reply to 
the government's information pamphlet on the EU sent out last 
year. The brochure will be one of the EU opposition's strongest 
cards in the battle for votes leading up to the national 
referendum on the EU. 
  No to the EU has a distinct advantage over its rivals in the 
European Movement when it comes to grassroots organization. With 
130,000 members, 19 county organizations, and 442 local groups, 
Nygaard can point to solid support in all parts of the country. 
  "Frequently we get rough treatment from pro-EU commentators 
in the media, but we can console ourselves with the fact that at 
least we have the masses behind us," said Nygaard. He did not 
regard the European Movement as the principal opponent. 
  "Our most dangerous opponent is Gro Harlem Brundtland, Karl 
Glad, and Svein Aaser. That is where you find the muscle in the 
EU camp," he said. Nygaard calculated that the national 
referendum will take place sometime between October of this year 
and June of next year. 
  "The government will presumably choose the time that suits 
them best. And that will likely be after Sweden has its national 
referendum," he said. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  [Box, p 2] </H5>
<H5>  Arguments for Joining the EU </H5>
  1. Europe is forming around the EU. Norway must assume its 
share of the responsibility for Europe's most important 
collective organization. 
  2. Membership means participation. 
  3. Scandinavia is becoming part of the EU. Much indicates 
that Finland and Sweden will join. Consequently Norway must also 
join. 
  4. The EU is a guarantee of peace and security. The United 
States is gradually withdrawing from Europe. 
  5. Europe is torn today between forces that wish to isolate 
and forces that wish to unify. It is important to be on the side 
of unity. 
  6. The EU is essential for saving the environment. Only the 
EU has the resources to deal with the ticking environmental 
bombs in the Kola peninsula and the Barents Sea. 
  7. The EU is the best tool there is for ensuring political 
control over economic forces. 
  8. The EU offers us a European democracy in addition to a 
Norwegian democracy. 
  9. The EU will give the Norwegian economy more legs to stand 
on. The EU will determine the future of the welfare state. 
  10. The EU facilitates working and studying abroad. 
<H5>  [Box, p 2] </H5>
<H5>  Arguments Against Joining the EU </H5>
  1. The EU means loss of Norwegian independence because EU 
law 
would take precedence over the Norwegian Constitution, laws, and 
judicial decisions. 
  2. The Union treaty guarantees that market forces will 
prevail. 
  3. The EU has almost twice as much unemployment as Norway. 
  4. The gap between rich and poor in the EU is increasing. 
  5. The EU's joint security and foreign policy will hamper 
Norway's role as mediator. 
  6. There are no border controls in the EU. The wine monopoly 
will be undermined and there will be more drug smuggling. 
  7. The EU will introduce a joint, restrictive asylum policy. 
  8. Through a free market and an economic union, the EU has 
made the goal of traditional economic growth a part of its basic 
law. 
  9. The EU's inner market means greatly increased transport 
and toxic emissions. Norway has stronger environmental 
requirements. 
  10. The EU means weaker environmental policy, and the EU's 
inner market will make the poor even poorer. 

