BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ali G. Macabalang] </F>
  [Text] Cotabato City -- Makabuhay (Dinospora 
rumphi), a wild plant known to be an effective cure for 
typhoid fever, tuberculosis, and other ailments, can prolong the 
life of persons afflicted with Human Immuno-Deficiency Virus 
(HIV). 
  Studies showed that makabuhay has been found to have various 
medical uses. 
  In some tropical countries, the plant is widely used to 
fight 
malaria and is also used as an "abortificent" and as a cure for 
women with irregular menstruation. 
  After learning of makabuhay from the pharmacology department 
of the University of the Philippines [UP], Dr. Eduardo De La 
Fuente Sr., a retired government physician and director of the 
Cotabato Herbal Processing and Pharmaceutical Plant here, 
undertook an extensive study on the "life-giver" herb. 
  The UP Pharmacological Department, led by Dr. Nelia Maramba 
in their studies, found out that the plant can protect the human 
immune system, according to De La Fuente. 
  Appraised of the discovery, doctors tried a makabuhay 
concoction to Sarah Jane (not her real name), a "sex worker" 
found positive of the HIV. 
  Two months ago, Sarah Jane willingly agreed to undergo 
"makabuhay therapy," hoping that her condition would not worsen 
to a full-blown AIDS case. 
  "The purpose of giving the patient makabuhay preparations is 
to prolong the stay of anti-bodies in her body and protect her 
immune system," De La Fuente said. 
  "We will let the virus die of old age while preserving Sarah 
Jane's immune system," he said, admitting though that makabuhay 
has not been medically validated as a drug. 
  He also cautioned that if improperly prepared and wrongly 
taken, "the makabuhay preparation could be extremely toxic and 
could instead do more harm than good." 
  Sr. Florecilla Inzon, a Dominican sister and incumbent 
directress of the Catholic-run Notre Dame Hospital here who 
takes care of Sarah Jane, said that she remains healthy without 
any sign of deterioration in her physical feature. 
  "Dati siyang madalas na nilalagnat ng matagal [She used to 
get long periods of fever quite often]," she said, "pero hindi 
na siya nilalagnat ngayon [but she does not have those fevers 
now]." 

