Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lima, 22 Feb (NOTIMEX) -- Today, a poll revealed 
that 45 percent of Peruvians believe President Alberto Fujimori 
is in control, while a similar percentage of Peruvians believe 
the Armed Forces are in control. According to an Apoyo company 
poll, 45 percent of the population believes the chief of state 
holds power, but a similar percentage believes just the opposite. 
  The poll indicated that 70 percent of the population is 
aware 
that two weeks ago the ruling majority in Congress approved the 
controversial law transferring the case involving the 
disappearance of nine students and a professor from La Cantuta 
University to a military court. Meanwhile, 28 percent of 
Peruvians were not aware of the law, and 64 percent disapproved 
of it because they said such a law violates the autonomy of the 
Judicial Branch. 
  The Apoyo poll also revealed that 72 percent of the 
population believe the Armed Forces indeed pressured Congress to 
approve the law because members of the military institution are 
responsible for the kidnapping and subsequent July 1992 murder 
of the students and professor. Meanwhile, 26 percent believe 
these actions are justified because Peru is experiencing special 
circumstances due to the political violence carried out by 
subversive groups and the need to achieve complete peace. 
  Ruling party Congresswoman Martha Chavez said today that 
unlike what occurred in previous administrations, the Armed 
Forces are currently under the control of the Executive Branch. 
She emphasized that Fujimori, as commander in chief of the Armed 
Forces, issues the antisubversive strategy guidelines and that 
the military forces carry out his orders. Yesterday, Nicolas De 
Bari Hermoza, commander of the Armed Forces Joint Command and 
commander general of the Army, confirmed that the armed 
institutions are subordinate to the president thereby denying 
Fujimori is a "prisoner of the military forces," like a British 
newspaper recently reported. 
  President Fujimori's popularity has dropped from 66 to 58 
percent during the last few weeks. These figures, however, are 
moving further away from the 70 percent popularity rate he 
obtained in October 1993 and the 76 percent he achieved in June 
1992. Analysts believe the enactment of the so-called "Cantuta 
Law" significantly harmed the head of state's popularity. 
  Fujimori strengthened his administration with the support of 
the Armed Forces, especially the Army, after his self-inflicted 
coup on 5 April 1992, when he ordered the dissolution of 
Congress and the intervention of the Judicial Branch and other 
autonomous institutions. On 21 February, the president said such 
isolated cases as La Cantuta must not hinder the 
counterterrorism strategy his government is developing. He 
denied that high-ranking Army officers were involved in the 
disappearance of the students and professor, as minority 
opposition sectors in Congress claim. 

