Straits 

<F P=102>   944Q0293A Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA in Russian 1 Apr 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 944Q0293A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> Article by Professor Ilya Mogilyovkin: "Russia's </F>
Transportation Connections Are Jeopardized: The Problem of the 
Black Sea Straits Is on the Agenda Again." The article is under 
the rubric "Law."] 
  [Text] More and more reports are coming out about Turkey's 
intentions to attain changes in the Convention governing the 
procedures for the Bosporus and the Dardanelles that connect the 
Black Sea and the Mediterranean. The issue concerns a change 
that is very important for Russia's interests, the so-called 
Montreux Convention, signed in 1936 by twelve countries, 
including the USSR and Turkey. This convention provides for the 
free passage of freighters of all countries through the straits 
and contains procedures for the passage of warships of countries 
bordering on the Black Sea, as well as other countries. 
  The Black Sea straits are of vital interest for Russia's 
maritime trade and that of other Black Sea countries. In recent 
times, up to 16,000 vessels per year have passed through the 
Bosporus and the Dardanelles Straits. Of the freight 
transported, especially important are exports of oil and natural 
gas. Their share of the total volume transported is over 60 
percent. 
  Now Turkey is trying to establish more stringent rules for 
the passage of vessels in a number of categories. Accordingly, 
vessels carrying oil or any dangerous cargo must inform the 
relevant Turkish authorities at least 24 hours prior to the 
proposed passage. A much stricter regulation is supposed to 
apply to tankers equipped with nuclear engines or to those 
having nuclear waste or chemical freight on board. Captains will 
have to receive permission for through passage from the Turkish 
Secretariat for Naval Affairs and take a local navigator on 
board. In essence, therefore, what is being planned for 
implementation is not a procedure to inform, but to have to 
request permission for certain categories of ships to pass 
through the Straits. Meanwhile, it is known that under these 
procedures, ships could be delayed while permission is being 
sought. 
  Moreover, according to available information, Turkey has 
announced that in the future it does not intend to permit 
passage of supertankers through the Straits. 
  Turkish authorities, in giving reasons for their intention 
to 
institute new procedures for passage of civilian freighters 
through the Black Sea straits, are saying that tankers could 
present an ecological danger for Istanbul and other maritime 
cities in the event of an accident in the Bosporus. 
  Turkey's intent to change the procedures in the straits 
directly touch upon Russian interests, since over a half of all 
goods carried by Russian vessels engaged in maritime trade go 
through the Black Sea straits. Specifically, Russia principally 
loads oil and other liquid materials for export in Black Sea 
ports. In connection with this, even recognizing the need for 
taking ecological requirements into consideration, Russia's 
concern cannot be ignored when her fundamental interests are at 
stake. 
  Russia's concern is all the more justified because the 
Turkish initiative to change the procedures cannot be examined 
in isolation from a whole number of important issues. 
  After the fall of the USSR, Russia was faced with an overall 
serious deterioration in her transport and communications 
systems, especially in the most important connecting routes with 
the West through the Baltics and Ukraine. Under these 
conditions, preservation of Russian interests that depend upon 
uninterrupted sea transport through the Black Sea and the 
straits becomes immensely important. 
  At the same time, very weighty concepts are being raised 
from 
a legal point of view with regard to the Turkish initiative. 
  The limitations on free passage of commercial vessels 
through 
the Black Sea straits, as proposed by Turkey, are in conflict 
with the Montreux Convention now in force. For this reason, the 
question arises about how present legal procedures will 
influence vessel passage in the future, not only in the Black 
Sea straits, but also in other international straits, including 
those where maritime commerce is important for Russia too. In 
other words, changing procedures in the Bosporus and Dardanelles 
may serve as a dangerous precedent for certain other straits. 
  The attempt to change the Montreux Convention, if the change 
takes place, also raises the question about possible legal 
reference points that may be selected for approving procedures 
for the passage of ships. Without any doubt, the most 
authoritative document is the UN Convention on Maritime Law 
signed in 1982 and subsequently ratified by many countries. It 
would not be right to ignore this important document when 
looking into possible changes in procedures. 
  At the same time, it is extremely important to delineate as 
clearly as possible Russian interests under new and not so 
simple transport and communications conditions. In so doing, it 
is essential to take into account not only the Black Sea straits 
themselves, but also the "overall" significance of the straits 
problem for Russia, as was mentioned above. This is why it is 
very important that problems with regard to the Straits be 
resolved as openly and publicly as possible. It would be highly 
desirable for the press to devote its attention to these 
problems and to inform the broadest possible readership about 
these problems. The multi-faceted nature of the straits problem 
affects the interests of many people in Russia, both as an 
industrial and a regional issue. 
  Only if these issues are broadly and constantly brought up 
by 
the mass media will it be possible to avert serious losses 
similar to those that Russia is suffering now in many aspects of 
her transport ties with the near abroad, as well as with more 
distant foreign countries. 

