BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "TV Today" newscast] </F>
  [Text] Eight months of negotiations ended today with a 
peace agreement between the government and 430 guerrillas of the 
Socialist Renewal Movement, CRS. The rebels turned in their 
weapons to Dutch Government and Socialist International 
representatives at a ceremony today in Flor del Monte, Sucre 
Department. 
  The CRS today formally surrendered their weapons and began 
making peace in the presence of peasants from Sucre Plains, more 
than 12 ambassadors from various countries, village priest Nel 
Beltran, Government Minister Fabio Villegas, members of the 
Advisory Board for Peace Issues, and media representatives. 
  [Begin recording] [First guerrilla] I am anxious to see my 
family, I haven't seen them for a long time. 
  [Unidentified reporter] What is your main concern? 
  [First guerrilla] We are not worried as much about the Army 
or the government as we are about other guerrilla groups. 
  [Second guerrilla] We know what has happened to many 
demobilized guerrillas, and we are afraid it could happen to us. 
[end recording] 
  Most of the rebels are under 30 years old. They say they 
will return to civilian life and to their homes to study and to 
work toward improving the country. Today they turned in their 
rifles, pistols, and grenades. Some of the weapons were dropped 
into the sea off the coast of Barranquilla. The other weapons, 
it was reported, will be melted down to make three bells for 
Flor del Monte, Ovejas, and El Pinar. 
  Here is Guillermo Perez, a member of the Advisory Board for 
Peace. 
  [Begin Perez recording] This is a victory for peace, for the 
reconciliation of all Colombians, which strengthens our hopes of 
building a democracy through the consolidation of peace. [end 
recording] 
  During the ceremony, the rebels remembered their comrades 
killed in action and mothers cried for their sons. Afterward, 
the rebels began their journey into civilian life. They 
departed in buses to Uraba, Barranquilla, Santa Marta, Pereira, 
and other places. They said they will participate in politics. 
  Many believe this was the Gaviria administration's last card 
for peace. 
  [Begin Government Minister Villegas recording] We have shown 
that there are options for peace in our country and that the 
vast majority of Colombians are rejecting violence and terrorism 
as a form of political expression. [end recording] 
  The government will issue identification cards and military 
cards to those who do not have them and will make loans of up to 
4 million pesos per person to be used in productive projects. 
In addition, each demobilized member will receive 170,000 
pesos per month for a year. 
  The rebels will create a political organization that will 
also be called CRS. They will automatically have two 
representatives in the Chamber of Representatives. CRS members 
will be asked to submit blank votes in the upcoming elections. 
  Thus 433 CRS guerrillas departed from Flor del Monte on the 
afternoon of 9 April to embrace peace. 
  The residents of Flor del Monte are afraid that other 
guerrilla groups could replace the CRS rebels. The agreements, 
however, contemplate the establishment of a verification 
commission, including the presence of soldiers and church 
members in Flor del Monte. 

