BFN 

  [Excerpts] Gabonese Prime Minister Casimir Oye-Mba has 
been in parliament since this morning to present his general 
policy program, in line with Article 28-A of the Gabonese 
Constitution. Casimir Oye-Mba's policy statement centered on 
several very important issues: the consolidation of democracy, 
the affirmation of state authority, the economy, foreign policy, 
and national solidarity. On the issue of state solidarity, 
Casimir Oye-Mba focused on the need to bridge the social gap, 
notably in housing and living standards. He stated: 
  [Begin Oye-Mba recording] One of the conditions for ensuring 
the well-being of the people is to ensure that every citizen 
lives under acceptable conditions, that is, that every citizen 
has decent accommodation. So, the government's action in this 
direction will center on a more rigorous policy, which will 
ensure that every Gabonese has access to better living 
standards. [end recording] 
  Prime Minister Casimir Oye-Mba also defended the amended 
budget, and said it was needed to win the confidence of 
creditors and reduce state spending. He added: 
  [Begin recording] The amended budget is based on the 
following premises: About 16 million tons of oil production, at 
$13 per barrel and at the rate of 600 CFA to the dollar. After 
balancing revenues and expenditures, the amended budget is fixed 
at 716 billion CFA, as compared with 415 billion CFA in the 
initial budget. Concerning expenditures, there is a clear 
increase in the recurrent and capital budgets. The recurrent 
budget increased from 246 billion CFA to 305 billion CFA. The 
59 billion CFA difference, which resulted from the effects of 
the devaluation of the CFA franc, is disbursed as follows: 15 
billion to cover the increase in the total wage bill; 3 billion 
for goods and services -- with nearly 80 percent of the amount 
earmarked for the social sector -- notably national education, 
health, higher education, and social affairs. This special 
effort naturally aims at checking falling educational standards, 
halting the disruption of the health care delivery system caused 
by mounting drug prices, and safeguarding our social assets. 
[end recording] 

