BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 11 KYODO -- The head of the second 
largest opposition party Wednesday [11 May] called for a snap 
general election for the House of Representatives under the old 
system of multiseat constituencies. 
  Social Democratic Party (SDP) chairman Tomiichi Murayama 
said 
in a speech that the government and the opposition should agree 
on an election for the key lower house of parliament under the 
old system, which is soon to be replaced with a mixture of 
single-seat constituencies and a proportional representation 
system. 
  Murayama said the snap election should be called on 
condition 
that ruling and opposition camps agree that its next election 
for the lower house will be conducted under the new system. 
  A government advisory body is now working on delimiting 
single-seat constituencies in line with a political reform 
package that the cabinet of former Prime Minister Morihiro 
Hosokawa pushed through the Diet in January. 
  The seven-member commission is expected to finish the task 
in 
June. But more time is necessary to enact a delimitation bill 
in the Diet, officials said. 
  The four-year term of office for members of the current 
511-seat lower chamber will last through July 1997, but the 
prime minister can call a snap election at any time. 
  Murayama's call for an early election came as the latest 
round in the SDP's recent salvo on its former coalition 
partners, which are running a minority government. 
  Murayama, arguing the current minority-backed cabinet of 
Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata is on a precarious footing, said, 
"The only way (to secure a stable government) is to build up a 
solid foundation through an election." A cabinet that cannot 
carry out its tasks should either resign or the lower house 
should be dissolved to pave the way for balloting, he said. 
  The SDP chief also swiped at a recent series of remarks by 
key cabinet members that call for steps to ensure Japan's 
collective security or legislation to handle emergencies, such 
as an international crisis over North Korea's suspected nuclear 
arms program. He said these remarks run counter to the policy 
agreement among the coalition partners before they jointly 
formed a cabinet under Hosokawa, who resigned in April over 
financial improprieties. 
  If the Hata cabinet takes a different stance over the 
security and constitutional issues from the Hosokawa government, 
Murayama hinted the SDP may submit a no-confidence motion to the 
Diet. 
  The SDP broke ranks with the ruling coalition immediately 
after it helped elect Hata to succeed Hosokawa due to a row over 
the move among the coalition's majority components to form a new 
Diet bloc. 
  Hata lashed out at Murayama's call for an early general 
election, making clear he has no plan to dissolve the lower 
house any time soon. "Let me ask why, then, in the first place 
the coalition including the SDP passed the political reform 
bills," he told reporters. "There are undoubtedly people who 
don't really want to see political reform," he said. 
  "The coalition government is still in place, and it's not 
the time to dissolve the House," he said. 

