Language: <F P=105> Bulgarian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Nora Ananieva, chairperson of the Bulgarian </F>
Socialist Party parliamentary faction, by Dora Chichkova; place 
and date not given: "No Parties or Persons Should Impose 
Themselves in Balkans"] 
  [Text] [Chichkova] Certain commentaries on your visit to 
Serbia contain the clear accusation that the visit took place at 
an inappropriate time, and that the opinions you expressed there 
do not coincide with the official attitude of the Bulgarian 
Government toward our western neighbor. Actually, what was the 
purpose of your visit? 
  [Ananieva] The parliamentary delegation of the 
Parliamentarian Alliance for Social Democracy visited 
Dimitrovgrad, Belgrade, and Novi Sad on 7-8 February at the 
invitation of the Serbian Socialist Party. If your question 
implies that we have deliberately selected the date of the 
visit, in other words, that we selected on purpose the brief 
period between two events that focused the attention and efforts 
of the entire world -- the sinister massacre in Sarajevo and the 
ensuing decision on air strikes against Bosnia, which is torn 
apart by the civil war -- I am tempted to answer in the 
affirmative. If this was so, then we could claim supernatural 
intuition, incredible information, and great organizational 
abilities. However, I will not succumb to this temptation and 
will only say that it is the constant position of the Bulgarian 
Socialist Party [BSP] the dialogue between all forces should 
never stop, and that this especially applies to crisis 
situations, when specific decision related to national interests 
are required. In all my public appearances I expressed the 
official Bulgarian position regarding the observance of the 
sanctions imposed by the UN Security Council. However, this 
position does not contradict the doubt whether the pressure 
applied in this manner on the rulers of any state could justify, 
for such a long period, the suffering and deprivation of such 
broad circles of the population in so many countries, including 
Bulgaria. This is especially true against the background of the 
voices that were heard recently regarding the need to review the 
instrument of sanctions. People ever more frequently ask the 
question of whether the sanctions achieve the anticipated effect 
and of who is actually paying the price? In other words, who is 
actually the one who is being punished? 
  On the other hand, the basic goals we pursued in our talks 
were related to the more active and broad participation of our 
country and companies in the humanitarian relief, resolving the 
transportation corridor issue, and preparing the ground for 
active economic relations after the embargo. Which of those 
goals do you think could jeopardize Bulgaria's national 
interests? 
  According to Borislav Jovic, chairman of the parliamentary 
Foreign Policy Commission of the Council of the Republics, the 
peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the lifting of the sanctions 
represent the backbone of Yugoslav foreign policy. However, he 
does not think that the war was the reason for imposing the 
sanctions. 
  [Chichkova] What was the real reason? 
  [Ananieva] The reason is, on the one hand, in the neo- 
imperialist interests of the United States in the Balkans within 
the framework of the international competition for influence, 
and, on the other hand, in the difficulties the United States 
encounters in implementing those goals when governments with 
leftist orientations are involved. The United States utilizes 
the sanctions in order to change the government and the people 
who rule Serbia. However, according to Mr. Jovic, this script 
is failing and only strengthens the anti-American moods. During 
our talk he expressed the opinion that no parties or persons 
should impose themselves in the Balkans. The people in this 
region have enough historical experience to select, alone, the 
parties and people whom they will entrust with their future. If 
they select the leftist alternative, as was the case with Serbia 
in the three elections since 1989, no one has the right to 
punish them with sanctions. 
  [Chichkova] However, the Socialists' influence decreased 
after the last elections. 
  [Ananieva] It rather stabilized. While only a few more 
votes were needed for gaining the absolute majority in the 
parliament, the party nevertheless seeks dialogue with other 
parliamentary factions. Mr. Dragan Tomic, the former leader of 
the Socialists' parliamentary faction, was elected chairman of 
the parliament. He even received four votes from the opposition 
in the secret vote. 
  According to the Serbian Socialist Party, the most suitable 
formula for the cabinet is a government of national unity, in 
which the Socialists will be 50 percent plus one, and will hold 
the posts of prime minister and minister of the interior. They 
do not think that this is shifting responsibility, but rather a 
proposal to share the responsibility and participate in the 
government. In the next six months, they anticipate an economic 
stabilization and production revival. However, Mr. Milorad 
Vucelic, the newly elected leader of the Serbian Socialist Party 
parliamentary faction and general director of the Belgrade 
Television, expressed doubt whether the opposition would like to 
share the responsibility, or prefer to boycott and aggravate the 
parliamentary activity. Simultaneously, he expressed the 
Socialists' firm determination to not allow the theft of their 
election victory, because they made maximum efforts to ensure 
the country's leadership at this crisis period not only through 
specific economic and social programs, but also through their 
cadre potential. 
  [Chichkova] Do they anticipate lifting the embargo? 
  [Ananieva] According to Mr. Jovic, the world public opinion 
underwent an evolution and understood that the Serbs have been 
punished without being guilty. He thinks that, after the United 
States failed to achieve its goals, it is now seeking a solution 
and declaring a willingness to lift the embargo, without 
carrying the responsibility for this. Deputy Prime Minister 
Zeljko Simic stressed that the sanctions affect the peaceful 
population and the economy of all Balkan countries. He 
maintains that a double standard is applied regarding Serbia. 
The world public is being served biased information about the 
Yugoslav crisis, and humanitarian relief that is not subject to 
sanctions -- food, medicines, and fuel for the heating of 
hospitals and refugee camps -- is being stopped. Even 
international organizations that by definition are of a 
humanitarian character have a biased attitude and thus take part 
in the genocide of the Serbian people, Mr. Simic said. 
  Mr. Simic asked us to greet Mr. Zhelev and tell him that his 
accidental or misinterpreted statement about air strikes against 
Belgrade did not contribute to improving relations between our 
countries. He also said that, regardless of how different our 
views about the development of the new world order would be, we 
both have no chance of finding ourselves in a different 
geographic location. This means that we will also be neighbors 
in the future. The better neighbors we are, the better it is 
for us. 
  [Chichkova] What leftist Balkan forum did you discuss during 
the visit? 
  [Ananieva] Such a forum has been discussed for a long time. 
The main initiator is the Panhellenic Socialist Movement 
[PASOK]. The Serbian Socialists attribute a great importance to 
a meeting of the Balkan leftist forces. They think that such a 
meeting would facilitate a serious analysis and assessment of 
the situation in the region, would contribute to consolidating 
the leftist alternative, and would stimulate dialogue and 
cooperation. 
  Our party has already discussed this prospect with PASOK 
and, 
in our talks with the Serbs, we referred to the opportunity of 
utilizing the possibilities of the separate parties in order to 
expand participation in such a meeting. The Serbian Socialist 
Party has good relations with the leftist forces in Romania, and 
for our part, we will try to cooperate in this direction on the 
basis of our contacts with the leftist forces in Albania and 
Turkey. 
  [Chichkova] Did you want to keep your visit secret? 
  [Ananieva] If I would not have guessed why you are asking me 
this question, I would have thought that you are naive. Modern 
technology has turned the world into a village and hardly anyone 
with good senses could view a visit to a neighboring country, 
observed by the entire world, as a conspiracy. In addition, the 
mass media reported broadly on the visit. The grave accusations 
of national treason, voiced by a Bulgarian journalist in a 
foreign radiostation, were based on a report of a Bulgarian 
correspondent of the same radiostation in Belgrade. Naturally, 
her information was biased and one-sided. When no normal 
information relations exist between our two countries, only 
reports of such a biased nature could be published by the press. 

