Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Andrey Gavrilenko under the rubric "The </F>
Society": "Dangerous Depth: Pacific Fleet Divers Sending Out 
SOS"] 
  [Text] Vladivostok-- 
<H5>  They Are Hurting </H5>
  The last time they rescued people was in June of 1983. A 
submarine had had an accident and sunk to a great depth. More 
than 100 men were sealed in at the bottom of the ocean. Deep-sea 
divers came to their rescue. The rescue operation, which lasted 
several days, was successful.... 
  Until the end of the 1980's two deep-sea diving systems 
(GVK) 
operated in the Pacific Fleet. These unique units made it 
possible to find and rescue crews of submarines involved in 
accidents at depths of more than 300 meters. The first was 
installed on the submarine Komsomolets Uzbekistana, the second 
on the search-and-rescue vessel Alagez. 
  For more than two years now, however, both diving units have 
been undergoing put-off repair work, and the fleet does not have 
the money to complete them. The scariest thing is the fact that 
if, God forbid, a submarine should be involved in an accident 
such as the one which occurred in 1983, no one would be able to 
help the crew. 
  According to Capt 1st Rank Aleksandr Peremet, chief of the 
section for search-and-rescue support and combat training, the 
situation has repeatedly been reported to the TOF [Pacific 
Fleet] commander, the commander in chief of the VMF [Navy] and 
even the President of Russia. No specific decisions have yet 
been made on this urgent matter, however. 
  Capt 3rd Rank Sergey Salin, senior diving specialist for the 
Pacific Fleet, told me that his subordinates are presently 
engaged only in minor servicing of ships and vessels in the area 
of the base. And all because the diving equipment of Pacific 
Fleet personnel lags at least 30-40 years behind that of the 
Europeans. It is not just difficult but actually dangerous to 
use the equipment. Two divers have died in the fleet in the past 
year. Three others have suffered serious injuries. 
Osteochrondrosis is an occupational disease of the diver. One 
out of two "conquerors of the deep" suffers from it. 
  There is worse. The latest training aid for divers dates 
back 
to 1962. The seamen learn the specialties of "underwater 
detonation specialist" and "underwater welder" from aids going 
all the way back to 1956. 
  The manning level for seamen-divers in the fleet (albeit 
this 
is of somewhat secondary importance; the personnel problem is 
the same throughout) does not exceed 35 percent. Nor are there 
enough civilian specialists, because their salaries in the Far 
East Shipping Line is greater than that of fleet personnel by a 
factor of 1.5-2. 
  There is one other factor, which clearly needs to be 
considered on the legislative level. As a result of the constant 
psychological and physical stress, the people who dedicate their 
lives to diving rapidly "wear out" and age. The fleet's medical 
specialists believe that the maximum age for deep diving is 40 
years. After the age of 40 deep diving is absolutely 
counterindicated. Lack of any kind of benefits, however, 
prevents the divers from retiring earlier than Moscow's 
trolleybus operators. 
  Unfortunately, this is far from all the problems faced by 
Pacific Fleet personnel at a dangerous depth. The Pacific Fleet 
could find itself in the near future with no one to dive. And 
the deep-sea rescue divers must therefore be rescued themselves. 

