BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Hookup" program] </F>
  [Text] The Seventh Security Police Group under the 
National Political Administration has completed its first patrol 
mission in the South China Sea. Minister of the Interior Wu 
Po-hsiung said: We will carry out such missions irregularly in 
the future, which is of great significance for claiming our 
sovereignty in the South China Sea. This will also focus 
international attention on the fact of our presence in the 
Nansha Islands [Spratlys]. 
  Two 400-ton patrol boats of the Seventh Security Police 
Group 
have completed their first 12-day patrol mission in the South 
China Sea. This is the first time that our country has 
exercised its police power in the South China Sea. 
  Minister Wu Po-hsiung said: The construction of satellite 
communication facilities on Taiping Island will soon be 
completed. With that island as a base, we will serve various 
countries with weather reports. We will build wharves there. 
But for the time being, we have no plans to build an airport 
there. 
  Minister Wu Po-hsiung said: What is most important is that 
we want the international community to know the fact of our 
presence in the Nansha Islands. Having legally occupied Taiping 
Island for a long time, we have a legal claim on its territory. 
  The two patrol boats were commanded by Chang Chen-chung of 
the Seventh Security Police Group. He said: During the patrol, 
his boats did not clash with any vessels of the Chinese 
communist Navy or the Vietnamese Navy, but discovered that 
Vietnam was building in a way on [name of island indistinct), 
one of the Nansha Islands. This shows that Vietnam attaches 
increasing importance to its right to exploit resources in the 
South China Sea. This cannot but cause our government to pay 
close attention to our rights there. 
  However, Wu Po-hsiung stressed: We do not want to cause any 
confrontation or tensions in the South China Sea, but hope to 
exploit various resources there along with other countries. 

