Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Stupar, under the "Russia" rubric: </F>
"Municipal Elections Lie Ahead. Having Experienced Failure, the 
Russian Movement for Democratic Reforms Hopes for Success"] 
  [Text] After the shocking success of V. Zhirinovskiy's LDPR 
[Liberal Democratic Party of Russia] in the last Federal 
Assembly elections and the more modest results obtained by the 
Russia's Choice bloc, the failure of the Russian Movement for 
Democratic Reforms [RMDR] was the third sensation of the 
political campaign that ended on 12 December of last year. Why 
was it that the movement that was called, not without 
justification, the most intelligent in terms of composition 
among the 13 participants in the election marathon and which was 
regularly predicted to have a successful, albeit modest, result, 
was unable to pass the 5 percent mark? 
  An analysis of the situation forces one to look for reasons 
for the failure primarily in the fact that the RMDR does not 
have a clear-cut, simple, and comprehensible program of action 
for specific areas of the life of society. That is, of course, 
the basic objectives were declared and essentially they were and 
still are correct: tax reduction to benefit commodity producers, 
transfer of a large part of federal authority to the local 
areas, support of domestic exporters, a change in foreign 
political priorities in favor of nearby foreign countries, and 
so on. But all of these slogans were lacking clear paths to 
achieving them. Moreover, the majority of the blocs that 
participated in the election campaign formulated basically the 
same or similar objectives, and it was sometimes simply 
difficult for the voters to figure out the differences among 
them. And here the main point that distinguishes the RMDR from 
other election blocs and parties, mainly democratic ones, should 
play a role--this is the slogan of democratic opposition to the 
democratic government. During the course of the campaign the 
RMDR repeatedly stated that it was not lusting for power, that 
it did not aspire to participate in the government, that it 
wanted only, by obtaining a faction in the State Duma, to oppose 
the government of the democratic majority, to monitor and 
correct its actions if they shifted in the direction of the 
interests of the nomenklatura-bureaucratic minority. In and of 
itself, this task in any normal democratic society should have 
met with a certain amount of understanding, but under the 
conditions of Russia, during the course of the first multiparty 
elections, in the constant rush of this fast-moving campaign, to 
bring it to the minds of the voters, who were expecting simple 
and speedy solutions, turned out to be extremely difficult. And 
this is why to put forth a slogan of "democratic opposition" 
turned out to be, apparently, premature in this stage of history. 
  But in spite of all these objective and subjective factors 
affecting the outcome of the campaign as a whole, one of the 
essential causes of the failure of the RMDR, in my view, was 
that it made certain mistakes in conducting the mass media 
campaign, especially with television. First of all the failure 
of the RMDP occurred because they did not prepare short 
advertising films about the movement and show them in blocks of 
commercial advertising time on the leading television channels. 
For example, one could boldly state that the success of the 
PRES [Party of Russian Unity and Accord] and DPR [Democratic 
Party of Russia], whose ratings were equal to those of the RMDR 
but whose advertising films played continuously on television 
from morning until evening, was brought about precisely this 
factor. And the RMDR had only one advertising film, which was 
shown only during a time especially devoted to paid political 
advertising on television. But this turned out to be clearly 
inadequate. Here, in my view, part of the responsibility lies 
with the Central Electoral Commission, which formally banned the 
showing of political advertising on television at any time not 
especially allotted for it. 
  In addition to this essential fact, the results of the 
campaign were undoubtedly influenced by the late beginning of 
active work on the part of the RMDP in the mass media, which did 
not begin until practically 10 days before the elections. 
  Nonetheless, in spite of all the mistakes and blunders, the 
result achieved by the RMDR in the elections cannot be 
considered a defeat. With the movement receiving 4.1 percent of 
the votes, which means more than 2.1 million people, this is 
rather a lack of success, an incomplete project with a large 
potential for success in the next election campaign, which is 
not so far away. If one takes into account the fact that the 
RMDR received significant support in large cities and industrial 
regions such, for example, as Moscow (7.19 percent), St. 
Petersburg (8.79 percent), and Sverdlovsk (9.5 percent), 
Kemerovo (6.45 percent), Irkutsk (6.37 percent), and Chelyabinsk 
Oblasts (5.84 percent), Maritime Kray (5.62 percent), Omsk 
Oblast (5.78 percent), and so forth, one can see that the 
movement has developed a stable electorate, which consists 
mainly of members of the creative and scientific-technical 
intelligentsia, entrepreneurs, and skilled workers. The results 
of the elections show that of the 87 regions of Russia that 
participated in the elections, the RMDR received more than 5 
percent of the votes of those who voted in 16 regions; in 21 
regions it garnered from 4 to 5 percent of the votes; in another 
24 regions--from 3 to 4 percent; in 20--from 2 to 3 percent; and 
in only seven rayons did it receive less than 2 percent. And not 
in a single rayon did the RMDR receive less than 1.5 percent of 
the votes. This is significant if one takes into account the 
fact that other blocs that did not pass the 5-percent mark 
frequently garnered only 0.5 percent of the votes in many 
districts. If one adds to this the victory in the single-mandate 
districts of the five independent candidates supported by the 
RMDR to the state Duma and two to the federation council, one 
can speak with complete confidence about the relative success of 
the RMDR in this campaign, in spite of its failure to pass the 5 
percent mark. To sum up the positive aspects of the recent 
campaign, the RMDR was able to test and "break in" its apparatus 
and its 41 regional centers, which can now apply the experience 
accumulated in March 1994 in the elections to the local organs 
of power, and then the federal elections. The movement has 
acquired and tested an invaluable personnel reserve, from which 
it can now draw candidates in future campaigns. These will be 
mainly candidates who have been "broken in" in single-mandate 
districts, who took second and third place there, and candidates 
from the list who participated actively in the recent campaign. 
There was also a selection of partners for the RMDR, and new 
ties were formed. The position of the outside critical observer 
can give the RMDR many more pluses than minuses in this 
situation. 
  The RMDR congress will convene on 29 January in Moscow. It 
will consider the results of the autumn election campaign of 
1993, and on the basis of the "lessons" learned it will develop 
the movement's strategy and tactics for the near and distant 
future. 
  In the political situation that has developed since 12 
December, a great deal of significance is being attached to the 
question of developing a new, third path for Russia, since 
neither the platforms of the pro-government blocs nor the 
platforms of the opposition received the necessary support from 
the voters, and they cannot solve Russia's problems. If one 
takes into account the fact that 50 million Russians did not 
come to these elections, one can say with confidence that they 
are the ones who will decide the outcome of the next elections. 
Whoever can offer them an alternative path to democratic reforms 
that does not entail mass unemployment and bankruptcy, 
devaluation of investments and hyperinflation, and disregard for 
problems of preserving Russia's scientific potential and her 
culture, these are the ones who will gain support in the next 
elections. 

