Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Yeung and Linda Choy in Beijing] </F>
  [Text] British firms bidding for lucrative contracts in 
Shanghai might suffer in the face of the Sino-British row over 
Hong Kong's political reform, a vice-mayor of the metropolis, 
Zhao Qizheng, warned yesterday. Separately, a senior official 
in charge of Hong Kong affairs, Chen Ziming, also warned 
Britain's long-term interests in China would be undermined if 
the political dispute remained unresolved. 
  Mr. Zhao launched a fierce attack on the British Government 
at a group discussion among Shanghai delegates to the National 
People's Congress on the Government Work Report yesterday. "The 
Foreign Affairs Committee of the British Parliament has said 
they hope the dispute will not affect trade. This appears to be 
correct, but wrong in actuality," Mr. Zhao said. "If the door 
of politics is closed, the door of economics will be closed, or 
at least half- closed." 
  He said the German and Japanese governments had made 
positive 
moves to strengthen relations with China over various areas 
including trade and investment. "What has the British 
Government done? It is pulling the legs of the UK firms 
instead....Many British enterprises do not agree with the policy 
of their Government to seek confrontation with China," he said. 
  Mr. Zhao urged Britain to make early moves to seek 
conciliation with China. He said foreign partners for many 
major projects in the booming city would have to be decided this 
year. These included infrastructure and other investments. 
"The chance is there. We can't hold up the projects for the 
improvement of relations (between the two countries). It's 
impossible for us to do business on one hand and engage in 
quarrels on the other," Mr. Zhao said. 
  Meanwhile, Hong Kong delegates to the National People's 
Congress (NPC) are one step closer to moving a resolution 
denouncing the three-tier government set up under British rule. 
The resolution, initiated by unionist Cheng Yiu-tong, was 
discussed at great length at a meeting of the congress yesterday. 
  Only three of the Hong Kong and Macao delegates at the 
meeting had reservations about the statement, whose message they 
said had already been carried in remarks by China's Foreign 
Ministry spokesmen and Premier Li Peng, in his Work Report to 
the NPC. Proposing the resolution, Mr. Cheng said it was 
necessary for the NPC, the most authoritative body in the 
Chinese Government structure, to support the disbanding of the 
political structure formulated by the British Government in the 
absence of a Sino-British agreement. 

