BFN 

  [Excerpts] Saveliy Timofeyevich Pachin, head of the 
Aktyubinsk oblast administration, held a news conference 
yesterday. Sabit Suleymenov, our own correspondent in 
Aktyubinsk, is in the studio there. [passage omitted] 
  [Suleymenov] As is known, of late President Nazarbayev has 
visited the Russian Federation and Japan. These visits were 
reported in the media. Mr. Pachin accompanied the president on 
both visits and he touched upon some of the results of these 
visits. [passage omitted] 
  Journalists asked many questions because the president has 
not held a detailed news conference on all these issues yet. We 
have heard many rumors about this Eurasian union. As far as I 
understand it, the population is not very optimistic about the 
feasibility of this idea although the nonindigenous population 
separated from their historical motherland quite welcome the 
idea. Ethnic Kazakhs do not welcome the idea at all because we 
have just liberated ourselves from the old imperial policy. All 
young states and their indigenous population oppose this idea, 
because Russia still thinks in terms of the old imperialist 
policy. 
  When Mr. Pachin spoke about other agreements discussed with 
Russians, he went into detail on those issues that concern our 
oblast. For instance, he met Russian Economy Minister Shokhin 
and the heads of Orenburg, Chelyabinsk, Samara, and Volgograd 
oblasts and concluded agreements with them on behalf of the 
oblast. 
  For instance, our Aktyubinsk oil production complex delivers 
its products to Orsk refinery, which poses a great problem. We 
give our oil away and then cannot get petrol or fuel. Now an 
agreement is signed. From now on Aktyubinsk will give its oil 
and get petrol and fuel, which is especially important in view 
of the spring sowing campaign. 
  Second, it is an open secret that we have the Kempirsay 
lithium deposit and mine. We have always worked there together 
with Russia. Now preliminary work is being done to set up a 
joint venture with Russia. This rayon also has a coal mine, and 
another joint venture with Russia is already operational there. 
Joint Kazakh-Russian coal development will be further 
invigorated. This is another piece of good news. 
  As far as the Japanese visit is concerned, the journalists 
were interested in possibilities of developing Kazakh-Japanese 
business relations. Of course, these issues have been widely 
covered in the media, but there are some particularly 
interesting aspects. The Japanese are investing their capital 
in all the biggest projects which are currently under way in the 
republic. [passage omitted] In West Kazakhstan, which is rich in 
oil, problems of oil prospecting, recovery, and refinery need a 
great deal of elaboration and the Japanese will participate in 
building the West Kumkol main pipeline. They will invest in the 
oil industry in West Kazakhstan, we were told. [passage omitted] 

