Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Guo Yunling (6753 0336 5376): "State Council </F>
Gives Written Reply to the `National Program for Water and Soil 
Reservation'"] 
  [Text] Recently the State Council gave an official, 
written reply to the "National Program for Water and Soil 
Conservation," agreeing in principle to carry out the water and 
soil conservation work in accordance with the second 
proposition. This means that China now has a fundamental basis 
to go by in carrying out the work. 
  Soil erosion in China, which is enormous in magnitude and 
covers vast tracks of territory, has inflicted great harm on the 
country. It has brought about long-term low yields and poverty 
to localities, and even is endangering the subsistence of the 
masses of people in some localities. Moreover, the running down 
of silt in large quantities has caused floods and waterlogging 
along the lower reachers of rivers. To work out this national 
program for water and soil conservation, the Ministry of Water 
Resources organized national forces to conduct large amounts of 
investigation and study, scientific experiments, and observation 
analyses. 
  In its reply, the State Council stressed: To do a good job 
in water and soil conservation has a bearing on economic and 
social development and on ecological environmental improvement, 
and helps China shake off poverty and gain prosperity. It also 
has a bearing on the development and harnessing of rivers and 
lakes, as well as on the state's construction in the energy, 
railway, communications, and mining industries, and other areas 
of endeavor It is a basic national policy that will yield 
success in our time and will bring benefits throughout the ages. 
Therefore, we should uphold it for a long time. The reply 
pointed out: Water and soil conservation is a systems 
engineering undertaking. It must adhere to the principle of 
"prevention as the key factor, overall planning, comprehensive 
prevention and control, suiting measures to local conditions, 
and stressing better management and efficiency." Effective 
efforts should be made to ensure the prevention, protection, and 
supervision of soil erosion, and to ensure law enforcement work. 
The policy should be implemented whereby those who harness 
rivers and lakes and those who manage and protect them will reap 
the benefits therefrom. While devoting our primary efforts 
toward bringing the Huang He and the Chang Jiang under control, 
we also should pay close attention to checking soil erosion in 
other rivers and to the water and soil conservation work in the 
key soil erosion prevention and protection areas, supervision 
areas, and control areas at all levels. 
  The "National Program for Water and Soil Conservation" puts 
forward two propositions on soil erosion control, of which the 
second one suggests a a more rapid pace of control. The State 
Council's reply agreed in principle to carry out the water and 
soil conservation work in accordance with the second proposition. 

