Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Artem Dmitriyev: "Is Duma an Economic Organ?"] </F>
  [Text] The deputies of the new parliament gave a sharply 
negative response to the statement by First Vice Premier 
Vladimir Shumeyko, who defined the Duma as "only the lower 
chamber, which should engage in economic issues." "We should 
not assign the Duma too great a role," the first vice premier 
stressed. And therefore, thus giving up the lower chamber, 
Vladimir Shumeyko has defined a different role for himself, 
laying claim to the post of upper chamber speaker. This 
intention of the first vice premier's has also generated a 
protest from deputies. It has become known to the editorial 
office that representatives of the Urals and Siberia have put 
forward their own nomination for this post. Other groups and 
factions also have their own candidates. So far no agreement 
has been reached on this issue. 
  This is not the first time recently that Vladimir Shumeyko 
has made statements which have met with a noisy response. There 
was a lot of noise over the statement which he addressed on the 
eve of the elections to the Central Electoral Commission. The 
first vice premier suggested removing from the register, that is 
in fact eliminating from participation in the elections, the 
parties and blocs criticizing the draft Constitution. As we 
know the Central Electoral Commission rejected this appeal and 
confirmed its decision in conjunction with the arbitration court 
not to allow the violation of legislation on elections. 
  It is also worth recalling that when the first vice premier 
held the post of minister of press and information the 
government adopted Decree No. 1233, which inflicted the most 
irreparable blow to freedom of speech and essentially led to the 
suspension of the publication of almost all newspapers and 
journals. Participation in such actions will hardly lend clout 
to the well-known politician who occupies a key position in the 
top echelons of power. 

