Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Cecile Remy and Tierry Mahe: "Electric Cars: </F>
Who's Taking the Risk?"; first paragraph is INDUSTRIES ET 
TECHNIQUES introduction] 
  [Text] For a vehicle reputed to be quiet, the electric car 
has generated a lot of hype. Until Renault and PSA industrialize 
their concept-cars, small independent automakers will struggle 
on alone to build a future for electric vehicles--and assume all 
the risks. 
  Two years ago PSA was trumpeting that France would have 
between 10,000 and 50,000 electric vehicles by 1995. Projections 
have since fallen to 5,000. The culprit, of course, is the 
recession. But cold feet on the part of big manufacturers and 
the cautious attitude of collectivities--the only players 
capable of "getting the market off the ground"--are also 
responsible. With no Draconian law in effect to curtail urban 
pollution1, cities saw electric cars mainly as an 
inexpensive way to fashion a "glamorous" image for themselves. 
Virtuous in the extreme, non-polluting, quiet, robust, and 
easy-to-drive and park electric cars are nonetheless guilty of 
one sin: they are expensive. The (1995) electrified version of 
the Clio, for instance, will cost 170,000 French francs [Fr], or 
three times as much as the standard one! The limited autonomy of 
electric vehicles and, most important, the lack of urban 
infrastructure (recharge terminals) also work against them. In 
fact, electric cars are the victims of a classic vicious circle: 
Limited infrastructure plus high prices equals few users and 
small production runs, thus keeping prices high and the number 
of customers low. This raises the question of who will take the 
risk of jumping in first. Initially, big automakers seemed the 
answer. So far, neither PSA nor Renault has done anything more 
than electrify very-small-run commercial vehicles. Renault will 
not start series production of the Master until March, or of the 
Express until October, 1994, following eight years of 
experimentation and 400,000 km of road tests at its 
Chatellerault pilot site. Moreover, annual production volumes 
will not exceed 1,000--a drop in the bucket! True, Renault's 
Clio and PSA's 106 and AX will come out in electrified versions 
by 1995. But here again, the doses will be homeopathic. 
Automakers are offering electrified "commercial" vehicles first, 
both to supply companies and collectivities and for technical 
reasons. Battery weight in relation to total weight is less of a 
drawback on commercial vehicles than it is on personal 
automobiles. In addition, the industrial investment needed to 
electrify vehicles is virtually negligeable. Laurent Bernard, 
project head of Renault's Electric Commercial Vehicles Division, 
confirms this. "Whether or not the vehicle is electric makes no 
difference in the process. Clio's engine plant is replaced by 
its electrical equivalent. The only change is the addition of an 
assembly island to install the battery block." Launching series 
production of the first personal cars truly designed to be 
powered electrically would be striking evidence of the 
commitment of big automakers. Unfortunately, Renault's Zoom, 
Citroen's Citela, and Fiat's Downtown are still nothing more 
than elegant theoretical constructs, with no launch dates in 
sight. The same manufacturers have not yet definitively chosen 
between all-electric vehicles and hybrid ones, as evidenced by 
Volkswagen's Chico, BMW's E1, or Renault-Volvo's ECC. Most 
important, the pricing policy of big automakers is a huge 
discentive. "It's because we haven't got costs under control. 
Seventy percent of the value of a traditional car is 
subcontracted, against 90 percent for an electric car!" pleads 
Laurent Bernard of Renault. 
  What might look like a wait-and-see attitude actually 
reflects real difficulties in keeping in step with a market 
whose volume is too low. As Dominique Mathon, director of 
Microcar (Jeanneau), explains, "Starting at 5,000 cars a year, 
we would have to revamp our manufacturing process. In contrast, 
5,000 is the break point at which big manufacturers can consider 
launching a series!" So it is the "Tom Thumbs" of the industry 
that hold the future of the electric car in their hands, and 
will continue to do so for another several years. Most of these 
pioneers began as makers of small motorized vehicles that do not 
require driver's licenses and of commercial vehicles. Examples 
include Erad, Aixam, Microcar, and Automobiles Ligier. In 
producing electric cars, they are remaining faithful to their 
light, two-seater, urban vehicle niche. The automakers have 
banded together under the banner of Apvere. As Pierre Bazier of 
Rocaboy indicates, it is an objective alliance in which "Each 
supplier offers a line that complements the others'." Adds 
Bazier, "Each time one of us sells an electric car, he helps 
shore up the market." 
  Jack Vergne, director of Seer-Volta, sees no reason to be 
anything but optimistic. "Our production doubles every year: 75 
vehicles in 1991-92, 150 in 1992-93. Our goal for 1994 is 300." 
The company has resolutely opted to produce just one product: a 
small commercial vehicle comparable to Citroen's C15 and 
Renault's Express for roughly the same price. How will the 
company be able to justify making its electric vehicle when the 
two groups launch their own series? Jack Vergne is untroubled. 
"Unlike those `electrified' models, Volta was designed to be 
powered by an electrical engine. This shows in its performance. 
Volta has a payload of 500 kg, against 300 kg for the C15; its 
degree of lock is shorter; the car's batteries do not cut into 
the amount of space available in the interior; and its 
suspension has been adapted to handle the extra weight." 
Competition from the big names does not scare Pierre Bazier of 
Rocaboy either. "Our model can be transformed in any way we need 
to." Erad agrees, pointing out that "We are satisfying demands 
that the big car companies will never be able to meet. One 
example is a modified version with a very short degree of lock 
to enable it to maneuver easily in the tunnel under the 
Channel!" Technologically, the companies must take a pragmatic 
approach, and the small firm Seer-Volta makes do with what it 
can find on the market. That means lead batteries and d.c. 
motors. "Nickel-cadmium technology would push up the price of 
batteries from Fr17,000 to Fr70,000. If that happened, we would 
offer lease contracts to enable customers to stagger their 
payments." 
  Most of the small car makers hold down their manufacturing 
costs by using non-industrialized technologies. Seer-Volta, for 
instance, buys its tubular frames from the supplier of Renault's 
Alpine. And it molds its body in polyester resin, a simple and 
cheap process that makes the vehicle quite light. Won't these 
modest processes curb production if the market takes off? "Not 
at all. We can supply up to 1,000 vehicles a year without 
changing anything in our procedure," says Jack Vergne. Another 
shrewd move on the part of the automaker is avoiding the long 
and costly crash-test process. "Volta features an `advanced 
cabin'; a simple Utac inspection is enough." Of all the 
automakers, Erad boasts the most varied line: three leisure 
vehicles (Agora, Spacia, Junior) and two commercial ones. Two 
years ago, electric vehicles accounted for two percent of its 
sales; today they make up 30 percent! Pascal Ansart, marketing 
director of Erad, describes the typical Homo Electricus Rex: 
"He's a veterinarian! He uses the car for his work, in urban 
areas and over short distances. Since he travels alone, he 
appreciates a `two-seater' that is easy to park and less 
expensive than a thermal vehicle: Fr1,400 altogether against 
Fr1,700 a month for a diesel." At Fr51,000, Erad's Agora is 
certainly the cheapest vehicle on the market. "It's because we 
make everything in house, using hyper-light materials. Agora 
weighs only 650 kg, including batteries. The vehicle's cost is 
tied directly to its weight/power ratio." Although the Junior is 
"electrified", the models that followed it were literally 
designed around batteries. "The load is perfectly distributed, 
which gives the vehicle excellent steering. That is not true of 
electrified vehicles." 
  Rocaboy, for its part, is a pioneer, having homologated its 
first electric vehicle in 1977! The RK200 commercial vehicle is 
now its leading product. Pierre Bazier, Rocaboy's director, 
explains. "Electric vehicles are expensive, I agree; but in 
certain cases, a thermal model would be even more so! For 
instance, if thermals were required to run quietly or without 
spewing any emissions into the air. So we supply Atomic Energy 
Commission plants and the Louvre Museum with vehicles for their 
service areas. Electric vehicles are perfectly suited for 
industrial use involving stops and starts every 500 meters and 
close handling." Finally, there are the companies that design 
special-use vehicles: Sita and Semat for street cleaners and 
garbage trucks, and Charlatte for industrial vehicles. Says 
Sita's Alfred Trombini, "Our electric models derive from thermal 
ones; they are quiet and non-polluting, two requirements which 
are found in certain municipal bid invitations. Given the price 
of this type of vehicle, the additional cost of electrification 
is only 10 to 30 percent." Such a small ratio makes it possible 
to retain a thermal engine to enable the vehicle to get back to 
repair shops and incineration plants, which are located far from 
urban areas. 
  Small electric carmakers still have a few years before the 
"big guys" invade their turf. At that time they might taste the 
bitter experience of having been the first ones on the block. 
Then again, they could, in the meantime, widen the gap so far 
that they will become forces to be reckoned with. 
<H5>  Boxed Material: Electric Vs. Electrified Vehicles </H5>
  "Electrified" vehicles are avatars of thermal ones--that is, 
they are series models whose original powerplants have been 
replaced by electric motors. All large-run personal vehicles 
will continue to be electrified versions for the next several 
years. Electric vehicles, in contrast, are designed with 
electrical propulsion in mind. Generally they feature two or 
three seats. Since battery weight and space needs are factored 
in from the outset, electric vehicles offer better skid 
resistance, comfort, and ergonomics. Their batteries, whose 
placement is better planned, do not cut into the room available 
in the vehicle's interior. 
<H5>  In a Nutshell </H5>
  --Once they reach a volume of 5,000 a year, small 
manufacturers will have to revamp their production processes. 
That is still a ways down the road. 
  --A vehicle designed to be powered electrically can carry 40 
percent more payload than a classic electrified vehicle. 
  --Agora weighs only 650 kg, including batteries. 
<H5>  Photo Captions </H5>
  Sita has been making its Lama 6000 street cleaner since 
1990. 
The same company supplies electric garbage trucks to the cities 
of Bordeaux and Paris. It was awarded the EUREKA label for one 
of its research programs on electric vehicles. 
  Renault's Master and Express are electrified vehicles. 
Tested 
since 1986 in Chatellerault, they will be mass-produced in 1994. 
The city of Goteborg (Sweden) has ordered 200. 
  Erad's Agora, made since early 1993, is the least expensive 
electric car on the market at Fr51,000. It is a small, 
two-seater, convertible with almost 2 HP! Its maker Erad is in 
the process of industrializing its shops to meet demand. The 
company expects to sell 450 electric cars (half personal, half 
commercial) in 1994. 
  The BMW E1 is an example of a hybrid vehicle equipped with a 
combustion and an electric engine. It has the qualities of a 
road car and is expected to reach maximum speeds of 125 km/h on 
its electric engine. 
  Peugeot's electric 106 and its AX cousin--also 
electric--will 
be given to 50 individual drivers for a year and a half in La 
Rochelle. This user test will precede product launch. It will 
also give the city a chance to test the smart-card-operated 
recharge terminals, slow recharge in parking lots, and quick 
recharge in certain gas stations. 
  Renault's Zoom concept-car, devised by Matra Automobile, 
prefigures the urban electric car of the next millenium. Its 
rear suspension is mounted on a retractable chassis, which 
shortens it 60 cm and allows it to be parked perpendicular to 
the sidewalk. The Zoom's nickel-cadmium batteries are expected 
to give it automony of 150 km. In 1995, Renault should 
industrialize its first electric recreational vehicle, the Clio. 
  Opel's Twin is a four-seater vehicle, with one seat in the 
front and three in the back. A 10-kW three-phase engine equips 
each wheel hub. The Twin can reach speeds of 120 km/h. 
Carbon-lithium batteries give it autonomy of 250 km. 
Footnotes 
  1. In California, the law requires that two percent of all 
vehicles be emission-free (and thus electric) by 1998, and that 
10 percent meet that standard by 2003. In France, a 25 October 
1991 decree defines special protection areas where prefects can 
take any measure needed to bring atmospheric pollution levels 
below an admissible threshold. 

