Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Prof. Dr. Gerhard Zeidler, chairman of the board </F>
of Alcatel SEL AG and chairman of the BDI Committee on Research 
and Technology Policy: "Ten Tasks of a Technology Council for 
Networking of Strategies for the Future"] 
  [TEXT]The question of which technology policy is the best 
is the source of much debate, as has been clearly demonstrated 
by twenty years of argument over the issue within Germany. 
  The pursuance of a technology policy characterized by the 
following is more damaging than the complete renunciation of any 
such policy: 
  - The objective of the policy rapidly fluctuates between the 
"struggle to attain world leadership in the field of high 
technology" and the "preservation of that which we have 
achieved". 
  - With regard to the degree of interventionism, the policy 
vacillates between endorsing state-run enterprises and a 
laissez-faire approach -- as well as every shade between the two. 
  - The programmatic orientation of the policy fluctuates 
between the support of broad-based and the support of 
cutting-edge research. 
  - In terms of volume, the policy attempts to accomplish more 
than is allowed for by current budgetary planning. 
  - Rather than providing a comprehensive view of technology 
creation, the policy wavers back and forth between assessing the 
state of technology and assessing the effects of legislation. 
  - It attempts to place the blame for the reluctance by 
public 
to accept new technologies on a few disgruntled teachers and 
journalists. 
  - The policy defines a "composite department" as one at 
which 
all other departments can slash away at will. 
  - The policy encourages researchers to adopt a more 
businesslike manner while at the same time calling upon 
businessmen to have more community spirit. 
  - The policy-makers are never able to offer 
internally-produced reports on the strategy of the policy, only 
those generated by consulting firms, Frauenhofer institutes, or 
commissions. 
  - When it comes to urgent national requirements, the 
policy-makers repeatedly stall for time by pointing to the 
European Union (EU) in Brussels. 
  Such a policy is worse than a (theoretically conceivable) 
complete renunciation of any technology policy, the economic 
effect of which can at least be calculated and its consequences 
plotted. 
  The Sixth Conference on Technology of the Federal 
Association 
of German Industry (BDI), held on 18 November 1993, made it 
clear once again that less-than-desirable conditions are making 
it impossible for key technological fields to fully contribute 
to the gross national product. 
  For example, the architects of the health reform did not 
take 
the effects on pharmaceutical research sufficiently into 
account. Spokesmen from the chemical industry state that many 
years of market opportunities were wasted as a result of the 
genetic engineering law alone. Through the Federal Ministry for 
Research and Technology, the German government subsidizes 
composite materials, the existence of which the environmental 
ministry is apparently unaware, as it has included complete 
recyclability (i.e., separation of materials) among its 
objectives. 
  The list goes on. In short, a general lack of coordination 
and cooperation is evident everywhere. This is no minor slip-up, 
but a strategic error within our technology policy. Technology 
policy must not be limited to technical matters; it must evolve 
into an innovation policy. 
  The lack of coordination (by whom is immaterial) that most 
branches of industry are only now beginning to recognize has 
long been obvious to those industries that deal with 
infrastructures. It is no coincidence that the Maastricht Treaty 
for the EU emphasizes the importance of "trans-European 
networks" for energy, traffic, and communications. In order to 
optimize traffic, for example, it is essential to have not only 
technological, but even more importantly, organizational 
infrastructures. 
  No individual sector has the comprehensive know-how 
necessary 
to build infrastructures. Consequently, it is counterproductive 
for each individual sector to attempt to create its own. The 
most important prerequisite for the creation of infrastructures 
within Germany as a business location in the nineteen nineties 
is networked strategies developed by commercial and public 
institutions. 
  Agreement between various departments will become 
increasingly critical, and not merely to the creation and 
maintenance of infrastructures. Cooperation between the 
research, health, environmental, and labor ministries may be as 
important to the chemical and pharmaceutical industries, for 
example, as cooperation between the transportation and postal 
ministries is to the creation of traffic and communications 
infrastructures. 
  Two policy decisions have recently been made that are of 
great importance to the needed innovation campaign. The first of 
these was the heartening decision by the Federal Cabinet in 
favor of the Transrapid. This decision must not be reversed, nor 
can it remain an isolated one. We must overcome the Wackersdorf 
syndrome and integrate the Transrapid into the transportation 
network. 
  The second decision was the decision to create a "Strategic 
Council for Research and Technology" within the BMFT as well as 
the creation of similar discussion rounds for the Federal 
Chancellor and the economics minister. This decision by the 
research minister represents an important step forward, one to 
which the parties and caucuses have obviously responded 
favorably. The Federal President put it quite clearly: 
"Economic, research, and technology policy should draw even 
closer together and evolve into a single entity. I am not 
referring here to a German version of the MITI (Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry). State dirigism is never 
innovative. It can neither stimulate nor replace efforts by 
industry to develop new ideas. However, within the framework of 
a dialog between all parties, the state can provide assistance 
in the reaching of a consensus on technological issues and in 
the orchestration of the many decentralized efforts." This has 
nothing to do with state control of industry or investments, 
however. 
  The Commission for the Future, headed by Minister President 
Teufel of Baden-Wuerttemberg, also called for a council on 
technological strategy. This proposal does not suggest a 
"Council of Wise Men" in the sense of a "national board of 
directors." Rather, it calls for the creation of a vehicle, 
which, via a combination of high-ranking individuals and an 
effective level of activity, will bring the issue into the 
German political arena on behalf of Europe and address both the 
practical problems involved with the coordinated development of 
infrastructures and other issues as well. Another important 
function of this council should be furthering public acceptance 
of new technologies. The marketplace is the sole test of public 
acceptance. 
  In my opinion, such a strategic council should be assigned 
the following ten tasks: 
  1. It should increase the political importance of research 
and technology issues without eclipsing the cost crisis 
generated by politics and wages. 
  2. It must provide models and visions that demonstrate the 
importance of new technologies, not only to prosperity and 
employment, but also to the attainment of other social 
objectives. These include such widely diversified aims as 
victory over hunger, war, and AIDS through the use of 
biotechnology, increasingly recycling-oriented design, 
resource-efficient energy supply, and the overcoming of distance 
via modern traffic and communication systems. 
  3. It must make it clear that it is becoming increasingly 
difficult for commercial enterprises to implement innovative new 
product lines without assistance. They require supporting 
legislation and administration (licensing procedures) and, in 
many cases, long-term political support (as in the case of 
energy). The council must serve as a political go-between. It 
must develop strategies for introducing complex new innovative 
product lines. 
  4. It must ensure that new lines of technology are married 
with infrastructure projects (including those that are privately 
financed) and innovative public procurement. 
  5. It must evaluate the entire technology policy and, in 
particular, new legislative proposals in terms of innovation. 
  6. It has the task of developing criteria for an efficient, 
strategically oriented, policy for supporting research and 
technology, including tax-supported research support. 
  7. The council must promote the strategic reform of the 
German research landscape (more application-orientation, 
competition for external funding). 
  8. It must decide whether strategic dependencies (in the 
microelectronics field, for example) should be tolerated or 
discouraged. 
  9. It must ensure that research support by the EU, the 
Federal Republic of Germany, and the laender is adequately 
dovetailed in terms of strategy. 
  10. Finally, the council must discuss whether German 
technology policy should be augmented, either temporarily or on 
a long-term basis, by additional innovative and structural tasks 
such as those currently confronting Germany as a business 
location as it endeavors to integrate the new laender. 
  The BDI will determine by Easter whether a consensus with 
the 
political community can be reached on the basis of such a task 
list. The industrial community has already begun to prepare for 
the strategic dialog. Where necessary, it will support that 
which is to be achieved through common strategies of the 
political, administrative, scientific, and industrial 
communities via an industry-wide internal dialog, such as on 
issues of common technology development and subcontracting. For 
without internal networking and coordination, industry will be 
unable to fully participate in the strategic dialog. 

