CSO 

<F P=106> [By Reporter Kim Chang-Ki] </F>
  [Text] On 31 March President Kim invited National Assembly 
Speaker Yi Man-sop, Supreme Court Justice Yun Kwan, Prime 
Minister Yi Hoe-chang; Cho Kyu-kwang, head of the Constitution 
Court; and Kim Chong-pil, chairman of the DLP, to a Blue House 
luncheon meeting to brief them on the results of his visit to 
Japan and China. 
  In a statement issued upon his return, President Kim said, 
"I 
shared the same view with the leaders of Japan and China that 
peace on the Korean Peninsula and unification are essential to 
security and prosperity in Northeast Asia." "My trip," he 
added, "has opened a new horizon for ROK-Japan and ROK-China 
cooperation." 
  Said President Kim: "It was my impression that Japan is 
running in the front and China is drawing a huge dragon picture 
of itself." He then stressed that "we must continue our efforts 
for change, reform, and internationalization without 
interruption in the rapidly changing world tide." 
  Earlier, on the morning of 31 March before leaving Beijing, 
President Kim held an over-breakfast press conference for Korean 
correspondents stationed in Beijing. On his way home he visited 
the exclusive ROK section in the Tianjin economic and 
technological development district to inspect Korean firms and 
give words of encouragement to its employees. 
  During the press conference over breakfast, the president 
said: "I have a firm conviction that we will prevail over North 
Korea without a fight, and I am confident that we can maintain 
security and peace on the Korean Peninsula." 
  At the same press conference for the Korean press corps in 
Beijing, President Kim said, "During my meetings with President 
Jiang Zemin and other top Chinese leaders, I fully briefed them 
on our government's position toward North Korea." Said the 
president: "During my visit to China, I convinced the Chinese 
leaders that the ROK has no intention whatsoever of annexing 
North Korea for the unification of country by absorption or to 
isolate North Korea, but has instead a strong determination to 
support the North Korean position in the international 
community and assist North Korea on our own." 
  The president stressed: "We must get ready to play an 
important role as a member of the international community. The 
international community is no longer in a position to ignore 
the ROK in its decision making." He added, "in maintaining 
peace and security on the Korean Peninsula and settling 
problems such as North Korea's nuclear issue, close cooperation 
among the neighboring countries including the United States, 
Japan, China, and Russia is essential." 
  While explaining the results of the summit meeting between 
him and President Jiang Zemin, President Kim said: "I received 
the impression that China attaches great importance not only to 
the issue of North Korea 's nuclear capability but also to 
peace and security on the Korean Peninsula and in Northeast 
Asia as a whole, and takes the position that responsible 
dialogue between the highest leaders of North and South Korea 
is particularly vital to settling all problems." He thus 
strongly hinted at the possibility that China will play a more 
active role in materializing a summit meeting between North and 
South Korea. 
  With regard to the question of President Jiang Zemin's 
chances of visiting the ROK, President Kim said: "We discussed 
the matter fully during the summit meeting with President Jiang 
Zemin and the reception, and I believe that he will visit the 
ROK." The president thus hinted that President Jiang Zemin will 
pay an official visit to South Korea in the latter part of this 
year. 
  Regarding the question of forming a Northeast Asian economic 
cooperation machinery, President Kim said, "With the expansion 
of ROK- China industrial cooperation as a momentum, economic 
cooperation between the two countries will proceed at a rapid 
pace." "I confirmed," added the president, "that China has a 
strong desire to promote economic cooperation with our country." 

