Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 28 Mar (MENA)--'Adil 'Abd-al-Baqi, a 
dissident element from the terrorist al-Shawqiyun group, has 
exposed the corrupt thought of the extremist terrorist groups 
that have misled many youths under false claims not consistent 
with the Islamic religion's teachings. 
  'Abd-al-Baqi described these extremist terrorist groups as 
"a 
band of thieves, criminals, and mercenaries who use religion as 
a cover for their acts and who claim that differences among them 
mainly revolve around the interpretation of the shar'iah. 
  In an interview with Egyptian television last night, 
'Abd-al-Baqi, 33, who was born in al-Fayyum, related his bitter 
experience with the various elements of terrorism and extremism 
over 17 years spent moving from one governorate to another 
calling for extremist thought and recruiting many youths. He 
said his relationship with the terrorist groups began in 1977. 
He was exercising in a sports hall inside a mosque in 
al-Fayyum. Shaykh 'Umar 'Abd-al-Rahman was chairman of a 
charitable society affiliated with the mosque. He then became 
acquainted with the members of this society with the aim of 
understanding Islam and studying religious issues. 
  Repentant 'Adil 'Abd-al-Baqi related his relationship with 
Shaykh 'Umar 'Abd-al-Rahman, describing him as a "dissolute 
preacher and power hungry." 'Abd-al-Rahman would answer 
questions without submitting evidence or proof. Most of his 
fatwas were governed by personal whims. He claimed that he was 
infallible and would issue orders without explaining who vested 
this authority in him. 
  'Abd-al-Baqi noted that on joining these groups he was 
affected by several books he read, including one entitled "The 
Four Terms" by al-Mawdudi and another entitled "Rules of 
Propagation," which calls for seizing funds by force and by any 
other means. After reading this book, he began carrying out 
armed robberies of jewelry shops, stealing cars, dismantling 
them, and selling them as spare parts. He explained that he 
adopted terrorism after reading a book entitled "Milestones" by 
Sayyid Qutb. He said the books calls for changing the regime by 
force. 
  'Abd-al-Baqi said he recruited many youths and inculcated 
them with corrupt ideas. These youths later became leaders of 
terrorist operations. They included Muhammad al-Aswani, Khamis 
Muslim, and Muhammad Sa'd, who carried out assassinations, armed 
robberies of jewelry shops, and attacks on Central Security 
Forces camps. 
  'Abd-al-Baqi explained that it was very easy to recruit 
youths because they were prepared for this and had no legal or 
religious background. It was easy to influence them. 
  He said that mingling with the terrorist groups he noticed 
that marriages within the groups took place haphazardly. These 
marriages were documented solely for security reasons, not 
because this was an important religious duty. He explained that 
some of these groups used to blaspheme [takfir] husbands to 
separate them from their wives who would then be forced to join 
these groups and marry group members. He noted that some wives 
would marry more than once without the knowledge of their first 
husbands who were declared blasphemous. The marriage would 
sometimes take place a few days after the wife got a divorce and 
without waiting for the legal three-month period. 
  Repentant extremist 'Abd-al-Baqi said in his interview with 
Egyptian television that the terrorist groups have nothing to do 
with religion. He described the members of the so-called 
al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah [Islamic Group] as having no religion or 
morals. He said that members of the al-Shawqiyun Organization 
are a group of thieves and criminals and of the al-Takfir Group 
[Repudiation and Renunciation] are a group of immoral people who 
commit adultery and prostitution under the cover of Islam. 
  'Abd-al-Baqi then discussed the financing of these groups. 
He said it took place through armed robbery. The money netted 
from these robberies was spent on members to meet their housing 
and marriage needs. 
  He also noted that weapons were stolen from village houses 
in 
Lower and Upper Egypt. 
  'Abd-al-Baqi said the purpose of making his confession is to 
expose these groups and show the falsehood of their ideas. He 
added: We found no one to correct our ideas so we stuck to our 
false beliefs. 

