CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Fuel and Tobacco Products: </F>
Increases"] 
  [Text] The prices for fuel at the pump increased by more 
than 20 percent on average starting Monday evening, 7 March. 
  A liter of "super" gas went from 6.50 dinars[DA] to DA8.50 
Algerian and a liter of "regular" gas from DA6.00 Algerian to 
DA7.00 Algerian, while a liter of gas oil (mazout) doubled, 
going from DA3.00 Algerian to DA6.00 Algerian. 
  NAFTAL, the petroleum products distribution company, has so 
far not provided an explanation for these increases, even if 
they had been expected, given the general context of inflation 
and deficit in the national budget. The increase in the prices 
of fuel is not part of NAFTAL's jurisdiction but rather the 
government's, which thought, when the last increase went into 
effect one year ago, that the prices for fuel were among the 
lowest in the world and that we were still far from a "true 
price," all the more so since Algeria, an exporter of crude oil, 
imports certain refined products. 
  For a long time the authorities hesitated to impose the 
principle of truth in prices for fuels all of a sudden owing 
mainly to surcharges for transport and development that result 
from them, further deepening company deficits, not to mention 
repercussions on mass transit fares and thus on overall 
purchasing power. [sentence as published] 
  With respect to the energy sector, an increase in production 
and distribution costs has been seen for some time, while at the 
same time calls by gas station owners for an increase in benefit 
margins, among other things, have been growing. 
  About two weeks ago a movement by service station managers, 
who are asking that this margin be multiplied by a factor of at 
least four, threatened to paralyze the country, but a call to 
strike received only little notice. The rise in pump prices 
should help provide the beginnings of a solution in the 
stand-off between NAFTAL and private managers that has lasted 
several years, it is thought. 
  An increase on the same scale of prices for tobacco products 
also took effect beginning 7 March. Indeed prices for tobacco 
products should increase by more than 10 percent on average, the 
National Tobacco and Matches Company (SNTA) announced yesterday. 
  The SNTA explained this increase citing "new measures aimed 
at increasing benefit margins with respect to production and 
wholesale and retail distribution." 
  The same increase, on the same scale, goes back one year. 


