Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Hohhot, January 30 (XINHUA) -- Baotou, once known as 
the "grassland steel town", is emerging as a multi-industry 
manufacturing center in China's Inner Mongolia Autonomous 
Region, after a decade-long reshuffling of its industrial 
structure. 
  In 1993, the city's industrial production increased 20.92 
percent over 1992 to reach a record 11.89 billion yuan, making 
it the second Chinese city in the ethnic minority area that 
boasts an annual industrial production of over ten billion yuan, 
city officials in charge of industry said. 
  Equally encouraging, said the officials, was that industrial 
enterprises of the city are running with better economic 
efficiency. By the end of last November, they produced a total 
2.145 billion yuan in profits and taxes, almost 136 percent 
higher than in the same period of 1992. The comprehensive 
economic index of the city also climbed by 42.9 percent in the 
same period. 
  However, a subtle but more significant change was that the 
domination of the economy by centrally owned enterprises has 
lessened, and local industrial ventures, as well as the private 
and rural industrial sectors, are playing a more and more 
important role, the officials pointed out. 
  In 1993, industrial enterprises owned by the city produced a 
turnover of 5.565 billion yuan, exceeding for the first time the 
turnover of enterprises owned by the central and the regional 
governments. 
  Though heavy investment by the central government in iron 
and 
steel and other heavy industries boosted the former marketing 
place of furs in the grassland region into a major industrial 
town in the 1950s, it inevitably caused an inborn weakness of 
local industry and the service sector, the officials said. 
  From 1990 to 1993, the city had pumped 310 million yuan into 
the local industry sector. In pursuing a policy of allowing 
more bankruptcy and takeover of enterprises, it has also turned 
806 small and medium-sized enterprises to collective or private 
operation through renting and auctions. 
  It also encouraged the forming of 847 shareholding companies 
and 30 enterprise groups, which are believed to have a better 
economic performance. 
  Thanks to the policy weight on rural and urban community 
industry by the government, the two sectors have become a major 
force in coal, metallurgy, construction materials, farm products 
processing, construction and transport, employing more than 
100,000 people. 
  In 1993, rural and urban community enterprises had a 
turnover 
of 3.2 billion yuan, up by 139 percent over 1992. Eleven towns 
administered by the city reported an agricultural and industrial 
production value of more than 100 million yuan a piece last year. 
  Meanwhile, the officials said, the city's foreign-funded 
enterprises have increased to 157, involving an investment of 
120 million U.S. dollars by overseas businesses. 
  Household business and private enterprise have also been 
developing rapidly in the city. The former sector netted a 
turnover of 430 million yuan in 1993, and the latter 160 million 
yuan. 
  Large and medium-sized enterprises owned by the central 
government, including defense industry plants, did not lose 
their edge in the market-oriented economy. With their 
advantages in equipment and technology, many of them have been 
successful at developing new products and expanding their market 
share, the officials said. The city produced three million tons 
of steel last year. 

