BFN 

<F P=106> [By Joey Caburnida] </F>
  [Text] Amid continued disunity and factionalism in its 25 
years of fighting the government, the Maoist New People's Army 
(NPA) yesterday said that their comrades' bolting from the 
movement has not weakened the organization but has instead paved 
the way for them to further strengthen their revolutionary cause. 
  In a statement, NPA spokesman Gregorio "Comrade Roger" Rosal 
said the removal of such former comrades as Rick Reyes, Arturo 
Tabara, Romulo Kintanar and Felimon Lagman was part of its 
rectification efforts. 
  At the same time, Rosal dismissed government pronouncements 
of the movement's pending extinction and described the fullblown 
schism in its ranks as a "temporary setback." 
  He vowed to carry on the fight to seize power from the 
government. The communist guerrillas have earlier rejected an 
amnesty offer made by President Ramos last week, saying it was 
meant to further divide the insurgents by luring their members 
surrender ahead of proposed peace talks. 
  "For as long as there is social injustice and until national 
freedom and democracy are achieved, the NPA will remain on the 
forefront of the people's armed struggle," Rosal said. 
  He added the NPA, its mother organization, the Communist 
Party of the Philippines, and its political arm, the National 
Democratic Front, have been implementing a rectification 
campaign to do away with their previous error of speeding up the 
process of insurrection and the undue haste with which the war 
from the countrysides to the cities was heightened. 
  He said Reyes, Tabara, Kintanar and Lagman refused to 
acknowledge the need to rectify such errors and had instead 
wanted to continue them. 
  He said the movement suffered from the assassination 
campaign 
waged by urban guerrillas against soldiers and policemen in the 
cities, which led to a public backlash. Rosal's faction favors 
small guerrilla units proselytizing and harassing military 
installations in the rural areas. 

