BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by presidential candidate Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de </F>
Leon of the Institutional Revolutionary Party; at the "Economic 
Growth for Family Welfare" symposium in Mexico City on 6 June] 
  [Text] Ladies and Gentlemen: Today, speaking before the 
workers, farmers, union leaders, professionals, businessmen, and 
representatives of the financial and civilian sectors, I have 
come here to present my economic growth program for family 
welfare. Thank you very much for being here. All of you, who 
represent various fields and organizations, play pivotal roles 
in Mexico's economic situation. 
  Modern Mexico, the country with the institutions we enjoy 
today, is the result of long-fought social struggles, programs 
that were advanced through decades of hard work. This explains 
the striking clarity of the rebels' demands, the firmness and 
validity of the untiring Juarist struggle, and the surprising 
strength behind the Mexican Revolution's social motivations. 
  We Mexicans have been building the framework which regulates 
and guides the nation's mission, and which, in 1917, was 
asserted as the will of the Mexican people to become a 
representative, democratic Republic, comprising free and 
sovereign states united in a federation. 
  Under its protection, and under the leadership of the 
National Revolutionary Party, the Party of the Democratic 
Revolution [PRD], and the Institutional Revolutionary Party 
[PRI], Mexico has modernized. 
  We are gathered today because we all want a nation in which 
every child can go to school; in which every worker has a 
well-paying job that enables him to provide housing and health 
care for his family; in which there is no poverty that 
frustrates the talent, impedes the destiny, or offends the 
dignity of the Mexican people; and in which all of us can feel 
safe and have our rights protected. Today, more than ever, 
Mexicans want to enter the 21st century as part of a great 
nation based on social welfare, equity, and justice. 
  Today, I have come to talk about my commitment to economic 
growth, my firm commitment to an economic policy that will 
enable us to grow; to increase profit margins in the industrial, 
agricultural, and service sectors; and to generate more jobs and 
higher incomes for Mexican families. 
  During my campaign, I have stressed that the struggle 
against 
poverty will be a priority for my government. This is why I 
will soon present to the people an aggressive, robust, and 
participative strategy to promote social development. Today, I 
will focus on growth, the means through which we can generate 
jobs and higher wages and sustain the fight against poverty. 
  In recent years, we Mexicans have made great efforts to 
overcome the crisis of the 1980's. Structural imbalances, debt, 
and ill-timed participation in the international market all 
helped engender a substantial loss in terms of public welfare. 
  In facing these challenges, and in taking advantage of new 
opportunities, Mexico decided to become an active participant -- 
not a passive spectator -- in the change process affecting the 
world. This change of attitude, which was promoted by President 
Carlos Salinas de Gortari, was designed to face the crisis of 
the eighties, the crisis produced in the past decade, and to lay 
the various foundations for the country's future development. 
  Our economic reform has allowed us to do two things. First, 
a stabilization policy was applied, and, for the first time in 
more than two decades, annual inflation was reduced to less than 
2 percent. 
  This policy was based on reorganizing public finances and on 
a successful renegotiation of the public foreign debt. In this 
way, the government stopped imposing on the people the so-called 
inflationary tax, which is the most unfair tax there is, the one 
that hurts the lower classes the most. 
  Likewise, the public debt as a proportion of the GNP 
decreased by more than two-thirds, from 68 to 21 percent. 
Mexico went from being one of the most indebted countries in 
the world to the least indebted in relative terms among the 
member-states of the OECD. 
  Second, economic reform allowed us to implement a policy of 
structural change to modernize the productive sector. This, 
along with more efficient government methods, contributed to the 
increased channeling of resources into social programs, as well 
as to helping ease the effects of extreme poverty in many 
regions of the country. The government also has allocated 
resources for the expansion of the infrastructure and other 
productive sectors of the economy. This is why we must 
consolidate the structural changes made to public expenditures. 
  Thanks to a great collective effort, we certainly have made 
progress, although this progress has not completely redressed 
our shortcomings. Wide segments of our population still live in 
poverty. We are not creating enough jobs and many of the 
existing jobs are unstable or only part-time. Instead of a 
growing formal economy, we have a growing underground economy. 
The workers' real wages are insufficient and peasant incomes 
are too low. I have seen how many microbusinesses, small 
businesses, and medium-sided enterprises are having trouble 
surviving. 
  Also, we must be fully aware of the challenges we will have 
to face because of our population growth. Even though our 
population is increasing at a rate of 1.9 percent annually, the 
labor force is increasing at an annual rate of 3 percent. This 
shows that social and demographic pressure is still being 
applied to the labor market. Because our population is 
predominantly young, this pressure will not decrease for many 
years. We must create an average of 1 million jobs per year to 
employ the women and young people who are entering the job 
market. 
  We also know that because of demographic reasons, only 
one-third of the population is economically active. This is why 
it is imperative to substantially increase productivity in an 
effort to increase everyone's income. 
  Sustained growth demands greater productivity from everyone 
in a framework of economic stability in order to guarantee 
certainty and thereby encourage people to plan, invest, save, 
and work productively. 
  By eliminating inflation, we will put an end to one of the 
most damaging phenomena to the distribution of income. This is 
why I intend to keep inflation under control by maintaining 
healthy public finances. 
  We reject demagogic positions that call for greater 
expenditures and reduced prices for everything. This is 
impossible. In the past, such policies were carried out at a 
high social cost that was ultimately paid by the Mexican people. 
We cannot return to these practices. A policy of balanced 
public finances demands that we charge what is fair and only 
spend what is socially necessary. The proposal I am presenting 
to you today is realistic and responsible. 
  Our assessment is clear: We have made important progress in 
the consolidation of a flexible, modern, and participatory 
economy, but we still need to make additional progress to 
capitalize on these efforts and to attain greater levels of 
prosperity. 
  We, the Mexican people, have made great efforts to stabilize 
the economy and make the necessary structural changes. We have 
seen an unprecedented process of sacrifice on behalf of 
everyone, but it has been a necessary process and one that is 
worthwhile. Mexico already has laid a solid groundwork for the 
future. 
  The time has come to pass from stability and structural 
adjustment to a policy of promoting investment and economic 
growth. The time has come to pass from stressing macroeconomic 
concerns to ensuring microeconomic transformations. The time 
has come to enrich the nation's integration with the economic 
opening of each region. 
  There are very few nations that have the social energy and 
human skills exhibited during Mexico's structural change. We 
must now use these assets to develop production and promote 
growth. 
  The strategy we will adopt to encourage growth is based on 
equal participation, clear rules, and fair treatment for all the 
productive sectors. We need fair treatment for our producers in 
competition overseas, fair treatment for domestic producers in 
their relations with the government, and fair treatment between 
producers and the production forces. 
  Fair treatment for domestic producers means they will not be 
disadvantaged when competing in overseas markets. It means they 
will not have to pay more for public services and raw materials 
here than their competitors pay overseas. It means financial 
competition should be bolstered by interest rates in Mexico that 
are competitive with international rates. If we indeed opened 
the economy to enable foreign competition to encourage 
efficiency and productivity, we must also correct the unfair 
conditions under which our producers compete. 
  Fair treatment between the government and individuals means 
having a transparent and fair fiscal system. It means the 
people will be able to defend themselves from possible abuses of 
authority. It means state-run companies should be efficient and 
work to provide goods and services under competitive conditions 
that are contingent on quality and price. It means precise 
regulation, without excess, to effectively encourage economic 
activity. 
  Fair treatment between individuals means judicial security 
in 
labor-management contracts and combating monopolistic practices 
and abuses. It means healthy competition will be encouraged and 
privileges will be done away with. 
  For this reason, my economic policy will be governed by the 
principle of fair treatment. I promise to ensure fair treatment 
for everyone and every group, regardless of size, geographic 
area, or economic activity. Fair treatment is what each and 
every one of you demands. Fair treatment will be a fundamental 
responsibility at every level of the government. 
  We will create the jobs that Mexico requires. We will begin 
to walk along the path of steady growth. We will progress in a 
stable manner toward an economy of the future, a more 
participatory economy, and an economy that favors the well-being 
of the family. 
  This is why I am proposing to you, representatives of all of 
the nation's productive sectors, a 10-point strategy for the 
reactivation of the economy and steady growth. We need this 
economic reactivation because the Mexican people cannot accept 
stagnation. We must reactivate our economy quickly and 
effectively. Steady growth is important because we do not 
intend to simply grow in the short-term, but, instead, to 
consolidate a structural change so that the productive sector 
can take advantage of the opportunities provided by domestic and 
international markets. 
  In this proposal, I hereby make a pledge to lead our economy 
to grow in 1995 at a rate that at least doubles the population 
growth rate and to increase this growth rate gradually in the 
years that follow. We know how to do this, and we will do it 
together. 
  I hereby make a pledge for this strategy to remain 
consistent 
with macroeconomic stability and to have as its main pillar the 
promotion of private and public investment, as well as the 
promotion of exports. 
  The 10-point proposal I am presenting here today to you and 
the entire public does not originate from an insensitive cabinet 
report, but has been nurtured with proposals presented by 
workers, peasants, housewives, youths, executives, and students. 
It has also been nurtured with recommendations made by the 
business sector, researchers, and social activists throughout 
the country. It is a strategy prepared after intense 
consultation carried out in factories and workshops, in 
companies and ejidos, in classrooms and business establishments, 
in households as well as work stations. I am confident that 
Mexico's social and productive sectors will recognize their 
proposals in this strategy. It is a strategy intended to 
multiply their opportunities and attain their aspirations. The 
10 points for economic reactivation and sustained growth are as 
follows: 
<H5>  First: Investment Promotion, the Drive Behind Growth </H5>
  In order to create the jobs Mexicans are demanding, the 
economy must grow, and in order for this to take place, we must 
significantly increase investment. 
  Private investment is the basic drive behind sustained 
economic growth because it plays an irreplaceable role in the 
development of the productive sectors by prompting the capacity 
to encourage society's well-being. For this reason, the next 
government must place the highest priority on promoting 
investments. We will design and apply measures to increase 
project yields and create adequate settings for investments to 
grow, and employment along with it. 
  Foreign investments must continue to be the complementary 
support to national investments, since it allows the acquisition 
of leading technology, and represents a link with international 
flow of trade and production. We will promote conditions of 
legal protection and parity in order for foreign investment to 
continue its complementary role. 
  Public investment is also essential to promoting growth, 
most 
of all, if it serves to eliminate bottlenecks in strategic 
sectors and provide needed infrastructure for the expansion of 
economic activity. Public investment is an important lever for 
accomplishing balanced regional development. 
  We plan to select public and joint investments that will 
encourage greater employment opportunities, are better rewarded, 
and of greater social impact to the entire nation. These 
investments will adhere to clear-cut guidelines and social 
relevance in order to take advantage of the best resources our 
economy counts on. 
  I propose three concrete actions to reactivate public 
investment and thus encourage a significant volume of private 
investments. 
  First, I intend to increase public investments during my 
first year in office by an additional one-fourth of its current 
level. 
  Second, we intend to promote reforms that will allow 
multi-annual public investing budgeting, which will ensure 
certainty when financing medium- and long-term projects. 
  Third, in order to induce private sector participation in 
infrastructure projects, I propose the creation of an Investment 
Promotion Fund. 
  This fund will provide protection to investment projects and 
open the door to financing at rates and periods in accordance 
with their respective yield and maturity period. The fund will 
also be in a position to invest risk capital on a temporary and 
minority basis, in addition to being able to complement private 
investment. 
  This fund will be financed with resources originating from a 
Contingency Fund, funded with profits received from the 
segregation of public sector assets which up until now has been 
used to pay off the public debt. 
  This fund will be authorized to engage long term resources 
in 
the international markets when conditions are favorable for this 
purpose. The fund will operate with prudence and its resources 
will be earmarked for specific projects, the yield of which will 
guarantee repayment capacity. 
  Just as in the past, the priority need to reduce the public 
debt was well taken care of with money from privatizations 
[disincorporaciones], today, when the priority is to reactivate 
the economy, these resources will be used to stimulate 
investment in infrastructure projects. 
<H5>  Second: Investment in Education, Training, and Health </H5>
  The central objective of my economic policy proposal is to 
improve the standard of living of the Mexican family. We must 
devote special attention to investing in people. Higher 
education, better training, and better health services will be 
our social platform so Mexican workers can be more productive 
and earn higher salaries. 
  Education will be an undisputed priority item in my 
government. We must make a great effort and conduct a true 
national crusade to overcome the persisting backwardness of our 
education, improve its quality, and lay a sound foundation for 
personal realization and improvement. Education is the key for 
a future of development, well-being, and justice. 
  In addition, the technological revolution underlines the 
importance of workers' education and training. Technological 
progress tends to eliminate unqualified and semi-qualified jobs 
in all productive sectors. The new jobs require analytical 
ability and the ability to handle automatic or computerized 
equipment. To be competitive, we must substantially increase 
our efforts at training and investing in workers. 
  I hereby pledge that, during the next government term, the 
number of workers who receive specialized training every year 
will be multiplied by at least 500 percent. We will do it 
through government incentives, based on the structure and needs 
of the enterprises. We will expand the training program through 
scholarships and financial support for adults, employed or 
unemployed, who require adaptation to new production 
technologies. 
  Under the labor principle I have presented, that the only 
acceptable changes will be those leading to the workers' higher 
standard of living, we will encourage new forms of organization, 
which can make it possible for workers to move within 
enterprises and in and out of sectors. 
  We will reinforce and extend the system of technical studies 
and training for work. To stimulate the scope and quality of 
higher education and to encourage scientific and technological 
research to unprecedented levels will be one of the highest 
priorities in the strategy that I propose. 
  Our attention should also be focused on health. Health is an 
essential factor for human well-being and productivity. We will 
see to it that the financial requirements of the institutions in 
charge of caring for the workers' health will not unnecessarily 
increase the enterprises' costs because this would reduce 
competitiveness and limit the level of productive work. To 
progress simultaneously toward more jobs and better health, we 
will supervise the costs of the social security institutions, 
demanding higher efficiency from them. 
  We have a special responsibility to working women. We will 
create new mechanisms so they can have good day care centers and 
good security and social assistance services. In addition, we 
will make a great effort to incorporate into the social security 
system those workers who do not enjoy this benefit at present. 
  To invest in education, health, and training is to invest in 
people. It is a direct investment in each Mexican child, young 
person, woman, and man. It is the most profitable investment 
for Mexico's present and future. 
<H5>  Third: A Fiscal Policy for Investment </H5>
  Throughout my campaign, I have heard again and again strong 
concern about the tax policy. Tax policy should become a pillar 
for supporting and stimulating production and investment. We 
should put the Treasury at the service of taxpayers, taking care 
that arrogance and abuse do not hamper the efforts and 
initiatives of all. 
  Juridical security regarding taxes will receive priority 
treatment. For this reason, I hereby propose that the fiscal 
authority in charge of enforcing fiscal laws and collecting 
taxes be a decentralized, modern, and autonomous agency with 
officials trained for civil service. As a result, the fiscal 
administration will have increasingly better trained people who 
earn salaries in accordance with the work they perform, whose 
service to the public will be of high quality and who enforce 
fiscal laws impartially. 
  I will propose that audits be carried out as rapidly as 
possible and that at the end of all audits, the taxpayer receive 
a copy of the resolution, with which he can go to court to 
confirm or deny the legality of the fiscal authority's actions. 
I will propose strengthening the Federation's Fiscal Tribunal 
by giving it greater autonomy. 
  Regarding simplification of the administration, I will 
underline the need for the fiscal authority's functions to be 
those of a community servant and that, as a consequence, it 
should do its work with the utmost efficiency and the least 
possible irritation to citizens. 
  A very important measure of immediate benefits will be to 
let 
many more enterprises compute and pay their taxes four times a 
year instead of every month. This means that more than 80 
percent of the country's enterprises, particularly 
minienterprises, as well as small and medium enterprises, will 
benefit from this measure. In addition, we will simplify 
procedures to reduce their administrative burdens. 
  I will promote an aggressive reforms program to provide a 
tax 
framework that can be competitive at the international level. 
Tax rates are just as important as collection procedures. We 
will revise the fiscal incentive system by rewarding productive 
investment. I will promote a reform to increase and extend the 
benefit of immediate deduction of investment to small and medium 
enterprises located in the three large metropolitan areas and 
increase this benefit in the other areas where it is already in 
practice. 
  I will propose a new fiscal incentive system so enterprises 
can devote a greater amount of money to labor training, adopt 
new technologies, and invest in equipment to combat pollution. 
This will make us more competitive in the international market 
and help raise the standard of living of the people in general. 
  I will propose revising the operational mechanism of taxes 
on 
assets to alleviate the harmful effects that have been pointed 
out to me since the beginning of my campaign. First, and as an 
initial step, I will propose a 10-percent reduction of this tax 
to make this rate consistent with the lower corporate tax rate. 
I pledge to revise this rate and the tax application mechanism 
at the end of the first year of my government. Second, I will 
propose a four-year grace period for the payment of this tax by 
the new enterprises and assets. Third, I will propose that the 
enterprises that experienced a deficit in a specific fiscal year 
be exempted from the payment of this tax if they obtained a 
profit in any one of the three preceding years. 
  We cannot turn our backs on firms experiencing hardships 
when these firms are sources of progress for the country. 
  Regarding workers' personal income taxes, I will propose 
reforms to simplify calculations and make taxes proportionate 
and fair. Workers with low and medium incomes will pay 
proportionately less tax. 
  It should be noted that the best fiscal system, the fairest 
and most equitable, is one in which taxpayers meet their 
obligations. The measures I propose will contribute to creating 
a fiscal regime that is simple and accessible to most 
contributors. This will mean better compliance by each tax 
payer. 
  We shall reach agreements with local and state governments 
on 
new formulas to guarantee the direct flow of greater resources 
to municipalities. We will encourage the coordination of 
efforts with local and state governments to improve their own 
collection sources, without excessive taxes that inhibit 
regional development, but guarantee the quality of the services 
they provide. 
  With these initial reforms we will spend the first year 
examining other reforms to quickly establish a permanent regime 
that gives certitude and has mechanisms to avoid continuous 
modifications. 
<H5>  Fourth: Encouragement of Savings and Competitive Financing </H5>
for Growth 
  The financial system plays a fundamental role in collecting 
savings and its efficient channeling toward productive 
activities. For this reason we should continue actions that 
increase the financial system's competitiveness and efficiency, 
so that its users may have access to services and products with 
price conditions and opportunities comparable to other countries. 
  National producers claims on the comparative disadvantage 
they face is very fair. It is not acceptable that our small- 
and medium- sized entrepreneurs should face such high interest 
rates as the current ones. 
  These rates have two components. One corresponds to the 
macroeconomic surrounding and is determined by interest rates 
abroad, expected inflation rates, and the perception of the so 
called "country's risk." The other component is determined by 
the middleman's margin; in other words the difference between 
the cost of funds to middlemen and the rate at which they lend 
these funds. 
  By consolidating macroeconomic stability, we should reach 
single digit inflation, just as at the beginning of the year. 
Likewise, the congruence of the economic strategy that I 
propose today will serve to reduce the "risk factor," which in 
turn will encourage lower interest rates. 
  It is also essential that the middleman's margin be reduced. 
For this, we need to encourage greater competition through 
greater opening of the financial sector, both at home and 
abroad. We must also encourage greater deregulation to broaden 
the variety of financial products and ease access to more 
enterprises to debt and capital markets. It is imperative that 
national producers have access to internationally competitive 
interest rates. We will work tirelessly for this. 
  We admit that even in a scenario of stability, financial 
markets are volatile and on occasions short-term interest rates 
reach levels that our enterprises cannot support. This is why I 
shall encourage the creation of mechanisms of protection that 
will not allow normal interest rate hikes to directly affect 
long-term financing for businesses. In addition, development 
banking will extend the benefits of long-term funding to small 
and medium enterprises. 
  I intend to increase development bank resources and support 
mechanisms for small and medium businesses because they are 
vigorous employment generators. Likewise, I will seek 
development banking and new financial middlemen that have arisen 
following the sector's opening and deregulation and guide their 
activity toward these types of businesses. 
  The financial system faces two more challenges: rural 
financing and boosting popular savings. We must recognize that 
commercial banking has specialized in niches of apparently more 
profitable markets, without offering basic financial services to 
the various productive sectors, population levels, and 
geographic regions. 
  It is unacceptable that on the eve of the 21st century, 
1,600 
municipalities do not have formal savings and loans services. 
My strategy includes boosting financial institutions with local 
orientation, which channel development banking resources and 
encourage popular savings. 
  I intend strengthening credit unions and savings banks that 
provide basic financial services to communities. We will take 
advantage of development banking and, in particular, the 
National Savings Board, so that it becomes a regulatory 
institution for these middlemen. 
  Regarding rural sector financing, it is necessary to 
encourage new institutional and operational mechanisms for 
credit to reach the countryside opportunely and at a low cost. 
I will propose conditions so that credit unions can directly 
deduct development funds. We should encourage a culture of 
healthy banking practices, always making a distinction between 
support, subsidies, and credit. 
  On the other hand, credit is an essential factor for 
encouraging the well-being of the population. It also 
represents a very dynamic activity and is a great job generator. 
  Today, we have a great housing deficit. Population growth 
and natural replacement call for building approximately 700,000 
houses every year. That is why during the government I intend 
to lead, I will especially stress housing development programs. 
In particular, I will encourage necessary reforms to create a 
secondary mortgage loan market to channel a greater volume of 
resources to this activity. I also propose to induce a 
considerable amount of SAR [Retirement Savings System] resources 
in support of social interest housing. 
<H5>  Fifth: Greater Deregulation To Encourage Employment </H5>
  Excessive regulation significantly affects productivity, 
competitiveness, and enterprise profitability. Consequently it 
inhibits investment and the possibility of generating well-paid 
jobs. The country cannot grow when producers support a great 
load derived from obsolete regulations and when regulations 
limit or eliminate the viability not only of enterprises but 
whole sectors of the economy. 
  For that reason, we will make a major effort to properly 
regulate the needs of an economy that seek greater growth and 
equity. Deregulation will be extended to all sectors of economic 
activity, lowering barriers to the entry of new participants, 
eliminating exclusive advantages, and establishing clear rules 
to be universally implemented. The result will be lower costs 
for companies and more jobs for our workers. 
  Our deregulation efforts must reach all of the country's 
spheres. Within the framework of our federal pact, I propose to 
establish coordination mechanisms with the state governments and 
municipalities. That is particularly important in matters, such 
as transportation and the use of soil, which may generate 
bottlenecks in creating jobs. Through these efforts, we will 
open new opportunities for small- and medium-scale businessmen 
in the states and the Federal District who are the ones most 
hurt by obsolete and often arbitrary regulations. 
  On the matter of concessions and public permits, we will 
promote legal reforms so that they be granted at all times based 
on the criteria of efficiency, eliminating discretionary 
excesses. 
  We admit companies, small and medium companies in 
particular, are bearing an excessive administrative burden. We 
also admit that the framework of regulations frequently favor 
corrupt practices. Mexico, at the end of this century, cannot 
have its progress hampered by a dense and sometimes irrational 
regulation or by redundant and useless administrative procedures. 
  The economy cannot continue to tolerate, for instance, 
Federal District businessmen having to go through over 100 steps 
at government entities in order to set up their businesses. All 
of this is hurting the opportunities of the district's 
residents. The policy of deregulation will be accompanied by a 
profound administrative streamlining and overhauling of 
procedures at all levels of government. 
  To keep some companies from obtaining illicit advantages 
through monopolistic practices, we will promote the policy of 
competition. The efficiency the country sorely needs to create, 
productive jobs, can only be achieved through a process of 
vigorous competition. It is not acceptable that the absence of 
competition should mean advantages, privileges, and 
extraordinary revenues for a few. Competition generates more 
jobs and a more equitable distribution of income. 
  It must be made very clear that the absence of clear and 
uniform rules for all, favoritism or abuses by some officials, 
and monopolistic revenues are not part of the modern economy we 
want to build. On the contrary, they obstruct it with 
privileges and corruption. My economic policy will be based on 
a fair treatment for all. We are going to work together for a 
participative economy. That is my commitment. 
  To ensure the effective progress of these measures, we will 
take advantage of the experience gained in social consensus for 
the macroeconomy. We will have to enter into a phase in which 
precise pacts at the microeconomic level are signed, placing the 
emphasis on deregulation. We will establish follow-up 
committees to meet periodically to monitor advances. We will do 
it in every municipality, region, and state where warranted. 
<H5>  Sixth: Intermediary Raw Materials and Infrastructure for </H5>
Competitiveness 
  We must eliminate all factors that diminish our producers' 
capacity to compete and create jobs. For that reason, one of 
the key elements of my economic policy proposal is to ensure 
national producers have access to raw materials, under 
conditions of quality and prices similar to those of their 
competitors abroad. 
  We want greater competition, but it must take place under 
just conditions for all. By equating the conditions for 
supplying strategic raw materials and infrastructure with those 
of our chief competitor countries, we will raise the profits of 
our country's companies, while promoting the creation of jobs we 
require. We will center our efforts on energy raw materials, 
transportation, and telecommunications. 
  With strict adherence to the existing constitutional 
framework, I propose introducing profound changes within state 
enterprises in the energy sectors. On the matter of 
electricity, we will take advantage of the new options the legal 
framework now offers to direct public investment toward 
strengthening and improving transmission and distribution and to 
encourage private participation in generating electricity. That 
way, local producers will have major savings either because the 
use of electricity will be cheaper or because improved quality 
will make it unnecessary to have additional equipment to guard 
against excessive flaws in the flow of electricity. 
  Maintaining state ownership and direct control over the 
hydrocarbons extracted from the national territory constitutes a 
political commitment clearly outlined in our Constitution. I am 
endorsing it with conviction and Mexican pride. Oil belongs to 
Mexicans and will continue belonging to Mexicans. 
  In order for Pemex [Mexican Petroleum] to further contribute 
to growth and the creation of productive jobs, I am proposing 
reinforcing its capacity to provide strategic solutions and 
operational efficiency. 
  We must concentrate Pemex's efforts on exploration and 
extraction, but we must also ensure we have a supply of 
industrial fuels, including natural gas, that is prompt, 
reliable, at competitive prices, and in the amounts required by 
national producers. 
  This is the only way Pemex will be able to rationally 
manage a nonrenewable state resource and supply the national 
plant with the inputs it requires for growth. 
  Investing in the transportation infrastructure is 
fundamental 
for reducing costs and increasing jobs through a broader 
economic network that enables companies to access regional and 
foreign markets; consequently, I propose allocating more budget 
resources to promote road maintenance and prevent the wear on 
transportation equipment and reduce dates for delivery. 
  In addition, the strategy I am recommending will encourage 
greater participation by private companies in construction and 
operations in order to advance in the enlargement of the road 
network, within a framework of competition that will lead to 
more competitive tolls and fees. Mexico has only begun to 
overcome the predicament, ignored for decades, of constructing 
modern roads. We must step up the pace. We cannot have new 
roads that are not used, nor can we have old roads that are 
overused. 
  As part of my proposal to modernize transportation, we will 
begin an in-depth transformation of the railroad infrastructure. 
This transformation is a serious task modern Mexico must 
undertake to enhance our economic performance. 
  Restructuring the railroads is necessary for the 
modernization of domestic trade. It is also indispensable for 
deregulating our ports, which will allow an increase in 
productivity, thus promoting a healthy competition among ports. 
This competition will reduce the costs of imported intermediate 
inputs by our producers and will boost competitiveness among 
exports. 
  In addition to supporting the process for the generation of 
jobs, restructuring railroads will be a lever for triggering the 
development of less-developed areas in the country. 
  My proposal to support domestic producers also includes a 
rapid modernization of telecommunications, adapting regulations 
to technological changes. We will encourage vigorous 
competition in this sector, resulting in a higher quality 
service, reduced costs, and development in pace with the 
country's needs. Improved telecommunications are not only 
necessary for attracting additional investment in an 
increasingly interdependent world, we must also have better 
informed citizens who can participate in the strengthening of 
our democracy. 
<H5>  Seventh: Technological Modernization for Greater Productivity </H5>
  In the medium term, technological modernization is the main 
source of growth. Mexico must reach the 21st century by 
combining its exports of traditional manufactured good with a 
greater proportion of technology intensive products. This 
combination constitutes one of the bases for increasing workers' 
incomes. 
  Technological modernization is a long process that entails 
risks and intense skilled labor. We will create novel plans to 
reduce investment risks in the purchase, adoption, and creation 
of new technologies such as fiscal incentives and plans of 
shared-risk with development banks. We will promote new forms 
of association among companies so that they may cooperate in 
research and developmental projects. We will equitably provide 
incentives, without discriminating among sectors or companies. 
  Our industrial policy will focus on creating the fiscal, 
credit, and regulatory conditions and incentives for 
technological modernization so as to enable all to participate 
under fair and equal conditions in economic activity. We must 
avoid repeating the mistakes of the past, when support to 
special sectors became counterproductive, because instead of 
boosting efforts to raise productivity, they encouraged the 
concentration of income. 
<H5>  Eighth: Fair Competition From Overseas </H5>
  When we speak of foreign trade, we generally think about the 
competition involved, not considering the opportunities it 
offers. Foreign trade is necessary in order to produce more and 
progress. Through trade, we can specialize in manufacturing 
better those items we produce. 
  To fully take advantage of this potential, we must advance 
further by promoting our exports. We plan to strengthen those 
efforts aimed at tearing down the administrative and legal 
obstacles our goods are confronting in international markets. 
We intend to bolster the framework of the foreign trade 
information centers, advisory, and technical training so as to 
provide better support to manufacturers. We intend to buttress 
Mexico's trade offices overseas so as to identify new markets 
and greater business opportunities. We intend to stress 
financing opportunities to encourage exports through more 
effective and active guarantees, as well as provide a larger 
number of financing intermediaries available to this sector. 
  Regarding imports, we will promote fair competition. We 
will vigorously enforce Mexican legislation in those cases in 
which the Mexican producer is the object of the disloyal 
practices of international commerce. I will guarantee to all 
Mexican producers that compensatory taxes will be implemented. 
I will take the necessary measures to prevent the triangulation 
of goods coming from countries not included in the preferential 
treatment regime. I will complement them by conducting a 
profound overhauling of the country's customs operations. 
  Concurrently, it is necessary to generate new commercial 
ties 
so as to obtain preferential access to the chief markets of the 
world and diversify our exports. I will continue to promote 
international accords to obtain conditions that guarantee 
fairness with our foreign competitors. 
  In those cases where there is no commercial reciprocity, we 
will act with the rigor the defense of our producers demands so 
they are not hurt by disloyal and unfair competition. 
<H5>  Ninth: Development of Mexico's Countryside </H5>
  In past years, the bases for rural development were 
established. The amendments to Article 27 of the Constitution 
and its laws and regulations strengthen and guarantee the 
existence of ejidos, communities, and small landholding and 
expressly banned large landholdings. We now have a legal 
framework that guarantees the patrimony of the men and women 
from rural areas and promotes the capitalization of the 
countryside. I pledge to consolidate and improve Procampo 
[Program of Direct Support to the Countryside] and promote 
conditions for fair and loyal competition with the rest of the 
world. Despite the advances, much remains to be done. 
Productivity in rural areas is four times smaller than in all 
other economic activities today. I will decisively support 
agricultural and livestock production, because I firmly believe 
in the potential of Mexico's countryside. 
  We will give priority to the development of the 
infrastructure, primarily to small-scale and medium-scale 
irrigation, drainage, the leveling of soils, rural roads, and 
erosion control projects. Infrastructure projects expand the 
range of crops the farmer may plant, make the countryside 
profitable, facilitate access to loans, favor the use of modern 
products, and permanently increase productivity. They also 
create more jobs and ease the migratory pressures on the urban 
jobs market. 
  Farmers have repeatedly demanded the abolishment of 
excessive 
intermediaries. I propose modernizing marketing systems to 
facilitate direct transactions between farmers and wholesalers, 
and I will complement this effort with investment in the 
marketing infrastructure. Similarly, we will promote the 
organization of farmers to reinforce their productive capability. 
  I will combat bureaucracy and centralization through a 
institutional reform of the organizations that handle the rural 
sector so that farmers' demands are taken care of in their place 
of origin. States and municipalities, with the support of the 
federation, will be the ones to meet the demands of rural 
society. 
<H5>  Tenth: For a Growth Respectful of the Environment </H5>
  Natural resources and the environment constitute one of the 
fundamental assets of the economic development of the whole 
country. To harm them gravely hurts, at times irreversibly, the 
people's possibility of welfare. 
  To protect our environment, I will promote economic and 
fiscal incentives. I also pledge to make ecological regulations 
clear, with terms that assure investment and entail an adequate 
cost for society. In addition, procedures must also be 
streamlined, without hurting conservation. 
  We will seek to make mechanisms for monitoring and 
enforcement simpler, more open and effective to facilitate 
compliance with legal provisions. 
  Likewise, it is essential to continue ecology education 
efforts and to encourage society's participation in the 
development, evaluation, and supervision of policies. 
<H5>  Eleventh: Ladies and gentlemen and all friends: </H5>
  These are the ten main points of the Economic Reactivation 
and Sustained Growth strategy that I propose today. 
  We will begin a new stage of development in Mexico with 
these 
ten points. Starting with advances in stabilization and 
structural changes, and on the basis of what has already been 
achieved, we will boost a strategy that encourages production, 
employment, and remuneration. 
  Conditions are now right to boost our country's growth. My 
proposal takes advantage of what has already been done to 
encourage economic activity, basing it on broad social 
participation with clear rules and fair treatment. To implement 
the proposal we shall consolidate the appropriate government 
support so that society's initiatives become viable projects. 
  It is essential that a legal framework exist to effectively 
protect people, both physically as well as morally. Economic 
growth, the same as social development, is not possible without 
legal security. It is especially necessary to guarantee 
contractual obligations and property rights. Legal security on 
legitimate property rights of all social groups, is an essential 
condition for growth. 
  I am convinced that we cannot postpone the decentralization 
of duties, which today the federal government conducts to 
address the demands and raise the standard of living of Mexican 
families. 
  Mexico must begin the 21st century with a renewed 
federalism, 
a fuller federalism, founded on strengthening the municipality, 
nurtured by the vigor of the states, and backed by a genuine 
division of government branches, and a government program close 
to citizens and responsible to them. 
  It is not enough to propose a simple tax reform. We need to 
redesign the entire system to achieve a new federalism, which is 
essential for overall economic growth in all areas. 
  We should transfer to municipalities and states the power, 
authority, effective means, and especially resources, which can 
then be turned into decisionmaking power and capacity. This is 
my pledge. 
  It is imperative that we recover the road to growth right 
from the next administration's first year. The strategies I 
proposed today guarantee this. Bolstering public and private 
investment will allow the 1995 GNP to grow to at least twice the 
rate of the population growth. 
  At the same time, by consolidating support for the export 
sector we can forecast vigorous growth through greater 
deregulation, new incentives, simplified taxes, and a favorable 
international market climate. We will create during the next 
six-year period the million jobs a year the population demands, 
and we will do this with greater investment and increased 
exports . 
  Today, I reiterate that our economic future demands special 
incentives for micro-, small-, and medium-sized businesses. 
These already generate 60 percent of the country's productive 
jobs and we should encourage their multiplication and expansion 
to become a dynamic boost for economic growth. This is why I 
proposed before the country's small businessmen a specific 
program to encourage their participation in the Mexican economy. 
  Our experience, and the experiences of other nations who 
have implemented successful growth strategies, clearly show that 
there is no miraculous recipe; there are no spectacular measures 
that lead to development overnight. The formula to accomplish 
sustained growth is based on ensuring that the daily endeavors 
of all Mexicans be more productive. If we move in the right 
direction, spectacular results will be everyday occurrences at 
factories, and among peasants, workers, technicians, executives, 
and employees. 
  During this political campaign, others have been making 
demagogic proposals to garner more votes, knowing quite well 
that their proposals are unrealistic. This is not the case with 
the PRI. 
  As my party's candidate, I propose an economic strategy of 
production and growth encouragement, based on realistic and 
reliable ground rules. This reactivation and growth strategy 
can be financed properly with the savings from the efforts of 
society and with revenues from economic growth. My proposal is 
closely related to fiscal accountability and economic stability. 
  This strategy includes the apprehensions, needs, and 
proposals of every social group, and it will be further enriched 
with the participation of all of you. I invite you all to do 
your share, and improve this strategy with your knowledge and 
your experiences. This proposal is open to every evaluation, and 
additional recommendations by the organizations represented 
here. I invite you all so that together we may transform this 
proposal into a shared government program. This proposal will 
benefit us all. This proposal will benefit Mexico. 
  The government efforts I plan to lead will be aimed at 
ensuring that the daily needs of all households are met by 
creating more employment and better wages. Gone are the days 
when state initiative meant indiscriminate participation in all 
productive activities. Today, the state must be society's 
partner in promoting economic growth. 
  We Mexicans do not want to remain indecisive in a world that 
is rapidly changing and which no longer permits any wavering or 
steps backward. We Mexicans do not accept brazen criticism that 
proposes nothing. We are not going to build the Mexico of the 
future with proposals that only destroy what we have 
accomplished. 
  We Mexicans do not accept proposals that entail building a 
hollow Mexico that does not acknowledge our history, our 
workers' accomplishments, as well as the predominant role of 
women in our society. 
  We Mexicans do not accept the pessimism of those who believe 
that our country is about to fall into a crisis, uncertainty, 
and violence. We Mexicans do not accept any paralyzing 
skepticism by those who would rather cross their arms instead of 
facing the challenges that lie ahead. 
  I view the future with optimism. Mexico has problems which 
we clearly and honestly acknowledge as a starting point to solve 
them. Additionally, with each campaign day, it is acknowledged 
more and more that the PRI is the party that offers the best 
platform, the best proposals, and the best men and women to 
implement them. 
  Today, more than ever, Mexico seeks unity. Today, more than 
ever, Mexico looks toward the future with optimism, 
steadfastness, and conviction. Today, more than ever, we are 
facing a clear path that will lead to growth and wellbeing. 
  Let us all together build a Mexico of sovereignty and 
development, development and welfare, welfare and justice. Let 
us all build a prosperous Mexico which today is practically 
within our grasp. Let us all build a Mexico our children 
deserve. Let us do it with everyone's participation and 
commitment. 
  Today, before you, I ratify this. That is my commitment, and 
I intend to fulfill it. Viva Mexico! 

