Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Cristian Nita report from Chisinau] </F>
  [Text] The president of the Republic of Moldova, Mr. 
Mircea Snegur, today received Mrs. (?Josette Girieux), French 
senator, member of the Council of Europe, and observer at the 27 
February elections. As the rapporteur of the Council of Europe 
regarding Moldova's adherence to this body, Mrs. Girieux said 
that the elections were a serious test that was successfully 
passed. She emphasized the fact that the coming, similarly 
important stage is the adoption of the Constitution of the 
Republic of Moldova. 
  German Chancellor Helmut Kohl has sent a letter to the 
president of the Republic of Moldova wherein he expressed 
thanks, among other things, for the message in which President 
Snegur pronounced himself for intensifying cooperation between 
the Republic of Moldova and NATO countries. 
  The letter also emphasizes that the summit meeting in 
Brussels marked a beginning of cooperation with a view to 
establishing order and security on the continent by inviting the 
young democracies in Central and Eastern Europe, and the 
republics of the former USSR to expand political and military 
cooperation with the NATO bloc within the Partnership for Peace 
program. 
  The press service of the president and government of the 
self-proclaimed Dniester Republic has published a declaration 
which, according to BASAPRESS, emphasizes that the Tiraspol 
authorities assess the victory in the elections by the Agrarian 
Democratic Party and the Bloc of the Socialist Party and 
Edinstvo Movement positively by also stressing that the victory 
of the agrarians in the elections will positively influence the 
process of negotiations on the Dniester problem. 
  BASAPRESS also reports that, through a decree issued by Igor 
Smirnov, president of the self-proclaimed Dniester Republic, the 
state of emergency in the Dniester region has been prolonged for 
a further month. It was to be suspended on 1 March. 

