CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Security Council Interdepartmental </F>
Commission for Defense Industry Scientific-Technical Issues 
Chairman Mikhail Dmitriyevich Maley by DELOVOY MIR Correspondent 
Galina Sidorova and Candidate of Philosophical Sciences Irina 
Filatova of the Russian Academy of Sciences and Ministry of 
Labor Employment Problems Institute, under the rubric: 
"Opinion": "Mikhail Maley: We Need Firm, Comprehensible Rule"] 
  [Text] The interview of famous Russian Entrepreneur 
and "Rossiyskoye zoloto" [Russian Gold] AK Board Chairman Mark 
Masarskiy was published in the analytical attachment of DELOVOY 
MIR No 71. Continuing the theme "Russia From the Present to the 
Future", today we offer for the attention of our readers a 
conversation with a representative of the state 
structure--Security Council Interdepartmental Commission for 
Defense Industry Scientific-Technical Issues Chairman Mikhail 
Dmitriyevich Maley. 
  [DELOVOY MIR] The president and the government constantly 
talk about the market course of our economy. Indeed, in the 
process they in no way designate the nature of the impending 
order. First, they attempt to apply to Russia the caftan of the 
most successfully managed model, for example, the Swedish model, 
then they assert that Russia has its own, third, path of 
development. Mikhail Dmitriyevich, what do you think in this 
regard? 
  [Maley] I am a scientist and I know precisely: There are 
never any extremes in the material world. The Gauss curved 
distribution, which shows that extreme points are striving 
toward zero, is always operating. The primary sum of the 
processes and selections lies in the center. 
  The objective development of events has placed us on that 
middle path that lies between the extreme points--socialism and 
capitalism. You can call it a third path but this is not 
specifically a Russian third path. Since there isn't pure 
capitalism or pure socialism, society always moves along the 
center, there, where the amplitude of the curve is maximum. But 
you can call that path a third path only in the sense that each 
country has its own specific features of development. In Russia, 
they will be specifically Russian. 
<H8>  An Experiment With a Deviation </H8>
  [Maley] Right now experimental progress is occurring with 
fluctuations and deviations. I would call this the broken curve 
of progress. But its vector has still been designated: We are 
moving toward a society that will be a symbiosis of the ideal 
models of capitalism and socialism and, I would like to hope, 
the best of their parts. 
  [DELOVOY MIR] Maybe the middle toward which we are moving is 
also the happy medium, but there have been painfully many 
fluctuations and deviations. Is there that staff on which we 
could reliably lean and still reach the goal? 
  [Maley] I think that any society, and ours in particular, 
cannot live in a space without an ideological orientation. There 
must be national goals and tasks that are naturally varied in 
significance. The main thing for Russia today is to return to 
the position of a great world power, not a military, but a great 
economic world power. In order to attain that, we must set a 
goal: To exceed the potential of the former USSR by at least a 
factor of two on a reduced territory. 
  A mass of subgoals result from this. Among others, this can 
be, for example, the following--for all great chess players to 
come from Russia, like before -- from the USSR. A subgoal 
results from that--to produce so many chess boards and men that 
they can be purchased in the smallest village and that they will 
be cheap. 
  We could assign the task--to continuously participate in the 
construction of a transcontinental automobile highway that runs 
across all of Russia, Alaska and America. This is a realistic 
project. 
  That is, I want to say that we must task society with 
gigantic tasks. People must see the goal toward which they are 
moving at each actual moment. 
  [DELOVOY MIR] For some politicians, yes and simply citizens, 
the global goal is to re-establish the Soviet Union. In your 
view, is that realistic? 
  [Maley] I remember the Soviet Union and I don't like what 
happened to it. But that is an objective reality and we will 
hardly find the resources to return the USSR to its former state. 
  In general, a world process of disintegration is occurring. 
From my point of view, it has an objective foundation under it 
and we cannot restrain it with any sort of subjective wishes. 
Even such a rich state as Belgium was divided and Canada is 
being divided... 
  As for Russia's position and prestige, I am nearly convinced 
that I will be able to freely drive throughout all of the land 
with a Russian passport and I will be able to travel even better 
with the ruble than with the dollar. I personally believe that 
the ruble will become stronger than the dollar for an entire 
series of circumstances. Right now the Americans will overexert 
themselves with policing the world and God has relieved us of 
that obligation. We will be involved with ourselves. 
  [DELOVOY MIR] Certainly time itself. The redistribution of 
property has engendered such problems which Russian previously 
had not encountered. 
  [Maley] The primary portion of the people have been removed 
from the redistribution of property and monitoring it. 
Therefore, society has become highly stratified. This is 
unpleasant and dangerous for all of us. If there are more than a 
definite share of indigent people in the country, society will 
mandatorily be hurt. 
<H8>  We Cannot Be Rich Among the Unfortunate </H8>
  [Maley] This American saying in a free translation--"Live 
and 
let live"--signifies the need to maintain a definite structure 
of society. The state not only does not monitor but it is also 
not even involved with the overall regulation of this process. 
Therefore, on the one hand, if the number of capitalists 
increases in Russia, on the other hand, there is an increased 
number of lumpen, and we cannot avoid social upheavals. 
  Society will be destabilized each time there is a definite 
number of people near the center of gravity. And "lumpenization" 
is occurring at an increased rate right now. This is associated 
with the government's social policy and with the objective state 
of the economy. 
  While beginning reform, Gaydar struck all of society. I am 
not condemning him for that. Everything was done in a Russian 
manner, in a revolutionary manner. He saved us about seven years 
of revolution but, unfortunately, he couldn't put the pieces 
back together. 
  [DELOVOY MIR] Although he was granted that opportunity. 
  [Maley] If we return to practice, he who destroys never 
builds. He simply organically cannot build, another psychology 
is needed. Therefore, the attempt to make Gaydar the creator 
from Gaydar the destroyer turned out to be a failure. 
  [DELOVOY MIR] What do you think, why is neither Gaydar's 
government nor the one that follows it managing to deal with 
inflation? 
  [Maley] In the mechanism for the regulation of prices, 
benefits, the correlation of income and expenditure and the 
budget sphere, inflation strengthens the government's position 
since it places enterprises and citizens in increasing 
dependence. A more or less comprehensible economic situation 
will come with financial stabilization and, in this situation, 
the subjects of the economy--enterprises, entrepreneurs and 
individuals--will begin to acquire increasing significance and 
the government's positions will begin to weaken. That is my 
point of view. 
  Where there are no comprehensible economic laws that operate 
objectively, political laws and the laws of coercion operate. 
And since political power is in the hands of the bureaucrats, 
isn't it a paradox that inflation is advantageous for the 
government so that it can be more significant and more powerful 
than in a normal situation. 
  [DELOVOY MIR] Maybe that is the reason why the government is 
not completely following the process of decentralizing the 
management of the economy? 
  [Maley] All conversations on the liberalization of the 
economy are only conversations for now. As before, all resources 
are drawn into Moscow and all authorizing normative acts emanate 
from here. The Moscow bureaucrats determine how much veterinary 
vaccine to produce, whom to authorize to haul edged or unedged 
board, how many trees to cut down and how many stumps to leave 
in the forest somewhere in Arkhangelsk Oblast. 
  Unfortunately, to a certain extent the current regime has 
repeated--and in an even worse variant at that--the last Soviet 
regime. The current government is building a market economy, 
say, with its right hand and is tightening the noose on Russia's 
throat with its left hand, and more cleanly than the Soviet 
regime. So, there are uprisings locally, nonpayment of debts and 
taxes and the appearance of "Urals republics". 
  Right now it would be appropriate to recall the golden age 
of 
the Khrushchev period when the well-known freedom of regional 
economic policy was permitted. Salvation is in this, this will 
help bring the country out of the crisis. 
  [DELOVOY MIR] And how do you regard the institution of 
presidential power in Russia? 
  [Maley] In general, I am inclined toward the presidential 
form of rule, toward the concentration of power at one point, 
and toward single centralized [yedinotsentrovyy] management of 
the economy. Because a parliamentary republic signifies two 
centers of real power and, consequently, a confrontation between 
them and the opportunity for violators of the law to maneuver 
between the two centers. But it is difficult to maneuver near 
one center. 
  As for the president, Yeltsin is implementing a moderately 
authoritarian regime of rule and, while he is in power, I think 
the regime will remain precisely that. 
  [DELOVOY MIR] How much has this regime been optimized for 
today's subjects of economic life? 
  [Maley] The subjects of economic life need firm, 
comprehensible rule. Therefore, if we theoretically discuss the 
best conditions for Russia's emergence from the economic crisis 
then, in my view, we would need enlightened authoritarian rule. 
Not high-handed, but the strict authoritarian rule of an 
intelligent person or group of people who would be alongside him. 
  World practice indicates that a concentration of power 
occurs 
under conditions of very powerful crises, beginning with a great 
economic crisis, the events in Chile and in Germany during 
Adenauer's time. Under conditions of liberalism and many voices, 
a regime emerges which we had from 1990 through 1993. Events are 
out of control and the simple man is suffering as a result. 
<H8>  A Second Source of Hard Currency </H8>
  [DELOVOY MIR] Mikhail Dmitriyevich, you represent the 
military industrial complex and naturally the question arises: 
What role do the defense industry leaders assign to the military 
industrial complex in the future Russia? 
  [Maley] The military industrial complex will not have a 
future outside of the market. In the process, we recognize that 
the current defense industry's capacity is excessive for Russia. 
Approximately one fourth of this capacity is sufficient for 
Russia in order to totally supply the army's needs. 
  But if we resort to that enormous reduction, then 
75% of 
those working at the complex's enterprises will find themselves 
in the grist of the transition period. We don't want to release 
that enormous number of people, all the more so that there is 
work for them. 
  The Russian defense industry occupies one of the leading 
places based upon the product produced, especially based upon 
those items that were quite recently top secret or were in 
stockpiles of semifinished products. That is, our workers and 
specialists are capable of producing a competitive product that 
is being bought and sold on world markets. And right now we 
would not like to transfer our jobs to the United States, France 
or Germany or to cede further sales markets for our arms. 
  Utilizing Russian Federation legislation, the Constitution 
and presidential edicts, we hope to preserve our position in 
world markets, to strengthen it and to progress further, while 
utilizing the terminology and arguments that the United States 
and the NATO countries previously used against us. That is, we 
will demand equal rights with all of the remaining 
arms-exporting countries. 
  Of course, this will not be simple. In order to work for 
export, we will have to heavily restructure. After the petroleum 
complex, the military industrial complex can become a second 
source of hard currency for the state. Its annual potential is 
$8-12 billion cash and $6-7 billion are adequate for the 
complex's total self-sufficiency and therefore it will be able 
to annually transfer $2-4 million to the treasury. 
  At the same time, the military industrial complex continues 
to arm its army. We are giving it super new equipment and we are 
selling new equipment. The Russian Army will always outstrip 
other armies in the quality of arms and in the required quantity 
and at no charge--at the expense of foreign ministries of 
defense. 
  [DELOVOY MIR] You said that the military industrial complex 
will have to be heavily restructured. What do you have in mind? 
  [Maley] The development of market structures. We have been 
involved with that for the last two years and today we can talk 
about specific results. By way of illustration, the Military 
Industrial Complex Business Center is already operating. This is 
a quasi-governmental organization. Its mission is to weed out 
Western businessmen who come to us with $15 dollars in their 
pockets in order to make money from us, but then again the 
Business Center must track our business people who either export 
capital or promise to resolve any problems on behalf of the 
president and who immediately sell 10 tonnes of uranium. 
  Further, we are creating the Military Industrial Bank. In 
capacity, this is the lead bank of the military industrial 
complex financial company and it will be second after the 
Central Bank in the capabilities of the financial system. 
  There is one other structure--the Russian Military 
Industrial 
Insurance Company. It will assume responsibility for insuring 
everything that concerns the complex. 
  The fourth structure is an information structure. There are 
11 very powerful economic information institutes in our country. 
They have preserved all of the communications systems and 
essentially right now monitor the situation in the entire 
defense and nuclear industry. We want to unite all of these 
institutes into one information ring and, as an information 
system, to orient it not only toward servicing the military 
industrial complex but the entire Russian Federation economy. 
  I want to stress: We are creating neither a financial nor an 
economic autarky. We are simply uniting the complex's capacity 
and capabilities in an open form. These are open type structures. 
<H8>  The "Tiger" of the Next Decade </H8>
  [DELOVOY MIR] But are there problems? 
  [Maley] Of course there are. The last has remained, in 1994, 
during which we cannot accept junior specialists into 
enterprises and institutes. In general, this is the last year 
when our society can permit itself to not accept young people 
into economic and technical VUZs [higher educational 
institutions]. But later the already irreversible break will 
begin -- the break of scientific schools and concepts. For the 
military industrial complex, this signifies the loss of the 
intellectual level that previously existed. Therefore, we want 
to begin independent progress. We will agitate young people to 
go to technical institutes, to raise stipends; in short, to 
prepare the augmentation of educated people whom we need in the 
scientific-technical portion of the military industrial complex. 
  [DELOVOY MIR] Unfortunately, not all sectors will be able to 
begin independent progress and to train specialists for 
themselves, like the military industrial complex will. And in 
general, we cannot count on anyone, except the state, in the 
sphere of humanitarian education. 
  [Maley] If we want to take advantage of material and 
spiritual blessings, we need to outstrip others in the nation's 
general education level. A more educated nation and a more 
educated state always has advantages because they are capable of 
more rapidly organizing, anticipating the development of events, 
and technologically defining others. They will always be more 
wealthy. And material wealth always gives us the capability to 
develop the spiritual sphere. And here the process is on hand: 
The wealthy get rich in all regards, the poor get poor in all 
regards. Education--that is the key which unfortunately many 
people in the Russian government do not understand. And we will 
begin to degenerate if statewide measures directed at the 
support of education are not taken by the end of 1994. 
  [DELOVOY MIR] I wouldn't like to end the conversation on 
that 
sad note. Russia really has many problems. And maybe there are 
even more clearly seen from the side than from within. I would 
be interested in knowing, what does the West predict for us, 
while looking from the side? 
  [Maley] Isn't it paradoxical, but they assess Russia's 
opportunities more optimistically than we ourselves do. For 
example, the biggest American capitalists who belong to the 
so-called "Rapid" Group think. Of all of the economic "tigers", 
Russia is the "tiger" of the next ten years. They predict an 
appreciable emergence from the economic crisis in four years. 
  What is curious is that this prediction coincides with the 
assessments that many of our experts provide but are 
self-conscious about publishing. In the background of the 
existing situation, our bright future is being perceived for now 
as something remote. 

