BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Zoltan Gal, Tibor J. Keri, and Attila Zsoldos: </F>
"Ministerial Plans From Bekesi, Through Keleti, to Kuncze"] 
  [Text] At today's founding session of parliament, Gyula 
Horn, prime minister-designate of the Hungarian Socialist Party 
[MSZP], is expected to receive instructions from President Arpad 
Goncz to form a government. As a result of the coalition 
agreement, the members of the new government have become known. 
We interviewed the future ministers on their plans. 
  Finance Minister Designate Laszlo Bekesi would first like to 
gain an accurate view of the current balance of payments, the 
situation of state finances, the payment obligations to run into 
the second half of the year, and the projected revenues. It can 
be stated with great certainty that, after the snapshot 
inventory, the financial processes for 1994 will have to be 
corrected regarding both the budget and the exchange rate and 
interest rate policy, Bekesi said. As an example, he mentioned 
the promise of an 8 percent increase of pensions for which the 
funds have not yet been found. 
  Bela Katona, the expected person for the position of 
minister 
without portfolio supervising the civilian secret services, did 
not accept his nomination easily. He said he had to assess the 
political weight and confidential nature of this position. 
After gathering information in his new position, Katona sees 
putting the employees of the office at ease as his most 
important task: There will not be any kind of major clean-up. 
He stressed that there will be no dismissals even under the 
heading of reorganization because they would like, by all means, 
to keep the experts in the services. 
  Katona wishes to "lobby" the government so that the services 
receive the necessary budgetary support. He also strives to 
make the public aware that the secret services operate in the 
interests of the country. 
  According to Laszlo Kovacs, the foreign minister designate 
of 
the new government, the main directions of Hungarian foreign 
policy will not change in the future, either. These are 
integration with Europe, gaining full European Union membership 
as a result of a longer process; making peace with our 
neighbors, Slovakia, Romania, and the Yugoslav Federation; and 
support for Hungarian minorities over the border in the interest 
of their rights becoming recognized in accordance with European 
norms. He added that none of the three directions will be 
subordinated to the other. He added that foreign political 
thinking will change in the sense that it will be based solely 
on rational elements: On Hungary's circumstances, interests, 
and on coordinating the interests of Hungary and the partner 
countries, rather than on a historical sense of mission, the 
injuries suffered in the historical past, or ideological 
sympathies and antipathies, he said. Talking about 
Hungarian-Russian relations, he said that they are very 
important for us because Russia is the region's biggest power. 
  In connection with the Foreign Ministry's staffing, he said 
that a good quality foreign policy planning and analysis 
department should be reestablished in the Ministry. At the same 
time, Kovacs would like to put the diplomatic service members at 
ease: He wants to rely on all experts, regardless of when and 
why they entered the foreign service. "I will not examine 
whether the members were placed in their positions because of 
being a former school mate, relative, or friend of someone three 
years ago; if their professional and human qualities make them 
suitable to perform their tasks, then I expect them to remain in 
their jobs," Kovacs said. At the same time, he added that those 
ambassadors who were on the Hungarian Democratic Forum's list at 
the elections will themselves have to carry the consequences. 
  According to Gyorgy Keleti, the MSZP's defense minister 
designate, the most important task of the initial period is to 
set up an expert committee. This body would assess the army's 
situation, the combat-readiness of the various army units, and 
the living conditions of the regular staff. Parallel to this, 
the army's budget will also have to be examined because, 
according to some information, the army might become insolvent 
by autumn, and this has to be avoided by all means, Keleti said. 
In his view, a crisis-management program has to be drawn up 
within a very short time, and they have to to begin to establish 
a rational army structure. In Keleti's view, the decree 
ordering the merger of the Ministry and the army's command has 
to be withdrawn. The deadlines prescribed in this decree cannot 
be adhered to, and it also has to be decided whether the Defense 
Ministry and the army's command need to be merged, he said. 
  For Justice Minister Designate Pal Vastagh, the coalition 
agreement determines his tasks for the near future. He has to 
draw up a law on legislation that lays down a more professional 
and better-founded responsibility of legislation. The law on 
ministerial responsibility will have to be completed this year, 
and the coalition agreement also has tight deadlines for drawing 
up a constitution. Vastagh believes it important and urgent to 
confirm judicial independence, and to set up the National 
Judiciary Council. "I would like the Ministry to be a 
government-level intellectual center for legislation and 
codification," Vastagh said. 
  Mrs. Kosa Magda Kovacs, the labor affairs minister of the 
new 
government, said that the Ministry's basic task is to care for 
the unemployed and to improve the situation of people seeking 
jobs for the first time. The Ministry will have to try to help 
the unemployed find jobs. In the interest of this, the 
ministries will have to review the employment consequences of 
their own decisions every year. The minister designate 
emphasized that the two coalition parties do not have any 
differences of opinion on the need for an economic and social 
agreement. According to Mrs. Kosa, the trade unions, employees, 
and other organizations will have to be involved in the 
conciliation process. 
  Future environmental protection and area development 
minister Ferenc Baja sees the drawing up of the environmental 
protection law as his first task, and he considers professional 
and political consensus necessary for it to be accepted. He 
said that the overlaps in the ministries' tasks have to be 
clarified, he mentioned water affairs and forestry as examples. 
On 25 June, Baja met representatives of the Green 
organizations. So far, Baja has mainly gained professional 
experience in area development but, according to him, confidence 
was established at the meeting, which provides the opportunity 
for cooperation with the environmentalist organizations. The 
Green movements see Political State Secretary Designate Katalin 
Szili as a recognized expert, and they appreciate that Baja, as 
deputy chairman of the MSZP, might be able to gain more room for 
maneuver in the government for the Environmental Ministry. 
"They expect me to use my political influence to the benefit of 
environmental protection, and this is what I will do," he said. 
  Industry and Trade Minister Designate Laszlo Pal's ministry 
will be formed from the merger of the Ministry of International 
Economic Relations, the National Technical Development 
Committee, and the Industry Ministry. Pal has set two goals for 
himself: To improve industry's ability to export, and to 
improve the country's export market positions toward the East 
and the West. He said that the predecessors left the energy 
prices to be settled by the new government. In order to secure 
the future of energy supplies in Hungary, the prices will have 
to be increased. However, such measures will only be brought by 
the government if the most needy people get compensated. 
  According to Welfare Minister Designate Pal Kovacs, his 
first 
tasks are to improve the situation of hospitals on the brink of 
bankruptcy, and to change the system of hospital referrals of 
patients. The government has to come to an agreement with the 
social security fund on the transfer of assets and the issue of 
pensions. The sections of the welfare law that exclude 
precisely the poorest people from the provisions will also have 
to be amended. Kovacs would like to extend the child-rearing 
allowance and make it a basic citizens' right. "I would like a 
ministry with a simpler structure, where medical expertise is 
not the only factor and which has a bigger influence in society 
and within the government," Kovacs said. 
  Laszlo Lakos, agricultural minister designate of the Horn 
government, said that they have already agreed on the most 
important tasks with the coalition partner. First of all, 
producers have to be assisted in selling the expected high grain 
yields and, together with this, the establishment of financial 
resources for the autumn soil preparation and sowing jobs is 
also an urgent task. Amending the laws on cooperatives, the 
Agrarian Chamber, and the operation of the land-issuing 
committees is a legislative task. "We would like to gain the 
trust of producers and agricultural intellectuals by 
establishing a predictable support system and market 
environment," Lakos said. In his view, the Agricultural 
Ministry has to serve the interests of the agricultural lobby 
rather than party interests. 
  Interior Minister Designate Gabor Kuncze said that his first 
task after taking office will be preparing the amendment of the 
law on local governments. This is the most urgent task because 
the local government elections are to be held in the autumn. In 
this area, issues in connection with the direct election of 
mayors, the rights and spheres of authority of the mayor, the 
town clerk, and the panel of deputies, and the legal rules of 
directly electing the county bodies will have to be settled 
without delay. Submitting the police's service law is another 
task that cannot be delayed. The only question is, he said, 
whether this can be done within the framework of the unified 
regulation of the armed forces. If this cannot be done within a 
short time, then the police's service law has to be submitted to 
Parliament separately. 
  Kuncze met [Interior Minister] Imre Konya in the Interior 
Ministry and they prepared a list of the issues to be handed 
over. They agreed that the minister still in office will give 
notice to his colleagues in the cabinet who are in confidential 
positions. However, the leader of the cabinet will, for a short 
while, assist the new minister in taking over the current issues 
after he takes office. 

