BFN 

  [Text] Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev and his 
Ukrainian counterpart, Vitaliy Radetskyy, failed to reach 
agreement on the Black Sea Fleet issue at their meeting in 
Moscow Thursday which followed a session of the CIS Defense 
Ministers' Council. 
  Commenting on the reasons for the aggravation of the 
situation, Grachev pointed out that Ukrainian customs officers 
and border guards had no right to search the hydrographic vessel 
Cheleken belonging to the Black Sea Fleet. He said that 
Cheleken's transfer from Odessa to Sevastopol had been 
necessitated by the fleet's hydrographic needs. Ukrainian 
marines attempted to prevent the vessel with hydrographic and 
navigation equipment on board from leaving on April 9. 
  On the next day, the vessel conservation group stationed in 
Odessa was made subordinate to Ukraine by an order of the 
Ukrainian defense minister. 
  Grachev said he had drawn the attention of his Ukrainian 
counterpart to the fact that the actions by Ukrainian special 
purpose units in Odessa were of "unilateral character," laying 
outside the scope of the two countries' agreements on the Black 
Sea Fleet. 
  For his part, Radetskyy laid down his point of view of the 
incidents in Odessa. "In the first place, the indignation of 
citizens of Odessa and Ukraine was caused by the order to use 
weapons without warning which had been given on board Cheleken," 
he told Interfax. The Ukrainian minister pointed out that the 
fact that the order was given by navy servicemen who were 
citizens of Ukraine triggered off an outbreak of indignation. 
  Radetskyy said that "as the 318th group (for vessel 
conservation stationed in Odessa -- IF) gave the order to use 
weapons, I, for my part, made a decision which was adequate to 
these actions -- to dissolve the unit." He said he considered 
Cheleken's leaving Odessa as "pure piracy." 
  Radetskyy supposed that if he had got in touch with Grachev 
at that moment, the incident could have been prevented. 
"However, I could not make contact a whole day," he said. 
  Commenting on the actions by Black Sea Fleet Commander 
Eduard 
Baltin during Cheleken's departure from Odessa, Radetskyy said 
he was amazed at his behavior. 
  What happened in Odessa is a thing of the past. Other issues 
have to be resolved such as that of the Black Sea Fleet. So 
said Ukrainian Foreign Minister Anatoliy Zlenko in an Interfax 
interview. He arrived in Moscow to attend the CIS summit. 
  In response to an Interfax question whether the Massandra 
accord of September 3, 1993 under which the Ukrainian part of 
the fleet would be handed over to Russia as payment for Russian 
fuel, Zlenko said that the accord had not been canceled or 
denounced but that these problems had to be discussed together. 
  Speaking of the recent visit to Ukraine by a Russian team 
headed by special envoy Yuriy Dubinin and Russian Navy 
Commander-in-Chief Feliks Gromov, Zlenko said as the talks 
started it became obvious that the team wanted to make the Black 
Sea Fleet a still bigger headache. 

