CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Susanna Reinboth: "Amphetamine Confiscations </F>
Continue to Increase in 1993"] 
  [Text] Almost 120 kg of hashish was seized last year. 
  Amphetamine seizures increased significantly last year, 
compared to the year before. The number of drug seizures has 
continued to increase strongly over a period of many years. In 
1993, the police and customs seized a total of 18.7 kg of 
amphetamines, while the amount seized the previous year, was 
11.5 kg. 
  The increase in hashish seizures also continued its upward 
trend in 1993, after dipping the year before. 
<H5>  Drug Rings Becoming Professional </H5>
  Hashish is still the most common drug, and more than 117 kg 
of it was seized. Almost half of that amount was seized by the 
Helsinki Narcotics Bureau, during the investigation of a major 
hashish case. 
  Last year, less heroin was seized than a year before. The 
reason for this is that, in 1992, two significant heroin 
shipments, which were not intended for the Finnish market, were 
seized from couriers arriving from Africa. 
  According to Bureau Chief Antti Turkama of the Central 
Criminal Police, the drug rings have clearly become more 
professional. 
  Previously, the drug smugglers and dealers were, almost 
without exception, drug users themselves, but during the last 
few years, economic gain has become almost the exclusive motive 
behind the drug trade. 
  Particularly, the dealers of hard drugs, mainly amphetamines 
and heroin, are professionals. 
<H5>  "Collection of Debts Has Become More Violent" </H5>
  In Turkama's view, this structural change has caused 
criminal 
enforcement methods to become harsher. The rings are carefully 
guarding their territories and their revenues, and the 
collection of debts has clearly become more violent, he 
explained. 
  Assistant Professor Erkki Vuori from the Institute of 
Forensic Medicine, has noted the same trend. During the latter 
part of the 1980's, no drug users were found among homicide 
victims, but during the last three years, the number of such 
victims has fluctuated between five and eight. 
  According to Vuori, the bodies of homicide victims who were 
drug users, are often severely beaten. 
  "It seems that this is based on some kind of private debt 
collection arrangement," he conjectured. 
  The drug problem is still most prevalent in and around the 
capital, as well as in other areas of the province of Uusimaa. 
However, based on available statistics, drugs are rapidly 
reaching other parts of the country. 
  The bulk of narcotics reaching Finland is still brought from 
traditional drug areas, such as Holland and Denmark. However, 
the drug flow from the east, or, in other words from Russia and 
Estonia, continues to grow. 

