CSO 

<F P=106> [Statute on Controls of Exports From the Russian </F>
Federation of Certain Types of Raw and Processed Materials, 
Equipment, Technology, Scientific and Technical Information 
Which Can Be Used in the Production of Weapons or Military 
Equipment] 
  [Text] 1. This statute specifies a system of measures for 
monitoring the export of certain types of raw and processed 
materials, equipment, technology, scientific and technical 
information which can be used in the production of weapons or 
military equipment (hereafter referred to as dual-purpose goods 
and services). 
  2. The procedure for monitoring the export from the Russian 
Federation of dual-purpose goods and services requires the 
following: 
  --the preparation and issuance of conclusions on the 
possibility of exporting dual-purpose goods and services 
included on List No. 74-rp of Certain Types of Raw and Processed 
Materials, Equipment, Technology, Scientific and Technical 
Information Which Can Be Used in the Production of Weapons or 
Military Equipment the Export of Which is Monitored and Effected 
Under License (hereafter referred to as the List) ratified by 
order of the President of the Russian Federation on 11 February 
1994; 
  --the licensing and drawing-up of customs accounts of 
dual-purpose goods and services. 
  3. All subjects of economic activities under the 
jurisdiction 
of the Russian Federation, regardless of form of ownership in 
the conclusion of contracts for export (transfer or exchange) of 
dual-purpose goods and services included on the List, must 
indicate in the text of the contract the end users and the 
purpose for which the exported goods and services are to be 
used, the commitment of the importer that such goods and 
services will be used only for purposes not directly or 
indirectly related to the production of weapons or military 
equipment and will not be reexported or transferred to anyone 
whomsoever without written orders to that effect from the 
exporter. 
  The obligations must be specially drawn up by the importer 
in 
an authorized state agency of the importing nation for each 
specific transaction for the delivery of any item of export 
included on the List in the form of an international (or 
national) import certificate or the like in the form of a 
document containing the obligations specified in the first 
paragraph of this point with a certified translation into 
Russian. 
  4. In the absence in the importing nation's legislation of 
standards governing the monitoring of exports of certain types 
of dual-purpose goods and services or the absence of a 
dual-purpose good or service imported from the Russian 
Federation on the national control list of the importing nation, 
an official document (notice) to that effect must be issued by 
an authorized state agency of the importing nation. 
  In this case the obligations of the importer contained in 
the 
text of the contract constitute an adequate basis for effecting 
the export. To the documents indicated is attached an extract 
from the commodity registry of the importing country or some 
other document confirming the legal status of the foreign 
importer according to the legislation of the nation in which he 
is located, with a certified translation into Russian. 
  The contract text must define the situation with respect to 
the exporter's right to verify that the good or service will be 
used in accordance with the stated purpose. 
  Setting up the monitoring of the obligations of foreign 
importers with respect to the use of dual-purpose goods or 
services imported from the Russian Federation is carried out by 
the procedure established in Decree No 1030 passed by the 
Council of Ministers and the Government of the Russian 
Federation on 11 October 1993. 
  If violations or nonobservance of the obligations are 
revealed during the verification, the contract is subject to 
abrogation. 
  5. The licensing of the export (transfer or exchange) of 
dual-purpose goods or services included on the List, is 
mandatory for all the subjects of economic activities within the 
Russian Federation and is performed for all types of foreign 
economic activities, regardless of the form of ownership, 
including direct production and scientific and technical 
relations, border and near-border trade, and commodity exchange 
operations, in accordance with this Statute. 
  The export (transfer or exchange) of dual-purpose goods and 
services included on the List is effected only under one-time 
licenses issued by the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations of 
the Russian Federation. 
  The issuing of a license is based on a conclusion of the 
Commission for Export Control of the Russian Federation under 
the Government of the Russian Federation on the possibility of 
exporting (transferring or exchanging) dual-purpose goods or 
services. 
  A conclusion from the Commission on Export Control of the 
Government of the Russian Federation under the Ministry of 
Economics of the Russian Federation (Russia's Export Control) on 
the possibility of exporting (transferring or exchanging) 
dual-purpose goods or services constitutes the basis for issuing 
a license. 
  The following are submitted for obtaining a conclusion in 
the 
Ministry of Economics of the Russian Federation (export control 
department): A request for the issue of a licence drawn up in 
accordance with the requirements established by the Ministry of 
Foreign Economic Relations of the Russian Federation; a copy of 
the contract; a copy of the agreement between the Russian 
producers and the exporter (when the export of the good or 
service is being effected through a middleman); the originals of 
documents describing the obligations of the importer (if they 
are not contained in the contract text) and the state agency of 
the importing nation as specified in points 3 and 4 of this 
Statute. 
  A conclusion on the possibility of export is valid for a 
period of no more than 20 days following the receipt of said 
documents. The conclusion is sent by the Ministry of Economics 
of the Russian Federation (the export control department) to the 
Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations of the Russian Federation 
and the requester. 
  The Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations of the Russian 
Federation sends information (in a coordinated form) on licenses 
based on conclusions of Russia's Export Control to the Ministry 
of Economics of the Russian Federation (export control 
department). 
  Permission to reexport is issued to Russian exporters based 
on a conclusion of Russia's Export Control on the possibility of 
reexporting. For this purpose the Russian exporter submits to 
the Ministry of Economics of the Russian Federation (the export 
control department) certified copies of the contract between the 
foreign importer and a third person containing the obligations 
stemming from the contract and drawn up in the authorized state 
agency of the country of the third person in the form of an 
import certificate or other document specified by its national 
legislation. 
  6. The temporary withdrawal beyond the borders of the 
Russian 
Federation of equipment (products), processed materials, 
technology, scientific and technical information contained on 
the List for showing at exhibits and fairs and for advertising 
purposes may be effected without a license based on conclusions 
of Russia's Export Control. 
  In order to acquire a conclusion on the possibility of 
temporary removal a request is submitted to the Ministry of 
Economics of the Russian Federation (export control department) 
containing the name of the item of export (indicating the TN VED 
[not further identified] code) and the quantity, the purpose of 
the removal and the way in which the object is to be used; the 
name of the exhibition (or fair); locations where the object 
will be used, periods during which the object removed will be 
kept abroad; name and address of Russian organization effecting 
the export; foreign contracting parties; the name of the customs 
agency which will draw up the customs forms on the object; and 
also the obligations of the Russian organization removing and 
returning the item. 
  A conclusion on the possibility of temporary removal is 
issued within a 20-day period following the receipt of said 
documents. The conclusion is sent by the Ministry of Economics 
of the Russian Federation (the export control department) to the 
requester for submission to the customs agency indicated in the 
conclusion. A copy of the conclusion is sent to the State 
Customs Committee of the Russian Federation. 
  7. The removal of processed materials (items), equipment or 
technology containing information which is a state secret is 
effected in accordance with the Law of the Russian Federation 
"On State Secrets." 
  8. Customs documents must be drawn up by the established 
procedure on dual-purpose goods and services included on the 
List which are moved outside the borders of the Russian 
Federation. 
  The exporter submits the license obtained to the customs 
agencies, which serves as the basis for allowing the items to 
leave the borders of the Russian Federation. 
  In the case of temporary removal outside the borders of the 
Russian Federation of equipment (items), processed materials, 
technology, scientific and technical information included on the 
List for display at exhibitions and fairs and for advertising 
purposes, the customs agencies are provided with the conclusion 
of Russia's Export Control on the possibility of their temporary 
removal. 
  The State Customs Committee of the Russian Federation 
submits 
(in coordinated form) to the Ministry of Economics of the 
Russian Federation (export control department) information on 
the removal outside the borders of the Russian Federation of 
dual-purpose goods and services for which the conclusions and 
licenses indicated in points 5 and 6 of this Statute have been 
issued. 
  9. Persons exporting dual-purpose goods or services on which 
special export controls have been established in violation of 
the procedure specified by this Statute bear liability in 
accordance with legislation of the Russian Federation. 

