CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yuriy Kolotvin, deputy chief of the Regional </F>
Office for Organized Crime, by S. Baranov; place and date not 
given: "Fifty Mafia Groups for the Kray. And a `Syndicate' To 
Boot"] 
  [Text] Just a few years ago even the question of 
whether there was organized crime here in the kray was being 
discussed in the press by way of a debate. Today no one has any 
doubt as to the presence of organized crime groups: They exist. 
As does now also a force opposed to them--the Regional Office 
for Organized Crime. Formed two years ago, this MVD subdivision 
is showing itself to be increasingly decisive. The work on 
countering the mafia crime formations in our kray is headed by 
Yuriy Kolotvin, deputy chief of this office. 
  [Baranov] So what is organized crime in the kray today? 
  [Kolotvin] Insofar as the legislators have yet to give us 
precise legal criteria of a definition of the "organized crime" 
concept, we have had to formulate them ourselves. As distinct 
from the customary criminal groupings, so to speak, 
organized-crime communities have to have been in existence for 
quite some time and to have quite a clear-cut structure of the 
chain of command, intelligence, outlets to the organs of 
administration and the law enforcement authorities, and legal or 
semilegal forms of "laundering" money obtained illegally. 
  On the basis of these estimates, we count in the kray today 
one criminal community--the "syndicate"--and 46 organized-crime 
groups. Those formed on a national basis included. They include 
three Azerbaijani, two Armenian, two Chechen, and two Korean 
crime groups. But I have to specify immediately that both 
quantitatively and qualitatively the composition of the groups 
is changing constantly. Last year, for example, two Azerbaijani 
groupings were locked in a mortal clash. Nine persons on both 
sides died as a result. Some of the groups, having been brought 
under our control, are disbanding themselves. 
  We "fish out" some, so to speak, in actual crimes and 
institute criminal proceedings against them. Thus two crime 
bosses and 35 leaders of various criminal groups were arraigned 
last year on the basis of material of our officers. As a result 
we were able to prevent the misappropriation of monetary 
resources totaling R5.5 billion and the attempted sale of almost 
10 kg of industrial silver, to detect and confiscate R2 million 
worth of counterfeit R5,000 notes and $4,000 worth in $100 
bills, and to confiscate from the criminals 51 firearms and 35 
kg of narcotics. 
  [Baranov] But does not your subdivision duplicate the work 
of 
other militia services, criminal investigation, say? 
  [Kolotvin] I do not believe so. Although there are many 
problems that we have to resolve together. 
  The point is that organized crime, availing itself of the 
new 
social opportunities, is rapidly invading all spheres of the 
economic and social life of society and mastering increasingly 
new types of crime, for which the Criminal Code has no name 
even. Thus are "dead zones," at which the militia branch 
services either cannot call in time or at which they cannot call 
at all, are emerging. Our officers employ in their work both the 
principle of the work of criminal investigation--from the crime 
to the person--and the principle of work of the economic crime 
subdivisions--from the person to the crime. It is the 
combination of these two principles that is enabling us to [word 
illegible] and, if not wipe out, then keep under control these 
"dead zones." 
  This was the case with, for example, forged letters of 
advice, owing to the use of which in the Far East region 
approximately R3 billion were lost. As soon as we learned about 
this, we made a careful study of the forms and paths of the 
embezzlement of the money and performed a colossal amount of 
work on detecting the enterprises that had been specially formed 
to this end. Twenty-seven of them were discovered in Khabarovsk 
alone, incidentally, and this made it possible not only to save 
over R5 billion for the kray but also to erect quite dependable 
barriers in the way of the transfer of monetary resources. 
  [Baranov] Does this mean that you are having today to deal 
more with crimes in the economic sphere? 
  [Kolotvin] Such a tilt has, indeed, emerged, but this is 
dictated more by the criminalization of our economy. The public 
sector has one foot in the grave, virtually. It has come to be 
replaced by a variety of limited-liability partnerships, 
associations, individual-private enterprises, and joint 
ventures, many of which are in practice merely a cover for 
illegal activity and the laundering of criminal cash. Thus last 
year the Komsomolsk-na-Amure branch of the Office for Organized 
Crime uncovered the theft by a number of officials and the 
commander of a military unit of military assets, provisions, and 
explosives worth a total of over R18 million. It has now already 
been established that everything that was misappropriated was 
sold via commercial structures controlled by the "syndicate." At 
a warehouse of the Tatyana individual-private enterprise our 
officers confiscated more than 200 kg of TNT demolition blocks, 
approximately 100 detonators, and 70 meters of safety fuse. A 
group of embezzlers at the shipbuilding yard was discovered 
there, in Komsomolsk, also. In exchange for consumer merchandise 
it has given Japan ultra-pure copper intended for military 
production. And these transactions were effected via the Yeva 
commercial enterprise. We were able to prevent the removal of 
the last consignment of copper (six tonnes). In a word, certain 
commercial structures require today the constant and unremitting 
attention of the militia authorities, ours included. But the 
economy far from exhausts the spheres of our attention, of 
course. 
  [Baranov] To what else do you pay attention? 
  [Kolotvin] Take racketeering. Given the imperfect state of 
Russian criminal legislation, extortion has become the favorite 
form of shaking loose money for our organized-crime groups. It 
is more profitable for organized crime than the traditional 
business--prostitution, gambling, narcotics. 
  Strapping young men approach a businessman and offer him 
so-called "protection." And although, as a rule, there are 
neither direct threats nor other physical pressure--only hints 
at possible dangers--such offers are accepted practically 
without a hitch. And this type of "activity" brings in enormous 
profits, effortlessly, what is more. Were the payers to see, 
willy-nilly, what tears are shed by their "protectors" whom we 
have taken into custody, they would not be giving up their money 
so easily. But fear in the face of the extortioners is so great 
that the victims of regular racketeering prefer to conceal 
themselves, are driving their problems inward, and are, 
ultimately, drawing even bigger trouble onto themselves. 
  Quite recently we were involved in a case of a businessman 
who had been "held" for almost a week and who, possibly, had 
been subjected to physical pressure in the gym of the Rossich 
Club, which had hitherto been classed with us as being in far 
from criminal ranks. It was demanded of the businessman that he 
return R24 million which he allegedly owed. Closer 
familiarization with the records of the Rossich Club, 
incidentally, affords reason to believe that its members have 
not eschewed concealed forms of racketeering either. Why, in 
fact, have numerous commercial firms suddenly become enamored 
with sport, that cultivated by Rossich, what is more, and begun 
to transfer millions in assets to the club's account? 
  Generally, fear, far-fetched, for the most part, is enabling 
a variety of no-good people to prosper. Although whoever has, 
for all that, ventured to turn to us has not yet once regretted 
it. 
  [Baranov] It is hard to believe. After all, organized crime 
is, you will agree, far from innocuous.... 
  [Kolotvin] This is true. But there is real danger and there 
is a mythical danger spurred more by the representatives of the 
criminal communities themselves, who make money out of general 
fear. But it is a very great distance from threats to their 
actual realization. We know this better than anyone. Especially 
since we are today capable of providing perfectly dependable 
protection for people who have turned to us for help. And there 
have been no malfunctions as yet. It is not fortuitous that the 
"syndicate" and organizations under its control are now trying 
to resort more to psychological methods, via the news media 
included. Many citizens of Khabarovsk most likely witnessed what 
strong words against the militia on the TVA [expansion 
unidentified] screen were uttered by Sergeyev, chairman of the 
Yedinstvo public organization, when we made public facts about 
the past of the leaders of this organization. 
  It never occurred to any of our officers or officers of the 
Internal Affairs Administration, incidentally, to appear on TVA 
and if only somehow to restrict the flow of Yedinstvo's 
protests. We believed and continue to believe that this is 
exclusively the business of the staff of the television station. 
That at least three members of Yedinstvo are at the present time 
under arrest for perfectly specific crimes is another matter. 
And they were arrested before Yedinstvo's television attack, 
what is more. 
  One way or another, we understand full well that we are 
constantly in the sights of criminal structures and that any 
misstep of ours, any mistake--and our officers are human, for 
all that--could immediately be presented in a distorted form. So 
we try to make as few mistakes as possible. 
  [Baranov] Since we are talking about employees of your 
office, what are things like for them today? 
  [Kolotvin] Thanks to the assistance of the kray Internal 
Affairs Administration, our outfit has been noticeably 
reinforced. We now have subdivisions in Sovetskaya Gavan and 
Vanino, in Amursk and Nikolayevsk. Special rapid-deployment 
subdivisions are being formed in Khabarovsk and in Komsomolsk. 
Our office has, in accordance with a decision of the 
administration of the kray, been allocated premises. And 
although they do not entirely resolve the problem of 
accommodating our officers, they are, for all that, better than 
nothing. We will hope that the social problems of the personnel 
of the Office for Organized Crime will be resolved. 
  Social problems, on which unfortunately we can exert no in 
any way appreciable influence, disturb us no less than our own, 
for that matter. The problem of the youth, primarily. 
  We are noting with alarm organized crime's vigorous 
penetration of the youth milieu. Having a criminal record and 
wearing the badges of affiliation to the criminal world are 
today considered among certain young people the height of valor, 
virtually. Last year the Komsomolsk "syndicate" even attempted 
to demonstrate its youth strength, organizing a protest action 
in connection with the militia's arrest of crime boss Turbin. 
Only thanks to the decisive and prompt measures of the 
leadership of the Komsomolsk Internal Affairs Administration was 
this action thwarted. But who could vouch under the conditions 
of the present social instability, inflation, and rising 
unemployment for the criminal world not tomorrow parading not 
hundreds but thousands of its new recruits? 
  Another serious problem is corruption. It is increasingly 
encompassing the authorities, the business leadership, and the 
militia and other law enforcement authorities. Senior officials 
and the criminal communities are coalescing in the soil of 
corruption. And although we already have considerable material 
on a number of officials, on account of the absence of 
legislation on corruption, we can use only that which comes 
under articles of the current Criminal Code. 
  This year, for example, we have succeeded in instituting two 
such sets of criminal proceedings: on the criminal collaboration 
of the chief accountant of the Pishchevik works under 
construction in Komsomolsk and the director of the Tsentr 
limited-liability partnership from Amursk. Abusing their 
positions, this pair embezzled R20 million intended for the 
construction of the Pishchevik. Criminal proceedings are being 
instituted against the director of the Ladoga small-scale 
enterprise for forgery, via which R5 million were 
misappropriated. Other material, alas, is as yet lying unused 
and is waiting for its time to come.... 
  And one further cause of our distress--the conditions of the 
storage of weapons. Even in the military units the theft of 
weapons has become almost a commonplace phenomenon. The theft of 
122 Makarov pistols and Nagant revolvers from the warehouse of 
the Higher Militia School was uncovered last year. And eight 
assault rifles have "disappeared" this year from the weapons 
depot of a military unit. And our officers recently detained a 
group of inhabitants of Nakhodka, who had brought into 
Khabarovsk two pistols, one Nagant revolver, two grenades, and 
three firing mechanisms for explosives. The origins of all these 
"goods" are currently being looked into, but we can from our own 
experience already surmise that there have once again been 
sloppy work, heedlessness, and a lack of control somewhere. 
  [Baranov] What are the current concerns of the regional 
office for organized crime? 
  [Kolotvin] Waiting for new homes, if we are speaking about 
internal matters. As far as work is concerned, there is, as 
always, a multitude of them. A group of the Nikolayevsk Bulk 
Plant, which this year alone has contrived to misappropriate 700 
tonnes of diesel fuel, is being investigated in 
Nikolayevsk-na-Amure. A group of persons who stole R25 million 
worth of liquor from a storehouse of the Intertorg 
individual-private enterprise is being investigated. We have 
considerable work to do with the Rossich Athletic Club. The 
leader of the Nikolayevsk "syndicate" is being arraigned on 
suspicion of homicide, and cases concerning the misappropriation 
of material assets totaling R80 million are being investigated. 
Sufficient? 
  [Baranov] Do you have sufficient forces for it all? 
  [Kolotvin] We should have. Were we to meet with more 
understanding and assistance on the part of the municipal and 
rayon authorities and inhabitants of the kray, we could be more 
vigorous in curbing the onslaught of crime.... 

