Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed Report: "Frontier Area Bids For New Markets"] </F>
  [Text] Once a closed province in Southwest China, Yunnan 
is now opening itself up to the outside world. 
  Governor He Zhiqiang said, "Development of foreign trade is 
the only way in which the province can be lifted out its 
closed-door mentality and backwardness. We'll do all we can to 
take part in world trade to promote our local economy. This is 
a good opportunity for us to catch up with world development." 
  Bordering Viet Nam, Myanmar and the Laos, the province is in 
an ideal position to open itself up to the outside world. 
  Yunnan's capital Kunming and the three border cities of 
Wanding, Ruili and Hekou, are in the forefront of promoting 
foreign economic relations. 
  Situated in a remote mountainous area, the province has a 
bountiful supply of nonferrous metal resources and a large 
variety of animals, plants and medical herbs. 
  But, its commodity-based economy is still under-developed. 
And its economic and social development is imbalanced. Though 
some of its products such as tobacco, have occupied an important 
position in China, Yunnan's economy and education still lag 
behind that of other parts of the country. 
  In the 21st Century, Southeast Asia will be one of the 
world's most vibrant economic centres. With its advantages in 
geography and natural resources, Yunnan wants to develop its 
economy so that it capture its share of the trade in the 
Asian-Pacific Region. 
  To reach this objective, the province will take the 
following 
measures: 
  1. Adjust the industrial structure to suit the development 
of export-oriented economy and transform raw material industries 
into raw material processing industries. A Southeast 
Asia-oriented industrial system to produce such daily 
necessities like beverages, rubber and wood products, garments, 
textiles, shoes and building materials, will be established. 
  2. Attract more foreign investment through sponsorship of 
import and export trade fairs in the province and overseas. The 
province had approved a total of 682 foreign-funded enterprises 
with a contractual value of $1.46 billion by November of last 
year. A total of 407 such enterprises were approved in 1993, 
attracting $938 million of foreign funds, nearly twice as much 
as the total of the past 13 years. Yunnan's exports valued $21 
million in 1993. In addition to the first import and export 
trade fair in Kunming, the province organized fairs in 
Singapore, Northern Europe and Hong Kong last year. 
  The Kunming fair attracted 5,169 businessmen from 45 
countries and regions and sealed $1.57 billion worth of trade 
contracts. Most of the traders were from Southeast Asian 
countries, Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan. The Kunming fair has 
become one of the country's most important trade fairs, together 
with the Guangzhou fair in the south, Shanghai fair in the east, 
Urumqi fair in the west and Harbin fair in the north. 
  3. Establishing various markets to promote commodity and 
material exchange in a bid to link up with the rest of the 
world. Over the past years, 3,096 markets covering agricultural 
and side-line products, information, capital and properties have 
been set up in the province. Specialized markets in machinery, 
tobacco and cigarettes, sugar and tea, and information have seen 
brisk business. 
  4. More to be done to boost border trade. The border trade 
value was 2.27 billion yuan ($260 million) in 1992, up 35 per 
cent over the previous year and making up 30 per cent of 
Yunnan's total foreign trade. Menghai County earned 100 million 
yuan ($11 million) in border trade in the first eight months of 
last year, up 11 times over the previous year. 
  6. More attention to be paid to enhancing regional economic 
co-operation. An economic co-operative network covering Yunnan, 
Guizhou, Guangxi, Sichuan, Tibet and Chongqing and Chengdu 
cities has been taking shape. 
  5. Development of its tourism industry to increase foreign 
exchange earnings, balance revenue and expenditure and promote 
other kinds of industries. 
  Yunnan has a vast number of tourist attractions. It boasts 
six State-designated beauty spots, 30 provincially-designated 
historical sites and seven State-designated travel routes. In 
1992, the province received more than 310,000 overseas visitors. 
The figure increased several times in 1993. 

