Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Inaugural speech by Venezuelan President Rafael Caldera at </F>
the Congress of the Republic in Caracas -- live] 
  [Text] President and Vice President of the Congress; 
President of the Supreme Court of Justice; Your Eminence 
Cardinal Jose Ali Lebrun, Archbishop of Caracas; Prosecutor 
General; President and members of the Supreme Electoral Council; 
President and Magistrates of the Judiciary Council; former 
President of the Republic; Ministers of the Executive Cabinet; 
Governor of the Federal District; Comptroller General; Attorney 
General; Your Excellency and Most Reverend Apostolic Nuncio, 
dean of the diplomatic corps; ambassadors; charges d'affaires 
and international organizations delegates; officers and 
admirals, members of the High Military Command; Governors; 
Mayors of metropolitan areas; presidents and directors of the 
national academies; rectors of the national universities; 
directors general of the executive offices; presidents of 
autonomous institutions and state enterprises; delegates of the 
media; Senators; Deputies; people of Venezuela: 
  As the homeland's distinguished citizens used to do in the 
past, I am assuming the office of the Presidency of the 
Republic, invoking God Almighty, in whose name I have sworn to 
obey and enforce the Constitution and bylaws. I hereby greet the 
heads and members of the other branches of the government, 
particularly the Legislative and Judicial Branches, with which I 
aspire to hold the best possible relations within the framework 
of the consideration that each of them deserves, and I pledge to 
cooperate with them in the fulfillment of the state's goals as 
stipulated by the Constitution. I hereby greet the state and 
municipal authorities elected by the people -- authorities who 
operate autonomously. I hope that, as part of the spirit of 
decentralization that has prevailed in the recent past, we will 
be able to do the joint work for which the people hope -- work 
aimed at resolving the country's problems and meeting the needs 
and aspirations of the Venezuelan people in general. 
  I hereby greet the various sectors of civilian society, 
whose 
importance is acknowledged more and more and whose understanding 
with the public sector is essential to the people's general 
well-being. I greet the religious authorities, workers, and 
entrepreneurs. I greet the men and women, Venezuelan and 
otherwise, who live in our territory, particularly the young 
people, who are the objects of my concern and hope and whom I 
hope to have in mind at all times in the government's plans and 
activities. 
  I greet the Armed Forces, an essential factor in preserving 
the democratic system and the country's development. I pledge 
to virtuously carry out the important constitutional function of 
being their Commander in Chief with a sense of justice and a 
permanent concern for their professional and technical progress, 
as well as their material improvement. In a particularly 
respectful manner, I greet Your Eminence the Cardinal, 
Archbishop of Caracas, and representative of the Catholic 
Church, to which the majority of the Venezuelan people belong. 
  Greetings to all of Venezuela's inhabitants. I begin my 
administration at a serious and complex moment. We are 
suffering the effects of a deep crisis, which began 20 years 
ago, paradoxically when the price of our main product, oil, was 
the fairest. This brought in an avalanche of money that 
mistakenly made us believe that we were very rich. This 
illusion of richness forced us to commit endless mistakes. From 
that time onward we began living a misguided process of chaos 
and disorder that produced widespread moral decline which lately 
has caused such a state of affairs that to overcome our problems 
we will need an intense national effort of solidarity. 
  President Ramon J. Velasquez, an illustrious Venezuelan who 
accepted the difficult task of leading the country into a 
political transition via an electoral process, has completed a 
job of historic proportions. No matter what the opinions may be 
about certain aspects of his administration, he deserves the 
recognition of his fellow citizens because he cannot be blamed 
for the state of affairs he dramatically outlined in his 
impressive speech of 28 January. 
  In the name of all Venezuelans I want to express to him, 
during this solemn moment, my deepest and sincerest gratitude. 
President Velasquez was the exception to the traditional change 
of office ceremony in which an outgoing president claims 
everything is fine and an incoming president stresses the awful 
aspects of the situation. In this case, the same person who, 
after listing his administration's positive deeds, felt the need 
to bare his conscience as a patriot and historian to put on 
record the very harsh reality he encountered and has turned over. 
  Exactly 20 years ago -- albiet, less one month and 10 days 
-- 
I transferred the administration I presided over between 1969 
and 1974 to the man who was elected by the people to succeed me. 
I handed over an orderly country in peace and with a fiscal 
surplus. I cannot be like singer Carlos Gardel, who once said: 
20 years is nothing! No, no way. These 20 years have been 
profound, and they have greatly influenced our country's life -- 
for good and for bad. Even through there are events that are 
unquestionably good, events have also occurred that are 
decidedly bad -- events that have threatened the very democratic 
institution that cost so many Venezuelans so much effort, so 
many struggles, and so much suffering. 
  Venezuela today is a very different country from the one I 
handed over 20 years ago. The population has, of course, 
increased substantially. From 12 million inhabitants, it has 
increased to more than 20 million by the end of 1993. The birth 
rate has diminished reasonably from 3.47 percent to 2.99 
percent, which is still high compared to more developed 
countries. Life expectancy has increased, thereby increasing 
the number of people over the age of 15, which at that time 
represented more than 52 percent of the population, to some 58 
or 59 percent. The urban population, which was 73 percent, is 
now 84 percent, which highlights the very serious duty we have 
to slum dwellers in the large cities. 
  Economic figures have undergone astronomical changes. The 
budget has gone from 14 billion bolivares to 1.4 trillion 
bolivares -- a figure which, despite the devaluation of our 
currency, represents three times the previous figure in real 
terms of U.S. dollars. 
  The GNP has increased by more than 50 percent, but per 
capita income and real salaries have dropped. The inflation 
rate, which was 5 percent, is now more than 40 percent. The 
foreign debt, which was $3 billion, is now more than $30 
billion. Unemployment has grown from 6 to 12 percent, and these 
figures could be misleading if we do not take into consideration 
that 40 percent of the active population functions within the 
underground economy. 
  The housing deficit is overwhelming. Public services have 
deteriorated. The cost of living is suffocating the middle 
class and the poor. The cost of borrowing has climbed 
dreadfully, and high interest rates are making it impossible for 
producers to ask for loans. 
  The agricultural sector was on the verge of collapse, but it 
is fair to commend the work carried out by the Velasquez 
administration and its agriculture minister, Hiram Gaviria. 
  Industrialists who were not prepared to compete in open 
markets are suffering the inevitable consequences of the sudden 
opening to foreign competition. 
  The value of the Venezuelan currency, which carries the name 
of our liberator and that used to be a symbol of stability, has 
dropped twenty-fold, and its plunge is continuing. 
  The economic situation is the main concern of the government 
over which I will preside. It has to be the main concern of all 
the Venezuelans. 
  The country is suffering from stagflation: There is no 
economic growth, but there is a rampant increase in prices. The 
people know perfectly well this is a difficult situation and 
they know that miracles cannot be performed. 
  I did not promise miracles during my election campaign, and 
I 
cannot offer them today, but I can assure you this is what the 
people want from the government being inaugurated today -- to 
work tirelessly, honestly, and with interest in serving, and to 
face the terrible problems that have been created because of 
irresponsibility, inefficiency, and corruption in the past few 
years. 
  Some believe we should declare a state of emergency to face 
this crisis and implement a war economy. There are enough 
reasons for doing that. It is necessary, however, to use the 
methods offered by the de jure state, methods that are enhanced 
because all the sectors of the nation have expressed support for 
these methods. 
  Others have said, almost defiantly, there is no alternative 
but to impose, with rigid neoliberal orthodoxy, more dramatic 
adjustments that will yield, they think, fruits in the mid- or 
long term. They have forgotten that complex ties link the 
economic and social aspects and that if the latter disintegrates 
there will be no way of generating trust for attracting 
investments and for kindling economic dynamics in the short-, 
mid-, or long term. 
  I will be both optimistic and prudent. Faced with two 
radical options -- the populist and the neoliberal -- I resolve 
to seek a commitment of solidarity with emphasis on the social 
aspects. 
  I want to trust in the reasoning abilities of the country's 
economic sectors and in the understanding and support of the 
people. I hope the various sectors do not fail to listen to the 
desperate calls for putting short-term egotistical interests 
aside for the sake of the long-term solutions that common sense 
demands. 
  The objective of this solidarity commitment is to secure a 
competitive and modern economy in the framework of social 
solidarity, with the private sector serving as the engine of 
economic growth while assuming part of the social 
responsibilities that have rested until now on the state and the 
oil economy. 
  The essential points of this strategy are: 1) We will wage 
an all-out fight against inflation. 2) We will implement 
austere public spending to attain a balanced budget and break 
the inflationary inertia in the short- and mid-term, without 
restricting social concerns, to which I will give priority. We 
will begin by setting an example by way of drastic cuts at the 
Presidency, at my own military house, and in the secret budget. 
The 1994 budget will therefore be reduced, and we will seek to 
coordinate fiscal and monetary policies to avoid contradictions 
in the fight against inflation. 3) We will stress an open 
economy and competitiveness within the framework of reciprocity. 
4) We will implement economic stabilization programs aimed not 
only at large macroeconomic accounts, but also designed to take 
into account the basic needs of the Venezuelan family. 5) We 
will wage an all-out war against waste and corruption in all 
sectors of the economy, both in the public and private sectors. 
6) We will stress openess in the privatization processes 
required by the country's situation, as well as in measures that 
tend to democratize capital. 7) We will implement tax policies 
inspired by constitutional precepts, which I quote: The tax 
system will attempt to distribute the tax burden fairly 
according to the economic capacity of the taxpayer, taking into 
account the principle of progressive taxation, as well as 
protecting the national economy and raising the the people's 
standard of living. This is the Article 223 of the Constitution. 
  This tax policy means this: on one hand, an effective 
collection of taxes, and, on the other, an in-depth reform of 
tax laws so that those who have the greatest capacity to pay end 
up paying the most taxes. [applause] 
  Regarding tax collection, a report from the Comptroller 
General's Office dated January 1994 concerning the fiscal 
deficit and the budget includes this impressive statement, and I 
quote: Studies by the Treasury Ministry and the Central Bank of 
Venezuela, as well actions by the Comptroller's General's 
Office, enable us to estimate that there is tax evasion of 
approximately 70 percent in terms of tariffs, tax contributions, 
and fines, without taking into account the income from petroleum 
products and income tax on the oil industry, unquote. This tax 
evasion represents a huge amount of money lost because of 
inefficiency and corruption. My government will strongly and 
firmly fight these two maladies. I trust that the results will 
considerably reduce the fiscal deficit. 
  Regarding tax reforms, I must be very clear in the position 
I 
uphold. I said in my letter of intention to the Venezuelan 
people during the electoral campaign, and I quote: We must 
stress the need to reduce and realign spending, radically 
improve tax collection immediately, and implement tax reforms to 
increase income, as well as distribute taxation with a sense of 
fairness to ensure that those with the most income have the 
biggest burden. Likewise, the value-added tax, the VAT, will be 
suspended because it is an unfair burden on consumers with less 
income, unquote. [applause] 
  In line with this promise, as soon as the new government is 
installed, the finance minister will present to the legislative 
chambers the draft bills proposed by the executive branch on 
urgent tax reforms in an effort to immediately confront the 
difficult situation created by the fiscal deficit. For the time 
being, we will request the elimination of the VAT on consumers 
[applause], and we will propose a series of fiscal measures, 
such as a selective tax on wholesalers, a luxury tax, and 
substantial reforms to the income tax, all of which are aimed at 
modernizing public finances so that taxes yield more progressive 
and productive results. At the same time, we will substantially 
improve public spending effiency, which is a matter that cannot 
be postponed and has been made worse by the deterioration of the 
oil market. 
  One main objective of our economic policy is to change the 
old disguised-as-modern system that called for economic growth 
while propping itself on unrestrained public expenditures. 
  The state's role is to promote and to govern. The objective 
is to encourage domestic and foreign private investments in the 
framework of legal and economic security and to stimulate, with 
proper measures, the reactivation of essential production 
sectors. 
  Short- and mid-term fiscal projects are not the only concern 
and interest of the government, which is interested in essential 
reform to the national economy. This is why I have designated a 
state minister whose responsibility will be to study and analyze 
long-term economic projects. We are on the threshold of the 21st 
century and we cannot limit ourselves to searching for ways to 
resolve situations that have arisen at the end of the 20th 
century. 
  No one can guarantee that in a society like the Venezuelan 
society, which is in the middle of a transition from a 
bonds-holding economy to a productive economy, no risk is 
involved. I can assure you I will make every effort to have a 
straightforward and trustworthy regime, and there will not be 
uncertainty in our exchange policy. I clearly announce, once and 
for all, that my government does not plan to impose a maximum 
devaluation or exchange controls. [applause] 
  Five years ago, it was announced that the production 
mechanism would be changed to make it competitive. This did not 
yield the promised results. Now it is not a matter of simply 
changing the mechanism, but of avoiding its collapse. This is 
why one fundamental objective of the solidarity commitment I am 
promoting is to implement a realistic and viable program that 
should encourage production and productivity and bring down 
interest rates. Right now, high interest rates make it 
impossible for large, medium, and small businessmen to utilize 
banking services. [applause] 
  According to what the labor and capital sectors want, a 
social solidarity program must be initiated. This program, which 
would take place as a dialogue for solidarity, should imply not 
only an institutional reordering but also the creation of public 
and private pension funds of a complementary nature as well as 
constructive discussions and analyses about social benefits and 
the guarantees workers should enjoy at the conclusion of their 
labor relations. 
  We will support the agricultural and livestock sector, which 
was severely punished by the economic readjustments and 
uncontrolled opening of recent years. 
  Priority attention will be given to guaranteeing nutritional 
needs. Investments in agriculture and livestock, industry, and 
human resource sectors will be the determining factors of the 
new, sustained economic-growth phase. 
  Production efforts in the agricultural sector will be the 
recipient of special encouragement and support. This implies 
respect for a legal and personal security system for the people 
in rural areas. We will encourage fishing activities, both 
industrial fishing in national and international waters, the 
development and consolidation of small-scale fishing, and the 
breeding of various aquatic species. 
  We will also support productive forestry activities while 
carefully protecting our ecological system. 
  The evolution of science and technology has brought 
substantial changes in the orientation and direction of 
productive processes directed at overcoming obsolete patterns, 
readapting structures, and projecting the efforts of industrial 
and farm workers to the conquest of foreign markets. 
  Aware of the disadvantages of current mechanisms of 
commercialization and marketing that establish a tangible 
difference between what a farmer is paid on his farm and what 
the consumer pays, my government will promote and encourage the 
establishment of agroindustrial intermediary structures that 
will be socially equitable and economically efficient. 
  Meanwhile, we will offer enthusiastic support to industrial 
initiatives involving the processing and manufacturing of 
agricultural raw materials and the manufacturing of industrial 
products for the countryside, thus we will be inclined to 
balance and increase farming and industry. 
  Our investment policy includes broad opportunities in 
tourism. Tourism investments in Venezuela are very attractive. 
We will make an effort to offer facilities and incentives to 
national and foreign investors, and we will work with 
determination to guarantee public security, which will be a 
powerful factor in this economic sector. 
  The country is also faced with the need for large scale 
public projects that are essential to development, such as the 
alternate highway from Caracas to the coast, the bridge over the 
Orinoco precipice, and a number of freeways, some of which were 
initiated but must now be completed. 
  In view of the fiscal situation, it is essential to 
establish 
a concessions system for the construction of projects. I hope 
Congress will review the law governing this matter and make it 
viable so we can take advantage of it now when it is urgently 
needed. 
  Small and medium businesses, handicrafts, and 
microbusinesses 
will be areas of special concern, convinced as we are of the 
important role they can play in reactivating the economy and 
generating jobs. 
  The recent collapse of an important banking institution, 
which threatened the stability of the financial system, was the 
tail end of the moral and economic crisis that has done so much 
harm. This incident was a serious warning, and it has prompted 
me to ask all economic and political sectors, especially the 
members of the financial system, to sign a basic pledge that 
will end a perverse policy: that of playing with the people's 
deposits in a sort of financial roulette [applause] that 
threatens essential institutions and damages our image of 
seriousness and honesty abroad. 
  The Banking Council, Superintendency of Banks, and other 
institutions linked to the system should eradicate the practice 
of making direct or surreptitious loans to members of the same 
banking group. [applause] 
  My administration will take the necessary initiatives to 
impose criminal and civil penalties on individuals responsible 
for fraudulent irregularities at this or any other credit 
institution. [applause] 
  We will do whatever is necessary to guarantee that account 
holders' funds will be returned to them and to ensure the 
promptest and most efficient attention possible for individuals 
who must use their deposits at the involved institution to meet 
their most urgent needs. [applause] 
  Although the terrible economic crisis and the alarming 
fiscal deficit are forcing us to take immediate action, we 
cannot overlook our priority duty to take care of social 
problems. Deteriorating living conditions are cause for deep 
concern among those who study the nation's situation. We feel 
it is our unavoidable duty to make sure that the people attain 
the greatest possible degree of happiness, as the liberator said 
in his Angostura speech. The number of families living in 
poverty and critical poverty has increased in Latin America to 
such an extent that multilateral organizations like the World 
Bank and the IDB [Inter-American Development Bank] have begun to 
place priority status on fighting poverty. The administration 
that the Venezuelan people elected to govern them in these 
crucial years cannot overlook that fact. I hope the 
institutions I have mentioned will give us valuable assistance 
in facing this serious problem. 
  Real wages have deteriorated to a large extent. The current 
minimum wage was established more than two years ago, years in 
which the economy suffered the onslaught of inflation and 
currency devaluation. That is why I intend to raise 
significantly minimum wage and the present food and 
transportation benefits, all within the framework of law. 
[applause] 
  Turning shantytowns into neighborhoods where people can live 
humane and dignified lives will be a fundamental concern of my 
administration. Water is a necessity everywhere. In 
shantytowns, however, the water shortage forces people not only 
to use water sparingly but to pay for it at prices incompatible 
with their modest incomes. I know the fiscal situation stands 
in the way of making good on this solemn pledge, but we will do 
everything possible and even impossible to honor my government's 
concern in this respect. Steps will begin to be taken 
immediately to solve the problem. 
  Venezuelan society has experienced many changes in the past 
few years, both in its behavior and living conditions. The 
application of economic measures without taking society into 
consideration has exacted a huge price, hence the habit of 
speaking out and resorting to demonstrations on a daily basis. 
The practice of registering complaints has played a major role 
in the political events of the five-year term that has just 
ended. People who rightly feel that they are victims of 
injustices and who cannot find a way to correct them vent their 
anger through demonstrations. I am willing to respect the 
institution of registering complaints. I will issue strict 
orders that every responsible complaint be investigated 
immediately and the results of the investigation reported in due 
time. As for demonstrations, I hope that a culture of 
demonstrations will lead us to endorse peaceful demonstrations 
and prevent provocateurs, who only seek to encourage violence, 
from infiltrating them. I hope this will also lead authorities 
to find sure methods to protect and assist protesters without 
endangering their lives and personal safety. [applause] 
  The country requires a government that governs. It requires 
an authority that can restore order within the law. I am 
determined to give the country such a government. [applause] I 
will place special emphasis on tackling the deterioration of 
public services, particularly those dealing with personal 
security, health, and education. The safety of homes, people, 
and property has deteriorated to an unacceptable degree. The 
health and education levels do not befit democratic Venezuela's 
degree of development. 
  These matters, for which the national, state, and municipal 
governments share responsibility, demand understanding, support, 
and the participation of the communities. 
  Decentralization cannot be seen as the shattering of the 
nation, and it cannot lead to burdening the municipalities with 
the defects of the central administration. The central 
administration must be exemplary in pointing out the course of 
an integral effort. 
  The task of bringing the education process up to date; of 
encouraging research, science, and technology; of searching for 
joint solutions to finance higher education; and of multiplying 
the ways of preparing people to work, especially the young 
people from poor sectors, will be tackled by the national 
government, which expects firm cooperation from governors and 
mayors. Without them it would be very difficult to take on this 
task. 
  Everyone's contribution is necessary to resolve the problems 
that aggravate everybody. I urge public employees to work with 
love and understanding to cooperate in the services 
reorganization task. I am sure that many will respond to this 
appeal. I have not made any bureaucratic assignment pacts. 
They are harmful to the country. [applause] 
  The national situation has given us big tasks. Viable 
development in the south demands coordinated activities to carry 
out projects with the cooperation of the national and regional 
governments, the armed forces, and academic and research 
organizations. 
  We must not delay in giving our immediate attention to a 
vast 
region of our territory that has been forsaken and left exposed 
to plundering by national and foreign adventurers who have 
caused irreversible damage to the economy and to the ethnic 
groups living there. In what used to be called Saudi Venezuela 
-- because of the splendor of the oil-produced bolivares -- 
there could have been no interest in what 20 years ago was known 
as the conquest of the south. [applause] 
  The urgency of the changes we need to undertake must, of 
necessity, begin with a constitutional reform. This is an 
urgent task and a fascinating challenge for the Congress of the 
Republic. Expert constitutionalists believe it will be possible 
to reform the Constitution this year as long as there is a 
consensus and the support of the popular vote. The main 
guidelines already exist: the participation of the people 
through four forms of referendum; reforming the Executive Branch 
and considering the possibility of having a prime minister; 
reforming the Legislative Branch and establishing, among other 
things, voting according to one's conscience; reforming the 
administration of justice; establishing a new system for 
electing and removing justices; and reforming the political 
parties based on strict guidelines that will insure the reforms. 
  These reforms would be the first step in the commitment to 
solidarity, which should include a generational solidarity 
agreement. 
  Constitutional reform must be accompanied by reforming and 
downsizing [redimensionamiento] the state to enhance the public 
administration's efficiency, which is functioning with 
difficulty in structures that are inappropriate to the present 
time and our needs. 
  We are anticipating great events in our country. Our trust 
in our country and our faith in ourselves must be reborn! The 
people have not lost hope! Our obligation is to strengthen 
their hope through continuous contact with them. Venezuelans 
have risen to the occasion every time they have suddenly had to 
face huge obstacles. 
  A great writer from Merida, Mariano Picon-Salas, said that 
the 20th Century began in Venezuela in 1936. I think we should 
work hard so we can also say that in Venezuela the 21st Century 
began on 5 December 1993! [applause] 
  Everyone's solidarity and work is necessary to make this 
happen. Everyone must make sacrifices, and everyone must make a 
commitment of solidarity. 
  The great crisis we have endured must turn out to be an 
opportunity for a new beginning, new horizons, new hope, and new 
life. If the confusion of our economic life, the problems in 
the administration of justice and public services, and the 
closing of participative channels have prompted growing social 
tensions, a culture of protest, and a tendency toward personal 
escapism -- indeed, if Venezuela appears to be a house divided 
-- all peaceful solutions to our problems must be sought 
hand-in-hand in solidarity. As Pope John Paul II said, 
solidarity is the firm and persevering determination to work for 
the common good -- namely, the good of each and everyone so we 
can all be responsible for one another. 
  The government whose presidency I am assuming today will be 
guided at all times by the resolute pursuit of that solidity, 
and this will enable the government to act as a guide and 
catalyst in the nation's reconstruction process. This will 
allow society as a united whole to mobilize its own resources to 
resolve urgent structural problems. 
  I am assuming the Presidency of the Republic again thanks to 
the popular vote. After a long life of struggle, I am doing so 
with the experience of my own mistakes, my unyielding 
determination to serve, and the day-to-day lessons of love for 
Venezuela. I know my country well. I know about its agonies 
and suffering, but I also know about the capacity of its people, 
their adherence to democratic values, and the incredible 
tenacity of their hopes. 
  Overwhelmed by difficulties, Venezuela is listening today to 
the question that was made to the liberator on his deathbed: 
General, what are you going to do now? Like Bolivar, Venezuela 
must respond to this question with a single word: Win! 
[applause] 
  With God's help, with the solidarity of all sectors of 
national life, with the enthusiasm and vision of youth, and with 
the entire heart of the people, we will make this crisis a 
chance for better days ahead, a time of affirmation, and a time 
of advancement in the life of the Republic. This will permit us 
to advance into the 21st century. Will we be able to accomplish 
this? We have no choice. Senators and Deputies, we must win, 
and, indeed, we will win. [applause] 

