BFN 

  [Text] Panama City, 12 May (ACAN-EFE) -- President 
Guillermo Endara plans to attend the fourth Ibero-American 
summit, scheduled to take place next month in Colombia, 
accompanied by his successor, Ernesto Perez Balladares, winner 
of last Sunday's presidential elections. Endara, who today 
installed the government transition commission with his 
successor, will be traveling on 14 and 15 June to Cartagena de 
Indias to his last meeting of presidents and heads of state. 
The government transition is scheduled to take place on 1 
September. 
  Perez Balladares, who confirmed that he will be traveling 
with Endara and Foreign Minister-designate Gabriel Lewis 
Galindo, abstained from commenting on Panama's position during 
the fourth Ibero-American summit since he "respects the 
direction" followed by the current administration. 
  Lewis Galindo said that the president-elect will try to 
recover the international prestige Panama earned during General 
Omar Torrijos' (1968-1981) era. He added that the Panamanian 
Foreign Ministry will do its utmost to attain readmission into 
the Rio Group from which it was excluded as a result of the 
crisis caused in 1988 by former Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, 
currently imprisoned in Miami (United States) on drug 
trafficking charges. 
  This June, Endara's successor plans to undertake a hectic 
international initiative that will take him to the Middle East, 
Costa Rica, and Colombia aimed at strengthening Panama's 
international relations. 
  When asked by ACAN-EFE about the main guidelines of his 
foreign policy, Perez Balladares indicated that he plans to 
create the necessary mechanisms to ensure the definite transfer 
of the inter-oceanic canal by the United States on 31 December 
1999, as stipulated by the 1977 Torrijos-Carter Treaty. The 
treaty signed by Torrijos and Former President Jimmy Carter 
establishes that the United States will transfer the canal and 
dozens of military bases distributed along the country's 80-km 
length to Panama's jurisdiction on a date no later than the last 
day of this century. The president-elect acknowledges that 
during the first years of his administration his main objective 
will be to prepare everything for the Panamanians to efficiently 
take control of the canal. 
  In addition, he intends to ensure Panama's inclusion in 
NAFTA. 

