Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jayme Brener] </F>
  [Text] The star of the PT [Workers Party] is shining beyond 
the frontiers of our homeland. At the request of the Farabundo 
Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN) -- the leftist Salvadoran 
guerrilla group that has ended its armed struggle -- two PT 
communications experts spent eight days in El Salvador advising 
Ruben Zamora, who will run for the presidency on the FMLN ticket 
on 15 March, on his election campaign. Sao Paulo reporters Jose 
Americo Dias and Dulce Cardoso were chosen by the PT 
International Affairs Secretariat to assist their Salvadoran 
comrades in everything from devising Zamora's campaign strategy 
to producing pamphlets, placards, and radio and television 
advertisements. Dias, 40 -- editor of the party newspaper 
BRASIL AGORA and radio and television coordinator of Luiz Inacio 
Lula da Silva's presidential campaign in 1989 -- told ISTOE: 
"The PT constitutes a major political frame of reference for 
the left in El Salvador together with the Democratic Party of 
the Left -- the former Italian PC [Communist Party], and the 
Party of the Democratic Revolution [PRD] -- Mexico's leading 
opposition party." The Salvadoran Association for Freedom and 
Democracy, a nongovernmental organization linked to the 
Salvadoran left, defrayed the two journalists' travelling 
expenses. The advisers did not charge anything for their little 
help. They were so delighted with this experience that they are 
contemplating supporting other fellow parties in Latin America. 
Who would have ever imagined it -- the left, which at the time 
of the Cold War was accused of exporting its revolution, is now 
exporting peaceful electoral support. "The Mexican PRD already 
has shown interest in this exchange of experience," said Dias. 
  Dias stated: "Our main objective in El Salvador was to lend 
a hand in the training of personnel for the election campaigns 
of Zamora, San Salvador mayoral candidate Shafick Handal, and 
leftist coalition deputies grouped around the FMLN. We also 
discussed the need to divide the campaign publishing pamphlets, 
specifically targeting the youth, intellectuals, peasants, and 
especially women." Public opinion surveys show that Zamora has 
very little backing among women. 
  The FMLN and the Salvadoran Army were fiercely engaged in a 
civil war that claimed nearly 75,000 victims from 1979 to 1992. 
An agreement signed by the guerrilla group and President 
Alfredo Cristiani -- from the conservative Arena Party -- two 
years ago spelled the end to fighting and transformed the FMLN 
into a legal party. The latest public opinion poll by the 
Technological University last December showed that 40.2 percent 
of people intend to vote for Armando Calderon Sol from the Arena 
Party while only 22.2 percent intend to do so for Zamora and 
14.1 percent for Christian Democrat Fidel Chavez Mena. In light 
of the fact that Zamora and Chavez Mena have centered their 
campaign on criticism of the government's performance in the 
economic sphere, it is possible that they may join forces for a 
possible runoff. 
  Contrary to what happens in Brazil, there is no free air 
time 
for election campaigns in El Salvador. It has to be bought, 
and it is precisely on television spots [preceding word in 
English] that the Arena Party is obtaining its greatest success 
thanks to the help of U.S. experts in electoral marketing. 
Brazilian election campaigns have held a certain fascination 
for the FMLN for a long time. A former representative of the 
guerrilla group in Brazil, Gregorio Ernesto Zelayndia, exported 
to his country one of the keynotes of Bahia State elections, 
namely cavalcades [carreatas], which, as a matter of fact, have 
been quite successful in that small country of 5.5 million 
inhabitants. 
  Dias said: "The greatest problem confronting the FMLN is 
ceasing to be a guerrilla group and changing itself into a legal 
party. Carrying a rifle is not quite the same thing as going 
door to door canvassing for votes." The Technological 
University survey also shows that Salvadorans' overriding 
concern is crime. The crime rate soared in the wake of the 
civil war due to the demobilization of thousands of soldiers and 
guerrillas who do not have jobs. Banditry mingles with the 
action of extreme right death squads, which the peace agreement 
could not totally eliminate. The PT journalists were able to 
see this serious problem for themselves. As Dias commented, 
"every time we accompanied the former guerrilla leaders in their 
cars, they were escorted by bodyguards armed with machine guns," 
adding that "everything was normal so far, except that there 
were always spare weapons on the floor of the car in case the 
other passengers had to repel an attack." 

