BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, chairman of the </F>
Presidential Council, at "an expanded symposium" of "leaders of 
political organizations and trade unions and mass organizations" 
in Sanaa on 25 May -- recorded] 
  [Text] In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate. 
May God's peace and blessings be upon his esteemed prophet. 
Brother citizens, ulema, intellectuals, trade union members. I 
again congratulate you on 'Id al-Adha and the fourth anniversary 
of the Yemeni unity. [applause] Yemen is passing through a 
serious and important turning point. We had never expected 
these developments to occur under the banner of unity and 
democracy on which our people pinned great hopes. Our people 
hoped that the realization of unity would bring security, 
stability, and peace and would allow free opinions and ensure 
human rights, and bury the partition of the past with all its 
characteristics and dimensions. They hoped that Yemen of the 
22d of May would be established with the cohesion of all the 
good men in the Yemeni arena. That was the hope of all of us 
and of all the good and nationalist Yemenis. We greatly 
welcomed the Yemeni Socialist Party [YSP] leadership's sharing 
and participation in all components of power. Many political 
force in Yemen were shunned in order to give the YSP leadership 
this opportunity. 
  We warned many political and nationalist forces that the 
political approach expounded by the traitor and incorrigible 
criminal al-Bid, who was regarded by every [word indistinct] to 
be brought up by their own intelligence organs. He has been 
under suspicion from the beginning. Many elements were misled 
by agent al-Bid's treasonous political approach. Al-Bid 
admitted his treason and agentry in front of many YSP 
leaderships. 
  We have known united Yemen since we came to this earth. 
Partition was always in the minds of certain leaderships but the 
Yemeni people have always been united in their belief, 
principles, and territory. This is proven by the fact that when 
the 26 September and 14 October revolutions began, the fighters 
from all parts of Yemen entered the same trench and in the same 
ranks to defend the revolution, in the north and in the city of 
Aden and in (?the governorates) and in all parts of the 
republic, and in order to expel the British colonialists. The 
partition was in the minds of certain leaderships. The Yemeni 
people never wanted partition. 
  'Ali Salim al-Bid and his treacherous clique longed to go 
back to the partition. In our political approach, we attempted 
to explain this to certain political forces and they simply 
believed that this was merely within the political endeavors 
that each one undertook to win the sympathy of others, and not 
that this individual longed for partition. He never believed in 
unity and did not come to unity out of conviction but came to 
unity within certain political and international circumstances, 
especially after the fall of the socialist bloc. He came to 
unity with grudges, keeping all the state's equipment and 
property in the southern part of the homeland. He kept in his 
own accounts both the cash belonging to government 
establishments and departments as well as the weapons, 
ammunition, and equipment. The traitor al-Bid kept them and 
never gave them to the state authorities. 
  During our talks with al-Bid, we asked him: Why don't you 
deliver these vehicles and equipment? He said: In fact this is 
party property. We said: This party is a state and not a 
political party in a showroom. You are a state and a party. 
This is state property. He placed all the funds of the 
government's establishments and bodies in private accounts. He 
never earned the state one single dinar. He left a debt of $4 
billion. If we look for these billions, we will find them in 
[words indistinct] or in private accounts for some of the 
secessionist leaderships under 'Ali Salim al-Bid, who does not 
hide his agentry and treason. 
  He began the crisis with his return to Aden on 19 August. We 
told the brothers in the leadership and in the party leaderships 
that al-Bid's return is undeclared secession. They said let us 
hold a dialogue. We invited the leaderships of mass 
organizations and parties and told them this is undeclared 
secession. They said let there be dialogue. We said let the 
political parties and organizations take part. We went on with 
this dialogue, which we called the dialogue of the deaf. This 
dialogue was in the interest of the YSP in the hope that results 
would be realized that would avert what we have today. This 
dialogue was held between Sanaa and Aden. This was one of the 
mistakes. The political forces did not realize that the capital 
was Sanaa. We should have held the dialogue in the capital. 
This does not mean that we belittle the trade and economic 
capital, Aden, which is the capital of all of us, but in order 
to make the other party submit and recognize the unity. If it 
was unionist, then let it come to the capital. However, we 
continued to move between Sanaa and Aden in the hope that we 
could reach results to avert what we have today. 
  Then came the Pledge and Accord Document. It was signed. 
Then he asked that we move to Amman. We said we can ratify it 
in one of the Yemeni capitals but he refused and said that we 
must go to Amman. Then we went and signed the document. He 
said that the other parties of the coalition should not sign it 
as partners but that the nationalist forces should participate 
and we said let that be. We said that we hoped the political 
forces would help preserve the coalition in order to save the 
homeland from the crisis. We then went to fraternal Jordan in a 
mammoth delegation. 
  Now we are offering many martyrs, the best of our sons, not 
for the love of power and not for raising the slogans of a 
victory by this party over that party. We are offering them in 
the name of the Yemeni people with their various political and 
nationalist organizations and forces with the aim of affirming 
the Yemeni unity. [applause] We will offer many martyrs for the 
unity of the land and people of Yemen. We are prepared to offer 
everything that is dear to us for the sake of unity. Not for 
triumphing over the criminal al-Bid in the YSP leadership but 
for the triumph of the truth and so that the will of this nation 
might triumph over the secessionists elements. 
  The current war is between the clique in the YSP and the 
Yemeni people. The biased media try to depict the war as a war 
between the north and the south. This shows us that certain 
media are fomenting the crisis, media that are financing the 
crisis and the secession. They are claiming that the war is 
between the north and the south, that a unity by force is 
impossible. 
  We were united out of our own free will. We have been 
united by a free, nationalist will and not by the will of the 
leaderships in the General People's Congress, the Reform 
Grouping, the Ba'th Party, the Nasirite Party, or the other 
political parties. It is the will of a nation. It was the 
people's will that forced everybody to realize unity. The unity 
has been realized. 
  Now the foreign media say that unity cannot be realized by 
force, that unity cannot be forced on the secessionist elements. 
I would like to discuss this issue clearly. Who is fighting at 
the front? Those who are fighting are the sons of Shabwah, 
Hadhramaut, al-Mahrah, Abyan, Lahij, and Aden. [applause] There 
are 11 military brigades with various kinds of weapons from the 
sons of Lahij, Abyan, al-'Awaliq, Shabwah, Hadhramaut, and 
al-Mahrah who are fighting in the front lines in defense of 
Yemeni Unity. [unidentified man is heard shouting an indistinct 
slogan amid audience applause] The biased media are defending 
the actions of secessionist elements through international 
communications (?claim) that the fighting is between the north 
and the south. The fighting is between the Yemeni people and 
the secessionist elements holding sway over the YSP leadership, 
a limited number of criminal soldiers and a number of criminal 
civilians in the YSP leadership. In this hall there are a 
number of leaderships and symbols of the southern governorates. 
They are well-known leaderships. 
  The traitor al-Jifri, who is known for his agentry and whose 
mission with which he came after the declaration of the Yemeni 
Republic, does not represent the south. We know the tasks 
assigned to this traitor. The security organs found important 
documents in the possession of the traitor al-Jifri and the 
tasks which he was assigned to implement in Yemen. He has now 
begun his plot when the secession was declared. He has now 
started to reveal his cards. 
  Hadhramaut, the biggest territory in the republic, does not 
vote with 'Ali Salim al-Bid. All the people of Hadhramaut 
denounce their [al-Bid's] presence in al-Mukalla except certain 
military units which are protecting them only in al-Mukalla but 
not in the Hadhramaut Governorate. Shabwah is in the hands of 
the unionists, Abyan is in unionist hands, Lahij is in unionist 
hands. He has no presence in al-Mahrah. Aden is afflicted with 
the YSP arsenal. 
  We have declared amnesty for those who are accomplices to 
this deplorable crime and we are still giving them an 
opportunity before we enter Aden. The Army is clamping a siege 
around Aden but it does not have the political decision to enter 
Aden in order to give an opportunity for those who claim to be 
unionists to define their position. This is also to avoid 
hitting civilians and [word indistinct] and to give them the 
opportunity to leave Aden and so that they may not be harmed. 
[applause] I am certain that the innocent citizens will be 
harmed in Aden. As for the YSP leadership, the secessionists, 
some of them are abroad, others went to Hadhramaut prepared on 
their cars [word indistinct] and the others are in readiness at 
the ports to leave Aden. Only innocent civilians will remain in 
Aden and they will [word indistinct] these coming problems. 
  I do not believe that a brave leader would take his plane 
and leave for Hadhramaut and prepare his cars to go abroad. The 
real leader would be the last to leave any position or trench or 
any [word indistinct]. This leader is at the front of the 
fleeing ranks. I do not consider as a leader one who is at the 
forefront of those fleeing. 
  The YSP knows him very well and we do not have to describe 
the traitor al-Bid. We told some of the leaders that this man 
is schizophrenic. They would say: Oh no, this president 
[Salih] is unjust, he does not want any voice besides his voice. 
  This is a madman, I [word indistinct] stayed with him for 
four years. They said the president does not want any voice 
other than his. It is all the same. 
  He is a demented, unbalanced person. The YSP is aware of 
this. from Qahtan to the last of them. This man can live only 
in a showroom. [word indistinct] used to appoint him a minister 
for six or seven months. He differed with his boss and escaped 
to Hadhramaut. He had some cars and he sold them. The 
leadership knows him. [Words indistinct] brother 'Ali (?Sani') 
is (?facing) the situation more than me or you. This is because 
they oppressed the people. They did not do this by force of 
political approach. They created means of oppression and terror. 
  Brother leaders of political organizations and parties, I 
highly appreciate your excellent stand in these difficult 
conditions. I call on all to effect national cohesion and to 
set aside all trivialities. I ask you to avoid all the negative 
aspects of the past within the framework of the party and 
political pluralism which have appeared rather suddenly now. We 
were not held to account for our political utterances. We must 
be held to account for this. We must benefit from freedom and 
political pluralism. This is a good phenomenon and must be 
preserved. We will deal with this, benefiting from the past and 
from our setbacks. Together we move to preserve the homeland's 
unity. In one trench we will all stand to defend Yemeni unity. 
[applause] 
  It is true that our resources and our people's resources are 
thin at this time compared with the funds which were taken by 
the leaders dominating the YSP, but with our meager resources 
victory will be on our side and the side of the nationalists. 
God will not grant success to this plot and nothing will result 
from it. Any funds man takes from outside the country to 
implement a plot will not make him successful. Never. The will 
of men and the principles and firm values of sincere men will 
triumph. Right and not wrong will triumph. [applause] 
  We hope that all the nationalist and party leaderships will 
continue to be cohesive and united to face this secessionist 
danger. We will work together on the battle front and on the 
political front and on all levels. Jihad does not only mean 
fighting the battle. We can all perform jihad: at the mosque and 
in all parts and areas of the country there is a form of jihad 
to preserve Yemeni unity. Even though we offer martyrs and 
sacrifices, it is worth it. It is worth the high price we are 
going to pay. There is no price higher than the blood which is 
being shed. 
  I would like to end my speech and give the political parties 
and leaderships the opportunity, so that we will emerge from 
this meeting with a united concept without instructions imposed 
from this rostrum. I hope the leaderships of the parties and 
social figures will come out with a unified national stand in 
the supreme national interests. I wish this meeting success. 
May God's blessings be upon you. 

