Energy 

<F P=102>   94WS0318D Berlin INGENIEUR DIGEST in German, Apr 94 p 43 </F>
<F P=103> 94WS0318D </F>
<F P=104>  Berlin INGENIEUR DIGEST </F>
<F P=105>  German, </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Guenther Ludwik: "Mirror Reflection of </F>
Decadence"] 
  [Text] Communities and associations quarrel with 
electric power providers about the cost of solar and wind 
energy. Public promotion of alternate energy misses the mark. 
Other countries are farther ahead. 
  What the Aachen city parliament decided in a rare unanimity 
across party lines, the Nordrhine-Westphalen commerce minister, 
Guenther Einert, undid with a stroke of the pen. He refused to 
authorize rate hikes for electric power fed into the public 
utility network from privately owned wind turbines and solar 
power plants. The Aachener owners wanted to be paid 30 Pf/kWh 
for wind energy and even 200 Pf/kWh for solar energy. [Pf = 0.01 
DM] 
  Thirty-five cities and townships are now demanding larger 
compensation for regenerative use of energy. Expectations which 
such sort of environment-friendly proposals raise are in reality 
dashed all over the country. The energy provider 
Mueritz-Oderhaff (EMO) AG in Neubrandenburg blocked three 
ready-to-operate wind power plants for several months, reports 
Dr Gotthard Schulte-Tigges of Eurosolar's regional 
Berlin-Brandenburg group. Discussions about hook-up to the 
public utility network continued for eight months. 
  The electric power provider hit on an idea. In one location 
the Uckerwind Management Company has already let 700 m of 
underground cable be laid for a price of 70 DM/m. The last 100 
m, however, the EMO wanted to lay itself for any price, provided 
it were to receive an advance payment of exactly DM185,000. The 
local press scared the citizenry that, owing to availability of 
wind power, they will have to pay 7 Pf/kWh more. 
  The Uckerwind business manager, Joerg Kuntsch, believes he 
knows the reason for this controversy: the EMO must pay only 10 
Pf/kWh for coal energy coming from Lausitz, while Uckerwind asks 
for 16.6 Pf/kWh for energy fed into the utility network. 
  The Schoenau township with a population of 2500 in the 
Southern Black Forest will no longer put up with these stalling 
maneuvers. A citizens' initiative opposing the township council 
is to push through a resolution that the franchise contract with 
the KWR energy provider not be prematurely extended. This year 
the citizens have a chance to take over management of the public 
network and, as a model for the entire Federal Republic, 
supervise the ecologically sound conversion of the local 
electric power supply system. For this they will need about 
DM3.8 million, and the GLS bank is willing to raise the money 
from a nationwide partnership fund. 
  In regional squabbles about alternate energy it is the power 
giants who enjoy the strongest backing. On the federal level, 
meanwhile, the commerce minister, Guenter Rexrodt, has the legal 
authority over the Land (State) ministers of commerce. In a 
memorandum to all he has made it clear that he will not approve 
cost-covering rate hikes applied for by local communal electric 
energy providers. 
  Practical implementation of this model of energy supply from 
alternate sources will obviously require billing the consumer 
about 1 percent more for electricity. Against this the 
Association of German Electric Power Plants in Frankfurt am Main 
argues that such a compensatory rate hike is just "a further 
subsidy at the expense of business and residential electricity 
consumers." This sort of accounting gets no corroboration by 
Prof Helmut Tributsch, director of the Solar Power Engineering 
Department at the Hahn-Meiner Institute in Berlin. "Solar energy 
seems to be too expensive only because we burn fossil fuels 
without paying for the accumulating debt to the environment. 
Consequently, energy taxes should offset the apparent economic 
disadvantage of solar energy. The widespread short-sightedness 
and arrogance vis-a-vis solar energy is in my opinion a clear 
mirror reflection of the decadence of our technoeconomic 
civilization." 
  At the same time, for instance, Germany is not behind Japan 
and the U.S. when it comes to public financial support of solar 
energy development. However, while in Germany many expenditures 
and projects aim to mollify the open-minded and therefore 
confused public (the motto being: "something is being done, but 
unfortunately the technology is too costly"), other industrial 
countries are methodically planning for commercialization and 
cost reduction. Says Tributsch: "For corrective measures Germany 
would have to re-examine both the flow of research moneys and 
current subsidies to industry." 
  So as to hasten the utilization of solar energy, Eng Manfred 
Kern from Chemnitz proposes the following four-point program: 
  --enactment of laws ensuring preferential utilization of 
renewable energy sources; 
  --approval of state grants assisting enterprises engaged in 
further development of necessary systems, plants, and cells; 
  --active involvement of municipal offices in ensuring that 
the possibility of utilizing alternate energy be pursued in 
rehabilitation and renovation of single- and 
multiple-dwelling houses, residential and sport facilities; 
  --inclusion of a unitized solar heating plant in bids put in 
on the building market. 
  Right now the chances that these ideas will be implemented 
are just not very good. Industry is not investing, because it 
sees no market. And a market is not generated, because industry 
cannot deliver at acceptable prices. This vicious circle could 
cost Germany dearly, according to Joerg Schindler and Dr Werner 
Zittel of the Ludwig Boelkow System Engineering in Ottobrunn: 
"German industry will find itself in a tight spot, because Japan 
has been pursuing this matter quite aggressively." 

