BFN 

  [Text] On 14 May, Zhu Rongji, member of the CPC Central 
Committee Political Bureau Standing Committee and vice premier 
of the State Council, listened to an economic work report by the 
Hubei Provincial CPC Committee and government in Wuhan. 
Attendees at the meeting included responsible persons from 16 
ministries, commissions, and financial organs under the State 
Council who accompanied Vice Premier Zhu Rongji to Wuhan, as 
well as Hubei Governor Jia Zhijie; Hui Liangyu, provincial party 
deputy secretary and chairman of the provincial Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference; Qian Yunlu, provincial party 
deputy secretary and Wuhan City CPC Secretary; and others. 
  In his work report, provincial Governor Jia Zhijie said: 
Since this year, our province's national economy has maintained 
a better momentum of development. As far as agriculture is 
concerned, a good summer harvest is expected. Our rural work 
has been centered on the targets of stabilizing grain and cotton 
production and vigorously developing a diversified economy and 
township and town enterprises. We are doing a solid job in this 
regard. Industry has had a good start. From January to April 
this year, industrial production output value at and above 
township level reached 50.284 billion yuan, an increase of 18.6 
percent over the same period last year. In the meantime, we have 
increased the weight of opening up to the outside world. 
Macroscopic management structural reform mainly targeted at 
finance, tax, banking, investments, foreign trade, and planning 
has been progressing smoothly. Jia Zhijie also talked about 
difficult points in present economic work and striking 
contradictions and ways and ideas to deal with them. 
  After listening to the work report, Vice Premier Zhu Rongji 
said: The situation of economic construction and reform and 
opening up in Hubei Province is good. This is the outcome of 
hard work done by Hubei's leaders at all levels and the broad 
masses of people in accordance with the 20-character guiding 
principle worked out by the central authorities. He hoped that 
Hubei Province would continue to firmly and unswervingly 
implement the guiding principle of seizing the favorable 
opportunity, deepening reform, expanding opening up, speeding up 
development, and maintaining stability to correctly handle 
relations between reform, development, and stability and 
maintain and develop the present favorable situation. 
  Zhu Rongji pointed out: Hubei is a large agricultural 
province. When Hubei, Hunan, Guangdong and Guangxi have a bumper 
crop, the country is free from hunger. Hubei must do well its 
rural work to speed up its agricultural development. Leaders at 
all levels must make efforts to grasp agriculture, grain 
production, and the vegetable basket project. Zhu Rongji 
stressed: Changes in price indexes in daily life of urban and 
rural residents are, to a large extent, affected by grain and 
other agricultural products. Only by grasping well agriculture 
can the government stabilize the market and gain the initiative 
to regulate and control the market. 
  As far as industrial production is concerned, Zhu Rongji 
emphasized: Under the guidance of the market, we must carry out 
effective production. We must stop any action which leads to 
the overstocking of goods because of blindly seeking speed. He 
said: We must shift our attention to studying the market and 
guide and help those enterprises which have suspended production 
or have been operating under capacity to gradually turn the 
corner. From 16 to 17 May, Vice Premier Zhu Rongji also 
respectively visited rural areas in Hanchuan County and the 
provincial People's Bank and Agricultural Bank to discuss with 
cadres and masses at the grass-roots level major plans for 
speeding up agricultural development and strengthening financial 
management. He encouraged them to make still greater work 
achievements. 

