BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] Talks between the Czech and the Slovak 
Government delegations ended a little while ago at the Crans 
Montana in Switzerland. The delegations are headed by Prime 
Ministers Vaclav Klaus and Jozef Moravcik. After their talks 
the Czech prime minister granted an exclusive interview to Czech 
Radio, in which he summed up the talks. 
  [Begin Klaus recording] As far as the topics are concerned, 
these are the issues which keep returning. I think it is 
appropriate on this level to say [word indistinct]. I will sum 
this up for you. 
  First, the issue of our unfortunate certificates. I think 
that the new element is that Slovakia has recently held talks 
with the European Communities about easing the situation for the 
European Communities in this sphere. This means that they will 
not require certain certificates. In fact it would be a measure 
discriminating against the Czech side if Irish, Portuguese, and 
Danish exporters are not obliged to acquire certificates, while 
Czech exporters would be obliged to acquire them. 
  We received an assurance, an unequivocal assurance from the 
Slovak side, an assurance which I perceive as a very positive 
one, that, first, nothing has been signed with the European 
Communities, only talks have been held; second, the Slovak side 
considers it self-evident that if such an agreement with the 
European Communities is concluded, it is clear that it will be 
applied automatically in the same way for the Czech Republic. 
Therefore, any discrimination can be ruled out. I think that 
this is the first important thing. 
  I would appreciate if our mass media make this clear because 
it is unfortunate to quote each other untruthfully. I would be 
really grateful to you if you could communicate this clearly. 
  Second, we spoke about the so-called old bloc -- all of us 
know what it means. Both sides have expressed interest in 
abolishing this old bloc, in putting it forward to the two 
parliaments to approve this. This means that the Slovak 
parliament has to do so by August, when it is to hold its last 
session before the elections. We would put this forward to our 
parliament at its July session because it does not hold any 
session in August. 
  Yes, there is an interest in abolishing the old bloc in the 
way which would make it impossible for any obligations to emerge 
between the two states, between the governments or between the 
government and enterprises in the given country. This means 
tackling the issue of any remaining relations on the level of 
enterprises. This is an important conclusion. It is 
unequivocally formulated and I think this is a good result, too. 
  Third, the old bloc concerns a payment agreement that will 
require an amendment concerning the abolition of the old bloc. 
This will of course be put forward to the two parliaments. 
  We have been alarmed by some statements made by the Slovak 
side about the necessity or lack thereof to revise the payment 
agreement as such. We reached an unequivocal assurance that we 
consider the clearing mechanism to be something that makes 
payments between enterprises of the two countries easier. 
Neither the Czech side nor the Slovak side see any reason for 
abolishing the payment system based on the clearing relation 
between our countries. We may improve or modify some of its 
particular points. We should not indicate to each other that 
one side wants to abolish it; that is untrue, and it would 
worsen and complicate our relations. This is the third 
important conclusion. 
  The fourth important conclusion which I would like to sum up 
is that the Slovak side repeated what we are saying as well: We 
are extremely interested in preserving the customs union. Those 
few sentences once uttered by somebody on this or the other 
side, the sentences which were in some way interpreted -- 
correctly or not -- in the media, are contrasted by statements 
made by the Slovak prime minister, the Slovak deputy prime 
minister for economic affairs, the finance minister and the 
economy minister -- that is, by the four fundamental 
representatives of the Slovak Republic in this sphere -- and 
expressing, I repeat this, an unequivocal interest in preserving 
the customs union and not providing space for speculations. 
  I think I have warned about the necessity of preventing 
sentences which might be interpreted in different ways from 
leaking to the media. We do not do this and would much 
appreciate the other side not engaging in this. This is, in my 
view, the fourth important conclusion. 
  The fifth conclusion is to take the border issue into the 
implementation phase. This is an important issue. There is an 
exception to the disputed area about which the Slovak side has 
clearly said that their side finds it impossible to make 
concessions -- the issue of the so-called Kasarna -- but 
otherwise it seems possible to conclude all the other issues. I 
think it is good to conclude these things. This would mean 
doing away with yet another problem. 
  The Slovak side says that they simply do not perceive the 
Kasarna issue as one which might be solved by handing the 
territory over to the Czech Republic. The only option is to 
introduce specific conditions in this region, opening a special 
border and roads, introducing a special norm there which would 
make it possible for numerous Czech owners of recreational 
compounds in this area to function normally, and subsequently to 
do the best to meet the needs there. They simply consider it 
impossible to hand over this area. This statement is necessary 
to take into account as a statement by the full-fledged Slovak 
representation. I have heard it and I am taking it into account. 
  We spoke also about property issues. A certain option 
emerged of a different method of registration, transfer of 
debts, perhaps a technical amendment. However, I repeat that it 
is not possible to make a breakthrough in this matter as at 
present, prior to the elections, the Slovak Government does not 
have a mandate to take any radical new step. I simply cannot do 
anything else than to take reality into account. 
  Finally, the last thing, which is not unimportant, is that 
we 
spoke once again about the need to follow up our close 
cooperation -- I would rather call it indirect cooperation -- 
which existed in the past also with the previous government, 
making the maximum effort to support each other whenever it is 
possible as far as foreign policy issues are concerned, where 
our interests are similar, and simply to tend to help each other 
rather than failing to do so. I think this, too, is in our 
mutual interest. [end recording] 

