Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Zhou Jizhong (0719 0679 0112)] </F>
  [Text] Shijiazhuang, 1 Feb (XINHUA) -- During a recent 
visit to rural primary and middle-school teachers in mountainous 
areas in Hebei, Li Lanqing, member of the CPC Central Committee 
Political Bureau and vice premier of the State Council, said 
emphatically: Governments at all levels should further improve 
their understanding of elementary education in the countryside, 
take measures to strengthen and improve compulsory education in 
the countryside, earnestly resolve problems regarding teachers' 
salaries and housing, and constantly improve teachers' 
qualifications and teaching quality, in order to train large 
numbers of people with practical skills to assist in rural 
economic development, as well as to lay a sound foundation for 
achieving, on schedule, fairly comfortable living standards and 
for promoting a rural economic boom. 
  Accompanied by Cheng Weigao, secretary of the Hebei 
Provincial Party Committee; Governor Ye Liansong; Xu Zhijian, 
deputy secretary general of the State Council; and Liu Bin, vice 
minister of the State Education Commission, Li Lanqing braved 
the biting cold to visit Shijiazhuang City, Baoding City, and 
Baoding Prefecture on 30 and 31 January. He conducted 
investigations and studies on educational work in rural areas 
and visited with teachers in five primary and middle schools in 
mountainous areas in Pingshan and Shunping counties. Upon 
arriving in each school, Li Lanqing carefully inspected school 
buildings and teachers' dormitories, inquired about teachers' 
working and living conditions, asked about the payment of 
teachers' salaries, and found out about the school's teaching 
problems. On behalf of the State Council, he extended best 
wishes to the vast numbers of teachers who had worked quietly, 
devotedly, and conscientiously under difficult conditions in 
rural areas, especially in mountainous areas, all year round. 
He extended New Year's greetings to them, wished their families 
happiness, and encouraged them to make even greater 
contributions to rural education. 
  In recent years, the Hebei Provincial Party Committee, the 
provincial government, and leaders at all levels took education 
seriously and promptly solved the problem of teachers' back pay. 
They are currently studying and devising safeguards aimed at 
realizing the goal of basically universalizing nine-year 
compulsory education and basically eradicating illiteracy among 
young and middle-aged people, as well as safeguards against 
delays in paying teachers' salaries. Li Lanqing fully affirmed 
these actions. Pingshan County in Shijiazhuang City is a 
revolutionary base area, which is generally not prosperous. The 
county party committee, however, made this decision: 
County-level leaders may not draw their salaries if they 
postpone paying the salary of even a single teacher in the 
county. Li Lanqing spoke highly of Pingshan County leaders' 
attitude of respecting teachers and stressing education, as well 
as their determination in this regard. 
  During the tour, Li Lanqing repeatedly emphasized: 
Elementary education is the basis of all kinds of education, 
and it affects the entire nation's quality. China's rural 
population numbers 800 million, and the crux and focus of 
elementary education lie in the countryside. If peasants do not 
possess an elementary education and professional skills, we 
cannot realize the goal of developing the rural economy and 
achieving fairly comfortable living standards in the entire 
country. Therefore, governments at all levels and educational 
administrative departments must make great efforts to earnestly 
improve elementary education in rural areas. We must tailor 
rural education to local conditions, fully consider practical 
needs and conditions in rural areas, and seriously study and 
reform the methods of running schools in those areas. He fully 
affirmed Shunping County's practice of introducing vocational 
education in certain stages of elementary education in rural 
areas, and of training large numbers of a new type of peasants 
who possess both an elementary education and a certain level of 
farming skills. He said: Making overall plans for agriculture, 
science, and education in rural areas is a good approach. This 
will not only help train more useful personnel for the 
countryside and accelerate rural economic development, but will 
also effectively universalize nine-year compulsory education in 
rural areas. 
  During the tour, Li Lanqing also held informal discussions 
with Hebei provincial leaders, responsible persons from relevant 
departments, and teachers' representatives on reform and 
development of higher education, vocational education, and adult 
education. He also heard the opinions and proposals of 
participants. 

