BFN 

<F P=106> [Text of citizens participation rights law, promulgated in </F>
Lima on 2 May] 
  [Text] Law No. 26300 on the Right of Citizens to 
Participate and to Exercise Control 
  The Democratic Constituent Congress [CCD] has enforced the 
following Law: 
  Title I 
  General Provisions 
  Chapter I 
  On the Right of Citizens to Participate and to Exercise 
Control 
  Article 1. This law regulates the exercise of the right of 
citizens to participate and to exercise control in line with the 
Constitution. 
  Article 2. The following are citizens' participation rights: 
  a. to propose initiatives for amending the Constitution; 
  b. to propose initiatives for creating laws; 
  c. to participate in referendums; 
  d. to propose initiatives for creating municipal and 
regional 
mechanisms; and, 
  e. to engage in other participation mechanisms that are 
provided for in this law for regional and municipal governments. 
  Article 3. The following are citizens' control rights: 
  a. to cancel officials' designations; 
  b. to dismiss officials; 
  c. to demand the rendering of accounts; and, 
  d. to engage in other control mechanisms that are provided 
for in this law for regional and municipal governments. 
  Article 4. The request to begin a procedure must be filed 
with the electoral authorities. The request will be accompanied 
by the corresponding proposed initiative and a list of the 
names, identification card numbers, signatures or fingerprints 
of those who sponsor the initiative, as well as their common 
domicile for the purpose of the initiative. 
  Article 5. The electoral authorities will establish how 
physically disabled citizens who cannot sign, or illiterate 
citizens, will exercise their participation rights. 
  Article 6. After receiving a request for initiation of the 
procedure, the electoral authorities will check the authenticity 
of the signatures and will issue the appropriate certificates. 
  Article 7. The citizens' participation and control rights 
referred to in Paragraphs d. and e. of Article 2, and in 
Paragraph d. of Article 3 of this law, and the referendum on 
regional and municipal regulations, will be regulated by the 
organic laws of regional and municipal governments. 
  Chapter II 
  On the Presentation of Initiatives 
  Article 8. If the signatures and if the subscribers' right 
to 
vote in the corresponding electoral district in which the 
initiative has been proposed are found to be within the law, the 
electoral authorities will issue a resolution granting the 
citizens' request and including in it, as appropriate, the text 
of the project if the initiative has regulations, the background 
report accompanying the proposal if the initiative seeks to 
cancel officials' designations or to dismiss them, the list of 
questions in case of a request to render accounts, or the 
regulatory matter that will be subject to a referendum. 
  Article 9. The sponsors of the initiative may designate 
representatives before every electoral organ to witness and 
supervise all the steps of the process. 
  Article 10. If after checking the list of subscribers, their 
number fails to reach the minimum value, the sponsors will have 
an additional period of up to 30 days for completing the list 
with the requested number of subscribers. 
Title II 
  On Specific Regulations 
  Of Proposed Laws 
  Article 11. All proposed laws consisting of one or more 
draft 
bills, accompanied by the certified signatures of no less that 
0.3 percent of all voters, will be granted preferential 
treatment by Congress. Congress orders its publication in the 
official gazette. 
  Article 12. The right to propose the drafting of laws 
encompasses all subjects with the same limitations that 
legislators have on tax and budget issues. The proposed law is 
drafted in a bill format. 
  Article 13. Congress drafts and votes on the draft bill 
within a 120-day deadline. 
  Article 14. Those who sponsor the proposed law can appoint 
two representatives to argue and defend it before the 
congressional drafting committees and, if the case warrants it, 
before the reviewing committee. 
  Article 15. If there are one or more draft bills on the same 
subject as that proposed by citizens, they will be grouped 
together. This, however, does not mean that the authority of 
those who sponsored the proposal or who represent it is 
disavowed. 
  Article 16. Draft bills rejected by Congress may be 
submitted 
to a referendum in compliance with this law. Moreover, if 
sponsors believe that prior to its approval the law has suffered 
substantial modifications distorting its main objectives, they 
may request a referendum to consult citizens on its approval. 
  Chapter II 
  On Proposed Constitutional Reform 
  Article 17. The right to propose the partial or complete 
reform of the constitution requires the support of 0.3 percent 
of all voters. 
  Article 18. A constitutional reform proposed by citizens 
must 
abide by the same rules of procedure established for bills 
proposed by legislators. 
  Article 19. Any proposed constitutional reform curtailing 
citizens' rights established in Article 2 of the Peruvian 
Constitution is inappropriate. 
  Chapter III 
  On the Removal and Dismissal of Authorities 
  Article 20. Citizens are empowered to remove from office the 
following officials: 
  a. Mayors and Government Magistrates [Regidores]; 
  b. Elected regional officials; 
  c. Elected civil servants. 
  Article 21. Citizens are empowered to remove elected 
officials from office. It is inappropriate to remove them during 
the first and last year of their government term, except elected 
judiciary officials. 
  A request for removal concerns a specific official. The 
request must be argued but need not be proven. 
  The National Election Board will call a referendum, which 
must be held within 90 days of the formal filing of a request. 
  Article 22. A referendum will be held in a constituency if 
25 
percent of its constituents, with a maximum of 400,000 
signatures, file a request with the appropriate office in charge 
of electoral proceedings for the removal of one of their elected 
officials. 
  Article 23. The removal will take place if an affirmative 
vote by the absolute majority of the constituents so decides. 
Otherwise, the authority on whom the removal from office has 
been referred to popular vote will remain in his/her post. A new 
request can only be filed two years after said vote. 
  Article 24. The National Election Board will appoint the 
runner-up on the same party's ticket as the official who has 
been removed from office to fill the vacancy until the end of 
tenure, with the exception of justices of the peace. 
  Article 25. New elections will be called only if the removal 
of more than one-third of the members of the Municipal Council 
has been confirmed. Alternate members may fill in until 
replacements for those removed from office are nominated. The 
same procedure will be followed if one-third of the directly 
elected members of the Regional Coordination Council are 
removed. Those who replace the ousted members will complete the 
latter's tenure. 
  Article 26. In the case of ousted elected judiciary 
officials, the National Election Board will proceed pursuant to 
the law that deals with this subject. 
  Article 27. Authorities appointed by the central or regional 
governments under regional, departmental, provincial, or 
district jurisdiction are removable. Political-Military chiefs 
in state-of-emergency areas are exempted. 
  Article 28. Dismissal will take place only when the National 
Election Board can attest that more than 50 percent of citizens 
from a constituency or judicial district request so. 
  Article 29. An elected official who has been removed from 
office is qualified to run for the same elected post in the next 
elections. 
  Article 30. The official who has been dismissed from office 
may not resume the same post for five years. 
  Chapter IV 
  On the Demand of Rendering of Accounts 
  Article 31. Through the rendering of accounts, citizens have 
the right to interpellate authorities about the execution of the 
budget and the use of budget funds. Authorities are obliged to 
answer. Those who occupy positions subject to removal and 
dismissal are subject to this demand of rendering of accounts. 
  The funds to which Article 170 of the Constitution refer to 
are subject to rendering of accounts according to the pertaining 
law. 
  Article 32. The interpellation form must contain questions 
exclusively related with the subjects included in the former 
article. Each question must be made in a clear, precise manner 
on the pertaining subject. 
  Article 33. The National Election Board must verify that the 
interpellation form contains appropriate, inoffensive wording. 
  Article 34. The rendering of accounts must be called for by 
at least 20 percent, with a maximum 50,000 signatures, of the 
voting population in the respective voting district. 
  Article 35. Once the rendering of accounts is demanded, the 
National Election Board must inform the authorities of its 
reception so that it may clearly and directly answer the 
interpellation form within 60 calendar days. 
  Article 36. The authorities requested to render accounts 
must 
publish the interpellation form together with the answers to it. 
  Chapter V 
  On the Referendum and Popular Consultations 
  Article 37. A referendum is the citizens' right to express 
their opinion, according to the Constitution, on the regulations 
of the subjects on which they are consulted. 
  Article 38. A referendum may be requested by an amount of 
citizens not less than 10 percent of the national voting 
population. 
  Article 39. A referendum is applicable in the following 
cases: 
  a. The total or partial amendment of the Constitution, 
according to Article 206 of the Constitution. 
  b. To approve laws, general regional regulations, and 
municipal provisions. 
  c. To disapprove laws, legislative and urgent decrees, as 
well as norms to which the former clause refer. 
  d. To the subjects described in Article 190 of the 
Constitution, according to a special law. 
  Article 40. The matters and regulations mentioned in the 
second paragraph of Article 32 of the Constitution may not be 
subject to a referendum. 
  Article 41. If Congress rejects or substantially modifies 
the 
proposed legislation, the terms of this law may be applied to 
request initiation of a referendum process, adding the necessary 
number of signatures to complete the legally required number of 
votes. 
  Article 42. The result of the referendum will determine the 
enforcement of the approved regulations, or the repeal of the 
rejected regulations, provided the decision is backed by 50 
percent plus one, without counting blank or null votes. The 
result will be valid only if backed by no fewer than 30 percent 
of the total number of voters, and will come into force on the 
day after publication of the official results by the National 
Election Board. 
  Article 43. Regulations approved through a referendum may 
not 
be modified within two years after their enforcement, except by 
a new referendum or by a Congressional decision upholding the 
modification in two congressional periods of sessions, with the 
approving vote of two thirds of the legal number of congressmen. 
If the result of the referendum is negative, the initiative may 
not be again proposed for two years after the referendum. 
  Article 44. The electoral authority will call for the 
referendum within four months of the approval of respective 
initiative. 
  Chapter VI 
  Final Provisions 
  Article 45. The call for electoral processes for the 
exercise 
of the political rights established by this law may be postponed 
by the electoral authority in case of proximity of general, 
regional, or municipal elections. In such case, the process may 
be implemented simultaneously or within the next four months. 
  Article 46. The electoral authority may accumulate approved 
initiatives and jointly submit them for consultation or to 
accompany other electoral processes. 
  Article 47. The sponsors of initiatives that result in the 
issuance of regulations, laws, or Constitutional amendments; or 
requests for canceling officials' designations or for dismissing 
officials; and the requests for referendum to repeal regulations 
or to approve a legislation proposal that was rejected or 
substantially modified by Congress, may request the 
reimbursement of expenses incurred before the electoral 
authority and for advertising, in keeping with the budgetary 
availabilities of the National Election Board, and in the form 
established by the National Election Board. 
  It is so ordered. 
  Lima, on the 18th day of April of the year 1994. 
  [Signed] Jaime Yoshiyama 
  CCD President 
  [Signed] Carlos Torres y Torres Lara 
  CCD First Vice President 
  I therefore order the publication and enforcement of this 
law. 
  Signed in Government House in Lima, on the 2d day of May of 
the year 1994 
  [Signed] Alberto Fujimori Fujimori 
  Constitutional President of the Republic 
  [signed] Fernando Vega Santa Gadea 
  Justice Minister 

