BFN 

  [Text] Civilian targets, such as health clinics and other 
public installations, are still targets of the vast program of 
destruction of the Luanda warmongering leaders. Our 
correspondent Jardim Prata reports from Cuito: 
  [Begin Prata recording] Two Popular Movement for the 
Liberation of Angola-Labor Party [MPLA-PT] Su-23 aircraft from 
Catumbela Air Base bombed the Bie Central Hospital, dropping 
eight highly toxic chemical bombs, completely destroying the 
[words indistinct] and emergency wards, which are still burning. 
The population is very worried about this political and tribal 
genocide perpetrated by the MPLA-PT. We will give further 
details later on. [end recording] 
  The central hospital of the city of Bie [Cuito] has been 
burning since 1300 yesterday, when incendiary and chemical bombs 
were dropped by Jose Eduardo dos Santos' aircraft. The 
residents, who are tired of war, request the international 
community to help end this hideous MPLA-PT massacre of 
defenseless civilians, in which children and women suffer the 
most as a result of the Futungo de Belas absurdity. 
  The central city of Bie is suffering violent clashes, and 
yesterday evening considerable blood was shed. The main targets 
of Eduardo dos Santos' organizations are [word indistinct] and 
Hotel Cuito, where attacking People's Armed Forces for the 
Liberation of Angola [FAPLA] are losing lethal materiel, as well 
as its best commanders and a high number of soldiers. Jardim 
Prata reports: 
  [Begin Prata recording] Over the past 48 hours, the glorious 
Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola [FALA] counterattacked 
MPLA soldiers and killed 57 FAPLA soldiers, including four 
officers, an unidentified lieutenant colonel and three majors 
named Lito, Joao, and Pedrito, respectively the commanders of 
the first and second FAPLA battalions [as heard]. UNITA 
[National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] forces 
captured 21 AK-47 weapons, 11 RPG-7's, 11 PKM submachine guns 
with 40 ammunition belts, 3 R-4 weapons, and a considerable 
quantity of AK and PKM ammunition. Meanwhile, FAPLA are still 
[word indistinct] FALA defense lines. [end recording] 
  Meanwhile, the situation is not very different in Lunda 
Norte 
Province. The Luanda regime also has its criminal apparatus in 
the area and is bent on exterminating the civilian population at 
all costs. An Su-25 aircraft indiscriminately dropped bombs 
over the Luzamba mining post in Cafunfo by 1130 on 31 May. Four 
hours later, by 1500, a similar aircraft raided the Muquelele 
ward in the Cafunfo commune, as well as the Luremo commune, 
killing two civilians and wounding many others, two seriously. 
  Americo Tomas, Voice of Resistance of the Black Cockerel 
reporter in Cabinda Province, reports that the Luanda regime is 
waging an offensive in Necuto, Beira-a-Nova, Chapa, and Ganda 
Cango areas, north of the province. Over the past 72 hours, 53 
civilians were killed and about 100 others wounded, causing many 
people to take refuge abroad. The FAPLA operations are run by 
General Jose Pedro, a man without scruples, who in 1991 ordered 
the massacre of Choa, which spread all over the province killing 
more than 1,000 civilians. 
  In view of yet another MPLA military offensive, FALA's 
command in Cabinda yesterday said it would not fold its arms 
when lives of civilians are at stake. 

