Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Liu Jiang of Ministry of Agriculture: "Rely on </F>
Science and Technology To Further Promote Agriculture and Rural 
Economic Development"] 
  [Text] Since the beginning of the reform program, China has 
scored tremendous achievements in agriculture and rural economic 
work, and made great contributions to developing agricultural 
science and technology. According to an estimate, 27 percent of 
the growth in China's total output value in agriculture during 
the 1970s should be attributed to scientific and technological 
progress. This figure rose to 35 percent in the 1980s. 
Scientific and technological progress plays a significant role 
in developing rural enterprises, improving production conditions 
in agriculture, helping peasants increase their income and 
readjusting the structure of rural industry and product mix. 
China's economic development has entered a new stage in the 
1990s. The development of agriculture and the rural economy is 
dependent upon scientific and technological progress and on the 
raising of the educational level of workers to a greater extent. 
Therefore, we must pay great attention to the issue of closely 
combining agriculture, science and education. 
<H3>  I. Issues on Actively Promoting the Combination of 
Agriculture, Science and Education </H3>
  If we seek to achieve the goal of doubling the gross 
national product in the 1990s, rural and agricultural 
development is a key to realizing this strategic target. In face 
of this arduous task, we cannot but soberly realize that 
problems which now confront us are our peasants' lack of 
scientific and general knowledge, low standards in 
agro-technology, slow scientific and technological progress, and 
ineffective use of scientific and technological findings in 
agriculture. To solve these problems, we must actively promote 
the integration of agriculture with science and education in the 
course of implementing the strategy of "revitalizing agriculture 
by relying on science and education." 
  "Economy is dependent upon science and technology. Progress 
in science and technology is dependent upon professionally 
trained people. The training of professional people is dependent 
upon education." Agro-scientific research, education and the 
promotion of agro-technology are the three major pillars in 
ensuring progress in agro-science and technology. They are also 
the main forces in revitalizing agriculture with science and 
education. The combination of agriculture, science and education 
is an effective way to solve problems in science and technology, 
education and production, to promote science and technology and 
to reform the educational system. The main technological 
resources in promoting agro-technology come from research work. 
The main resources of scientific and general knowledge of the 
agro-scientists and technicians and peasants are mainly from 
their education. Only by putting the findings of agro-scientific 
research into agricultural production will it be possible to 
turn such findings into the actual productive force. Conversely 
the popularization of agro-techniques also provides agricultural 
research and education some feedbacks and a vast field for 
carrying out practice. Meanwhile such practice will help verify 
the achievements in education and scientific research and 
further spread and improve them. 
  Illiterate and semi-illiterate people account for 30 percent 
in China's rural population. Revitalizing agriculture with 
science and technology will be empty talk if peasants' 
educational and technical standards are not raised. Education in 
agriculture plays a significant role in helping the large number 
of peasants improve their quality, increase their sense on 
developing highly efficient agriculture today, and train more 
professionals. A host of facts show that only when a large 
number of peasants have mastered the results in agro-scientific 
research, will it be possible to turn such results into gigantic 
material wealth. To help agro-science and technology leave the 
laboratories and books and become popular on farms, it is 
necessary to broaden technical education among peasants and help 
them raise their level in science and technology. This 
constitutes the foundation in revitalizing agriculture by 
relying on science and technology. This is an important measure 
in raising agricultural productivity and building up the 
potential in farming. That is precisely why the developed 
countries are attaching great importance to education. 
  The essence in combining agriculture, science, and education 
is to carry out scientific research and education, and 
popularize technology with the focus on agricultural 
development. It is necessary to conduct scientific research with 
an aim to solve major problems in agriculture and in rural 
economic development, ensure that more scientific and technical 
personnel will go to the major battlefield in agriculture and in 
rural economic development, and help them score even greater 
achievements at an earlier date. In carrying out education, 
emphasis must be placed on raising the educational level of the 
rural workers, broadening basic and professional education in 
the countryside and training more people with agro-technical and 
managerial skills. The department in charge of the promotion of 
agro-technology must strengthen its efforts in verifying and 
popularizing their scientific and technical achievements and put 
them to use as soon as possible. In the process of carrying out 
this procedure, the various departments in charge of agriculture 
must play their administrative role well, and do a good job in 
exercising their leadership, and in organizing and coordinating 
with other sectors in the society for the use of science and 
education to revitalize agriculture. On the one hand, the 
various departments in agriculture, science and education must 
take advantage their own merits to share out the work; clearly 
define their own task and coordinate with one another; and bring 
into full play the wisdom and the technical potential of the 
scientific and technical personnel and educational workers in 
developing agricultural production and rural economy. On the 
other hand, they must help improve external environment and 
ensure the supply of funds, improve their work in agricultural 
scientific research and education, and provide better living 
conditions for the staff members and workers. They must also 
help solve problems, work out and improve the policy of giving 
scientists and technicians incentive and protecting intellectual 
properties in support of the work of combining agriculture, 
science, and education so as to achieve the final goal of 
building the irrigation canal of education, and of using the 
water of science and technology to irrigate the farmland of 
agriculture. 
<H5>  II. On Issues of Increasing Storage of Agro-Technology </H5>
  For the past 40-odd years, China has established a fairly 
complete system for carrying out scientific research in 
agriculture from the local to the central level, and scored 
tremendous achievements in scientific research. According to 
incomplete statistics, nearly 3,000 major scientific and 
technological achievements were given awards by various 
departments at and above the ministerial level during the past 
decade. Right now, approximately 7,000 items in agro-science and 
technology have been submitted every year for citation. Some of 
the items fill in the gaps in China's fields of science and 
technology, while others are approaching or have reached the 
world advanced level. Still others are in the forefront in the 
world. About 30 to 40 percent of the achievements have been put 
to good use in agricultural production and in the development of 
rural economy, attaining tremendous economic results. Twenty two 
of the 32 scientific and technological awards which exceed 100 
million yuan in economic results announced at the first national 
invention awards meeting in 1985 were in agriculture. Their 
economic results totalled 24.163 billion yuan with achievements 
in agriculture winning the top nine awards. The achievement in 
science and technology in hybrid rice, which was put to good use 
since 1973 has helped China increase its grain output by more 
than 80 billion jin in the past ten years. However, our 
scientific research work in agriculture still lags far behind 
the world advanced nations as a whole. Particularly China's 
agriculture is marching along the path of developing a 
high-efficient agriculture which provides greater and better 
yields. It urgently needs the support of new achievements in 
scientific research. We must proceed from the actual situation 
in our country, keep pace with the development of science and 
technology in the world, and strengthen our efforts in 
conducting scientific research in agriculture. We must strive to 
make breakthroughs in tackling major issues in agro-science and 
technology, score even greater and more scientific and 
technological achievements in order to increase our potential in 
agricultural production. To meet the current needs in 
agricultural production, we must strengthen our research work in 
the following four aspects: 
  1. We must work out measures to transform large tracts of 
medium- and low-yielding farmland and help arid and semi-arid 
areas raise its per-unit yield. 
  2. We must study how to develop new protein and assorted 
feeds, make diversified use of resources of animal and plant 
life and reduce the pressure imposed by the society for grain 
production. 
  3. We must study and cultivate new varieties of high-grade 
animal and plant life that provides high yields and is of 
high-quality and disease-resistant and weather-proof. 
  4. We must study how to arm agriculture and rural 
enterprises 
with modern industrial technology and equipment and make 
technical breakthroughs in preventing and destroying cotton 
bollworms, cultivating new varieties of high-quality farm 
products, treating epidemic diseases and solving other serious 
problems that hamper and restrain the development of 
agricultural production. 
  Once breakthroughs in these aspects are made, a new "green 
revolution" will take place in China's agriculture and a leap 
forward in terms of quality will emerge in the development of 
rural economy. 
  It takes a fairly longer time to carry out scientific 
research in agriculture. While studying basic sciences and new 
high-technology and conducting applied technological research, 
we must energetically keep pace with and introduce the findings 
of scientific and technological research work abroad; reduce 
unnecessary repeats; quicken our tempo in carrying out research; 
and strive to score achievements and put them to good use in 
agriculture as soon as possible. 
<H3>  III. On Issues of Steadily Developing the Contingents of 
Grass-Roots Level Workers for Popularizing Agro-Technology </H3>
  The popularization of scientific and technological 
achievements in agriculture among peasants is dependent upon the 
grass-roots organizations and the large number of workers in 
spreading agro-technology. The system for the popularization of 
agro-technology is the media used by the government department 
to provide technological guidance and the pillar of the 
operational mechanism for the popularization of scientific and 
technological findings in agriculture. After scores of years, 
the system of the popularization of agro-technology has become 
an important sector in rendering agro-technical services, the 
core in developing the rural social service system and a major 
pillar in support of the rural tertiary industry. There are more 
than 220,000 organizations for agro-technology popularization, 
over 900,000 workers on official payroll to disseminate 
agro-techniques, over one million peasant-technicians and more 
than 6.6 million families which are assigned to demonstrate 
agro-techniques to fellow peasants in the vast countryside. 
Nevertheless, the number of people who promote agro-technology 
in China is far from being adequate as compared with the 
developed nations. It fails to meet the requirements for the 
development of modern agriculture. There is only one 
agro-technician for every 10,000 peasants. In some developed 
countries, there are an average of 13.5 agro-technicians in 
Germany, 7.2 agro-technicians in the United States and five 
agro-technicians in Japan for every 10,000 peasants. Centers for 
agro-technology popularization have not been completed in 36 
percent of the counties, and institutions for the promotion of 
agro-technology not built in 20 percent of the townships and 
villages (administrative villages). A large number of 
institutions for agro-technology popularization are unable to do 
their jobs well because of lack of funds. This is the main 
reason for hampering the promotion of the achievements in 
scientific and technological research and preventing 60 to 70 
percent of the fruits of China's scientific and technological 
research from being used on a large scale and on time. 
  Not long ago, a trend of ignoring and even weakening the 
efforts to promote agro-science and technology has cropped up. 
During the structural reform, some localities have even 
eliminated funds for popularizing agro-technology, and curtailed 
or even abolished institutions for the popularization of 
agricultural science and technology. The local authorities have 
tried to "break off relations with these institutions" and "wean 
them from the breast." Attending the trifles to the neglect of 
essentials, their practice will seriously affect agricultural 
production and the development of rural economy. 
  Most of departments in the development of agro-science and 
technology and in the popularization of agro-technology are 
faced with problems such as low revenues and high risks because 
of the fact that agriculture is often restrained by natural 
conditions, that production in agriculture remains unsteady, 
that the comparative efficiency in agriculture is low, and that 
it is difficult to keep agro-technological findings 
confidential. However, agricultural science and technology 
brings considerably greater social benefits to agricultural 
production. The increase of farm and sideline products and the 
development of rural economy brought about by the application of 
new technological findings will promote the development of the 
entire national economy. Therefore, we cannot evaluate the 
cost-benefit ratio by viewing the procedure of popularizing 
agro-technology only. We should do so by taking into 
consideration the overall benefit to the whole society. On the 
basis of this view, the government must give vigorous support to 
scientific and technological research and to the popularization 
of agro-technology. It is precisely because of this reason that 
some developed countries have set up huge agro-science research 
institutions, educational departments for agriculture and a 
system for the popularization of agro-technology; and provided 
them with financial support. Although agriculture only accounts 
for a limited percentage of each nation's gross national 
product, these developed countries have taken into consideration 
the unique position and role of agriculture. 
  It is necessary to steadily develop the contingents of rural 
grass-roots service personnel for the popularization of 
agro-technology. This is the basic carrier to popularize science 
and technology in thousands of peasant households, an important 
means of revitalizing agriculture with science and education and 
an important form of organizational guarantee in laying a solid 
foundation in agriculture. We must act in strict accordance with 
the "two laws" and the circular issued by the six ministries and 
commissions to ensure the authorized number of staff members and 
the supply of funds for rendering basic-level services in 
promoting agro-technology; and further set up and improve the 
system to promote science and technology at the grass-roots 
level in the countryside. We must truly form a network to train 
peasant-technicians and promote agro-technology, which links 
colleges, universities and research institutions with 
specialized groups and households. The organizations which 
provide technical services may also collect fees for their 
services, become economic entities for self-development, and 
improve their services in support of agriculture. However, the 
governments in various localities must not reduce or suspend 
their financial support to these organizations and force them to 
abandon their services and become profit-oriented alone. 
<H5>  IV. On Issues of Accelerating the Training of Professionals </H5>
  Our future economic development is determined by whether or 
not we can master advanced science and technology, while the 
development of advanced science and technology is dependent upon 
a large number of advanced professionals. Those who command a 
large number of professionals have a good future. This is an 
inevitable trend in historical development. Revitalizing 
agriculture with science and technology is also dependent upon 
professionally trained people. Without a large number of highly 
competent scientific and technological personnel, it is 
impossible to revitalize agriculture with science and technology. 
  In the past, a large number of our scientists and 
technicians 
have persistently worked hard on the rural forefront for a long 
time, dedicate themselves to agricultural development and made 
tremendous contributions. Under the influence of many factors in 
the society, there are less and less young people working in the 
field of agro-science and technology at present. Many young 
scientists and technicians are unwilling to carry out scientific 
research work in agriculture. Particularly they are unwilling to 
go to the forefront in the countryside to guide peasants in 
agricultural production. A situation whereby there is a shortage 
of professionals and successors to carry on their work in 
support of agriculture prevails. This is the most serious 
potential crisis facing us in the development of agro-science 
and technology. If that continues, it will seriously affect 
China's agricultural production and the development of its rural 
economy. 
  In face of the advent of the 21st century, the challenge of 
constantly changing new technology and the strong demands to 
further develop agriculture, we should put our task of training 
a contingent of middle-aged and young agro-scientists and 
technicians with great academic attainments in both theory and 
practice as an important item on our daily agenda. We must make 
use of all types of public media to stress the important role of 
scientists and technicians in agricultural development in both 
theory and practice, and create a fine general mood in the whole 
society in which professionals are respected and cherished. The 
vast countryside must adopt even more open-minded policy on 
professionally qualified people and carry out its work well to 
attract more competent people. We must not only create better 
living conditions to attract more professionals; create better 
working environment for them, establish a good mechanism of fair 
competition; and encourage competent people to distinguish 
themselves from others. We must boldly assign young scientific 
and technical personnel to important posts and give them 
support; help them temper themselves, improve their skills and 
broaden their knowledge; and encourage them to score greater 
achievements at an earlier date. We must strengthen ideological 
education among young scientific and technical personnel; and 
vigorously promote the spirit of arduous struggle and selfless 
dedication while we must give priority to improving working and 
living conditions for those scientific and technical personnel 
who are working on the rural forefront and try our best to 
increase their pay and elevate their status. We must strictly 
demand that young scientists and technicians temper themselves 
in practice and withstand severe tests. We must also encourage 
the younger generation to make contributions to revitalizing 
agriculture and the rural economy. 

