Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Mr. Leotard Criticizes Mr. </F>
Mitterrand's Suggestions on M-5 Nuclear Missile Programs"] 
  [Text] On Thursday, 3 March, Defense Minister Francois 
Leotard spoke before the National Assembly's Finance Committee 
in a public session. He stated that the wish to adapt the TN-75 
missile warhead (already in use on the current M-45 missile) to 
the future M-5 submarine missile and the wish to produce a 
land-based version, christened the S-5, for the Albion platform 
silos, would be decisions entailing "unreasonable costs." By 
saying this, Mr. Leotard indirectly criticized a wish expressed 
by the head of state in a recent interview with AFP and which he 
repeated, with a vigor that surprised his listeners, at the 
meeting of the Defense Council on 16 February. 
  Mr. Leotard stressed: "If we are to implement the M-5 
nuclear missile program, we need to carry out tests to develop 
the new TN- 100 warhead (which was originally intended for it)." 
Replying to former (Socialist) Defense Minister Jean-Pierre 
Chevenement, who asked him about the possibility of equipping 
the M-5 missile with the TN-75 nuclear warhead which currently 
arms the existing M-45 submarine missiles, Mr. Leotard said: 
"That would be unreasonably expensive." He continued: 
"Adapting the M-5 to the Albion platform in its land-based 
version named S-5 would also incur unreasonable costs." 
  Much heavier than the current S-3D missiles equipping the 
Albion platform, the M-5 missile and its land-based derivative, 
the S-5, would mean restructuring the underground silos. The 
TN-100 warhead has the dual advantage of being smaller and more 
"stealthy" than the TN-75. It is known that Rally for the 
Republic President Jacques Chirac is in favor of the M-5 program 
and of restarting tests to perfect the new nuclear warhead. 
<H5>  Mastering `Simulation' Technologies </H5>
  Moreover, Mr. Leotard stated that the M-5 program was begun 
early, "in 1992 instead of in 1995" by former Defense Minister 
Pierre Joxe, and that "we must return to a more normal rate of 
progression for this program." He continued by saying that, as 
indicated in the White Paper for Defense, "nuclear modernization 
has been placed on temporary hold," but that an "unprecedented" 
budgetary effort is being made with a view to the development of 
nuclear test simulation technologies, with 1994 funding 
amounting to 280 million French francs [Fr]. Mr. Leotard 
stated: "This amount should double" in the 1995-2000 military 
programming law, enabling France to acquire the simulation 
capacities enjoyed by the Americans "in nine or 10 years' time." 
  The defense minister pointed out: "In no way is the existing 
French deterrent threatened by the moratorium imposed on nuclear 
tests," which remain necessary "to acquire this simulation 
capacity." He thus indicated that the future military 
programming law would take this fact into consideration. He 
also stated that the renewal of the nonproliferation treaty in 
1995 does not pose any particular problems for France, which 
will sign it. On the other hand, he reminded the committee that 
France would only approve the total test ban treaty, currently 
being negotiated in Geneva and which the Americans would like to 
see concluded in 1996, "if France masters the capacity for 
simulation." 
<H5>  Maintaining the Level of Equipment Credits </H5>
  In addition, the minister expressed his wish to see 
"equipment credits maintained or increased in constant franc 
terms" in the next five-year programming law. "The chosen base 
is Fr100.4 billion," i.e., an initial sum equal to equipment 
credits granted in 1994. 
  The budget for the military programming law is currently 
being studied by the government. It should have been submitted 
to the Defense Council on 16 February, but was not because the 
prime minister's final arbitration had not yet been received. 
Mr. Mitterrand is demanding that the final project be submitted 
by the end of March. Within the government, discussions have 
run into difficulties concerning the annual rate of increase of 
defense credits before inflation. 
  The defense minister envisages a rise of 2.5 to 3 percent, 
which would still mean sacrificing certain arms programs 
(reducing orders, spreading orders over time, or even radically 
abandoning whole projects). The budget minister, who must 
operate within the limits of the law controlling public 
expenditure passed by Parliament at the end of 1993, refused to 
depart from the rule whereby all state expenditure must be 
reduced by an average of 0.5 percent over the next few years. 
  Lastly, Mr. Leotard stated, for the first time, that the 
cost 
of each Rafale fighter aircraft would be Fr315 million 
unequipped and Fr588 million fully armed and with all spare 
parts and regular maintenance included. 

