Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus by Martin Danes; </F>
place and date not given: "He Who Whips the Cream Before Baking 
the Cake Does Not Get Far"] 
  [Text] The topic of the Czech Republic's 
international relations that has been raised ever more 
frequently recently is free trade. In our regular interview 
with the prime minister, we deal mainly with this issue. 
  [Danes] Ministers of four Central European Free Trade 
Association (CEFTA) signatory states issued a statement in 
Prague last week, according to which the deadline for CEFTA 
implementation should be moved forward from eight to five years. 
Are you satisfied with this result, or do you believe that the 
term could have been even shorter and the trade spectrum wider? 
  [Klaus] These are two different things: There is an 
official communique and the actual topic of the talks. What 
the ministers just signed has actually been discussed throughout 
the last year. The Czech side has exerted exceptional pressure 
to this effect. I had to step in several times and push the 
prime ministers of Poland and Hungary, who, fortunately, hold a 
somewhat different view from the trade ministers of those 
countries, and therefore it was possible to bring this issue to 
a successful conclusion. Thus, it was in fact just a formal 
signing of something that had been agreed upon on the level of 
deputy ministers before the end of 1993. 
  Something else was the real topic of the Prague meeting: to 
progress again a bit further. This time, too, we pushed for a 
further acceleration of the implementation of the free trade 
zone, unconditionally supported by the Slovak side. The 
opinions no longer coincide here. Hungary and Poland demand 
numerous advantages for themselves and are not interested in 
speeding up the process. I consider it very bad because the 
CEFTA agreement on free trade is the core of our cooperation 
with these three countries and not some superficial 
proclamations or formal political gestures. Hence, my feelings 
are mixed. 
  [Danes] What is our starting point? 
  [Klaus] Our country does not want to be protectionist. I 
made arrangements recently for a substantial acceleration of the 
work on a free trade zone with Estonia, and we have reached an 
agreement this week with Israeli Prime Minister Rabin on the 
plan to do the same in the near future. We are simply 
interested in free trade. If we say this in the direction of the 
West, it is absolutely clear that it is our duty to speak at the 
same volume in addressing the East. 
  [Danes] Are these steps towards breaking down the trade 
barriers a part of some broadly based international political 
concept? 
  [Klaus] Everything must be placed in a much more general 
framework. In Central and East Europe but also in West Europe, 
the feeling gained prominence that integration equals 
integration of institutions. That is a completely wrong idea 
and confuses the issue. Integration does not at all have to be 
an institutional integration. It could be based on a simple 
breaking down of the trade barriers and opening borders. This 
way, every citizen is integrated with a citizen in the 
neighboring country, every businessman is integrated with a 
businessman abroad, every consumer benefits from having on the 
table a product from another country, etc. We really need to 
make room for interhuman relations in all spheres. What formal 
integrational steps the states have to take is only the icing on 
the cake and not the essential part. If we whip the cream 
before we bake the cake, as is the case in numerous 
integrational attempts around the world, we will not get far. 
  Of course, the central evidence of people is only a 
technical 
modality of the entire process. I must go back to that whipping 
cream and cake: It simply is not possible to jump into 
something head first, if the essence is lacking. We know very 
well that numerous European countries have suddenly been 
discovering that charity begins at home, that they are French 
before they are inhabitants of the European Community. For this 
reason, the national card is being drawn much more often than 
one would expect, based on the statements of particular 
politicians in the past. 
  [Danes] Do you believe that the physical removal of borders 
in West Europe is premature? 
  [Klaus] A border as a barrier, wire, fence--i.e., tangible, 
palpable, which must be crawled under or climbed over--is one 
thing. It is another thing completely when the border is a 
rather symbolic affair. I believe that the borders that are 
100-percent located in Europe will remain just symbolic borders, 
and that as long as can be foreseen. The fact that the borders 
in the sense of a tangible thing keep disappearing is a matter 
of course. Thus the borders in the former sense have been and 
will be disappearing--that is a continuous and natural 
process--and I believe that the borders in the latter sense of 
the word will also disappear. 
  [Danes] There has been a lot of discussion lately about 
the statements made by Deputy Jiri Payne in the United States 
regarding the list of [former State Security] agents published 
in NECENZUROVANE NOVINY. A general question comes to mind: To 
what degree can a representative of the government majority 
publicly present his own personal views that are not identical 
with the official position of the government? 
  [Klaus] I have not conducted any detective investigation as 
to what degree the statements of Deputy Payne are authentic and 
to what degree they were enhanced by the media. I, for 
instance, was cited by all kinds of world media recently as 
having said in Davos that, after a stagnation in our country, 
economic growth will follow. I would never let the word 
"stagnation" pass my lips. It was by no means stagnation that 
took place in our country but, rather, an entirely different 
process of ridding ourselves of the ballast of absurd production 
that could have existed only in the centrally planned regime. 
  Therefore, I will stay with a general answer. We live in a 
democracy, and we cannot order people to hold identical views on 
everything. I do not take this as a formal question but, 
rather, as a specific, fact-finding one. I am rather depressed 
if several ministers announce in advance how they are going to 
vote. I consider it against the esprit de corps. If the result 
of the vote is 10:9 or 6:13, I do not even need to explain the 
outcome--who was in favor and who opposed--to anybody. I am 
sorry that it is done. The same applies to the alleged 
statements by Deputy Payne. 
  On the other hand, we must strictly differentiate between an 
official statement by a politician at a news conference and 
statements made in a two-hour discussion with an audience of 
500, when willy-nilly--we are all just people of flesh and 
blood--we succumb to a certain degree to the atmosphere, the 
environment, and we are more relaxed, do not use crystal-clear 
sentences as we would do in an official communique. At an 
informal discussion with expatriates, it can easily happen that 
you speak about something significant for 90 percent of the 
time, and then someone asks a question, to which you reply with 
a relatively imprecise, unclear answer, and this answer will 
suddenly dominate in the media. I try to avoid this myself but 
am aware that one can never avoid it altogether. 

