CSO 

<F P=106> [M. Ogandzhanyan report based on press agency material: "The </F>
Bishkek Protocol--`Disgrace' or Path to Peace?"] 
  [Text] As we know, at Geydar Aliyev's meeting with Jan 
Eliasson, chairman of the CSCE Minsk Conference, his deputy 
Mathias Mosberg, and Vladimir Kazimirov, ambassador at large of 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Russia and personal 
representative of the president of Russia at the negotiations on 
the Karabakh conflict, on 13 May the president of Azerbaijan 
wholly and fully supported the Bishkek Protocol "since it 
creates the conditions for a cease-fire and permits the 
practical implementation of efforts pertaining to a settlement 
of the conflict." 
  Yet the Azerbaijan National Independence Party (PNNA) is 
declaring its rejection of the Bishkek Protocol. As the 
statement of this major opposition movement of the republic 
observes, "the signing of this document in conjunction with the 
so-called Nagorno-Karabakh Republic signifies international 
recognition of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic, the commitment to 
the conflict zone of Russian troops, and, as a result, 
Azerbaijan's loss of control over part of its territory." The 
PNNA demands that the National Assembly adopt a decision on the 
dismissal of Speaker Rasul Guliyev, who has perpetrated an 
anticonstitutional act and who has exceeded his authority. Nazim 
Imanov, a leader of the PNNA, declared that if the authorities 
attempt to compel the National Assembly to recognize Rasul 
Guliyev's signature, the opposition will by all democratic means 
put pressure on the authorities to prevent such actions. 
  Similar statements were made by other political parties of 
Azerbaijan. A conference of 16 political parties of varying 
persuasions held on 11 May at the headquarters of the Musavat 
Party adopted a document addressed to Rasul Guliyev, chairman of 
the parliament of the republic, which sharply condemns the 
Bishkek Protocol that he signed. It was observed at the 
conference that the present leadership of Azerbaijan has from 
the very outset occupied a defeatist position on the Karabakh 
issue. 
  A number of women's organizations of Azerbaijan, including 
the Dilyara Aliyeva Society for the Defense of the Rights of 
Women, the Democratic Women organization, women's branches of 
the Musavat and Boz gurt parties, and others, adopted a joint 
statement, which rejects the Russian plan of a settlement of the 
Karabakh conflict as contrary to Azerbaijan's national 
interests. Tofik Gasymov, chairman of the parliamentary 
Committee for Constitutional Development and former minister of 
foreign affairs of Azerbaijan, is of the same opinion. "The 
document signed in Bishkek has no legal validity and is 
anticonstitutional," he declared. According to him, it is 
essential to take account of the fact that the question of an 
armistice does not come within the jurisdiction of the chairman 
of the Supreme Council but is within the jurisdiction of the 
president. 
  A Policy Center of political parties and organizations of 
the 
republic was created last Sunday in Azerbaijan. A statement 
adopted by this center emphatically condemns the actions of the 
leadership of Azerbaijan and calls the Bishkek Protocol 
"disgraceful." 
  But there the opposite opinion is in the republic also. A 
meeting of the center bloc of parties, which includes the 
Azerbaijan Democratic Independence Party, the Social Democratic 
Party, the Gummet Party, and others, approved the signing by the 
speaker of the parliament of Azerbaijan of the Bishkek Protocol. 
The document itself is seen as a readiness for peace 
negotiations, and the anxious calls of certain political forces, 
as an aspiration to disturb internal stability and a struggle 
for power. 
  Zardusht Alizade, leader of the Social Democratic Party of 
Azerbaijan, termed the Azerbaijan side's signing of the Bishkek 
Protocol a reasonable compromise. He emphasized here that a 
peace on milder terms could have been concluded prior to the 
capture of Agdam, but it was rejected at that time. 
  In response to the demand for his resignation Rasul Guliyev, 
speaker of the Azerbaijani parliament, declared: "I would resign 
with the utmost pleasure, but the interests of my people are for 
me higher than all else." 
  There was a demonstration recently in front of the Supreme 
Council of Azerbaijan building organized by the Dilyara Aliyeva 
Society for the Defense of the Rights of Women. The democrats 
demanded the annulment of the "Bishkek Protocol, which is a 
disgrace for Azerbaijan," and a political evaluation of the 
actions of the chairman of the parliament of Azerbaijan, who 
had, in their view, exceeded his authority. The police used 
force against the demonstrators, as a result of which several 
women received injuries and were taken to hospital. 

