BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Faris Buwayz by a panel of </F>
AL-AHRAM writers in Cairo; date not given] 
  [Excerpts] The discussion began with writer Muhammad 
Salmawi greeting the Lebanese foreign minister. Salmawi 
wondered about the developments in that long-suffering fraternal 
country and said that we all wonder if an end to Lebanon's 
ordeal is in sight. Writer Lutfi al-Khuli then mentioned that 
we need to learn more about the events in Lebanon since the 
church bombing. 
  [Buwayz] Thank you, everyone. I think that the bombing of 
Sayyidat al-Najat Church, which came on the heels of the 
explosion in the al-Ibrahimi Mosque, was aimed at diverting 
attention from the latter explosion and rechanneling the 
attention of the international media. Another goal of the 
church bombing was to provoke the locals and lead them into 
thinking that the bombing was the doing of the resistance. A 
third motive was to incite Christians into demanding a change in 
the relations between Lebanon and Syria. I think that these 
were the motives behind the church bombing. It was a 
provocative and conspiratorial act. 
  Immediately after the investigations began it became clear 
that the above impressions were justified. I arrived at the 
scene just 20 minutes after the explosion, which occurred in my 
home town and electoral district. What I told you before were 
my first impressions, and they were vindicated. A number of 
individuals were arrested and they later confessed that they had 
links with Israeli officers. They admitted to having met 
Israeli officers in the border strip and to have received the 
information, instructions, money, and equipment for carrying out 
the bombing. Clearly, this was an attempt to disrupt the 
situation in Lebanon. This is hardly a secret anymore. 
  I recall remarks made by the head of the Israeli negotiating 
delegation to the effect that Israel finds the security equation 
in Lebanon unacceptable, particularly the presence of the 
resistance in the south, and will try to change it. About ten 
days ago, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin said that Israel 
cannot reach an understanding with Lebanon unless the current 
relations between Lebanon and Syria change. 
  Therefore, it is clear that what is happening is an attempt 
to change a number of domestic equations in order to promote 
certain political interests. True, the Lebanese were known 
during the war to be susceptible to infighting and to foreign 
plots and intervention, but this time the country's reaction was 
very mature. As a result, the bombing failed to create a 
factional division or spark sectarian strife. 
  The nation was almost unanimous that unity should be 
maintained. The public was aware that those who perpetrated this 
atrocity wanted to revive internal strife here. I believe that 
the nation has passed that test in good form, helped to no small 
extent by the progress in the investigations. I am a lawyer and 
therefore cannot prejudge things, but it seems that the evidence 
gathered in the case and the statements of the detainees have 
pieced together a clear picture. [passage omitted] 
  [Dr. Halah Mustafa] My question concerns the future 
political impact of Hizballah's presence in Lebanon. It has two 
parts: First, what effect will Hizballah's armed operations in 
the south have on the future of the peace process, specifically 
the Lebanese-Israeli peace process? Second, what is the nature 
of Hizballah's relations with the legitimate authorities in 
Lebanon? Because, given its ideological and political structure 
and its well known regional links, Hizballah may pose a real 
challenge to the authorities in the post-peace agreement era. 
Will the authorities in Lebanon be able to control this party 
in the future? 
  [Buwayz] In Lebanon Hizballah is part of the resistance. In 
fact, this party was established on the basis of certain 
commitments. Despite its ideological premises based on applying 
the Islamic shar'iah, Hizballah realizes that it is impossible 
to achieve its goal in Lebanon as long as Lebanon is a unified 
country. Thus, Hizballah's ideology takes the Lebanese situation 
into account and perhaps it is trying not to aggravate this 
situation as long as they need Lebanon to remain a unified 
homeland for all its sons and sects. Hizballah cannot impose 
its own interests on other sects. Regarding the second part of 
the question, I believe it is wrong to say that resistance 
should stop before guarantees are obtained on the return of 
southern Lebanon, because the resistance is not the reason for 
the occupation. The resistance emerged as a result of the 
Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon and not vice versa. There 
would not have been any resistance had it not been for the 
occupation of part of Lebanon. The crux of the issue is the 
resistance, which was founded on a clear and just basis--that 
is, Israel's occupation of one-tenth of Lebanese territory, 
apart from its daily actions and arrests. It seems that no one 
wants to know that there are 400 Lebanese detainees in Israeli 
jails who have not been visited by any international 
organization. 
  The resistance is sometimes a manifestation of international 
impotence. The Lebanese Government is being asked to restrict 
or abolish the resistance; Israel constantly requests this. We 
say: How can the state abolish the resistance when it has no 
guarantees? This means that the Lebanese Government is being 
asked to become a suburb of the Israeli occupation. This might 
trigger a permanent civil war in Lebanon between those who 
believe that resistance is a legitimate right as long as 
Lebanese territory is occupied and those who want to end the 
resistance. Therefore the Lebanese Government will not enter 
into internal strife over this issue. The Lebanese Government's 
stand is that since Israel maintains that it has no designs on a 
single inch of Lebanese territory or one cubic meter of Lebanese 
water, a joint military committee can be formed to discuss a 
timetable for withdrawal as well as all security requirements in 
the south. This committee could also discuss hopes for the 
future. The Government could then say that there is a plan to 
liberate the south and that the resistance is preventing 
liberation. The resistance would then look like a hindrance to 
liberation instead of the only means of liberation. Israel 
continues to ask us why we do not commit ourselves to ending the 
resistance. We are not saying that we will not agree to take 
control of the security situation in the south until the last 
Israeli soldier withdraws. In stage two, a joint security 
committee could decide to link withdrawal to the establishment 
of security and stability. The Government will then be 
responsible for any violation originating on Lebanese territory. 
Certainly the resistance is not a military problem for Lebanon. 
For the Lebanese state, the resistance is a political issue. 
When the political side of this problem is solved, there will 
be no problem. [passage omitted] 
  [Ahmad Nafi'] It was noticed that the issue of deploying 
the Army in the south was raised during U.S. Secretary of State 
Warren Christopher's visit to Lebanon to speed up the resumption 
of the peace negotiations. Talk about this issue then stopped. 
It is being said that there is still a plan for the Army's 
deployment in the south. What effect would this have on 
speeding up the implementation of Resolution 425? 
  [Buwayz] There is a fundamental point that we did not touch 
on when we spoke about the al-Ta'if accord and its achievements. 
The al-Ta'if accord allowed the state to build up the 
establishments. The Lebanese Army numbered no more than 10,000 
soldiers and its armament was very weak when the civil war 
ended. The army now has around 40,000 soldiers and we can say 
that it is now a respectable force. Overall the Armed Forces 
now number 70,000 if we include the internal security forces and 
some other organs. 
  One of the achievements of the al-Ta'if accord is that it 
allowed Lebanon to rebuild its institutions. All the militias 
have been dissolved. Everyone recognizes that this is not a 
military problem, but a political one. Looked at from this 
angle, the Army's deployment in the south has dispelled the 
fears. It is not a military problem but a political one. 
  [Muhammad Salmawi] Has a decision been made in Lebanon to 
concede the resistance card? 
  [Buwayz] The consequences of making a premature decision and 
the absence of Israeli guarantees would create an internal 
problem, and perhaps even a civil war in Lebanon between the 
resistance's supporters and opponents. The state has not looked 
at this issue yet. What we are saying now is that the cabinet 
has decided to order the Army to deploy on all the Lebanese 
territory. But the deployment so far is limited to part of 
Beirut and other areas -- that is, to around 65 percent of 
Lebanon's territory. Four days ago, the Cabinet expanded the 
Army's deployment. This means that the internal security 
situation will be under full control. But the decision does not 
mean stopping the resistance. 
  [Amin Muhammad Amin] There is supposedly a link between the 
Syrian peace track and the Syrian presence in Lebanon. Does 
such a link in fact exist or is this a mere Israeli assertion? 
  [Buwayz] There is a real and known link, but this linkage is 
Israel's and is not new. This linkage was first made after the 
17 May 1985 agreement when the Lebanese negotiator had 
negotiated at length with the Israeli side. When they broached 
the issue of withdrawal from the south, the Israelis linked all 
these terms to Syria's approval and blessing of the agreement. 
That was not the first time that Israel had made the linkage. 
I will explain how Israel concocts the linkage. We tell 
Israel: UN Resolution 425 has been passed, so please implement 
it. In return, the Lebanese Government will pledge to impose 
full security and stability on both sides of the border. This 
resolution has nothing to do with regional developments and is 
independent of a peace agreement. This resolution demands 
Israel's withdrawal and says that the Lebanese state is 
responsible for security and stability. It is an independent 
resolution. We are and remain Arabs. So what is the Israeli 
reply? They say that Israel will withdraw only after the 
signing of a peace agreement with Lebanon, the peace agreement 
that involves recognition and relations. It says: To implement 
Resolution 425, the Lebanese state first has to impose security 
and stability. We will sign a peace with you when all the Arab 
problems are resolved and agreement is reached with the 
Palestinians, Syrians, and Jordanians. A separate peace 
agreement with Lebanon is impossible as long as this conflict is 
a comprehensive Arab effort and as long as this peace and its 
establishment can only be built on the general principles of the 
peace process. We say that Israel must withdraw in 
implementation of Resolution 425; and when progress is made with 
the Palestinians, Syrians, and Jordanians, we will, in 
solidarity with them, sign a full peace agreement with Israel. 
As you can see, it is Israel who links the situation in the 
south to the overall situation in the region and to the Syrian 
track in particular. 
  There is no link between Syria's presence and Israeli's. We 
believe the Syrian Army's presence in Lebanon to be necessary 
for a while to help the state rebuild its institutions and 
impose security and stability. We regard the Israeli Army's 
presence as an occupation that is opposed by all Lebanese. We 
needed the presence of an army at one stage but this need is 
decreasing daily since we have rebuilt our institutions, but 
there is an occupation that is creating a political crisis, an 
occupation in the full sense of the word. As far as we are 
concerned, this occupation is illegal. Politically and 
regionally, when Israel withdraws from the south, then there 
might be no justification for the presence of any foreign army 
in Lebanon, depending on the political and psychological 
conditions. 
  Legally, of course, we refuse to equate these two presences. 
[passage omitted] 

