BFN 

  [Text] Tirana, May 13 (ATA) -- "There is no doubt that the 
friendly relations and the close cooperation with the countries 
in our region, with our neighbours, have been and will be a 
priority of the Albanian foreign policy," Albanian president 
Sali Berisha said in an interview with the Albanian television 
on May 12. 
  Mr. Berisha said that the aim of this visit is the extension 
of the political, economic, cultural and scientific cooperation 
between the two friendly countries. 
  The friendship and cooperation treaty signed in Romania, the 
removal of double taxation between the two countries, the 
encouragement of investments and the economic and scientific 
cooperation which complete the full legislation "place the 
relations of these two friendly countries on a new basis 
guaranteeing for them a reliable prospective." 
  "In my opinion, through its equilibrium in politics, Romania 
has made a great contribution to the safeguarding of peace and 
stability in the Balkans," Mr. Berisha said, adding that "it is 
indisputable that the economic cooperation with the countries of 
the region is indispensable in order that Albania and the region 
in general be integrated into the European Union". 
  "In the talks with President Iliescu, we made an extensive 
analysis not only of the bilateral relations but also of the 
situation in the region in general," Mr. Berisha said. 
  "Romania is committed to contribute to the prevention of the 
conflict, to its solution through peaceful means and dialogue." 
  "Romanians have some traditional ties with Serbia, ties that 
are stronger than others and I insisted in the talks with Mr. 
Iliescu and the Romanian Government that these ties too must be 
used to influence in Belgrade to start an unconditional dialogue 
with Pristina in the presence of a third party," Albanian 
president said. He considered as very important the lowering of 
tension and the beginning of efforts for the solution of a very 
complicated problem as that of Kosova is." 
  "In my meeting with the opposition, Mr. Constantinescu, who 
is my friend, I had the pleasure to notice that both the 
Romanian Government and the opposition have similar opinions 
with regard to the foreign policy. Both parties nurture 
profoundly friendly feelings for Albania and the Albanians and 
are greatly interested in a close cooperation with our country," 
Mr. Berisha said. Romania is ready to support Albania's 
membership to the Council of Europe and to cooperate with 
Albania in the context of the Partnership for Peace and other 
international institutions. 
  Speaking of a meeting an a working luncheon with the 
Hungarian president, Arpad Goncz, during a stop-over to Budapest 
on his way Romania, Mr. Berisha said that we stressed that 
numerous agreements have been signed during the last two years 
and we are preparing to sign very soon the treaty between 
Albania and Hungary and other agreements which will complete the 
legislation of this important cooperation," President Berisha 
said. 
  Concerning the Kosova problem, President Berisha pointed out 
that "Hungarian President Goncz said that the Kosova problem is 
a very delicate problem and the Balkan crisis cannot be solved 
unless the Kosova question is resolved." President Berisha also 
said that he had a full understanding with the Hungarian 
president about all the developments in the region. Mr. Berisha 
appreciated the free election in Hungary, which, he said, are "a 
victory of democracy." President Berisha appreciated the fact 
that none of the extremist parties is represented in the 
Parliament. 
  President Berisha also stressed that "Presidents Iliescu and 
Goncz had accepted his invitations to visit Albania in in a near 
future." 

