CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Ingo Capraro on a commentary by Charles Moore, </F>
editor of the SUNDAY TELEGRAPH, appearing in THE SPECTATOR; date 
not given: "Free White Press in South Africa Has Only Two Years 
Left"] 
  [Text] London--Today's free, white-managed press in South 
Africa has probably less than two years of freedom left, 
according to a British newspaper editor who attended the 
just-concluded conference of the International Press Institute 
in Cape Town. It is relatively apparent that Mr. Nelson Mandela, 
who addressed the conference, wishes to have a one-party state, 
writes Mr. Charles Moore, editor of the SUNDAY TELEGRAPH in the 
most recent edition of THE SPECTATOR. 
  The African National Congress (ANC) is already a huge system 
of patronage for millions who would like to get ahead in life. 
The ANC has the capacity for large-scale organized violence. It 
enjoys the sentimental indulgence of the outside world and it 
has a socialist program and a strong communist contingent. Why 
then should it allow the niceties of a multiparty democracy to 
stand in its path? 
  The ANC needs capital but not freedom as it is generally 
understood in the West. "When Mr. Mandela spoke to us--as an 
audience of journalists--he said he wants to have `diversity in 
the media.' This means that there must be important newspapers 
controlled by blacks and a black-controlled broadcasting 
system--natural things for him to want." Yet his vision is not 
one of "competition among titles" but of something less: He 
wants ANC control. 
  The greatest danger, writes Mr. Moore, is that President 
F.W. 
de Klerk gave away too much in the negotiations. Historians will 
focus on the last year or so of the talks and will question 
whether it was necessary for him to rush his own pace by setting 
a specific date for the election before agreement had been 
reached on the constitution--for the election is one in which 
the winners take all. That imposes a thoroughly centralized 
authority upon a profoundly nonunitarian nation. This is, in 
view of the fact that the ANC could perhaps get more than 
two-thirds of the votes and thus could modify the constitution, 
a proposition for a one-party state. 

