BFN 

<F P=106> [Valeriy Kovalev report under the "Events and Commentaries" </F>
rubric: "Russia-Belorussia [Belarus]: Work on Agreement in 
Military Sphere Concluded. Another Round of Talks Between the 
Russian and Belorussian Delegations on Issues of Military 
Cooperation Has Been Held in Minsk"] 
  [Text] Minsk -- At the request of your KRASNAYA ZVEZDA 
correspondent, Veniamin Popov, leader of the Russian delegation 
and ambassador at large, commented on the results of the talks. 
  "During the latest meeting," the Russian diplomat said, "we 
worked on preparing the texts of four agreements. Two of them 
deal with the future operation of strategic installations 
located on Belorussian [Belarusian] territory. These are the 
naval radio station at Vileyka, which ensures communications 
with the ships of the Russian Fleet, and the missile 
early-warning radar station near the city of Baranovichi. The 
third agreement will regulate issues connected with financing 
the group of Russian forces stationed in Belorussia. The fourth 
agreement will determine a procedure for allowing Belorussian 
air defense troops to use our missile firing ranges to carry out 
combat firing exercises. 
  "In my view, the talks went well, and were held in an 
atmosphere of mutual understanding and accord. Consequently we 
directly proceeded to initial all four agreements. All that 
remains is to to clarify one or two details. This will be done 
during our upcoming meeting in Moscow at the beginning of June, 
after which we will be able to submit the documents for signing 
by the leaders of our states' governments." 
  The head of the Russian delegation stressed that the success 
of the talks that have just taken place was decisively 
predetermined by the Treaty on the Unification of Russia's and 
Belorussia's Monetary Systems signed 12 April in Moscow. This 
raised a number of questions which it would not have been easy 
to resolve had this treaty not existed. 
  So what is the upshot? Following the signing of the 
agreements that have been worked through, Russia will get the 
chance to use the radio station in Vileyka even after its 
strategic troops have been withdrawn from Belorussia. 
Construction of the radar station near Baranovichi will be 
completed. This installation will also remain on Belorussian 
territory after the year 2000. It will operate not just in 
Russia's interests, but in the interests of all CIS countries 
that are party to the Collective Security Treaty, and that 
includes Belorussia. For their part, Belorussian missile troops 
will be able to carry out combat firing practice at Russian 
military firing ranges. They intend to take advantage of this 
opportunity as early as this summer. 

