Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Chris Whitfield, political correspondent] </F>
  [Text] The Inkatha Freedom Party [IFP] has launched a bid 
to have the election postponed in kwaZulu/Natal and for a 
referendum to be held on a provincial constitution it would 
compile. 
  In terms of the IFP's surprise proposals put to a 
parliamentary committee, an election in the province could be 
delayed by more than a year. The move--the latest in a long 
series of initiatives from Ulundi designed to shift the 
direction of the transition--comes with ANC [African National 
Congress] president Nelson Mandela and IFP leader Chief 
Mangosuthu Buthelezi scheduled to hold a highly important 
meeting tomorrow. The fact that Mandela initiated the meeting 
and was prepared to travel to Durban is being seen in some IFP 
circles as an indication that the ANC might be prepared to make 
further concessions to the IFP and its Freedom Alliance (FA) 
partners. 
  However, one senior Government negotiator was highly 
sceptical last night, saying. "I think we are just going to 
have to resign ourselves to an election without the IFP or the 
Afrikaner Volksfront [National Front]." There is increasing 
speculation that Bophuthatswana--its administration reportedly 
crumbling under civil service strikes--might come into a 
settlement. Today Parliament begins a three-day session in 
which amendments to the Interim Constitution agreed by the 
Negotiating Council will be passed. The amendments were 
designed to lure the FA--including the IFP--into a political 
settlement but have been bluntly rejected by the dissenting 
parties. 
  Chief Whip of Parliament Alex von Breda said last night it 
was technically possible for additional amendments to be made to 
the Interim Constitution and approved by Parliament if they were 
agreed to today or tomorrow. 
  IFP members of the parliamentary standing committee on 
constitutional matters said they had "given notice of intent" by 
tabling a document on Friday spelling out proposals in terms of 
which kwaZulu/Natal would be handled as a special case. The IFP 
hoped these proposals would be included as amendments to the 
Interim Constitution. 
  The IFP proposals include: 

  -  The Interim Constitution would have no force in 
kwaZulu/Natal until the province had adopted its own 
constitution. 
  -  The kwaZulu/Natal Joint Executive Authority (JEA) would 
maintain legislative and executive control of the province until 
it had adopted a new constitution for the province. 
  -  An administrator-general for the province be appointed by the 
State President. 
  -  Existing civil servants in kwaZulu/Natal within 12 months, 
providing it had been approved by 60 percent of voters in the 
province. 
  -  The election in kwaZulu/Natal would take place no less than 
90 
days after the adoption of the constitution. 


