BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement issued by the COSATU on the SAPA PR Wire Service: </F>
"ANC Elections Victory"] 
  [Text] COSATU [Congress of South African Trade Unions], and 
our entire membership of 1.3 million workers salute the African 
National Congress, and President Nelson Mandela for their 
magnificent elections victory. This is a victory which 
thousands of members of COSATU have worked tirelessly for over 
the last few months. It is fitting that workers were able to 
celebrate this victory on May Day. 
  The decisive victory of the African National Congress is a 
triumph for the people of South Africa in their struggle for 
democracy and social justice. In particular it is a victory for 
the working people. Workers voted for the ANC in their millions 
because the ANC has represented their aspirations over the 
years, and has a clear plan to build a better life for them and 
their families. 
  The overwhelming majority of workers voted against the 
negative and racist campaign of the NP [National Party]. They 
voted in the knowledge that NP rule means exploitation, 
division, and privilege for the few. 
  The ANC's positive message of peace, jobs, housing, 
education, and a better life for all struck a deep chord in the 
working people of our country. This message had credibility 
because of the clear programme of reconstruction and development 
[RDP] which the ANC put to the nation. 
  COSATU welcomes last night's statement of President Mandela 
that the RDP will be the cornerstone of the government of 
national unity, and that all parties will be expected to work 
within this framework. We believe that this is the unambiguous 
mandate given by the electorate. Trade unions and other 
organisations of civil society will do all in our power to 
ensure that the RDP is not blocked by any grouping elections [as 
received]. We dip our flag in the memory of COSATU members and 
leaders killed in their attempt to ensure free political 
activity, including those comrades killed in Ulundi shortly 
before the elections. 
  Now is the time for us to rebuild our country and 
reconstruct 
our economy. We call on business to join us and the democratic 
government in creating jobs and basic social infrastructure for 
all our people. The prospects for a significant economic boom 
are extremely bright. We must not squander this opportunity on 
speculative economic activity and white elephants. Our priority 
is to restructure our industries in a manner which creates 
sustainable economic growth and development aimed at addressing 
poverty and extreme inequality. If all South Africans commit 
themselves to this goal, we will witness an economic and social 
miracle unprecedented in our country's history. 

