BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Aleksandr Shalnev: "Russia Has Become a Proving </F>
Ground for `Exotic Intelligence Services'"] 
  [Text] The Russian authorities are concerned about the 
espionage activity being conducted against us by Asian 
countries, in particular China and North Korea. Yuriy Baturin, 
national security adviser to the Russian president, told foreign 
journalists this. 
  As he put it, "this problem has arisen comparatively 
recently 
and is capable of being solved. We have discussed it at various 
levels with various departments. And now measures are being 
adopted to prevent the leakage of technologies, in particular 
dual-purpose technologies." 
  To illustrate the espionage problem, Baturin reported that 
"in the past five months" Russian counterintelligence has caught 
red-handed a North Korean spy who was operating under diplomatic 
cover. No theft of technologies by the Chinese has been 
observed this year, he said, although he added that there have 
been cases where the competent organs have discovered 
"approaches to top secret facilities." In these situations, 
preventive measures have been adopted. 
  Informed sources in Russian counterintelligence, commenting 
on the presidential adviser's remarks, confirmed that "Russia 
has today become a proving ground for all kinds of intelligence 
services, some of them exotic. The intelligence services 
operate in a brazen and barefaced manner." The sources declined 
to comment on the detention of the North Korean or to cite 
examples of operations against Russia by the Chinese. "As 
regards the Chinese," the sources stressed, "we are especially 
concerned about the spread of Chinese criminal structures, in 
Maritime Kray in particular. [no closing quotation marks as 
published] It was also stressed that the existing system in 
China enables Beijing to make use of any citizens, whatever 
their status, in the interests of intelligence work. 
  On the subject of espionage, Baturin explained the problem, 
in part, in terms of the economic situation in Russia. "I am 
convinced," he observed, "that if our specialists were 
guaranteed more appropriate living conditions, there would be no 
need for more active counterintelligence activity, nothing would 
find its way to China via these specialists, and they themselves 
would never leave for China." 
  The president's adviser also noted the wide scale of illegal 
immigration by Chinese people to Russia, taking place mainly via 
the former Union republics (in particular Kazakhstan), which are 
not capable of property controlling their borders with China. 
As Baturin stressed, the Kremlin is interested in an agreement 
with Kazakhstan that would enable Russia to organize tougher 
security measures on the borders. 

