Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The Drug-Trafficking Problem: Unfavorable Winds </F>
Blow From Washington"] 
  [Text] The U.S. antidrug policy seems to have taken an 
unexpected and dramatic turn. First President Clinton himself, 
and later on the main U.S. Government authorities responsible 
for this area, announced to the world that the new 
administration had decided to lay emphasis on the prevention of 
drug consumption, and reduce repression activities. 
  This announcement made sense taking into account the 
lamentable and universal failure of the repression activities 
carried out by the Army and police of that superpower, as well 
as of those carried out by the cocaine producing countries. The 
millions invested during the last years of the U.S. Republican 
administration were wasted, because repression by itself only 
pushes drug prices up, and this in turn gives the drug 
traffickers more power, thus generating more production and 
involving new people in this illegal trade. Another irrefutable 
argument was that U.S. taxpayers were sick of seeing their money 
ill spent on repression actions within their country and abroad, 
instead of being used for more profitable purposes. 
  Bolivia received this news with a sense of relief and hope. 
The escalation in repression activities was not solving the 
problem at all; on the contrary it was creating the appropriate 
conditions for a fearful and dangerous wave of violence which -- 
like what is happening in Colombia -- could lead to bloodshed in 
the country, cause victims having nothing to do with drug 
trafficking, place the democratic process at stake, increase 
political and personal rivalries, and bring more hunger and 
unemployment to the conflictive rural areas engaged in producing 
coca leaves. 
  Recent reports from Washington point in a different 
direction, however, and one not so encouraging for Bolivia, as 
the plan to emphasize prevention rather than repression only 
applies to the United States, as the armed struggle against drug 
trafficking in Bolivia will be even greater. As a correspondent 
of the international media pointed out when the announcement was 
made on 9 February, the change furnished by Clinton's plan 
forecasts days of peace for the United States but of war for 
Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, and Mexico. 
  One could say that the increasing militarization of the 
struggle against drug trafficking is a positive fact, because it 
is a chance for the Armed Forces and police to receive more 
funds, thus relieving the National Treasury. This, however, is 
a cynical and highly dangerous conclusion for the country, which 
has nevertheless been handling this area in a very unscrupulous 
manner, through successive administrations. It is quite obvious 
that between intensifying a stupid war in the country, and 
having a poor Army and police, the latter is the much better 
choice. 
  If the government does not reject this alarming prospect, 
one 
could believe that this new policy is not only welcomed in 
Bolivia, but also that it was promoted by our government. One 
must not forget that behind this policy in the United States 
there are people of great influence in the State Department who 
support its implementation. 
  The official U.S. announcement states that $13 billion will 
be earmarked for the treatment and prevention of drug abuse in 
the United States, while $427 million will be invested to 
"eradicate" cocaine and heroin, the latter in the "golden 
triangle" formed by Laos, Burma, and Thailand. 
  It should also be recalled that these definitions of policy 
are part of a much broader concept which the Clinton 
administration calls "global affairs," [preceding two word in 
English] that is, a strategic concept focused on the U.S. 
national interests in its new role -- which is now generally 
acknowledged -- as international policeman. 
  Thus, the so-called struggle against drug trafficking is 
also 
designed to maintain satellite armies and their own forces 
trained in combat on foreign terrain. This was the cause of the 
recent and bitter controversy in Colombia, generated by the 
small and highly specialized units of the U.S. Army which enter 
into whatever country in the capacity of "engineers" or 
"physicians" engaged in civilian projects. The truth is -- and 
this is quite obvious -- that they carry out maneuvers using the 
"rapid deployment tactics" with which we became familiar two 
years ago. 
  Bolivians have the duty to be on the alert, and support our 
government if it dares to raise before international 
organizations the expediency of depenalizing drug production and 
consumption that are at this point banned. A sound argument 
would be that if we continue on this same path, Bolivia will be 
threatened by instability and violence, which is in no way 
suitable for South America's international system. People would 
listen to us if we had the courage to make the proposal. But in 
order to be able to do so we need to give up the comfortable 
situation of our Armed Forces living on the repression of drug 
trafficking. 

