Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sofia Wu] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, March 22 (CNA) -- Beijing could toughen its 
policy toward Taiwan if the People's Liberation Army (PLA) gains 
the upper hand in post-Deng Xiaoping power struggles, a Japanese 
scholar said here Tuesday [22 March]. 
  Akio Takahara, an assistant professor at Omilin University 
in 
Tokyo, said during a seminar on Mainland Chinese affairs that 
maintaining an international climate favorable for the 
mainland's economic development and pursuing national 
unification are the two pillars of Beijing's foreign policy. 
  Takahara noted that Deng Xiaoping's personal reputation has 
been a major force preventing the nationalist PLA from 
interfering in Beijing's foreign policy. 
  However, with Deng aging and his influence declining, the 
call for hardline foreign policy has been mounting within the 
PLA, he said. 
  Takahara added that some 100 active-duty and retired 
mainland 
military officers wrote to Chinese Communist Party (CCP) 
Secretary-General Jiang Zemin and paramount leader Deng last 
June, asking them not to yield to American pressure on 
diplomatic affairs. 
  Last August, Takahara said, a group of retired senior PLA 
officers and members of the CCP's Central Military Commission 
also issued a joint statement urging Beijing authorities to 
harden policy toward the United States. 
  In response to those calls, Beijing's Politburo, while 
reiterating a moderate line in dealing with the US, declared a 
"four no's" policy -- no confrontation, no provocation, no 
evasion and no fear -- in handling diplomatic affairs last 
September. 
  Takahara observed that Deng has supported a moderate stance 
toward the US partly because he feared that a rift between 
Beijing and Washington might push America closer to Taiwan. 
  Takahara said after Deng dies, the hardline faction in the 
PLA will very likely have a greater say in Beijing's 
decision-making. By then, he predicted that the 
"Taipei-Beijing-Washington" relations triangle may change 
greatly. 
  The mainland affairs seminar, which opened Monday, is being 
sponsored by National Chengchi University, with more than 100 
Taiwan and Japanese scholars participating. 

