Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Monrovia, Feb 28 (AFP) -- Rebel Liberian leader 
Charles Taylor named Monday [28 February] five supporters to 
ministerial posts in a transitional government after striking a 
power-sharing deal with a rival armed movement, pro-Taylor radio 
said. 
  Taylor said his National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) 
and the United Liberation Movement (ULIMO) had agreed since last 
September to split four key "power" ministries between them, 
foreign affairs, justice, finance and defence, said NPFL radio 
monitored here. 
  The rebel leader nominated Momolu Sirlead as foreign 
minister, Laveli Supuwood to the justice portfolio, Joe Mulbah 
to information, Roland Massaquoi to agriculture and Tom Woewiyu 
to employment. 
  The NPFL and ULIMO had agreed to split "the majority" of the 
major ministries between themselves as long ago as last 
September, the radio said, adding there was no need to discuss 
the issue further. 
  There was no immediate confirmation of the agreement from 
ULIMO, one of Taylor's rival in this war-ravaged West African 
state before a peace pact was signed last year. 
  A February 16 meeting to decide the ministry carve-up ended 
without agreement and talks were due to be continued at an 
unspecified later date. 
  Nominations to the agriculture, information and employment 
portfolios had been agreed at a Liberian peace conference 
attended by the NPFL, ULIMO and the interim government currently 
exercising authority over part of the country, notably the 
capital Monrovia. But differences had remained over the key 
posts. The transitional government is due to take office after 
the completion of a disarmament programme -- scheduled for March 
7. 
  However, the rebel radio warned the NPFL would only hand 
over 
its weapons to ECOMOG [Economic Community of West African States 
Cease-Fire Monitoring Group] peacekeepers from outside the 
region. Taylor's force has long been hostile to the Nigerian-led 
force, which it accuses of siding with his rivals in the bitter 
civil war. Currently six nations make up the force, Nigeria, 
Ghana, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Gambia and Mali, Tanzania and 
Uganda. 
  Meanwhile officials announced David Kpormakor had been 
elected Monday president of the State Council, an interim 
collegial presidency which is due to assume power under the 
final peace accord. Kpormakor, an interim government 
representative on the five-member council, replaces another 
interim government member Philip Banks. 
  The election to the post of president -- the subject of 
intense political manouevrings -- took place under the 
supervision of UN special envoy on Liberia Trevor Gordon-Somers. 
  The council elected Thomas Ziah (ULIMO) as first vice 
president, Isaac Musa (NFPL) as second vice president, with 
Banks and Mohamed Sheriff (ULIMO) filing the remaining posts. 

