BFN 

<F P=106> [Responses by FRY Ambassador to Croatia Veljko Knezevic to </F>
written questions from Ramiro Villapadierna; date not given: 
"Yugoslavia Has No Territorial Claims -- There Has Already Been 
Too Much War"] 
  [Text] Veljko Knezevic is Belgrade's first ambassador to 
Croatia since the war between the two countries in 1991. Serbia 
still holds 27 percent of Croatian territory. A Serb from 
Croatian Krajina, Knezevic was in charge of Zagreb television 
for 10 years, before escaping to Krajina in the fall of 1990 to 
found the underground Petrova Gora TV station that was before 
long encouraging the Serbian radicals to go to war. 
  Since the start of the 1980's, at the time of the great 
Serbian repression in Kosovo, Veljko Knezevic held a position of 
strategic importance for the Communist Party at the head of 
Zagreb TV, despite scarcely having had a primary education -- a 
fact which caused considerable controversy in cultivated Zagreb. 
He remained at its head until his embarrassing escape to 
Krajina, eight months before the start of the war. His return 
as -- for the time being, acting -- ambassador, has been 
interpreted in Zagreb as a provocation by [Serbian Prime 
Minister] Milosevic. Knezevic refused to give ABC an interview 
for two weeks, finally agreeing to answer our questions in 
writing. 
  [Villapadierna] Do you think you will get Croatia to 
recognize your country? 
  [Knezevic] My role as ambassador is set out in an interstate 
agreement. That is my country's plan and it is certain that 
soon we will arrive at a situation of mutual recognition. 
However, in the meantime, we have to respect the reality of 
things: This is not a normal process for Yugoslavia because we 
are being subjected to violent, drastic, and inhumane 
international sanctions. In any case, the interests of European 
powers, the United States, and world powers are involved in such 
a way that everything has become complicated, and often 
development depends more on foreign influence than on those who 
are directly involved, namely Yugoslavia and Croatia. If you 
add to that Washington's new strategy, with Croat and Muslim 
Bosnians, it is clear that the path to normalization and 
recognition will be heavy-going, thorny, and uncertain. 
However, we are supported by the desire of both governments and 
peoples to continue with normalization and to resolve everything 
by political means. There has already been enough talk of war, 
too much talk. 
  [Villapadierna] When do you hope to reestablish telephone, 
road, and rail links between Serbia and Croatia? 
  [Knezevic] Normalization will be a very long process for 
objective reasons: There are many issues that have yet to be 
resolved. The main thing is negotiation and agreement between 
Croatia and the (self-proclaimed -- ABC editor's note) Serbian 
Republic of Krajina. The first step has already been taken: 
The cease-fire that has been signed has put a stop to all 
military conflict and the borders have already been agreed on. 
Thanks to a very disciplined approach, the highest level of the 
agreement has been accepted, and that is a very good thing. 
Second-stage negotiations will begin shortly on telephone, 
trade, rail, and road links. All of these issues are connected 
and conditioned by an agreement between Krajina and Croatia. 
Given that these issues are of very great interest to everyone, 
we hope that concrete discussions can begin immediately in both 
sets of negotiations: Croatia-Krajina and Croatia-Yugoslavia. 
Yugoslavia has no territorial claims on any neighboring country 
and we will accept any agreement between Krajina and Croatia. 
  [Villapadierna] Some 7,500 people disappeared in the 
Croatian 
war. Has the joint committee made any progress? 
  [Knezevic] The Yugoslav side has taken its role on this 
committee very seriously. With great humanitarian respect, it 
has started to draw up a list of names, although not all the 
documentation has been completed. Not one shred of information 
will be ignored. The Yugoslav side will in this area apply all 
international standards and will accept the contribution of any 
qualified humanitarian delegation. 
  [Villapadierna] What is your impression of Zagreb on your 
return, three years after your publicized escape to Belgrade? 
  [Knezevic] Well, it is as it always was: Very clean, the 
people are peaceful and calm, the shop window displays are good 
and varied, and there is a very well stocked market. In 
political life there is dialogue between parties on political 
and economic issues, which is good for the development of 
democracy and the multipartite system. The government has made 
a tremendous decision to try and carry through its program for 
general development, stabilization, and budgetary discipline to 
control inflation, and to support production and foreign trade. 
Privatization is making slow progress, there is no way of 
changing the production system, and the State still owns a lot 
of capital and property. The standard of living has stabilized, 
albeit at a modest level. However, the government is very 
active at the level of international contacts and economic 
cooperation, and as a result they can soon hope to see a rise in 
living standards. 

