Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by staff reporter Xiao Wu: "Inflation to Be Kept at </F>
'Acceptable' Level] 
  [Text] China will spare no effort to curb inflation and 
keep consumer prices "at a level acceptable to the public," a 
senior government official pledged yesterday. 
  "The rise in the cost of living this year will not surpass 
the growth in the people's per capita income," said Zhang Sai, 
General Director of the State Statistics Bureau. 
  Zhang released the government's final version of the 1993 
economic report, which contained statistics of every sector in 
the national economy . 
  He said this year the growth of China's Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) will slow down. 
  The government will work to cut fixed-assets investment and 
the money supply to prevent the economy from overheating. 
  Prices of consumer goods in the 35 largest cities already 
soared by 23.3 percent in January from the same month of last 
year. 
  This was attributed to the buying spree through the New Year 
and Spring Festival holidays. 
  Zhang said inflation will not reach any higher this year, 
but 
refused to disclose the exact inflation rate. 
  The government will strive to gradually defuse the 
inflationary pressure step by step this year, he added. 
  He called this a crucial task for achieving government 
economic targets. 
  "If the government doesn't take stern measures to avoid a 
runaway fixed-assets investment and keep the country's inflation 
at bay, we might see the re-emergence of an overheated economy, 
just like that at the end of 1988, the general director said. 
  Zhang also admitted a widening gap between rich and poor has 
appeared along with the economic boom. 
  Meanwhile, the disparities in economic development between 
the inland and coastal areas have also become more conspicuous. 
  This is not the ultimate goal of the government's economic 
development plan, he said. 
  The government has been encouraging one part of the 
population to become rich first through honest labour. 
  Relevant departments are now calling for trans-regional 
cooperation between inland provinces and eastern coastal areas 
in order to better tap economic potential. 
  On last year's agricultural production, Zhang said, peanut 
production topped the list with a year-on-year rise of 34.6 
percent. 
  But, production of cotton, rape seeds, sugar cane, beet, 
tobacco and cow milk all suffered setbacks. 
  Among industrial products, household refrigerators became 
the 
most popular item on the domestic market. The sector saw output 
grow by 28 percent from the previous year. 
  But the production of tractors had the poorest showing among 
China's industrial sectors in 1993, when the country turned out 
only 37,000 tractors, down 35.3 percent from the previous year. 

