BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dr. Mate Granic, deputy prime minister and </F>
foreign minister, by Ivan Sabic; place and date not given: "In 
Vienna the Croats Supported a Joint Position"] 
  [Text] Apart from being occupied with intraparty 
negotiations, which were mentioned in the first part of the 
interview (conducted yesterday), Dr. Mate Granic, deputy prime 
minister and foreign minister, has been involved in the 
negotiations on the reintegration of the UNPA's [UN Protected 
Areas] into the constitutional and legal system of the Republic 
of Croatia, and has been regularly present at the peace talks on 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. This part of the interview is dedicated to 
these talks and the meetings connected to their 
organization. 
  [Sabic] You have recently met with Veljko Knezevic, head of 
the Office of the "FRY" [Federal Republic of Yugoslavia] in 
Zagreb. What was discussed at the meeting? 
  [Granic] Although it was our first meeting, many things were 
discussed. I clearly presented the Croatian positions regarding 
the issues of reintegration of the UNPA's, putting an end to the 
crisis in Bosnia-Herzegovina, and the need for a global 
solution. On the other hand, I explained why at this moment my 
visiting Belgrade is out of the question. Namely, before I 
would do so, there should be certain results in the negotiations 
with the Serbs and in the negotiations in Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
and some specific signals regarding these processes should come 
from Belgrade, too. I told him that our wish was to achieve 
peace, a peaceful reintegration of he UNPA's, and 
good-neighborly relations in the future, but all this will 
depend on the processes I have mentioned. 
  [Sabic] Mr. Knezevic has nevertheless announced your visit 
to Belgrade several times. 
  [Granic] My visit to Belgrade was agreed upon at the meeting 
with Zeljko Simic, deputy prime minister of the "FRY," but 
certain preconditions should be met for that to happen. 
<H5>  Optimism in the West </H5>
  [Sabic] Last week you were in Geneva, where the meeting of 
foreign ministers of the United States, Russia, and five 
European Union countries was held. Was there any mention on the 
necessity of parallel resolving of the crisis in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and the reintegration of the UNPA's in the 
contacts you had there? 
  [Granic] I discussed this with the U.S. State Secretary 
Warren Christopher, with German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel, 
and Bosnia-Herzegovina Prime Minister Haris Silajdzic. 
  [Sabic] What are their positions regarding the issue? 
  [Granic] Silajdzic fully supports this position, and we 
could say we also have the support of the United States and 
Germany, although they believe that the resolution to the crisis 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina is a much greater problem than the 
reintegration of the UNPA's. 
  [Sabic] However, certain optimism has appeared in the West 
regarding this great problem. Alain Juppe has stated that the 
next meeting of the seven foreign ministers could be the new 
opportunity for a decision. 
  [Granic] Optimism is necessary after this dirty war. At 
present certain optimism can be recognized in the fact that 
there is good coordination between the United States, the 
European Union, Russia, and United Nations, the main 
international forces. The announcement at the Geneva meeting 
leads to the conclusion that a peaceful solution will be found. 
There has been mention of a cease- fire and an agreement, and 
certain compromise dimensions have been presented. There has 
not been enough emphasis on what the quality of the territory 
offered to the Federation will be, or on the guarantees and 
mechanisms concerning the implementation, but the positive thing 
is that the talks are expected to begin late next week. The 
U.S. side directly informed us about that. 
<H5>  Percentages for the Croat-Bosniak Federation </H5>
  [Sabic] These talks are considered secret to a certain 
extent; the public does not know much about them. 
  [Granic] This is up to the contact group that organizes the 
negotiations and the three sides that negotiate. 
  [Sabic] You have mentioned the quality of the territory for 
the Federation. However, the percentages are also questionable, 
as there is a difference between the Vienna agreement and the 
international community plan regarding the issue. 
  [Granic] The Vienna agreement on the external borders of the 
Federation was made on the basis of certain principles. First 
the principles were adopted, and only then the outer borders of 
the Federation, which, in compliance with these principles, 
include the territories in which the Croats and Bosniaks are the 
majority, which is 58 percent of the Bosnia-Herzegovina 
territory. With this the negotiating position of the Federation 
was made. Naturally, the Serb side also has its own negotiating 
position: In the negotiations its starting point is the 
proposal that the Federation be given 43 percent of the 
territory. The international community has suggested that it be 
51 percent. 
  [Sabic] This is approximately the mean value. 
  [Granic] Yes. But it is important what the quality of the 
territory is, and if there are certain problematic areas about 
which it will not be possible to reach an agreement -- whether 
they will be under UN control until the issue is resolved 
through arbitration.... Naturally, only the Federation can 
negotiate that. In the negotiations the Federation 
representatives will be on one side, and on the other will be 
the representatives of the Serbs of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  [Sabic] It was agreed in Vienna that two cantons would be 
formed with equivalent authorities, which is a great and, we 
could add, unexpected compromise. However, there are opinions 
that these are not the best solutions, and that they will not be 
able to facilitate peace, the return of the refugees, and the 
return to normal life. What is your opinion? 
  [Granic] First it should be emphasized that the Croat 
people in Bosnia-Herzegovina have always supported the 
preserving of Bosnia-Herzegovina as an integral, but 
decentralized country. This is the continuity of Croat policies 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina. On the other hand, it should be 
emphasized that the starting position of the Bosniaks was a 
unitary Bosnia-Herzegovina, the so-called civil state, that the 
Serbs wanted the division even before the war, and that in the 
war, with the help of the Yugoslav Army, they conquered about 70 
percent of the territory, while the international community did 
nothing effective to stop this. Now there are certain realities 
within which the Croats departed from their concept the least, 
which is evident in the fact that now a decentralized federation 
exists. The cantons in central Bosnia and the valley of the 
Neretva River are a compromise, as you have said, and there are 
no losers there. It is very important that there are no losers! 
  These two cantons, connected by a purely Croat canton, and 
leaning on the Republic of Croatia, are, with all the 
constitutional provisions, an additional guarantee of the 
equality of the Croat people in the federation. It is possible 
to understand the fear, and the opposition of those who thought 
that annexation to Croatia was the only solution. For them it 
is a great change to live in the federation and be confederally 
connected to Croatia, which will be specifically defined only 
when the agreement with the Serbs is finalized. However, we 
should bear in mind that this is a model supported both by the 
Croat public and the whole world. 
<H5>  Ljubic and Pandzic Cooperated </H5>
  [Sabic] What can be done to overcome the fear of the Croats 
who remain in these "parity" cantons? 
  [Granic] Their fears are realistic. We should therefore 
primarily consider how we can help the Croats in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, especially those who had to leave their 
homes, how to return the refugees, help in the restoration.... 
It needs to be explained to the Croats there that Croatia will 
always be with them, that the Croatian corps in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina will be protected by constitutional 
guarantees, and that they will have international support. I 
prefer explanations and help to conflicts. 
  [Sabic] Before the Vienna negotiations there was much talk 
about sabotaging the agreement; certain Bosniak officials were 
openly accusing the Croat side of obstructing its 
implementation. Was this mentioned in the talks with the Bosniak 
representatives? 
  [Granic] Fear and resistance of individuals exist on both 
sides. However, there is great decisiveness on both sides, and 
there is also something that is called the total Croatian 
interest, which can be actualized through the Washington 
agreement, and that is why we have been fighting for its 
implementation. We are therefore in contact with the Bosniak 
side; we discuss all the practical issues, and issues such as 
those concerning the degree of the liberalization of entering 
Croatia, entering Bosnia-Herzegovina through Croatia, the 
situation with the refugees, the refugee aid to Croatia.... 
  [Sabic] The ethnically mixed Bosnia-Herzegovina delegation 
was present at the Vienna talks. Ivo Komsic, Vlado Pandzic, and 
Mariofil Ljubic were in the delegation. What cooperation did 
you establish with them? Was the presence of Croats in the two 
delegations a sign of division in the Croat people in Bosnia- 
Herzegovina? 
  [Granic] Mr. Ljubic and Mr. Pandzic immediately went to the 
room in which the Croat delegation was, asking to be accepted as 
part of the Croat corps, and they were very constructive in the 
negotiation process. Naturally, the direct negotiations were 
conducted by the delegation consisting of gentlemen Zubak, 
Akmadzic, Buntic, and Markotic. As far as Mr. Komsic is 
concerned, he only attended the first plenary session, and we 
did not see him later. He also made some statements, saying that 
nothing would come out of the negotiations. 
  [Sabic] Judging by the recent appearances, one could say 
that the divisions between the Croat politicians in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina have been mitigated. The public appearances 
used to be much sharper.... 
  [Granic] There were absolutely no divisions in Vienna. The 
Croats supported a joint position. 
<H5>  Visit to Sarajevo -- a Question of Arrangement </H5>
  [Sabic] During his short visit in Zagreb, president of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency Alija Izetbegovic sent a short 
letter to President Tudjman, reminding him of the visit to 
Sarajevo he had promised he would make. Will the visit be 
announced soon? What is the nature of the difficulties that have 
caused the visit to be postponed? 
  [Granic] There are no political difficulties; both sides 
want this visit to happen. There are only technical 
difficulties, from the security ones to the question of time 
acceptable to both sides, with regard to the obligations of both 
presidents. This was discussed in the last talk with Mr. 
Silajdzic, but will not yet be released in public. 
  [Sabic] On that occasion you met with Mr. Izetbegovic. Did 
you achieve the same degree of coordination concerning topical 
issues as you had done with Mr. Silajdzic? 
  [Granic] When you compare that meeting with the Bonn 
negotiations, this is a completely different story. It was 
possible to discern a determination to implement the agreement, 
to cooperate with Croatia, have President Tudjman for a visit, 
and consider certain practical aspects of cooperation. All in 
all, it was a pleasant meeting. 
  [Sabic] Was there a difference in relation to the Serbs? 
Namely, it seems that the Croats are still in favor of an 
agreement and peaceful solution, while the Bosniak side, 
according to a recent statement by Mr. Izetbegovic, keep the 
military option open too. 
  [Granic] These differences are getting smaller and smaller. 
The Croats primarily support the peaceful option. However, they 
are asking for firm guarantees for the agreement and its 
implementation. If there is a difference, it is because the 
Bosniaks are much more endangered, as the Serbs have occupied a 
significant part of their territory. The positions toward the 
Serbs have become closer for another reason, and that is that 
the Bosniak side has begun to realize that the possibility of 
the Serbs entering the Federation under equal conditions is very 
small. The Croats understood that from the beginning. 
  [Sabic] Perhaps it would be better to say that the Bosniaks 
also understood it from the beginning, but could not accept it? 
  [Granic] Yes, you could put it that way too. As can be seen 
from the Geneva announcement, the world is at present talking 
about a loose union between the Croat-Bosniak federation and the 
Serb territory. This is a model through which the territorial 
integrity of Bosnia-Herzegovina should be preserved, it is the 
reality of the present, and the Bosniak side is aware of this 
reality. 
<H5>  No Changing Borders With Neighbors </H5>
  [Sabic] Finally, could you tell us a few words about the 
relations between the Republic of Croatia and the neighboring 
countries, considering that, after the elections in Italy and 
Hungary, this is a very interesting topic? 
  [Granic] Despite the change of the party in power, we are 
not expecting any changes in the relations with Hungary. As far 
as Italy is concerned, some people from Fini's party have issued 
certain statements unacceptable to Croatia. However, they were 
followed by other statements among which the most important one 
was the one made by the Italian foreign minister -- it concerned 
the necessity of preserving the borders. We therefore hope that 
the Italian government will conduct the policy of 
good-neighborly relations. 
  [Sabic] Perhaps this is partly a result of certain 
suggestions the U.S. administration officials had given the new 
Italian government. 
  [Granic] Warren Christopher said very clearly that the 
United States firmly supported the position that the territorial 
integrity of the Republic of Croatia must not be questioned. 
This fact cannot be neglected. 

