Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Andrey Bayduzhiy: ``A Martyrology of the </F>
Ecology''] 
  [Text] Another white paper has been published--the State 
Report on the Condition of the Environment in the Russian 
Federation in 1992. Whereas the first such publication a year 
ago appeared before the public in conjunction with a report on 
the state of health of the populace, this time the ecologists 
have stolen a march on the medical profession, whose ministry is 
only now finishing ``its own'' white paper, while at the same 
time urgently seeking the means to publish it. Last year's and 
this year's publication of state reports have yet another 
difference in circumstances. Whereas the promulgation of the 
first of them in 1992 became a minor sensation--an event 
signifying the transition from the epoch of a taboo on 
ecological information, to the common practice of civilized 
countries--the circumstances of the appearance of this year's 
report bore the marks of a more commonplace, working matter; but 
it is precisely this that signifies that openness in the realm 
of the ecology is no longer the exception, but the norm of the 
official policy of Russia at all levels. 
  As RF Minister of Environmental Protection and Natural 
Resources Viktor Danilov-Danilyan wrote in the foreword to the 
book, ``The condition of the environment in the Russian 
Federation remains on the whole unsatisfactory.'' And although 
for the majority of Russians who live in zones of ecological 
catastrophe this truth is understood even without a white paper, 
the paper provides a wealth of statistical material which 
permits confirming this truth in concrete examples. One of the 
most vivid is the fact that the slump in industrial production, 
which last year was in excess of 18 percent, contrary to the 
expectation of optimists did not cause a commensurate decline in 
the volume of pollution of the environment. Discharges of 
harmful substances into the atmosphere during that same time 
declined in all by 11.8 percent; and while the hydrologic intake 
from natural sources declined by 5.4 percent, the discharge of 
polluted waste water declined by only 9.4 percent. Nearly a 
third of the population of the country was subjected to the 
influence of one harmful substance or another last year, in 
amounts exceeding the allowable concentration by a factor of ten 
or more, and nearly 20 percent live in conditions of 
continuously high levels of pollution of the ambient air by 
several harmful substances. 
  Without a doubt the strong point of the white paper, as 
typical of such documents, is its systematic nature. Without 
reporting anything principally new--the majority of the data 
entered into it was known among specialists before this; 
nevertheless, having assembled and broken the data down into its 
component parts, it provides quite a complete picture of the 
ecological crisis in Russia. It is also of no little importance 
that the creators of the document did not limit themselves to 
merely saturating it with ``raw'' data, but strove to apply 
analysis to the report, introducing sections which examine in 
detail the causes for the current unfavorable condition of the 
environment; prognoses for further development of the situation 
in this sphere; recommendations for the future; and, analysis of 
the effects on the ecological situation of various factors in 
the economic, political and social life of the country. It is 
precisely owing to their systematic nature that the first and 
the now-published second state report, that they have done what 
the ecological society had talked about for so long: the empty 
spaces in the mass of data on the state of the environment have 
indeed been put on the map, and not in the form of seas in which 
the islands of reliable information may founder. The last area 
in which such gaps existed for the general public at least, and 
there still are quite a few, remains the radioactive 
contamination of Russia and the consequences of the operation of 
various atomic sites and their products on its territory. A 
report of a State Commission on Radioactive Contamination of the 
Seas and Oceans Contiguous to the USSR and Russia, which was 
made public in April of last year, having made public disclosure 
of the unfavorable condition in our environment, according to 
the law of contrast only stressed the lack of information on 
similar contamination of the dry land, which poses a much 
greater threat to the population of Russia. Thus, the compilers 
of the present state report have their work cut out for them, 
and in the next white paper published they might propose 
significantly expanding the section devoted to radioactive 
contamination of the country. And in consideration of the 
critical nature of this problem and the interest in it in the 
regions, it could even be issued as a separate document. 
  And finally, the last item. In the chapter devoted to 
shedding light on ecological problems by the mass information 
media, quite unexpectedly NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA turned up on the 
list of newspapers who do this inadequately. While understanding 
and respecting the wishes of the authors of the report to see 
our pages 100 percent filled with materials on ecological 
topics, we cannot of course consent to this--if only because of 
the fact that the first of the Russian mass information media 
to acquaint its readers with the contents of the white paper on 
the ecology which came out in 1992, as was the case with the 
report of the governmental commission on pinpointing the 
locations where radioactive wastes are buried in the seas, was 
in fact--NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA. 
  The circulation of the state report consists of 500 copies 
and is addressed to specialists only. However, according to 
preliminary information, the newspaper ZELENIY MIR [Green World] 
plans to publish this document along with other official 
documents on the ecology, and sell them as a supplement to the 
newspaper. One would hope that they would then reach a much 
wider circle of readers, indeed as many as possible. 

