BFN 

  [Text] Riyadh, 8 May (KUNA) -- The foreign ministers of the 
European Union [EU] and their GCC [Gulf Cooperation Council] 
counterparts have renewed their emphasis that the complete and 
quick implementation by the Iraqi regime of all UN Security 
Council resolutions remains a precondition to the establishment 
of peace and stability in the Gulf region. 
  In a communique released at the end of their meetings here 
today, the ministers condemned the Iraqi regime for not fully 
implementing the Security Council's resolution, and for pursuing 
a selective policy in implementing those resolutions. 
  The ministers stressed the importance they attach to the 
full 
and unconditional abidance of the Iraqi regime by Resolution 
687, its immediate release of all Kuwaiti and other POWs and 
hostages from its prisons and detention camps, the dismantling 
of mass destruction weapons, and the payment of full 
compensation for the losses and damages caused by its aggression 
on the State of Kuwait. 
  The ministers renewed their support of the Security 
Council's 
Resolution 833 that stresses the inviolability of the 
international borders of the State of Kuwait and endorses the 
final report by the UN Commission on the demarcation of the 
international Iraqi-Kuwaiti boundaries. 
  The communique included an appeal to the parties in Yemen 
for 
self-restraint, halting the fighting, and to resort to reason 
and dialogue. 
  In their communique, the ministers stressed the importance 
of 
"the stability of international energy markets and the 
realization of equilibrium between supply and demand in the 
interest of the producers and consumers alike, and to facilitate 
investments in the field of energy." 
  In their statement, the ministers urged Iran to respond to 
an 
initiative by UAE President Shaykh Zayid Bin Sultan al-Nuhayyan 
to resolve the dispute peacefully through negotiations and in 
line with international law. 
  The communique welcomed the Gaza-Jericho agreement that was 
signed in Cairo last week and expressed full support for it to 
be implemented totally and urgently. They pointed out the 
importance they held in achieving fundamental and quick progress 
in the other tracks of the bilateral negotiations, particularly 
the Syrian track, in order to guarantee a just, lasting, and 
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The communique also 
expressed the GCC's intention to continue to play an active and 
constructive role in the multilateral talks that completed -- 
and did not replace -- the bilateral negotiations. 
  The ministers reiterated their views that fundamental 
progress in the bilateral tracks will contribute to the success 
of the multilateral talks and stressed the importance of 
providing all forms of help, including economic aid, to the 
occupied territories. 
  The communique outlined the European point of view that 
"lifting the Arab boycott of Israel will contribute toward 
strengthening the peace process" in the Middle East. 
  As for Bosnia, the ministers expressed their full support 
for 
efforts by the international community to reach a negotiable 
solution soon to the dispute in Bosnia. 
  They indicated that the main outlines for the European work 
plan that all parties endorsed at the time remained a strong 
basis for a solution. 
  The Council's foreign ministers expressed their view on the 
necessity to lift the arms embargo on Bosnia-Herzegovina to 
enable it to practice its right to legitimate defense [words 
indistinct]. 
  On the economic side, the two sides did not arrive at a 
clear 
view regarding the carbon tax that the industrial countries want 
to impose on their imports of oil. However, they agreed to 
continue the constructive dialogue with the aim of reinforcing 
economic and commercial cooperation. 
  Sources at the meeting had noted earlier today that the 
morning session that dealt with economic topics "did not 
concentrate on the issue of carbon tax as expected." The 
sources said this was due to the lack of a unified European 
stance vis-a-vis the imposition of the carbon tax, in addition 
to the spirit of cooperation shown by the Gulf partners. 
  The communique stressed the need for a suitable policies to 
deal with issues of the environment, energy, and economic 
development due to the overlap between them. 
  The communique also stressed the two sides' resolve to 
complete the free trade negotiations as soon as possible by 
calling on the industrial, energy, and environmental cooperation 
working groups to meet with the aim of presenting fresh 
proposals for cooperation in those fields. 
  On the other hand, Greek Foreign Minister Karolos Papoulias, 
the head of the European side in the meeting, and his Saudi 
counterpart, Prince Sa'ud al-Faysal, emphasized the success of 
the meeting and the agreement of the two sides within the 
framework of mutual cooperation. 
  In a joint news conference held at the conclusion of the 
fifth meeting, the two ministers noted that an extensive 
discussion was carried out regarding the situation in the Middle 
East and Europe, in addition to economic cooperation issues. 
  The Greek foreign minister stressed Europe's interest in 
ending the conflict in Bosnia-Herzegovina as a "European 
problem." He referred to the efforts of the European Union, in 
cooperation with the United States and Russia, in order to reach 
an immediate cease-fire in Bosnia, stressing that this was the 
basis for the settlement of the conflict. 
  Officials taking part on the European side stressed during 
the news conference that it was unlikely that the two sides will 
arrive at the present at an agreement pertaining to free trade 
due to the nonexistence of a unified customs tariff in the GCC 
countries, however, they welcomed the decision of the GCC 
finance ministers regarding the agreement on drawing up a 
program to unify the customs tariff in the GCC countries. 

