Productivity   Production Systems 

<F P=102> 94FE0298A Tokyo NIKKEI MICRODEVICES in Japanese Dec 93 pp 
88-95--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0298A </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo NIKKEI MICRODEVICES </F>
<F P=105>  Japanese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yasuaki Nagahiro] </F>
  [Text] 
<H5>  Production Equipment Competes on the Basis of COO at Semicon </H5>
Japan 
  Equipment for 16M DRAM production lines in 1994, with 
increased productivity by factors from 1.3 to 2, and 
experimental equipment to evaluate the future productivity of 
the 64M line, with increased productivity by factors from 1.5 to 
2, have appeared repeatedly. The productivity of this equipment 
has begun to be evaluated by using the COO index, which 
quantifies the economics of production lines and production 
equipment. This trend was clear at "Semicon Japan 93," where 
there were seminars on the topic of COO. The equipment that 
appeared this year for improving the 16M line does not provide 
size reduction, so their prices are unchanged. Throughput is 
being improved by shortening the conveyor time, and availability 
is being improved by reducing the number of parts. On the other 
hand, steppers for the 64M line are improving throughput while 
providing 2-to-1 size reduction. 
  Various kinds of equipment for making semiconductors have 
appeared with performance improvements by factors from 1.3 to 2 
in throughput, availability, and cost (Figures 1 and 2). 
  The 16M DRAMs have started to receive real funding in 1994. 
Attempts to improve the productivity of 0.5 m, 8-inch 16M 
DRAM equipment have paid off with productivity improvements by 
factors from 1.3 to 2 over the previous equipment of the same 
manufacturers. At the same time, prototype equipment to evaluate 
the productivity of 64M DRAMs, which will begin mass production 
in 1996, have made improvements by factors from 1.5 to 2. 
  Manufacturers are using the COO model to evaluate the 
economics of production lines and production equipment, 
competing on the basis of this index. (The concept of COO, which 
stands for "cost of operation," quantifies the economics of 
capital expenditures and operation of equipment. The COO model 
uses various coefficients to calculate the contributions of the 
equipment's cost, productivity, reliability, and yield over the 
mechanical life of the equipment. It can also evaluate the 
economics of an entire production line. The COO value is 
expressed as the cost in dollars per wafer.) This trend was 
clearly apparent at "Semicon Japan 93," which was held on 
December 1-3. 
&lt;graphic&gt; 
&lt;capt&gt; Figure 1. Appearance of 0.5 m, 8-Inch 
Production Equipment With 1.3 to 2 Times Better Efficiency. For 
4M, the COO value decreased about 20 percent every year. For a 
DRAM of the same capacity in the 16M case, a decrease of 30 
percent per year is expected. In accordance with this, equipment 
that increases productivity by 25-50 percent appears 
repeatedly.&lt;/graphic&gt; 

&lt;graphic&gt;
&lt;capt&gt; Figure 2. Improvements in CEO Values For Various 
Equipment. The CEO value has gone down 25-50 percent for every 
type of equipment.&lt;/graphic&gt; 

<H5>  Quantification Using the Simpler CEO Index for Equipment </H5>
Manufacturers 
  This trend is the result of the great demands for lower cost 
being made on LSI manufacturers, a trend which began growing 
around 1990. 
  The cry for lower costs has been getting louder in Japan 
since around 1990. At the start of 1993, slogans such as "200 
Percent Production Efficiency" (Toshiba) and "Triple Efficiency" 
(Fujitsu) were prominent in newspapers. LSI manufacturers have 
been demonstrating how much effort they are putting into 
lowering costs, not just in their production departments but 
also in design and development. 
  So far, however, this index has only been used for entire 
production lines, and each of the individual types of equipment 
has only had a "qualitative goal" (Toshiba Semiconductor 
Production Engineering Promotion Center). It seems that Japanese 
LSI manufacturers will soon be decreasing their domestic 
purchases and "America will take the lead," not just in 
equipment technology but even in production technology, says a 
process engineer working for a manufacturer doing joint 
Japanese-American DRAM development. 
  The high productivity of Korean manufacturers has also been 
recognized, and there is now a strong danger that "Japanese LSI 
manufacturers will lose the cost war" (NEC memory department). 
It seems that Japan may fall into third place behind America and 
Korea. 
  In America, on the other hand, quantification of 
productivity 
is moving forward, centered around SEMATECH. (SEMATECH is an 
American semiconductor research organization that is a joint 
project of the public and private sectors. They have two 
programs to improve and develop equipment. The aim is to secure 
world leadership in the area of production.) The model for 
quantifying the economics of production lines and production 
equipment is COO, based on an economic evaluation model 
developed by the American company Intel. They also use a 
simplified model called CEO (Cost of Equipment Ownership), which 
concentrates on evaluating just one piece of equipment by 
omitting the yield factor. (The CEO model simplifies the COO 
model in order to evaluate just one type of equipment. In 
particular, the CEO model omits the yield factor that is not 
possible to evaluate for a single piece of equipment.) 
  Such evaluation methods have existed in the past, but only 
in 
a simple form capable of discussing the economics of investing 
in entire production lines. Such methods could not 
quantitatively evaluate the economics of individual processes 
because, unlike COO and its simplified variant CEO, they did not 
take into account the throughput and availability of each 
process and each piece of equipment, nor did they consider labor 
costs or equipment floor space. 
  At the present time, SEMI (Semiconductor Equipment and 
Materials International) is the most important world body 
concerned with equipment and raw materials, and they are making 
the COO and CEO models into standards. 
<H5>  The Three Worst Types of Equipment Are Etchers, Sputters, </H5>
and CVD 
  With the current strong push to lower costs, Japanese LSI 
manufacturers are accepting COO as a new standard of 
productivity. While simplifying their processes, they are also 
looking to equipment manufacturers to improve productivity. 
  Up through 4M, most LSI manufacturers were decreasing the 
COO 
index about 20 percent per year, for DRAMs of the same capacity. 
However, the goal has become 30 percent for 16M. Also, starting 
with 64M, the aim is to use size reduction to offset the usual 
increase in COO in going to a new generation, bringing it down 
from 50 percent to 20 percent. In reducing costs, "60 percent of 
the reduction should come from equipment improvements, working 
together with the equipment manufacturers" (Fujitsu process 
general manager). 
  This magazine conducted a survey of the Japanese LSI 
manufacturers that have performed quantitative evaluations of 
present 0.5 m, 8-inch production line equipment, namely, 
NEC, 
Toshiba, Mitsubishi Electric, and Fujitsu. The results make it 
clear that "the three worst types of equipment are etchers, 
sputters, and CVD [chemical vapor deposition]" (Table 1). On a 
scale from 1 to 10, these three types of equipment came in 
between 3 and 4. 
  The reason for these results is low availability. The LSI 
manufacturers all evaluate it to be below 60 percent. That means 
that these types of equipment are only working two days out of 
three. There are even examples where one day is spent wet 
washing the chamber for every hundred hours of operation. It 
would be difficult to dramatically improve the availability 
alone, so equipment manufacturers are looking for ways to 
improve the combined availability and throughput. 



  Table 1. Evaluation of Equipment Productivity by LSI Manufacturers. 

                               Company    Company    Company    Company    Average 
                               A          B          C          D 

CVD         SiO[.sub]2[/]       2-3 3      3 3        6 3        2 3        3 3 
            Metal 

Etchers     Metal              2 4 3      2 3 3-4    4 6 4      3 3 4      3 4 4 
            SiO[.sub]2[/] 
            Polycrystalline 
            Si 

Sputters    Al TiN             4 4-5      3-4 3-4    3 3        3 4        3 3 

Steppers                       6          5          5          8          6 

Vertical Furnaces              7          7          9          8          8 

Ion Implantation               7          7          6          7          7 

Application Phenomena          8          8          7          9          8 
Equipment 

Washing                        8          8          7          9          8 

The average values are simply rounded off from the answers of the individual 
manufacturers. 


<H5>  [Boxed item, p 91] The 0.5 m 8-Inch Line Will </H5>
Produce 10,000 Wafers Per Month for Japanese LSI Manufacturers 
  For one Japanese LSI manufacturer after another, beginning 
in 
the second half of 1994 and going into 1995, the 0.5 m 
8-inch 
line availability will be 10,000 wafers per month (Figure A). Up 
until now the capabilities had only been several thousands of 
wafers per month. 
  At present, orders from Japanese manufacturers to equipment 
manufacturers are increasing. With regard to steppers, which 
sell more than any other type of equipment, "orders dropped by 
half during 1993, but will return to the 1992 levels in 1994" 
(Canon, Nikon). 
  Among Japanese manufacturers, Toshiba will be first in 
expanding its Yokkaichi 8-inch line to 10,000 wafers per month. 
The equipment will be installed in the second quarter of 1994, 
with the plan to achieve 10,000 wafers per month in the third 
quarter. At full production the wafer processing capability will 
be 20,000 wafers per month, although they have only decided so 
far to install three-fourths of the equipment. 
  Next will be Mitsubishi Electric and Hitachi Seisakusho. 
Mitsubishi will install equipment in their Nishijo factory in 
the third quarter, and put it into operation in the fourth 
quarter. Hitachi will install equipment in its Naka factory 
starting in early 1994, which will be capable of 20,000 wafers 
per month at full production. However, the line will only be put 
into operation in stages, so 10,000 wafers per month capability 
will not be realized until as late as the first quarter of 1995. 
NEC should also be capable of 10,000 wafers per month by the 
beginning of 1995. However, Mitsubishi Electronics of Korea will 
soon be capable of 20,000 wafers per month, so they are far 
ahead of Japan. 



  Figure A. Actual Production Capability of 0.5 m, 8-Inch Lines of Japanese Manufacturers. 

              (Year)        1994                      95                      Notes 

              (Quarter)     1Q      2Q    3Q    4Q    1Q    2Q    3Q    4Q 

NEC           Kyushu                      X           X 
              "Diffusion 
              8" 

Toshiba       Yokkaichi             X     X 

Hitachi       Naka "N2"     X                         X                       Production 
                                                                              line will 
                                                                              be expanded 
                                                                              in several 
                                                                              stages. 

Fujitsu       Wakamatsu             X           X                             Joint 
                                                                              venture 
                                                                              with AMD, 
                                                                              aiming at 
                                                                              flash 
                                                                              memory. 

Mitsubishi    Nishijo "A                  X     X 
              Wing 2B" 

Mitsubishi    No. 5         X             X 
              "Phase 2" 

The first X in the row shows when the equipment is installed and the second X shows when 
actual production reaches the level of 10,000 wafers per month. 


<H5>  The CEO Value as the Basis for Selecting Equipment </H5>
  Equipment manufacturers have responded to the strong demand 
for cost reductions from LSI manufacturers by using the CEO 
index to quantify their equipment, dividing the cost by 
throughput and availability. This trend was visible at Semicon 
Japan (Figures 3 through 6). 
  The use of the CEO index aims at the American LSI 
manufacturer market, which is moving toward CEO as a basis for 
selecting equipment for purchase. At the same time, this also 
should set up a common ground for competition in Japan, where 
evaluation standards have been less rigorous. In fact, it has 
even been said that Intel has not made purchases because the CEO 
value was not provided. 
  The equipment with higher productivity to be introduced 
starting at the end of 1993 and into 1994 falls mainly into two 
types. The first type is equipment to improve productivity by a 
factor from 1.3 to 2 for 16M, which will receive real funding in 
1994. In other words, the CEO value will decrease 25 to 50 
percent compared to earlier equipment. The second type is 
experimental equipment preceding the completion of 64M 
production equipment. Here the productivity will increase by a 
factor from 1.5 to 2, meaning that the CEO value will decrease 
30 to 50 percent. 
  In the 16M case, size reduction is not being provided, so 
the 
equipment price will be stable. This equipment improves 
throughput and availability. For example, the wafer conveyor 
time, which constitutes more than half of tact time, will be cut 
in half in order to improve throughput by a factor of 1.3. And 
availability will be improved by decreasing the number of parts 
so that periodic maintenance will need to be performed less 
frequently. 
  In the 64M case, the hope is for a breakthrough that will 
improve productivity while providing size reduction. For 
example, steppers have appeared with 2-to-1 size reduction and 
double the throughput. Unlike the case of 5-to-1 steppers, a 
great improvement is expected just by loosening the design rules. 
<H5>  Etchers: Robot Wait Time Cut by a Factor of Three </H5>
  One of the "three worst" etchers have now appeared for 16M 
that reduce the CEO value by 30 percent, from &yen;520 per wafer 
for previous equipment to &yen;400 per wafer. (SEMATECH shows 
COO and CEO values as dollars per wafer, but here we have 
converted this to yen per wafer for Japanese manufacturers.) 
  Applied Materials (AMAT) of America is selling the "P-5000 
Mark II-J Etch MxP," which lowers the CEO value by keeping the 
price the same, improving availability 10 percent, and improving 
throughput 20 percent (Figure 3). The price is about &yen;200 
million, and sales began in Japan in October. 
  The improvement in availability was achieved by reducing the 
generated particles by an order of magnitude and doubling the 
interval between maintenance. The number of particles of size 
greater than 0.3 m was reduced to between 0.03 and 0.05 
particles per cc. This was achieved by means such as using an 
aluminum cutting chamber with attached rounds, using the most 
appropriate blow holes for the gas supply, and switching to a 
hot wall method. The improvement in availability also includes a 
12.5 percent improvement in MTBF [mean time between failures] 
(This is the average time from the occurrence of one failure to 
the occurrence of the next failure) over earlier equipment, and 
an improvement in MTTR [mean time to repair] by 22 percent. 
(This is the average time from the occurrence of a failure until 
it is repaired.) MTBF improved because the number of parts 
within the chamber decreased. 
  Throughput was increased by decreasing the convey time, 
which 
is more than half of the tact time. The conveyor speed was 
increased by a factor of three when not waiting for a wafer. In 
the future, robots will be used that can hold two wafers 
simultaneously, and the convey speed will be made even faster. 
&lt;graphic&gt; 
&lt;capt&gt; Figure 3. An Etcher With the CEO Value Reduced by 30 
Percent. The throughput was increased 20 percent and 
availability increased 10 percent while holding the price to the 
same level as earlier equipment. Applied Materials of 
America.&lt;/graphic&gt; 

<H5>  Sputters: Cutting the CEO Value in Half to &yen;300 Per Wafer </H5>
  Two companies, Nihon Denwa Anelba and Nihon Shinku 
Technologies, are introducing 16M sputters that cut the CEO 
value in half to &yen;300 per wafer. They reduce the gas exhaust 
time and convey time, respectively. 
  The "ILD-1060," introduced by Nihon Denwa Anelba in October, 
decreased the CEO value from the &yen;600 per wafer of previous 
machines to &yen;360 per wafer. The price of about &yen;160 
million is the same as previous machines, while the availability 
has been increased 10 percent and the throughput 50 percent. 
  The improvement in availability was achieved by reducing the 
hundreds of moving parts by about 50. 
  The improvement in throughput was achieved by shortening the 
vacuum exhaust time, which according to LSI manufacturers took 
up between 40 and 50 percent of the tact time. The exhaust time 
was cut in half by performing loading and unloading 
simultaneously. This was achieved by developing robots that 
could hold two wafers simultaneously. Previous robots were 
improved, rather than developing new ones. 
  The "Z-1000" sputter introduced by Nihon Shinku reduced the 
CEO value from &yen;660 to &yen;330 per wafer. While slightly 
reducing the price to &yen;170 million, the availability was 
improved 40 percent and the throughput was improved 50 percent. 
  The improvement in availability was achieved by cutting in 
half the number of parts, which had been 4500. Sites of particle 
generation were reduced, and the area of the nonstick board 
within the chamber was reduced by an order of magnitude. 
  The improvement in throughput was due to a 40 percent 
reduction in convey time. Nihon Shinku accomplished this by 
changing from the previous belt drive method to a frog leg 
method. 
&lt;graphic&gt; 
&lt;capt&gt; Figure 4. Productivity Is Higher for a Low Pressure Method 
Than For a Collimated One. Productivity cannot be maintained 
with a collimated method because as the number of processed 
wafers increases the speed of membrane formation degrades and 
particle generation increases markedly. Nihon Shinku.&lt;/graphic&gt; 

<H5>  CVD Equipment: Close Attention Paid To Improving Throughput </H5>
  The 16M CVD equipment has appeared with a CEO value of 
&yen;400 per wafer that is reduced to 60 percent of prior 
equipment. This is CVD that works at ordinary pressures with 
TEOS for the raw material gas. 
  Canon estimates that their CVD "ATP-5800" reduces the CEO 
value to &yen;400 per wafer. They found it difficult to improve 
availability, so they increased the throughput by 60 percent. 
The price of about &yen;200 million is the same as before. They 
investigated improvements in availability by in-situ cleaning, 
but gave up on that idea because they felt that the price 
increase of &yen;10 million was not worth the small improvement 
in the CEO. 
  Throughput went up 25 points by increasing the number of 
process chambers from four to five, and 30 points more by 
changing the convey method. The rectangular shape of prior 
equipment was changed to a polygonal form, without much increase 
in the area occupied by the equipment. The convey speed was 
increased while changing from linear motion to circular motion. 
<H5>  Vertical Furnaces: First, Realize an Increase in the Number </H5>
of Charges 
  Kokusai Electric has announced two new 16M vertical 
furnaces, 
one with sales beginning in January, 1994, and the other in the 
second quarter of 1994. These reduce the CEO value over previous 
equipment by 30 percent and 50 percent, respectively, for the 
case of field oxidation. Unfortunately, however, it is the 
policy of Kokusai Electric not to announce the absolute numbers 
for the CEO values. 
  The vertical furnace "V-IIIE," with a 30 percent lower CEO 
value, increases throughput by increasing the number of charges. 
They said that the availability was already so good that it 
could have little effect on improving the CEO value. 
  The vertical furnace "V-IIIF," with a 50 percent lower CEO 
value, decreases the tact time of the V-IIIE. Kokusai Electric 
plans to invest most heavily in this product for 16M. The V-IIIE 
is available for users who need an earlier delivery date. 
  Both the V-IIIE and V-IIIF increase the number of charges 
from 100 to 150. The convey time increases, but this convey time 
is still only 10 minutes as compared with the four hours 
required for the field oxidation process, so there really is 
little effect on the tact time. The larger number of charges is 
achieved by increasing the length of the heater from 1200mm to 
1350mm and the height of the equipment from 2800mm to 3100mm. 
  The V-IIIF plans to decrease the tact time by reducing the 
process time from 4 hours to only 1.5 or 2 hours. They plan to 
produce test equipment at the beginning of 1994. 
  Kokusai Electric states that increasing the number of 
charges 
is advantageous for field oxidation and the trench flushing 
process. Kokusai Electric is investigating the CEO value 
together with LSI manufacturers (Figure 5). They have also 
quantitatively found that there is little advantage for the case 
of processes that take less time, such as the capacitor 
insulating membrane formation process. For such processes, size 
reduction is the way to improve throughput. 
&lt;graphic&gt; 
&lt;capt&gt; Figure 5. Improving CEO by Increasing the Number of 
Charges. For example, in the case of a field oxidation membrane, 
increasing the number of charges to 150 reduces the CEO value by 
30 percent. Kokusai Electric.&lt;/graphic&gt; 

<H5>  Ion Implantation/Washing: The Road to Low Cost </H5>
  For 16M, ion implantation equipment and washing equipment 
have appeared with lower costs. 
  Nihon Shinku will market the "IDZ-8800" ion implantation 
equipment that cuts the CEO in half from &yen;500 per wafer to 
&yen;250 per wafer. They have given up the parallel method of 
vertically implanting ions in the wafer surface and returned to 
the previous scan method. They returned to the scan method to 
lower the cost, because half the cost of the equipment was in 
the parts needed for parallelization. The price is &yen;200 
million. 
  Nihon Shinku developed the new equipment after 
investigations, performed together with LSI manufacturers, had 
shown that the parallel equipment is only needed 10 to 20 
percent of the time. However, LSI factories usually have a 
tendency to purchase several of the same type of equipment so 
that an equipment failure does not stop the entire line. A 
question is whether this will continue to be the case even 
without the parallel equipment. 
  The throughput has increased to 280 wafers per hour. One 
wafer is already being conveyed while another one is being 
processed. In the future, the convey time should not be a factor 
at all, and it should be possible to have 360 wafers per hour. 
  Dainippon Screen Seizo will sell washing equipment where the 
CEO value has decreased from &yen;450 per wafer to &yen;400 per 
wafer, for prices ranging from several tens of millions of yen 
to &yen;300 million. Lower prices have been achieved by reducing 
the number of parts from 125 to 50. While throughput may double 
for other types of equipment, such as etchers or CVD, washing 
equipment still has throughput to spare, so there is no way to 
improve the CEO value except through lower costs. 
<H5>  Appearance of 64M, 2-to-1 Steppers </H5>
  Experimental steppers for 64M production give a 2-to-1 
reduction ratio. 
  Some LSI manufacturers had used 5-to-1 steppers together 
with 
magnifying exposers in 4M production lines. The 16M production 
lines that invested in bubble technology went exclusively to 
5-to-1 steppers. The appearance of 2-to-1 steppers now is for 
the purpose of reducing the cost of the exposure process. Of 
course, the CEO value is much lower for magnifying exposers than 
for steppers. Therefore, some LSI manufacturers are looking for 
steppers that can be used as magnifying exposers in processes 
that have flexible design rules, such as ion implantation 
processes or bonding pad opening. Throughput is increased by 
changing the ratio from 5-to-1 to 2-to-1, increasing the 
exposure surface area, and reducing the number of shots. 
  Preliminary calculations for the new 2-to-1 steppers from 
the 
two largest companies, Nikon and Canon, show reductions in CEO 
from &yen;500 per wafer to &yen;350 per wafer and from &yen;500 
per wafer to &yen;400 per wafer, respectively. The Nikon price 
is about &yen;300 million, and the Canon price is over &yen;300 
million. Both have an exposure surface area of 50mm on a side 
and an NA of 0.3. Both companies have doubled the throughput of 
earlier equipment. The light source is i-rays. 
<H5>  Proposals for Increasing Productivity Through Process </H5>
Shortening 
  There are also sputters and vertical furnaces that aim to 
increase productivity for the 64M generation. 
  Nihon Shinku has found that low pressure sputters are more 
effective at increasing productivity than collimated methods 
(Figure 4). Beginning with 64M, they are developing high vacuum 
equipment of 10[.sup]-9[/] Torr (one Torr is 133 Pa) for 
barrier metal membrane formation. A linear beam of sputter 
particles increases the distance between the target and the 
wafer, and the sputter particles reach to the bottom of the 
hole. It is not possible to maintain productivity with a 
collimated method because as the number of processed wafers 
increases the membrane formation speed degrades and the number 
of particles generated increases markedly. 
  Kokusai Electric is pursuing research into equipment for 
processes with short processing times, such as for capacitor 
insulator membranes. They take the point of view that thin style 
CVD will be advantageous for productivity and membrane formation 
characteristics. The equipment is in the experimental stage, 
with calculations suggesting that the CEO value can be decreased 
20 to 30 percent. Generated particles are kept under control by 
using a hot wall method, raising the temperature with a heater. 
If the temperature can be maintained at a constant value even 
during conveying, then membranes that may grow on the side walls 
will not peel, so particles will not form. 
  Equipment manufacturers are also reporting that they can 
reduce CEO values by shortening their processes. For example, in 
CVD processes that form layer insulator membranes, multiple 
processes such as SOG were used for imbedding in the past, but 
now a plasma CVD method with just a single cycle has appeared 
(Figure 6). 
&lt;graphic&gt; 
&lt;capt&gt; Figure 6. Layer Insulator Membrane Processes With 
One-Cycle Imbedding. Imbedding characteristics are improved by 
using plasma TEOS membrane formation reactions with fluorinated 
gas and etching reactions with fluorinated gas at the same time. 
Such announcements were made at the Fall 1993, 54th Applied 
Physics Research Conference (Mizuno, et. al., Fall 54th Applied 
Physics Research Conference; Paper Number 28 p-X-2; September, 
1993). This is one example of a process that LSI manufacturers 
hope to be able to shorten.&lt;/graphic&gt; 


