BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by President Carlos Saul Menem at the opening of </F>
the 112th session of Congress in Buenos Aires -- live] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] I am glad that the opening of 
your ordinary sessions should be on May Day. Work, work, and 
yet more work is the key to building a great nation and a happy 
people. 
  Honorable congressmen, you have engaged in politics to seek 
the common good and to guarantee the people's endeavors through 
the rule of law. This is our challenge, a challenge that the 
three branches of government have taken up. This is our 
service, a service to the people whom we have just applauded. 
If we rise to the occasion, the people will thank us through 
their affection and adhesion, and future generations will recall 
our transit through our country's institutional life. If we 
fail to do so -- as someone said -- the people will unleash a 
thunderbolt of swift retribution. 
  Opportunities usually present themselves without much fuss. 
Let us not waste them. Now is the time. Let us turn politics 
-- this hard and lofty task -- into a space for convocation, 
integration, and proposals. The consolidation of our 
institutions, their regular operation, and the transformation of 
our economic system and its stability have paved the way for a 
historic 1994, which we, Argentines, are to witness at the 
threshold of the year 2000. This is the year of the 
constitutional reform. This amendment to the Constitution is 
underpinned by four central concepts that enable us to assert 
that this is indeed a historic year -- the consolidation of the 
democratic system, the buttressing of the independence of the 
judiciary, the strengthening of the federal system of 
government, and the promotion of Latin American and hemispheric 
integration. 
  Democracy is consolidated through an enhanced democratic 
system. The Honorable Congress enacted Law 24309 convening a 
Constituent Assembly to amend the Constitution, which the 
executive branch promulgated through Decree 2700 in 1993, and 
the people confirmed at the polls last 10 April when electing 
the Constituent Assembly members who will amend the 
Constitution. Our consolidated democracy will be strengthened 
with the amended Constitution because Argentina has changed and 
the Constitution must be updated. [passage omitted] 
  Having drawn our inspiration from the preamble of our Magna 
Carta, two constitutional presidents [Raul Alfonsin and Menem] 
took upon themselves a historical imperative with the 
responsibility the political management had conferred on them. 
Without giving up their struggle, they signed the pact this 
Honorable Congress ratified through the enactment of Law 24309 
convening the Constituent Assembly. As I have pointed out on 
several occasion, responsible leaders, good rulers, are guided 
in their actions by their concern for future generations rather 
than the forthcoming elections. 
  Honorable Congressmen, I reiterate, this is the year of the 
constitutional reform which we achieved thanks to the political 
stability that reigned throughout this decade in democracy. It 
is this stability of our institutions that enabled us to achieve 
economic stability -- the starting point for growth and social 
justice. This historic year, which will be characterized by a 
most modern political law due to the amendment to the 
Constitution, will also be a landmark year on account of 
economic growth and social justice. The amended Constitution, 
an Argentina that has taken off, and social justice are the 
banners of work that I put forth to the Argentine people and its 
representatives that are gathered here for consideration. 
  Honorable Congressmen, we have time and again said that the 
government is like an orchestra, which in order to perform well 
needs not only an appropriate coordination of the different 
musical instruments, it also needs each one to play the score 
given by the conductor. We all know that the first notes 
interpreted by our administration were in the area of economics, 
which were of course the result of deep political decisions. We 
could not set in motion the concert of development, production, 
and social justice -- a goal that our administration will never 
forsake -- without first putting our finances in order and on a 
firm footing. We have accomplished this with such great success 
that at present nobody even remembers the difference between the 
Argentine we inherited and the Argentine we have now. Stability 
-- a nearly chimerical dream in 1989 -- is now a reality that 
has so much been incorporated into our daily lives that it is no 
longer a novelty. 
  Our most bitter adversaries, even those who have reviled 
and are reviling the chosen economic path, talk about stability 
as a common good that must be protected, safeguarded, and 
respected. Regardless of the political opportunism that may 
exist in some, this is a good indication. 
  Stability belongs to all Argentine people because, even 
though it was achieved under this government's strategic 
leadership, it was made possible through the efforts and wisdom 
of our people who understood that there are no miraculous 
solutions, only work, work, and yet more work. 
  For example, it is no longer news that in the past 12 
months, 
from April 1993 to April 1994, the combined price-inflation rate 
totaled 1.3 percent. In 1989, it totaled more than 5,000 
percent. It is no longer news that the GDP grew 6.4 percent in 
1993 after investments recovered. Investments grew from 14 
percent in 1990 to 18.4 percent in 1993. It is no longer news 
that in the past three years the total GDP growth was about 26 
percent. Thus, our country has achieved the largest growth rate 
in the entire western hemisphere and ranks third in the world. 
And it is positive that all this is no longer news because the 
less the economic achievements are mentioned, the less they are 
discussed, and the clearer it is that we are on the right track. 
  I have not come to make significant announcements. What we 
did and what we will do are virtually included in this 
presidential message that you have. I have not come here to 
make significant announcements because the time for significant 
announcements in the Argentine Republic is over. 
  We are now going through a new stage that must be marked by 
an unswerving improvement of our political, economic, and social 
institutions. I urge the entire Argentine nation and its 
legitimate representatives to become involved in the successful 
completion of this stage. 
  It is true that the growth achieved has not equally reached 
everyone. We are aware that there are problems in the economies 
of various regions in our country. Nevertheless, it is 
appropriate to be very frank on this point. Farmers and 
cattlemen were hit between 1990 and 1993 by the worst 
international prices of the 20th century. We should not be 
ashamed to say this, even though now it is more comfortable to 
blame the government for all this. Our foreign trade has been 
badly deteriorated by international recession and the aggressive 
agricultural protectionism practiced by developed nations. 
  A gradual process of recovery of the prices paid for our 
products has occurred since 1993. We expect this recovery to 
continue unchanged as a consequence of the agreements achieved 
at the GATT and a growing belief in the absurd nature of 
protectionism, its high social cost for the poorest countries 
and regions, and its high fiscal cost for the nations that 
practice it. 
  The federal government is furthering a well-defined policy 
so that the fruits of growth may equitably reach all the regions 
of our country. First, this policy is included in the federal 
pact for employment, production, and growth, as it will be 
instrumental in reducing employers' social security 
contributions between 30 and 80 percent -- especially in the 
poorer provinces and those far from the federal capital. 
Obviously, Argentine provincial and regional growth will be 
greater if the federal pact is fully implemented in everything 
that pertains to deregulation, since it will enable a 
considerable reduction in labor and judicial costs. With regard 
to privatizations, it will prompt a reduction of electricity 
costs by up to 50 percent, among other things. 
  The investments being made in the provinces using domestic 
resources -- genuine resources -- are already quite significant. 
Investments will total 5 billion pesos this year. We intend to 
increase this by 300 million pesos in those provinces where 
increased private investment stemming from the full 
implementation of the federal pact makes new public works 
necessary. Within five years -- with the cooperation of this 
Honorable Congress -- national investments in the provinces will 
total 7 billion pesos. These investments will be financed 
through a deepening of the state reform and through loan 
agreements that are being negotiated with international 
organizations. To contribute to this task, I ask the Honorable 
Congress to speedily pass the bill establishing the national 
system of public investments. 
  Moreover, investments funded by the provinces' own resources 
may be increased by 2 billion pesos above that established in 
the program. To do so, provincial tax revenues and current 
expenditures should not increase more than those of the federal 
government, and provinces must adhere to the new pensions law 
and transfer the deficit of their pension funds to the federal 
government. [passage omitted] 
  The federal government will have a reviewed system of 
tariffs 
and refunds put together by 1 July. This system will come into 
force as of 1 January 1995 and will be instrumental in 
increasing between 5 and 10 percent tax rebates for manufactured 
agricultural and livestock products. To prevent any mistakes, 
the draft project will first be submitted to the National 
Economic Council for consideration. We will thus progress 
steadily toward realizing a dream the interior has cherished for 
decades -- to process the raw materials in the provinces. This 
will be buttressed with the extension of industrial productive 
centers, with the implementation of the Suppliers' Development 
Program, and with the consolidation of the successful Rural 
Change Program. 
  The deepening of the economic policy, the full 
implementation 
of the federal pact, and the public works under way will solve 
yet another great challenge of our times -- the creation of new 
jobs. We have created 280,000 new jobs per year over the past 
three years, but we must raise that number to at least 350,000. 
The contribution of this Honorable Congress -- by passing the 
new laws regulating labor relations in our countries -- is of 
prime importance. 
  Our determination to promote job-creation does not end here. 
In a little while, the executive branch will submit to this 
Honorable Congress a bill that will help to considerably 
increase the building and funding of housing for middle- and 
low-income families. This bill proposes the complete 
deregulation of the building of low-priced housing and more 
accessible financing. 
  We want to stress that we are going to come down heavily on 
tax evaders, especially on the payment of personal property and 
income taxes. 
  With regard to public spending, we will take advantage of 
the 
opportunity that will present itself with the constitutional 
reform to reduce the number of public agencies and finally do 
away with our bureaucratic government. One of the first tasks 
of the cabinet chief and ministers of state -- who following the 
reform should not exceed 12 -- will be to consolidate and 
streamline more than 20 top government agencies, including 
ministries, secretariats, and other bodies directly subordinate 
to the presidency. Their task will be to devise a more 
cost-effective and less cumbersome structure and to clearly 
define the functions and responsibilities of all officials to 
avoid superposition. This will help the government cut expenses 
by millions of pesos, which will thus be readily available to 
fund public investments and meet social needs. [passage omitted] 
  Honorable Legislators, the efforts and achievements in the 
economic sphere, I reiterate, primarily seek to generate funds 
which will be allocated for social needs. The truth is that so 
many pending needs have accumulated through the years that to 
palliate the most basic necessities of life, it is essential to 
implement small and daily measures, which if assessed in 
isolation sometimes fail to attract the attention of the mass 
media. 
  As men, Argentine, and Justicialists, we are concerned -- 
and so are our circumstantial political adversaries -- about the 
data stemming from the so-called map of poverty, even though all 
indicators show an ongoing enhancement of the quality of life of 
those living in abject squalor. As we have repeatedly said, our 
greatest efforts are geared to providing definite solutions to 
these chronic evils. We are well aware there are no over 
simplistic solutions to these problems. It is not a question of 
applying demagogic remedies, which only provide for bread now 
and bring about more hunger tomorrow. We must not -- because it 
is neither ethical nor moral -- use the hope of the neediest for 
political motives. We must not overcome poverty with charity. 
We want to wipe it out through social organization. The 
federal government is responsible for creating the economic 
conditions to eradicate marginalization, but the success of this 
endeavor requires the concerted action of all. We do not shrug 
our responsibilities. On the contrary, we are well aware that 
the key to this problem lies in the creation of new jobs and 
this is precisely what we are trying to do. 
  I would like to now turn to the main problems existing in 
the 
area of labor and social security, and the government's 
proposals to come to grips with them. To have an overall 
understanding of this issue, I will begin by making a 
categorical assertion: The Argentine labor relations system has 
not evolved at the same pace as domestic and international 
events. The prevalence of labor regulations, institutions, and 
behaviors, which go beyond what is reasonable, have much to do 
with the problems confronting us today with regard to jobs and 
working conditions. 
  Concerning the former, we are concerned by two things. 
First, our low employment rate. The importance of this is seen 
if we bear in mind that of 100 inhabitants who are in a position 
to work in Sweden, 70 have a job, whereas only 42 have a job in 
Argentina. How far we are from the goal that each one should 
produce at least what one consumes? 
  Second, unemployment, which strongly affects many of our 
homes. And even though the unemployment rate does not exceed 
average international unemployment rates, it is a factor that 
must be taken thoroughly into account. 
  On the other hand -- and I want to be very clear on this 
point -- we are not interested in importing the First World's 
flaws, but rather its virtues. The struggle against corruption 
therefore represents one of our administration's priority and 
irrevocable goals. 
  Yet another more significant point is that the Argentine 
economy, despite the record growth achieved during the past 
three years, has been unable to create enough employment. With 
respect to working conditions, the government's and society's 
concerns involve three other issues: 
  First, the lack of dynamism in collective bargaining. Trade 
unions and employers have not managed to find a way for the 
generalization, decentralization, and renewal of collective 
labor agreements, a situation that might be, at least partially, 
blamed on some legal obstacles and the shortcomings of the labor 
administration system. In this regard it is important to take 
as an example an agreement signed between SMATA [Trade Union of 
Mechanics and Related Automotive Transportation Workers] and 
General Motors. A practical and flexible agreement was reached, 
an agreement that benefits both sides. This type of responsible 
initiative, improving the legislation in this field, favors 
increased employment. 
  Second, the high rate of labor accidents. The number of 
labor accidents or illnesses is very high in our country. This 
is further aggravated by the fact that the prevention system is 
insufficient and the recovery system unsuitable, partial, and 
inappropriate. 
  Third, the excessive court involvement in labor conflicts. 
Years of state interventionism have prevented the development 
of independent practices for the solution of conflicts. This 
has resulted in an excessive, costly, and inefficient transfer 
of these conflicts to the legal field. 
  In a nutshell, the current labor system is seriously 
affecting our competitive possibilities, limiting our economy's 
ability to create jobs, and making impracticable the principles 
of solidarity, equity, and social efficiency. 
  These reasons actually explain my administration's firm 
decision to promote a substantial transformation of labor rules 
and practices, seeking to favor the creation of jobs, promote 
the competitiveness of our companies, and improve labor 
conditions. 
  Nevertheless, regardless of the emphasis we place on this 
effort, which is of a purely reformist nature, we will not 
successfully meet the pending challenges in the field of 
employment and competitiveness unless we are able to make a 
sustained and intelligent effort in the field of professional 
training. 
  It is necessary to admit that, for many years, we Argentines 
have neglected the task of training our workers, executives, 
managers, and employees. 
  I am sure that I am not exaggerating if I emphasize that our 
country's future and the future of those who inhabit it, 
economic growth, and social equity depend on the consistency of 
our efforts to make up for the time lost. 
  Therefore, right now we call upon all the social forces to 
establish the bases for a national professional training program 
that will meet the new requirements of the productive apparatus, 
and will be able to meet the professional training requirements 
of our young people and unemployed people as well as the 
permanent training of all those who are involved in the effort 
to produce goods and services. 
  Argentina today has the highest salaries in Latin America, 
and also higher than in some places elsewhere in the world. It 
also has the highest per capita income in Latin America. 
Professionalization is necessary in order to preserve these 
advantages. It is now time to make innovations in teaching 
techniques, to update our knowledge, and to place education on a 
level with the demands for new expertise and new jobs. [passage 
omitted] 
  I am saying, however, this as a man who comes from one of 
the 
provinces that has many natural limitations. Not all the 
problems that the interior has to face are the consequences of 
geographical disadvantages or of centralism. Some provinces 
have not yet completed their transformation processes, or in 
other words, their adaptation to changes. In this respect the 
national government is willing to closely cooperate with these 
provinces in order to revert the deficiencies they may have in 
their development. 
  I have also given instructions to the ministers to come up 
with solutions in accordance with the problems that have 
occurred in some of the regional economies due to the fall in 
the international prices of their products. We cannot leave to 
one side those Argentines who live in the less protected areas, 
while hoping that the local situation will be reversed. 
  The national government has thus drafted a series of actions 
with the aim of alleviating the most critical situations. Among 
these actions we must highlight the creation of the Social 
Development Secretariat, which will come directly under the 
executive branch. This secretariat's main objective is to 
guarantee that the social funds reach their appropriate 
destination. 
  In 1993, within the context of the Federal Solidarity 
Program, support was given to 98,194 families and jobs were 
found for 25,389 persons. We have also recovered the line of 
credit for housing. We are handing over the properties to the 
persons who occupy them, and are opening homes for children of 
the street. 
  With actions such as the implementation of vanguard 
legislation regarding the handicapped, the law on the womens' 
quota regarding jobs, and punishment for sexual harassment 
[applause], we have also advanced toward a more just society. 
  We have attacked the problems of the pensioners on three 
fronts. We have assumed the historical debt that the state had 
with the pensioners, thus overcoming an injustice that had been 
going on for a long time; we have give a huge push to social 
security benefits, both in the medical and social areas, 
increasing the former by 256 percent and the latter by 320 
percent during our tenure; and during the same period the 
allowed expense for each member of PAMI [Comprehensive Medical 
Assistance Plan] increased from 142 pesos to 551 pesos, which 
has indirectly been a great reinforcement for salaries and wages. 
  We have also implemented social security reform, to allow a 
definitive solution to this problem in the future. The 
administrators of pension funds will begin to work within this 
framework on 2 May. [passage omitted] 
  Honorable Congress, As I have been saying since the 
beginning 
of my tenure, and it is an expression we have listened to for a 
long time in Argentina, during all of the governments, I have no 
doubt that corruption is one of the scourges that conspire 
against social justice. 
  Corruption gives to a very few what should be given to many. 
It is a type of Robin Hood in reverse. Corruption is 
definitively an empire of bad habits and manners. That was the 
Argentine state. It was disorganized, without lucidity, 
bureaucratized, ready to carry out any kind of shady deal, 
mainly through the large state enterprises that had become a 
type of game reserve for the various levels of bureaucratic 
climbers. 
  As a structural answer for putting an end to this situation, 
we privatized enterprises and reorganized the state. We have 
said and demonstrated that we are not willing to stand for this 
type of scourge, with those who are corrupt. 
  But our efforts have not been sufficient. We will therefore 
continue to seek solutions that, with the help of the people, 
will allow us to definitely eradicate this tremendous scourge 
from the democratic life of this country. 
  The state belongs to everyone, and not, as was the case up 
until a few years ago, to but a few. To protect state assets is 
to protect every one of us. In a republic the most important 
guarantees come from an independent and agile judicial branch, 
as a slow judicial branch ends up in injustice. 
  The independence of the judicial branch, which will become 
even more strengthened with the constitutional reform, is 
guaranteed by the moral and professional qualities of our men of 
laws. But its agility is limited by serious problems of 
infrastructure. This factor must be overcome urgently, and 
therefore as I announced before this honorable Congress last 
year, the technical and financial feasibility studies have been 
completed for the new judicial city of Buenos Aires. 
  The old Puerto Madero Corporation, on the orders of the 
Building Infrastructure Commission of the national judicial 
branch, will within 30 days call for national and international 
bids for the financing, development, and administration of this 
judicial city. 
  The implementation of the procedural legislation, the 
positive results of this legislation now being observed, is 
another determining step to make the judicial branch more agile. 
  Messrs. Legislators, Nothing of what has been done will last 
without Argentina's real insertion into the world. Inward 
growth is not possible if there is no outward growth. 
  Honorable Congress, In the international context there are 
three areas on which we have focused Argentina's participation. 
In other words, on the political, economic, and ethical areas. 
  In the political sphere we have strengthened Argentina's 
presence while trying to do away with that image of 
non-commitment that we used for decades, and which isolated us 
from the great processes of history. 
  Without exaggerating, we can maintain that Argentina's 
biological clock was behind the times. For one cause or another 
it entered history 5 or 10 years behind the times. 
  A policy of permanent participation, of being an active 
protagonist, has allowed us to recover that inertia, and today 
our clocks tell the same time as those of the most important 
countries in the world. This achievement was based on a firm 
alignment with democracy, freedom, and human rights. 
  Argentina has placed itself in the vanguard of the fight 
against indifference, fully convinced that to look the other way 
has allowed the greatest horrors of this century. With this 
belief we have suggested the need for preventive diplomacy, a 
diplomacy that foresees conflicts in order to resolve them 
before they turn into confrontations. 
  We are not afraid to take action. Direct action, as has been 
proven by the more than 1,500 members that are today 
participating in UN Blue Helmet operations, while we understand 
that it is better to anticipate that than to succor. 
  In this respect, I wish to highlight the role of the Armed 
Forces, because they have undertaken a commitment and have 
complied with the nation's political desire of cooperating with 
international organizations. With efficiency and 
professionalism they were the noble ambassadors of this new 
Argentina. 
  The Argentine Army, Navy, and Air Force have demonstrated, 
as 
the security forces also have done, their full integration into 
the democratic way of life and the understanding of their new 
role looking toward the 21st century. 
  The drama of the former Yugoslavia, which I take as the most 
distressing example, is a slap in the face of all men and women 
who live on this Earth. The principle of nonintervention has 
ruled international relations for many years, but this was more 
in theory than it was real, as the violations have been 
systematic in modern history. At the dawn of the third 
millennium it is necessary that relations be made crystal clear 
and matters placed in their right context. 
  Human rights are, of course, more important than the 
principal of nonintervention, as man is more important than a 
border. This does not, however, mean a lack of respect for 
borders, which would lead to great chaos and the implementation 
of the law of the strongest. It means to give international 
organizations the prestige, respect, and necessary power to 
guarantee the rights of man. 
  In this respect Argentina maintains that the United Nations 
must be strengthened by making its General Assembly the world's 
parliament, and by making its General Secretariat its executive 
organ. 
  This is and will continue to be our country's position in 
all 
international forums, especially in the UN Security Council, 
where Argentina has been elected as a non-permanent member for 
the 1994-1995 period with the vote of 169 countries out of 175. 
  We understand that in a world that is being checkmated by 
the 
crisis -- the food crisis, the poverty crisis -- the fight 
against hunger is an obligatory crusade. We have therefore 
proposed, with very positive reception, the creation of the 
White Helmets, or International Organization of Volunteers for 
the Struggle Against Hunger. This initiative, which was 
submitted to the UN secretary general in November 1993, 
establishes that the White Helmets will channel the efforts in 
the struggle against hunger by optimizing resources and the 
necessary intelligence. 
  The transforming of the UN General Assembly into the world's 
parliament can thus be considered as the ultimate objective for 
the molding of that universality. The path toward this goal 
will be based on regional organizations. 
  The OAS, the European Parliament, and the various 
organizations for political rapprochement have been complemented 
with the creation of regional economic blocs, thus optimizing 
the productive and trade possibilities of nations. 
  Argentina plays a leading role in this process, following 
the impetus given to Mercosur [Common Market of the South]. 
Trade among Mercosur member countries has tripled. It is hoped 
that a united customs system will be achieved on 1 January 1995. 
An agreement was reached to establish a common tariffs system 
before this target date. 
  Argentine borders no longer represent a separation from 
brotherly countries, but unity for championing the interests of 
our nations. The great fatherland dreamed by Jose de San Martin 
and Simon Bolivar may no longer be a utopian goal in the 21st 
century. We endorse integration with our neighbors, but we also 
endorse integration with our other Latin American brothers and 
brothers from the entire continent. 
  Mercosur's success may be the proper path for the formation 
of a South American Free Trade Area. This proposal was 
well-received by various nations. The South American Free Trade 
Area, along with NAFTA North American Free Trade Agreement, must 
be America's pillar, an America in which free trade must become 
a reality from Alaska to Tierra del Fuego. 
  Messrs. Legislators, Argentina has chosen the path of 
integration and peace, duly proving its true vocation with 
measures like signing the Tlatelolco Treaty on the prohibition 
of nuclear weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Nevertheless, a painful thorn still remains: the Malvinas 
Islands. 
  We have had a cooperative and pragmatic attitude toward the 
United Kingdom, reaching significant agreements in the field of 
fishing to preserve and rationally exploit fishing resources. 
  We have no doubts that with this cooperation policy, and 
with 
reason on our side, a fact that has become increasingly visible 
for the international community, the Malvinas Islands, through 
peaceful methods, will again become fully integrated into our 
country, which expects them like a prodigal son. [applause] 
  Honorable Congress, in this brief summary I have presented 
to 
you my administration's achievements in 1993 and the projects 
for the last year of my administration, running from 1989 to 
1995. 
  We are beginning the sixth year of the people's mandate with 
the same strength, with the same beliefs, and with the same 
hopes that we harbored on 8 July 1989. 
  Quoting Saint Paul, we have fought and have kept our faith 
alive. We have changed history, beginning with that saying: 
Argentina, arise and walk, and ending with this democracy that 
is standing and walking. 
  Our project is basically of a cultural nature. It has 
freedom of expression as an unswerving and irrevocable pillar of 
the change we have made; it has the entire country as the scene 
for our actions; it has progress as a guide for our actions; it 
has dissent as an example for our administration; it has our 
people's leading role as a custodian of the course taken; and it 
has respect for conflicts for which a solution is to be sought. 
  This is our cultural identity. It is the foundation of our 
national unity. 
  Messrs. Legislators, upon formally inaugurating the 112th 
period of legislative sessions, I, along with all Argentine 
people, urge you to remain true to yourselves, as there is not a 
single nation without hopes of grandeur. May God bless you. 
Thank you very much. [applause] 

