BFN 

<F P=106> ["Finance Minister: Public Property Should Be Privatized, </F>
Be It Dirty Cheap" -- BTA headline] 
  [Text] Sofia, March 30 (BTA) -- 1994 should be the year of 
Bulgaria's structural adjustment based on privatization, Finance 
Minister Stoyan Aleksandrov today told a news conference on 
"Privatization, Investments and International Financial 
Cooperation" organized by the Hanns Seidel Stiftung Foundation 
of Germany. The Bulgarian finance minister also said that 
without foreign investments this country would hardly solve most 
of the problems it is facing. 
  The privatization is dragging because of the existing 
legislative obstacles; because of the psychological barrier 
raised by the bad image the private sector in this country has 
created for itself; because of the fears from a large-scale 
privatization which people expect to create job redundancies and 
reallocations; because of the end of the "calm life" Bulgarians 
have been enjoying until very recently. Yet another factor is 
the discrepancy between the character of mass privatization and 
the insolvency of buyers, according to Mr. Aleksandrov. 
  "The concentration of capital brought about a polarization 
of 
society. The funds accumulated are either being used 
ineffectively -- the law provides for tax concessions for stock 
purchasing -- or invested in the setting up of new commercial 
banks and banks with already existing financial groupings. The 
bulk of the Bulgarian companies have overseas headquarters which 
means that Bulgarian capitals are being exported abroad," the 
Bulgarian finance minister also said. According to him, the 
economic groupings have no interests in privatization. "They 
bleed the public sector white and are in control of both the 
input and the output of the state-owned companies," he went on 
to say. 
  Mr. Aleksandrov pointed the lack of interest on the part of 
foreign investors as another reason for the belated 
privatization in this country. This lack of interest mirrors 
both the political and the economic instability in Bulgaria; the 
lack of adequate infrastructure; the legislative imperfections; 
the financial isolation of this country following the March 1990 
moratorium on interest rate payments to the foreign creditors 
declared by the then-Bulgarian government. Finance Minister 
Aleksandrov also said that none of the cabinets that have been 
in office has managed to create the preconditions necessary to 
get privatization going. According to him, the international 
financial institutions, too, did not make use of their powers to 
press for a speedy privatization. 
  The future success of privatization would entail amendment 
of 
the privatization law, adoption of a mass privatization scheme 
and revision of the effective legislation to make the commercial 
banks share in denationalization, the finance minister also told 
journalists. He went on to say that the ministries should be 
authorized to privatize units of the respective sectors, 
estimated at over 10 million leva and do away with the monopoly 
the Privatization Agency has on deals of this kind. The trade 
unions' say in privatization, too, should be curtailed to 
prevent the creating of a hostile atmosphere, according to Mr. 
Aleksandrov. He also said that the settlement of the bad debts, 
which has yet to be done, should have been accomplished back in 
1991, when it would have taken less money. Now the bad debts to 
be transformed into a public debt amount to 100,000 million 
leva-plus, Mr. Aleksandrov said. 
  The settlement of the bad debts will financially 
rehabilitate 
the commercial banks, clear their portfolios and, though 
temporarily, help enterprises. The major benefit of this 
operation is the possibility to swap the 100,000 million leva 
government bonds to be issued for property. The absence of 
security market in Bulgaria places a stumbling block for the 
trade with this particular type of bonds. Under a cabinet 
decision, they will be sold at a market price and swapped at 
their book value, the finance minister further specified. 
Enterprises can also be privatized through selling them to the 
employees on lease. Mr. Aleksandrov did not rule out the 
possibility for some companies to face bankruptcy during 
privatization. About 200 companies are expected to declare 
bankruptcy by year's end, the finance minister said. Industry 
Minister Rumen Bikov in early April is expected to submit a list 
of 35 companies to go bankrupt, he also said. 
  "The public property is not longer viable and it should be 
privatized, be it dirty cheap. Privatization will revive 
Bulgaria's economy and the swapping of the bonds will bring 
budget expenditures down. The democratic process here is 
irreversible. This country boasts an exceptional geo-strategic 
situation and what it needs is a political stabilization which 
will speed up the reforms," Mr. Aleksandrov concluded. 

