Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colonel General Andrey Nikolayev, commander </F>
in chief of Border Guards, by Boris Vinogradov; place, date not 
given: "Russians in Green Service Caps Will Guard Their 
Neighbors. Cost To Be Split Equally" -- first three paragraphs 
are introduction] 
  [Text] Russia is the only state which considers it 
necessary to guard its boundaries hundreds and thousands of 
kilometers away from its own territory. Russian border guards 
are guarding the borders of other independent states as well as 
their own. 
  The actual length of Russia's land borders is 22,125 km. 
Bearing in mind that Russia keeps border detachments in some CIS 
countries, it turns out that Russia has been obliged to ensure 
the security of another 3,600 km of border. Meanwhile, the 
number of border guards remains unchanged. 
  Under an edict issued by Boris Yeltsin, the border guards 
have been transferred from the disbanded Ministry of Security to 
a special federal service, which basically means an increase in 
status to ministry level. Colonel General Andrey Nikolayev, 
commander in chief of the Border Guards, who replaced Vladimir 
Shlyakhtin in this post after the tragic events on the 
Tajik-Afghan border in summer 1993, answers IZVESTIYA's 
questions: 
  [Vinogradov] Why send our border guards to serve at other 
states' border posts, states that are friendly but nevertheless 
independent? After all, they do not send us their soldiers to 
guard Russia's borders with China or Finland, for example. 
  [Nikolayev] Russia and the former USSR republics are 
separated by a state border. But Commonwealth states cannot 
successfully resolve their border problems separately from one 
another. This is at odds with our economic interests and our 
national security. Russian units and subunits are guarding the 
borders of Armenia, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan on 
contractual terms. Appropriate documents have also been signed 
with Turkmenistan. The service performed by our border guards 
in these places is also to Russia's benefit. Belarus, Ukraine, 
Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan are guarding their own borders. But 
Russia believes it has a duty to help them build border 
installations and train cadres. 
  [Vinogradov] The Russian Federation border currently runs 
along the symbolic line which used to separate the RSFSR from 
the other union republics. In most cases it is not monitored. 
Uninvited guests can easily enter Russia via CIS countries. 
What might the consequences of this situation be? 
  [Nikolayev] Could we erect an unbroken fence, for example, 
along our border with Kazakhstan, Belarus, and Ukraine...? But 
the sections of the new border which, if left open, could pose a 
serious threat to Russia's security have been or are being 
covered by our troops. Take our border with the Baltic 
countries: Last year we prevented the export from Russia of many 
thousands of tonnes of nonferrous and rare earth metals, fuel 
and lubricants, and other contraband worth over 2 billion rubles. 
  [Vinogradov] A memorandum has been signed in Ashgabat on 
cooperation in guarding the external borders of the CIS in 
Central Asia. On what terms will this cooperation be 
implemented? Who will pay and how much? What will be the 
status of the Russian border guards? 
  [Nikolayev] The memorandum states that guarding external 
borders is a joint concern and should be implemented through 
joint efforts. The terms for cooperation are being defined by 
multilateral and bilateral agreements which should be concluded 
within three months. The status of Russian servicemen 
performing their military service in Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and 
Turkmenistan has already been defined. Our border guards' 
rights have been protected in legal terms. 
  With regard to costs, we favor sharing the burden. Our 
approach is to split costs down the middle. The sum involved is 
immeasurably less than the amount it would cost the taxpayer to 
equip a new border with CIS states. 
  [Vinogradov] An insuperable craving for economic integration 
coexists with a desire for full independence. Will it not be 
the case that in 5-10 years' time Russia will be guarding 
neighboring states' borders while leaving its own unsupervised? 
  [Nikolayev] The ties that bind us are too numerous to permit 
us to fence ourselves off from each other with barbed wire. I 
am sure that none of these countries will object to open borders 
with their Commonwealth neighbors if nothing threatens their 
sovereignty and national security. Among other things, this is 
ensured by reliable guarding of the Commonwealth's external 
borders. Surely Russia, by guarding its border with Finland, is 
thereby ensuring Ukrainian national security? On the other 
hand, are not Ukrainian border guards protecting Russia's 
economic interests by foiling smugglers' activities on the 
Ukrainian-Polish border? 
  [Vinogradov] Azerbaijan recently insisted that Russian 
border guards should quit its territory. They left Nakhichevan, 
for example, leaving behind all their property and weapons. 
Geydar Aliyev is now complaining that 170 km of the border with 
Iran has been seized by Armenian troops, and all the indications 
are that he will not object to inviting the Russians back. What 
response will Russia make to this invitation? 
  [Nikolayev] Russian Federation border troops do not intend 
to intervene in the internal affairs of any state or assume the 
role of peacekeeper in regional conflicts. I visited Azerbaijan 
at the beginning of January. We need to find mutually 
acceptable forms of cooperation for guarding Azerbaijan's border 
with Iran and Turkey. The units withdrawn from Azerbaijan are 
now guarding the border on Russia's new boundaries. They are 
monitoring international routes in the Makhachkala region, 
keeping the shores of the Caspian under observation, and 
guarding the high mountainous section of the border with Georgia. 

