Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] The government yesterday dismissed a Skopje plea 
for dialogue, ahead of today's visit to Athens by international 
mediators Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg. 
  "It appears that Skopjean President Gligorov is belatedly 
acknowledging the importance of good relations with Greece for 
the survival of his country," cabinet spokesman Evangelos 
Venizelos said yesterday, referring to Mr Gligorov's interview 
with the Italian daily LA REPUBBLICA on Friday [14 January]. 
  "Skopje should therefore finally abandon its intransigence 
and make a gesture of genuine good will towards Greece before we 
could consider opening a dialogue with them," Mr Venizelos added. 
  Worried that his country might be sidelined by the current 
efforts towards a peaceful settlement of the Yugoslav crisis, Mr 
Gligorov said he was prepared to meet the Greek premier, Andreas 
Papandreou, "anytime" to discuss "solutions to all pending 
issues between the two countries." 
  The Greek government spokesman earlier stressed that Athens 
would not link the Skopje issue with the pacification of Bosnia, 
during Owen-Stoltenberg talks. [passage omitted] 
  Meanwhile, the delegations of U.S. Congress and European 
Parliament members meeting in Athens yesterday declared 
themselves in favour of a dialogue between Greece and Skopje, 
but also urged the latter to drop the Greek Veryina Sun from its 
national emblem and amend irredentist claims in the Skopje 
constitution. 
  Congressman Tom Landos and Eurodeputy Allan Donnelly told a 
joint news conference at the Athens Zappion Hall: "There is 
great concern in both the U.S. and Europe over the danger of 
hostilities in former Yugoslavia spreading to the former 
Yugoslav republic of Macedonia, although we support most of the 
Greek positions on the symbols and constitution of that 
country." The delegates also reserved praises for Greece's 
European orientation and policies, which, Mr Donnelly noted, are 
"more pro-EU than the policies adopted by my own country, 
England." 
  On Monday, Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou is due to hold 
a 
special meeting with President Konstandinos Karamanlis, to brief 
him on recent developments in the Skopje and Cyprus issues, the 
transatlantic summit in Brussels last Tuesday, as well as on the 
political priorities of the Greek presidency of the European 
Union. 

