Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Aleksey Yablokov, adviser on questions of </F>
ecology to the president of Russia, by MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI 
observer Mikhail Shevelev; place and date not given: ``Leaders: 
Aleksey Yablokov''] 
  [Text] ``...I intend to resign. Rather, I am thinking 
about it very hard....'' 
  In the discussion the presidential adviser calls the Russian 
Government, as in the old days, the Council of Ministers, and he 
finds it difficult to remember the precise names of the 
instances and state posts. It is remarkable that four years of 
work in the highest echelons of power have not been enough to 
take the real bureaucrat out of him. 
  Shevelev: Do you intend to run for the Duma? 
  Yablokov: No. Out of considerations of principle. 
I am familiar with this work from the Union parliament and I do 
not find it especially interesting. 
  Moreover the Green Movement cannot count on a large number 
of 
seats in parliament now. I have the opportunity to analyze the 
president's mail and I see that this subject occupies 10th to 
12th place in importance...so we will have to join in a bloc 
with other parties, that is, get involved in politics. 
  I came to the president's administration to work as an 
adviser and I hope that I will be able to do some real work. And 
up until this spring I had not been disappointed. 
  Shevelev: And what happened in the spring? 
  Yablokov: I saw that I had no support behind me. 
The ministry of environmental protection came out in support of 
the program for the development of atomic energy. I said that it 
could not be adopted without an expert ecological evaluation, 
but in the cabinet meeting I was supported only by Minister of 
Justice Nikolay Fedorov. There are some things that cannot be 
done, there is a limit to compromise. 
  Shevelev: Does the problem lie only in your 
disagreements with the minister of environmental protection? 
  Yablokov: I think that what happened with him, the 
fact that he was not able to resist bureaucratic pressure, says 
something about the entire government. Is this really the 
government we dreamed about when Gaydar and Burbulis came? Did 
we need eight or nine deputy prime ministers with duplicate 
functions? Did it not turn out to be uncontrollable?... 
  Shevelev: Aleksey Vladimirovich, you are speaking 
as a person who intends to retire. 
  Yablokov: I intend to leave. Rather, I am thinking 
about it very hard...in the spring when I understood that I 
would not be able to get through the Council of Ministers I 
suggested raising these issues at the Security Council. For now 
an interdepartmental commission on questions of ecology has been 
created. If nothing happens here.... 
  Shevelev: ``Raise questions,'' ``interdepartmental 
commission''--this does not sound very inspiring.... 
  Yablokov: This is my last chance. Let us look. 
Yesterday, for example, at this commission they discussed what 
to do with the submarine Komsomolets. The direst predictions 
from four years ago are coming true. The plutonium has turned 
into a mushy mass and only the beryllium lining is keeping it 
from spilling out. 
  Shevelev: How long, in your opinion, will it hold 
out? 
  Yablokov: A year. 
  Shevelev: And what did your interdepartmental 
commission decide to do? 
  Yablokov: There were voices that said we should 
not get upset. But when it came to the question of who would 
sign such a decision--not to do anything--there were none who 
were willing. We will spend money now because otherwise, if the 
plutonium starts leaking, we will spend 10 times as much on 
fines alone. And we will also be blamed for others' 
pollution--we know the rules of this game--for example, the 
discharge of plutonium from the British nuclear power plant in 
Sellafield. 
  At the next session of the commission we shall be 
considering 
a document with this name: ``The Threat to National Security in 
Connection With Reduction of the Fertility of the Soil.'' Last 
month we considered technogenic accidents. Just think: Each day 
there are two large accidents in petroleum and gas fields, each 
week there is a serious accident on rail transportation, each 
month in industry, and every half year there is an accident like 
Tomsk-7 or the fire at KamAZ which cost us taxpayers hundreds of 
millions of rubles. 
  Shevelev: And in this situation you are thinking 
about retirement? 
  Yablokov: We are not in England or in Sweden. 
There they have significant nongovernmental organizations, for 
example, ecological ones, which will not allow the ruling party 
to make big mistakes. This is not fighting, but cooperation in 
administration. But here...if at that damned meeting on the 
development of nuclear energy I had not simply spoken with 
emotion--and I simply shouted there that this program must not 
be adopted--and if instead I had a well substantiated, well 
argued document...but under our conditions it is impossible to 
get such a document through state structures. 
  Shevelev: Why? 
  Yablokov: The system resists. For example, the 
program for the development of energy is now being considered. 
At best we will receive nuclear energy at the previous level, 
and at worst--on an even larger scale. And yet there are other 
possibilities! SU fighter engines use kinds of technical 
solutions that, if applied in gas turbine electric power plants, 
in three years and with $6 billion we could solve the problem of 
energy supply. And to bring our nuclear power plants up to the 
level of safety in the West, which we, gritting our teeth, will 
agree to do, will take, according to certain estimates, 160 
billion [no currency specified]. Everybody knows this including 
Yeltsin and Gaydar. They issued an order for Shumeyko to create 
a commission. It was created but it never met even once. I went 
to the president three times, I cannot do more. I am not an 
intriguer! 
  Shevelev: Does it seem to you that the resistance 
from the system is spontaneous or does it have a mercenary basis? 
  Yablokov: There are no mercenary interests. There 
are departmental ones. I cannot accuse the minister of nuclear 
energy of being concerned about his own pocketbook. The 
department is what is important to him. 
  Shevelev: But they are the same thing. Whoever has 
the bigger budget is the one who lives better. So we have not 
gone anywhere in the past five years? The word itself seems 
somehow archaic Sovietism--``departmentalism''... 
  Yablokov: Two years ago it seemed that everything 
would be different. I remember these government meetings; I 
participated in them. There were like-thinkers: Gaydar, 
Burbulis, the people who were at their side. And for some time 
they acted as like-thinkers. But then came bureaucratic life: A 
decree has to be adopted here, 50 salaries have to be added 
there, create a department here--and we had no antidote. Now so 
many decrees are being adopted it makes your head spin! The 
government made a resolution last year: The same department may 
not use natural resources and be in charge of their use. A week 
ago Zaveryukha, the deputy prime minister in charge of 
agriculture, put through a resolution on the creation of a Main 
Hunting Administration under his jurisdiction. And the way he 
did it! Even Yarov, who is responsible for natural resources in 
the government, did not know about it. And they lie at the same 
time! They said it was coordinated with the ministry for 
protection of the environment...it was not coordinated! So with 
relations like these I do not see a place for myself. 
  Shevelev: But you still have hope in the Security 
Council. 
  Yablokov: Perhaps they will take a different 
attitude toward its resolutions. 
  Shevelev: And do you have no hopes for the new 
forms of management? If the state is anti-ecology perhaps 
private capital will be more reasonable? 
  Yablokov: They have their own threats here, but 
there is a solution. The condition of the environment we have 
here existed in America, Japan, and Europe 30 years ago. And now 
people are swimming in the Rhine and trout have appeared in the 
Thames. They did it! How? The polluter pays, and not mythical 
fines but enough to reimburse the society for damages. Then 
there is payment for the utilization of nature. If there is no 
master of the land this means, in the first place, that you can 
pollute wherever you want to and, in the second place, nobody is 
responsible. And, finally, instead of writing complaints we must 
learn how to defend our rights in court. And we even have 
precedents. The socioecological alliance took the government to 
court for a resolution concerning the development of the nuclear 
power industry, and the Constitutional Court accepted it. And I 
know that the government started thinking. 
  But on the other hand we must copy nothing categorically. 
The 
average Swede or American consumes 60-70 times more energy 
resources than citizens of other countries do. If we, the 
largest country in the world, adopt this type of utilization of 
nature, the world will simply have no future. 
  Shevelev: Perhaps Greenpeace is right; they fight 
for this future using desperate, almost irrational actions. 
  Yablokov: Almost a year and a half ago I was in 
charge of the Soviet branch of Greenpeace--not everything is so 
simple here. Of course, desperate actions are necessary, but 
with respect to Greenpeace--and this is a powerful 
organization--there is reason to believe that certain interests 
are behind them. 
  On the one hand, there is the sincere enthusiasm of honest 
young people who are indeed taking a risk. For example, members 
of Rainbows of War--that is the Russian analog to 
Greenpeace--were simply beaten when they tried to stop work on a 
mine in Samarskaya Luka National Park. On the other hand, there 
is the suspicion that there is a great deal of money behind all 
this. 
  Shevelev: A way of eliminating competitors? 
  Yablokov: Perhaps. 
  Shevelev: But ultimately it was because of 
Greenpeace that we learned about the pouring out of radioactive 
wastes in the Far East. 
  Yablokov: A good example. You know the ecological 
significance of this discharge? None. The radioactivity was 0.38 
curies. Japanese nuclear power plants annually discharge 
hundreds of curies. The British and French--thousands of curies 
a year. Such is the scale of the event. 
  Shevelev: Why did our government have to take the 
blame for this? 
  Yablokov: Most likely they were afraid of a 
political outcry. But the people who made this affair 
public--they were highly professional. They must have known that 
radioactivity below one curie is not even considered pollution. 
But then you wonder why? 
  Shevelev: So the only result of all the hubbub 
were credits obtained to modernize and construct plants for 
processing radioactive wastes. 
  Yablokov: So it would seem. 
  Shevelev: Since our discussion has come around to 
the ecological movement, are you not disturbed by the fact that 
these organizations have frequently taken nationalistic 
positions? 
  Yablokov: I am. The ecological movements were the 
first manifestations of the opposition to be allowed. And what 
did they produce? Rigid, uncompromising nationalistic 
organizations in the Baltic, Moldova, Ukraine, and Armenia. The 
picture is similar in Russia. This makes me bitter because I 
have fundamental political differences with Rasputin who, like 
myself, is protecting Lake Baykal. But he is an absolutely 
sincere person and he speculates a very great deal...any 
argument of the nationalists: the birth rate is declining, the 
nation is dying out! But we should not juggle the facts: Even 
ten years ago all predictions said that we were proceeding 
toward these indicators. 
  Shevelev: You are a man of science. Were you 
willing to get involved in all this...politics? 
  Yablokov: Up until 1986 I could only dream about 
having the information that is available to me now. Now I regret 
the fact that I do not have time to interpret it. During the 
past four years I have accumulated unique experience in 
ecological activities in higher echelons of power. It would be a 
shame not to take advantage of it. 
  Shevelev: And has the perestroyka frenzy passed? 
  Yablokov: You know, my father died from cancer, 
and then my mother, and then my wife too. And among the causes 
of oncological diseases--70 percent are in the ecology, in the 
environment. I do not want my grandsons to die of cancer. For me 
politics is a personal issue. 
<H5>  MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI Dossier </H5>
  Aleksey Vladimirovich Yablokov. Born 10 March 1933. 
Graduated 
Moscow State University imeni M.V. Lomonosov. Doctor of 
biological sciences, corresponding member of the Russian Academy 
of Sciences. From 1956 through 1990, worked in the USSR Academy 
of Sciences Institute of Biological Development. 1989-1991--USSR 
People's Deputy. Since 1991--RSFSR state adviser on Ecology and 
Public Health. Since August 1992--adviser to the Russian 
Federation president on questions of ecology and health 
protection. 

