BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Keeping the Channels Open"] </F>
  [Text] Despite the euphoria with which the peace process 
was greeted when it began in Madrid in 1991, no one expected the 
negotiations to bring about an immediate solution to the Arab- 
Israeli conflict. Nor did anyone believe the Arab parties to 
the talks will have identical approaches to the many complicated 
aspects of a conflict that continued to grow wider during the 
decades in which it has kept the whole region living under the 
shadow of war. 
  Differences among them were bound to develop, but common 
national interests and the necessity for a coordinated and 
unified Arab stand against an enemy which always sought to 
divide Arab ranks provided enough gurantees that these 
differences will never grow into major disagreements. 
  More than anybody else, the fates of the Jordanian and 
Palestinian peoples are inter-connected. What happens on the 
West Bank of the river will have its reverberations in the East 
Bank. So will any development in Jordan have its bearing on the 
Palestinians. That is why it is so crucial that Jordan and the 
Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) maintain open channels 
and the highest level possible of coordination. Strong 
Jordanian-Palestinian relations are a requirement by everyone 
interested in protecting the rights of the Arabs, a necessity 
that neither side can escape. Only Israel would want the PLO 
and Jordan to go their separate ways; because only Israel will 
benefit under such a scenario. 
  Jordan has, throughout the peace talks, called for a strong 
Arab front in the negotiations, emphasising more than anything 
else the uniqueness of the Jordanian-Palestinian relationship. 
In words as well as in deeds, it demonstrated its support for 
the Palestinian people and the negotiating position of the PLO. 
But we will be fooling ourselves to say that differences 
between the two sides did not emerge. It serves no purpose to 
deny that the relations were at some point uneasy, at other 
tense. But, fortunately, the disagreements have so far been 
contained and the problems not allowed to grow out of 
proportion. From that, there has been only one winner: the 
Arabs, one loser: the Israelis. 
  Hence is the importance of the visit of PLO Chairman Yasir 
'Arafat to Jordan yesterday to discuss the Palestinian track of 
the negotiations with His Majesty King Husayn. the meeting 
would certainly help put things back in their right perspective 
and give a boost to efforts to have stronger coordination 
between Jordan and the Palestinians. The PLO can only benefit 
from hearing the Jordanian point of view on the problems facing 
its negotiators, and the Arab negotiating position can only get 
better. 
  Only through continuous contacts can Jordan and the PLO 
overcome their differences. Only by maintaining a strong front 
can the two sides make real progress in working to alleviate the 
suffering of the Palestinian people under occupation, regain 
Arab rights and advance the cause of peace in the area. 

