Language: <F P=105> Vietnamese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [National Assembly's resolution on the practice of thrift </F>
and efforts to oppose waste, corruption, and smuggling adopted 
by the Ninth National Assembly's Fourth Session in Hanoi on 30 
December 1993] 
  [Text] I. On the recommendation of the government, the 
Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Organ of 
Control; and based on the Nationalities Council's investigative 
report, the National Assembly Committees' viewpoints, and the 
ideas of voters nationwide on the struggle against corruption, 
smuggling, and waste, the National Assembly noted the following: 
These social vices have developed to a serious degree, thereby 
corrupting a segment of cadres and state personnel, adversely 
effecting social order and safety, creating indignation among 
the public, and diminishing the people's confidence in our 
regime. [passage omitted] 
  II. The government must fully exercise its authority and 
function as prescribed by the law. It must formulate the 
concrete lines and key measures to: 
  1. Amend, supplement, and promulgate lines and policies on 
improving the management mechanism to suit the reality, 
enhancing the effectiveness of state management work and helping 
weak establishments to overcome waste, setbacks in production, 
and damage to the people's interests. 
  In amending policies, improving the management mechanism, 
and 
strengthening the implementation of tasks, special attention 
must be paid to areas that encourage corruption and waste 
causing great losses to state property. These include such 
areas as capital construction, land and house management, budget 
allotment, taxes and customs, banking, export-import, and 
project examination. Efforts must be made to promulgate rules 
and regulations to step by step eliminate the system of 
management by ministries and the administration as well as 
prejudice between central and local enterprises. Efforts must 
also be made to strengthen state management function at 
production and business establishments; rearrange business 
activities at state-run agencies, mass organizations and 
societies; and supplement and perfect expenditure regulations 
for state-run enterprises and mass organizations and societies 
in line with the reality, while promoting saving and motivating 
the people to practise thrift, especially during the Lunar New 
Year celebrations. 
  2. Efforts must be made to perfect the organization of state 
agencies, train a contingent of competent cadres, and expel from 
state apparatuses various degenerate elements who are involved 
in corruption and smuggling. We must take due action against 
heads of agencies and units who ignore law violations in their 
areas of responsibility. We must strengthen and perfect the 
measures against corruption and smuggling from the central to 
local levels, purify the contingent of cadres, and assign 
capable and prestigious cadres to agencies to enhance their 
efficacy. 
  3. We must provide close guidance and strengthen the control 
and investigation work at various state-run agencies and 
enterprises to promptly detect and stop such practices as 
influencing authority, embezzlement, extortion, corruption, 
smuggling, helping smugglers, misappropriation of public funds, 
wastage, and causing losses to state property and the people's 
interest. 
  Those who violate the law in the ways previously mentioned 
will be seriously dealt with in accordance with the law, 
regardless of their authority and position. Those who are found 
guilty must pay a full compensation to the public fund or to the 
persons concerned. Drastic measures must be taken against those 
who provide protection for criminals, or those who used their 
authority to settle cases of violation in their organization 
when the evidence was sufficient for a court trial. Measures 
must be taken to protect those who detect and denounce illegal 
acts. 
  4. Efforts must be made to formulate concrete plans to guide 
and supervise various sectors and echelons to effectively carry 
out this resolution. 
  III. The Supreme People's Court, the Supreme People's Organ 
of Control, and various government law enforcement agencies must 
carry out the following tasks: 
  1. Perfect the organization and training of cadres so as to 
make them genuinely strong and capable, expel degenerated 
elements from law enforcement agencies, and enhance the quality 
and capability of cadres and state personnel; 
  2. Closely coordinate with other agencies to strengthen law 
enforcement work, promptly detect and deal severely with crimes 
and criminals, especially serious cases that cause great loss to 
the state and people's property, including the pending cases. 
  IV. The National Assembly's Standing Committee must 
strengthen its supervision in the promulgation of essential 
decrees and resolutions. It is imperative for the National 
Assembly to promulgate the resolution on coordination procedures 
between state agencies in order to organize the movement to 
promote thrift and oppose waste, corruption, and smuggling. 
  The Nationalities Council and other National Assembly 
Committees must formulate plans to implement resolutions in 
accordance with their functions and duties as prescribed by the 
law. 
  National Assembly delegations and deputies, the People's 
Councils, and People's Councillors at various echelons must 
exercise their function and duty of supervising various state 
agencies at the central level and in the provinces to 
satisfactorily implement this resolution. National Assembly 
deputies and the echelons of People's Councils must set a good 
example in carrying out their tasks and activities. 
  V. The National Assembly requests the Vietnam Fatherland 
Front, mass organizations and societies to motivate the people 
to develop their master role, promote thrift, and oppose 
corruption and smuggling. They must participate in and 
supervise the movement to oppose violation of the law while 
heightening vigilance to foil the enemy's schemes and tactics 
against this movement. Various mass media agencies must 
satisfactorily carry out the propaganda work, commend good deeds 
and denounce negative practices, contribute to detecting acts of 
law violation, train a contingent of competent journalists, and 
present accurate news and information. 
  The National Assembly charged the Prime Minister, the Chief 
Judge of the Supreme People's Court, and the Chief Procurator of 
the Supreme People's Organ of Control with the task of 
organizing the implementation of this resolution. Efforts must 
be made to launch a campaign to promote thrift and oppose waste, 
corruption, and smuggling among the people in society. 
Periodical reports must be filed to the National Assembly's 
Standing Committee on the results of the implementation of this 
resolution. [passage omitted] 
  This resolution was adopted by the SRV Ninth National 
Assembly's Fourth Session on 30 December 1993. 
  [Signed] National Assembly Chairman Nong Duc Manh 

