Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Sergey Turchenko report incorporating interview with </F>
Colonel General V.A. Achalov: "Three Days After State Duma 
Decision on Amnesty, Lefortovo Prisoners Have Been Freed"] 
  [Excerpts] Dozens of journalists and hundreds of 
representatives of the capital's patriotic movements gathered at 
the main entrance to Lefortovo Special Prison on the frosty 
morning of 26 February. And above the heads of the gathering 
could be seen crimson banners, numerous placards proclaiming 
"Freedom to the Defenders of the Motherland!" and "All Power to 
the Soviets!", and huge portraits of Rutskoy, Khasbulatov, 
Achalov, Makashov, and Anpilov.... [passage omitted] 
  The next morning, I met with Colonel General Vladislav 
Alekseyevich Achalov, and the first question I asked him was how 
he would explain the confusion that reigned as they were leaving 
Lefortovo, and why they came out through different gates. He 
answered: 
  [Achalov] It is clear that the amnesty decision was 
coordinated with Yeltsin. But it is perfectly obvious what 
pressure was put on him by "Russia's Choice" and the other 
ardent democrats. The result of this pressure was, evidently, 
Yeltsin's appeal to Kazannik proposing a delay. So that to the 
end, no one knew for sure whether we would be freed or not. It 
was only at 1500 hours that the investigator summoned me and 
said that the decision had been made, and I gathered my things. 
The prison chiefs came into the cell and said good-bye. We 
were all warned that a very large crowd had gathered at the main 
entrance. They asked us whether we intended to give interviews. 
I asked which mass media had gathered there. I was told: 
Mainly the foreign and "democratic" mass media. I refused to 
give an interview and decided to come out through the staff 
door. Everyone did what they considered feasible. 
  [Turchenko] What is your attitude to the amnesty? 
  [Achalov] I do not perceive this amnesty as my having 
received a pardon. I am not guilty of anything. Judge for 
yourselves. The only thing that they questioned me about in 
five months was who was with me and what I was doing 21 
September through 4 October. There was not one confrontation, 
not one identification. And, as of 17 December, the questioning 
stopped altogether -- there was nothing to ask about. True, 
they did submit forensic findings on the corpses. It was 
terrible! Some of them had up to 15 bullet wounds. Was it 
really necessary to shoot people? Those are the cases which 
should be investigated. 
  [Turchenko] What are your plans for the future? 
  [Achalov] The State Duma has elaborated a stance of national 
reconciliation. No matter where I work, I will support it. I 
know what war is, and I do not want our people to experience it 
in full measure. The people themselves have already realized 
what's what. The elections showed this. And the fact that 
Gaydar has now left the government means that he has run away 
from responsibility. Other "national zealots" are doing the 
same. Sooner or later, the people will make them answerable. 
But now we have to think about how to save Russia and prevent a 
civil war. [passage omitted] 

