Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by military correspondent Eytan Rabin] </F>
  [Text] Senior IDF [Israel Defense Forces] sources, 
including Major General Sha'ul Mufaz, commander of the IDF in 
the West Bank, issued warnings as far back as December 1993 
regarding the danger of attacks on Arabs by settlers. Despite 
this, Mufaz ordered all the units in the West Bank to refrain 
from firing at settlers. 
  A document drawn up by the head of the military government 
branch of the General Staff Operations Department, Lieutenant 
Colonel Avi'el Dagan, includes a warning about various 
disturbances and attacks by settlers. The General Staff ordered 
that such a pamphlet be drawn up, and it deals with law 
enforcement with regard to the Jewish population in the West 
Bank and Gaza. The pamphlet was distributed in the IDF on 12 
December 1993. 
  The pamphlet begins with the following: "As a result of the 
signing of the Declaration of Principles with the PLO, a new 
reality has been created in the field. We have recently 
encountered several instances in which Israelis in the West Bank 
and Gaza took steps that disturb the public order. The purpose 
of this document is to provide detailed instructions regarding 
procedures in such cases." 
  The document defines the distribution of authority between 
the IDF and the police with regard to law enforcement in the 
territories and says that the police will deal only with 
criminal cases. 
  The second page of the pamphlet details three categories of 
anticipated activities by settlers: 
  "A. Public disturbances, protests, demonstrations on the 
roads and at junctions, burning tires, setting up roadblocks and 
other obstacles along the travel axes, and other protest moves 
characterized by activity that has been coordinated among 
various elements. 
  "B. Public disturbances in populated areas, riots, breaking 
windows, overturning stalls, etc. 
  "C. Violent activity that may endanger lives by stone 
throwing, burning property, use of cold-steel weapons, or 
shooting." 
  The pamphlet also specifically mentions those locations in 
which activity of this type is expected. It says: "The centers 
of such activity in the West Bank and Gaza are, among other 
places, Hebron and its environs and the Ramallah area...." 
  Despite everything written in it, the pamphlet informs the 
soldiers, in an underlined passage, that "it is stressed that a 
soldier shall not use arms against an Israeli." The pamphlet 
also includes instructions to officers to clarify to their 
soldiers what is considered proper behavior toward Israelis who 
disturb the peace and break the law. Thus, paragraph 5 says 
that "if the suspect resists arrest, reasonable force may be 
used to detain him and bring him to the nearest police station. 
Handcuffs are not to be used except in extreme cases and when 
there is no other way to execute the arrest." 
  Yesterday, sources in the General Staff confirmed that the 
pamphlet was distributed among the soldiers in the West Bank. 
They noted that the General Staff supported Mufaz's decision to 
distribute the pamphlet. They pointed out, however, that the 
IDF has passed to the commission of inquiry that is 
investigating the Hebron massacre other pamphlets and findings 
that are also related to the testimony of Lt. Col. Me'ir Tayar, 
the commander of the Border Police in Hebron, regarding the 
order not to shoot at settlers under any circumstances. 
  A senior IDF source said that the pamphlet confirms the 
claim, raised before the commission, that the commanders in the 
field received specific orders from the top echelons. 

