BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Kuleshov report: "Yuriy Shafranik Will Help Build </F>
Turkmenia-Iran-Turkey-Europe Gas Pipeline"] 
  [Text] Ashkhabad [Ashgabat] -- An international conference 
in Ashkhabad regarding the organization of oil and gas exports 
from Turkmenia [Turkmenistan], in which government delegations 
from Russia, Iran, Turkey, and Kazakhstan and representatives of 
U.S. and Argentine business circles took part, has decided the 
route of a gas pipeline linking Turkmenia, Iran, Turkey, and 
Europe. An agreement has also been signed between the Turkmen 
and Russian Governments on cooperation in developing the fuel 
and energy complexes. 
  With Russian Fuel and Energy Minister Yuriy Shafranik's 
participation in this meeting any suspicion that Russia would 
shun the development of Turkmenia's fuel and energy complexes, 
primarily the laying of a transcontinental gas pipeline from 
Turkmenia to Europe, has been dispelled. Two years ago, after 
signing the bilateral agreement on friendship and cooperation 
between Turkmenistan and Russia, President Boris Yeltsin told 
journalists: 
  "Turkmenia and Russia today have the richest stocks of 
natural gas in the CIS. However, the supply of gas can be 
increased. We discussed this issue with Saparmurad Niyazov and 
have come to the conclusion that cooperation in this sphere is 
of mutual benefit. Russia is willing to invest the necessary 
funds in the construction of a gas pipeline, which will make it 
possible to transport Turkmen gas to Europe...." 
  This was reaffirmed by Yuriy Shafranik today: "We will try 
to help Turkmenia. Cooperation will enable our states to 
cooperate on the European market in the future without 
infringing one another's interests." 
  Representatives of the Turkmen, Iranian, Russian, and 
Turkish 
Governments agreed to set up an interstate council chaired by 
President Niyazov with regard to organizing oil and gas exports 
from Turkmenia to world markets. 
  The draft documents will be examined at a meeting of the 
council members in Tehran 1 July this year. 

