Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: France-Iraq: "The Resumption of Talks </F>
Is Confirmed"] 
  [Text] By welcoming high-ranking Iraqi officials in a span 
of a few days and mentioning the "progress" made by Iraq on the 
disarmament issue, France is expressing the wish to see that 
country reintegrated into the international community if it 
meets its commitments. 
  A Quai d'Orsay [Foreign Ministry] spokesman has confirmed 
that Mr. Riyad al-Qayssi, director of international affairs at 
the Iraqi foreign ministry, will arrive in Paris today for 
discussions. "We will explain to the Iraqi official that it is 
in his country's interest to quickly implement the UN 
resolutions," the Foreign Ministry communique said. 
  This visit comes less than a week after a high-ranking Iraqi 
Oil Ministry official arrived in France at the invitation of the 
Total and Elf-Aquitaine companies, which have been negotiating 
contracts for the exploration of oil sources in southern Iraq 
once the embargo is lifted. On Wednesday [3 March], for the 
first time, French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe explicitly 
hinted at the "progress" made by Iraq. Some months ago, he 
talked about Baghdad's "wider openness" in applying the UN 
resolutions. 
  After his latest mission to Bagdhad, Rolf Ekeus, chief of 
the 
UN commission on disarmament, and Iraqi officials said that they 
were ready to accelerate setting up a mechanism aimed at 
controlling Iraq's armaments in order to allow the oil embargo 
to be lifted. Once this mechanism is agreed upon, Iraq will have 
to wait for a "probationary" period of six months before a UN 
decision in its favor can be made. Alain Juppe, who remains 
very cautious, stressed that several other resolutions have not 
yet been respected by Baghdad, such as the inviolability of 
Iraq's border with Kuwait. Juppe considers those resolutions as 
a "sine qua non condition" for Iraq's reintegration into the 
international community. French diplomatic sources say that it 
is unlikely that the sanctions will be lifted at the next 
Security Council meeting in March which will be chaired by 
France. 
  Nevertheless, things seem to be improving on the bilateral 
level, evidenced by the opening of an "Iraqi interests section" 
in Paris in September 1993 (the two countries ceased all 
diplomatic relations in February 1991) and by the visit to 
France in mid-October -- officially for "health reasons" -- of 
Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq 'Aziz. 

