BFN 

  [Excerpt] President Yoweri Museveni has congratulated the 
people of South Africa, the ANC, and Mr. Nelson Mandela, in 
particular, on their recent victory in the elections which have 
ended the inhumane system of apartheid. The president was 
addressing a crowd which gathered at the parliamentary buildings 
in Kampala today to celebrate the end of apartheid in South 
Africa. Mr. Museveni said that it is a great achievement to see 
that this sad chapter in human history has come to an end. He 
also congratulated Mr. de Klerk for changing his mind from his 
original stand and join the people of South Africa in the move 
toward this new chapter. 
  Mr. Museveni paid tribute to the people of South Africa who 
sacrificed a great deal in the struggle for freedom. He singled 
out Nelson Mandela, Oliver Tambo, (Subukwe) among others as 
people who refused to surrender their right to freedom despite 
the terrible hardships they went through. He also paid tribute 
to African leaders who made significant contributions to the 
freedom struggle, whom he enumerated as Julius Nyerere, Kenneth 
Kaunda, Samora Machel, Kwame Nkrumah, 'Abd-al-Nasir, Ben Bella, 
Muammar al-Qadhdhafi, Sekou Toure, and Robert Mugabe. Mr. 
Museveni said that with this new chapter in South Africa, Africa 
is now free from the Cape to Cairo. He cautioned, however, that 
Africa is only free in the broad-based sense, because there are 
still many problems to solve, such as the present conflicts in 
Rwanda, Burundi, the Sudan, and Angola. He also pointed out 
that the combined gross domestic product of South Africa, East 
Africa, and Nigeria is still smaller than the gross domestic 
product of a small country like Belgium. 
  The president, who acknowledged the presence of ANC soldiers 
at the celebrations, said that since the National Resistance 
Movement came to government in 1986, it has given assistance to 
the ANC in line with the OAU policy. This assistance culminated 
in the receiving of ANC soldiers in Uganda after they were 
forced to leave Angola in order to pave the way for the 
independence of Namibia. [passage omitted] 

