CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by CI, CTK: "Slovak Health Care on the Brink of </F>
Collapse"] 
  [Text] Bratislava (CI, CTK)--You cannot talk about a 
transformation of health care in Slovakia because today it 
hovers on the brink of collapse, Minister of Health Tibor Sagat 
said yesterday. He referred particularly to the "unfortunate" 
systemic measures of the previous government "introduced in a 
badly planned time sequence," incompetent changes in the 
management of hospitals, and the discontinuation of the 
transformation system of health insurance. The difference in the 
development of health care in the Czech Republic [CR] and in 
Slovakia after the division of CSFR is, according to him, the 
result of better leadership of the Czech Ministry of Health, 
which managed to provide cogent evidence in support of its 
needs. "That, unfortunately, was not the case here," he added. 
  Minister Sagat sees the greatest shortcoming of the former 
government of Vladimir Meciar in the neglect of the financing of 
health care, which led to an uneven indebtedness of health care 
facilities. According to him, health care needs 4 or 5 billion 
Slovak korunas [Sk] more than is provided in the budget for this 
year (Sk15.7 billion). At the same time, the internal 
indebtedness of health care facilities amounts to, according to 
him, to as much as Sk50 billion. 
  As a possible source of needed additional funds, the 
minister 
mentioned an increase of the budget deficit, which the Slovak 
leadership is discussing with IMF representatives in 
Washington. Loans from some European as well as non-European 
countries should provide another source for the financing of 
health care. The minister expects that they will be granted by 1 
July this year at the latest, at which time he is planning to 
make some changes in the financing and economic management of 
health care facilities. 
  The foreign loans should create the "start-up" capital for 
insurance companies, which are unable, given the "irregular and 
variable" collection of insurance premiums, to cover the deficit 
in their own resources. In this connection he mentioned the need 
for the state to better meet its obligations. The state, 
according to him, provides only 10 percent for the health 
services to children and retirees, which is less than Sk40 per 
day. 
  Minister Sagat is in favor of separating the funds of health 
care and social services insurance in the National Insurance 
Agency. The fact that the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of 
Labor and Social Services did not come to an agreement on where 
health care insurance should belong, led to a compromise 
solution and the creation of the National Insurance Agency. But 
the six months of its activity did not bring the expected 
results, and the separation of the two funds is to be expected. 

