BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "What We Want the VIP Ambassador To See"] </F>
  [Text] U.S. Ambassador to Japan Walter Mondale is here in 
Okinawa. Governor Masahide Ota has asked him to help resolve 
issues related to U.S. military bases. 
  Mondale has come at a time when people all over Okinawa are 
fiercely protesting the crash of an F-15 Eagle fighter on Kadena 
Air Base (on 4 April), and a CH-46 helicopter crash on Futenma 
Air Station (on 6 April). The prefectural assembly convened an 
emergency session on 8 April, and adopted a protest resolution 
on the two accidents and a statement asking for a thorough 
investigation into the accidents; publication of the findings; 
and suspension of military training until the causes of the 
accidents are determined, after the concerned local governments 
had done the same. This process has been repeated over and over 
again. 
  Regarding the base issues, both former Governor Junji 
Nishime 
and Governor Ota decided not to just sit and wait for the 
Japanese Government to negotiate. They have visited the United 
States several times to petition directly. 
  Ambassador Mondale claims he "can understand the Okinawans' 
feelings." We hope he takes this opportunity to visit the 
relevant sites and see for himself. 
  We hope he will see how expansive military bases occupy a 
good portion of the small islands of Okinawa, how the 
residential areas are threatened by the possibility of damage 
from accidents, how artillery fire has punched holes into some 
of our few remaining green mountains, how noise interferes with 
daily life, and how Okinawans are exasperated by all of this. 
  The specific demands of the prefectural government at this 
point consist of: The return of Naha Military Port, 
discontinuation of parachuting exercises at the Yomitan 
Auxiliary Airfield and the return of the airfield, an end to the 
live shelling exercises across Prefectural Highway 104, plus the 
prevention of accidents relating to military training. 
  As Governor Ota stated, next year marks the 50th anniversary 
of the end of the war. We want to see tangible solutions to the 
base issues. Prevention of accidents is a particularly urgent 
matter. 
  There is one more thing we want Ambassador Mondale--a VIP 
politician who was vice president during the Carter 
administration and once a presidential candidate--to know. 
  We want him to know the significance of the fact that 
Governor Ota--who upholds peace as the key policy of his 
administration--defeated the previous Governor Nishime, who had 
made significant achievements in developing the Okinawan economy 
during his 12 years in power. 
  Following the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] policy of 
"working for the effective and steady implementation of the 
Japan-U.S. Security Pact, while improving the livelihood and 
welfare in Okinawa," Nishime also worked positively for the 
solution of the base issues in Okinawa. 
  During the election of November 1990, amid the Gulf crisis, 
the immediate reason for Nishime's crushing defeat was that he 
at first favored the "UN Peace Cooperation Bill" submitted by 
the LDP administration to the Diet (although he later opposed 
the dispatch of Self-Defense Forces). Most supporters of Ota, 
who won the election, oppose the Japan-U.S. security setup. 
  The military bases on Okinawa formed the key links in the 
security system safeguarding Japan and the United States under 
the premise of the Soviet threat when the structure of East-West 
confrontation still existed. Even since this framework has 
changed, they assume the important function of a rear support 
base for a world strategy covering the Middle East and other 
areas of conflict in faraway lands. This indefinite strategic 
role is unacceptable to the Okinawan people. 
  At present, there is the issue of the DPRK (North Korea). 
Okinawa may be important as a base from which to apply pressure 
on North Korea. Even so, other people feel the DPRK should not 
be forced into desperation. Our indignation at the accidents 
does not only concern our daily life at present. This may 
become an opportunity for an outpouring of opinion questioning 
the ability of the present security system to safeguard world 
peace. 

