BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Robert Urbain, Belgian foreign trade and </F>
European affairs minister, by unidentified correspondent; place 
and date not given: "On Signing GATT Accords in Marrakech"] 
  [Text] [Correspondent] The euphoria at the end of December 
when the Uruguay Round was concluded seems to have died down now 
. 
  [Urbain] Having been closely involved, by virtue of the 
European presidency, in the dramatic phase which preceded the 
agreement of 15 December, I can state that the political leaders 
were essentially motivated by the fear of failure to reach an 
agreement after seven years of negotiations. You must remember 
that in 1986, when the Round was launched in Punta del Este, our 
ambitions were as never before, with the inclusion of sectors 
such as textiles, services, and intellectual property. When you 
conclude an agreement on such a scale, you can always think that 
the concessions made are excessive compared with what has been 
obtained. Then, from 15 December, the critical phase has 
developed, for the parliaments, for the sectors, and within the 
non-profit making organizations. But without an agreement, the 
door would have been open for protectionist maneuvers, 
unilateral decisions, and regional accords. Instead of that, we 
have an accord which sets the seal on the birth of the World 
Trade Organization (WTO). 
  [Correspondent] Is this WTO going to prevent unilateral 
retaliatory trade measures, such as the U.S. Super 301? 
  [Urbain] Two months ago, when the United States made a new 
attack against Japan based on this Super 301, they wanted to 
demonstrate to the world that the GATT accord would not prevent 
them from using their unilateral retaliatory measures. Until 
very recently, the Americans were strongly against the idea of 
the WTO. They have finally accepted it, while claiming that the 
Super 301 is compatible with the GATT regulations. In any 
event, even if the legal compatibility were to be proved, it is 
an admission of failure, as unilateral measures are weak 
measures. 
  [Correspondent] Does not the WTO threaten to become 
overloaded by adding on new subjects, such as the social clause? 
  [Urbain] Belgium has always insisted on the need to include 
the social clause on the agenda. This has now been achieved. 
But the social clause covers varied problems. When the 
European Commission takes a stance against child labor, we know 
very well that artisanal production in developing countries is 
generally family-based. We are not going to ban imports of 
Pakistani carpets because somewhere, there is a child who is 
working with his parents! But we must fight against the 
deliberate maintaining of low wages and the absence of social 
protection. 
  [Correspondent] Are not the Uruguay Round accords a product 
of the West designed for the West? 
  [Urbain] If we had wanted the GATT to be a "device" at the 
disposal of the West, we would not have opened it up to 122 
countries. It is clear that the problems between the rich 
countries are often different than those between the rich 
countries and the developing countries. For example, we had 
problems with the United States on the film industry, the 
aircraft and aviation sector, iron and steel, and 
telecommunications. For the developing countries on the other 
hand, intellectual ownership was the problem. The GATT was much 
more than a dialogue between the rich countries, even if 80 
percent of world trade is between the rich countries. 
  [Correspondent] Is a country such as China in a position to 
quickly join the ranks of WTO countries? 
  [Urbain] Not all the problems have yet been solved. But this 
giant must respect the rules of international trade. Interest 
in the Chinese market by many large countries is evident, 
starting with Japan and the United States, for which human 
rights pose something of a problem ... but not really so much 
of one. Step by step, this huge market must become integrated 
into the international trading community, hence its idea of 
joining the GATT. Because at present it is not the proper thing 
to be outside the GATT. 
  [Urbain] Belgium is going to sign the GATT accords in 
Marrakech. What benefits will this bring to Belgium and its 
people? 
  [Correspondent] We are, as a small country with a high level 
of economic development, more dependent on foreign trade than 
many other countries. So anything which helps to regulate 
foreign trade, in order to avoid unfair competition or dumping, 
to open up new markets, serves as a stimulus to our exports. We 
can therefore hope to further boost our trade, especially with 
developing countries. 
  [Correspondent] But the liberalization of trade is likely to 
further "globalize" the economy. With even more company 
delocalizations? 
  [Urbain] There have always been delocalizations. I am 
against it when it is an indication of social dumping. Such as 
the transfer of Hoover from France to Great Britain. We all 
make a great deal of noise when companies leave to produce in a 
developing country, but let us begin by stopping delocalization 
at home ! 

