BFN 

<F P=106> ["Own Information" report: "Friendship Is All Very Well, </F>
but Let's Keep Our Smokes to Ourselves. The West Is in No Hurry 
To Allow Russia Access to Advanced Technologies"] 
  [Text] Another pillar of the Cold War -- the notorious 
COCOM [Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls] 
-- is apparently not long for this world. Having existed for 44 
years, it formally ceased to operate at the end of March. It is 
therefore natural to ask: What happens now, what can Russia 
expect now that it has suffered from COCOM's sundry bans and 
restrictions? 
  U.S. Department of State spokesman Mike McCurry announced 
that this matter was discussed in detail during a meeting 
between U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Russian 
Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev in Vladivostok. It is also the 
focus of attention at the U.S.-Russian consultations currently 
being held at expert level and "at the highest level." It is 
expected that Russia will be able to take part in all aspects of 
the new international agreement on export control procedures 
which is to replace COCOM. 
  It is intended to formulate this procedure by October this 
year. But for the time being, the Department of State spokesman 
indicated, the 17 COCOM member countries "have agreed to retain 
during the transitional period the potential to exercise control 
at national level over the trade in goods appearing on COCOM's 
lists." At the same time members have been instructed to apply 
national export laws and display extreme vigilance regarding 
trade in products which could have serious consequences if 
supplied. In other words, during the entire transitional period 
-- until October -- and in the interests of national security 
(of the United States, Japan, and the other COCOM member 
states), a tough licensing policy will be retained in respect of 
anything that has been manufactured using complex technologies. 
  M. McCurry explained that we should not expect to see any 
changes regarding control of exports to the DPRK and the 
delivery of military technologies to Russia and China. Nor 
should countries which support terrorism entertain any rosy 
hopes. The new licensing rules will be introduced almost solely 
with regard to telecommunications equipment designed for 
civilian use. 
  Let us remind readers that the list of products banned by 
COCOM for export to former communist bloc countries includes 150 
items which now need to be reviewed. However, according to data 
in the JAPAN TIMES, this will not apply to approximately 10 
categories of state-of-the-art dual-purpose technologies and 
materials. These include coding devices and heat-resistant and 
highly porous composite materials and coverings used in the 
aerospace industry, for example in the manufacture of Stealth 
aircraft. 
  Regarding the structure and tasks of the new international 
organ, the newspaper stresses that it is primarily designed to 
counter the dangerous proliferation of weapons in Third World 
countries such as Libya and Iraq whose actions pose a threat to 
the world community. 
  In the opinion of William Raynsh [surname as 
transliterated], 
who has been appointed U.S. deputy secretary of commerce by 
President Clinton, Russia and the other former Soviet republics 
are unlikely to be among the founders of the new organization. 
We expect these countries, he indicated, to try to achieve the 
same objectives using their own export control systems, and they 
will be able to join our organization in the future. 
  So is COCOM on the way out? It is, but only to remain in 
place, it seems: So control-free times are not just around the 
corner. 

