BFN 

  [Excerpt] Bratislava April 25 (CTK) -- The creation of the 
Slovak Democratic Union (DEUS) from the Alliance of Democrats 
(AD SR) and the Alternative of Political Realism (APR) is 
another step confirming that the political parties tend to 
integrate, the independent daily SMENA comments on yesterday's 
merger of the two groupings. 
  "While the left-wing, conservative and extremist parties are 
still crystallising, it is necessary to admit that the Slovak 
political spectrum is lacking a really democratic and liberal 
party which could appeal to voters to whom Meciar (chairman of 
the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia, HZDS), Weiss (chairman 
of the Democratic Left Party, SDL) or Carnogursky (chairman of 
the Christian Democratic Movement, KDH) are unacceptable for 
various reasons," the paper notes. 
  If the DEUS becomes this sort of a party, the future will 
not 
investigate whether the "first defectors from the HZDS," who 
rejected Meciar's political methods half a year after his 
smashing electoral victory, united with the politicians who 
sided with Meciar longer and "even some of the newly fledged 
liberals who personally caused that Meciar's fall did not come a 
bit earlier," the paper states. 
  Jozef Moravcik's election as the DEUS chairman may be 
conceived as violating the coalition agreements, according to 
which top political figures should not be represented in the 
government. On the other hand, it could be said that not to 
place a politician whose poll ratings have been the same as 
Meciar's to the top of the party would be amateurish, the paper 
says. 
  "One of the essential questions of mankind is: Who are we, 
where are we coming from and where are we heading for. In case 
of DEUS representatives, it seems to be obvious who they are and 
where they are coming from. And it will be decided whether or 
not the slightly bitter taste in the mouth will remain, only 
after they show where they are heading for," the daily concludes. 
  "As in any Slovak political party, there is a dormant 
tension 
in the DEUS, too," the independent NARODNA OBRODA says. "It is 
more than probable that it will not transpire before elections 
(scheduled for September 30-October 1), but then the struggle 
for the essence of Slovak liberalism will take place," the daily 
adds. 
  The paper asks the question whether the DEUS will be 
dominated by a group of entrepreneurs "eying the right" who have 
no experience with the HZDS and for whom the liberal party 
constitutes a means of political activity rather than evasion, 
or by the socially-orientated DEUS members who have quite 
recently voted in the parliament as is right for an HZDS deputy. 
  "While Milan Knazko, Jan Budaj and Rudolf Filkus were 
building the party at the time when this activity was really not 
a source of popularity, at present the HZDS ranks have been 
swamped with liberals. There is a real threat that liberalism 
will become an escape channel for the deputies who do not care 
much for their orientation, but rather for the advantages 
connected with the post of deputy. The boundaries of Slovak 
liberalism will be defined only after the elections," the paper 
notes. 
  The DEUS "as an HZDS with human face" has a chance to win 
over a part of the HZDS electorate as well as new voters, the 
daily states. 
  "And this is not little, in particular if we bear in mind 
that Slovakia had to decide in 1990 what percentage the 
communists would get, and in 1992 whether or not the Federation 
would be preserved. In 1994 the main issue will be whether or 
not Meciar will be allowed to make good another promise to 
return. Indeed, although some politicians are reluctant to say 
it aloud, this will be the crucial issue of the elections," the 
paper concludes. 
  The tabloid NOVY CAS reports that the polls give the new 
party nine per cent. If the KDH enters the elections 
separately, the DEUS would be the strongest partner in the 
right-wing and centre coalition. Such a bloc stands a chance of 
becoming the third strongest party after the HZDS and the left 
bloc. "This achievement would please all the voters who have 
criticised the clumsy cooperation of the right and were burying 
its ambitions even in these elections," the paper states. 
[passage omitted] 

