BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "The East Votes Red"] </F>
  [Text] Six months before the Bundestag elections, the 
Germans are convinced that there will be a change of government, 
and they welcome that. According to the Emnid poll commissioned 
by SPIEGEL for April, 58 percent of those eligible to vote 
believe that the present climate is particularly favorable for 
the Social Democrats; the CDU [Christian Democratic Union]/CSU 
[Christian Social Union] is well behind with 13 percent. Even a 
large majority of CDU/CSU voters believe that there will be a 
change of government in the fall. 
  The CDU/CSU's image is pretty terrible in the new laender 
especially. Irrespective of whether the issues are 
unemployment, safeguarding pensions, combating crime, housing 
construction, foreigners, or economic growth, in 14 out of 17 
particularly important policy areas, only the Social Democrats 
are credited with the ability to solve problems (eight out of 17 
in western Germany). 
  The CDU/CSU is only just ahead of the SPD [Social Democratic 
Party of Germany] on the issue of "limiting state debt." 
According to the east Germans, the CDU/CSU and the Social 
Democrats are equal on "ensuring law and order." In the case of 
environmental policy, the Greens are well ahead with 33 percent. 
  In eastern Germany, representatives of the SPD are 
particularly popular, especially Brandenburg's Social Affairs 
Minister Regine Hildebrandt. A total of 68 percent of voters 
want the controversial politician to play an important role in 
the future -- in the west the figure is 40 percent. In the case 
of Brandenburg's Minister President Manfred Stolpe, the figure 
is 51 percent among east German citizens and only 35 percent 
among west German citizens. 
  There is not much of a difference in west Germans' and east 
Germans' assessment of Republikaner boss Franz Schoenhuber. In 
contrast to what has been suspected, an astonishing 11 percent 
accord the right-winger an important role in politics, whereas 
in the west, the figure is as high as 15 percent. 
  Federal Justice Minister Sabine Luetheusser-Schnarrenberger, 
FDP [Free Democratic Party] is more popular with the public than 
within her own party. A total of 34 percent of CDU/CSU voters 
(and 38 percent of FDP voters) want the opponent of bugging to 
have an important role in politics and 41 percent in the case of 
the SPD and the Greens. 
  And who can govern with whom following 16 October? The SPD 
(38 percent) and the Greens (9 percent) have at least an 
arithmetical majority. 

