Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Anastasiya Romashkevich report: "Russia's Transcaucasus </F>
Policy. Baku and Yerevan Cannot Be Reconciled Yet"] 
  [Excerpts] The CSCE-sponsored informal consultations of 
"the Minsk Group of Nine" on the settlement of the conflict in 
Nagorno-Karabakh will resume in Vienna today. The meeting will 
take place against a rocky background: Starting from 
mid-December hostilities flared up twice in the conflict area, 
and Russian attempts to broker a temporary cease-fire failed 
last week. Vladimir Kazimirov, special envoy and the Russian 
president's representative to the talks on Nagorno-Karabakh, 
kindly agreed to comment on the situation in the area of the 
Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict. [passage omitted] 
  According to the Russian diplomat, the positions of those 
who 
advocate conflict settlement by force are still fairly strong, 
which was actually the main reason a truce due to start 1 
February fell through. He complained that the sides' statements 
on their desire to achieve peace have often turned out to be 
mere "camouflage" to conceal their military actions. 
Nonetheless, the diplomat pointed to the statement made by 
Azerbaijani President Geydar Aliyev 31 January on security 
guarantees to the Armenian population in Karabakh in the event 
of a cease-fire by the Armenian side. However, Vladimir 
Kazimirov said, owing to distrust between the two sides, this 
appeal is unlikely to find a response among the Armenians. 
  According to Mr. Kazimirov, claims that Russia plans to send 
its troops to the conflict area "are not quite correct." What 
is actually at issue is the need to send disengagement forces 
there. The operation itself should be multinational in nature, 
but the national lineup of the contingent is yet to be 
determined. The diplomat noted that it would be desirable that 
the contingent be given a UN mandate: unlike CSCE forces, "blue 
helmets" may carry out forcible operations (that is, to be 
present in a conflict area without consent of the warring 
sides). [passage omitted] 

