Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Nassau, Bahamas, 26 Jan, Cana -- Twenty per 
cent of shareholding in the state-owned Bank of Bahamas will be 
offered to the public later this year, Prime Minister Hubert 
Ingraham has announced. 
  He said the government's ownership of a commercial bank is 
against the policy of the ruling Free National Movement 
administration. 
  Ingraham, in a recent address to the Bankers Association of 
the Bahamas, also warned of the United States' efforts to try to 
"close down" and put pressure on international banking 
businesses in small countries. 
  He said the Bahamas must continue to maintain a good banking 
reputation so "we can look at them (United States) and say we 
are operating a clean banking system". 
  The Bahamas must also continue to be able to say that it 
does 
not facilitate drug trafficking and criminal money, and that the 
banks in the Bahamas have a code of conduct that is enforced, 
said Ingraham. 
  He said government will undertake a close examination of the 
banking sector to determine ways of improving its 
competitiveness. [passage omitted] 
  The Bank of the Bahamas, a 100 per cent government-owned 
entity, is being operated without government involvement in its 
management and is competing effectively in the private sector, 
he said. 
  Ingraham said government's continuing ownership of a 
commercial bank is consistent with its policy - leave business 
to business persons. 
  "Later in the year, we will begin the government's 
divestment 
programme by offering to the Bahamian public 20 per cent of the 
shares of the Bank of the Bahamas. 
  "The state's disengagement, however, will take due account 
of 
relevant factors including employment," said Ingraham. 
  The importance of the banking sector to the Bahamian economy 
is underscored by its estimated contribution to gross national 
product and employment opportunities. 
  In 1992, the banking industry employed almost 3 400 persons 
and had direct expenditure of almost 200 million dollars. 
  Ingraham said government was keen, not simply to maintain 
the 
Bahamas' position as the leader in the offshore banking 
community, but on regaining any of the ground lost to 
competitors. 
  As technology changes and as other financial centres improve 
their products and financial markets, the Bahamas will continue 
to improve efficiency and cost effectiveness in banking in the 
Bahamas, he said. 
  "We are making additional investment to ensure that we have 
the most sophisticated, state of the art telecommunications 
systems and that our regulatory framework remains appropriate to 
the business we are doing," said Ingraham. 
  As a result, the Bahamas is reviewing its telecommunication 
charges in comparision with other international financial 
centres so that it might ensure that it is technologically cost 
competitive and attractive to international business. 
  "The role played by human resource development in promoting 
the efficiency of our offshore centre, and in ensuring a more 
balanced distribution of economic and social progress cannot be 
over emphasised," Ingraham said. 
  "The government will place even greater emphasis on 
upgrading 
the skills of our work force through well defined training and 
retraining programmes which will take account of the dynamics of 
the marketplace," he said. 

