Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Leonard Doyle article: "Drugs Intelligence Unit Sweeps Into </F>
Action"] 
  [Text] After only two weeks in business, Europol, the new 
drugs intelligence unit of the European Union, is taking credit 
for two international drug sweeps involving the police forces of 
Greece, Belgium and France. 
  The unit, which is based in The Hague, was established to 
combat what the police and politicians describe as an 
ever-escalating threat to European society from the 
international drugs trade and money laundering and organised 
crime associated with it. 
  Seizures show that the quantity and value of drugs being 
shipped to the EU is rising all the time, and the organisations 
bringing it in are increasingly violent. There is further 
evidence of drug traffickers becoming involved in illegal arms 
sales and of links with subversive groups. 
  Colombian drug cartels are shipping cocaine via Spain, 
Eastern Europe and Nigeria, while the classic Balkan pipeline 
for heroin has been diverted by the war in Bosnia. Heroin from 
South-east Asia is transported via Eastern Europe and also by 
courier through Nigeria. 
  Europol's future role has yet to be decided, with some 
countries, like Germany, keen that it should become a fully 
operational European-style FBI. For now it is restricted to 
providing analysis to police narcotics squads. In the fight 
against drug dealers who operate across borders with virtual 
impunity, Europol is providing some badly needed assistance to 
overstretched police forces, which rarely communicate about 
operational matters because of language barriers. 
  For the first time, EU drugs intelligence officers are 
providing instant tactical intelligence, helping to target 
individuals and organisations suspected of planning drug 
operations. Language problems are overcome by having a drug 
liaison officer from each EU country based at Europol's 
headquarters in The Hague. Others provide analysis on the mass 
of intelligence information that is now on tap. 
  EU police are still unable to conduct cross-border 
operations, except for nine Schengen countries (which exclude 
Britain, Denmark and the Irish Republic) when they are already 
in hot pursuit. 
  Jurgen Storbeck, Europol's acting director, said the 
organisation had already intervened to help Greek, Belgian and 
French drugs officers in recent raids, ensuring that two 
international sweeps went off without a hitch. 
  The intelligence back-up they provided allowed police to 
move 
in and make arrests with pinpoint accuracy. The direct computer 
links to national police intelligence services accomplishing in 
hours, what would otherwise have taken weeks. 
  In one case Greek customs arrested three individuals on 
board 
a ship in Patras and discovered 16 kilograms of cocaine hidden 
in its cargo of fruit. "Following consultations here, when it 
was established that the ship had already been under 
surveillance in Antwerp they were able to arrest two Colombians 
and one Greek instead of detaining the ship" and spoiling the 
cargo, Mr Storbeck said. 
  In another case Europol was able to co-ordinate the arrest 
of 
two Italians, three French nationals and a Dutchman after being 
consulted by the Belgian authorities, and putting off moves by 
French anti-drug agents. 
  Not all experts in the drugs trade share Mr Storbeck's 
enthusiasm for Europol. Nicholas Dorn, of Britain's Institute 
for the Study of Drug Dependence, believes that there is too 
much emphasis on beating the trade by concentrating on "top 
trafficking". 
  "This is a vision which does not correspond to reality in 
Britain, nor to general trends in Europe," Mr Dorn said. 
  "If you `top slice' drugs intelligence in this way, then you 
don't get the top of the triangle--there is no triangle; you 
just get a few slithers [as published] of this and that", 
because drug markets are dominated by medium to small players. 
  Mr Dorn describes Europol's and Britain's drugs policy as "a 
giraffe on a virtually tree-less plain". 
  However, fighting the illicit drugs trade has become a top 
vote-winning priority for European politicians and the strategy 
they have adopted is one of areas [as published] where there is 
little dissent in the EU. 

