Language: <F P=105> Azeri </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] We start our program with a report from the Defense 
Ministry press service. 
  Lately Armenia's Armed Forces have been trying to broaden 
their offensive operations in order to occupy more Azerbaijani 
lands. Having brought in a considerable amount of troops and 
military hardware, Armenia's Armed Forces are engaged in a show 
of force in Agdam and Beylagan sectors of the front. The brave 
Azerbaijani fighters are courageously resisting the enemy's 
onslaught, inflicting counter strikes, and forcing him to 
retreat from the occupied lands. Following bloody and fierce 
battles, the Azerbaijani troops repulsed large-scale enemy 
attacks and liberated (Ashagy-Yaglyvent), Kerimbeyly, and 
Shukurbeyly settlements in Fizulinskiy Rayon. At present, our 
troops are in control of Goradiz. The Armenian fighters fleeing 
in panic left behind eight tanks, 12 antitank missiles, six 
missile launchers, seven cannons, three vehicles, and numerous 
other military hardware. 
  Overall, the enemy lost some 500 soldiers, 32 tanks, five 
vehicles, six grenade launchers, and 10 artillery pieces during 
the latest fighting in this sector of the front. More than 
3,000 mines were neutralized. 
  At present the Azerbaijani Army subunits are in control of 
certain regions in Fizulinskiy, Khodzhavend [Martuninskiy], and 
Kelbadzharskiy rayons. Fighting is continuing. 
  The valor of the Azerbaijani fighters is given duly praised 
by the Supreme War Command. Most of the troops and officers 
have been considered worthy of orders and medals. 
  During a reconnaissance operation, Sergeant-Major Ismailov 
Etibar Beyleroglu infiltrated behind the Armenian units and 
displayed bravery in fighting his way in the direction of 
Khodzhavend and inflicting effective blows at the enemy. The 
scouts destroyed six enemy cars, a tent camp, an arms depot, 
three tanks, and some 70 troops. 
  The brave fighter Sergeant-Major Etibar Ismailov, in trying 
to destroy an important Armenian target on 4 January threw the 
grenade he was holding under an enemy tank and saved his 
comrades-in-arm and was martyred heroically. God bless his 
soul, and may his grave be filled with bliss. 
  The Azerbaijani Armed Forces command expressed condolences 
to 
the kin of soldiers martyred during the fighting. 

