BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Ding Jianming (0002 1017 6900)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 8 Jun (XINHUA) -- The Import-Export Bank 
of China [IEBC], whose organization and establishment was 
approved by the State Council, officially started operations 
recently. Tong Zhiguang, the first chairman of the IEBC's board 
of directors, said in an interview with this reporter: The 
major task of the IEBC is to implement the state's industrial 
and foreign trade policies and offer policy-related financial 
support for expanding the export of China's machinery, 
electronic goods, equipment in complete sets, and other capital 
goods. 
  Tong Zhiguang said: The State Council's decision to 
establish the IEBC is not only an important decision on further 
deepening the reform of the financial system and economic 
structure and on opening wider to the outside world, but also a 
requirement for further developing China's foreign trade. Tong 
Zhiguang said: Over decades of efforts, China's foreign trade 
has grown considerably. In 1993, the total import and export 
value approached $200 billion. In the meantime, the structure 
of export goods has significantly improved from mainly exporting 
agricultural, sideline, local, and special products at the 
beginning to the export of light industrial goods, textiles, and 
daily consumer goods. Since reform and opening up, machinery, 
electronics goods, and equipment in complete sets has joined the 
ranks of export goods; their export value and proportion to the 
total export volume have risen constantly. In 1993, the export 
of machinery, electronics goods, and equipment in complete sets 
amounted to $22.7 billion, nearly one-fourth of the year's total 
export volume. However, compared with world's trading powers, 
whose export of machinery, electronics goods, and equipment in 
complete sets generally accounts for 80 percent of their total 
exports, China still has a long way to go. 
  Tong Zhiguang noted: Exporting machinery, electronics goods, 
and equipment in complete sets earns more foreign exchange. He 
said: Over some 40 years of construction, China's 
machine-building industry has developed a fairly complete 
system; its technological level and product quality have been 
greatly improved in the past few years and now have very strong 
competitiveness on the international market. For lack of 
necessary or full financial support in the past, however, China 
lost many chances to win international bids. Therefore, the 
State Council decided to set up an import-export bank with a 
view to supporting the development of China's exports, 
particularly the export of machinery, electronics goods, and 
equipment in complete sets, through financial means, to promote 
the upgrading of the structure of export goods. Tong Zhiguang 
explained: The IEBC operates on an independent and break-even 
principle and practices business management. The sources of the 
bank's capital, apart from funds allotted by the state, mainly 
come from refinancing with the People's Bank of China, issuing 
financial bonds in China and negotiable securities abroad, and 
funds raised from financial institutions at home and abroad. 
  Tong Zhiguang particularly stressed: Although the IEBC is a 
policy-lending bank, it is by no means an institution allotting 
funds without setting conditions. It is also managed in 
accordance with the general rules governing banks, but it will 
also carry out the state's industrial and foreign trade policies 
at the same time. He noted: In granting credits, the IEBC will 
mainly support export units who are in dire need of funds, 
capable of competing on the international market, and in the 
meantime, able to repay the capital and interest. It will also 
support units with a good foundation, management, and 
credibility; high technological level; and people familiar with 
the operations of importing and exporting. 
  Tong Zhiguang, 61, is a foreign trade expert. He has worked 
in China's foreign trade departments since 1951 and has been the 
head of the Sino-U.S. trade negotiating team, as well as head 
and chief representative of the Chinese negotiating team for 
rejoining GATT. Before assuming the post of chairman of the IEBC 
board of directors, he was vice minister of foreign trade and 
economic cooperation. Speaking on the IEBC's leadership 
structure, Tong Zhiguang said: The IEBC makes the bank president 
responsibile under the leadership of the board of directors, 
which is the bank's highest decision-making body and answerable 
to the State Council. Its specific functions include examining 
and finalizing the bank's medium and long-term plans, operating 
principles, and annual plan according to the state's industrial 
and foreign trade policies; supervising the bank's financial 
affairs, accounting, and the maintaining and increase in the 
value of state-owned assets; examining and approving financial 
budget, final accounts, and plan for after-tax profit 
distribution; discussing and making decisions on offering export 
credit guarantees and relevant policies depending on countries, 
taking credit risks, and other important decisions. Tong 
Zhiguang indicated that the bank will set up a strict assessment 
and examination system for determining the projects it will 
support and the amounts of loans. 

