Language: <F P=105> Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vaino Sarnet, Executive Director of </F>
Privatization Agency: "Getting Rid of Toothache (lack of 
economic viability in a state enterprise), Calls for a Dental 
Drill (privatization)"] 
  [Text] 
  Vaino Sarnet, executive director of the 
Privatization Agency has been on the job for four months now. In 
the accompanying letter he wrote: "My views on privatization, 
however, go back much longer than that, to the time when I was 
assistant district elder for Western Virumaa and chairman of the 
district's commission on returning illegally expropriated 
property." Have they remained the same or have they changed, the 
author asks. 
  Vaino Sarnet's position is that privatization 
should be accelerated and decentralized. 
<H5>  We Are Still a Long Way From Where We Expected To Be </H5>
  On the positive side one could mention an increase 
in the rate of sales at the end of last year, a decrease in the 
portion of selling off parts of enterprises, and an increase in 
the portion of selling shares. 
  Averting, or at least postponing, the many potential 
privatization scandals is a positive factor in itself, so that 
one could go on working instead of concentrating on scandal 
control. We have faced court debates ever more assertively, 
creating precedents so that the privatization process could not 
be slowed down or stopped on some flimsy pretext. 
  There are enough people around who wish that privatization 
be 
curbed or brought to a stop. The simplest way to do that would 
be to emphasize the confusion and the setbacks that inevitably 
go along with any changes in ownership formats. 
<H5>  Myths About Privatization </H5>
  A privatization notice brings out the Doomsday sayers 
at an enterprise. This is partially true, but only in cases 
of inefficient management and production. The buyer wants to get 
the enterprise operating efficiently, involving all of its good 
employees and specialists. 
  State-owned enterprises are sold to foreigners for 
next-to-nothing. Foreigners would have to buy an enterprise 
in a round of competitive bidding, where Estonian capital would 
have an advantage (a 10-year schedule of payments). It is 
important to have as many foreign investors among the bidders as 
possible. This increases the chances of finding a buyer who has 
the skills, the knowledge and the money to make a go of it on 
the world market. 
  Privatization is happening too soon, Estonia's capital 
is not yet strong enough. The strength of Estonia's capital 
comes from lower wages and more difficult working conditions, 
compared to those of foreign companies. It is not something that 
most people cherish. Russian capital, for one, has been very 
eager to supplement, and to dilute, our capital. The only way to 
minimize that is to attract Western investors. 
  In the course of privatization, someone's interests and 
rights are always being stepped on. Partially, this is 
true, of course. Sudden changes will always violate someone's 
rights but, due to the significance of the process, one must 
proceed without slowing down. These problems, too, will have to 
be solved either on the run, or put off until such damages can 
be assessed, and the state in a position to compensate for them 
out of the earnings stemming from privatization. 
<H5>  Why Is Rapid Privatization an Economic Necessity? </H5>
  Privatization is necesary because: 
  1) Even in principle, the state cannot properly handle the 
business side of an enterprise, not to mention a weak state 
like Estonia; 
  2) The state cannot vouch for the preservation of assets, 
not 
to mention for increasing them; 
  3) The national treasury does not collect enough taxes from 
state enterprises. State enterprises are being subsidized 
from tax liabilities, putting private enterprises at a 
disadvantage; 
  4) Due to lack of supervision, economic crimes are being 
committed; 
  5) Due to lack of supervision, privatization through 
unauthorized acquisitions of property can be attempted with 
the help of the bankruptcy law and bond agreements; 
  6) There is a reluctance to invest in state enterprises and, 
if and when it happens, it is done at a considerable 
disadvantage to that state enterprise; 
  7) State enterprises are many, and that makes it impossible 
for the state and the ministries to deal with the tasks that 
shape the economy of the state (economic policy, tax policy, 
financial policy). Instead, a half-hearted effort is usually 
made to assume the role of the owner. It is difficult, however, 
to maintain both roles, that of being the owner and that of 
prescribing norms to regulate itself. 
<H5>  A Dental Drill Can Scare Off Anyone </H5>
  To the Estonian media, and through it also to the general 
public, privatization has so far been like a dental drill that 
will scare off anyone. Just the sight of a drill can make you 
forget the pain that brought you to the dentist's office. One 
also gets used to the pain. This is why it is important that 
someone assume the thankless task of explaining that toothache 
(lack of economic viability in a state enterprise) can only be 
cured by using the dental drill (privatization). 
  Inevitably, the privatization agency must assume a bigger 
role, here. Without the support of public opinion, however, 
privatization could be severely hampered. 
  Not enough writing is done on topics such as the unfounded 
economic deterioration of state-owned enterprises, the unabashed 
transfer of assets from state enterprises into corporations 
closely linked to its employees, managements' helpful hand in 
the bankruptcies of many state enterprises, unprofitable and/or 
illegal sales or rentals of state enterprise assets, shutting 
off heat to housing units of state enterprises, closing of 
nursery schools, use of municipal assets, and tax liabilities of 
state enterprises. 
<H5>  How To Speed Up Privatization? </H5>
  To speed up the rate of privatization, we are planning to: 
  * continue having international bidding competitions; 
  * start privatization proceedings with a public sale of the 
corporation's shares for money or for privatization securities; 
  * decentralize preparations for privatization (involving 
ministries, district governments, and private companies). To 
widen the scope of decentralization, prior permission should be 
obtained from the government of the republic to make payments 
for privatization activity contingent on the outcome. 
Additional opportunities should be found, even through foreign 
aid programs; 
  * start preparations for the sale of more complex objects 
with the help of foreign experts, and make maximum use of 
opportunities presented by foreign aid programs; 
  * speed up preparations for the sales by extending 
cooperation with banks. 

