BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Kjell Dragnes: "Fighting Over the Last Hunting </F>
Grounds"] 
  [Text] Fishing is the last major human economic activity 
that can be said to be part of the culture of the hunter -- 
catching animals from stocks that have not been tamed. And in a 
way this is what is the ideological foundation for the 
Icelanders' fishing in the loophole [disputed area in Barents 
Sea] and in the fisheries protection zone around Spitsbergen. 
  When hunters had made sufficient use of stocks in an area 
they moved to other areas. This is precisely what Icelandic 
trawlers do today; they have overfished off Iceland and are now 
looking for other hunting grounds. But today there are almost 
no free hunting grounds. A system of international laws and 
rules aims at protecting and maintaining natural resources. 
This is a system of laws and rules that Iceland has at times 
pushed for. 
  The cod wars in the seventies happened because Iceland 
extended its jurisdiction over the seas, first to 50 nautical 
miles, and then to 200 nautical miles. Later these principles 
became enshrined in the Law of the Sea Treaty, which was signed 
on 10 December 1982. Iceland is in fact the only developed 
country that has ratified the treaty, and the Icelanders have 
also been very active in the work of the United Nations to solve 
the problem of the exploitation of wandering fish stocks. 
Iceland's view: Littoral states should have greater control 
over these stocks, even when they are to be found outside their 
economic zones. 
  Norwegian-Arctic cod is one of these wandering fish stocks. 
Spawning takes place close to the coast (Lofoten), and the fish 
grow up off Spitsbergen, on fishing banks inside economic zones, 
and outside them -- in the so-called loophole. The Icelanders 
are not only felling trees in someone else's forest by fishing 
here; they are also felling all small trees and destroying 
growth. 
  Norway introduced its 200-mile zone on 1 January 1977. Here 
Norwegian jurisdiction applies, with the exception of the gray 
zone. The gray zone was something new, created in negotiations 
in the summer of 1977, in order to solve the problem of fish 
stock management. The demarcation line between the Norwegian 
and Russian 200-mile zones has not yet been drawn. The gray 
zone is an interim arrangement. 
  The fisheries protection zone around Spitsbergen is a 
halfway 
house and a legal nut that has still not been cracked. It was 
introduced on 15 June 1977, but only Finland has recognized 
Norway's right to enforce the zone. Norway's view is clear: 
Spitsbergen has no continental shelf of its own; it is an 
extension of the Norwegian continental shelf. We have therefore 
a full right both to have an economic zone and to regulate the 
fish in the sea and the resources under the seabed. The 
fisheries protection zone is simply an interim solution to 
regulate fish stocks in an important nursery area. 
  The problem lies in the Spitsbergen Treaty -- signed on 9 
February 1920 and now acceded to by 40 countries. The treaty 
gives Norway sovereignty, but it also states that "the ships and 
subjects of all the contracting parties will have similar rights 
to fishing and hunting in the areas mentioned in article 1 and 
in their territorial waters." 
  Norway takes the view that "territorial waters" means a 
4-mile limit, in line with the way that the territorial waters 
of other countries are calculated. Other countries take the 
view that the treaty must apply in sea areas and on the 
continental shelf contained within certain limits: between the 
74th and 84th parallels and between 10 and 35 degrees east. If 
you draw these lines on the map you get the so-called 
Spitsbergen box. 
  The problem remains unsolved. But up to now all the 
countries which traditionally have fishing rights off 
Spitsbergen -- something Iceland does not have -- have remained 
silent and accepted that the fisheries protection zone is 
enforced -- as they put it in law: de facto, but not de jure. 
  European Union [EU] fishermen report their catches to 
Norway, 
the Russians refuse to sign catch protocols, but accept 
inspection and regulation. This has not happened without blows. 
Spain in particular was extremely aggressive in 1986. 
  But regardless of whether the Spitsbergen Treaty or the Law 
of the Sea Treaty is taken as the point of departure, it is 
Norway that administers the treaty. So when the Icelanders 
claim that the Coast Guard is behaving illegally, they are on 
very shaky ground. For the fishing waters off Spitsbergen are 
not open seas. 

