BFN 

<F P=106> [By Geoffrey Crothall in Beijing and Willy Wo-lap Lam] </F>
  [Text] Prime Minister Li Peng will leave for an official 
visit to Austria and Germany at the end of June, his first visit 
to Europe in more than two years. The Chinese media is expected 
to provide high profile coverage of the trip, which has yet to 
be officially announced, it being Mr Li's first visit to Germany 
as premier. Mr Li is expected to arrive in Germany on July 3 
for a six-day visit at the invitation of Chancellor Dr Helmut 
Kohl, who made an official visit to Beijing Shanghai and 
Guangzhou last November. 
  Diplomats in Beijing said the visit was part of a renewed 
emphasis by Beijing on building diplomatic, economic and trade 
ties with the European Union, which is seen as a more reliable 
and pragmatic trading partner than the United States. 
  Mr Li's trip follows that of the soon-to-be-completed visit 
of politburo standing committee member, Li Ruihuan to 
Scandinavia and the Benelux countries. Diplomats said that, 
while European governments had voiced "quiet concern" over 
China's human rights record, they had emphasised that 
differences over human rights and other political issues should 
not affect the development of economic and trade ties. "There 
now appears to be a consensus amongst the Europeans that human 
rights should not get in the way of business, and that is an 
attitude the Chinese obviously appreciate," an Asian diplomat 
said yesterday. 
  The German Government in particular has adopted a very low 
profile on human rights, and Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel again 
hinted this week that such sensitive issues would not be on the 
agenda during Mr Li's visit. Continued right-wing violence 
against immigrants in Germany made it very difficult for Germany 
to pressure other countries on human rights, Mr Kinkel said this 
week. 
  However Mr Li, who is still widely known in Europe as the 
"Butcher of Beijing" is unlikely to escape the human rights 
issue altogether. During his last visit to Europe in February 
1992 Mr Li was greeted by demonstrators on virtually every leg 
of his tour and was forced to cancel a meeting with the Mayor of 
Barcelona, Pascual Maragall, because his security could not be 
guaranteed by the Spanish authorities. 
  Analysts said Mr Li could use the trip to bolster his image 
at home as an international statesman. They said the premier's 
political fortune had recovered somewhat since last year when he 
suffered a major heart attack. 
  Sources close to the State Council said while Mr Li's 
economic portfolios had theoretically been ceded to Vice-Premier 
Zhu Rongji in late 1992 and 1993, he had recently spoken with 
authority on financial and related matters. They said economic 
policy had shifted to recentralisation, a speciality of the 
premier's. 

