BFN 

<F P=106> [Jiangsu Provincial People's Government Work Report </F>
delivered by Governor Chen Huanyou at the Second Session of the 
Eighth Jiangsu Provincial People's Congress on 24 February] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies: 
  I am going to present the Jiangsu Provincial People's 
Government work report on its behalf. Please examine it. I 
would also like to ask members of the provincial committee of 
the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC] 
and other observers to express their views on this report. 
<H5>  1. </H5>
  The year 1993 was one in which people in Jiangsu proceeded 
victoriously along the path of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics. People in Jiangsu earnestly followed the 
instructions Comrade Deng Xiaoping made in his important talks 
in southern China as well as the guidelines laid down in the 
14th National CPC Congress; seized the opportunity; deepened 
reform; opened up wider to the outside world; intensified and 
improved macroeocnomic regulations and control; and persisted in 
promoting material civilization and socialist ethics at the same 
time. The economy grew rapidly, new headway was made in all 
areas, and the province enjoyed political and social stability. 
On the whole, the situation was very satisfactory. 
  (1) As result of seizing the opportunity, the economy 
enjoyed sustained and rapid development. We persisted in 
emancipating our minds, seeking truth from facts, and developing 
the economy rapidly and successfully. To deal with problems 
caused by high economic growth, we followed through with the 
state policy of strengthening and improving macroeconomic 
regulation and control, put financial and taxation affairs in 
order, intensified tax collection and price management, and 
adjusted the economic structure. This brought about positive 
changes in economic operations. The province's gross national 
product [GNP] in 1993 increased 18.5 percent, reaching 255 
billion yuan. The goal of quadrupling [di er ge fan fan 4574 
0059 0020 5064 3972] the GNP was achieved seven years ahead of 
schedule. The per capita GNP of 3,675 yuan was more than 1,000 
yuan higher than the national average, and the province's 
overall economic strength leaped to a higher level. The economy 
developed in all rural sectors. Stronger leadership over 
agriculture and rural affairs, and efforts to stabilize all 
policies and control or reduce farmers' burdens safeguarded and 
mobilized farmers' enthusiasm. Despite all kinds of natural 
disasters, Jiangsu had fairly good agricultural harvests. The 
additional value yielded reached 42.18 billion yuan, an increase 
of 4.2 percent. The total output of grain and oil-bearing crops 
reached 32.797 million and 1.257 million tonnes respectively, 
approaching the output of 1992, which was a year of bumper 
harvests. Because of natural disasters as well as smaller 
acreage, cotton output declined by nearly 20 percent. All kinds 
of economic undertakings developed. The output of eggs, aquatic 
products, silk cocoons, and fruits increased quite 
substantially. New headway was made in afforestation. Because 
of expansion, upgrading, and quality control, village and town 
enterprises achieved higher economic returns and played an 
important role in Jiangsu's economic development. Rural areas' 
secondary and tertiary industries accounted for 84.6 percent of 
their total output value. That was 3.8 percentage points higher 
than that of 1992. New successes were achieved in building key 
water conservation projects and developing agricultural 
resources. The annual plans for controlling the Tai Hu and Huai 
He were accomplished, and the Tongyu He project proceeded 
rapidly. Industrial production maintained its relatively fast 
growth. Doing everything possible to overcome difficulties 
caused by capital shortage and strained energy supply and 
transportation facilities, we guided enterprises to organize 
production according to market needs, speed up restructuring, 
and achieve higher returns. The output of major industrial 
goods -- such as steel, rolled steel, cement, petroleum 
products, automobiles, chemical fibers, ethylene, and plastics 
-- continue to grow. Plans for developing 100 major new 
products and upgrading 100 types of key technology were 
fulfilled or overfulfilled. The value of industrial output 
increased 13.654 billion yuan, or 23.1 percent; and the 
production and marketing rate reached 95.3 percent, or 1.6 
percentage points higher than before. The per-unit consumption 
of major energy and raw materials declined, and the 
comprehensive index of industrial economic returns rose from 
89.3 in 1992 to 99.3. The development of building industry 
continued to accelerate, and the additional value increased 23.6 
percent. Significant progress was achieved in building key 
infrastructures and basic industries. Attention was paid to 
improving the investment pattern and ensuring the needs of 
priority projects so that there will be greater capacity for 
sustained economic development in the future. Public investment 
in fixed assets increased 51 percent, reaching 107.49 billion 
yuan. State units' investment in technological upgrading 
increased 50.8 percent, or 16.4 percentage points higher than 
the investment in capital construction projects; and investment 
in communications, transportation, postal and telecommunications 
services increased 59.3 percent, or 33.7 percentage points 
higher than industrial investment. The construction of the 
Shanghai-Ningbo Expressway and the first-grade 
Ninngbo-Lienyungang and Ningbo-Tonghua Highways as well as the 
dredging of the canal in southern Jiangsu were in full swing; 
the early-stage construction of the New Nanjing Airport, the 
Jiangyin Changjiang Highway Bridge, the Xinchang railroad, and 
other major projects intensified. The reconstruction of the 
Yancheng- Nantong section of the No. 204 national highway and 
the first- and second-stage projects of rebuilding the highway 
network in southern Jiangsu were completed according to 
schedule. This has expedited local construction of 
communications facilities. Some generators in the Changshu 
Power Plant and the Huaneng Huaiyin Power Plant started to 
operate, increasing Jiangsu's generating capacity by 17 million 
kilowatts. With our fast postal and telecommunications 
development, Jiangsu has become China's second province with 
switchboards having total capacity for handling over 2 million 
telephones in urban and rural areas. All county seats can now 
be accessed by telephones, and portable phones are used 
everywhere in the province. Tertiary industry developed more 
rapidly. By setting up business and service concerns through 
multiple channels using multi-layered efforts, we expanded such 
new and developing trades as information, consultation, 
accounting, auditing, and law firms, thus increasing the added 
value of output from tertiary industry [di san chan ye zeng jia 
zhi 4574 0005 3934 2814 1073 0502 0237] by 20.3 percent to 62.3 
billion yuan. Urban and rural markets flourished and 
stabilized. We fully enhanced the roles of market mechanisms, 
vigorously promoted commodity circulation, and ensured abundant 
market supply. Total volume of retail sales in 1993 increased 
33.9 percent to 107.42 billion yuan. Banking and financial 
situations improved relatively. We vigorously encouraged 
savings, promptly increased loans, and optimized the credit 
structure. Various kinds of savings deposited in banking 
institutions in the province increased 36.9 billion yuan, with 
savings deposited by urban and rural residents increasing 19.7 
billion yuan; loans of various types increased 28.9 billion 
yuan. Money supply was controlled as planned. We strengthened 
tax collection and administration, vigorously managed financial 
revenues, and collected 22.13 billion yuan, or 45.3 percent 
more, financial revenues for that year. 
  (2) We continued to deepen all reforms, starting with 
the reform of the enterprise management and ownership 
system. We actively and steadily experimented with the 
standardized shareholding system in state-owned enterprises, 
forming a total of 600 limited liability companies and 104 
limited liability stock companies in the province, six of which 
floated their stocks on the Shanghai and Shenzhen markets. In 
some small state-owned enterprises, we conducted various types 
of reforms which involved such efforts as transforming, 
transferring, leasing, contracting, and selling. Collective 
enterprises and village and town enterprises in cities and towns 
actively explored ways to innovate their systems, and nearly 
10,000 village and town enterprises implemented the shareholding 
cooperative system. Individually owned and privately owned 
economic sectors developed rather rapidly. New features emerged 
in the establishment of enterprise groups: Enterprise groups in 
the form of chain stores appeared in the distribution sector; 
large-scale and highly efficient industrial groups equipped with 
high technologies emerged in the industrial sector; and a number 
of large enterprise groups started to venture into the world, 
seeking new ways to achieve transnational development. We 
achieved obvious results in the construction of the market 
system: Markets for consumer goods and means of production 
continued to expand; markets conducting transactions in such 
major elements as technologies, labor forces, financial matters, 
foreign exchange, stocks, property rights, and real estate 
developed rather rapidly; and intermediary organizations started 
to develop in various types of markets. We strengthened 
auditing and business administrative work. We made greater 
strides in price reform; lifted control over the purchasing and 
selling prices of grain and edible oil; increased prices for 
cotton procurement; lifted control over and adjusted prices of 
such basic products as coal, electricity, and oil; and allowed 
market mechanisms to play an increasingly important role in our 
economic life. We carried out comprehensive housing reform, and 
entered a phase in which we implemented social security system 
reform on a larger scope. 
  (3) We further expanded opening up to the outside 
world, and the export-oriented economy maintained vigorous 
growth. We fully displayed our superiority in economics, 
science and technology, and labor quality; further explored new 
horizons for growth; and actively pushed forward our 
export-oriented economy from south to north. We built 
provincial-level development zones at the same time as we were 
accelerating the construction of various types of state-level 
development zones. We launched extensive activities to attract 
businesses and investments, and scored great success in 
utilizing foreign investments. Province-wide, we approved the 
establishment of 10,032 new units of the three types of 
enterprises which are partly or wholly foreign-owned, and 
directly used $3 billion in foreign investments, or 1.1 times 
more than previous figures. We also used relatively more Taiwan 
investments. The scope of foreign investment has been broadened 
with a higher level of commitment and greater involvement in 
major projects. Foreign investment in the fields of energy, 
communications, basic industries, tertiary industry, and new and 
high technologies have increased markedly. The use of foreign 
funds has brought about a faster pace for transforming 
state-owned large and medium-sized enterprises. The 
restructuring of foreign trade continued to be deepened, 
resulting in an even better performance by the province's four 
major exchange earners -- provincial foreign trade companies, 
county and city foreign trade companies, three-types of wholly 
or partly foreign-owned enterprises, and production enterprises 
with operating rights in the import and export business. Total 
import and export value for the year reached $8.7 billion, an 
increase of 39.2 percent, of which the $5.96 billion export 
value marked a 27.6 percent rise. Foreign contracts and labor 
cooperation services developed rapidly, with newly approved 
non-trading enterprises in foreign lands reaching 210 in number. 
Departments handling foreign, Overseas Chinese, and Taiwan 
affairs as well as customs and commodities inspection have an 
active role to play in the process of opening up to the outside 
world and economic development. International tourism enjoyed a 
favorable development trend last year with nearly 800,000 
foreign tourists bringing in $129 million in foreign exchange. 
  (4) We actively implemented the strategy of "developing 
Jiangsu through application of science and technology"; 
scientific, technological, and educational undertakings made new 
progress. Efforts were made to deepen the reform of the 
scientific and technological structure by implementing various 
policies and measures; to push a host of scientific research 
institutes majoring in promoting technological development to 
industrialize themselves by joining enterprise groups, where 
they could participate in or form their own technical 
development centers for a particular trade; to set up various 
non-government science and technology enterprises; and to 
explore formats in developing state-owned enterprises by private 
management. Shifting of scientific and technological 
achievements toward the production field has been accelerated 
with the technological trade transaction volume exceeding 1 
billion yuan. Intensification of basic studies and major 
scientific and technological research has resulted in the 
development of a string of leading -- both in and outside China 
-- scientific and technological achievements. While speeding up 
the construction of key provincial laboratories and scientific 
and technological development experimental centers, we have 
achieved marked results in comprehensive agricultural experiment 
and exhibition bases, and sample scientific and technological 
construction in towns and villages. The industrialization 
process of high and new technologies has been quickened, while 
headway was made in constructing state-level high and new 
technological industry development zones. Total revenues 
derived from technological industry transactions amounted to 
4.76 billion yuan. Plans for the setting up of 10 "spark 
technology-intensive zones" have been approved, while a string 
of projects under both the "Torch Plan" and the "Spark Plan" at 
provincial level and above have been implemented. Educational 
undertakings were actively promoted with larger enrollment in 
ordinary institutions of higher learning, and that of assigned 
trainees and paying students accounting for 42 percent of total 
student enrollments throughout the province. The maintaining 
rate [gong gu lu 7255 0942 3764] for students attending primary 
and junior middle schools has increased steadily, while 56.8 
percent of the population eligible for nine-year compulsory 
education went to school -- a 20 percent increase over the 
previous year. Progress was also made in preschool education 
and special education for the mentally retarded and handicapped 
children. Education at the senior middle level has been 
accelerated with emphasis being laid on the development of 
vocational and technical education. Some 565,000 young and 
middle-aged illiterates throughout the province benefited from 
the illiteracy elimination program. Adult education and 
on-the-job training developed relatively fast, while urban and 
rural comprehensive educational experiments conducted in some 
cities and counties showed progress. A host of privately run 
schools have been established. Efforts were made to improve the 
running of major colleges and the teaching of key subjects in a 
bid to further integrate education, the economy, and science and 
technology to enhance their functions of serving economic 
construction. 
  (5) As result of efforts to improve urban and rural 
residents' living conditions, the masses' living standards were 
raised. Investments in commercial housing construction 
amounted to 9.91 billion yuan, up 230 percent from 1992. 
Residential buildings covering a total of 13 million square 
meters [sq m] of floor space were constructed in urban areas, 
thereby basically solving housing problems for homeless people 
and improving the living conditions of 16 percent of the 
population whose per capita living space was less than 4 sq m. 
New houses totaling 46 million sq m were built in rural areas. 
In cities, gas was available to 58.2 percent, and tap water to 
95.4 percent of households; and expansion and construction of 
roads were sped up. The condition of drinking water in rural 
areas was improved markedly, with tap water available to an 
additional 2.3 million people. The incidence of contagious 
diseases dropped; the results of setting up national- and 
provincial-level hygienic cities were consolidated and 
developed. The natural population growth rate was 7.36 per 
1,000, and was controlled within the targeted limit. Efforts 
for comprehensive improvement of the environment were stepped 
up, with new progress made in eliminating waste gas, waste 
water, and industrial residue. As a result of efforts to 
provide more employment, 206,000 unemployed people in urban 
areas found jobs. On the basis of developing production, 
efforts were made to increase urban and rural residents' 
incomes. Urban residents' per capita income that was used for 
living expenses was 2,525 yuan; and the average per capita net 
income of farmers was 1,267 yuan. After allowing for price 
rises, these figures represented a 10.2 percent and 3 percent 
increase respectively, over the previous year. Civil and 
welfare facilities were improved; and work to help the aged and 
disabled was improved. Active efforts were made to assist poor 
areas to develop their economies, and a total of 300,000 people 
cast off poverty last year. 
  (6) As result of intensifying the construction of 
spiritual civilization, democracy, and the legal system, the 
political situation characterized by stability and unity was 
further consolidated. We launched an extensive drive to 
study the theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics. Following the publication of Volume 3 of the 
"Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping," a mass study campaign was 
launched throughout the province, sparking enthusiasm among 
cadres and people to expedite reform, opening up, and 
modernization. In light of new circumstances and features under 
the conditions of a socialist market economy, we reinforced 
ideological education on patriotism, collectivism, and 
socialism. Adhering to the principle of emphasizing 
construction, we accelerated the implementation of Jiangsu's 
"Outline of the Program for Building Socialist Spiritual 
Civilization During the Eighth Five-Year Plan." We vigorously 
promoted outstanding national cultures, paid keen attention to 
the production of intellectual products, and obtained new 
results in literature, drama, music, dance, arts, radio, and TV 
as well as in journalism and social studies. Many creative 
works won national grand prizes. We intensified publicity aimed 
at foreign countries to make Jiangsu better known overseas. 
Mass campaigns to build spiritual civilization were launched 
successively and a number of provincial-level civility units 
were designated and commended. Cultural undertakings further 
developed, and construction of cultural facilities was 
quickened. Radio and TV broadcasts were brought to a wider 
audience, with TV broadcasting covering 93.3 percent of the 
population. We strengthened supervision over cultural markets 
and set up a preliminary management network characterized by 
unified leadership, division of labor, and coordination of 
various departments concerned. We achieved results in wiping 
out pornography and cracking down on illicit publications. Mass 
sports activities flourished, and the level of athletic sports 
was enhanced. Last year, athletes from Jiangsu scored good 
performances at the Seventh National Games, won nine world 
championships at major international competition, and broke 
three world and six Asian records. 
  To correspond with the demands of the socialist market 
economic system, we further strengthened democratic and legal 
system construction. Governments at all levels consciously 
subjected themselves to the supervision of people's congresses 
and their standing committees at the same level, as well as 
exploited the political consultative and democratic supervision 
role of people's political consultative conferences, democratic 
parties, trade unions, and mass organizations. We handled a 
total of 787 various suggestions and motions submitted by 
deputies of people's congresses and people's political 
consultative conferences. The government earnestly did a good 
job in handling the people's complaints. It forged closer 
contacts with mass organizations such as trade unions, communist 
youth leagues, and women's federations. Nationality and 
religious work was strengthened. The legislation of local 
administrative laws, particularly economic laws, was quickened. 
We popularized laws through education. We earnestly carried 
out CPC Central Committee and State Council plans as well as the 
guidelines of the Second Plenary Session of the Central 
Commission for Discipline Inspection on the short-term 
anti-corruption struggle; and we achieved temporary results in 
the relevant work. We applied a practical approach to 
strengthen the task of building a clean government and made 
notable progress in guiding cadres to practice honesty and 
discipline. We dealt with a group of major and important cases, 
and handed down severe punishments on a group of corrupt 
elements. We took special steps to rectify several unhealthy 
styles, which were especially scorned by the people. We 
initiated measures to stop government offices from engaging in 
business and enterprises, abolished a group of wanton fee 
collections, and rectified the practice of spending public funds 
for local and overseas travel. We fully upheld the tasks for 
comprehensive control of social order and severely punished 
serious criminal activities and economic crimes in accordance 
with the law to eliminate the hideous social phenomenon. The 
people's armed police force as well as public security, state 
security, and judicial administrative departments continued to 
consolidate their development. We actively supported the 
construction and reform of Jiangsu-based People's Liberation 
Army troops. Our militia and reserve duty soldiers made new 
progress. We actively conducted "double support" activities, 
which enhanced army-government and army-people unity. 
  Last year, at a time when we experienced arresting 
contradictions and greater difficulties in economic life, it was 
not easy for Jiangsu to achieve these results in economic and 
social development. We realized that we must seize opportunities 
whether the economic environment is good or bad. The crux lies 
in making the best use of situations, developing strong points 
while avoiding weak points, and seeking development in 
restructuring. To quicken economic development, it is necessary 
to consciously uphold deepened reform and widened opening up; 
realistically resolve profound contradictions in economic 
operations; accelerate the pace of the transition to a socialist 
market economy, and continue to emancipate and develop social 
productive forces. We should always rely on the vast number of 
cadres and people, actively develop and advance, and strive to 
explore development avenues suited to local conditions. We will 
then be able to step forward more solidly and forcefully. 
  Fellow deputies, in the past year, under the guidance of the 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics and 
the party's basic line; the direct leadership of the Jiangsu CPC 
Provincial Committee; and through the unity and struggle of the 
entire province, various tasks determined by the First Session 
of the Eighth Jiangsu Provincial People's Congress for 1993 were 
basically accomplished. On behalf of the provincial people's 
government, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to 
workers; peasants; intellectuals; cadres; Jiangsu-based People's 
Liberation Army troops; officers and men of armed police force; 
and public security cadres and police officers in the entire 
province; democratic parties, industry and commerce 
associations, and nonparty patriots; mass organizations, 
including trade unions, communist youth leagues, and women's 
federations; as well as Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao compatriots 
and overseas Chinese who have enthusiastically supported 
Jiangsu's modernization. 
  While affirming the achievements, we must soberly realize 
shortcomings and defects in the government's work and 
difficulties and contradictions on the road of advancement. 
Agriculture as the foundation of the economy is still relatively 
weak; and maintaining stable grain and cotton production remains 
a formidable task. The investment structure in fixed assets is 
not rational; energy, transport, and other "bottleneck" 
constraints stand out very prominently; and problems related to 
low-level and redundant processing industries have yet to be 
solved. Price rises are high; and vegetable and nonstaple food 
prices, in particular, have increased drastically. Poor 
management of enterprises and problems of safety in production 
and transportation have resulted in a number of major accidents. 
Science and technology, education, culture, and other social 
undertakings are incompatible with the development of the 
provincial economy. We are slow in changing government 
functions; and our thinking and work style still cannot meet 
requirements for the establishment of a socialist market 
economy. A handful of government functionaries are corrupt, and 
formalism and bureaucratism have undermined the government's 
ties with the masses. We must pay keen attention to and 
earnestly solve these problems. 
<H5>  2. </H5>
  This year will be crucial for maintaining a sustained, 
rapid, 
and healthy development of the economy, as well as promoting 
reform. In line with the spirit of the Third Plenary Session of 
the 14th CPC Central Committee, the Seventh Plenary (Enlarged) 
Session of the Eighth Provincial Party Committee has put forth 
two targets to be accomplished by Jiangsu before the year 2000. 
The first is the target of reform, that is, to establish the 
basic framework of a socialist market economic structure in 
about five years; and the second is the target of development, 
that is, on basis of prefulfilling in 1993 the objective of 
quadrupling the gross annual value of industrial and 
agricultural production, to realize the objective of sextupling 
the gross annual value of industrial and agricultural 
production, to substantially improve Jiangsu's overall economic 
performance and comprehensive strength, and to bring economic 
prosperity to the people throughout the province ahead of 
schedule before the end of this century. Centering around these 
two targets, the overall requirement of the work of the 
government this year is: Under the guidance of Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the party's basic line, to comprehensively 
implement the guidelines of the 14th CPC National Congress and 
Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee in 
further emancipating minds, persistently seeking truth from 
facts, and firmly seizing the opportunity; to strengthen the 
intensity of reform in accelerating the process of 
internationalizing Jiangsu's economy; to speed up structural 
readjustment and scientific and technological progress for 
improving economic performance and efficiency, and maintaining 
sustained, rapid, and healthy economic development; and to 
intensify the construction of socialist spiritual civilization, 
democracy, and the legal system for safeguarding political and 
social stability, promoting the all-around progress of society, 
and opening up a new situation in reform, opening up, and 
modernization construction. 
  The major targets of Jiangsu's economic and social 
development for this year are: The gross provincial product is 
to increase by 12 percent, including 4 percent in primary 
industries, 14 percent in secondary industries, and 18 percent 
in tertiary industries; financial revenue, by 7 percent; 
investments in local fixed assets, by 25 percent; imports and 
exports, by 9 percent, including at least 17 percent in exports; 
retail sales, by 20 percent; the general index of retail prices, 
by less than 12 percent; the average wage of workers and staff, 
by about 16 percent; the average net income of farmers, by at 
least 14 percent; the natural population growth rate, by less 
than 9.83 per 1,000; and urban unemployment rate, by less than 
2.5 percent. 
  Many favorable factors can help us realize the various 
targets for this year. Judging from the domestic and 
international situation, we are facing a rare historic 
opportunity. We must seize, cherish, and make good use of this 
opportunity. As Jiangsu made a relatively early start in 
introducing market-oriented reform and practicing 
multi-directional opening, the provincial economy has developed 
in a sustained and rapid manner, social undertakings have 
expanded continually, and comprehensive economic strength has 
been built up substantially; thereby laying the sound foundation 
for expediting reform, opening up, and modernization 
construction. We must firmly grasp the central task of economic 
construction, and unite and rely on people throughout the 
province in jointly working to further improve work in all 
fields of endeavor. 
  Recently, the CPC Central Committee emphatically pointed 
out: 
The overall interests of the whole party and country's work are 
seizing the opportunity, deepening reform, opening up 
wider, promoting development, and maintaining stability. 
Work in all fields must serve and be subordinate to these 
overall interests. To this end, it is necessary to pay close 
attention to the following aspects: 
  -- Placing deepening reform in a conspicuous 
position. Grasping the opportunities for self-development 
and pushing the economy to a new level after several years are 
the fundamental and pressing tasks we face. Meanwhile, it 
should be noted that an accelerated development must rely on 
deepening the reform. If we fail to grasp the current favorable 
opportunities brought about by reform and effectively resolve 
the inbedded problems in the economic structure and straighten 
out economic relations, we will be unable to maintain a 
sustained, rapid, and healthy economic development. It is 
therefore necessary to energetically push forward various 
reforms and strive to make breakthroughs in certain key issues. 
As many reform measures have been promulgated this year, the 
implementation of which involve greater difficulties, it is 
essential to enhance the concept of taking the situation as a 
whole and have them conscientiously implemented through 
meticulous arrangements and in a well-coordinated way, making 
sure that experiences are summed up in time to achieve concrete 
results. 
  -- Attaching importance to enhancing both quality and 
efficiency in economic growth. We should foster the 
concept of "development is the final word" for a speedier 
development whenever and wherever possible. As long as we 
stress efficiency and quality, we have nothing to worry about in 
developing an export-oriented economy. Of course, attention 
should be paid to avoid a lopsided pursuit of production values 
and a blind race for speed. We should establish a new mechanism 
for economic growth required by a socialist market economy, 
attach greater importance to bringing out the role of science 
and technology as the prime productive force, vigorously promote 
scientific and technological progress, and effectively 
strengthen operation management. We should attach importance to 
coordinated development among primary, secondary, and tertiary 
industry and within each industry itself -- particularly the 
appropriate solution of such problems as "bottleneck" 
constraints in basic industry and the comparatively lower 
proportion of tertiary industry -- to optimize the industrial 
structure. We should be more active in widening the scope of 
economic activities, strengthen the social division of labor, 
speed up the adjustment of stocks in social assets, and enhance 
an intensive management level and overall economic quality. We 
should apply guiding ideology in actual work and genuinely put 
economic construction on track with raising economic efficiency 
as its focus. 
  -- Opening wider to the outside world. In facing 
a new situation brought about by accelerated reform and 
development, we must further enhance the sense of urgency that 
calls for opening wider to the outside world with even greater 
coverage and at a higher level. While vigorously developing an 
export-oriented economy, we should make full use of 
international markets, funds, technologies, and resources to 
further enlarge total Jiangsu's economic strength; improve 
technological composition; enhance efficiency of resources 
disposal; and seek harmonious links with the international 
economy in a faster and better way to quicken the process of 
establishing a new socialist market economic system. 
  -- We must resolutely safeguard political and social 
stability. Stability is indispensable for reform and 
development. Reform, opening up, and economic development cannot 
possibly proceed without social stability. Thus, while we must 
seize the opportunity for development, we must fully realize the 
problems ahead and work cautiously but with daring so that we 
can discover problems and solve them properly as soon as they 
are discovered. As reform proceeds, interests in various 
sectors certainly must be readjusted. This calls for meticulous 
ideological and political work. We must properly educate and 
enlighten the masses, pay attention to protecting their vital 
interests, and be concerned with improving their livelihood so 
that they will understand and support reform and so that reform 
will truly become their common understanding and conscious 
action. In handling economic affairs, we must consider both the 
immediate and long-range needs. While we must do our best, we 
must also assess our strength and do what we can. Overexerting 
ourselves is not proper. In short, we must take concrete 
measures to create a stable political environment and an 
economic environment that can facilitate reform, opening up, and 
modernization. 
  -- We must always uphold the principle of promoting 
material civilization and socialist ethics at the same 
time. The deepening of reform, the broadening of opening 
up, and especially the establishment of the socialist market 
economic system, will certainly trigger profound changes in 
people's way of thinking, their concept of values, and their 
lifestyles. In line with these changes, we must intensify our 
efforts in promoting socialist ethics and make sure that our 
economic construction will proceed coordinated with the 
development of our socialist cause. Focusing on economic 
construction, we must draw up overall plans for promoting 
socialist ethics, building a democratic legal system, managing 
public security comprehensively, and intensifying ideological 
and ethical education so that we can foster our national spirit, 
promote good public conduct, and expedite the development of the 
socialist cause with Chinese characteristics in all sectors. 
<H5>  3. </H5>
  To achieve the targets set for Jiangsu's economic and social 
development this year, we must focus our attention on 
accomplishing the following projects. 
  (1) We must continue to deepen reform by promoting it 
in all sectors and making breakthroughs in key sectors. 
Focusing on expediting the establishment of a socialist market 
economic system, we must give priority to establishing a modern 
enterprise system and reforming macroeconomic management as well 
as carry out other project supporting reform. 
  State enterprises must continue to replace their 
operating mechanisms and explore effective ways to establish a 
modern enterprise system. Relacing the operating 
mechanisms of large and medium state enterprises, which are 
pillars of the national economy, are essential for deepening 
their restructuring. We must continue to implement the 
"Enterprise Law" and the "Regulations Governing the Change of 
Operating Mechanisms of State-Owned Industrial Enterprises" so 
that enterprises can truly enjoy their privileges and fulfill 
their responsibilities. Enterprises must continue to improve 
their internal mechanisms and revitalize their operations 
through reforming their labor, personnel, and distribution 
systems. Certain large and medium enterprises should experiment 
with modern operating systems so as to explore ways to become 
modern enterprises and accumulate experiences in this regard. 
At least 20 percent of large and medium state enterprises 
should operate as corporate companies. The existing 400 or so 
enterprise groups should gradually reorganize themselves into 
businesses with stock held primarily by corporations. 
Enterprises in competitive trades operating in line with the 
state's industrial policy should be encouraged to reorganize 
themselves to become limited-liability companies funded by state 
and other corporations. Some large state-owned enterprises 
whose operations are relevant to the national economy and the 
people's livelihood should be designated to reorganize 
themselves to become limited-liability companies funded 
exclusively by the state. A small number of limited-liability 
companies should be designated to experiment with selling stocks 
in foreign currencies. Small enterprises should use various 
means to readjust their asset inventories. Efforts must be made 
to strengthen the management of state assets to make sure that 
the values of state assets can appreciate or be maintained, and 
that state assets will not be lost. Collective enterprises 
should continue to promote the joint-stock cooperative system. 
While promoting the development of public-owned businesses, we 
should encourage the establishment of independent and private 
businesses. We should treat all forms of enterprises equally and 
create for them conditions for competing on an equal footing. 
  In line with the need to reform the macroeconomic 
system, we must earnestly reform the fiscal, taxation, banking, 
and investment systems. All reform measures should be 
carried out in accordance with the state plan. The provincial 
plan of separating the provincial and municipal tax systems 
should be improved. A more equitable and binding fiscal system 
should be established. Local treasuries should make efforts to 
balance local revenues and expenditures and avoid deficits. 
Earnest efforts must be made to implement the new tax system, 
reform the tax system, and dovetail the new and old tax systems. 
Every effort must be made to explore additional tax resources, 
manage taxation affairs according to law, strengthen tax 
collection and management, and prevent losses of tax revenue. 
We should assist relevant central departments to strengthen the 
central bank's supervision over the implementation of monetary 
policies and all types of financial institutions. Specialized 
state banks should take positive and steady steps to replace 
their operating mechanisms with those of state-owned commercial 
banks. Systematic steps should be taken to establish rural 
cooperative banks and municipal cooperative banks and to 
encourage foreign-funded banks and national commercial banks to 
set up branches in Jiangsu. We should actively promote 
standardized credit services between different regions and 
broaden credit avenues. We should develop and improve the 
securities markets and strive to have our request approved for 
setting up a provincial securities trade center. We should 
deepen reform of the insurance system, and speed up the 
development of insurance businesses. We must properly 
restructure the foreign exchange system and intensify the 
construction of the foreign exchange market. We will introduce 
mechanisms governing market competition so that enterprises can 
play stronger roles as main investors. We should, through 
promoting joint investment and selling stocks, guide capital to 
flow into industries and trades that badly need development. 
  We should continue to speed up building a market system 
and continue to promote price reform. We should give 
priority to establishing the markets for goods and services 
essential for production, such as money, technical expertise, 
property rights, labor, real estate, and information. We should 
continue to standardize and develop the money market, improve 
the comprehensive and supporting services in the marketing of 
technical expertise, encourage proficient personnel and workers 
to flow rationally, and develop market agent services. We 
should continue to establish and develop a large number of 
large, regional wholesale markets of agricultural and sideline 
products, industrial consumer goods, and capital goods; and 
these markets must have a fairly large capacity and be able to 
provide comprehensive services. We must intensify market 
management and supervision and crack down on the manufacturing 
and selling of counterfeit and inferior goods so as to protect 
fair competition. We must actively and steadily carry out price 
reform, continue to merge the different prices of capital goods, 
and continue to improve the mechanisms for price formation. We 
must speed up replacing the operating mechanisms of state-owned 
distributors so they can give scope to their leading roles in 
ensuring supply and holding down prices. We must earnestly 
implement the system under which localities can have special 
reserves of important commodities, and properly collect and use 
the funds for regulating market prices and hedging against risks 
caused by price fluctuations for important materials. We must 
intensify price supervision and inspection and make efforts to 
stabilize the market's commodity prices. 
  We will gradually estalish a rational system governing 
income distribution and social security, and promote 
comprehensive supporting reforms. We must continue to make 
sure that enterprises have autonomy over their internal 
distribution so that their workers' wages can be truly 
commensurated with economic returns, and so that enterprises 
will establish or improve their mechanisms for restraining 
internal distribution. Institutions should have different wage 
systems and different forms of distribution. Self- supporting 
institutions may implement the same wage system as that of 
enterprises. On the basis of reforming their wage systems, 
administrative state organs should gradually establish their 
systems governing normal promotions and wage increases. We 
should gradually establish a consolidated organ to take charge 
of social security, and we should separate administration from 
the operation of insurance funds and tighten the management of 
all types of funds. Enterprises should improve their old-age 
pension systems and insurance against unemployment, carry out 
pilot projects on workers' medical services, and strenghten the 
functions of social services. We should establish a farmers' 
old-age pension system under which farmers' family support will 
be supplemented by community assistance. We must consolidate, 
develop, and improve rural areas' cooperative medical services, 
and carry out in selected rural areas experimental cooperative 
medical insurance projects. In light of state regulations, we 
must speed up housing reform, which places emphasis on selling 
publically owned housing and which sells, rents, and builds 
housing simultaneously. 
  (2) Vigorously develop an export-oriented economy and 
accelerate the process of economic internationalization. 
While reforming the management systems for foreign trade and 
foreign exchange, we should seize the opportunity to expand our 
foreign trade in order to promote the development of an open 
economy. 
  Continue to increase our ability to earn more foreign 
exchange through exports. We should quickly change the 
operating mechanisms of foreign trade enterprises, accelerate 
the integration of trade and industry, trade and technology, and 
trade and agriculture and encourage large foreign trade 
enterprises to move toward industrialization and 
internationalization and to form enterprise groups. We should 
allow enterprises to export more of their products themselves 
and authorize more production enterprises, scientific research 
units, and commercial and materials enterprises the necessary 
conditions to deal with their foreign customers. We should 
continue to implement the market diversification strategy, with 
product quality as a top concern; we should consolidate and 
develop our traditional markets, vigorously open new ones, and 
increase our share in the international market. We should 
accelerate the building of an overseas economic and trade 
network, strengthen the association of our enterprises abroad, 
more extensively carry out international economic and trade 
activities, and raise our economic returns abroad. We should 
accelerate the readjustment of our export mix and support and 
encourage the export of machinery, electrical products, 
technology-extensive products, and complete sets of equipment. 
Through scientific and technological progress, policy guidance, 
and improved management, we should strengthen the system for 
guaranteeing the quality of exports and after-sale service and 
increase our ability to compete in the international market. We 
should make great efforts to develop international tourism and 
increase our nonrade foreign exchange earnings. 
  Further improve the scale and level of using foreign 
funds. We plan to actually and directly use $3.9 billion 
of foreign funds this year, a 30 percent increase over last 
year. We should make vigorous efforts to solicit foreign 
businessmen to invest in the province and to expand fields for 
investment. We should increase the total amount of investment 
by foreign businessmen and attract more consortia and 
multinational companies to invest in the province to expand the 
scale of projects and raise their level. We should encourage 
the foreign partner of a joint venture to increase his 
proportion of investment; we should encourage foreign 
businessmen to run wholly foreign-funded enterprises. We should 
particularly guide foreign businessmen in investing on a large 
scale in transportation, communications, energy, raw and 
semifinished materials, agricultural development, infrastructure 
facilities, and basic and tertiary industries. We should 
develop more technology-extensive and new- and high-technology 
projects and accelerate the technical transformation of large 
and medium-sized enterprises by using foreign funds. We should 
conscientiously sum up experiences, further improve the 
investment environment, and strengthen marcoeconomic guidance 
for and the coordination and management of enterprises with 
foreign investment. We should conscientiously make overall 
planning for various projects and the evaluation of assets. We 
should make sure that foreign-funded enterprises have enough 
investment, go into operation on schedule, have the ability to 
earn foreign exchange, and yield good economic results. We 
should make better use of loans from foreign governments and 
international financial institutions. 
  Actively expand economic and technological cooperation 
abroad. We should expand our economic cooperation with 
foreign countries. Our contracting of projects and provision of 
labor services abroad, now with the focus on construction and 
transportation, should develop into various fields, and we 
should raise the level of such economic cooperation. While 
increasing the export of manual labor services, we should also 
pay attention to the export of technological services. We 
should expand such economic cooperation by striving to contract 
larger projects for construction. 
  Build various development zones according to high 
standards. We should persistently implement the principle 
of giving top priority to using foreign funds, earning foreign 
exchange through export, and developing new and high technology. 
We should introduce appropriate-scale, up-to-standard, and 
high-efficient projects and strive to operate such projects 
according to their distinctive features. We should establish a 
new, flexible, and high-efficiency management system and 
operating mechanisms and form a comprehensive, coordinated 
good-quality service network. We should start the construction 
of the Suzhou Industrial Park. The Zhangjiagang Bonded Zone is 
operated as a closed area [feng guan yun xing 1409 7070 6663 
5887]. 
  (3) Strengthen the foundational position of 
agriculture, develop the rural economy in an all-around 
way. We should fully implement the "policies and measures 
for developing agriculture and the rural economy at the current 
stage" of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, 
deepen reform in rural areas, actively adjust the economic 
structure, stress increasing the income of peasants, and promote 
a sustained and all-around development of the rural economy. 
  Actively establish a new operational system for the 
rural areas. We should continue to consolidate and improve 
the responsibility system, the main form of which is the 
household contract with remuneration linked to output, and the 
system of unified management combined with independent 
management. Those contacts should be extended for 30 more years 
without change when they mature. The period of contract may be 
longer for agriculture of a development nature. In places with 
good conditions, we should speed up the development of 
large-scale operations in an appropriate manner. We should 
continue to promote reform of the marketing system for 
large-volume agricultural products and promote direct contact 
between producers and marketing departments. We should 
encourage and support cooperative economic organizations in the 
rural areas and peasants' entering the distribution field. We 
should promote the prosperity of rural markets and continue to 
promote the establishment of rural cooperative funds. We should 
strengthen the socialized service system in rural areas; 
establish various kinds of combined enterprises, including crop 
cultivation, animal husbandry, processing and marketing; and 
promote the integration of agriculture, industry, and trade. We 
should further strengthen collective economic organizations at 
township and village levels and give full play to the role of 
services provided by economic and technological departments 
related to agriculture. We should consolidate the contingents 
of service workers, expand the scope of services, and raise the 
quality of services. 
  Continue to readjust the mix of agricultural 
production. Agricultural production should be geared to 
the need of the market. We should vigorously develop the kinds 
of farming that provide high yields of fine quality with maximum 
efficiency and can earn foreign exchange. We should continue to 
stabilize the production of grain, cotton, and oil-bearing 
crops; guarantee their planting acreage; and find ways and means 
to seize an all-around bumper harvest in agricultural production 
for the whole year. We should vigorously develop diversified 
farming operations and gradually realize specialized production 
in various production bases and regions. We should give full 
play to the advantage of specialized and large-scale production. 
We should develop export-oriented agriculture and encourage 
agricultural production enterprises with good conditions to 
export their products in a direct manner. 
  Persist in using science and education to prosper 
agriculture. We should strengthen the research of 
agricultural science and technology and the training of 
technical personnel, and promote the application of findings of 
agricultural science and technology. We should develop 
vocational training in the rural areas, do a good job in 
technological training at the grass-roots level, popularize 
knowledge of science and technology, and constantly raise the 
quality of peasants. 
  Further improve conditions for agricultural 
production. We should increase the proportion of local 
capital construction funds, budgetary funds, and credit funds 
for agriculture. We should also prevent the loss and shift of 
special funds for agriculture to other purposes. We should 
encourage collectives and peasants to increase their cash and 
labor investment in agriculture, and continue to implement the 
policy of using industry to supplement and develop agriculture. 
We should speed up the construction of large and medium-sized 
irrigation works and their supplementary facilities. We should 
do a good job in harnessing main rivers and building water 
conservancy works to strengthen the ability to resist natural 
disasters. We should accelerate the comprehensive development 
and utilization of agricultural resources. We should improve 
land administration and effectively protect farmland. We should 
seriously implement the responsibility system for concerned 
departments of the province and various cities and trades, and 
make sure that the supply of industrial products for 
agriculture, especially chemical fertilizers and other 
agricultural means of production, can be provided for peasants 
in a timely manner with good quality, adequate quantity, and 
reasonable prices. We should strictly control and reduce 
peasants' burdens, effectively protect the peasants interests, 
and find ways and means to increase peasants' income. 
  Vigorously develop and improve village and town 
enterprises. We should stress promoting the joint stock 
system and speed up the reform of the ownership system of 
village and town enterprises. We should gradually standardize 
administration and prevent the loss of collective assets. In 
line with state industrial policy and the demand of domestic and 
foreign markets, we should step up the readjustment of 
industries and industrial production. We should accelerate 
technological transformation, strenthen the development of new 
products, and expand the market. We should vigorously develop 
economic associations of various forms and promote cooperation 
in specialized fields. We should improve organizational, 
operational, and financial management to further improve the 
quality, scale, and efficiency of enterprises. We should 
integrate the work of developing village and town enterprises 
with the development of public works and environmental 
protection. We should guide village and town enterprises to 
concentrate in an appropriate manner so as to develop their 
combined advantages and lead to the construction of small cities 
and rural economic development. 
  (4) Intensify structural adjustment to enhance overall 
economic quality. We should closely rely on scientific and 
technological progress to quicken the pace of structural 
adjustment that may in turn help Jiangsu secure new edges in 
acute economic competition. 
  Enhance scientific and technological involvement in the 
industrial economy and for better efficiency. We will 
apply new technologies and techniques to accelerate the pace of 
transformation in traditional industries and vigorously develop 
new products. A host of technical transformation projects 
designed to improve key products will be appropriately 
implemented and unfinished jobs will be followed up to ensure 
successful development and production of important products. We 
will upgrade technological equipment to enhance our capability 
in developing science and technology. We will go all out to 
implement the "symbolic projects" to speed up industrialization 
of high and new technologies; to develop a string of 
high-technology, high value-added, and high exchange-earning key 
products; and to nurture a number of backbone enterprises with a 
strong high-technology background and new industries producing 
high-grade merchandise. While accelerating the adjustment of 
enterprises' organizational structure, we will, based on 
products and assets links, incorporate a host of large 
enterprise groups with improved professionalism and 
intensiveness. We will actively open up new markets, 
particularly rural and international markets and urge 
enterprises to improve their management, do more home work, 
enhance quality, produce more and spend less, and increase 
revenues and cut down expenditures. Enterprises running at a 
loss should make serious efforts to reverse the situation, while 
those already in the black should try harder to increase 
profits. We will strengthen labor protection and 
conscientiously improve workplace safety. 
  We will give full play to the superiority of the 
construction 
industry and be determined to enhance its management level and 
overall quality, diversify its operations, open up domestic and 
overseas construction markets, and raise its economic efficiency. 
  Concentrate strength to improve infrastructure and 
basic industries. We will maintain a reasonable size of 
investment, optimize the investment mix, and make sure that the 
limited financial and material resources will first be diverted 
to the construction of key projects. We will fulfill the annual 
projects of harnessing the Huaihe River and the Taifu Lake, 
complete construction of the main channel leading to the Yuhe 
River, strive to commission a 1.225-million kwt electric power 
generating unit and related transmission installations, and 
accelerate construction of the Jiangsu stretch of the 
Shanghai-Nanjing Expressway and the first-class highways linking 
Nanjing with Lianyungang and Nantong respectively, and the 
improvement of canals in Southern Jiangsu. Works will soon begin 
in constructing the new Nanjing airport and the highway bridge 
across the Chang Jiang at Jiangyin. Some 1.25 telephone 
switchboards will be added to improve better telephone services 
in both urban and rural areas, while communications networks 
will be further expanded with improved technology. Effective 
efforts will be made to ensure the availability of such 
important raw and processed materials as iron and steel, cement, 
acrylic fiber, and polyester. We will speed up revision and 
examination of overall urban and rural planning; strengthen city 
management; improve public utilities, including roads, water and 
gas supplies, fire services, and environmental protection. We 
will actively explore new sources and ways to raise funds from 
the community in support of certain key projects and exercise 
stricter project control to ensure engineering quality, shorter 
building time, and better investment returns. 
  Speed up development of tertiary industry. 
Efforts will be made to increase the proportion of tertiary 
industry in the gross national product through meticulous 
planning, rational distribution, and enhancement of overall 
efficiency. While upholding the principle of the state, 
collective, and individual playing their respective roles, we 
will encourage collective economic organizations in both urban 
and rural areas, privately run enterprises, and individuals to 
go ahead with the development of tertiary industry. We will 
optimize the internal structure of tertiary industry by 
developing pillar trades and professions closely related to 
production and livelihood of the people and characterized by 
little investment, quick return, high efficiency, and more job 
opportunities. While vigorously developing new trades and 
professions involving scientific and technological advancement, 
we will pay attention to the development of the 
intelligence-type of tertiary industry, including information, 
consulting, accountancy, auditing, and legal services. We will 
actively develop tourism and the entertainment industry; 
regulate the real estate market; adjust the mix in real estate 
investment; and speed up the construction of ordinary urban and 
rural housing, particularly that with little profit margin built 
for families with extreme financial difficulties. 
  (5) Bring into play local advantages to promote common 
development of the provincial economy. It is necessary to 
earnestly implement the outline program for economic development 
in seven cities in the Chang Jiang valley and four cities in 
northern Jiangsu, and to rationalize the economic structure so 
as to improve overall economic performance and competitiveness. 
  Proceeding from the actual condition of each locality 
in blazing a path of development with local 
characteristics. Localities in the Chang Jiang valley 
should fully utilize their geographical advantage and existing 
foundations in stepping up efforts to converge local economic 
development with Pudong's opening and development. They should 
further optimize the distribution of productive forces; go all 
out to explore ways for developing an export-oriented economy; 
expedite the establishment of a sound market economic 
operational system; and strive to be forerunners in reform, 
opening up, and modernization construction; thereby making 
positive contributions to the provincial economic and social 
development. Localities in northern Jiangsu should mobilize the 
masses and cadres and work hard and self-reliantly to create the 
conditions for accelerating development. In exploring ways for 
developing an economy suitable for local conditions, they should 
pay particular attention to promoting diversified management and 
actively develop village and township industries. It is 
necessary to exploit local resources in developing intensively 
processed products and increasing the added value of products. 
It is also necessary to adopt more flexible policy measures to 
vigorously develop the publicly owned economic sector and to 
encourage individual and private economic sectors in urban and 
rural areas to invest in areas compatible with their operations. 
We must allow some areas and individuals to become rich first 
through hard and honest work and legitimate operation in order 
to accelerate the pace toward prosperity. 
  Adopting practical measures to support northern Jiangsu 
to speed up economic development. In view of northern 
Jiangsu's relatively weak economic foundation, the provincial 
government shall assist the region's development mainly through 
the following four measures: (1) We should expedite 
infrastructure construction. To further improve the investment 
environment, efforts shall be stepped up to construct main 
highways, including the Nanjing-Lianyungang and Nanjing-Nantong 
primary grade highways, the Nanjing-Yancheng highway, and the 
section of the national highway Route 204 in the north of 
Yancheng; to map out plans and complete the first-phase 
preparation for the Xuzhou-Lianyungang main national highway and 
the northern Jiangsu section of the Tongjiang-Sanya national 
highway; to start the construction of the Xinyi-Changzhou 
Railway; to map out plans and complete the first-phase 
preparation for coastal ports; and to speed up construction of 
the Yangzhou-Yancheng and Xinyi- Lianyungang optical trunks, and 
the construction of power stations and a number of basic 
industrial projects. (2) We should open the region wider to the 
outside world. We should bring into play the region's 
geographical advantage to continuously advance the strategy of 
opening up and developing the coastal region and the region 
along the eastern Longhai Railroad and should step up efforts to 
introduce investment from abroad and to establish lateral ties 
at home. In a bid to make the "showcase" of an open economy a 
great success, we should improve management of the existing 
national-level and newly established provincial-level 
development zones. Efforts should be made to utilize rich local 
resources and explore new ways for attracting foreign investors; 
and to integrate foreign trade with industry and agriculture, 
and energetically develop export-oriented agriculture. (3) We 
should quicken the restructuring of agriculture. Efforts should 
be made to earnestly implement the state's policies for 
strengthening the construction of commercial grain and cotton 
production bases and stabilizing grain and cotton production; 
and to energetically promote diversified management and 
invigorate the rural economy. (4) We should strive to do a 
better job in assisting the poor and coordinate the southern and 
the northern regions in aiding the poor. We should earnestly 
implement various aid-to-the-poor measures, strive to build up 
the stamina of economically underdeveloped areas for 
self-development, and help them shake off poverty and become 
well off as quickly as possible. We should further adopt 
economic measures to encourage state enterprises, urban and 
rural collective enterprises, private enterprises, research 
units, and individuals from the south to set up associations and 
conduct cooperation in various areas, at different levels, and 
in diverse forms. We should encourage the south to speed up the 
transfer of labor-intensive industries to the north in line with 
the policy of readjusting industrial structure. We should 
encourage the south and the north to cooperate in the exchange 
of talented people and labor services, to complement each other 
with one's strong points, and to promote common economic 
development of the south and the north. 
  (6) Further develop science and technology, education, 
and cultural undertakings to promote the all-around progress of 
society. The development of science and technology, 
education, and cultural undertakings is a major component of the 
modernization drive as well as an important guarantee for the 
smooth progress of reform, opening up, and economic 
construction. We must attach great importance to reform and 
development in these areas while concentrating resources on 
promoting economic construction. 
  Promoting the integration of science and technology 
with the economy. In line with the principle of "holding 
fast to one end and leaving the whole field open," we should 
give priority to stabilizing a compact contingent of scientific 
and technical personnel engaged in basic research, high-tech 
research, key research projects, and public welfare projects. 
We should give free reign to the research, development, and 
business activities of organizations engaged in developing 
technology or providing scientific and technical services; 
actively develop scientific and technological enterprises run by 
nongovernmental organizations; energetically promote technology 
markets; and more quickly transform new scientific findings and 
technological achievements into actual productive forces. We 
should increase input into science and technology through 
various channels to formulate step-by-step a well-structured, 
rationally distributed, and highly efficient system of research 
and development; and to promote the development of exploratory 
research in new and high technology and their related 
industries. We should coordinate the deployment of scientific 
research resources for the purpose of solving knotty 
technological problems which have an important bearing on the 
national economy. We should encourage and facilitate scientific 
research institutes and institutions of higher learning to 
cooperate with enterprises in conducting large-scale, 
high-quality research. To do good work in importing and 
assimilating advanced technology and in technical upgrading, we 
should establish a new framework under which the developmental 
efforts of research institutes are dovetailed to the 
introduction of imported technology. We should accelerate the 
construction of high-tech industrial development zones, and 
bring into play their leading role in readjusting the structure. 
We should strive to popularize advanced and applicable 
technologies, and step up the research and development of soft 
science. We should develop intermediary organizations for 
transferring technologies, attach importance to constructing 
bases for intermediate and industrial experiments, and form 
regional and professional organizations for technical renovation 
and a network for the diffusion of technology. 
  Making it a strategic task to give priority to 
education. We should further implement the "Outline 
Program for the Reform and Development of Education in China, 
ensure essential and stable input in education, and improve 
teaching quality and educational efficacy. We should accelerate 
the restructuring of the educational system and encourage joint 
management of schools in various forms to give rise to a new 
system in which the government plays the central role in running 
schools, and all walks of life pool their efforts to expand 
education. We should enhance the sense of urgency in enforcing 
compulsory education and continue to fight illiteracy. We 
should energetically develop vocational and adult education and 
other forms of social education and improve the structure of 
schools to better meet market needs. We should expand the 
decisionmaking powers of colleges and universities in running 
their own affairs, step up reform in the enrollment and 
employment system for graduates, adjust the establishment of 
specialities, and improve curricula and teaching materials and 
methods. Under the state's unified planning, we should 
concentrate resources to successfully run a number of key 
universities, subjects, and specialties. We should earnestly 
enforce the "Law on Teachers," improve the quality of teachers, 
safeguard teachers' lawful rights and interests, and foster a 
healthy atmosphere of respecting teachers and valuing education. 
  We should further create the environment and conditions for 
talents to emerge and play their full role. Training should be 
combined with the rational use of intellectual resources so as 
to bring into full play Jiangsu's superiority of talented 
people. We should coordinate the reform of the labor and wage 
systems with the system of promoting cadres, and should take 
steps to encourage fair competition and promote the rational 
flow of talents by opening jobs to public application. We 
should continue to improve the working and living conditions of 
intellectuals. In line with the principle of "supporting 
students studying overseas, encouraging them to return, and 
letting them decide for themselves whether to come or go," we 
should in various ways encourage talented people studying or 
residing in foreign countries to return and serve Jiangsu's 
reform, opening up, and modernization construction. 
  Further prosper cultural work. We should firmly 
adhere to the orientation of serving the people and serving 
socialism, implement the policy of "let a hundred flowers 
blossom and a hundred schools of thought contend," and follow 
the main guidelines while advocating diversification. We should 
seriously produce high quality spiritual products welcomed by 
the broad masses with emphasis on the "five firsts project [wu 
ge yi gong cheng 0063 0020 0001 1562 4453]." We should further 
develop the role of the theoretical, news, publication and 
cultural fields in uniting, encouraging, and educating the 
people, and have those fields serve the reform and opening up 
and the building of the two civilizations. We should seriously 
build spiritual civilization as outlined in the "Eighth 
Five-Year Plan," continue to improve and implement economic 
policy for cultural work, and increase investment through 
various channels to promote the development of cultural work. 
We should properly concentrate funds for doing some solid work 
to promote spiritual civilization. Based on the principle of 
giving priority to protecting and rescuing cultural relics, we 
should further improve the work of cultural museums. We should 
pay attention to the construction of libraries, cultural halls, 
scientific and technological pavilions and archives. We should 
strengthen cultural work at the grass-roots level, improve 
administration of the cultural market, and persist in 
"eradicating pornography" and cracking down on illegal 
publication activities. 
  Strive to develop public health and sports work. 
We should continue to unfold patriotic health campaigns in 
urban and rural areas and actively develop healthy cities. We 
should strengthen public health work, especially public health 
work and prevention of diseases in the rural areas. We should 
vigorously unfold various kinds of mass sports activities to 
strengthen people's bodies. We should conscientiously do a good 
job in holding the 13th Provincial Sports Meet and step up 
preparations for the Third National City Games. We should 
strengthen work to protect women and children, and attach 
importance to solving problems for the aged. We should show 
concern for and support the work for the handicapped, and strive 
to improve work and living conditions for disabled people. 
  Seriously grasp the work of family planning and 
environmental protection. We should strenthen the 
administration of family planning for the migrant population, 
improve management at the village level, consolidate the results 
of those units which have made improvements in family planning, 
and ensure that the birth control rate will exceed 90 percent. 
We should enhance people's consciousness of environmental 
protection, further strengthen the administration of 
environmental protection according to the law, achieve a 
comprehensive improvement of the environment in urban and rural 
areas, strictly control the development of new sources of 
pollution, and actively solve the problem of old sources of 
pollution. We should step up the pace of afforestation in 
plains areas, raise the level of greening in cities, and improve 
the ecological environment. 
  Fellow deputies! In the entire course of reform, opening up, 
and the modernization drive, we must pay strict attention to the 
construction of socialist spiritual civilization. We should arm 
the people with scientific theory, guide the people with correct 
public opinion, cultivate the people with a noble spirit, and 
encourage the people with outstanding literary and art works. 
We should organize the broad masses of cadres and people to 
study Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics in a deep-going manner. We should 
continue to conduct education on patriotism, collectivism, and 
socialism; education on arduous struggle and building the 
country through thrift and hard work; education on vocational 
ethics and social morality; and education on the basic national 
situation. We should strenthen national defense education, 
enhance all people's consciousness of national defense, and show 
concern for and support the construction and reform of the 
People's Liberation Army units stationed in Jiangsu. We should 
continue to do a good job in building civilized units, villages, 
and towns; turning more families into families with new customs 
and civilized families; "making three outstanding achievements 
[chuang san you 0482 0005 0327];" building double-support cities 
(counties); "building civilized units jointly by the armymen and 
people;" "supporting the Army and giving preferential treatment 
to military dependents" and other effective mass activities to 
promote the building of spiritual civilization. We should pay 
attention to actual results and raise the quality of our work. 
<H5>  4. </H5>
  The new situation of reform, opening up, and the 
modernization drive has exerted higher requirements on 
government work. We should strive to raise our ideological 
standards, earnestly change government functions, 
conscientiously improve workstyle, strengthen administrative and 
coordinating capabilities, perform realistic work, seek 
pragmatic results, and continually strive to improve new working 
conditions. 
  Expeditiously change government functions and properly 
handle organizational reform. It is necessary to 
expeditiously transform government functions so that the 
government will engage in implementing policies on macroeconomic 
regulation and control, in properly planning and constructing 
infrastructural projects, and in strengthening social 
administration. By applying a combination of economic, legal, 
and mandatory administrative means and indirectly regulating 
economic operations, the government should be compatible with, 
guarantee, serve, and enhance the development of a socialist 
market economy. In accordance with the principle of changing 
functions, improving relations, streamlining administration with 
fewwer personnel, and raising efficiency, we should accelerate 
reform in government organizations. We should emphatically 
strengthen macroeconomic regulation and control and supervision 
of departments, upgrade the departmernts in charge of social 
administration, and gradually reduce the number of special 
organizations in charge of economic operations. We should 
accelerate reform in provincial government organizations and 
properly perform preparatory tasks before conducting reform in 
government organizations at city and county levels. We should 
establish, and later improve, a responsibility system for 
government organs and personnel at various levels so as to 
improve the personnel contingent and raise its quality. 
  Actively promote democratic progress and enhance 
scientific and democratic processes in decisionmaking. 
Governments at various levels should conscientiously accept the 
supervision of the people's congress and its standing committee 
at the corresponding level; should respect people's deputies' 
democratic rights; should earnestly listen to their ideas; 
should properly handle and implement people's deputies' 
proposals, suggestions, criticisms, and opinions; and should 
actively and properly coordinate with the people's deputies' 
experiment to appraise government departments' performance. We 
should uphold the system of multiparty cooperation and political 
consultation under the CPC's leadership. While making some 
major decisions and handling issues of common concern to the 
masses, we should, by holding democratic consultations and 
situation-report meetings, extensively listen to ideas of 
representatives from the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference [CPPCC], from various democratic parties, from the 
All- China Federation of Industry and Commerce, and from people 
without party affiliation so as to give full play to their roles 
in political consultation and democratic supervision. We should 
properly handle CPPCC committee members' proposals. 
Furthermore, we should establish, and improve later, a 
democratic administrative procedure, and should pay attention to 
studying decisionmaking processes and consultations. 
Additionally, we should earnestly implement policies so as to 
further improve our work on nationalities and religious affairs, 
and on issues concerning Taiwan and overseas Chinese. We should 
attach importance to mass organizations including trade unions, 
the Communist Youth League of China, and the All-China Women's 
Federation which serve as bridges and links between the 
government and the people. We should also improve democratic 
management; and should let staff's and workers' congresses, 
residents' committees, and villagers' committees earnestly play 
their roles so as to further vitalize democratic activities at 
the grass-roots units. 
  Enhance legal system work in a down-to-earth manner; 
exercise administrative functions according to law and raise 
work efficiency. It is necessary to do an even better job 
in mapping out plans for government legal system work in line 
with the requirements for building a socialist market system. 
According to the five-year legislative plan worked out by the 
provincial people's congress, steps should be quickened to 
formulate local laws and regulations which complement state laws 
and regulations and which help standardize market practices, 
maintain market order, enhance macroeconomic regulation and 
control, perfect the social security system, and promot opening 
up. A sound system for enforcement of administrative laws and 
regulations, for supervision and checking of law enforcement, 
and for reviewing administrative measures should be established, 
and the level of enforcing administrative laws and regulations 
should be raised. Phenomena such as disregarding the law, 
failure to strictly enforce the law, to investigate cases of 
breaking the law, and cases such as abusing power and breaking 
the law for departmental and regional interests in economic 
activities and in other activities should resolutely be 
rectified. Education in the legal system should be carried out 
in an in-depth manner so that people will gain an enhanced sense 
of the law. Steps should be taken to strenghthen the work of 
helping to mediate disputes among the people. Efforts to 
enhance comprehensive management of social order are needed. 
Measures should be worked out to improve the leadership 
responsibility system over the management of social order. 
There is a need to do an even better job in crime prevention at 
the grass-roots level. Social forces must be pooled and 
mobilized to help combat crime. Efforts should be kept up to 
severely crack down on crime. Resolute and continued efforts 
should be exerted to check all kinds of social ills. Concrete 
steps should be taken to strengthen managing public places in 
urban areas as well as to enhance management of transients. The 
work of cracking down on smuggling should be pursued according 
to law. The police force must be strictly managed. Law 
enforcement personnel should strive to improve themselves and to 
raise their professional and administrative quality. At the 
same time, it is necessary to provide them with adequate funds 
for handling cases and to gradually improve their working 
conditions. 
  Control abrupt commodity price rises and show concern 
for the people's livelihood. Special attention should be 
paid to help solve problems which are of great concern to the 
masses. Management over commodity prices should be 
strengthened. There is a need to establish and improve a 
monitoring and control system over the prices of daily 
necessities which have a direct bearing on the citizens' daily 
lives. Attention should be given to vegetable and grain supply. 
All levels of governments are urged to continuously work out 
policies and measures to support the production and supply of 
nonstaple food, to run well hog-breeding and vegetable-growing 
bases, and to do a good job in nonstaple food production. While 
developing the economy, we need to do our best to help increase 
urban and rural citizens' incomes. We also need to pay 
teachers' salaries on time. The basic needs of life must be 
ensured for staff members and workers who have lost their jobs 
because their enterprises have gone bankrupt or because their 
enterprises have cut back on production. We need to provide 
effective relief for poor households in urban and rural areas 
and show concern for and help arrange retirees' post-retirement 
life. Importance should be attached to the work of handling 
well the people's mail and to the people visiting government 
departments to air grievances, to opening up channels that would 
help forge a closer tie between the government and the people, 
to grasp in a timely manner the masses' opinions and demands, 
and to listen to and accept rationalization suggestions from the 
masses. It is necessary to correctly handle contradictions 
among the people which emerge in the new situation, to strive to 
solve problems in the initial stage, and to rely on the masses 
to help maintain and develop a stable and united political 
situation. 
  Keep in mind the purpose of whole-heartedly serving the 
people; dutifully performing duties; and enhancing the building 
of a clean administration. This is a basic task for 
building up the regime as well as an important guarantee for 
realizing smooth progress in reform and development. We should 
conscientiously implement the CPC Central Committee's decision 
on combatting corruption and do a good job to help bring about 
honest performance of official duties by leading cadres, 
particularly those cadres working at or above county-level 
departments. We will resolutely investigate major and important 
corruption cases and will resolutely mete out punishment to 
corrupt officials. We will conduct special anticorruption 
campaigns, exert great efforts to rectify unhealthy tendencies 
in various trades and professions, and consolidate and expand 
the results which we have scored in earlier anticorruption 
campaigns. At the same time, we need to establish a system that 
will enhance the building of a clean administration, to 
gradually put in place an effective internal and external 
supervision and restraining mechanism that will help prevent 
abuse of power cases. We will try to be thrifty as always in 
running all undertakings and to oppose extravagance. Personnel 
at all government levels must work hard, be pragmatic, and raise 
professional levels and work efficiency. More efforts are 
needed to study the theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, particularly to make in- depth study of volume 
3 of the "Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping" and the "decision" 
adopted at the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee. We must study and understand the socialist market 
economy and acquire such new knowledge as modern science and 
technology. As the state's major policies are already in place, 
the key lies in implementing them. We should develop a 
realistic workstyle; overcome bureaucratism; guard against 
formalism; go deep among grass-roots units to conduct 
investigation; understand actual conditions; promote advanced 
experiences; discover problems; properly handle contradictions; 
and make sure that all undertakings will progress in a positive 
and steady manner. 
  Fellow deputies! We now face a glorious yet arduous task in 
the new year. Let us rely closely on the people in the 
province; work with one heart and one mind: rouse ourselves for 
vigorous efforts; display a pioneering spirit; work in a 
down-to-earth manner to score a new victory for Jiangsu's 
reform, opening up, and modernization construction under the 
guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics and the party's basic line and 
under the correct leadershiip of the CPC Central Committee with 
Comrade Jiang Zemin as the core. 

