Internal   Combustion Engines 

<F P=102> 94WS0318A Berlin INGENIEUR DIGEST in German, Apr 94 pp 20-21 </F>
<F P=103> 94WS0318A </F>
<F P=104>  Berlin INGENIEUR DIGEST </F>
<F P=105>  German, </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Guenther Ludwik: "Autonomous Hybrids" </F>
  [Text] The hybrid drive combines the cleanliness of 
an electric motor and the mobility of a combustion engine. 
However, series production is sill far away. 
  The principle is easily understood: The conventional 
combustion engine is engaged for driving under conditions where 
it operates optimally in terms of fuel consumption and 
environmental protection, and at the same time will charge the 
battery. The electric motor is engaged when the combustion 
engine would run at a low efficiency and thus harmfully to the 
environment. This is the case when only little driving power is 
required as, for instance, in city traffic or in a stop-and-go 
situation particularly often encountered in the inner city, 
where emission of pollutants and noise needs to be avoided. 
  This idea is not new, but there are still stumbling blocks 
along the way to its practical realization. The optimum 
configuration is being sought. In order to approach this goal, 
the German Research Association has established a new special 
research program, "Autonomous Hybrid Drive Set," at the 
Technical University in Munich. 
  "By a simulation process we want to develop a model and with 
that configuration then build a prototype," explains Prof Dr 
Bernd-Robert Hoehn. "Conventional drive components must be 
optimized for this special application. Stepless transmissions 
and regulators must be designed from scratch and tested. These 
components will, however, be usable not only in a future hybrid 
vehicle but also in conventional ones and in electric ones as 
well." 
  The concept of an autonomous hybrid is explained by the 
basic 
diagram on page 20 [shown below]: The axle is driven by either 
the combustion engine or the electric machine operating as a 
motor, through a common stepless mechanical transmission 
featuring a wide range of speed ratios. When operating as a 
motor the electric machine draws energy from the battery, in 
turn charging the battery when it operates as a generator during 
light-load or slow-traffic conditions while the combustion 
engine is engaged. Boosting the battery charge is possible but 
not required during normal operation. An appropriately designed 
transmission makes it feasible to engage the combustion engine 
throughout its most fuel-favorable operating range and outside 
this range to use a high-speed and thus light-weight electric 
machine delivering full power over a wide speed range. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-EST-014-15A>      Figure </FIG>


  Further advantages are: 
  1. Use of smaller combustion engines is made feasible by 
higher start-up transmission ratios. 
  2. Use of smaller and lighter batteries is made feasible by 
autonomous recharging. 
  3. There is no need for a lighting generator and a starter. 
  4. The fuel saving in the ECE cycle is about 40 percent and 
emission of pollutants can be drastically minimized. 
  5. Noise emission is reduced owing to lower engine speed and 
wide overdrive range. 
  Among electric motors for hybrid vehicles, permanent-magnet 
(PM) motors have recently been found to offer great promise. The 
advantage of using them in vehicles lies in lossless maintenance 
of the magnetic flux. A breakthrough in required 
high-performance magnetic materials came about with the 
appearance of rare-earth magnets, Sm-Co in the nineteen 
seventies and Nd-Fe-B in the nineteen eighties. 
  "The previously high costs pose no problem today. Thus 
Nd-Fe-B magnets for mass products are now purchased at a price 
also acceptable for vehicles," believes Prof Sture Eriksson of 
the ASEA Brown Boveri (ABB) Automation and Drives [ASEA--Swedish 
General Electric Co]. "Drives with PM motors cost about 15 
percent more than comparable ones with induction motors. For 
that, however, in test runs they indicate an about 
15-percent-longer travel range. 
  Both the ASEA Brown Boveri (ABB) AG and the Bayerische 
Motorenwerke (BMW) AG got together with the U.S. engine 
manufacturer Unique Mobility for further development of this 
technology. Prototype engines were already tested in BMW's 
experimental vehicles. The engine shown on page 21 [not 
reproduced] is coupled through a speed reducer to a 
transmissionaxle unit. The tests verify that drive systems with 
PM synchronous motors, while certainly not the only candidates 
for electric vehicles, are probably the high-performance "number 
one" for this application. 
  Since several years ago the research departments of the 
large 
automobile manufacturers have already been been looking for the 
ideal configuration. Electric motors were coupled to gasoline 
and Diesel engines, even to gas turbines (Volvo ECC-ID 3/93, 
S.38/39). All designs to date have one thing in common: they are 
by far not ready for mass production. Thus even the second 
generation of the BMW E1 will not likely be produced in its 
present form, if at all. Also the Mitsubishi people have crammed 
so many innovations into its first hybrid research vehicle ESR 
(Ecological Science Research) that their study of it just shows 
what would be technically feasible if only the production cost 
could be to a reasonable level. The ESR concept is based on the 
series hybrid system, which means an exclusively electric drive. 
The four-cylinder tandem gasoline engine with 1.5-liter-capacity 
has a turbogenerator. Fuel is supposed to spare also the 
mufflerless exhaust system, electronically controlled 
counternoise compensating the exhaust noise. Body structure 
along with exterior and interior designs are setting standards. 
  Closer to practical implementation is the Ford design. Its 
drive consists of a 1,2-1 2-stroke 3-cylinder engine (60 kW = 82 
hp), an electric induction motor (40 kW = 54 hp), and a Ni-Cd 
battery (40 kW, 7 kWh) weighing 200 kg. When mounted in an 
Escort Turnier, the system accelerates from standstill to 100 
km/h within 10.9 s and in the electric drive mode to 50 km/h 
within 6.8 s. Driving at speeds up to 65 km/h is emission-free, 
the combustion engine automatically cutting in for higher 
speeds. Both sets together provide a power of 100 kW. 
  The questions remain as to whether there is at all a demand 
for such cars and how much they would cost. The results of a 
survey commissioned by Opel and covering 3000 car drivers 
indicate that 95 percent would buy a hybrid vehicle and 45 
percent would pay 20,000 German marks for it. A top speed of 100 
km/h satisfies 55 percent and a 200-km-long travel distance 
without recharging is adequate for 48 percent of them. These are 
interesting data to be included in the specification sheets for 
engineers. 

