Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Andrzej Lepper, chairman of Samoobrona </F>
(Self-Defense) Farmers Trade Union, by Ewa Koszur and Andrzej 
Sondej; place and date not given] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] What is 
"Lepperism"? 
  [Lepper] Lepperism is certainly neither Stalinism nor 
Hitlerism, nor anything similar to these phenomena. It is a 
movement that arose from the grass roots, from people's sense of 
injustice suffered, a movement that places the human being 
first, as a subject in its own right rather than an object. 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] Do you, too, feel that injustice has been 
done to you? At a meeting with Nowogard farmers, you spoke of 
your debts, which exceed one billion zlotys [Z], and of your 
inability to pay them off because interest payments are accruing 
on them like an avalanche. 
  [Lepper] The reason I became politically active was not 
simply that I had fallen into the debt trap. I carried out an 
in-depth analysis of the situation ensuing from our involvement 
with the World Bank and the IMF. With the very high interest 
rates that have been given us in the form of a diktat, Poland 
has no chance whatsoever to develop in any way. I could have 
sorted out my own affairs a long time ago; I had several offers 
of help. However, I take a wider view of the situation. And I 
have a sense of duty. If I know the truth concerning certain 
World Bank operations and World Bank funds, I am obliged to pass 
it on and make it public. [passage omitted] 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] During the election campaign, everyone in 
Poland listened as you spoke of debts and social injustice, and 
then the promotional campaign advertisements broadcast by the TV 
election studios showed you in a brand new sports Mercedes. 
  [Lepper] I have a 10-year-old Fiat 125, which can be easily 
verified. My house is old and very small--just three tiny 
rooms. One of our colleagues from Warsaw drives a BMW, another 
gave me a lift in his Mercedes to the television interview. 
People in our group own a variety of good cars, but that does 
not automatically mean that Lepper has one, too. 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] You have a 50-hectare farm. Who runs it 
and works on it on a daily basis, inasmuch as you occupy your 
time with political activity and travel around the country a 
great deal? 
  [Lepper] I have an agreement with a group of younger farmers 
who can use my agricultural machinery and equipment and, in 
return, cultivate my land in addition to their own. But my 
yields are now much lower than in the past, when I sometimes 
collected as much as 60-90 hundredweights of wheat grain per 
hectare, working with quite poor--4th-, 5th-, and even 
6th-grade--soils. 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] You told farmers that you are in favor of 
progress but, at the same time, against banks with marble-lined 
halls and computers everywhere. In that case, what do you 
understand by progress? 
  [Lepper] We do need computers in banks, and perhaps we also 
need new banks, but there is one question that still needs 
answering: If those computers and those banks fail to give us 
credits for agricultural production and, as a result, our 
agricultural production begins to decrease, are the computers 
and the new banks really the most important investment at this 
stage of our development? I am in favor of progress. And, if 
we do not have appropriate new technologies ourselves, we 
certainly need to make use of world achievements in that area. 
However, we must not do that at the risk of destroying our own 
achievements in the process. For example, could we not 
concentrate, in state farms being set up in new premises, on 
promoting modern agricultural practices centering on the 
agricultural food-processing industry? Such enterprises would 
represent closed systems, where agricultural raw material would 
be produced, processed, and even sold. This would benefit the 
urban sector as well as the rural community because it would 
significantly shorten the path between producer and consumer. 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] You criticize everyone at your 
meetings: the president, the peasant prime minister, the State 
Treasury Agricultural Property Agency, the banks, the IMF.... 
  [Lepper] If we want to leave the path of our subjection to 
diktat and Poland's dependence on others' decisions, then we 
must be prepared to say "Halt!" in three instances--that is, to 
carry out the banking reform and to invest in production credits 
connected primarily with the construction and agricultural 
sectors. This would, at the same time, solve the unemployment 
problem for us. Of course, we must find the means to carry out 
all these operations. Without money we really will not achieve 
anything at all. This could be in the form of cash or either 
credit cards or checks. 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] But where would we find the funds to back 
these? 
  [Lepper] Data published by the Main Statistical Office 
provide reliable information on the state's assets. From this, 
we could take 10 percent and get going. Money can simply be 
printed. 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] But what about inflation? 
  [Lepper] And how is inflation created now? After all, when 
there is no production, the living standards will fall, too. 
Already there are 40 percent of householders who can no longer 
afford to pay the rent. If this goes on, we will eventually 
fall into such a trap that only 10 percent will be able to pay 
the rent. 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] As we listen to you we are reminded of 
Boleslaw Tejkowski's latest conference. The difference is that 
you do not place the whole blame squarely on the Jews, the 
Americans, and the Germans, but chiefly on the World Bank and 
the IMF. Would you agree if we were to tell you that your views 
are very similar to those proclaimed by the Polish National 
Community? 
  [Lepper] I know the Polish National Community's program, but 
my views are most certainly not convergent with its. The only 
shared trait could be that our groups have arisen out of 
national movements. Ours is also a national movement, but it is 
not chauvinistically so. 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] Like Zhirinovskiy's, or Le Pen's? 
  [Lepper] I recently read Le Pen's Hope, and I 
believe that there is much sense in what he says. I am not an 
anti-Semite, and I have nothing against ethnic minorities in 
Poland, but I keep repeating that Poland should be ruled by 
Poles. 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] We talk about values--what is right and 
what is wrong. But your Samoobrona is assessed in negative 
terms by the majority of the population. 
  [Lepper] That is your own opinion. I believe that our group 
is influencing wider and wider reaches of society. Our next 
congress, which will be held in May of this year, will show how 
many members we have attracted. We had a "blank" in the 
Szczecin region before, but now I find that even here there are 
people who support us. [passage omitted] 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] You are no longer the same Andrzej Lepper 
the peasants' leader that you were three years ago. Instead, 
you have become a politician. It seems that you are losing 
contact with farmers.... 
  [Lepper] When it was necessary for someone to stand at the 
head of the protesters at Lysomice, cut through the haggling and 
get rid of the head of the Regional Agency, I accepted the 
challenge and did all of those things. I have gained a lot of 
experience over the past three years, but I have not changed. I 
am still as radical as I was then. I expect that we will soon 
take over yet another dismantled state farm in your area, in 
Szczecin Voivodship, rather than allow it to go to ruin. 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] Are you planning to use the wheelbarrow 
[reference to trade unions' traditional ritual when deposing 
officials] again? 
  [Lepper] Why should we need a wheelbarrow? The employees of 
the Torun state farms complex have been striking under our 
banners, but there is still work there, and the enterprise 
manager is staying put. The only thing is that the new owner is 
not being allowed on the premises. We will do the same here if 
that is the work force's will. 
  [GLOS SZCZECINSKI] What will Lepper be like in five years' 
time? Will Samoobrona still be around? 
  [Lepper] This is a difficult question, but everything seems 
to indicate that our movement could at a certain moment dominate 
the political scene in Poland. I deeply hope and believe that 
we will in the end reach out to all of the farthest corners of 
Poland. People will come to understand that they must take 
responsibility for their own defense. 

