CSO 

<F P=106> [By Himeji Dokkyo University Professor Yuichiro Tamura] </F>
  [Text] The life insurance industry is said to march in 
lockstep. I have compared it to a flock of wild geese flying 
through the sky. Except for the bird at the head of the 
formation, each one sees only the goose flying right in front 
of it. It is an industry with only a vague sense of 
responsibility. With the financial meltdown resulting from 
exchange losses and the collapse of the bubble economy, there is 
growing dissatisfaction with the industry and its inability to 
establish a clear locus of responsibility. 
<H5>  Life Insurance Industry at Crossroads </H5>
  According to the most recent figures, it appears likely that 
sales of new life insurance policies for the fiscal year ending 
31 March 1994 will be down for a second consecutive year. Is the 
life insurance industry, which used to pride itself on high 
growth, entering a period of low growth? Is this merely a 
temporary phenomenon, the result of a recession and two years of 
insurance premium rate hikes? 
  Even after the period of high growth ended, Japanese 
continued to purchase new life insurance policies. As a 
percentage of national income, Japanese currently hold more than 
double the amount of individual life insurance held by Americans 
and Canadians. Against the risk of death, the Japanese are 
today the most secure people in the world. Why are the Japanese 
so overinsured? The personal bonds upon which people used to 
rely are breaking down, and the nation is no longer as caring. 
People want security and peace of mind. This has worked to the 
advantage of an industry whose motto is "One can never have too 
much security." 
  This general sense of unease among the people was incited by 
the oil shocks, and they rushed en masse to purchase 
comprehensive insurance, whose popularity was well timed. The 
onset of the gradual aging of society and concern about the 
future solvency of the national pension fund contributed to the 
growth in private pension policies. "Uneasiness" alone fueled 
the growth of the life insurance industry. Certainly, the 
present Heisei recession has done nothing to alleviate this 
sense of unease among the populace. It is slowly becoming clear 
that companies cannot provide a safety net for employees and 
that lifetime employment is nothing but an illusion. Yet despite 
these new uncertainties, sales of personal insurance policies 
have declined. This suggests that the market has become 
saturated. Already, insurance premiums have reached their upper 
limit as a percentage of household budgets. In addition, 
insurance companies raised their premiums again this April. 
Unless very attractive new insurance policies are developed, 
demand should fall yet again. Needless to say, the future does 
not look bright. Life insurance, and the life insurance industry 
itself, may in fact have reached a turning point. 
<H5>  Marching in Lockstep </H5>
  Phrases are often used to describe an entire era. After the 
speculative bubble burst and the nation lapsed into the Heisei 
recession, phrases such as "the absence of checks and balances," 
"laxity," "lockstep," and "self-reliance" began to appear 
regularly in newspapers and magazines. Naturally, these were not 
words of praise. Even if they were prone to exaggerate, these 
journalists tended to expose the past and present ills of the 
Japanese economic system and to call for a revolution or rebirth 
of a new Japan. However, because both the critics who pointed 
out these ills and the system to which they belong are, after 
all, "Japanese," their efforts have tended to be futile. 
  A few of these phrases aptly describe the insurance 
industry. Take for example "lockstep" [yokonarabi]. 
Nobody has satisfactorily defined this term, but a certain image 
comes to mind. I imagine a flock of geese flying though the 
northern sky in a perfect V-formation. The bird at the head of 
the formation can see the sky around it and the earth below, but 
the other birds can only see the bird that is flying right in 
front of it. The insurance industry is the same way, for the 
"pecking order" of the companies has hardly changed in the half 
century since the end of the war. Even in the ultraconservative 
world of higher education, the ranking of universities has 
changed more. If one of the companies were to break ranks and 
contend for the lead, there would be complete chaos. Witness the 
disorder in the construction industry over changes in the 
bidding process. 
  Competition is said to have been intense in the life 
insurance industry. A former government official described it as 
"neck and neck." While this may have been the impression in the 
industry, there was competition in neither price (premiums) nor 
product development during this period. In the end, the amounts 
invested in business personnel determined business results. 
Because the amounts invested in staff depended on the financial 
strength of the individual companies, the rankings never changed. 
  The same was true in product competition. During the period 
of high inflation, many hoped that anti-inflation "variable 
amount" insurance policies would be introduced. Despite the fact 
that such insurance had the blessing of the Finance Ministry and 
the Insurance Commission, the industry did nothing. Instead 
they invested in fixed-term retirement plans, unleashing 
"multiplier competition" as they began offering policies paying 
10, 20, and 30 times the full-term insurance premiums in the 
case of ordinary or accidental death. The insurance companies 
eventually introduced "variable amount" policies during the 
bubble era when they were feeling invincible. This introduction 
was mistimed, as the collapse of the bubble economy has 
demonstrated. I find it amazing how insurance companies 
convinced themselves that the good times would continue 
indefinitely, and how quick their customers were to believe them. 
  For a long time, I have wondered why these companies 
introduced virtually identical policies and never seemed to 
improve upon them. Did these policies result from individual 
decisions? On the surface, these companies all insisted that 
they were offering a complete set of policies to meet their 
customers' every need. However, none of them seemed willing to 
place a high priority on creativity in order to develop original 
policies. Instead of meeting their customers' every need, these 
uniform policies ensured that these companies could maintain 
their share of the pie in a growing market. Will these companies 
now become more active in product development? They may have 
exhausted all of their ideas, but that is another story. 
  At one time there was much talk of lump-sum retirement 
policies, but the industry has not demonstrated much interest in 
the idea. If they have forecast that the current period of low 
interest rates will continue, the industry may with some 
justification be unable to offer such policies at the present 
time. However during the period of high interest rates, these 
were the same companies that boasted about their high rates of 
return. If they do not want to sell policies during periods of 
low interest rates, what good are they as insurance companies? 
They are consumed by unsophisticated concerns, which may be 
reflected in their decision to increase insurance premiums twice 
in the past two years. 
  Life insurance is supposed to provide peace of mind over a 
long period of time, during which business cycles go boom and 
bust, and unforeseen events such as structural reforms occur. 
Insurance companies must steer a straight path without incident, 
and not be led astray by the vicissitudes of the economy. 
Providing financial security for their many different customers 
is the primary duty of the life insurance industry. Therefore, 
it is imperative that these companies invest their assets 
wisely. None of these rock-solid insurance companies has ever 
gone bankrupt in their primary business, but most of them have 
been inept at managing their assets. 
  Recently, these companies have written off huge exchange 
losses and their latent profits have shrunk considerably. 
Somehow these companies have managed to squander the assets 
entrusted to them by their policyholders. Most of these managers 
believe this to be the result of the economic downturn. They 
believe there was nothing their company could have done. This 
explanation is somehow unsatisfactory to me. Need I mention the 
word "responsibility"? They are running at full speed with the 
palanquin of the gods on their shoulders. Are they about to go 
off a cliff? 
<H5>  System of "Policyholder Self-Rule" </H5>
  The majority of life insurance companies are mutual 
companies. It is difficult to explain what a mutual insurance 
company is adequately, but to use a metaphor boldly without fear 
of being misunderstood, it is a company comprised entirely of 
stockholders with voting rights based on the idea of "one man, 
one vote." However, because the number of policyholders [each 
one of whom is a shareholder] is so great, these companies 
cannot hold general stockholders meetings. For this reason, 
these mutual companies have decisionmaking bodies called 
membership representative boards through which select members 
represent them. Mutual insurance companies are built on the 
principle of "policyholder self-rule." 
  Membership representative is an honorary position. They 
serve 
without pay, yet bear heavy responsibilities. Membership 
representatives approve closing account estimates and decisions 
by the board of directors. Few if any membership representatives 
appear to be aware of their awesome responsibilities to manage 
huge amounts of assets, thousands of employees, and anywhere 
from hundreds of thousands to tens of millions policyholders. 
Lack of awareness is a serious problem. 
  I myself serve as a membership representative for an 
insurance company. The representative board at this company 
engages in lively debate on the tobacco issue and environmental 
problems, and this is a very good thing. However, I have noticed 
something else. Very few of the hundred-plus membership 
representatives appear to understand the nature of a mutual 
company or the gravity of their responsibilities. Until recently 
no life insurance company was faced with a crisis, and the 
membership representative boards would most often rubberstamp 
the decisions of the board of directors. They were a mere 
formality. On the off chance that an insurance company were to 
face bankruptcy, would the membership representative board 
completely abdicate its responsibilities? 
  Mutual companies are technically comprised of "members," not 
policyholders. However, the board of directors is comprised 
entirely of salaried employees. Is this arrangement as natural 
as it seems? True, in Japan the common stock company is not 
considered the mere property of the stockholders. But in the 
United States mutual companies often send out documents to 
policyholders beginning with the words, "This is your company." 
In Japan, these documents refer to the "customer." This is not 
mere rhetoric, because technically speaking the policyholder is 
not a customer. In the United States, policyholders sit on the 
boards of directors at mutual companies. At the very least, 
there is a chance that its decisions will reflect the interests 
of policyholders. Some also have standing committees comprised 
of policyholders that perform oversight functions. 
  The history of U.S. mutual companies begins in 1843. Since 
that time, there have been many colorful incidents in the long 
struggle at mutual companies between advocates of policyholder 
self-rule and managerial control. The problem is that there are 
significant discrepancies between the formal rights of 
policyholders and actual managerial control. These discrepancies 
result from the irreconcilable differences between the stated 
democratic structure of these companies and the realities of 
managerial autocracy. Congress has held detailed hearings on 
this problem, and the mass media and researchers have criticized 
them severely. In one extreme case, a company was forced to 
reform the way in which its board of directors was elected. I 
believe that mutual companies in the United States can be 
likened to a smoking volcano ready to erupt. 
  The situation is analogous in Japan. However, in the United 
States there are competent authorities to oversee matters, from 
the various committees in Congress to the "checks and balances" 
of the mass media. Competition in the United States is also much 
more intense. In comparison, the competent authorities in Japan 
have distorted market competition. So much for a system of 
checks and balances. To return to my earlier metaphor, the goose 
at the head of the formation is not the largest insurance 
company, it is the Ministry of Finance. 
  Many firms converted to mutual companies in the aftermath of 
World War II. Soon thereafter, the Insurance Commission passed 
reform measures concerning the structure of membership 
representative boards and the method of electing 
representatives. This is the source of the smoke emanating from 
the volcano; these reform measures were imposed from the 
outside. The ideal management structure should have been 
determined by the companies themselves. 
  Several years ago an official at one of the large city 
[money-center] banks wrote, "The insurance industry and the 
mutual company system lack adequate checks and balances." This 
statement initiated reforms of the mutual company system. Soon 
after, a "vote of confidence" was given to some obscure reform 
measures and these were adopted by several companies. At the 
time, industry leaders compared these reforms to "judges on a 
national board of examiners." Were they joking? Boards of 
examiners have serious responsibilities with direct bearing on 
the national interest. Most membership representatives are 
honorary delegates who serve without pay and receive answers 
from management only if their personal social status is high 
enough. Just how are they supposed to "oversee" the company? In 
addition, not enough information is made available to 
policyholders for them to determine who is competent to serve as 
a membership representative. 
  Policyholders entrust their assets to mutual companies, and 
it is the duty of these companies to provide financial security 
to them. Naturally, the day-to-day operation of the company 
should be left in charge of employees under the supervision of 
the managing directors. However, who should be responsible when 
it comes to providing oversight of management? We need to renew 
the debate on the essential nature of a mutual company. If the 
advantages of the mutual company system cannot be made clear, 
then these firms should consider reverting to joint-stock 
companies. 
<H5>  Japan-U.S. Insurance Trade Friction </H5>
  Then there is the problem of trade friction with the United 
States on the issue of insurance. As in the case of other 
companies, U.S. insurance companies complain that they have not 
been able to make significant inroads into the Japanese market. 
This is an impossible task. It is a market in which similar 
products are sold at similar prices. Competition is based on the 
size of sales staffs and their personal connections. Foreign 
firms, therefore, cannot possibly compete effectively. In order 
for foreign insurance companies to be successful in the Japanese 
market, they have to focus on creativity and devise superior 
products for niche markets such as cancer insurance. There are 
consumers out there who can recognize a truly superior product, 
but, needless to say, the market as a whole is a long way off 
from competition based on product innovation. 
  The problems facing life insurance companies are the same 
ones that face Japanese companies as a whole. In this sense, it 
is senseless to blame one industry. However, when one looks at 
the fact that life insurance companies sell security, and when 
one considers the fact that their sales method is to dispatch 
representatives to people's households and workplaces, few 
industries have such intimate ties to the daily lives of 
individual households. This industry has always claimed to take 
the interests of ordinary people seriously, and at best it has 
always wanted to base its decisions on their interests. It needs 
to receive frank advice if this is to become a reality. 

