BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on drug-related crimes, investigations, trials, 
sentencings, and other activities in the PRC monitored by Hong 
Kong Bureau during the period 1 to 16 June. The source and mode 
of processing are given in parentheses at the end of each entry. 
<H5>  National </H5>
<H5>  Drive in Rural Areas To Concentrate Attack on Four Types of </H5>
Criminals 
  A member of the CCPC Central Commission on Political Science 
and Laws recently stressed that rectifying public security in 
rural areas is part and parcel of the 1994 task of improving all 
facets of public security. The department concerned will take 
"major steps" to crack down mainly on four types of criminals so 
that the public security in rural areas will be markedly 
improved within a short period. The four criminal types are: 
One, local riffraff, rural despots, hooligans, and other evil 
forces, especially robbery gangs and criminal organizations 
close to the underworld; two, train robbers, highwaymen, 
pirates, and those engaged in murder, robbery, causing 
explosions, and rape using force; three, serious criminals 
guilty of destroying railroads and telecommunications and 
production equipment or stealing state assets; and four, those 
who organize prostitution, engage in drug trafficking, abduct 
and sell women and children, defraud others of their money 
through superstition and the manufacture and distribution of 
obscene items, and who organize gambling. (Summary) (Hong Kong 
ZHONGGU TONGXUN ZHE in Chinese 0915 GMT 11 Jun 94) 
Stepped Up Antidrug Operations Reap Rewards 
  Stepped up antidrug operations since early this year have 
resulted in 2,000 solved cases, almost double the number last 
year, and the seizure of 2,000 kg of drugs. Public security 
organs in the southwest border provinces and regions, and along 
the southeast coast--Yunnan, Guangxi, Fujian, and 
Guangdong--have increased reconnaissance and border and coastal 
interceptions. Yunnan solved 900 cases in the first quarter, 
seizing over 700 kg of heroin. Guangxi and Guangdong solved over 
400 cases, arresting a number of drug traffickers from outside 
the borders. Fujian solved 22 cases, seized almost 40 kg of 
drugs, and arrested 57 suspects, some of Taiwan origin. The 
public security organs made a point of mobilizing and relying on 
the masses to launch a people's war against drugs. (Summary) 
(Beijing RENMIN RIBAO in Chinese 26 Apr 94 p 3) 

