CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with V.V. Reguretskyy, first deputy chief of the </F>
tax inspectorate; place and date not given: "What Sort of Taxes 
Can We Expect?"] 
  [Text] New draft taxation documents were prepared for 
study by the Ukrainian Supreme Council. The press service of the 
Ukrainian Main State Inspectorate requested V. V. Reguretsyy, 
first deputy chief of the tax inspectorate, to comment on their 
contents. 
  [PRAVDA UKRAINY] Vasiliy Vasilyevich, what innovations in 
the 
indicated documents would you single out for special attention? 
  [Reguretskyy] First of all, it is planned to introduce as a 
major change in the tax policy the transfer from taxation of 
income to taxation of profit. Such a scheme exists in 
practically all the countries. For us, however, that will permit 
the resolution of many questions. Primarily because the wage 
fund is incorporated in income and, as commonly known, is formed 
differently in various enterprises. There are highly 
labor-intensive branches of the economy where the wages are 
high, and there are also those that are less labor intensive. As 
a result, some pay 12-15 percent with relation to profit, while 
others pay in excess of 40 percent. This is specifically the 
circumstance that brought about a change in the existing system 
of collecting taxes from enterprises. 
  [PRAVDA UKRAINY] The proposal to change the nature of taxes 
is understandable. But how about lightening the tax burden? 
  [Reguretskyy] The Supreme Council will create that plank. 
The 
draft documents, however, propose a tax rate at the 30 percent 
level. And, I will note that this is significantly lower than in 
the developed states. But, we understand that today it is 
exceptionally important to operate levers that will stimulate 
the national economy, animate investments, and allow the 
development of newly created businesses. 
  [PRAVDA UKRAINY] What else is being proposed to the 
legislators? 
  [Reguretskyy] Two other no less important draft laws were 
proposed. They pertain to the taxation of enterprise property 
and real property of citizens. In our view, the entire taxation 
system must be based on two positions--tax on profit and tax on 
property. 
  Property taxes exist in all the states of the former USSR. 
We 
brought out proposals to introduce them in Ukraine in the past, 
but the previous Supreme Council did not undertake a study of 
those draft laws. Presently we attempted to arrange matters so 
that these two forms of taxes on profit and on property combined 
would not amount to more than 35 percent for the enterprises. 
  As far as subjects of taxation are concerned, for 
enterprises 
that would be property and commodity stocks. For citizens, real 
property is assumed to be apartments, houses, and structures in 
their possession. By the way, the most complex problem will be 
the correct evaluation of the real property of citizens. In 
other words, its evaluation proceeding from the existing price 
level. 
  This will require a certain amount of time. Therefore, it is 
assumed that it will be possible to introduce these taxes 
starting next year. 
  [PRAVDA UKRAINY] In discussions with enterprises, 
practically 
every other word used is value-added tax or excise duty. They 
are especially concerned with the payment of those taxes. 
  [Reguretskyy] Some changes are proposed there as well. As 
far 
as the value-added tax is concerned, it is our goal, first of 
all, to simplify the mechanism for calculating it and, secondly, 
to determine the amount of that tax more precisely. It is 
undoubtedly too high. Therefore, it is proposed to lower its 
rate. 
  [PRAVDA UKRAINY] If it's not a secret, to what level? 
  [Reguretskyy] Since the specific share of budgetary revenues 
from this source is rather high, we are conducting these 
calculations very scrupulously. We have so far tentatively 
decided on 20 percent. 
  Approaches to the determination of excise duty rates are 
also 
being reevaluated. Here, by contrast with value-added tax, the 
calculation system is simple. The most important issue is to 
determine the goods that are to be subject to excise duty. As 
before, we consider that they must be monopolistically produced 
goods, or, as we have earlier become accustomed to saying, 
nonessential goods. It is another matter what to include in that 
list. 
  I can say that for individual types of goods (for instance, 
liquors and vodka, wine, cigarettes, motor vehicles, and others) 
we are proposing to lower the rate of excise duty while 
completely exempting certain individual goods such as, for 
instance, television sets, video cassette recorders of domestic 
production, essences, alcohol (in individual cases), and some 
others. 
  All the proposals that I mentioned above are designed for 
the 
immediate future. There are some problems, however, which, in 
our opinion, must be resolved as soon as tomorrow. They include, 
let us say, questions pertaining to maintenance of the social 
sphere by enterprises. It must be preserved and supported. 
Therefore, we are proposing that all expenditures on its 
maintenance be exempted from taxes. 
  In order to animate investments, it is proposed to introduce 
additional tax benefits in individual cases. In our opinion, for 
instance, it is possible to eliminate value-added tax on all 
construction and repair work--in both production and 
nonproduction spheres. 
  [PRAVDA UKRAINY] Are there proposals to change anything in 
taxes on citizens and their personal income? 
  [Reguretskyy] With regard to the income of citizens, there 
are proposals to lower maximum rates to an acceptable level, 
while raising the level of maximum income that must be taxed at 
a higher rate. 
  [PRAVDA UKRAINY] Could you please spell that out? 
  [Reguretskyy] I think that in the final documents there 
should be no rates of 60 and 90 percent. Here it is necessary to 
proceed from the average wage level. Estimate its variations up 
and down and determine tax rates so that the bulk of the 
population would be paying acceptable personal income taxes. 
  With regard to the higher brackets, we must orient ourselves 
so as to stimulate investments instead of consumption with the 
aid of tax rates covering higher personal income. If businessmen 
earn sufficiently high income, let them simply invest it in 
production and earn profits while the tax on their income will 
then be lower. This principle of controlling that process is 
utilized by all countries. We probably should also use that 
method. 

