SUMMARY 

                               Despite the success of Jordan and the PLO in signing an economic 
accord following intense Jordanian pressure, Amman has clearly 
signaled that it does not intend to tolerate Palestinian neglect 
of its political and economic interests as the PLO negotiates 
with Israel over the terms of the Gaza-Jericho accord.  In 
addition to being the catalyst for the latest economic agreement, 
the increasing Jordanian pressure will likely have the effect of 
forcing the PLO to pay greater attention to other Jordanian 
concerns, such as border and security matters. 

                           END SUMMARY 

   In the context of continuing strains between Jordan and the PLO, 
the accord signed by the two sides in Amman on 7 January--giving 
Jordan's Central Bank broad financial responsibilities in the 
West Bank and Gaza during the transitional period of Palestinian 
self-rule--has received mixed coverage in Jordan's media. 
Several Amman newspapers have emphasized that the accord came 
only after King Husayn exerted strong pressure in his 1 January 
speech to top-level military officials.  In the speech, the king 
described his meeting with 'Arafat two days earlier as "extremely 
frank" and said that he had warned 'Arafat that unless he took 
advantage of one "last opportunity" to coordinate with Jordan, 
Amman and the PLO could "separately assume their 
responsibilities" (Amman TV, 1 January).  For example, an 
editorial in Al-Dustur portrayed the pact as being a direct 
result of "His Majesty King Husayn's directives, calls and wise 
views regarding the need to establish clear, firm and serious 
Jordanian-Palestinian relations"--a clear reference to the king's 
1 January speech   In a reference to recently strained relations 
between the sides, the editorial stressed the necessity of 
"circumventing all the residues and repercussions of the previous 
phase" (8 January). 

   Other press comment expressed an outright distrust of the PLO, 
complaining that it is negotiating with Israel at Jordan's 
expense, and that the new economic agreement offers Jordan no 
long-term guarantees for its banking privileges in the 
territories under self-rule. 

   --A Jordan Times editorial echoed Information Minister al- 
'Anani's assessment of the event as "comforting" to Palestinians 
and Jordanians in light of the "seemingly tense 
atmosphere...between the leaderships of Jordan and Palestine," 
which has been "disturbing for people on both sides of the Jordan 
River."  At the same time, it accused the PLO of having neglected 
Jordanian interests in the haste to conclude agreements with 
Israel, explaining that "the Palestinian brothers were so 
submerged in their bargaining with the Israelis that they 
relegated (sic) their coordination with the Jordanians" (8 
January). 

   --Viewing the accord as a setback for Jordan, a column in Al-Ra'y 
asserted sharply that the agreement "does not commit either of 
the two parties to anything" and actually constitutes a "step 
backward" from an earlier draft.  The columnist complained that 
the agreement allows Jordanian banks to operate in the 
territories only "until the self-rule authority is able to 
prevent them from doing so," amd that the Jordanian dinar would 
cease to circulate in the territories once a Palestinian currency 
is issued. (See Note 1)  It also ridiculed the provision on 
reopening Jordanian banks, since "Israel, the party with the 
authority, has (already) allowed this" in its own separate 
agreement signed with Jordan (10 January). 

   (Note 1) These conditions were not present in a reported earlier 
draft, highlights of which were published in the 13 December 
issue of Al-Ra'y. 

   Tough Talk Underscores King's Impatience 

   In addition to the ultimatum to 'Arafat on the economic accord, 
King Husayn used his 1 January speech to bluntly criticize 
'Arafat's failure to coordinate with Jordan, an attack that 
appears intended to embarrass the PLO and drive home the 
seriousness with which Husayn views any perceived neglect of 
Amman's interests in the autonomy talks. 

   --Recounting his meeting with 'Arafat, King Husayn said that he 
told the PLO leader that "commitment should mean commitment," and 
that Jordan and the PLO "should not remain in a whirlpool of 
talks that do not yield tangible results." The king added that he 
told 'Arafat that Amman had "tolerated too much, and we cannot 
proceed in this way" (Amman TV). 

   --Appearing to cast aspersions on 'Arafat's ability to 
effectively lead an emerging Palestinian authority, the king 
stated that Palestinian leadership "must now be a leadership for 
all the Palestinians" inside and outside the occupied 
territories, adding that "those who are capable of assuming 
responsibility should be prepared to do so," since "the question 
of credibility is very important" (Amman TV). 

   --Revealing his irritation with 'Arafat for repeatedly raising 
the sensitive issue of creating a Jordanian-Palestinian 
confederation, King Husayn stated that during his talks with 
'Arafat on the subject, he "asked the brother president to drop 
this expression from his lexicon and absolutely not to discuss it 
with me, not in any form--not even any other formula, other type, 
or other approach that leads to this course."  Nevertheless, the 
king suggested that although talks on the subject were unwelcome 
in the current phase, they could occur at a later stage with the 
consensus of both peoples, arguing that "at the appropriate time 
and circumstances, people will decide the nature of the 
relationship which should be established.  But to create formulas 
and act on them, I believe, is premature and out of place" (Amman 
TV). 

   Further clarifying the meaning of the king's remarks on 
confederation, Information Minister Jawad al-'Anani was cited as 
stating in response to a question during a 7 January news 
conference that "King Husayn's recent speech has been clear in 
this regard.  His majesty said that we will leave such a thing 
for the future, and the Jordanian and Palestinian sides will 
decide the nature of the joint relationship between them" (Amman 
radio, 7 January). 

   For their part, Palestinian officials reportedly indicated a 
willingness to defer to Jordan on the confederation issue.  PLO 
Political Department head Faruq ()addumi was cited as stating en 
route to negotiations in Amman that talk about a Jordanian- 
Palestinian confederation was "premature" and that "discussing 
this at present would complicate matters" (4 January). 
Furthermore, Al-Ra'y cited a statement by PLO Executive Committee 
member Muhammad al-Nashashibi indicating that King Husayn had 
personally sought to place the impact of his confederation remark 
in a milder context.  Asked what he thought of the king's remark 
suggesting that 'Arafat drop the word "confederation" from his 
vocabulary, the official responded that "in accordance with the 
clarification that we heard from his majesty the king when he 
honored us with his meeting with us two days ago, 'dropping' is 
not the correct word.  The major hopes and expectations will be 
discussed in due time.  This is what he meant." 

   Implications 

   The signing of the economic pact following King Husayn's 
unusually sharp oration suggests that for now, the PLO will 
likely take more careful account of Amman's concerns with regard 
to the autonomy arrangements in the territories, since it can ill 
afford to risk further alienating an already irritated King 
Husayn.  Given obvious Jordanian doubts about the credibility of 
the PLO leadership, however, Amman can be counted on to maintain 
its pressure on 'Arafat as the two parties move toward a 
reevaluation of their future relationship. 

(AUTHOR: MURRAY.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH  (703) 733-6094) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/jf 22/0105Z JAN 

