BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 26 (AFP)--The former leader of China's 
1989 pro-democracy demonstrations, Wang Dan, called on the 
government Thursday to overturn its official condemnation of the 
movement and release all protestors who remain behind bars. 
  "We believe that the government's ruling that the 1989 
movement amounted to chaos and counter-revolutionary rioting is 
unfair. This ruling must be revised as soon as possible," Wang 
said in a petition addressed to the standing committee of the 
National People's Congress (NPC). Six other dissidents involved 
in the Tiananmen Square movement also signed the document. 
  The petition also calls on the the release of "all those who 
are still detained because of their role in the 1989 movement" 
and "compensation for relatives of the June 4 dead, and help for 
former prisoners returning to society." 
  The pro-democracy movement began on April 15 and mobilised 
millions of Chinese before being crushed by the People's 
Liberation Army in central Beijing on June 4, 1989. According 
to an official version of events, 300 people died. Dissidents 
and observers who were present said several thousand were killed. 
  Wang's petition said: "This movement was a popular, 
patriotic 
and democratic movement, based around students. We were 
reasonable and non-violent throughout." 
  "We believe that the June 4 incident is like a `knot' in the 
history of the Chinese nation. Today we are at a key moment in 
reform and opening, and, like the government, wish to have 
stability," the text, released to the foreign press, said. 
  The document highlighted the need to promote social 
stability, build a democratic system and ensure social progress. 
  "We must undo this knot," it said. "This is why we sincerely 
wish that the government will take a wise step and take into 
account the interest of the nation and the future of the state." 
  "We have never forgotten this event, and we firmly believe 
that this movement has played a highly important role in the 
history of our country." 
  "On the occasion of the fifth anniversary, we exercise our 
political rights as citizens to issue these public appeals to 
the standing committee of the PNC, the supreme organ of state," 
it said. 
  The petition was signed by Wang Dan, Ma Shaofang, Zhai 
Weimin, Shao Jiang, Li Hai, Zheng Xuguang and Guo Haifeng. 
  According to a report released this month by the group Human 
Rights Watch/Asia, several hundred people are still in prison 
after being detained during the crackdown. 

