Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report signed "rms/DW": "Ruehe's Austerity Program Under </F>
Fire"] 
  [Text] Bonn -- Defense Minister Volker Ruehe is meeting 
with increasing criticism in the dispute about the Bundeswehr 
austerity plans. Speaking in Berlin at the weekend, Foreign 
Minister Klaus Kinkel called upon Ruehe to present "a feasible 
concept for the Armed Forces." The Bundeswehr is "not designed 
to solve our budget problems," Kinkel said, referring to the 
envisaged 1.25 billion mark [DM] cuts in the Defense Ministry. 
  Another dispute has been triggered between the Federal 
Auditor (BRH) and the Defense Ministry. In spite of severe 
criticism by the BRH, Ruehe wants to discard the big Mi-24 
(called Hind within NATO) combat helicopters taken over from the 
former GDR Army as well as the Mi-8 transport helicopters, which 
also come from the former Soviet Union. The reason: By today's 
standards, the Hind, feared as a "flying fortress" by NATO 
during the Cold War, has "enormous shortcomings." In addition, 
the cannon ammunition (30 millimeters) is not in line with 
Western security standards, and operating costs are high. 
  Unlike the ministry, BRH experts can see "opportunities for 
long-term use" of the former GDR combat helicopter by the 
Bundeswehr. Thus, the Bundeswehr's "rapid task forces" could 
improve their "operative mobility" by using the Hind. The 
Defense Ministry rejects this, presenting its calculation of 
costs: 49 Mi-24 helicopters would create more than DM70 million 
in operating costs per year, almost ten times the amount of the 
current PAH-1 antitank helicopters. The entire fleet of 205 
PAH-1s only costs one-seventh of the amount to be paid for the 
49 Hinds. 
  This means that the Defense Ministry is now concentrating on 
acquiring a new generation of helicopters, which should be 
constructed identically for Army, Air Force, and Navy and should 
also be used by other NATO forces. Besides the "support 
helicopter" (UHU), which can be used for reconnaissance and 
fighting at night and in any weather, and which is to be 
introduced from the year 2002 onwards, the ministry also plans 
to use the NH-90, a transport helicopter suitable for night 
flights. 
  The Navy is thinking of introducing a "derivative of the 
NH-90 family." The Air Force is planning to acquire something 
similar. The defense budget allocates a total of DM3.04 billion 
in research costs and DM13.9 billion of acquisition costs to the 
UHU, which is being developed jointly by German and French 
companies, and to the NH-90. This should buy the Bundeswehr 269 
NH-90s and 75 UHUs. 

