Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, Jan. 25--A visiting Japanese Minister, 
Mr. Shozo Azuma, today surprised his hosts by adopting positions 
on key political issues of concern to this country that can only 
be described as unthinking, uninformed, and shorn of nuances and 
complexities. 
  The Japanese Parliamentary Vice Minister for Foreign 
Affairs, 
the counterpart of a Minister of State here, is the first 
Minister from his country to come here after the Prime Minister, 
Mr. P.V. Narasimha Rao, went to Tokyo two years ago. 
  Considering this, his rough-edged articulations on major 
political questions raised eyebrows even higher as these were 
accompanied by constant references to Japan's Overseas 
Development Assistance (ODA) Charter which stipulates that 
Japanese aid should be related to the level of arms expenditure 
of the recipient country, proscribing of weapons of mass 
destruction, conforming to (west-defined) human rights, and 
adherence to the market economy. 
  These are known principles and were ratified by Japanese 
Parliament two years ago. It is their juxtaposition with a 
prickly presentation on sensitive issues straight out of a 
written-down, prepared brief that tended to cause dismay here. 
  The surprise caused by Mr. Azuma's understanding of key 
issues like the nuclear non-proliferation treaty (NPT), Kashmir, 
human rights, missile proliferation and India-Pakistan 
relations--on each of which this country is engaged in delicate 
and difficult dialogue with the United States other major 
powers, as well as Pakistan--was all the greater as only eight 
days ago in Tokyo, Japan had adopted a restrained approach on 
these questions during the India-Japan bilateral talks on 
nuclear and disarmament issues. 
  The External Affairs Minister, Mr. Dinesh Singh, is reported 
to have done some plain speaking, reminding Mr. Azuma that Japan 
had been a victim of nuclear attack. As such, it occasioned 
surprise to see a Minister from that country taking a position 
that permits nuclear weapons to be institutionalised in the 
hands of a few countries while denying it to others. 
  Mr. Singh is also believed to have displayed some impatience 
with Mr. Azuma's presentation on the Kashmir question. Official 
circles suggest that the visiting Minister was informally told 
that if Japan accepted the position that people's wishes should 
be ascertained in Kashmir--euphemism for plebiscite that 
Pakistan has now begun talking about stridently--it should be 
prepared for a similar exercise in the Northern Territories that 
lie in dispute between Japan and Russia. In that event the 
region was most likely to lapse to Japan's neighbour to the 
north. 
  Of course, a section of the officialdom took the charitable 
view that Mr. Azuma was a first-time Minister not quite familiar 
with the ground on which he chose to tread. 
  The Japanese Minister arrived here for three days yesterday 
on the last swing of a goodwill tour of nine countries in Africa 
and Asia, including Nepal and Pakistan. Today he called on the 
President, Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma, the Finance Minister, Dr. 
Manmohan Singh, besides the External Affairs Minister. 
  Interestingly, he preferred to dwell more on politics than 
economics even in his meeting with the Finance Minister. During 
his several meetings he was informed of India's latest 
discussions, and detailed offer of talks, with Pakistan. At the 
end of it, it is understood he appreciated the complexity of the 
situation, sources noted. 

