BFN 

<F P=106> [By Elsy Fors] </F>
  [Text] Havana, 2 May (PL) -- The Cuban parliament has 
displayed flexibility and economic realism without relinquishing 
social achievements in education and public health. After two 
days of discussions on the most burning economic problems, the 
special session of the National Assembly of the People's 
Government [ANPP] drafted guidelines that will allow the 
government to immediately adopt tangible measures against 
economic imbalances and domestic speculators. 
  The ANPP's final resolution calls on the state to exert 
strict control over its expenditures and to oversee its public 
resources systematically. Figures from the Ministry of Finance 
and Prices reveal Cuba has a budget deficit of 4.2 billion pesos 
(official exchange rate is one peso per dollar). 
  The parliament voiced its "flat-out opposition to the 
unscrupulous activities of those who have become wealthy or who 
are trying to become wealthy at the expense of the majority." 
The ANPP instructed the government to take steps, even 
exceptional steps, to eradicate such activities. To that 
effect, President Fidel Castro forewarned of the confiscation of 
ill-gotten money and illegally acquired properties. 
  Parliament President Ricardo Alarcon, in one of his speeches 
considered by many observers as bearing an impressive 
ideological message, recalled the fate of the island being 
forged in Miami. He said wealthy emigrants and large 
landowners, whose properties were confiscated by the revolution 
in 1959, are promoting a return to Cuba to reclaim their 
properties and privileges. 
  In addition, there is another fact that discourages the 
adoption of neoliberal shock therapy in Cuba, namely, social 
deterioration triggered by such therapy in developing countries 
where it has been applied. 
  According to official opinions, social inequities being 
prompted by the economic reforms implemented in Cuba is a minor 
setback when compared to the consequences of the neoliberal 
policies imposed by such international financial organizations 
as the IMF and the World Bank. 
  On the other hand, the measures proposed by the Cuban 
legislature protect the fundamental achievement of providing 
free health care and education without failing to acknowledge 
that the island is becoming part of a world controlled by 
multinational corporations and by a market economy. 
  The adjustments proposed include price increases on selected 
goods and services, as well as the gradual implementation of a 
new and integral tax system that will offer lower-income sectors 
the greatest possible protection. The parliament also asked the 
government to study the possibility of changing the currency to 
complement the measures in due time. 
  The ANPP's final resolution states that the measures "will 
lead to the progressive surmounting of current adversities." To 
achieve this, the parliament exhorted the people to "intensify 
their daily efforts." 
  Some participants of the special session believe the final 
results will restore fiscal and financial order, which had been 
neglected during decades of integration into the economic system 
of former socialist countries. At the same time, the results 
will yield greater trust in foreign investments. 
  In short, although the fall of the Soviet Union made the 
island lose three-fourths of its trade and its main source of 
foreign aid, most deputies and economists believe the current 
independent development will be more advantageous in the long 
run. 

