CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Regarding Prices, Subsidies, and Economic </F>
Efficiency"] 
  [Text] The people's debates on efficiency and 
improving domestic finances will be over in just about a week. 
Now we can talk, without fear of error, of an ample number of 
proposals on which Cuban workers have reached consensus. 
  Some of these proposals concern price adjustments for 
specific products, like cigars and rum; they are primarily 
related to basic commodities for which coupon books are used for 
purchases. 
  For cigars, the formulas proposed have two basic variants: 
one favors eliminating all quotas, with the unrestricted sale of 
this product at a new price; and another advocates eliminating 
the additional quota (1.60), and keeping cigar prices 
unrestricted. 
  For rum, the majority of the people who expressed an opinion 
in the people's parliaments felt the price should be increased 
and it should be offered only on free sale. 
  These two items, which are not necessities, no matter how 
much many people do need them, have the potential to attract 
foreign currency in an amount that could reach 4 billion pesos a 
year, if Cuba were to ensure a sufficient production of both 
items so they could be sold without restrictions. 
  For essential goods which are now subsidized, the workers' 
meetings frequently suggested new prices that would at least 
cover production costs. 
  At the present time the subsidies included in these prices 
may be calculated at about 400 million pesos a year; the 1993 
budget deficit was 10 times larger. 
  This means that, financially speaking, the contribution that 
cigars and rum could make toward a healthy budget is much 
greater. The price adjustment for essential goods, assuming that 
it were applied to all subsidized items, would not be decisive, 
though it would make a significant contribution. 
  At this point, it is wise to emphasize one point in order to 
avoid misinterpretations of what we are saying. Consensus does 
not mean unanimity, and consensus approval does not mean there 
is no dissent on this or that aspect of a given issue. 
  This is also the right time to say that the existence of 
popular consensus on a broad group of possible measures does not 
mean they will definitely be applied immediately. It is the 
responsibility of the People's Government National Assembly and 
of other high-level government bodies to decide which are the 
most appropriate and possible measures, with what dynamism and 
intensity they should be applied, and how they should be 
implemented so that they will have an impact on the economy in a 
harmonious and interrelated manner, so they will become part of 
the system and not enter the financial universe in isolation. 
  But whether or not all the measures the workers have 
recommended on prices are adopted immediately is not the most 
important thing. The essential is that the problem of prices is 
beginning to become a part of our national economic awareness. 
  For years, partly because of lack of foresight and partly 
because the Cuban economy was integrated in an international 
trade system that was essentially fair and certain, the problem 
of prices, both domestic and foreign prices, was something that 
did not concern the population. 
  Just remember: the price of sugar in what was called the 
world market, an issue that had earlier obsessed our 
grandparents, was barely of interest to specialists. 
  For domestic prices, it was often true that we consumers 
paid 
for products without even bothering to find out the unit price 
of the items we were buying. 
  Now we are beginning to realize that we have to pay much 
more 
attention to economic laws if we are going to keep our economy a 
socialist economy. And we can understand that prices are a 
leading instrument for restructuring our economy that has been 
forced by circumstances to become a part of an external world 
that is absolutely driven by market laws. 
  No matter what measures may emerge from the next session of 
the People's Government National Assembly, it is extremely 
important for people to understand that when they buy a pound of 
black beans at the retail price, it costs the state 50 centavos, 
while the consumer buys it for 30. 
  Something similar takes place with almost all grains, dairy, 
and meat products, coffee, bread, fuels, and other items. Of 30 
essential household items, over 20 are subsidized by the state. 
  Here we are speaking of merchandise whose real costs could 
be 
estimated in freely convertible currency, as these items are 
mostly acquired abroad. In this world of prices, both the prices 
paid by the population and those used in the business economy, 
we need to become more aware and realize that everything we 
consume, everything we see around us that is produced by labor, 
in the end has a specific cost in convertible currency. 
  This will force us to make a much greater effort to increase 
the correlation between real costs and prices, while not 
overlooking the fact that in the future it will be virtually 
impossible to keep prices immobile, which was the normal 
practice during the last three decades. 
  But this does not mean we are advocating that this 
correlation in retail prices should be reached suddenly and 
automatically. Prices paid by the people in our socialist 
society will always be a means used to promote the just and 
equitable distribution of social production; this is not to be 
confused with egalitarianism. 
  The workers are asking that people whose incomes are too low 
for them to pay the regular prices be subsidized, in order to 
avoid having the state subsidize everyone in an egalitarian 
system. 
  Paradoxically, subsidized prices benefit both the money 
hoarder and the retiree, and both the idler and the model worker. 
  The workers want this to come to an end. They know this is a 
process. They know it will take time. They agree that sacrifices 
will have to be made, but they have confidence that, in prices 
as well as in other areas, we will achieve rationality and 
efficiency. 

