Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Rauf Gerz report: "Secret Flights to Yerevan"] </F>
  [Text] Istanbul--Turkish Air Force officials have 
discovered that the Ukraine Airlines Company diverts its 
passenger aircraft, which fly between Odessa and Aleppo, to land 
in Yerevan. The four flights weekly between Odessa and Aleppo 
"during the off season" drew the attention of the officials. 
They had the Tupolev-154 aircraft, which are capable of 
accommodating 164 passengers, followed on radar and established 
that they landed in Yerevan after crossing through Turkey's 
airspace. Meanwhile, the officials also established that the 
passenger aircraft from Russia's Aeroflot company, take off from 
Aleppo, fly to Sochi, and later proceed to Yerevan. This 
information indicates that the arms embargo on Yerevan has been 
breached. Considering the few passengers who fly from Aleppo, 
the officials have decided that the aircraft transport arms and 
terrorists to Yerevan. 
  The information gathered by the officials through intensive 
intelligence work has confirmed the concern that foreign 
aircraft are transporting arms and Workers Party of Kurdistan 
[PKK] terrorists from Syria to Yerevan. The Turkish Foreign 
Ministry has cautioned Ukraine and Russia on the matter, noting 
that Turkish Air Force units will intervene and their aircraft 
will not be allowed into Turkey's airspace if the flights are 
maintained. 
  The military sources have said the PKK militants who are 
transported to Yerevan infiltrate into Turkey to carry out 
terrorist activities. Later, some of them return to Armenia and 
the others move from the eastern part of Turkey to the 
southeastern region to cross into Syria, carrying out terrorist 
activities as they go. The flights from Aleppo are also a means 
of supplying arms to the PKK. 
  All this was discovered early in 1994. The frequent flights 
of the two companies from Aleppo to Odessa and Sochi drew 
official attention. The Turkish Air Force units followed them, 
and the foreign planes were observed on radar to land in 
Yerevan. The officials believe that many flights have taken 
place between Syria and Armenia through Turkish airspace, and 
large quantities of arms and ammunition have been transported to 
the Armenians and the PKK. 
  Meanwhile, the General Staff has ordered the Turkish Air 
Force to continue to follow closely all the aircraft that take 
off from Aleppo to fly to the CIS countries. The military 
sources have ascertained that the Ukraine Airlines Company and 
Aeroflot, which are in a difficult financial situation, demand a 
very high price for their charter flights. 
  The officials are trying to establish who provides the arms 
that are transported from Syria to Armenia and the number of 
secret flights that have landed in Yerevan so far. 

