Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Caoimghin O'Crolrin, member of </F>
Sinn Fein National Executive Board, by Marcelo Justo "in 
London"; date not given] 
  [Text] In London there is talk of sending the Army to guard 
Heathrow airport which has been the target of three IRA attacks 
in the last five days. Yet the British Government insisted 
yesterday that the peace process begun through the Downing 
Street Declaration, which was agreed to in December with the 
Republic of Ireland, "still stands" and "needs no clarification." 
  The IRA issued its first response to the declaration at 
about 
midnight on 12 December. It emphasized the need for John 
Major's government "to abandon its negative attitude," a key 
phrase used by the Catholic and republican organization to 
reassert its demand for the "clarification" of certain points in 
a text that seeks to appease all without satisfying anyone. The 
complex political scenario of Northern Ireland encompasses two 
countries -- the Republic of Ireland and Great Britain -- with 
violent and peaceful Catholic nationalists; legal and 
clandestine Protestants. Sinn Fein holds a particularly 
important place as the political wing of the IRA and the 
mandatory representative in any negotiation with the IRA. 
Caoimghin O'Crolrin, a Sinn Fein National Executive Board 
member, told PAGINA/12: "The Downing Street Declaration is not 
dead." During a long telephone interview, O'Crolrin explained 
that the IRA attacks are a variant of the IRA's policy which 
seeks to "involve the British in different fields," by forcing 
them to respond politically and militarily. Within this 
context, O'Crolrin, who insisted he was speaking on behalf of 
Sinn Fein, did not reject the possibility of further IRA attacks. 
  [PAGINA/12] Is it not contradictory to talk about achieving 
peace while attacking one of the busiest airports in the world? 
  [O'Crolrin] Sinn Fein deplores all violent actions. We do 
not want any violence -- from the IRA, from the British 
Government, or from its surrogate Protestant paramilitary 
groups. But we do not condemn violence out of context. 
Violence can only be eliminated if all parties cease to use it, 
including the British Government. Moreover, we believe the IRA 
communique issued last night was positive because it clearly 
shows a willingness to achieve peace. This is how it was viewed 
in Ireland: As the expression of the desire to continue the 
negotiations. The British media interpreted it differently. To 
put it more plainly, the British media interpreted the opposite. 
The IRA communique urges the government to discontinue its 
negative attitude, which became obvious when it rejected the 
peace plan that was agreed last year by Sinn Fein President 
Gerry Adams and Social Democratic Party President John Hume. 
Despite this, we do not reject the Downing Street Declaration: 
We consider it ambiguous, which is the way it has been 
interpreted by a wide political spectrum. We have thus 
requested an explanation. The Irish Government has given us an 
explanation but they can only speak on behalf of the Irish 
Government. The British Government has so far refused to do so. 
Yet John Major had no qualms in granting an explanation at the 
time to Protestant Unionist parties. 
  [PAGINA/12] What must the British Government explain to 
convince the IRA to renounce violence? 
  [O'Crolrin] We accept no preconditions for negotiations. 
When the British Government hosted the Bosnia-Herzegovina 
negotiations in 1992 it did not establish any prerequisites. It 
seems that it does so with the Sinn Fein and the IRA. Not just 
the surrender of arms but -- to use British Government 
terminology -- the establishment of a "purification" period. 
The British Government is the one that must "purify" itself 
before negotiating with us. We are neither the second rate 
citizens of a nation nor will we be treated as a scourge. But 
beyond all this, there are certain issues that must be 
explained. The declaration states that it supports Ireland's 
self determination but adds that it demands the consent of the 
people. 
  [PAGINA/12] The stumbling block of the declaration seems to 
be that it seeks to satisfy the Protestant Unionist -- by 
stating that it will not modify anything without their consent 
-- and the Catholics -- by stating that it seeks the self 
determination for Ireland, which is precisely what the Unionists 
do not want. What is the solution? 
  [O'Crolrin] For us the issue began in 1921 when -- against 
the wishes of the Irish -- their country was divided. Only 
within the context of national democracy, reconciliation, and 
lasting peace can we go forward. We have a series of proposals 
within this framework. It is obvious that we do not think we 
have a monopoly on anything. We will listen to all options 
proposed by other political groups. This, of course, includes 
the Protestants who are an important part of our society. But 
we reject the idea that any sector has the right to veto anyone 
because such an action goes against democratic principles in any 
society in the world. Unfortunately, this is one interpretation 
of the Downing Street Declaration. This is why the British 
Government must clarify the declaration or it will lose a 
historic opportunity of achieving peace. 

