Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by (Africano Neto) from Angola -- live or recorded] </F>
  [Text] Radio Rebelde listeners, greetings from Luanda, the 
capital city of Angola. 
  Reactions to Cuban Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina's visit 
to Angola continue to be heard. The Angolan media continue to 
report on the importance of Foreign Minister Robaina's 
statements during a news conference on 15 January, moments 
before leaving for Harare, Zimbabwe. Asked to describe the 
relations between Cuba and the United States, the young foreign 
minister said: 
  [Begin Robaina recording] You can describe relations between 
two countries when relations exist. When there are no relations, 
you cannot describe them. There are no relations between Cuba 
and the United States. Since there are no relations between Cuba 
and the United States, relations such as the ones we enjoy with 
Angola and many other countries, I can say nothing about them. 
The U.S. issue always seems to come up, wherever Cuba goes. 
However, I am always willing to discuss this issue. As far as 
Cuba is concerned, the U.S. foreign policy has not changed. We 
are convinced that Latin America and Cuba are not priorities for 
the new U.S. Administration. The U.S. Government has many 
domestic problems it must solve, and it is being pressured 
domestically to ensure that it will not normalize relations with 
Cuba. 
  Regarding the United States, Cuba will reiterate what it has 
always said. Cuba is willing to sit down and talk with the whole 
world, as well as with the United States. However, this is based 
on one thing: absolute respect. If absolute respect does not 
prevail, then we have nothing to say to the United States. If 
they want us to sit at a negotiating table as subordinates, we 
will not go. We are willing to broach the most difficult issues 
-- we are even willing to begin discussing the less complicated 
issues -- as long as there is absolute respect. Cuba is begging 
no one to talk to us; Cuba is imploring no one to talk to us. 
Cuba simply states on what basis it is willing to talk. If this 
condition is respected, then we would have no objection to 
sitting down to talks. 
  The only sign of interest we detect in the new U.S. 
Administration is the fact that the new U.S. Administration does 
not use the aggressive language used by previous U.S. 
Administrations. I do not think this is much. It could be 
something, and perhaps something may come of it, but there is no 
reason for us to be overjoyed. [end recording] 
  This was what Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina told local 
and 
foreign reporters during a news conference held at the Luanda 
International Airport shortly before leaving Angola. Robaina 
said that Cuba will not negotiate as a subordinate. 
  Robaina also answered other questions for the reporters. One 
question had to do with the vast political, economic, and social 
changes being made in Cuba. Robaina also mentioned that the 
Cuban people are allowed to possess dollars. Robaina said: 
  [Begin Robaina recording] Cuba is undergoing very important 
changes. We would have to define what big changes really are. 
Big changes can be interpreted in one way or another. I believe 
the situation is extremely difficult and complex. We are 
undergoing a process of industrial change as well as changes in 
our foreign economic relations. We are doing this in the short 
term. Doing this in the short term has been extremely complex. 
Our task is more difficult because we are doing this amid a 
brutal blockade, harassment, and relentless persecution. 
  Regarding unrest, I am happy to say that we are a people who 
enjoy great calm. We have political discussions. We are 
currently undergoing strong political discussions. My country is 
currently facing difficulties and making changes; therefore, it 
is only natural that there should be discussions and very 
difficult times. However, I do not believe that the 
decriminalization of foreign currency is the most difficult 
issue we have broached. There are many other more important 
things we have discussed. For example, the economic changes we 
are undergoing. Some of these economic changes are: foreign 
investment, giving land to peasants and workers in exchange for 
their work, self-employment, and decriminalization. All these 
things must be discussed. Whenever so many topics are broached, 
various opinions will be expressed. However, the most important 
thing is that we are capable of doing this and we are doing 
this. This is the situation we are currently experiencing in 
Cuba. 
  Cuba chose to follow a path. We believe that even though the 
world we live in is a difficult world. We believe this world has 
changed. Cuba, however, will join that world. Cuba is willing to 
join that world without giving up certain principles. Cuba will 
not negotiate its sovereignty and independence, and we will 
never give up our right to be heard. We will not take steps 
backward in the fields of education, health, science, social 
security, and social justice. We will not negotiate those areas 
where we have made important progress. [end recording] 
  These were statements by Cuban Foreign Minister Roberto 
Robaina during a news conference held on 15 January in Luanda. 
Robaina said that Cuba will not negotiate such fields as health, 
education, culture and sports, in which important progress has 
been made. 
  Back to Radio Rebelde now. This was Africano Neto. 

