BFN 

  [Text] Santiago, 3 May (EFE) -- Today, Argentine Ambassador 
to Santiago Eduardo Iglesias said his country will "warmly 
welcome" Chile's entry into the Common Market of the South 
(Mercosur), which comprises Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, and 
Paraguay. 
  During a news conference, the ambassador said the decision 
to 
join Mercosur is the exclusive decision of the Chilean 
Government, adding that if it wishes to do so, the Chilean 
Government can study this possibility without any haste. 
  Iglesias voiced satisfaction because he has found, as he put 
it, a new predisposition in the Chilean authorities regarding 
Mercosur, especially in Finance Minister Eduardo Aninat and 
Economy Minister Alvaro Garcia, and in Juan Salazar, the 
director of the International Economic Relations Department of 
the Foreign Ministry. 
  The ambassador said this after confirming that Argentine 
Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo will make an official visit to 
Santiago on 10 and 11 May, with the main objective of beginning 
"a new style of relations" with Chilean economic officials, 
which he referred to as "Dialogues of the Southern Cone." 
  During his visit, Cavallo will meet with President Eduardo 
Frei Ruiz Tagle. He will also deliver a lecture on the 
Argentine economic process and will hold working meetings with 
his Chilean counterpart Eduardo Aninat. Cavallo will also visit 
"Expomin '94" -- Latin America's main mining fair -- which will 
be held in Santiago next week. 
  Iglesias emphasized that Cavallo and Aninat have known each 
other professionally for 20 years, since the time they studied 
at the U.S. University of Harvard. He said he believes this 
will strengthen bilateral relations, "which are already 
extraordinary." 
  The ambassador added that at an economic level, 
Chilean-Argentine integration has had "fantastic" achievements, 
while bilateral exchange grew five-fold in four years, to $1.2 
billion in 1993. He noted that during the first quarter of 
1994, bilateral exchange grew by 15 percent with respect to the 
same period in 1993, adding that he expects it to reach 
$1.4-billion in 1994. 

