CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by P. Shcherbakov: "A Spoon, the Path To Dinner"] </F>
  [Text] "If this document had been adopted in early January, 
I would have succeeded in laying in a supply of fuel, in 
preparing good seed and in supplying fertilizer with 
pesticides," sighed a familiar Ryazan farmer who had come to the 
editorial office. "Now this fine paper is just being released to 
the regions and specific executive agents, as the flood-water 
removes the last snow from the fields." 
  Thus was the response to publication of the decree of the 
government of the Russian Federation entitled "Economic 
Conditions for the Functioning of the Agro-Industrial Complex of 
the Russian Federation in 1994," not only by this farmer but 
also by a majority of the country's APK [agro-industrial 
complex] workers, regardless of whether or not they work at 
collective farms, in joint-stock companies or conduct their own 
production operations. 
  Perhaps my acquaintance was largely correct, implying that a 
spoon provides the path to dinner. But what is to be done if, in 
the words of the vice premier of the government of the Russian 
Federation, A. Zaveryukha, uttered recently by him during a 
press conference for Russian and foreign journalists, this 
decree is experiencing difficulty in reaching the governmental 
and ministerial offices. During the course of prolonged 
discussions and coordination, the draft of the future decree was 
thoroughly "scaled down." Improvements were realized in those 
statutes in which specific figures were cited for financial and 
investment support for agriculture. 
  Be that as it may, the document was nevertheless published 
and has already started to work. According to data which became 
known to the edictorial board, 400 billion rubles have already 
been used for the repayment of debts for grain sold by 
agricultural producers. The indebtedness to enterprises and APK 
organizations for subsidies and compensation that were in effect 
during 1993 will be repaid during the first quarter. A similar 
operation will be carried out for debts associated with the 
capital construction volumes actually carried out at 
installations, the financing of which was implemented using 
federal budgetary funds. 
  Yes and what funds will be used for APK development this 
year? On the whole, appropriations for APK development are being 
maintained at the level for the funds actually allocated in 
1993, with the average coefficient for indexing expenditures of 
the federal budget being taken into account. In addition, four 
trillion rubles from the federal budgetary fund for financial 
support in behalf of the more important national economic 
branches of the Russian Federation are being allocated for 
agricultural development. 
  Certainly, not all of the financial problems will be 
resolved. Nevertheless, agricultural producers will receive 
strong assistance in the form of compensation for 30 percent of 
their expenditures for energy resources employed for the growing 
of vegetables on sheltered ground and also enterprises engaged 
in the primary processing of flax and hemp. Similar compensation 
will be provided for the acquisition of mineral fertilizer and 
agents for the chemical protection of plants. 
  Beyond any doubt, the fact that a number of statutes of the 
governmental decree call for a noticeable revival of investment 
policies in the agrarian sector of the economy is indeed 
reassuring. Thus, Minfin for the Russian Federation will this 
year assign no less than two thirds of the overall volume of 
funds being received in the federal budgetary fund for financial 
support for the more important national economic branches to a 
special sub-account entitled "Fund for Financial Support for 
Agriculture." The funds from this sub-account will be employed 
for specific programs, including for reconstruction and 
re-equipping, for expansion and new construction of 
installations of a production nature, for developing the 
logistical base for breeding enterprises and seed production 
farms and for land reclamation and nature conservation measures. 
  During the first six months, a governmental commission for 
credit policies and the Central Bank of Russia will allocate not 
less than five trillion rubles worth of centralized credit 
resources for the purchasing of fuel, seed, spare parts, mineral 
fertilizer and feed. A portion of this money, or more exactly 
1.3 trillion rubles, will be used for acquiring equipment, 
trucks and pedigree livestock. These credits will be issued for 
a period of up to three years, with annual repayment of 
indebtedness commencing 1 September and with simultaneous 
payment of interest. 
  In addition, the plans call for centralized capital 
investments in the amount of 2.8 trillion rubles and investment 
credit in the amount of 1.3 trillion rubles. 
  This money will be used for development and revival of the 
agrarian sector of the economy. They must serve in the role of a 
unique locomotive, one which pulls behind itself all of the 
national economic branches that are associated with agricultural 
production -- machine-building, chemistry, processing. 
  And a chief consideration is the fact that this money cannot 
be used for consumption. This is especially frightening to 
society and to those who oppose financial support for 
agriculture and do not encourage inflation. To the contrary, the 
revival of production operations in a whole series of national 
economic branches will serve as a reliable means for restraining 
the inflationary processes. 
  Measures are set forth in the decree for providing support 
for peasant (private farmer) farms. In particular, not less than 
15 percent of the capital investments called for in local 
budgets for the mentioned purposes will be allocated for the 
construction of installations for the social and production 
infrastructure. The plans call for monetary assistance for those 
families which resettle in rural areas. 
  The production volumes for agricultural products, which are 
maintained at the 1993 level, are set forth in the document. 
Federal food funds in response to state needs are being created 
and provision is being made for advancing funds on credit for 
products sold to these funds, in the amount of 50 percent of 
their value. 

