Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Syrian `Veto' on PLO Torpedoes Cordon </F>
States Meetings"] 
  [Text] Amman, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT -- Highly placed Jordanian 
sources have stated that the formula governing the meetings of 
the Arab cordon states, namely Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, Egypt, 
and the PLO, probably no longer exists and no coordination 
meetings are expected to be held in the near future. 
  The sources added that Syrian Foreign Minister Faruq 
al-Shar' 
had stated frankly at Amman airport on his latest visit that the 
PLO had ruled itself out of all coordination frameworks when it 
signed the Oslo agreement in Washington last September. 
  The sources expected the five-party cordon states formula to 
be replaced by coordination meetings between Jordan, Syria, and 
Lebanon. 
  'Abd-al-Rahim Malluh, who has resigned from the PLO 
Executive 
Committee, also ruled out the possibility of a cordon states 
meeting in the near future. In an interview with AL-SHARQ 
AL-AWSAT he said that "such meetings came to a halt when the PLO 
leadership solitarily signed the Oslo agreement, which made 
Damascus emphatically object to the PLO's presence at 
coordination meetings. [no closing quotation mark] 
  Faruq Qaddumi, head of the PLO's Political Department, tried 
unsuccessfully to soften the Syrian position and to call for a 
coordination meeting attended by the five parties. The valid 
formula now is one of consultation between the three parties. 
That was clear when President Hafiz al-Asad, in his 
conversation with U.S. President Bill Clinton after the Security 
Council passed its resolution 904, said that Syria, Jordan, and 
Lebanon had agreed to resume the negotiations with Israel. 
  Political observers in Amman point out that Cairo is no 
longer very enthusiastic for a coordination meeting of the 
cordon states and that at present it gives priority to the 
implementation of the PLO-Israel Cairo agreement, over which 
Cairo had a diplomatic clash with Washington when President 
Clington called for the transfer of the venue of the 
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations to Washington. That 
disagreement was resolved on the basis that the final agreement 
between the two sides would be signed in Cairo. 

