BFN 

<F P=106> ["Excerpts" of report by Chen Biting, chairman of the </F>
Jiangsu Provincial Planning and Economic Commission, on the 
implementation of Jiangsu's 1993 national economic and social 
development plan and the draft 1994 plan] 
  [Text] 1. Implementation of the 1993 Plan 
  In 1993, all localities in Jiangsu were able to maintain the 
vigorous momentum of economic development and achieve new 
success in all social causes. This is a result of following 
through with the guidelines from the important talks which 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping gave in southern China and the guidelines 
laid down by the 14th National CPC Congress, namely seizing 
opportunity, deepening reform, opening up wider to the outside 
world, accelerating the restructuring process, expediting 
scientific and technological progress, and intensifying 
macroeconomic regulation and control. On the whole, the 
situation was gratifying. The province's gross value of goods 
and services increased 18.5 percent, totaling 225 billion yuan, 
and attained the goal of quadrupling the province's industrial 
and agricultural output seven years ahead of time. The output 
of cereal and oil-bearing crops was basically stable, and the 
rural economy developed in all sectors. The value of total 
agricultural output increased 8.4 percent, totaling 79.6 billion 
yuan in 1993. Total grain output was 32.797 million tonnes, and 
total output of oil-bearing crops was 1.257 million tonnes, 
which was slightly lower than a year ago. The total cotton 
yield decreased 18.7 percent, dropping to 429,000 tonnes. The 
development of village and town enterprises and export-oriented 
businesses was quite fast. The industrial economy grew rapidly 
and the level of overall development was higher. In 1993, the 
output value yielded by enterprises operated by townships and 
larger areas increased 34.2 percent, totaling 502.4 billion 
yuan. The sales rate of industrial goods produced by 
enterprises operated by townships and larger areas increased to 
95.3 percent, up from 93.6 percent a year ago. The composite 
index of industries' economic returns totaled 99.34 percent. 
The investment pattern continued to improve, and significant 
progress was made in building major infrastructures and basic 
industries. Public investments in fixed assets increased 51 
percent, totaling some 107.49 billion yuan. This included 
state-owned units' investments of 45.87 billion yuan, or a 59.3 
percent increase in their fixed assets. Many major capital 
construction projects and technological upgrading projects were 
put into operation or were basically completed. The development 
of tertiary industries picked up speed, and the commodity market 
was prosperous and stable. The added value of tertiary 
industries in 1993 was 62.3 billion yuan, an increase of 20.3 
percent. The total sales of consumer goods in the year 
increased 33.9 percent, totaling 107.42 billion yuan. Banking 
operations continued to improve, and the growth of revenues was 
quite quick. The amount of public savings was 36.934 billion 
yuan more than that registered early in the year, and the amount 
of loans extended was 28.916 billion more than that registered 
early in the year. Revenues in 1993 increased 45.3 percent, 
totaling 22.13 billion yuan. Opening up wider to the outside 
world, the province's export-oriented economy developed 
vigorously. Total imports and exports in the province increased 
39.2 percent, totaling $8.7 billion. The total amount of 
foreign capital actually used in the province increased 90.9 
percent, totaling $3.29 billion, and the establishment of 10,032 
new foreign-invested businesses was approved. Enterprises made 
some headway in replacing their operating mechanisms, and 
reforms continued to deepen in various fields. A total of 600 
limited-liability companies and 104 corporations selling stocks 
to specific sectors were established throughout Jiangsu, and the 
stocks of six companies were listed. Small state-owned 
enterprises carried out all sorts of reforms such as 
restructuring operations, switching production, leasing out 
operations, contracting outside businesses, and selling 
themselves to buyers. A total of 9,500 urban enterprises as 
well as village and town enterprises became joint-stock 
businesses. Substantial headway was achieved in rural and price 
reforms. Remarkable results were achieved in promoting 
scientific and technological development. Educational services 
were improved. The province accomplished 100 projects of 
developing and producing major new products, popularized 2,000 
types of new technology, and many centers were built for 
tackling scientific and technological problems, for conducting 
industrial experiments, and for carrying out engineering 
research. The province accelerated the pace of its educational 
reform, restructured its educational system, and improved the 
basic education. Compulsory nine-year education was carried out 
in 28 counties (cities and districts) as well as 420 townships 
and towns. Illiteracy was wiped out among 565,000 young people 
and people in their 30's through 50's. The people's standard of 
living continued to improve. The province's total population 
was 69,672,700 by the end of the year; the natural population 
growth rate was 7.36 per thousand. By the end of the year, 2 
percent of urban dwellers were unemployed. Per capita wages 
increased 26.6 percent, totaling 3,533 yuan; the per capital 
income of farmers increased 207 yuan, or 19.4 percent, totaling 
1,267 yuan. New success was achieved in the development of 
cultural and health services, radio and television broadcasts, 
sports, civil affairs, environmental protection, tourism, and in 
promoting socialist ethics. 
  Major problems existing in Jiangsu's economic and social 
life in 1993 were demonstrated by: 1) latent factors of 
instability in agriculture: 2) a worsening funds problem; 3) 
insufficient vitality and low efficiency among state-owned large 
and medium enterprises; 4) a structural contradiction remained 
conspicuous; and 5) an excessive rise in commodity prices with 
the overall social retail commodity price index reaching 15.4 
percent. 
<H5>  2. Guiding Thoughts in Mapping Out Plans for 1994 and </H5>
Several Major Tasks To Be Fulfilled Well 
  Guiding thoughts in mapping out a province-wide plan for 
1994 
will be: To thoroughly implement guidelines of both the 
14th CPC National Congress and the Third Plenum of the 14th CPC 
Central Committee and to realize the overall objectives of 
establishing a socialist market economic system by further 
emancipating the minds, seizing the opportunities, intensifying 
reform, accelerating opening to the outside world, speeding up 
structural adjustment, strengthening macaoeconomic regulation 
and control, striving for better efficiency and quality in 
economic operations, attaching greater importance to maintaining 
the basic balance between total social supply and demand, and 
ensuring sustained, rapid, and healthy national economic 
development to promote all-around social progress. Based on 
the aforementioned guiding thoughts, the primary goals for 
province-wide national economic and social development for 1994 
will be: 
  A 12-percent increase in GNP, of which increases in 
primary, secondary, and tertiary industry will be 4 percent, 14 
percent, and 18 percent, respectively; 
  A 7-percent increase in revenues; 
  An investment of 124 billion yuan in total local social 
fixed assets, which represents a 25-percent increase; 
  A total import and export value of $9.5 billion -- a 
9-percent increase -- of which the total value of exports will 
increase by 17 percent to reach $7 billion; 
  An actual use of foreign funds amounting to $4.2 billion 
-- a 27.6 percent increase -- of which the direct use of foreign 
funds will be increased by 30 percent to reach $3.9 billion; 
  A total social commodities retail volume of 129 billion 
yuan, or a 20-percent increase; 
  The rate of the increase in overall social retail 
commodities prices is to be controlled, in the region of 12 
percent; 
  A 1,450 yuan per capita net income for peasants, an 
increase of 180 yuan or over 14 percent; 
  The natural population growth rate is to be limited to 
9.83 per thousand; and 
  The job-waiting rate for both urban and rural areas is to 
be controlled at 2.5 percent or lower. 
  Various tasks related to province-wide national economic and 
social development for 1994 will be thoroughly unfolded to meet 
the overall requirements of seizing the opportunities, deepening 
reform, opening wider to the outside world, promoting 
development, and maintaining stability. To achieve this year's 
set targets, we are prepared to do the following tasks 
particularly well: 
<H5>  (1) To Strengthen the Agricultural Base by Energetically </H5>
Increasing Peasants' Incomes and Promoting Overall Rural 
Economic Development. 
  First, we should continue to deepen rural reform; stabilize 
and improve the responsibility system, the main form of which is 
the household contract with remuneration linked to output; 
establish and perfect the mechanism of transferring land use 
rights; gradually liberalize both prices and the management of 
all major agricultural products; set up grain risk funds and a 
surplus stock system; strengthen the construction of a rural 
socialized service system; and strictly control and 
realistically lighten peasants' unreasonable burdens. Second, 
we should strive to increase input into agriculture to raise its 
comprehensive production capacity. The input into agriculture 
should be concentrated mainly on improving agricultural 
infrastructure; and supporting the construction of commercial 
grain and quality cotton base counties, the comprehensive 
development of agricultural resources, the construction of farm 
produce markets, the integration of trade with industry and 
agriculture in enterprises, and the agricultural service system. 
Third, we should readjust the agricultural product-mix and go 
all out to develop diversified management. We should rely on 
science and technology in develop agriculture towards a pattern 
of high yields, high quality, and high efficiency. We should 
strengthen organization and guidance over diversified management 
and, under the premise of ensuring stable grain and cotton 
output, expand the area of cash crops. We should step up 
efforts to promote the "vegetable basket" project to ensure a 
stable supply of nonstaple foods for urban areas. Fourth, we 
should energetically develop secondary and tertiary industries 
in rural areas. We should continue to develop village and 
township enterprises. In economically developed areas, village 
and township enterprises should concentrate efforts on expanding 
scale, raising product quality, and improving management. In 
underdeveloped areas, village and township enterprises should 
gradually integrate trade with industry and agriculture. We 
should advocate the establishment of lateral ties between the 
south and the north. We should vigorously develop tertiary 
industries in rural areas to expedite the shift of the rural 
work force. Fifth, we should do a good job in the production 
and supply of agricultural capital goods. We should enforce 
price differentials in the circulation of major agricultural 
capital goods. We should establish a price risk fund and 
reserve system at different levels for major agricultural 
capital goods, and should continue to renovate and expand 
industries producing support-agriculture goods in accordance 
with the Eighth Five-Year Plan. 
<H5>  (2) Actively Readjust the Industrial Structure To Promote </H5>
Efficient Growth of Industry. 
  First of all, we should emphasize the focal points of the 
readjustment and make breakthroughs in developing fine-quality, 
large-scale, high added-value, and export-oriented industries. 
We should concentrate resources on developing a number of 
highly interrelated staple products containing extensive 
technology and having high added value and marketability for 
earning foreign exchange. We should rely on key enterprises 
with rich resources to develop enterprise groups. We should 
organize Jiangsu's pillar industries to set up new enterprise 
groups. We should accelerate the implementation of the 
"hallmark engineering" project to set up high and new-tech 
industries and increase the application of technology in 
Jiangsu's industrial economy. We should further develop an 
export-oriented economy and speed up Jiangsu's convergence with 
the international economy. Second, it is necessary to 
effectively coordinate essential factors for production. 
Alleviation of the strain on Jiangsu's coal supply in 1994 will 
depend on railway transportation. Therefore, we should step up 
the coordination with relevant state departments to increase the 
delivery of coal covered by the state plan, while actively 
seeking resources not covered by the state plan. Power 
shortages will continue this year, with demand topping supply by 
more than 3 billion kwh. We shall mainly take the following 
measures: operating the existing generating units at full 
capacity; actively organizing trans-regional power supply for 
processing industries; increasing the loading factor of power 
consumption; and accelerating the construction of generating 
units. Industry will continue to face a shortage of working 
capital this year. Therefore, it is necessary to raise funds 
through various channels to increase the total capital supply; 
to energetically limit production, reduce stocks, and increase 
sales to reduce the occupation of funds; and to optimize 
investment patterns to ensure the development of key products 
and enterprises. 
<H5>  (3) Make Greater Efforts To Readjust Investment Strucure and </H5>
Concentrate Energy To Ensure the Completion of Key Projects. 
  This year, the state set the fixed assets investment scale 
for our province's collective-owned units at 82.92 billion yuan. 
The state-owned units will invest 34.05 billion yuan in fixed 
assets. A total of 12.31 billion yuan and 16 billion yuan will 
be used for basic construction and technological transformation 
at state-owned units. Under that arrangement, we will devote 
greater efforts to readjust investment structure, and we will 
use limited funds and materials for key projects conforming to 
industrial policy and for key projects that can generate good 
economic returns. In water conservancy projects, we will mainly 
direct our efforts to harness Huaihe and Taihu, and to divert 
Yihe, Shuhe, Sihe, and Tongyuhe. In the area of power supply, 
we will strive to add 1.225 million kwh of power generation 
capacity to our province this year. In transport, we will 
continue to build the Shanghai-Nanjing Expressway, first-class 
Nanjing-Lianyungang Highway and Nanjing-Nantong Highway, the 
Sunan Canal, and to start building the New Nanjing Airport, the 
Changjiang Highway Bridge at Jiangyin section, and the Xinchang 
Railway. In telecommunications, we will increase the number of 
telephones in urban and rural areas to 1.25 million. In raw 
materials, we will continue to strive to do well in steel and 
polyester production, to try to complete ongoing machinery, 
electric, light textile projects, urban infrastructure 
facilities, and other social undertakings at an early date. 
This year we will concentrate efforts to upgrade technologies 
for producing major products. We will see to the implementation 
of key projects and will monitor the progress of key projects. 
We will accelerate the construction pace of the state's and 
province's key projects and see to the completion and putting 
into production of 100 projects, including medical equipment, 
and digital-controlled machine tools as scheduled. We will step 
up the startup work on the key projects of the "87 projects." 
We will also strive to do well in the "landmark projects." 
<H5>  (4) Accelerate the Development of Tertiary Industry and </H5>
Continue To Raise Its Proportion. 
  We will concentrate on the following to accelerate the 
development of tertiary industry. First, we will accelerate the 
establishment of a market system, foster and improve a number of 
commodity markets, as well as the finance, technology, labor, 
real estate, and information markets. Second, we will stress 
improving transport, telecommunications, civil administration, 
and public services. Third, we will encourage the development 
of insurance business, the entry of foreign banks, the proper 
development of non-bank financial institutions, the 
establishment of cooperative banks in urban and rural areas, and 
the reform of social insurance and security systems. Fourth, we 
will vigorously develop promising forms of tertiary industry, 
support intelligent-type tertiary industry, standardize and 
develop the real estate market, and promote tourism and 
recreation industry. Fifth, we will encourge individuals and 
private businesses to develop tertiary industry. Sixth, we will 
pool funds through various channels to develop tertiary industry. 
<H5>  (5) Put Great Effort Into Foreign Trade and Strive To </H5>
Develop an Open Economy. 
  First of all, we should deepen reform of foreign trade 
enterprises' operating mechanisms. We should encourage foreign 
trade enterprises to move toward industrialization and 
internationalization, to amalgamate into groups, and to 
institute the shareholding system. We should continually 
accelerate granting qualified enterprises and science and 
technology research institutes the power to engage in foreign 
trade. We should support counties where conditions permit 
enterprises to engage in export. Second, we should continue to 
implement the strategy to diversify markets. We should 
extensively explore markets in Western Europe, the Middle East, 
Southeast Asia, South America, Africa, Eastern Europe, and the 
Commonwealth of Independent States. We should encourage various 
localities to look for trade opportunities in a well-guided and 
planned manner; promote marketing and after-sales service 
outside Jiangsu; and actively adjust the export product mix. 
Third, we should open up more areas to foreign investment. 
This year, we will focus on attracting foreign direct 
investment, channeling it into high-technology, large-scale, and 
high-efficiency projects, and further develop cooperative 
relations with foreign transnational companies and consortium. 
We will attract Taiwan and overseas Chinese investment in an 
ever active manner; widen channels for foreign investment in 
infrastructural facilities, raw and processed materials, high 
and new technologies, agricultural development, real estate, and 
other domains; accelerate transforming large- and medium-sized 
enterprises through utilizing foreign funds; and strengthen 
macro management over foreign-funded enterprises. Fourth, we 
should unfold foreign economic tasks in all domains, at 
different levels, and through many channels, on the basis of 
running Jiangsu's foreign economic and technical cooperation 
companies smoothly. Fifth, we should strengthen the 
construction of development zones and give full play to the 
development zones serving as "windows" to openness. 
<H5>  (6) Work Hard To Explore Markets in Urban and Rural Areas </H5>
and Continue To Improve Living Standards. 
  We should pay close attention to the issue of the market; 
strengthen market research and analysis; make great efforts to 
explore markets in urban and rural areas; continue to stabilize 
and expand sales contingents; formulate scientific and flexible 
marketing strategies; strengthen the construction of the market 
system and marketing network; organize various promotions, 
exhibitions, and order-placing fairs; make a success in 
introducing industrial products to rural areas; attach 
importance to exploring markets in rural areas and remote 
provinces and regions; strive to expand the international 
market; and increase Jiangsu-made products' market share. 
According to the state's arrangement, the public functionary 
system and wages reform are implemented step by step, thereby 
improving employees' income. With the improvement of productive 
forces and efficiency, workers' income increases 
correspondingly. At the same time, peasants' income is much 
improved, thanks to the development of the rural economy and 
increases in the price of agricultural products. We should make 
arrangements for the well-being of the retired, workers of 
loss-making enterprises, peasants in poverty-stricken areas, and 
teachers of primary and middle schools. 
<H5>  (7) Vigorously and Steadily Promote Price Reform and Strive </H5>
To Keep the Rises of the General Price Level Under Control. 
  The major thrust of the price reform is: raising procurement 
prices for grain and cotton; lifting control on coal and 
chemical fertilizer prices that fall under unified state 
distribution; breaking down the disparity in crude oil prices 
and correspondingly raising crude oil and refined oil prices; 
appropriately raising electric utility rates; cautiously 
handling reactions resulting from the readjustment of prices of 
basic products; gradually raising rents on citizens' houses; and 
adjusting fee collection items which produce conspicuous 
contradictions. In view of last year's excessive price rises 
and this year's mounting inflationary pressure, and to control 
price rises to a level tolerable to the masses, we must 
earnestly enhance our capability to control commodity prices. 
We should concentrate our price control efforts on the supply 
of vegetables and rice because these have a direct effect on the 
people's daily life. We will continue to enforce the target 
responsibility system over the level of price rises. We will 
establish a sound and special reserve system for grain, cotton, 
cooking oil, meat, and for such major commodities as coal, heavy 
oil, and means for farm production. We will set up and improve 
a market price regulatory fund as well as a risk fund for the 
prices of major commodities. 
<H5>  (8) Deepen Reform, Strengthen Management, and Manage Well </H5>
Enterprises in a Down-To-Earth Manner. 
  It is necessary first of all to implement well the 
"Regulations on the Transformation of the Management System of 
State-Owned Industrial Enterprises" and the "Regulations on the 
Supervision and Management of State-Owned Enterprises' Assets" 
and conscientiously supervise and check the implementation of 
those two regulations; to genuinely return decision-making 
rights to enterprises; to accelerate the transformation of 
government functions; to effectively lighten enterprises' 
burdens; and to resolutely put a stop to illegal collection of 
fees, fines, and other charges. Second, we must truly change 
enterprises' operation mechanisms by concentrating efforts on 
establishing a modern enterprise system. Reform of the corporate 
system should be carried out at state-owned enterprises in a 
planned manner. The pace of reforming the shareholding system 
should be stepped up. It is necessary to strive to do a good 
job at 800 state-owned enterprises which have been selected to 
carry out investigations of assets. State-owned small and 
medium-sized enterprises should continue to practice the 
management method of enterprise contracting, leasing, and sales. 
We should continue to promote the cooperative shareholding 
system at collective-owned enterprises and work toward realizing 
the goal of having 30 percent of the collective-owned 
enterprises in the province adopt the cooperative shareholding 
system this year. Encouragement and support should be given to 
the development of the non-public economic sectors. Third, we 
must enhance enterprise management and fully tap enterprise 
development potential. Campaigns to transform enterprise 
operation mechanisms, to improve enterprise management, to 
enhance enterprises' development potentials, and to increase 
enterprise efficiency should be extensively launched. There is 
a need to establish a strict management system. Continuous 
efforts should be exerted to help enterprises turn losses into 
profits and to conserve and lower energy consumption. We must 
practice strict quality control, monitor and check quality 
control work, and promote the quality- certification system 
practiced by the international business community. Fourth, we 
must stress safe production work; conscientiously implement the 
"safety first, prevention is the best" policy; enforce safe 
systems of production responsibility; enhance the safety 
inspection and supervision system; improve leadership over the 
handling of accidents; and enforce strict safety inspection 
measures. 
<H5>  (9) Pay Close Attention to Science, Technology, and </H5>
Education, Promote Coordinated Development of Social 
Undertakings. 
  We should continue to speed up the reform of the science and 
technology management system, comprehensively promote basic and 
developmental research, put new and high technology to use in 
production, and vigorously combine science and technology with 
the economy. We should promote the transformation of scientific 
and technological achievements into a productive force: 1) we 
should do a good job in carrying out a number of key projects to 
tackle difficult scientific and technological problems that have 
a great bearing on economic and social development; 2) we should 
step up the building of basic facilities for scientific research 
and support the construction of some engineering research 
centers; and 3) we should vigorously make technological 
development, hold technological demonstrations, and promote new 
products. 
  In practical terms, we should give strategic priority to the 
development of education. We should further strengthen 
elementary education and do a particularly good job in 
implementing the nine-year compulsory education system; we 
should vigorously develop secondary occupational and technical 
education and adult education; and we should stabilize and 
develop higher education. We should continue to increase our 
investment in education. People should be encouraged to raise 
funds to set up and run schools. Attention should be paid to 
improving the quality and efficiency of education and stepping 
up the building of a contingent of teachers. It is necessary to 
make vigorous efforts to develop culture, the press, publishing, 
broadcasting, film and television, public health, sports, 
tourism, and other undertakings and to further strengthen the 
building of socialist spiritual civilization. We should 
continue to do a good job in family planning, strengthen 
environmental protection, and pay attention to protecting and 
rationally utilizing natural resources such as land, mineral 
resources, forestry, and water. We should promote a coordinated 
development of both the environment and the economy. 
<H5>  (10) Further Improve and Strengthen Macroeconomic Regulation </H5>
and Control; Raising the Coordinating Capability of the Economy. 
  In 1994 we should take measures to further improve and 
strengthen macroeconomic regulation and control. First of all, 
we should effectively carry out various reforms according to 
unified state arrangements. Second, we should effectively 
maintain a balance between aggregate demand and aggregate supply 
and readjust the economic structure. In macroeconomic 
regulation and control, the province this year should focus its 
attention on optimizing the economic structure and improving 
efficiency and strive to maintain a basic balance between 
aggregate demand and aggregate supply. Third, We should make 
full use of local favorable conditions and rationally readjust 
the distribution of productive forces. We should take effective 
measures to support northern Jiangsu in accelerating the 
construction of infrastructural facilities. Fourth, we should 
do well in making long- and medium-term plans and start drafting 
the Ninth Five-Year Plan and a long-term program for the period 
from now to 2010. Fifth, we should strengthen our forecasting 
and analysis of economic trends and regularly provide economic 
information to grass-roots units and enterprises. Sixth, we 
should continue to strengthen the capability of macroeconomic 
regulation and control at the provincial level and ensure the 
completion of key provincial- level projects and tasks. 
Seventh, economic planning departments should effectively 
improve their work methods, work style, efficiency, and services 
according to the requirement for changing functions, so as to 
make a greater contribution to economic construction. 

