Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Press review] </F>
  [Text] TISHRIN carries an editorial about the Israeli 
prime minister's visit to Washington and the danger facing the 
peace process as a result of Israeli maneuvers. TISHRIN says: 
Observers agree that Rabin's visit has two basic objectives: 
One objective is to paralyze the Security Council so that it 
will not adopt a resolution against Israel dealing with the 
al-Ibrahimi Mosque massacre and providing protection to the 
defenseless Palestinian people. The other objective is to push 
the United States to pressure the Palestinians in order to 
continue negotiations on a separate agreement that entrenches 
the occupation through settlement building for at least five 
more years. 
  TISHRIN stresses that the peace process is in danger and 
that 
there is no alternative to an effective international and U.S. 
move end the impasse. The paper believes that the peace process 
cannot be rescued by pressuring the Palestinians to implement 
the Oslo agreement because the Palestinian people have wholly 
rejected the agreement. Indeed, the peace process can only be 
rescued by pressuring Israel to return to the bases of the 
Madrid conference, to move toward a just and comprehensive 
peace, to discuss the issue of settlements, to evacuate the 
settlers from the occupied territories, and to remove this daily 
threat to the Palestinian people. 
  TISHRIN continues, saying: The peace process was supposed to 
achieve tangible progress after the Geneva summit. However, the 
peace process has retreated. This poses legitimate questions 
about an honest and constructive U.S. role. Why hasn't 
Washington put the necessary pressure on the rulers of Israel in 
order to implement the Security Council resolutions? Especially 
since it is these rulers who prevented the desired progress and 
are responsible for encouraging Zionist settlers to perpetrate 
barbaric massacres, the continuation of which will certainly 
destroy the peace process. 
  TISHRIN concludes by saying: Many thought that the 
al-Asad-Clinton summit in Geneva would give a strong push to the 
peace process, especially since Syria has adhered to all the 
requirements of the peace process and to achieving a just, 
comprehensive, and firm peace in the region. However, Rabin's 
government was not only satisfied with deadlocking the 
Washington bilateral talks. Indeed, it sought to single out the 
Palestinian side and impose the Oslo agreement. Then it 
surprised everyone with the al-Ibrahimi Mosque massacre to show 
that Zionism had not changed any of its methods or essence and 
that Zionism and aggression are two sides of the same coin. 
  AL-BA'TH also devotes its editorial to Rabin's visit to 
Washington. Paper says that Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq 
Rabin's visit and his meeting with U.S. President Bill Clinton 
are aimed at justifying the Hebron massacre and holding others 
responsible for the lack of progress in the peace process and, 
hence, gaining more political, financial, and military aid. The 
paper notes that this visit comes after the Hebron massacre, 
which was proven to have been executed in arrangement with 
Rabin's government. 
  Although Israel is fully convinced that Washington will not 
allow the Security Council to adopt any resolution that disturbs 
Tel Aviv. Rabin's government wants more than this from the U.S. 
Administration. It is clear that Israel wants the United States 
to help it avoid all possible effects the Hebron massacre could 
have on Israel. 
  AL-BA'TH continues, saying: If the Tel Aviv government was 
seeking to achieve peace, it would have at least responded to 
the requirements of the peace process by taking at least one 
step in the right direction. During the peace talks that 
started in Washington more than two and a half years ago, it 
became clear that Israel does not want the peace desired by the 
rest of the world. Instead, Israel is seeking to achieve its 
interests in the region. Hence, it is continuously avoiding 
every proposal that could serve the peace process and its 
objective. 
  AL-BA'TH says: Israel is circumventing every proposal 
presented during the peace process by raising side issues that 
have nothing to do with the essence and that do not serve the 
peace process whatsoever. This is clearly evident in Israel's 
avoidance of an announcement of its commitment to the principle 
of withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories. 
  AL-BA'TH believes that the peace process, which is suspended 
because of the Israeli stand, requires a more decisive role by 
the cosponsors of the peace process, especially from the United 
States because it has well-known influence on Tel Aviv -- the 
party seeking to derail the peace process. 
  AL-BA'TH concludes by saying: It is time for the United 
States to force Israel to face reality, not to overwhelm it with 
more political support and military and financial aid. This is 
especially true since achieving a real just and comprehensive 
peace is supposed to have become even more important. 

