BFN 

  [Excerpts] Chilean Foreign Minister Carlos Figueroa said 
yesterday in Marrakech that despite the success obtained in the 
Uruguay Round of talks within the General Agreement on Trade and 
Tariffs (GATT), it is necessary to continue to fight at a world 
level against protectionism and commercial discrimination. 
  He emphasized the contribution that will be made in this 
regard by the World Trade Organization (WTO), which will replace 
GATT on 1 January 1995. Figueroa strongly warned that emphasis 
should be placed on some subjects, like the liberalization of 
agricultural product trade, the improvement of the rules against 
dumping, and the banning of unilateral sanctions and 
extraterritorial enforcement of domestic environmental standards. 
  The minister thus advocated the lifting of measures that may 
entail covert protectionism or the possibility of hindering free 
commerce through social or environmental criteria, or through 
the appearance of a kind of neo-protectionism that will be 
particularly harmful to developing nations. 
  "More liberal commerce, without discrimination, remains our 
best choice and our first priority," Figueroa said, in a speech 
he addressed to the representatives of 118 countries that today 
will sign the Final Act of the Uruguay Round of GATT talks and 
the agreement for creation of the WTO. 
  Addressing ministers of countries from all over the world, 
Figueroa conveyed our country's strong determination to actively 
and responsibly engage in the WTO. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  The Chilean Position </H5>
  Figueroa went to Marrakech to sign the Uruguay Round 
agreements on behalf of the Chilean Government. 
  In the speech before his peers yesterday, Figueroa noted 
Chile's satisfaction over the fact that the Final Act will 
include the attainment of several objectives that were outlined 
in the Declaration of Punta del Este, such as the liberalization 
of commerce through the reduction of custom tariffs and the 
lifting of several non-tariff restrictions, particularly those 
affecting agriculture. 
  He also emphasized as a major achievement the fact that the 
textile and clothing sectors will also be ruled by GATT 
regulations, although the terms and deadlines will preserve 
restrictions that favor some countries for "too long." 
  As a second major achievement, Figueroa mentioned the 
strengthening of the multilateral system of commerce through 
effective rules. He said such rules strengthen the principle of 
nondiscrimination as the essential foundation of international 
trade. 
  Figueroa expressed Chile's satisfaction over the fact that 
the final documents will uphold -- from a legal and political 
viewpoint -- a new dimension of commerce that goes beyond the 
exchange of goods. He remarked that the agreement that 
regulates the supply and demand of services, and that creates -- 
among other things -- a forum and the mechanisms for 
strengthening liberalization, is a major step forward. 
  He explained that the improvement of the system for the 
settlement of disagreements is beneficial for mid-sized or small 
countries like Chile, as their interests will be preserved 
especially by the certainty and stability of international law. 
  Figueroa said that the creation of the WTO has strengthened 
the legal framework that is necessary for assuring these 
achievements, and that it is also a forum for multilateral 
negotiations in search for freer, nondiscriminatory trade. 
[passage omitted] 
<H5>  Pending Tasks </H5>
  Even though he expressed Chile's general satisfaction over 
the agreements, Figueroa said that in the future it will be 
necessary to place emphasis on six different subjects in the 
quest for freer world trade. 
  First, he obviously mentioned the implementation of the 
decisions as of 1 January 1995. 
  Second, he advocated continuation and acceleration of the 
liberalization of the agricultural products trade. Third, he 
said it is necessary to improve antidumping rules, so that they 
do not become instruments for unjustified, discriminatory 
protection. 
  Figueroa said it is also necessary to consider the 
relationship between trade and the environment, reaffirming the 
principle that each nation should independently address the 
subject, impeding the extraterritorial enforcement of domestic 
standards, and avoiding unilateral sanctions. 
  Figueroa said that countries should be encouraged to join 
the 
multilateral system of commerce, in order to give it an 
effectively global nature. [passage omitted] 
  Concerning some existing concerns, Figueroa emphasized that 
Chile has maintained and promoted an open, clear commercial 
policy, both for goods and services, especially in the area of 
investment. He warned that Chile will preserve its national 
interests if the tariffs that some countries have adopted for 
the agricultural sector impair or neutralize the benefits that 
were negotiated. 

