BFN 

<F P=106> [By Nur Batur from the "The Diplomacy Corridor" column: </F>
"The Secret Turkish-Russian War in NATO"] 
  [Text] Who will win the Turkish-Russian war currently 
being waged behind closed doors at the NATO Ministerial Council 
meetings in Istanbul? 
  We are really curious. 
  This time, Turkey faces a different situation than in the 
Cold War period with regard to the Russian threat, over which 
there is renewed concern. The United States and other Western 
allies appear to have abandoned the entire Caucasus and Central 
Asia to Russian hegemony, in exchange for East Europe. The 
Turkish Administration, in turn, is losing sleep over this. 
  In actual fact, developments in the Caucasus are a source of 
great concern. 
  What are the developments that led even General Dogan Gures, 
chief of the General Staff, to openly refer to the Russian 
threat? 
  Approximately one year ago, Russia demanded raising the 
ceiling on the number of weapons allowed in the Caucasus within 
the framework of the CFE [Conventional Armed Forces in Europe] 
agreement. Naturally, Turkey was the first country that reacted 
against this demand. 
  The reaction of the West to this demand, which was raised 
immediately following Yeltsin's artillery fire against the 
Russian parliament "in the name of democracy," was initially 
inadequate as far as Turkey's expectations were concerned. At 
the time, the United States even indicated that the CFE may be 
renegotiated. In the wake of pressure from Ankara, however, 
NATO started to insist on remaining loyal to the agreement. 
  The distance covered by Russia during this time is very 
important. Russian Defense Minister Grachev even threatened to 
violate the agreement if the demand to raise the ceiling is not 
accepted. 
  As it happens, during this time, Russia staged a skillful 
scenario. Georgian President Eduard Shevardnadze, who did not 
favor sending Russian troops to the region, and Armenian 
President Levon Ter-Petrosyan now agree with Russia. Russia 
concluded defense cooperation agreements with both these 
countries and has begun amassing weapons in the region under the 
banner of peace forces. 
  The CFE allows Georgia and Armenia to deploy 220 tanks each 
in the area. Both these countries allocated 150 from their 
respective quotas to Russia. Moreover, Russia is also relying 
on Article 5 of the CFE, which allows for "temporary 
deployment." In this way, Yeltsin is side-stepping the CFE and 
amassing forces in the Caucasus. 
  The only country that resists this Russian plot is 
Azerbaijan. It is a fact that Azerbaijani President Aliyev is in 
an extremely difficult position. The fact that 15-20 days ago, 
Grachev invited the Armenian and Azerbaijani defense ministers 
to Moscow and announced that the Azerbaijanis have also agreed 
to a Russian peace force clearly demonstrates the Russian 
pressure. 
  The fact is, however, that the United States refuses to see 
this intensive pressure on the part of Russia to reamass forces 
in the Caucasus. And Turkey is left alone in its struggle 
against Russia. If, eventually, Russia succeeds in subduing 
Azerbaijan as well, the number of tanks it will deploy in the 
whole of the Caucasus will reach 1,800. Turkey is engaged in a 
truly difficult struggle. 
  In their joint communique, the NATO foreign ministers may 
issue a call to comply with the CFE. Can such a call eliminate 
the secret agreement that leaves the Caucasus in the hands of 
the Russians? 
  If such an agreement does not exist, the United States and 
NATO should not remain spectators to the plot staged by Russia. 

