BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by JORDAN TIMES staff reporter Nirmin Murad] </F>
  [Text] Amman--After the U.S. announced its acceptance of a 
Jordanian proposal to ease the naval blockade against the port 
of al-'Aqabah, the Kingdom will await final agreement and 
implementation before renewing its full participation in the 
peace process, a senior Jordanian official said Wednesday [27 
April]. 
  Information Minister Jawad al-'Anani told the JORDAN TIMES 
that the kindgom is satisfied with the U.S. move, which he said, 
had "removed a major obstacle and has allowed the Kingdom to 
shift its position towards renewed participation in the peace 
process." 
  But he pointed out that the U.S.-Jordan agreement over the 
naval blockade in al'Aqabah was not "100 per cent complete" and 
that the Kingdom was awaiting final agreement and implementation 
before announcing its return to the Middle East peace 
negotiations. 
  At a joint conference that followed a meeting in London with 
His Majesty King Husayn, U.S. Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher announced that "subject to fine tuning the U.S. 
accepted a Jordanian proposal on a new land-based system of 
verifying compliance with international sanctions against Iraq 
without the need to intercept ships at midsea. 
  The acceptance came after months of deliberations which 
prompted the King to link Jordan's return to the peace talks 
with Israel to an end to the sea-based inspections of all 
Jordan-bound vessels by a U.S.-led naval force which Washington 
calls the Multinational Interception [as published] Force (MIF). 
  Dr. al-'Anani said that the U.S.' positive response is an 
indication of the "unfolding realisation of Jordan's important 
role," another issue that Jordan tied to the renewal of Jordan's 
participation in the talks. 
  King Husayn had told representatives of Security Council 
member countries that he believed the pressure on Jordan with 
the al-'Aqabah siege was humiliting to Jordan and indicated a 
lack of appreciation for Jordan's positive role in promoting 
peace in the region. 
  Dr. al-'Anani, who said that the problem with the U.S. could 
have been averted earlier, said that this latest move will 
contribute positively to the "credibility of U.S. policies" in 
the Kingdom. 
  Politicians and analysts interviewed by the JORDAN TIMES 
agreed that the Jordan-U.S. agreement has placed Jordan back 
into its traditionally important role in the Middle East peace 
process. 
  Jordan had stuck to its conditions out of total frustration 
with the U.S. on two occasion where Arabs and Israelis were 
meeting for multilateral negotiations, Jordan sent only 
low-level observers to attend the meetings and held back "active 
participation." 
  In the multilateral meeting on water, held for the first 
time 
in a Gulf state, Oman, Jordan balanced its need to underline 
that it was not going to play a spoiler role by boycotting the 
meeting with a reiteration to its ultimatum on al-'Aqabah. The 
Jordanian observer to that meeting managed to delay the issuing 
of recommendations at the end of that meeting for several hours 
before allowing the meeting to conclude for the sake of 
maintaining Amman's relations with Muscat. 
  Observers believe that having been awarded a dignified way 
out of what was threatening to escalate into an open 
confrontation with Washington, Jordan is now willing to take an 
even more active role in the negotiating process with Israel, 
especially that a problem that arose earlier this month between 
the two countries over the present of Hamas representatives in 
Jordan seemed to have been settled. 
  "We are now willing to sign agreements on all individual 
items on the Jordan-Israeli agenda and to participate in the 
multilateral talks on all fronts discussing all issues at one 
time in the hope that these negotiations will lead to a peace 
treaty," Prime Minister 'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali told reporters 
this week, stressing that such a treaty cannot be reached any 
other way. 

