BFN 

  [Text] MANNERPLAW, Burma, May 26 (AFP) -- Burma's National 
Convention, charged with drafting a new constitution for the 
country, is a "farce" aimed at keeping the ruling military junta 
in power, a convention delegate said Thursday. 
  "I have lost all faith in the National Convention," said 
Daniel Aung, who has defected to the opposition, at a press 
conference in this opposition stronghold near the Thai border, 
about 700 kilometres (420 miles) northwest of Bangkok. 
  The press conference was held to mark the anniversary of 
Burma's 1990 elections, in which the opposition won a landslide 
victory against the military junta, which then refused to 
recognize the election results. 
  Until last month, Aung was one of five leaders of a group of 
political parties -- consisting of 99 deputies elected in the 
1990 polls -- at the convention. 
  He is the second delegate to the convention -- which has 750 
members, 500 of whom are appointed by the ruling junta -- to 
have defected to the opposition since work on the constitution 
began in January 1993. 
  Aung conceded delegates were able to speak freely during 
debates at the convention, but said that the country's military 
leaders, who chair the proceedings, paid no attention to the 
deliberations. 
  "The SLORC (State Law and Order Restoration Council) simply 
went ahead and adopted the principles of its own choice," Aung 
said. "They just don't care." 
  Aung criticised the method for electing the country's next 
president which were devised to "only allow the military to 
permanently monopolize the executive power." 
  The junta has also demanded that the constitution grant the 
army "a leading role" in national affairs. 
  The former party leader also warned visitors of forming 
false 
impressions of Burma. 
  "Some foreign visitors in Rangoon might have the illusions 
that things in Burma are improving," he said. 
  "On the surface, in Rangoon, it might be true ... however, 
nobody dares to speak and it is because the whole population is 
still under the terror of guns," Aung said. 
  He also criticised the policy of "constructive engagement" 
adopted by the six member countries of the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) which calls for a rejection of 
western sanctions against the junta, or SLORC. 
  "I will state it briefly -- the Burmese people do not like 
'constructive engagement' with the SLORC." 
  Backing Aung was General Bo Mya of the rebel Karen National 
Union, the oldest and most powerful armed opposition group 
fighting against the SLORC. 
  The 67-year-old general, who is also president of the 
Democratic Alliance of Burma -- comprised of rebel ethnic 
minority opposition groups -- denounced the junta's call for a 
ceasefire with all rebel movements and rejected "any political 
solution." 
  The SLORC has signed official ceasefire agreements with 10 
of 
the country's 12 rebel ethnic movements. 
  Bo Mya has demanded that the government recognise the rights 
of minorities, adding that the SLORC "frankly announced to us 
that if we wanted to talk politics, we'll stay outdoors of the 
meeting." 
  The mainly Christian Karens, who are Burma's largest ethnic 
minority and among the few groups that do not deal in opium, 
have adopted a defensive strategy in dealing with the military 
junta, aimed at retaining their zones of control. 
  The general has asked to hold "passive negotiations" with 
the 
government. 

