BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Mikhail Shevtsov] </F>
  [Text] Moscow May 4 TASS -- The Headquarters for 
Coordination of Military Cooperation of the Commonwealth of 
Independent States (CIS) intends to propose the NATO to make 
additions to the "Partnership for Peace" program. Specifically, 
these additions will concern the interaction between the NATO 
and the Commonwealth at the level of two defense alliances. 
Preliminarily this proposal will be considered by the Council 
of Defense Ministers of the Commonwealth, Lieutenant-General 
Leonid Ivashov, secretary of the Council of Defense Ministers of 
the Commonwealth who returned from Brussels on Tuesday, told 
ITAR-TASS today. 
  Representatives of the leadership of the Headquarters for 
Coordination of Military Cooperation of the Commonwealth headed 
by Colonel-General Viktor Samsonov, took part in a meeting of 
the NATO military committee which discussed problems of Bosnia 
and the "Partnership for Peace" program. 
  In the course of the meetings, Leonid Ivashov noted, the 
Russian delegation displayed interest in the development of any 
forms of cooperation and interaction. At the same time the 
Russian delegation expressed concern about the unclear character 
of some directions of the "Partnership for Peace" program which, 
the general believes, do not give full guarantees of security to 
the Commonwealth states. According to Leonid Ivashov, the 
program for cooperation proposed by the NATO resolves only a 
small part of the security problems which are facing Russia, 
specifically its peacemaking mission in hot spots in other 
former Soviet republics. 
  "Taking into account the processes taking place on the 
territory of the former Soviet Union, Russia must rely on the 
Commonwealth," Leonid Ivashov stressed. 
  Touching on the situation in Bosnia the lieutenant-general 
noted that the majority of the participants in the discussion in 
the NATO came to the conclusion that the forcible methods would 
not be able to bring positive results as the air bombing of the 
Serbian positions was taken as backing of one of the warring 
sides. 
  On the whole Leonid Ivashov underlined the usefulness of the 
participation of the delegation of the Headquarters for 
Coordination of Military Cooperation of the Commonwealth states 
in the meeting of the NATO military committee. 

