BFN 

  [Text] Moving north now, the Sinn Fein president, Gerry 
Adams, has welcomed some aspects of the British government's 
response to his party's questions on the Downing Street 
Declaration. He said today that the peace process was moving 
forward, however slowly, but he indicated that Sinn Fein would 
not be responding comprehensively until after the European 
election. Our northern editor, David Daven-Parr, asked him how 
helpful he felt the response was from the British Government: 
  [Begin recording] [Adams] Well, I think the provision of 
clarification may in many ways be more significant even than the 
substance -- remember, for the last five months the British 
refused to provide clarification and did so in the most 
insulting and provocative language -- so I think that then they 
took 21 pages to answer. I think it's worth noting that this 
happened as a result of an initiative from Ireland which 
involved the Dublin government, ourselves and of which Mr. Hume 
was aware. So, helpful in terms of the provision; in terms of 
the answers, some responses, I think, are useful. The 
addressing of some of the core issues with the Sinn Fein 
mandate, the Government of Ireland Act, and so on. The ignoring 
of other questions is not helpful. So, a mixed bag, anyway. We 
have to take all of this into account and come at it positively. 
  [Daven-Parr] You warned in a couple of statements before the 
response that it might be a dismissive one. Were you pleasantly 
surprised when you got such a comprehensive statement? 
  [Adams] Well, I was pleased -- not on any personal level, 
because I am quite thick-skinned -- that the provocative 
language, the insulting language which was part of the 
atmospherics, I think, of building the peace process, or not, 
was absent like that we didn't have any talk about 
decontamination, we didn't have any of that arrogance. 
Excepting one issue -- where they dismiss 70 years of coercion 
of nationalists here, as an assumption not based upon reality. 
So, the general tone, notwithstanding those problems, I think 
was good. 
  [Daven-Parr] What was your reaction to the news -- you may 
have been away at the time, but no doubt you have been fully 
briefed by now -- of the loyalist attack, a potentially very, 
very serious loyalist attack on a target in Dublin, resulting in 
the death of an IRA member? 
  [Adams] Well, I think first of all that was well signalled 
in 
advance by some members of the British establishment, by some 
British politicians, and particularly the members of mainstream 
unionist leaderships. Secondly, I don't think that we can 
divorce the British involvement in previous attacks in Dublin -- 
remember, the biggest casualties in any single incident came 
from the Dublin (Monaghan) bombing, and it's an open secret that 
there was a covert British involvement in that. Thirdly, the 
loyalists with their sponsors were obviously trying to 
intimidate public opinion in the 26 counties and to intimidate 
the Dublin government. They won't intimidate us, I don't 
believe they'll intimidate the Dublin government, and they 
should not be allowed to intimidate the people of Dublin. And 
can I say that [Fine Gael leader] John Bruton's remarks on all 
of this are most inappropriate. He was more concerned with the 
conduct of the funeral yesterday, than he was with the incident 
or its circumstances. [end recording] 

