Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, March 15 (BTA) -- The Government Commission 
on UN Sanctions met today with its head, Deputy Prime Minister 
Evgeni Matinchev, in the chair. The meeting was attended by 
Finance Minister Stoyan Aleksandrov. The commission was briefed 
on the incident involving the Khan Kubrat by Interior Ministry 
Chief Secretary General Kosta Bogatsevski, First Deputy Foreign 
Minister Valentin Gatsinski, Deputy Finance Minister and Chief 
of the General Customs Directorate Khristo Kulishev, and Deputy 
Transport Minister Kharalan Kharalanov. The commission adopted 
extra measures for the prevention of violations of the UN 
Security Council sanctions against the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). 
  Each department concerned with the incident will call to the 
strictest account its employees who were officially involved in 
the application of sanctions in this particular case. 
  The Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Finance and Transport 
were 
given until March 18, 1994 to work out a plan of action in 
similar situations. The same ministries were assigned to 
submit, by March 21, a draft act of government introducing extra 
measures for the enforcement of sanctions and the imposition of 
temporary restrictions on the handling of liquid fuel in the 
Bulgarian Danube ports. 
  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs will draft and send the UN 
Sanctions Committee answers to questions already posed to the 
Republic of Bulgaria in connection with the application of UN 
sanctions against the FRY (Serbia and Montenegro). 
  The commission will approach the Prosecutor General's Office 
for assistance in the enforcement of the UN sanctions against 
the FRY (Serbia and Montenegro). 
  The UN Security Council blamed the FRY government for the 
accident. In a statement, the Council welcomed the Bulgarian 
Government's cooperative treatment and called on it to 
investigate the actual circumstances of the action and to bring 
the culprits to justice. 
  On January 31, the ship pushing barges laden with diesel oil 
was detained on suspicion of sanctions busting. It slipped out 
of Bulgaria on the night of March 3 and docked at the Serbian 
port of Prahovo on March 6 to unload. It was arrested on its 
return to Bulgaria on March 13. 
  Upon the arrival of the Khan Kubrat, all 21 persons on board 
were arrested. After questioning at the Regional Directorate of 
Internal Affairs in Vidin (on the Danube, Northwestern 
Bulgaria), 18 of them were released. The ship's captain, first 
mate and engineer remain in custody. Five of the sailors told 
the BTA local correspondent that the ship had been hijacked from 
the port of Somovit by persons of unidentified nationality. 
Five persons armed with rifles and automatic pistols and 
wearing white hoods together with Rumen Stoykov, president of 
the Rutoplast Company of Petrich (southwestern Bulgaria) and one 
Mitko, boarded the ship on the night of March 3 to 4, the 
sailors said. According to a log record, Rumen Stoykov took 
over command of the ship as from March 4, they specify. When 
the ship sailed past Vidin, the gunmen herded part of the crew 
out on the deck and lined them up with their hands behind their 
heads. 
  In the Serbian port of Prahovo the gunmen disappeared 
mysteriously, and when the local police and customs arrived, 
they found neither the hijackers nor the weapons on board, the 
sailors said. Minutes before the Khan Kubrat started back with 
its six empty barges by 11 PM on March 12, Rumen Stoykov and his 
colleague Mitko got off at the port of Prahovo, the sailors said. 
  A team of investigators from the National Investigation 
Service left from Vidin for Sofia today, taking along the 
captain, first mate and engineer of the Khan Kubrat, the BTA 
correspondent reports. The chief of the Regional Directorate of 
Internal Affairs in Vidin Nikolay Dechev told a news conference 
that he expected the investigation into the case to be completed 
soon. 

