Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by political correspondent Aluf Ben] </F>
  [Excerpts] The powers of the Palestinian urban police 
force to be set up in Hebron will be decided unilaterally by 
Israel and will be made public in an order issued by the town's 
military governor following the signing of the agreement with 
the PLO on the establishment of the police force. The 
governor's order will detail the structure and tasks of the 
urban police and the locations where they will be stationed. 
  In talks between Israel and the PLO it was agreed that the 
source of authority for Hebron's urban police will be the order 
of the Israeli governor, who is the sovereign in the area. 
Israel will not discuss the details of the powers with the PLO. 
  The urban police will safeguard a limited number of 
Palestinian public structures, and according to Israeli sources, 
it will mainly have a symbolic role. 
  The Israeli intention is to have the Palestinian police 
located at sites which are currently not guarded by the Israeli 
security forces. In addition, there will be joint patrols by 
the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] and the Palestinian police. 
  The Hebron police will not have any authority over Jewish 
settlers in the town, just as the Palestinian police in Gaza and 
Jericho will not have powers and responsibilities over the 
Israeli settlers in those areas; their security will continue to 
remain the responsibility of Israel even after the autonomy is 
set up. 
  At a gathering in Cairo last Thursday of donor states to the 
Palestinian police force, it transpired that the various states 
promised to contribute equipment and train the police, but that 
the Palestinians are suffering from serious shortages in funds. 
[passage omitted] 
  Israel called on the PLO to present a list at the next 
meeting detailing its requirements for funds, equipment, and 
training for the Palestinian police force. Israel offered 
assistance in making up the list. 
  [Tel Aviv MA'ARIV in Hebrew on 29 March in a related report 
by Hemi Shalev on page 2 says: "Despite Israel's declared aim 
to reach an agreement before 13 April, at yesterday's 
consultations at the Defense Ministry participants assessed that 
it will be impossible to complete the deliberations in less than 
four to six weeks. Sources said after the consultations that 
Israel will show flexibility with Palestinian demands to 
increase the policing force to 100 observers and some 150 
Palestinians. Israel is not opposed in principle to the 
Palestinian demand that observers from another country in 
addition to Norway be deployed, but will not agree to observers 
from Egypt, Russia, or the United States being stationed there."] 

