BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ukrainian Ambassador to Austria Yuriy </F>
Kostenko by Lidiya Yakovenko in Vienna; date not given: "When 
Russian Envoy Begins To Reprimand an Estonian, Latvian, or 
Lithuanian, I Feel I Have To Counter This..."] 
  [Excerpts] 
  [Yakovenko] Yuriy Vasylovych, you represent our 
country not simply in the capital of a European state. Vienna, 
as everybody knows, is also the center of international 
diplomacy. A UN mission and other influential international 
organizations are located here. This is a very important spot 
to Ukraine. How has the work of the Ukrainian diplomatic corps 
been developing, and what has already been achieved? 
  [Kostenko] Yes, you are right. Vienna is of particular 
importance to Ukraine, simply because the Ukrainian diplomatic 
representation in international organizations has been located 
here for 10 years. Thus, after the declaration of independence, 
the development of diplomatic structures in Vienna was quite 
different than in capitals of other countries. We had to 
transform our representation into an embassy smoothly and 
quietly. This was not an easy task, since Ukraine had virtually 
been oriented toward multilateral diplomacy until 1992. 
Bilateral diplomacy had always been Moscow's prerogative. We 
did not have skilled cadres. For instance, we did not have 
enough German speaking specialists. On the other hand however, 
we had a sort of foundation -- a small group of personnel which 
could be trained for bilateral diplomacy. In August 1992, we 
began by opening our consulate. For Vienna, Austria it was 
actually the discovery of Ukraine. 
  Since then, we have managed to establish fairly stable 
political relations between the two countries. 
  [Yakovenko] There is an opinion that Austria can 
become a bridge to the West for Ukraine, and the fact that 
Ukraine was once a part of the Austro-Hungarian empire, and a 
certain interpenetration took place -- which helps to achieve 
mutual understanding, rapprochement, and cooperation -- could 
play a certain role in this. At the same time, Ukrainian 
businessmen, who are trying to establish contacts with their 
Western colleagues, are complaining that Western businessmen 
consider Ukraine one of the most unsuccessful countries among 
those which rose from the rubble of the Soviet Union. Have you 
noticed such a mood in Austria? 
  [Kostenko] The development of economic relations is very 
complex. When we signed an agreement on trade and economic 
cooperation with Austria last year, we expected a breakthrough 
in this area. Unfortunately, this has not happened. There is 
indeed this kind of mood that we have mentioned. We are not 
trusted enough. Our political and economic instability should 
be blamed for that. Although we have already established about 
70 joint venture enterprises, there have not been any serious 
joint projects that could be considered achievements. We have 
only been continuing those projects that were developed when 
Ukraine was a part of the USSR. For example, we are still 
shipping coal through the Danube for Austria's steel casting 
industry. 
  [Yakovenko] Do the UN sanctions against Yugoslavia 
hinder this business? 
  [Kostenko] They do very much. The Ukrainian Danube 
Steamship Company has its office here, and we closely cooperate 
with it. This is, by the way, one of the few state companies 
which have their offices in Austria. So, returning to the 
development of economic relations, we have been trying to obtain 
a substantial loan from Austria. There was even a moment when 
the Austrians were ready to grant us such a loan. Over the last 
six months however, so many prime ministers and deputy prime 
ministers have been replaced that they have become confused. I 
do not blame them. They send, for example, a letter to one 
deputy prime minister, they wait for a response for a month, and 
when it finally comes, it is signed by another person, whom they 
do not know. 
  There are also problems connected with the fact that we have 
not settled the issue of debts. The debt of the former Soviet 
Union to tiny Austria amounts to $5 billion. The Austrians have 
linked the issue of debts to the possibility of receiving new 
loans, knowing that we do not have funds to repay them. 
  They also know about another matter. I have had a 
conversation with one of the leaders of the currently ruling 
Social Democratic Party. He said the following: "You are not 
serious when it comes to the issue of debts. You say that you 
do not have funds to repay them, but we know that you have 
delivered to South Korea goods we would have bought with 
pleasure, including reinforced steel and chemicals." 
  Russia, despite its unsettled debts, still receives 
multibillion loans from tiny Austria. Austrian business is not 
the only one in Austria. It is a center where many contracts 
are signed. They grant loans to Russia, because Russia can 
repay them in gas, oil, or other products for which there is a 
high demand here. Whereas they are not afraid that the money 
will be wasted by Russia, our situation is very similar to that. 
  They can grant a loan only under the government's guarantee. 
Nevertheless, we have not managed to accomplish anything with 
Austria in this area. Austrian businessmen are complaining that 
our people have not yet been accustomed to fulfilling their 
commitments and developing contacts. 
  As for science and technology, the situation is more 
promising here, predominantly because certain politicians and a 
part of society remember the fact you have mentioned before, and 
this historic nostalgia helps. For example, at the Ministry of 
Science and Research headed by Austrian Vice Chancellor Erhard 
Busek, the so-called stipend system was created three years ago, 
which gives our specialists the opportunity to come to Austria 
for training for either two weeks or one year. There are many 
contacts between institutes. [passage omitted] 
  [Yakovenko] Yuriy Vasylevych, let us turn to another 
aspect of your work -- as a permanent representative at 
international organizations. What is currently important to 
Ukraine in this area? 
  [Kostenko] In general, for a young state that is currently 
looking for self-affirmation, all aspects are important. Let us 
have a look at the participation in the International Atomic 
Energy Agency [IAEA]. At the February session of the IAEA 
management board (Ukraine is one of the 35 countries which 
comprise the board), we discussed very acute political 
questions. One of them, for instance, considered the nuclear 
potential of North Korea. Ukraine, with its population of 52 
million, should have its own stance on every issue, particularly 
now since we took an important step toward nuclear disarmament, 
and we intend to sign the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Arms 
Treaty. The system of guarantees will be developed exactly by 
the IAEA. Unfortunately, many unflattering opinions have been 
voiced against this organization over the last few years, 
because its leadership has not come forward with a clear stance 
on Chernobyl. Our well known politicians have accused the IAEA 
of being the world's "nuclear" lobby. Maybe, this is true. 
But, there are different kinds of lobbies. If a lobby leads to 
another Chernobyl, I am against such a lobby. If a lobby 
advocates, however, that 70 percent of energy be produced at 
safe nuclear reactors, as in France, I support such a lobby. 
  Ukraine is currently obtaining up to 35 percent of its 
electricity from five nuclear power plants, including the 
damaged Chernobyl one. Therefore, it is an issue of national 
security to receive information from the IAEA, and to ensure 
safe operation of our 15 power units. 
  We must establish a national system of inventorying nuclear 
materials with the help and cooperation of the IAEA. A 
civilized state should know how many nuclear materials it has, 
because if this is unknown, the country will be pilfered. 
Later, it will be a great discredit if someone is caught with a 
nuclear container in Austria or Germany.... 
  Finally, there is the third aspect of our activities -- the 
participation in the Vienna negotiations of the CSCE. There is 
a meeting every day. Currently, such vital issues as 
international peacekeeping operations in Europe are being 
discussed there. Russia has come forward with claims to the 
role of a dominant power in our region, as well as to the right 
to conduct peacekeeping operations on territories of the former 
USSR. 
  [Yakovenko] How have relations between Ukrainian 
diplomats and their Russian colleagues been developing here in 
Vienna? 
  [Kostenko] This is a very uneasy topic. As you recall, I 
have been a diplomat for a long time. I worked for many years 
in the Soviet Union delegation in Geneva on negotiations on 
chemical weapons and disarmament. I know many diplomats, and I 
have a few things to compare. I am now very grateful to Soviet 
envoys with whom I worked and who taught me a lot. Here, I have 
to say that, unfortunately, Russia is currently losing the 
experience of Soviet diplomacy. Talented and reasonable people 
either have joined other structures or have begun to work for 
international organizations where they receive better salaries. 
[passage omitted] 
  We do not currently have such relations as the ones we had 
after Ukraine had pronounced its independence. There is a 
certain alienation between us. This is connected with the fact 
that we have very different stands on a whole range of issues. 
This relates not to relations between Kostenko and Popov or 
Zaytsev (the former is the Russian ambassador to Austria; the 
latter is Russia's permanent representative at international 
organizations), but between Russia and Ukraine. We cannot agree 
(this relates to the CSCE talks) that Russia will play a 
dominating role on territories of the former USSR. We cannot 
agree that Russia is assuming a leading role in the CIS. 
Similar disagreements, and this is connected with my speeches 
and statements at the talks, repel us from each other. 
  Everyone understands that Russia, as a nuclear state and the 
largest republic of the former USSR, whether we want it or not, 
will play the leading role. The point is, however, that it 
should not offend others. When a Russian envoy begins to 
reprimand an Estonian, Latvian, or Lithuanian, I feel I have to 
counter this. Sometimes, I try to support my Baltic colleagues, 
when Russia tries to impose its opinion. It is very good that 
we have reached consent at the Vienna talks. Either my word or 
that of my Estonian colleague can block any decision. [passage 
omitted] 

