Language: <F P=105>Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Carlos Salinas at a ceremony to mark </F>
the 56th anniversary of the Mexican Government's expropriation 
of the oil industry; at Pemex, Mexican Petroleum, Headquarters 
in Mexico City on 18 March -- recorded] 
  [Text] Fellow oilmen, ladies, and gentlemen: The oil 
industry was expropriated 56 years ago. That was an action of 
national dignity that brings pride to all the Mexicans. It 
reminds us of the many efforts men and women have made to 
strengthen the fatherland and to turn oil into a tool for the 
development and well-being of all Mexicans. This is why this 
moment is very significant. It allows us to renew our 
nationalist convictions and to ratify our commitment to the 
country. 
  The nationalization of the oil industry by Lazaro Cardenas 
del Rio was a sovereign and just measure. The nation could not 
allow foreigners to ignore the state's supremacy. This is why 
it was a sovereign move. The state cannot tolerate disregard 
for the constitutional mandate that gives it exclusive ownership 
over this resource for the benefit of all Mexicans. This is why 
it was a just action. 
  These past few years have been years of changes to 
strengthen 
the country in the face of new international challenges and in 
the face of shortages and setbacks that have mounted through the 
years. 
  The national oil industry has been changing also, and it is 
being strengthened through the sovereignty and justice of the 
nation. This is happening because in today's highly competitive 
world only an efficient and modern industry capable of facing 
the uncertainty of international oil markets can continue to 
serve as an engine for the economy, a keystone of the 
government, and a confirmation that state control can serve the 
nation. 
  This was a just action. We are moving away from an 
inefficient and bureaucratic oil industry that benefited a few 
and that was in hands of a few. Now, this is an industry in 
which workers and management join together for the benefit of 
all Mexicans. 
  This explains the great efforts to enhance productivity and 
the support given to the states and regions in which the 
industry operates. This explains the sector's extraordinary 
contribution to public finances which, in turn, produces more 
for the needy. This explains the commitment to protect the 
environment -- a commitment that this enterprise has decidedly 
assumed. 
  Mexico has been in the position of having to defend its 
sovereignty on many occasions throughout history. This has 
allowed us to strengthen our integrity and has turned it into a 
fundamental element, thereby allowing us to be independent among 
the nations of the world, to stand firm before the world, and to 
reject any kind of meddling in our domestic affairs. 
  In the face of new ways of challenging sovereignty, we 
reevaluate and renew our nationalist will. 
  Today's modern exercise of sovereignty demands the defense 
of 
territorial integrity. It also demands more contact with other 
nations to defend our positions and to promote our projects in 
the face of heightened competition from other nations. This is 
why it is important to participate in world affairs in an 
increasingly active way. 
  This is why we must participate more efficiently in the 
marketplace to open new opportunities that benefit our homeland 
and make it stronger to enable it to be heard. This means to 
present, both within and outside the country, initiatives that 
can contribute to attaining national goals, thereby creating 
better opportunities for developing our homeland. This is 
precisely what happened in 1938, when oil was expropriated. In 
our time, we are defending sovereignty by working to strengthen 
and stabilize our economy; advancing in an agreement to improve 
democracy; and in particular, promoting social and legal justice 
throughout the territory of the nation. 
  We are doing this in a number of ways. One of them is by 
building enterprises such as this one -- modern and efficient 
enterprises that can accept renovations and make deep changes to 
meet new competitiveness and productivity requirements. We are 
diversifying production to compete in local and foreign markets 
with a great many more quality products at lower prices. Let us 
keep in mind that a decade ago, oil comprised more than 
two-thirds of Mexico's exports. Today, however, more than 80 
percent of our exports are manufactured products. This does not 
mean that we should stop supporting a product as important as 
oil, but, rather, we should further stimulate this industry and, 
at the same time, initiate other productive activities, 
diversifying them to create more jobs and to ensure higher 
income for the population. Because we have done this, low 
global oil prices have not had a greater impact on the country's 
finances. 
  Pemex [Mexican Petroleum] has been modernized. Its 
structures have been transformed to make them more efficient. 
Pemex has established a more consistent pricing policy, has 
increased production, and has embraced full respect for the 
environment. At the same time, Pemex contributes to regional 
development by decentralizing its activities toward various 
areas of the country. Pemex has increased production in all 
areas by lowering operational costs by 30 percent in five years 
and by turning out greater quality products, such as unleaded 
gasoline, which already represents nearly half its sales, and 
new diesel fuel with a lower sulfur content. Subsidiary 
organizations work efficiently and resolve the problems they 
encounter. Marked progress has been made in the debt 
amortization program, and the investment program, as has been 
noted, is being financed with its own resources. For the third 
year in a row, the total production of liquid hydrocarbons was 
higher than the level reached in 1982. 
  In this context, I wish to acknowledge the great effort of 
the oil workers and technicians who work in this enterprise, all 
of whom have shown willingness to talk and remain united in 
carrying out the necessary changes that enable Pemex to continue 
to serve the nation and all Mexicans. The workers' efforts and 
solidarity have made it possible for us to take additional steps 
toward new and greater productivity and efficiency. For this, 
the efficient leadership of Carlos Romero de Champs, secretary 
general of their union, has been very important. [applause] I 
also wish to congratulate the Pemex staff, particularly its 
director general, because they have intelligently faced the need 
for changes that today already show results in terms of the 
strengthening of Pemex. For this reason, I hereby give special 
recognition to the honest, responsible, and efficient labors of 
Francisco Rojas Gutierrez. [applause] 
  What we have done at Pemex underscores what a great national 
enterprise it is, and this shows we want it to continue to be a 
great national enterprise. The strengthening of Pemex is 
equivalent to ensuring its continued existence as a Mexican 
enterprise and as a state enterprise at the people's service. 
To have not transformed it as we did would have been equivalent 
to letting it weaken and, consequently, taking the chance of 
allowing Pemex to become the prey of private interests, whether 
local or foreign. Quite the contrary, to consolidate its 
restructuring, to make the enterprise more efficient and 
productive, to raise its reserves and its level of production, 
to improve its dealerships and marketing, to protect the 
environment with cleaner products, and to work united in Pemex 
and for all Mexicans is equivalent to guaranteeing that this 
enterprise will continued to exist and, in turn, continue to 
benefit Mexicans. 
  The best justification of the 1938 nationalization is to 
enable Pemex to remain as a state enterprise in the hands of the 
Mexican people; it is one of the world's strong and great 
enterprises. Friends, oil belongs to the Mexican people and 
exists for your benefit. This has been my commitment since I 
was sworn in as president, and this will be my standard of 
conduct to the last day of my administration. Throughout the 
changes experienced by Pemex, even in the free trade agreements 
we have signed with other countries, oil has always remained as 
a nonnegotiable property of the nation -- a property exclusively 
managed by the state for the good of all Mexicans. We have made 
good on our promises. Pemex is an example of a reinforced state 
enterprise. Oil is a strategic resource for our nation, and it 
will continue to remain the exclusive property of the Mexican 
people. 
  Pemex is now a stronger company that assures its future 
capacity as a state-run company. I reiterate, sovereignty and 
justice are invariably intertwined in the nation's collective 
conscious, and all government efforts have been shaped by this 
binary relationship that marks our Constitution and fully 
commits our willingness. 
  Pemex is now a stronger company and has a greater capacity 
to 
meet domestic as well as foreign challenges. Pemex is now a 
stronger company and more committed to development and to the 
well- being of all Mexicans. Pemex recommits itself to the 
future and the benefit of future generations. The government's 
responsibility to Pemex is fulfilled if it establishes 
conditions that guarantee Pemex's permanency as a state company. 
  We have constantly worked to meet this responsibility by way 
of our actions, and the actions we have undertaken are evidence 
of this. Currently, Pemex is stronger because it is more 
productive and efficient. It is guaranteeing the nation's 
energy supply, strengthening public finances for social 
expenses, increasing its reserves and investments, and 
restructuring its activities. Overseas, Pemex's strength is 
growing, and at no time will we ever agree to any international 
negotiations that attempt to subject Pemex's decisions to the 
will of anyone except the will of the Mexican people. [applause] 
  Yes, we have worked to strengthen Pemex with political 
actions and decisions. The strengthening of Pemex is the best 
way to guarantee that it will remain a state company. An 
unproductive and weak Pemex, or one subjected to foreign 
decisions, would be the best pretext for anyone who seeks to 
harm it. This is why we strengthened it. This is why, I 
reiterate, Pemex will continue under the ownership and control 
of the Mexican people. On this anniversary of the expropriation 
of the oil industry, we reaffirm that we will strive to 
invigorate Pemex, and with this commitment, we reiterate our 
nationalist vocation and our commitment to a stronger 
sovereignty. We will continue supporting Pemex with actions; it 
is an important state enterprise -- the pride of all Mexicans. 
[applause] 

