Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Vesna Vujic: "Kostunica and Djindjic in the Same </F>
Deputy Team"] 
  [Excerpts] After it had been reported that the Democratic 
Party [DS] and the Democratic Party of Serbia [DSS] would form a 
joint deputy caucus, numerous questions were asked about 
relations between the two parties. To what extent is this move 
only a temporary practical solution, and to what extent is it a 
step toward closer cooperation, even perhaps reunification under 
the same roof? Following the flood of speculation, we asked the 
parties to the agreement what the joint deputy caucus would 
mean, especially in view of the increasingly cordial relations 
that began before the elections. 
  The DSS spokesman Milorad Jovanovic stressed that in this 
way 
the parties would solve practical problems in the new assembly. 
The DSS-DS deputy caucus is a temporary solution, until the 
Rules of Procedure of the Serbian Assembly are changed. 
According to the new rules, deputy caucuses would be reduced 
from 10 to five members. All opposition parties in the 
parliament are demanding this change. The agreement reached by 
leaders of four opposition parties is that a joint deputy caucus 
be formed until the new Rules of Procedure are adopted. This 
will probably be done by DEPOS [Democratic Movement of Serbia], 
DZVM [Democratic Alliance of Vojvodina Hungarians], and the 
coalition of the PDD [Party for Democratic Activity] and the DPA 
[Democratic Party of Albanians]. This was accepted as a 
rational solution, because in this way the opposition parties 
would have a majority over the SPS [Socialist Party of Serbia] 
in assembly committees, and possibly one more deputy than the 
Socialists in the Chamber of Republics. 
<H5>  The Importance of Clean Accounts </H5>
  Jovanovic used this opportunity to stress the importance of 
the DSS' decision not to go into any coalitions before the 
elections. Now that accounts are clean, all parties can 
cooperate better. "Perhaps we paid a price for it, but it is a 
fact that opposition parties have no difficulties today in 
reaching agreements on certain issues," the DSS spokesman said. 
  There are democrats in both parties who would again want to 
see the emergence of a single party through the setting up of 
the joint deputy club. The most frequently mentioned argument 
for a single party is that in fact there are hardly any 
differences in the party programs, that is, in the polices of 
the DSS and DS. The differences lie more in the form. 
Djindjic's young democrats claim that they are pragmatists in 
the realization of the party's interests. They say that 
Vojislav Kostunica's democrats were "oppositional 
fundamentalists" in the struggle against the regime, which is 
perhaps the key difference between them. 
  The person whom we found in the DS to talk to us about this 
topic wanted to remain anonymous this time. He wanted to stress 
that the DSS has never accused the DS of "collaborating" with 
the SPS. This party had not done this even though it perhaps 
had more right to do so than any other party. The party has 
never been linked with the Socialists in any way, and it 
considers this fact to be one of its special qualities. The 
criticism came from the SPO [Serbian Renewal Movement] and the 
SRS [Serbian Radical Party], which divided power with the SPS 
(SPO in Savski Venac, and the SRS in Novi Sad and the Vojvodina 
Assembly). 
  This statement is reminiscent of someone who is nostalgic, 
someone who wants primarily to stress the importance of elements 
that link the "pragmatical" and "fundamentalist" democrats. 
There are also some observers who, forgetting all choice 
epithets connected with politics in general, were even seriously 
surprised by the joint deputy caucus of the two democratic 
parties. They immediately recalled the time when the DS was 
experiencing rifts and when its leaders were accusing one 
another without apology. [passage omitted] 
  In any case, the outcome today is that relations between the 
two parties had begun to normalize even before the elections. 
This was followed by talks between party leaderships. The DS, 
as it claims, received its first sincere congratulations from 
the DSS on its election success. The founding of the caucus is 
therefore, in a way, natural and politically constructive. Some 
democrats say that they would not be surprised if the two 
parties entered the next elections with joint candidates. 
  Time will, of course, show what happens. However, when 
assessing the chances of the democrats building a joint house, 
one should not lose sight of the fact that, after all, these two 
parties have each built their political identity in their own 
way. 

