Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Peter Scherer report: "Manhunt With Video Films"] </F>
  [Text] Frankfurt/Main -- German left-wing extremists are 
now using secretly made video films against their potential 
terrorism victims. The "black films" were produced, as the 
extremists claim themselves, at a high cost, and show "persons, 
structures, and meeting places" of political opponents, that is, 
of right-wing extremists or suspected right-wing extremists. As 
of now, it should be possible to "take them to task at any time, 
be it in their favorite restaurants or in their apartments," a 
paper of the Antifascist Action says, which the Federal Office 
for the Protection of the Constitution [BfV] considers as 
belonging to autonomous groups from the Rhine-Main area who are 
ready to use violence. 
  The filmed "wanted posters" are accompanied by a topical 
militant brochure, giving details such as names, photographs, 
and addresses of the "militant fascists." In the area of 
Aschaffenburg, 23 "targets" are listed, in Frankfurt 14, in 
Hanau 7, and in Mainz 5. In addition, the lists also contain the 
car license plates of the "target persons," who must "be stood 
up to wherever they are." 
  One of the persons listed has been the target of left-wing 
extremist violence several times. After an attempted arson 
attack on his car, the perpetrators justified their attack as 
follows: "There are enough reasons to put a stop to the plans of 
such swine as.... We will get them all. Antifascist resistance 
must not peter out with slogans and limit itself to pure 
symbolism." 
  Acts of violence by the autonomous groups are not limited to 
the Rhine-Main area. In Berlin, too, people have been called to 
participate in "Volxsport" [distortion of "Volkssport," which 
means "popular sport"], which is a synonym often used in the 
milieu to mean attacks. "Wanted posters" were also printed by 
the Hannover paper RAZZ "to serve as a basis for all antifascist 
forces who have recognized the necessity of directly combating 
and politically isolating neofascism." 
  In the view of the BfV, a new wave of violence in Germany's 
extremist scene threatens because of the mutual publication of 
"political hit lists" -- at the end of last year the neo-Nazi 
brochure EINBLICK published the names of "anti-German and 
antinationalist forces." 
  The so-called Revolutionary Cells are also involved in that. 
In a position paper, their women's group -- Red Zora -- has now 
committed itself for the first time again after a five-year 
break to continuing the "armed struggle." The "destruction of 
installations, buildings, and objects" is an "important, 
indispensable part of revolutionary women's policy," the 38-page 
brochure says. In a "practical handbook" the activists inform 
the reader about, among other things, the handling of 
explosives, the building of incendiary charges, and the forging 
of documents. Whoever does not seriously decide in favor of 
militant actions and armed struggle, Red Zora admonishes, does 
not recognize the dimension of the opponent and of the apparatus 
of power. Thus, the terrorists recommend, for instance, 
"punitive actions" against rapists' lawyers. 
  According to the BfV, more than 28,000 persons in Germany 
belong to left-wing extremist organizations and groups. 
Autonomous groups that are ready for violence and that have 
more than 5,000 followers, register a steady influx of new 
members. The mobilization potential amounts to a further 
several thousand persons. 

