Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of a meeting between King Husayn and several leaders </F>
of the U.S. Jewish community in Washington on 24 January -- 
recorded; in English] 
  [Text] [Husayn] Ladies and gentlemen, it really is a 
pleasure for me to have this opportunity together with [Queen] 
Nur, the prime minister of Jordan, members of our Jordanian 
group on this visit to Washington, to meet with you, and I hope 
that in the spirit of friendship and optimism that we have for 
the present and the future regarding the tremendous and 
important developments that have occurred of late in our part of 
the world, which I hope will see us coming together as the 
children of Abraham in a land and an area that has had such an 
impact on civilization and on mankind [sentence as heard]. I am 
happy that this meeting takes place, and I have had the pleasure 
in the past, from time to time, to meet some of you. I 
certainly hope that we will meet again regularly, that we will 
convey also my feelings of determination, on one hand, and total 
commitment to the cause of a just, honorable, lasting peace that 
future generations can live with, can protect, can enjoy in our 
region; our determination to achieve this goal; and our optimism 
despite the difficulties over the fact that there is no other 
option. There is no other alternative. The growing realization 
of this fact in our region, amongst all peoples, and beyond 
that, it's our duty to do whatever we can for the generations to 
come beyond, to give them a better chance, to give them a better 
life, to give them what they deserve long after we are gone. 
  We welcome you to this meeting, and we hope that we will 
convey to our friends in the United States our greetings and the 
essence of our hopes and determination to make progress toward 
the attainment of peace. Rather than continue myself now any 
further, I would like to give everyone the opportunity, and to 
start -- well some of you might have known whenever we have met 
in the past -- to start a dialogue and maybe to answer any 
questions that you may have. Once again, you are most welcomed. 
Thank you so much. [applause] 
  [Unidentified speaker] Your majesty, we (?met) with you a 
number of times in the past, in the 80's, and also at occasions. 
It was very clear to us, as it has been to the State of Israel, 
that the Kingdom of Jordan, under the right circumstances, was 
ready to enter into peaceful arrangements with the State of 
Israel, even as you made clear to us every time we met that it 
is not for Jordan--it was not for you--to negotiate on behalf of 
the Palestinians. An obstacle has been removed. There is now 
someone to negotiate with. And may I now, on behalf of all of 
us here, simply wish your majesty and her majesty the queen a 
life of good health, a long life, and a life which sees where 
you and we can see, not only that the State of Israel and the 
Kingdom of Jordan are living in peace together, but that both of 
them are living in a peaceful and prosperous Middle East. I 
don't want to ask you any questions, but if I can be of help in 
finding those who do.... Mr. (Smarling). 
  [(Smarling)] Your majesty: Last Friday, the crown prince had 
an interview that was published in the Israeli press. And he 
said some words that were very moving to us and also--we 
know--to many Israelis. The crown prince said we want a warm 
peace with Israel, and he mentioned some of the projects--the 
economic projects--that would be part of a warm peace. Could 
you elaborate a little bit on this, about what a warm peace 
means to you? And what would be some of its components? 
  [Husayn] Thank you very much indeed, Sir. And once again, 
may I thank you for your comments and say how happy I am, Sir, 
that we meet again under these circumstances here in Washington 
at this very exciting and very, very interesting moment. You 
are quite right, Sir, in terms of the problem as it evolved. We 
have always sought, to the best of our abilities, to promote the 
cause of a just, comprehensive peace in our region. After the 
adoption of Security Council Resolution 242, we tried our very 
best to see its implementation through. That, unfortunately, 
was not possible at the time. Israel looked at us as a country 
that had been one that had actually occupied another land and 
had been driven out of it. In 1974, an Arab summit saw the whole 
Arab world respond to a Palestinian wish that they speak for 
themselves regarding their future. And so we acceded to that, 
and I have honored our commitment there ever since. Our Israeli 
neighbors, at a certain moment in time, following 1974, started 
to ask us to be the negotiating partner over Palestinian affairs 
and Palestinian fate and future. But it was impossible. So it 
has taken all these years until finally Madrid, following the 
tremendous events that occurred in our world and the growing 
realization in the area that we must really resolve this 
problem. Madrid, and we provided the umbrella for the 
Palestinians to enable them to speak for themselves. And 
Moscow. And the multilaterals. And then Washington. And, as 
you say, September 13th, a tremendous step forward. And I have 
described it as a very courageous one by Israel and by the 
Palestinians in terms of mutual recognition and the beginning of 
a process. So we supported that and will continue to support 
it. And again, Sir, we have, in terms of the facts, 
we've....[pauses] Go back to Madrid, we started at the same 
point, all of us, all the parties concerned. Palestine and the 
Palestinian cause has been very, very close to our hearts and is 
[words indistinct]. September 13th is of great significance 
because it saw the Palestinians move on their own and begin a 
process. September 14th saw us ratify an agenda that had been 
held back until we saw some progress on the Palestinian-Israeli 
dimension. The agenda is not a peace treaty. The agenda is 
areas of concern to all of us. But we hope very sincerely that 
we will see progress on all the items in that agenda as rapidly 
as possible to arrive at satisfactory answers and solutions to 
all the problems there. We have suggested that we will 
implement whatever we agree upon, that there should be symmetry 
-- the problems should be placed in baskets here and there. But 
we should ensure that we sensitize people to the results of 
peace and to the promise of peace as we move along. 
Unfortunately, in the minds of some, this might have created 
the impression that we are talking about arrangements, 
agreements here and there that would be implemented, but that we 
are not committed to ratifying a peace treaty. I would like to 
say categorically here that we are committed, at the end of the 
process, once we have resolved all these problems, that the 
crowning achievement will be the ratification of a peace treaty. 
  I don't believe there is any contradiction between that 
fact and the fact that we have always sought a comprehensive 
settlement in the region and that we will work and do our utmost 
to ensure that that comes within that context as well, so that 
the whole area moves from where we are to where we should be--to 
where we should have been. 
  The areas of concern, Sir, are many. But, let me give you an 
example of what my brother, probably, had in mind, and what I 
have examined with my colleagues, what we have talked about in 
Jordan. For example, we have a border problem, and in particular 
in the southern area, the Dead Sea right down to the Gulf of 
al-'Aqabah. Well, in the period after 1967, Israeli forces sort 
of moved into Jordanian territory without war, without fighting. 
For security reasons, we couldn't do very much about it at that 
time, but we registered the fact. We would like to see progress 
made as soon as possible to resolve this particular problem--the 
problem of territorial sovereignty, of border demarcation and 
delineation. We are calling for a committee to look at this 
subject as rapidly as possible, and I hope that this will lead, 
obviously, to meetings on the ground there at important high 
levels. Once this is done--as opposed to suggestions that maybe 
Jordan can lease land--Jordan cannot. This is Jordanian land. 
Then, we will look at the whole Rift Valley as an economic 
unit, and we will look at everything that we can do to make it 
so. To see what benefits can be derived of our joint efforts to 
make that one of the most important elements of the coming 
peace, be it in terms of mineral resources, in terms of 
communications, in terms of the environment, in terms of -- so 
many other elements that would come along, as well. 
  This is something that we hope will happen and will begin to 
see realized sometime soon, and this leads onto the 
environmental questions, fighting desertification and dealing 
with that. Another area is water, and that is very, very 
important to all of us. So, again, we hope that very, very soon 
we will concentrate on that and see what can be done to ensure 
that the future is bright, at least in terms of the rights of 
all of us, on one hand, and then what can be done beyond that 
because I don't believe that the resources available in the area 
are sufficient to all of us. This is a problem that is very 
much on our minds. We cannot ignore it, and we have to look at 
other ways and means by which we can provide the water that is 
needed within our region. 
  In the Camp David accords, there is an area or an item that 
deals with a road that would link Egypt, and therefore Arab 
North Africa, with the Arab World and that would pass through 
Elat. We have suggested recently that: Why not? Let us look at 
that at this time and, hopefully, see what can be done because 
that will be a very important step forward, as well. There are 
many other related issues and possibilities. Nothing has been 
settled, nothing has been discussed, maybe, in-depth as yet, 
but, for example, we were looking at linking our national grid 
system with the Egyptian one through a cable under the Gulf of 
al-'Aqabah. Do we need to do that now? Or can we look at a much 
more logical way of approaching this particular problem? 
Tourism, movement of people. 
  These are just some areas which my brother probably touched 
on in his thoughts as he made the statements to the Israeli 
paper, I believe the YEDI'OT AHARANOT, if I am not mistaken, in 
Amman. The other important element, of course, is the question 
of people. I think we all know that Jordan has borne the 
results of every disaster that has beset our area and our region 
and has had an impact on the Palestinians, our brethren. We are 
very anxious to see what can be done and to bring about a change 
in the quality of life. The priority has to go, obviously, to 
Gaza and the West Bank, to the occupied territories. But beyond 
that, we have to look at the whole region and what can peace 
bring with it. On the human level in that regard, there is a 
pending problem, as well, which we hope to address, and that is 
the reunification of families, in terms of those who legally 
should be reunited with their families in the occupied 
territories. There is so much that is being done, so much that 
we are doing to the best of our abilities, in every area, and I 
hope that the results, not only of our efforts, but of the 
commitment and efforts of all concerned, will produce the 
results that all of us hope, something entirely different and 
may be too difficult for me to speak about in terms of 
limitations or scope at such a meeting. 
  [(Sigmond)] You stressed in your comments the importance of 
comprehensiveness, and you said that you would like to see the 
whole area move from where we are to where we ought to be. In 
the past, this principle of comprehensiveness has served as an 
element to moving the area from where it is to where it ought to 
be because of the reluctance on the part of many of the players 
to take initiatives that would move the process forward for fear 
that the rest of the Arab world is not moving along. To what 
extent do you believe in the light of the agreement on September 
13th, more recently the meeting between President al-Asad and 
President Clinton and what was said there, to what extent does 
this free bilateral movement that is not dependent on the most 
common denominator in the region? Could you speak to us on that 
subject? 
  [Husayn] Thank you very much indeed, and I once again very 
happy indeed that the level of confidence in the area and 
dialogue that is going on at this time is something that I have 
not seen over the years. If you take Jordan and Syria, for 
example, we are constantly in touch. I am very happy to hear 
the results of the meeting between President Clinton and 
President al-Asad. I have every confidence that there is, on 
behalf of the Arab parties concerned, a total desire and 
commitment to the cause of a just comprehensive peace. So I 
personally see that it is going to begin to manifest itself 
hopefully sometime soon in terms of real progress on other 
tracks. But in that regard, I wanted to make it abundantly 
clear. As far as we are concerned, we are moving. We started 
at the same point. We have the same objective. We are moving 
on our own to deal with all the problems that we have to deal 
with and address, leading to the ratification of a peace treaty 
as a crowning achievement. We would certainly hope and pray 
that our efforts will also succeed in encouraging others to move 
and in seeing other movement in a meaningful way so that we 
arrive at our objective that we have sought for so long, of a 
comprehensive peace. But regarding the seriousness of the 
Jordanians in terms of the negotiating process now, we are very 
serious, we are determined, and we will put our best efforts to 
see rapid movement and achieve results. The timeframe is beyond 
me to be able to determine at this stage, but I hope it would 
not be long before we see that happen. So, in other words, we 
are not tying ourselves down to anything except the 
determination to move and more rapidly. We hope and we believe 
and we will work for our efforts to result in peace, and, at the 
same time, hopefully we will see that not only on the Jordanian- 
or Palestinian-Israeli track but also regarding Syria and 
Lebanon so that we have finally what we have always sought, a 
comprehensive peace in the region. In other words, we are our 
own masters in terms of our fate and our destiny. We are 
determined to do whatever we can, but we believe that in the 
interest of all and future generations in the region and in the 
interest of the security of all the coming generations, we have 
to work for a comprehensive peace. That does not mean that we 
should wait until everybody else deals with their problems, we 
are also approaching these problems very, very seriously. 
  There has been some ambiguity or some difference of opinion 
or some cause for confusion. We have been called upon to ratify 
a peace treaty. Some suggestions were that we should ratify it 
on this visit of mine, here, on the occasion of my visit to the 
United States for a medical checkup. And very frankly my 
friends, I don't believe this is the right approach. We do not 
ratify a peace treaty and then begin to negotiate what it should 
contain. We negotiate and work out all the problems so that you 
don't have any left once you have peace. And this is the way we 
are going about. Thank you, Sir. 
  [Al Moses] Al Moses, your Majesty. Could you foresee 
Jordan's role in the territories in the intermediate period and 
beyond. Is federation still a concept that has been [word 
indistinct]. Will Jordan have a significant economic role, 
beyond simply having the dinar the official currency. Do you 
foresee Jordanian banks as being the principle banking 
institutions in the territories; education for school children 
coming from your Ministry of Education and [words indistinct] so 
that you have a cultural, economic, and in time perhaps 
political bond between the territories and the Kingdom of 
Jordan, or do you see an independent Palestinian state that has 
friendly relations but is independent, culturally, economically, 
and politically with the Kingdom of Jordan? 
  [Husayn] I can only see, based on the very close relations 
of 
members of one family in that region, that the future will see 
us coming closer together. But with all due respect to all 
those who have suggested federation or confederation or any 
other formula at this stage, I have asked for example President 
'Arafat to drop that from his vocabulary when he talks with me 
the term confederation, because this does not come, Sir, as a 
result of the wish of an individual or even a group of people. 
This has got to be something that develops and matures over 
time. We are very, very close together, but there has been a 
lot of damage done over the years. Many misconceptions, many 
impressions that we had designs over the fate of our brethern. 
We had supported them and we will continue to support them to 
the best of our ability, will help. And the future has to be 
something that is built from the grassroots upwards. 
  So in the coming phase, I see our role as one of supporting 
Palestinians to the best of our ability, in every way we can, 
and helping them to move ahead and hopefully, eventually, people 
will work out what the relations ought to be. I personally 
believe that in Palestine, as is the case in Jordan, there is a 
yearning for democracy, there is a yearning for institutions 
that insure that people have a say regarding their future, that 
this is inevitable, this will come about. So may be it is 
premature to speak about how it will all shape up but I am sure 
the links and the ties are there and they will develop and grow. 
  In the meantime, as far as Jordan is concerned and all 
members of our Jordanian family, regardless of their origins, we 
shall remain one family. And we shall remain determined to 
ensure that nothing touches this fact in any form or way, 
adversely. If and when people have another option, have another 
choice, individually or collectively, then we will look at that 
and they are free to do whatever they wish. Jordan, as you 
know, is the only Arab state that shared everything with its 
Palestinian brethern and members of the Palestinian family. And 
again, we do have problems in terms of the long run. We have to 
ensure that people--if we are talking about the legalities of 
it--have the right to either return or be compensated or return 
and be compensated, or certainly be compensated. But somehow we 
hope that in the context of peace, in the context of movement to 
change the shape of things in our area, we will see a 
difference, we will see a change in the quality of life for 
people. We will see them have more chances to live the kind of 
life that they deserve, we will see the narrowing of gaps, and 
therefore, the removal of fears and suspicions that existed over 
so many years. We will see the children of Abraham come 
together in that part of the world and everywhere. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Your Majesty, many of us around the 
table who have been a kind of antidote to those in our community 
who would encourage the abandonment of the peace process, we 
ourselves were encouraged in September that, at the beginning of 
the process, we would see the alleviation of the Arab boycott 
against Israel in very serious ways. We understand that it is 
on the agenda of a meeting of the foreign ministers--we have 
read soon--and I wonder if you could please give some of your 
own insight and observation on the possibility of any level of 
that boycott being officially removed at that time, to help us 
out with our community. 
  [Husayn] Sure, Sir, and I think that it's a good idea to 
discuss this in the following way and may be to clarify again 
some of the misunderstandings about it. Sir, if you look at the 
Palestinian-Israeli dimension, or Jordan, Palestine, and Israel, 
it is something different to the boycott, let's say, of 
companies that have subsidiaries in Israel. I think that that 
kind of situation that might have lasted in the past is probably 
on the way towards being removed and addressed. But we have 
problems which, again, we have to discuss in the times ahead and 
it is I think an item of concern for us and hopefully will be 
part of the coming negotiations. For example, Sir, and 
practically since 1970, Israeli restrictions on Jordanian 
exports to the occupied territories has cost Jordan $2 billion, 
deficit. As a result of these policies, Israel has gained a 
trade surplus of 7.5 billion. So, what I'm trying to say is 
that we have two problems here, Sir. How do we address them, we 
hope that we will address the immediate one as it concerns us, 
and certainly the other one as it concerns other international 
concerns. I think that is being resolved very, very soon. I 
hope we will address this one to see that the protectionism that 
exists does not affect adversely the other side, and we have to 
work out something new and I hope that this will be addressed 
very, very soon. 
  [(Lynne Lev)] Your Majesty, one of the concerns that I think 
we all have in terms of how this will move forward is the 
increase in violence and the growth of fundamentalists? Could 
you respond to that and how you see it playing out and what can 
be done to reverse fundamentalists? 
  [Husayn] I believe, Madam, that this is the greatest 
challenge that we face on probably either side of the divide at 
this stage. There are those who believe that we must carry out 
our responsibilities now and bear them in terms of 
responsibility towards future generations. And there are those 
who, may be, live in the world of yesterday or today and cannot 
see what this opportunity means. I believe as we make progress, 
God willing, we will pass through this difficult phase and we 
will see that the peace camp on both sides gains the upper hand 
as it produces results that affect the future of peoples, all 
our people, in all the times to come. The challenge is there. 
The problem is one of sometimes despair or lack of vision or 
too much trauma of what has happened so far. But let's hope and 
pray that we can pass through that phase as rapidly as possible. 
And I believe that we have the capability and we have the 
determination and the staying power to go through it and see the 
breaking of a fresh dawn, a new dawn in our entire region and 
our lives. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Your Majesty, you have painted a bold 
and encouraging picture of the (?word) peace, and I think that 
this dialogue will contribute to the climate and momentum that 
will keep the specific negotiations moving forward. Not 
everyone in the Middle East is committed as you are to a 
comprehensive peace. I wonder if you might reflect a bit on the 
role of Iran in the current discussions taking place in the 
Middle East. 
  [Husayn] I wouldn't know what to say in this regard, Sir. 
Iran is outside the immediate area of the problem that we are 
trying to address. They may have their views. They haven't 
shared them with us, officially. Nor have we had the chance to 
debate them with them. But I believe that resolving our problem 
removes the root cause of instability in that entire region. 
And if you would look at the past many, many years, the problem 
has been the ladder to power by many ambitious individuals or 
groups that sought to gain power. 
  Again referring to the question of fundamentalism or 
extremism, I am very happy to see that, over a number of years, 
there is an interfaith dialogue that is covering much ground. 
And I think all of us realize that many acts and actions, taken 
in many different parts of the world, sometimes in the name of 
faith and religion, are so alien to everything we believe in and 
to the teaching of our religion. So let us hope that what can 
happen in our area can positively affect the rest of the world. 
It was a beacon. It was the source of illumination for the 
world in the past. Let us hope that this will happen again. It 
is worth our very best efforts, and hopefully we will succeed in 
making our contribution. 
  [Rabbi (Sapisti)] Your Majesty, could you reflect for a few 
moments on the role of the United States in the short run, what 
might it do to be helpful in enhancing the chances that the 
accord will be implemented and peace agreements will be signed? 
But in the long run, what role do you think the United States 
needs to play--militarily, politically, and/or economically--and 
what are some of the cautions that you give to the United States 
about things that it might be tempted to do that might be 
counterproductive? 
  [Husayn] It is very difficult for me to cover all these 
areas, Sir. But I think that, for a long period of time, the 
message we have heard in our part of the world is that we in the 
area need to address our own problems and that the United States 
is a partner. We welcome that, obviously, and welcome the help, 
assistance, concern, and interests of friends throughout the 
world. I believe that the United States is in a unique position 
now, shouldering so many responsibilities the world over. So we 
hope that they will continue to help to the best of their 
abilities and help us all move toward the establishment of a 
just, lasting peace that we have sought for so long. 
  I think, Sir, that in the context of peace, again, the 
opportunities are going to be tremendous for people the world 
over to benefit from the results of peace, on the moral level, 
on the human level, on every level. And the area could see us 
working together with our friends here and elsewhere in the 
world in trying to bring and succeeding in bringing about the 
kind of change that is in the interest of all our people and the 
future generations. 
  The military dimension of the problem again is being 
discussed in negotiations at this stage to create the kind of 
balance that has to be addressed to remove the threat 
of--hopefully in time--of weapons of mass destruction, wherever 
they may be, and to remove the cause for spending so much on 
military armaments at the expense of everything else and the 
needs of people. But the United States will continue to have a 
very, very important role to play, and we hope that we will 
encourage them to do so, realizing at the same time our own 
responsibilities directly in this matter. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Your Majesty, I believe I am quoting 
correctly, you said that before the treaty is consummated you 
must negotiate. That is a model that I believe Israel has tried 
to enforce in its relations with Syria. What Syria apparently 
wants is to have a treaty before the negotiations, and that has 
been a great obstacle because the word normal has been used but 
nobody knows exactly what normal means to the Syrians and what 
normal means to the Israelis. And I wonder, because--as I 
understand what you have said--Syria is a part of comprehensive 
peace for the region, and I'd like very much for you to comment 
on Syria's positions with regard to any future peace treaty with 
Israel. 
  [Husayn] I can't speak for the Syrians, nor would I presume 
to do so. But I am in constant touch with them, and I believe 
that the recent statements that we have heard are a reflection 
of what I know personally and they have gone far more than has 
ever been the case there in the past, in terms of clarity and in 
terms of a real determination, to also seek the goal that all of 
us are seeking. So I hope [words indistinct] that the coming 
phase will see some real progress regarding the Syrian-Israeli 
dimension, regarding the Lebanese-Israeli dimension, and 
certainly as far as we are concerned, I think we are just about 
to start once again. Today in fact? [laughter] 
  [Unidentified speaker] May I, Sir, first of all thank you 
for 
this opportunity to speak with you, for your candor, and may we 
all be present with you when you have achieved the crowning 
achievement, as you have described it, ratifying the peace 
treaty, and may it be soon. 
  [Husayn] That is our hope, God willing, Sir. [applause] 

