This     Special Memorandum, "Media Developments:  Russia and 
Ukraine," is a periodic series aimed at reporting and analyzing 
changes to and events affecting the Russian and Ukrainian media. 
Comments and queries regarding this series may be directed to 
Chief Analyst, ENEAG at (703) 733-6072. 

In this issue ... 

Spotlight on ... 

Russia: Sovetskaya Rossiya--Zyuganov's Mouthpiece 
Russia: RIA-Novosti Returned to Government Oversight 

Features 

Russia: Zavtra Ambivalent About Zhirinovskiy 
Russia: Government Daily Tries, Fails at Independence 
Russia: Editorial Turmoil at Pravda 
Russia: Government Official Moves To Restrict Media Access 
Ukraine: Post-Postup--Attempt at a Western-Style Newspaper 

In Brief 

Russia: Vladivostok Newspapers Suspended 
Russia: Rossiyskaya Gazeta To Run Tatar Insert 

Other Publications of Interest 

Russia: Journalists Slam TV Campaign as Biased, Uninformative 
Russia: Last Minute State TV Campaign Against Zhirinovskiy 
Russia: Pro-Communist Press Keeps Options Open on Zhirinovskiy 
Russia: Debt Crisis Temporarily Halts State Broadcasting 
Russia: Yeltsin Restructures Media Bureaucracy 
Russia: RTV Blasts Yakovlev, Poltoranin 

   Spotlight on ... 

   Russia: Sovetskaya Rossiya--Zyuganov' s Mouthpiece 

   Summary:  The opposition newspaper Sovetskaya Rossiya has served 
as a mouthpiece for Gennadiy Zyuganov's Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation (CPRF) since at least July 1993, when the 
newspaper began publishing a regular insert, Pravda Rossii, which 
carries news of CPRF functions, official party positions, and 
commentary by party officials.  The partnership between the paper 
and the party is not surprising in view of their shared 
ideological inclinations, which involve the fusion of nationalism 
and communism.  The evolution of such a nationalist-communist 
fusion has been evident in the pages of Sovetskaya Rossiya for 
some time, and the CPRF has steadily moved in that direction 
under Zyuganov's leadership.  Moreover, the Zyuganov-Sovetskaya 
Rossiya connection pre-dates the August 1991 coup, when 
Zyuganov's attacks on CPSU reformers were printed and echoed in 
the pages of what was then the RSFSR's official communist 
newspaper. 

   Sovetskaya Rossiya began publishing Pravda Rossii on 10 July 1993 
with "Special Edition" Number 1 ("Prepared jointly with the 
Central Executive Committee of the CPRF"), but, at least for now, 
the CPRF appears only to be extending limited financing to the 
Pravda Rossii insert and not to Sovetskaya Rossiya as a whole. 
The "Special Edition" carried an announcement of the election of 
the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the CPRF 
(whose membership includes Central Executive Committee Chairman 
Gennadiy Zyuganov), an announcement excerpted from the CPRF 
action plan" (including a call to Muscovites to attend a mass 
meeting to protest "the course taken by the government"), news of 
CPRF regional activities, and a CPRF Central Executive Committee 
"Announcement," which called on "all patriotically inclined 
social groups," from "workers to our native private 
entrepreneurs," to "halt the collapse of Russia, to save her 
state unity."  At the 15 March CPRF Central Executive Committee 
plenum, Zyuganov chided the party for not paying sufficient 
attention to the publication of Pravda Rossii and for not 
"rendering assistance "--presumably financial--to Sovetskaya 
Rossiya (Sovetskaya Rossiya, 17 March). 

   Subsequent editions of Pravda Rossii have continued to stress 
patriotic themes, sometimes combined with a socialist-oriented 
economic line, and to highlight the activities and viewpoints of 
the CPRF.  Pravda Rossii Number 2 published the election platform 
of the CPRF in anticipation of possible early parliamentary 
elections.  The platform combined nationalistic calls for the 
preservation of the territorial integrity of the Russian 
Federation and exhortations that the "salvation and 
strengthening'' of Russia's indigenous ''spirituality'' are 
necessary conditions for the rebirth of Russia" with traditional 
communist denunciations of "the forced capitalization" of Russia 
(Sovetskaya Rossiya, 22 July 1993).  Virtually every edition of 
Pravda Rossii has reported on activities of local CPRF 
affiliates.  Number 3, for example, carried news from CPRF groups 
in Northern Ossetia, Ryazan, Orel, Volgograd, and Moscow 
(Sovetskaya Rossiya, 5 August 1993).  Number 4 carried an 
announcement proclaiming the CPRF to be the party of "state 
patriotism," whose ideology is directed toward "the salvation and 
rebirth of Russia," while simultaneously attacking "bourgeois 
liberalism."  In the same edition, the CPRF Central Executive 
Committee encouraged communists to subscribe to Sovetskaya 
Rossiya as part of its broader efforts to "spread" the CPRF line 
in "the party press" (Sovetskaya Rossiya, 7 September 1993).  The 
CPRF-Zyuganov-Sovetskaya Rossiya connection was further 
illustrated in the political arena on 12 December 1993, when 
Sovetskaya Rossiya editor Valentin Chikin was elected as a deputy 
to the State Duma on the CPRF party list. 

   While remaining true to its communist origins, Sovetskaya Rossiya 
has augmented its communist ideology with a strong dose of 
Russian nationalism in recent years, including the regular 
publication of an insert entitled Rus Pravoslavnaya (Orthodox 
Russia), which frequently features articles by the nationalist 
Metropolitan Ioann of St. Petersburg.  This tilt toward 
nationalism has been evident for some time.  For example, like 
most prominent Russian newspapers, Sovetskaya Rossiya carried 
special coverage of the Russian government's commemoration of the 
first anniversary of the August 1991 coup attempt, but it used 
the opportunity to attack the "democrats" in a particularly 
nationalist vein.  According to an article published on 20 August 
1992, "A certain group among the 'democratic forces' consists of 
representatives of youth," who are "mesmerized" by "pro-American, 
anti-Russian and anti-Soviet propaganda, camouflaged as anti- 
communist."  The article maintained that these groups were 
heavily infiltrated with "agents of influence" carrying out a 
plan that had been "worked out in Washington" for the 
"destruction of the USSR, then Russia" (Sovetskaya Rossiya, 20 
August 1992).  In the same issue the paper's political observer, 
Eduard Volodin (like Zyuganov, Volodin later joined the 
nationalist-communist opposition National Salvation Front, whose 
manifesto was published in the 6 October 1992 edition of 
Sovetskaya Rossiya and was signed by, among others, Volodin, 
Zyuganov, and Chikin), called the August 1991 events a loss of 
"national honor . . . and national dignity," rather than a 
liberation from "stagnation and dogmatism."  According to 
Volodin, the "democrats" in the government were conscious agents 
of "the builders of the 'New World Order, '"--an allusion to the 
United States--who were seeking "the destruction of Russia's 
international authority" as well as the "dismemberment" of the 
Russian state. 

   As Sovetskaya Rossiya embraced nationalism, so did the CPRF and 
its leading figure, Zyuganov.  Zyuganov was elected chairman of 
the CPRF Central Executive Committee by a party congress in 
February 1993.  That same party congress adopted a "Program 
Statement" that included a section called "The Fatherland in 
Danger," which urged the "consolidation of all . . . patriotic 
forces, united by the idea of saving the Fatherland."  Other 
sections of the statement side-stepped communist dogmas by 
endorsing a mixed economy (although the state sector would still 
be the "basis" of the "multisector economy") and calling for 
communist cooperation with all "patriots," including active 
members of the Orthodox Church (Pravda, 26 February 1993).  The 
extreme nationalist weekly Den subsequently endorsed Zyuganov's 
election and characterized the "majority of the delegates" to the 
congress as "not just fans of the long dead writers Marx and 
Lenin" but as "ordinary citizens" who were concerned with the 
"fate of the Fatherland" (Den, 21-27 February 1993).  Zyuganov 
himself subsequently trumpeted the nationalist-communist line in 
Sovetskaya Rossiya and actively participated in organizing and 
leading nationalist organizations.  In an article entitled "The 
Russian Question," Zyuganov called on leaders of the "patriotic 
movement" to develop an "ideology of national rebirth" as part of 
a "national liberation" strategy for Russia (Sovetskaya Rossiya, 
3 July 1993).  He called his opponents in the "democratic" camp 
"those who hate Russia," and saw the collapse of the USSR as just 
another chapter in the "thousand-year" history of efforts to 
destroy Russia.  He repeated similar charges in a front-page 
article in Sovetskaya Rossiya on 28 August 1993 entitled Derzhava 
(Great Power), which viewed the Soviet period as simply one stage 
in the development of the Russian nation and empire.  Zyuganov 
was cofounder of the Council of National-Patriotic Forces of 
Russia, organized in 1992, a cochairman of the Organizational 
Committee of the National Salvation Front from 1992 until the 
October violence in Moscow, and a cochairman of the Duma of the 
Russian National Assembly, a nationalist organization founded in 
1992 by ex-KGB General Aleksandr Sterligov. 

   Old Ties 

   The Sovetskaya Rossiya-Zyuganov connection predates the August 
1991 coup attempt, when Sovetskaya Rossiya published a series of 
Zyuganov articles and interviews attacking reform and carried 
other articles defending Zyuganov's positions.  Zyuganov fired 
his first salvo in an anti-reform barrage in Sovetskaya Rossiya 
on 20 March 1991, when he attacked Boris Yeltsin and his efforts 
to forge ties with Russia's new class of entrepreneurs, which 
Zyuganov derided as a "homegrown bourgeoisie."  He followed with 
an attack on the "architect" of perestroyka, Aleksandr Yakovlev, 
whom Zyuganov held responsible for the social and economic 
problems of the Russian Federation: "What lies in store for us- 
-the final destruction of all social connections . . . a social 
explosion?" (Sovetskaya Rossiya, 7 May 1991).  A 6 June 1991 
article called the reformists "false prophets" and claimed that 
the Soviet Union had reached the "breaking point."  In a 
subsequent interview, Zyuganov lamented that the Soviet Union 
found itself on the "verge of national catastrophe" (Sovetskaya 
Rossiya, 25 June 1991).  Zyuganov's views, and his attack on 
Yakovlev in particular, were defended in a 22 June article by 
Volodin, in which Volodin continued the attack on reforms in 
general (Sovetskaya Rossiya 22 June 1991).  Zyuganov also signed 
the open letter, "A Word to the People," widely believed to have 
been a call to arms in anticipation of the August 1991 coup 
attempt (Sovetskaya Rossiya, 23 July 1991). 

   Russia:  RIA-Novosti Returned to Government Oversight 

   Summary:  A recent edict signed by President Boris Yeltsin ends 
almost two years of organizational turmoil within the RIA-Novosti 
news agency by placing it under the sponsorship of the Russian 
Council of Ministers and apparently returning to it a foreign 
propaganda function similar to that of its predecessor, APN.  The 
edict appears to quash the agency's own efforts in recent years 
to achieve independence from state or presidential control, but 
it is not yet clear whether its new official status will affect 
its domestic news reporting function. 

   An edict signed by Yeltsin on 23 December 1993 ordered the 
conversion of the RIA-Novosti news agency from a quasi- 
independent media organization to an agency of the Russian 
Government and also assigned to it apparent propaganda and 
analytical functions that differentiate it from the official news 
agency ITAR-TASS.  According to the edict, the transformed RIA- 
Novosti will become a "state information and analysis agency" 
whose purpose is to provide "information and analytical support 
for Russia's domestic and foreign policy and creat[e] a favorable 
image of the Russian state" (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 30 December 
1993). (See Note 1)  The apparent propaganda function assigned to 
RIA-Novosti underscores its role as the successor to the old 
Soviet Novosti Press Agency (APN), whose purpose was to promote 
"mutual understanding, trust, and friendship among peoples" 
through "widespread dissemination abroad of true information" 
about the USSR and by "familiarizing" the Soviet public with the 
"life of people of foreign countries" (Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 24 
July 1993).  In addition, the 23 December edict stated that the 
Council of Ministers is to "ratify the charter" of RIA-Novosti, 
apparently an oblique way of saying that the Council of Ministers 
is the agency's new founder (sponsor), since the Russian Law on 
the Mass Media establishes that the founder "ratifies the 
editorial charter" (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 8 February 1992). 
Finally, the edict guaranteed state funding for RIA-Novosti and 
granted it a number of tax breaks and official privileges. 

   (Note 1)  By contrast, a recent Yeltsin edict characterized ITAR- 
TASS as a "central state news agency" and asserted a more 
politically neutral purpose for its formal transfer to the 
government--to create the "conditions for ensuring high quality 
and timeliness in the collection and dissemination of 
information" (Rossiyskiye Vesti, 24 December 1993).  The impetus 
for Yeltsin's edict on ITAR-TASS appears to have been the 
dissolution of the Federal Information Center and the need to 
transfer formally its media organizations to the jurisdiction of 
the Council of Ministers. 

   The transfer of RIA-Novosti to government oversight appears to 
cap a period of restructuring in the agency that began last 
September and has included the appointment of new management.  On 
15 September Yeltsin ordered the Council of Ministers to "adopt 
the necessary measures to fully reconstitute the activity" of 
RIA-Novosti (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 18 September 1993).  Two days 
later a government decree appointed Vladimir Markov, a former 
Novosti political observer, as chairman of the agency (ITAR-TASS, 
17 September 1993; Izvestiya, 25 September 1993).  Markov 
replaced Maysarat Makharadze, whose departure from RIA-Novosti 
may be linked to the appointment of her husband, former Deputy 
Premier Valeriy Makharadze, as trade representative to Canada 
(Moskovskiy Komsomolets, 21 September 1993).  More recently, a 
government directive appointed former RIA-Novosti journalist 
Aleksandr Slabynko and Anatoliy Chebotarev as deputy chairmen of 
the agency's board (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 11 March). 

   Foreign, Domestic Information Role 

   Markov, who remains the agency's chairman, has outlined an 
ambitious program for RIA-Novosti that seeks to combine its role 
as an instrument of Russian foreign policy and as a domestic news 
agency capable of competing with ITAR-TASS and the independent 
news agency Interfax.  He has indicated his support for RIA- 
Novosti's propaganda role--though he himself reportedly does not 
use that word (Izvestiya, 25 September 1993)--saying that it was 
a "big mistake" to discard the "services" of APN in providing 
"informational support for Russia's foreign policy" and affirming 
RIA-Novosti's "duty" to ensure that "Russia has a worthy image 
abroad" (Moscow radio, 31 October 1993).  Among the tools he will 
apparently use for this purpose are the old APN methods of 
preparing articles, commentaries, photos, and television items 
for and "at the behest of" foreign media (Izvestiya, 25 September 
1993).  At the same time, he has argued that the "handful" of 
news agencies currently operating in Russia are "not enough for a 
huge country" and has said that RIA-Novosti will strive to inform 
people "at the local level about the activity of all branches of 
power."  Additionally, Markov foresees a "public relations" role 
for the agency, providing "informational assistance for our new 
political parties," possibly through the dissemination of party 
programs and announcements (Izvestiya, 25 September 1993; Moscow 
radio, 31 October 1993). 

   Organizational Turmoil 

   The transfer of RIA-Novosti to government oversight formally 
reverses an earlier Yeltsin edict that was to have merged the 
agency with the TASS state news agency.  On 22 January 1992 
Yeltsin ordered RIA-Novosti and TASS to merge into one agency, 
ITAR-TASS, although he apparently authorized some components of 
RIA-Novosti to operate independently as the RIA joint-stock 
company (see box 1).  However, for reasons that are unclear, the 
merger of the two news agencies appears never really to have 
taken effect.  On 8 January 1992 Makharadze replaced Andrey 
Vinogradov as director of RIA-Novosti under circumstances that 
one experienced journalist called "strange" but are undoubtedly 
due to her political connections (Moskovskiye Novosti, No. 27, 5 
July 1992; Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 24 July 1993) (see box 2). 
According to the journalist, the impetus for the merger had 
already "disappeared" with the ouster of former RIA-Novosti 
chairman Vinogradov (Moskovskiye Novosti, No. 27, 5 July 1992). 

   Under Makharadze, RIA-Novosti continued to function--at least as 
a domestic news agency--and to enjoy some independence from state 
control, (See Note 2) but her attempts to merge the RIA joint- 
stock company with RIA-Novosti into a larger, quasi-independent 
joint-stock company ultimately failed.  In June 1992--perhaps as 
a result of Makharadze's personal connections--the Russian 
Government reportedly authorized the transfer of RIA-Novosti's 
property to the RIA joint-stock company, thus effectively 
reversing Yeltsin's January 1992 edict that had transferred RIA- 
Novosti's property to TASS and had ostensibly abolished RIA- 
Novosti (Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 24 July 1993).  Makharadze, 
however, wanted to go a step further and to merge the RIA joint- 
stock company with RIA-Novosti into a larger joint-stock company 
with the state as the majority share holder.  She expected a 
government order to this effect by 1 August 1993 (Nezavisimaya 
Gazeta, 24 July 1993), but it apparently never materialized, and 
Yeltsin's most recent edict appears to dash her plans. 

   (Note 2)  When Yeltsin created the Federal Information Center 
   (FIC) in December 1992 and appointed Poltoranin to head it, a 
provision in the edict made the FIC a cofounder (cosponsor) of 
RIA-Novosti, indicating that the agency still existed, at least 
on paper (See the FBIS Trends of 21 January 1993, pages 16-22). 
In an interview more than a year later, Poltoranin said that the 
"Russian Information Agency"--apparently meaning the joint-stock 
company--did not belong "structurally" to the FTC and that the 
FTC had "not yet considered the transfer" of RIA's sponsorship to 
the FTC (RIA, 26 May 1993). 

   Box 1 

   The Tumultuous Existence of APN-IAN-RIA-Novosti 

   February 1961.  Established as an "information organ of Soviet 
public organizations," the Novosti Press Agency (APN) formally 
came under the sponsorship of the USSR Union of Journalists, the 
USSR Union of Writers, the Soviet Society of Friendship and 
Cultural Relations With Foreign Countries, and the All-Union 
Znaniye Society, though in reality it was under the control of 
the CPSU Central Committee's ideological department, which 
appointed Novosti's top officials (Moscow Central TV, 1 August 
1990; Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 24 July 1993). 

   July 1990.  In an apparent response to signs that the Yeltsin-led 
RSFSR Supreme Soviet wanted to wrest control of Novosti from the 
Union Government--part of a broader battle waged by the RSFSR to 
establish its own media outlets--then-USSR President Mikhail 
Gorbachev signed an edict transforming Novosti from a public 
agency "subsidized by the state" into a "presidential, state 
agency" (Moscow Central TV, 1 August 1990).  At the same time, 
its name was changed to the Novosti Information Agency (IAN), but 
the agency's basic propaganda function reportedly remained the 
same (Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 24 July 1993). 

   August 1991.  In the wake of the failed coup attempt, a Yeltsin 
edict of 22 August removed IAN Director Albert Vlasov from his 
post and  transferred the agency to the jurisdiction of the RSFSR 
Ministry of the Press and Mass Media. 

   September 1991.  A decree of the RSFSR Council of Ministers 
merged IAN with the Russian Information Agency (RIA), an 
independent news agency founded six months earlier by Andrey 
Vinogradov--himself a former Novosti journalist--but the agency's 
formal status and sponsorship were unclear.  Renamed RIA-Novosti 
and headed by Vinogradov, the combined agency took legal title to 
IAN's considerable assets, including publishing houses, printing 
plants, photography labs, and television production studios as 
well as an extensive network of foreign bureaus (IAN, 30 August 
1991, 12 September 1991; Tokyo Shimbun, 25 September 1991).  The 
merger apparently caused disgruntlement among IAN staffers, who 
contended that Vinogradov's experience heading RIA's staff of 50 
reporters--all based at the time in the RSFSR and former Union 
republics--left him ill-qualified to manage the complexities of a 
worldwide news agency (Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 24 September 1991). 

   January 1992.  In a highly controversial move that sparked 
concerns about attempts by the Russian Government to bring the 
media under tighter control, a Yeltsin edict of 22 January 
ordered the merger of RIA-Novosti and the official state news 
agency, TASS, into the newly-named ITAR-TASS.  Then-Minister for 
the Press and Mass Media Mikhail Poltoranin offered the official 
explanation that the state needed to reduce spending on the 
agencies, but an official investigation into RIA reports about a 
purported government order to partially withhold workers' wages 
allegedly leaked to it by a government source suggested high- 
level displeasure with the agency and with Vinogradov in 
particular.  The combined news agency was placed under the 
directorship of TASS's Vitaliy Ignatenko, a former Gorbachev 
spokesman who became the head of TASS in the wake of the failed 
coup. 

End Box 1 

Box 2 

   The Meteoric Rise of Maysarat Makharadze 

   According to Maysarat Makharadze, then-Minister for the Press and 
Mass Media Mikhail Poltoranin "invited" her to head RIA-Novosti 
because he liked "the fact that I had a lot of journalistic and 
industrial experience" (Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 24 July 1993), but 
this explanation seems disingenuous.  By her own account, 
Makharadze's journalism experience appears limited to provincial 
media.  She began writing for the Chechen newspaper Groznenskiy 
Rabochiy in 1959 and became a correspondent for Dagestanskaya 
Pravda within a year.  After earning a degree at Makhachkala 
University in Dagestan, she worked for unspecified regional 
newspapers and television stations until 1977.  Upon her 
husband's assignment to Udmurtiya in 1977, Maysarat Makharadze 
left journalism to work in a bottle making factory, rising 
suspiciously quickly to shop director and, ultimately, factory 
director.  As Valeriy Makharadze's political career flourished 
and brought him to Moscow, so, too, did Maysarat's.  She served 
briefly at the end of 1991 as deputy press minister under 
Poltoranin before he appointed her to head RIA-Novosti 
(Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 24 July 1993). 

End Box 2 

Features 

   Russia:  Zavtra Ambivalent About Zhirinovskiy 

   Summary:  Interviews and commentary in the ultranationalist 
weekly Zavtra--the successor to Den--following the December 
elections (through February) suggest that hard-line nationalist 
oppositionists regard the electoral success of Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy and the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia (LDPR) 
with ambivalence.  While reaction on the whole was hostile, some 
opposition figures, including Zavtra editor Aleksandr Prokhanov, 
appear to view Zhirinovskiy as a potential political ally. 

The first issue of Zavtra--now published in Vladimir--following 
the elections (No. 4, December 1993) featured a front-page 
section entitled "Nashi (Our People) in the Duma," which carried 
interviews with prominent opposition figures who had won election 
to the State Duma, including August 1991 coup plotters Anatoliy 
Lukyanov and Vasiliy Starodubtsev, as well as nationalist 
television personality Aleksandr Nevzorov.  No member of the LDPR 
was interviewed and the evaluations of the LDPR's success were 
decidedly mixed.  Nevzorov yas the most positive in his 
assessment, observing that he counted Zhirinovskiy among those he 
considered "nashi."  Lukyanov took a more ambivalent view, 
observing that the voters "did not vote so much for Zhirinovskiy 
as they did against the [Yeltsin] regime."   He maintained that 
although his own views differ from Zhirinovskiy's, the LDPR 
nevertheless "expresses the interests of those who feel that the 
Russian empire is being methodically destroyed" and that the 
government is conducting "an attack" on "the Russian [Russkiy, 
that is, ethnically Russian] people and Russian interests."  He 
also complained that ''the patriotic movement'' was not 
represented" during the elections, claiming that the government 
had deliberately blocked "patriotic" movements like Sergey 
Baburin's Russian National Union (RNU) from registering for the 
elections and had thus "cleared the road" for a Zhirinovskiy 
victory.  Lukyanov asserted that, since Zhirinovskiy had 
supported the president's efforts to pass the draft constitution, 
the "democrats" had counted on Zhirinovskiy's continued support. 
"Now they feel that the constitution can work for Zhirinovskiy as 
well," he said, alluding to the presidential aspirations of the 
LDPR leader.  In Lukyanov's view, this is why government 
supporters are currently attacking Zhirinovskiy in the press. 

   Starodubtsev, in the most negative assessment of the three, 
called Zhirinovskiy's "promises" a form of "dangerous" populism 
and termed his foreign "ambitions" a "provocation."  He added 
that if Zhirinovskiy did not seek a "clash" with the communists 
or the agrarians, he would discover that they, too, are "people 
who sincerely feel pain for Russia."  An unsigned front-page 
article in the same issue seconded Starodubtsev's negative view, 
taking up the assertion that the "democrats" had deliberately 
aided Zhirinovskiy in order to thwart the communists and 
"patriots."  The article asserted that Zhirinovskiy was incapable 
of the kind of "great power leadership" that National Salvation 
Front or RNU leaders had displayed.  The writer considered 
Zhirinovskiy a "marionette" manipulated by the Yeltsin regime. 

   Zavtra's first issue for January 1994 continued the hostile tone, 
featuring a savage attack on Zhirinovskiy by Eduard Limonov, a 
one- time member of his "shadow cabinet."  In the article, 
Limonov called Zhirinovskiy "an enemy of Russian nationalism" who 
had merely used nationalism as a vehicle for furthering his own 
personal aims.  "Is it not degrading that a former activist of 
the Jewish movement [Zhirinovskiy] . . . informs us of his plans 
to protect Russians?" he asked.  Limonov also maintained, as 
Lukyanov had in the previous issue, that Zhirinovskiy's success 
was due to the government's blocking of the registration of 
nationalist parties for the December elections. 

Zhirinovskiy Interview 

   In an interview with Zhirinovskiy published in February (No. 6), 
Zavtra editor Aleksandr Prokhanov displayed a friendly attitude 
toward the LDPR leader.  Though Prokhanov mentioned 
Zhirinovskiy's reputation as an "eccentric politician," he noted 
their shared notions concerning the "Russian idea," which 
included the conviction that the "mongrel" Russian Federation is 
"in no way Russia as such."  Taking his cue from Prokhanov, 
Zhirinovskiy contended that the future Russian Empire should 
include all the territory of the former USSR "at a minimum" and 
seconded Prokhanov's assertion concerning the just nature of the 
Russian people and empire.  Zhirinovskiy claimed that the empire 
had "uplifted" all its former subjects, raising primitive 
cultures, such as that of the Kazakhs, to "cosmic heights."  "You 
and I were not together [previously], in one party, but we think 
identically," he told Prokhanov. 

   Russia:  Government Daily Tries, Fails at Independence 

   Summary:  Rossiyskiye Vesti has renewed its government 
affiliation after a six-week experiment with independence during 
which it found the financial difficulties entailed in the loss of 
government funding too harsh to bear.  The return to government 
sponsorship places Chief Editor Valeriy Kucher in a dilemma, as 
he will likely have to rein in the editorial independence on 
which the paper had embarked or risk alienating the holders of 
the purse strings in the government. 

   On 31 December Rossiyskiye Vesti announced that it was severing 
its ties to its official sponsor, the Russian Council of 
Ministers, and becoming an independent newspaper.  The 
announcement said that the paper's journalists collective had 
decided on 29 December to terminate the relationship with the 
Council of Ministers because the Council of Ministers had failed 
to fulfill its "statutory obligations" to the editorial office, 
tried to "impede" the work of the chief editor and the paper's 
journalists, and attempted to ''get rid of'' the editor as 
unsuitable."  They also charged that the government would not 
accept" criticism from the, paper.  The announcement noted that 
the paper's status as a government publication had given it an 
unjust" image as an "obedient" publication that had an "adverse 
effect" on its standing.  It claimed that its new status would 
allow it to "perform its social role considerably more freely and 
professionally" (Rossiyskiye Vesti, 24, 31 December 1993).  The 
journalists based their actions on the Law on the Mass Media 
which stipulates that sponsorship reverts to a publication's 
editorial office in the event of the sponsor's reorganization, 
and noted that Russian President Boris Yeltsin had reorganized 
the Government with his 23 December edict "On the Transformation 
and Reorganization of the Council of Ministers-Government of the 
Russian Federation." 

   Following the announcement, the paper continued to publish 
regularly until 25 January, when it failed to appear.  Editorial 
information published on the back page of each issue now listed 
the Journalists' Collective of the Editorial Office as the 
"temporary" sponsor whereas before it had listed the Council of 
Ministers.  The paper reappeared on 1 February, having missed 
five regularly scheduled issues, and apologized for its "forced 
interruption."  The paper charged that its decision to assume 
sponsorship in lieu of the Council of Ministers resulted in a 
cutoff of credits to cover publishing costs (1 February).  When 
it reappeared, however, its distribution was apparently confined 
to the Moscow region until 2 March, when it published an issue 
containing an apology to regional readers who, the paper said, 
had not received their subscriptions for a month. 

   Government Ties Reestablished 

   On 12 February the paper resumed listing the government as 
sponsor, without offering an explanation, and listed the 
journalists' collective as a cosponsor.  Without mentioning the 
resumption of government sponsorship, the apology asserted simply 
that the "suspension of publication" was due to "interruptions in 
[state] budget financing."  In its New Year's message to 
subscribers, the paper had noted that in the absence of 
government financial support it would be resorting to increased 
advertising as a means of self-financing (4 January).  However, 
Russia's weak advertising market apparently made this solution 
unviable, especially on such short notice. 

  Early Signs of Rift 

   Preliminary signs of tension between Rossiyskiye Vesti's 
government affiliation and its staffers' desire to exercise 
editorial freedom appeared during the October 1993 political 
crisis between the president and the parliament.  The paper 
criticized police for rough handling of journalists attempting to 
provide coverage of the crisis, including journalists from 
opposition newspapers who attempted to cover the standoff.  The 
paper also decried Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin's decree 
putting the defunct Supreme Soviet's official newspaper, 
Rossiyskaya Gazeta, under government sponsorship, as a violation 
of the law and of the rights of the paper's staffers (2 October). 
Rossiyskiye Vesti also questioned the legality of the 
occupation" by law enforcement personnel of the editorial 
offices of opposition papers Den, Sovetskaya Rossiya, and Pravda 
(6 October) and condemned as ''lawlessness'' what it called the 
extremely dangerous trend" of "closing down media without trial 
or investigation" (16 October). 

   Not long after the October events, rumors began to appear that 
efforts were underway to remove Kucher due to "differences" 
between him and Chernomyrdin over the role of the government 
press (Kommersant-Daily, 30 November).  Eight days before the 
decision to sever its relationship with the government, a 
journalists' collective meeting charged that "individual 
employees" of the Council of Ministers apparatus were "attempting 
to command" the newspaper and that high- level members of the 
apparatus had attempted to oust Kucher (Rossiyskiye Vesti, 24 
December).  The paper accused the government of attempting to 
"destroy Rossiyskiye Vesti as an independent" newspaper and 
"return to the old methods of directing the press, to make it an 
obedient executor of the will of apparatus bureaucrats."  The 
paper also reported that the journalists' collective had given 
Kucher a vote of confidence. 

   Though the paper claimed that its assertion of independence was 
not an "attempt to stand in opposition" to the government and 
that it would "fairly and thoroughly" report the government's 
efforts to reform the economy (4 January), the move to 
independence had an almost immediate impact on its editorial 
line, transforming the paper from a relatively loyal defender of 
government policy to a harsh critic.  On 22 January the paper 
illustrated its new editorial latitude by publishing an 
unprecedentedly critical commentary that called the formation of 
the new cabinet "undemocratic," compared it to a Soviet-era 
cabinet, and charged that it would not represent the interests of 
the broad public.  The commentary also took aim at Economics 
Minister Aleksandr Shokhin, accusing him of trying to "reanimate 
Gosplan," the Soviet-era state planning agency.  Since its 
reacceptance of government sponsorship, no such criticisms have 
been observed. 

   Implications 

   While the return to government sponsorship has apparently eased 
the paper's financial difficulties, it does not appear to have 
solved the fundamental conflict between the journalists and the 
government.  Despite the fact that the journalists' collective 
has been made cosponsor along with the government, real control 
is probably wielded by the government via the purse.  And 
although Kucher continues to serve as chief editor, tension 
between the paper and the government is likely to remain, placing 
his continued tenure in doubt. 

   Russia:  Editorial Turmoil at Pravda 

   Summary:  After five months that featured four changes of chief 
editor, three publishing hiatuses, and a circulation decline of 
more than half, the situation at Pravda appears to have 
stabilized, at least temporarily.  Most of this turmoil seems to 
be attributable to a struggle for financial control of the 
newspaper between ousted editor Viktor Linnik, who, apparently 
backed by many of the paper's staff, wants to reestablish Russian 
control, and rival editor Aleksandr Ilin, backed by a Greek 
businessman who owns a controlling interest in the paper. 

   The latest round of troubles for Pravda began when, during the 
height of the October crisis in Moscow, the Ministry of the Press 
and Information, acting under President Boris Yeltsin's 
declaration of a state of emergency, suspended the paper's 
publication.  Following the suspension First Deputy Press 
Minister David Tsabriya, overstepping his legal authority, 
"ordered" that Pravda change its name, reregister, and replace 
Chief Editor Gennadiy Seleznev with Deputy Chief Editor Ilin. 
Ilin agreed to the ministry's terms and promised to resume 
publication of Pravda as a paper of "civilized opposition," 
echoing the language of press ministry officials in an apparent 
attempt at appeasement (Izvestiya, 16 October 1993).  Ilin 
appeared ready to assume the role of chief editor of the paper 
under the new name Put Pravdy [The Way of the Truth] when the 
paper's staff elected Linnik in his place.  Linnik also appeared 
to appease press ministry officials, stating his intention to 
turn Pravda into a voice of "civilized opposition" (Radio Rossii, 
28 October), and after a month-long hiatus, the paper reappeared 
on 2 November as Pravda, not Put Pravdy, with Linnik as chief 
editor.  The paper published normally until 19 November and then 
again disappeared from newsstands until 10 December.  The paper 
then continued to publish through 4 February, but on 5 February 
it suspended publication briefly following another election by 
the staff which, on this occasion, elected Ilin as chief editor 
(Moskovskiy Komsomolets, 8 February).  Pravda reappeared on 9 
February and has been publishing regularly since. 

   Trojan Horse in the Editorial Office?     Left orphaned after the 
dissolution of the CPSU in December 1991, Pravda eventually found 
new financial backing through a partnership with a Greek 
businessman.  In August 1992 Rossiyskaya Gazeta reported that the 
paper, having failed to find backing from Russian businessmen, 
had signed an agreement with the Greek firm Steel Light Holding, 
Ltd. and its president, Yannis Yannikos (8 August).  Yannikos and 
Pravda together formed the joint-stock company Pravda 
International, with Yannikos holding a 55 percent controlling 
interest but reportedly having "no intention of interfering in 
the newspaper's content."  A Moscow News commentary on the deal 
questioned Yannikos' credentials and the credibility of Steel 
Light Holding, Ltd. and quoted Greek journalists who called the 
deal "shady and highly suspicious" (Moscow News, 23-30 August 
1992).  The commentary alleged that Yannikos had ties to the CPSU 
and might be fronting for the party, or alternately, that he was 
simply a "petty businessman" trying to "lay his hands on 
anything" that could be "grabbed." 

   Pravda's Election Silence 

   Indications of possible troubles between the paper's chief editor 
and its Greek sponsor surfaced after the paper went silent at the 
height of the fall 1993 national election campaign.  When it 
reappeared on 10 December, just two days before the elections, 
the paper apologized to its readers for disappearing at such a 
critical moment and, without explicitly naming Yannikos or 
stating a motive, said simply that an unspecified "they" had "cut 
off" the paper's "oxygen supply"--presumably a reference to 
financial support.  The paper continued to appear into the new 
year, but the print run fluctuated from a high of 350,000 on 4 
January to a low of 120,000 on 21 January before stabilizing at 
172,934 on 9 February.  According to Linnik, from December to 
February, financial backing for publication came not from 
Yannikos but from Russian entrepreneur Konstantin Zatulin--a 
deputy from the Party of Russian Unity and Accord--and the 
Russian Communist Party (CPRF) (Moskovskiye Novosti, 6-13 
February). 

   Nationalist Challenge to Greek Ownership 

   A report in Moskovskiy Komsomolets (28 January) asserted that a 
conflict between Linnik and Yannikos started to develop following 
the October political crisis when Linnik launched a search for 
Russian sponsors.  In a 5 February Interfax report, Linnik was 
quoted as saying that most of Pravda's staff wished to see a 
"Russian corporation" as the paper's sponsor.  Meanwhile, an 
appeal appearing in the weekly Golos (15-21 February) written by 
a former Pravda journalist noted that the word "pravda is Russian 
... but by no means Greek," encouraged Yannikos to go back to 
Greece if he wishes to publish a newspaper, and called for 
sponsors who are "serious, respectable, and most importantly, our 
own Russians."  According to Ilin, Linnik's search for long-term 
domestic financial backing failed (Kommersant Daily, 10 
February).  Apparently neither Zatulin nor the CPRF were willing 
or able to give the paper such backing. 

   Linnik Ousted 

   In another round of conflict at the paper, Yannikos apparently 
engineered Linnik's removal and his replacement by Ilin.  After 
another brief publishing hiatus, which began on 4 February, the 
paper reappeared on 9 February with a "word to the reader" 
announcing that on 4 February the "work collective of the 
editorial office" had elected Ilin as the new chief editor.  The 
announcement also protested "distortions" being spread in the 
media by some Pravda staffers that the staff was caught in a 
struggle between the "advocates of a national Russian paper" and 
those willing to "sell out to foreign capital."  Indeed, the 
accounts of the situation at Pravda that appeared in Moskovskiye 
Novosti (6-13 February) and Kommersant-Daily (10 February) 
painted just such a picture.  According to these accounts, 
Seleznev, the chief editor when the deal with Yannikos was first 
struck, had sold Yannikos the controlling interest "for pennies"- 
-without consulting the collective--in exchange for promises of 
high salaries and vacations on the Greek isles.  But pay was low 
or non-existent (except for such loyalists as Ilin who reportedly 
received 130,000 rubles per month) and the only one to enjoy a 
Greek vacation was Seleznev himself.  Yannikos allegedly 
interfered in the editorial process, fired one journalist for 
writing a negative piece about an acquaintance, compiled a "black 
list" of 13 more journalists he wanted to see fired, and wished 
to "drive out" Linnik, whom he could not control because he was 
elected.  The accounts also alleged that Yannikos had withheld 
financing but promised to increase honoraria and resume financing 
publication in exchange for Linnik's removal, and that the 
election removing Linnik was conducted in violation of the 
paper's charter. 

   Staff Split, Duma May Decide Issue 

   Linnik's defeat in the election may not be the end of the 
internal conflict.  While Linnik's name no longer appears on the 
listing of the editorial staff, he reportedly has not yet 
relinquished his office (Moskovskiy Komsomolets, 8 February) and 
claims the support of "most of the staff" (Interfax, 5 February). 
Ilin has confirmed that a split among the staff continues to 
exist but played down its impact on the paper's day to day 
operations, asserting that even those workers who support Linnik 
"continue to help put out the newspaper" (Kommersant-Daily, 10 
February).  According to Kommersant-Daily (10 February) on 9 
February, unnamed Pravda representatives made a proposal to the 
State Duma to introduce a draft law forbidding "foreign control" 
over Russian media sources. 

   Implications 

   Duma action to deprive Yannikos of ownership cannot be ruled out 
in view of his heavy-handed efforts to establish editorial 
control over a paper that the many nationalist and communist 
deputies in the Duma regard as a national institution.  If 
Yannikos remains in control, draconian policies such as his 
willingness to silence Pravda, one of the leading opposition 
papers, during a critical political period may delegitimize the 
paper in the eyes of its readership and result in further 
declines in its circulation and loss of influence among 
opposition politicians. 

   Russia:  Government Official Moves To Restrict Media Access 

   Summary:  In a widely publicized move that raises questions about 
the government's commitment to openness, Vladimir Kvasov, head of 
the cabinet's apparatus, attempted to severely restrict media 
access to meetings of the Russian Government.  Although Kvasov 
subsequently asserted that the tight restrictions applied only to 
the 3 February Government meeting, he has continued to advocate 
restricting media access and shown only limited tolerance for 
public airing of official debate on contentious issues. 

   In an apparent response to widely publicized reports about his 
recent attempt to restrict media access to government meetings, 
Kvasov has attempted to portray the move as a temporary measure 
made necessary by concerns about lax procedures for accrediting 
journalists.  As initially reported by the news agencies Interfax 
and ITAR-TASS on 3 February, Kvasov issued an order barring all 
journalists except those from the newspaper Rossiyskaya Gazeta- 
-which came under the government's sponsorship after the 
dissolution of the Supreme Soviet in September--from attending 
meetings of the Russian Government "from now on."  Kvasov's order 
coincided with the 3 February Government meeting which was 
scheduled to discuss the potentially divisive issue of subsidies 
for agriculture in 1994 (ITAR-TASS, 3 February).  According to 
one report, Kvasov's move even "took the government's own press 
service by surprise" (Moscow radio, 3 February).  Defending his 
action, Kvasov said in an interview to Rossiyskaya Gazeta (8 
February)--whose staffers were not observed to challenge either 
the initial media restrictions or Kvasov's explanations--that the 
restrictions were necessary after the government's move to new 
quarters created "confusion," prompting his "verbal instruction" 
that the accreditation system for journalists "should be 
regulated." 

   Suggesting that Kvasov is still trying to restrict media access 
and defend the government's apparent preference to avoid media 
scrutiny, Kvasov has set limits on the media's access and 
justified the exceptions made for the official media.  Kvasov 
explained the preferential access extended to Rossiyskaya Gazeta 
by saying that only media outlets "accredited to us [the 
government]" should be able to attend working meetings, later 
adding that journalists from the official news agency ITAR-TASS 
would also be allowed to cover such meetings (Moscow radio, 3 
February; ITAR-TASS, 4 February).  Kvasov added that media 
accreditation in the future will depend on the agenda of the 
Government sessions, with broad access granted to general 
meetings but only ITAR-TASS and Rossiyskaya Gazeta allowed to 
cover more specialized sessions that affect the "interests of a 
narrow circle of specialists" (Moscow radio, 3 February; ITAR- 
TASS, 4 February). 

   Kvasov's arguments for restricting media access suggest that the 
government has only limited tolerance for media scrutiny and- 
-perhaps of more significance to the development of a civil 
society in Russia--is unwilling to extend to the media a role in 
fostering public debate on contentious issues.  Underscoring his 
reluctance to allow the media to report official debate on 
current issues--and thus to increase the potential for public 
opinion to exert pressure on officialdom--Kvasov stated that the 
government is "ready" to provide the media with "necessary 
materials, but only after a final decision is made on the 
discussed problems" (ITAR-TASS, 4 February).  He expounded on 
this theme in his interview to Rossiyskaya Gazeta, criticizing 
the media for reporting issues that were "still at the discussion 
stage" and claiming that this practice "disinformed society, 
destabilized the situation in the country, and cast the 
government in an unfavorable light." 

   Ukraine:  Post-Postup--Attempt at a Western-Style Newspaper 

   Summary:  Since its establishment in September 1991, the 
newspaper Post-Postup has distinguished itself by its 
comprehensive coverage of national, local, and international 
news.  Linked to a news agency of the same name, the newspaper in 
1993 began consciously to model itself after Western-style 
journalism while serving as a proponent of moderate Ukrainian 
nationalism and economic reform. 

   Post-Postup is a small-circulation (30,000), independent weekly 
based in Lviv in western Ukraine. Like other unsubsidized 
newspapers, its financial situation is rather shaky, sometimes 
leading it to suspend publication for a time (it did not publish 
at all during January 1994, although the press agency of the same 
name continued to function).  Originally a small locally-oriented 
newspaper, it was revamped in 1993 into a Western-style newspaper 
with a tabloid format.  The paper covers national, local, and 
international news in a more thorough manner than is usual in the 
Ukrainian press, which tends to be more focused on national news 
or exposes.  Post-Postup's editor, Oleksandr Kryvenko, is running 
for parliament in the March 1994 election with the Nova Khvylya 
(New Wave) bloc, a group of moderate nationalists from Lviv 
including Ihor Yukhnovskyy and Viktor Pynzenyk, who favor 
political and economic reform.  The newspaper can be 
characterized as moderately nationalist, strongly in favor of 
economic reform, and critical of Ukrainian President Leonid 
Kravchuk and the conservatives in power in Kiev.  Nevertheless, 
it does not emphasize the historical and patriotic themes of 
other Lviv papers such as Za Vilnu Ukrayinu.  The newspaper 
contains less editorializing by correspondents--although some 
remains--and more straight reporting than is typical in the 
Ukrainian press.  Unlike other independent newspapers, such as 
Nezavisimost and Vechirniy Kyyiv, it does not strongly bear the 
personal stamp of the editor.  It does not have signed front-page 
editorials or regular columns by the editor. 

   The newspaper was officially registered in September 1991 along 
with a separate press agency with the same name, which has 
correspondents in all major western Ukrainian towns and nearly 
all oblast centers.  Originally Post-Postup appeared to be aimed 
at a youth audience, publishing a great deal of satire and racy 
material to attract readership.  It focused on local material and 
national news, as is typical of most Ukrainian papers.  In 1993 
the newspaper was revamped completely, dropping the satirical and 
racy material in favor of serious reporting.  Post-Postup is 
divided into three sections: Politics (including national, 
regional, and international), Business, and Culture (including 
the arts, sports, and cultural commentary).  As might be 
expected, national politics is covered extensively.  Issues have 
featured, for example, the government's economic decrees and an 
overview of the political parties (9 December 1993), Rukh 
election tactics, and the activities of the Kuchma-Hrynyov 
election bloc (16 December 1993). 

   One of the distinguishing features of Post-Postup is its detailed 
coverage of regional politics, especially from eastern Ukraine. 
There are regular reports from Odessa, Poltava, Donetsk, and 
Kherson, as well as other cities.  The 2 December issue included 
reports on Kharkiv political groupings, while later issues 
covered Donetsk, Kherson, and Odessa politics (16 December 1993) 
as well as the election chances of various party candidates in 
Zaporizhzhya, Odessa, and the Crimea (28 February). 

   Another feature that sets Post-Postup off from other Ukrainian 
papers is its international coverage.  Usually the Ukrainian 
press limits itself to coverage of its immediate neighbors, 
primarily Russia.  While events in Russia are well covered by 
Post-Postup (the Russian elections and the success of 
ultranationalist candidate Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, etc.), other 
world events receive attention as well, for example, the Anglo- 
Irish talks, U.S. policy toward Russia (9 December 1993), Serbian 
elections, and Turkish-Israeli relations (30 December 1993). 

   Economic reporting is not neglected either.  There is wide 
coverage of business issues with a particular emphasis on the 
views and activities of private bankers and entrepreneurs. 
Government credit and exchange rates are criticized (9, 16, 23 
December 1993); private bankers give their 1994 economic 
prognoses (30 December 1993); joint venture troubles and 
privatization in Lviv are explored (9, 23 December 1993); and 
articles on computer systems and-safety are published (2, 9 
December 1993). Notably absent are old-style articles glorifying 
production or long interviews with officials giving their views 
and remedies for the current economic crisis. 

   In Brief 

   Vladivostok Newspapers Suspended 

   An ITAR-TASS item carried in the 23 March Izvestiya reports that 
the Vladivostok newspapers Bolshoy Vladivostok [Greater 
Vladivostok], Utro Rossii [Russia's Dawn], and Krasnoye Znamya 
[Red Banner] have been suspended in the wake of the ousting of 
Mayor Viktor Cherepkov.  Both Bolshoy Vladivostok and Utro Rossii 
reportedly had supported Cherepkov, while Krasnoye Znamya, 
according to ITAR-TASS, "sided with his opponents from the Kray 
administration."  Anatoliy Lyapyakin, editor of Bolshoy 
Vladivostok, together with other unnamed "human rights 
defenders," has, according to the ITAR-TASS report, "appealed to 
the U.S. Consulate General," requesting "permission to travel 
outside Russia's borders." 

   Rossiyskaya Gazeta To Run Tatar Insert 

   An 11 January Rossiyskaya Gazeta article announced that a weekly 
insert on Tatar affairs and culture will be added to the paper. 
The Tatar Berdemlek-Yedinstvo--founded jointly by Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta and the Government of the Republic of Tatarstan--will 
reportedly be the first ethnic publication to obtain nationwide 
circulation.  The publication reportedly targets ethnic Tatars 
living outside Tatarstan by featuring lessons in the Tatar 
language and articles on Tatar customs and holidays; the insert 
will be published in Russian.  Last year Tatar officials 
initiated the dubbing of Russian Television's "Vesti" news 
program into Tatar as a reflection of Tatarstan's official "state 
languages" of Russian and Tatar (Russian TV, 17 June 1993). 
According to editor-in-chief Natalya Polezhayeva, Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta is "prepared" to cooperate both with ethnic republics and 
with "other peoples"--"Ukrainians, Germans, Jews, Koreans"--who 
lack national formations in the Russian Federation. 

   Other Publications of Interest 

   Russia:  Journalists Slam TV Campaign as Biased, Uninformative 

   Even before the official television campaign got underway with 
the broadcast of the first free programming, some print 
journalists had charged that government-controlled television was 
biasing the campaign in favor of Russia's Choice by its 
continuing coverage of the official activities of many prominent 
government officials running for the legislature on the Russia's 
Choice ticket.  A front page article in the 19 November issue of 
the independent newspaper Nezavisimaya Gazeta, for example, cited 
what it claimed were "a great multitude of examples illustrating 
Ostankino's obvious political affiliation."  According to the 
article, programs presenting Russia's Choice candidates were 
"camouflaged as being 'simply' programs." (See Note 3) 

   (Note 3)  See the FBIS Trends of 15 December 1993, pages 18-20, 
for the full text of this article. 

Russia:  Last Minute State TV Campaign Against Zhirinovskiy 

   On the eve of the 12 December legislative elections, state 
television broke with its previous policy of providing uncritical 
coverage of the contending partied by airing two programs 
attacking Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, chairman of the misnamed Liberal 
Democratic Party of Russia.  This last-minute attempt to turn 
voters against Zhirinovskiy suggests that high-level officials 
within the Russian Government had become aware of strong popular 
support for Zhirinovskiy, at least by the eve of the election. 
(See Note 4) 

(Note 4)  See the FBIS Trends of 15 December 1993, pages 57-58, 
for the full text of this article. 

   Russia:  Pro-Communist Press Keeps Options Open on Zhirinovskiy 

   Pro-communist newspapers Pravda and Sovetskaya Rossiya have 
reacted cautiously to the success of Vladimir Zhirinovskiy's 
Liberal Democratic Party (LDPR) in the party preference voting in 
the 12 December Russian legislative elections.  Perhaps in part 
out of fear of offending a disaffected electorate that they too 
are attempting to woo with their own nationalistic appeals, they 
have refrained from harsh criticism of him and have left open the 
possibility of communists cooperating with the LDPR in the new 
legislature.  At the same time, they have laid the lion's share 
of the blame for Zhirinovskiy's success on what they consider the 
misguided policies of the reformers in the government. (See Note 
5) 

(Note 5)  See the FBIS Trends of 5 January 1994, pages 8-11, for 
the full text of this article. 

Russia:  Debt Crisis Temporarily Halts State Broadcasting 

   Protesting state-owned television and radio companies' prolonged 
failure to pay for broadcasting services, Ministry of 
Communications workers struck on 10 February, disrupting 
broadcasts across much of Russia.  Although Prime Minister Viktor 
Chernomyrdin persuaded the broadcasters to end their strike the 
same day by promising to pay the debt, he hinted that the 
government may turn to privatization of some television and radio 
companies to reduce the debt problem.  The belated government 
response to the strike threat suggests that new state television 
chief Aleksandr Yakovlev, who is not a member of the cabinet, may 
not be well positioned in the government to serve as an effective 
spokesman for his sector. (See Note 6) 

(Note 6)  See the FBIS Trends of 23 February 1994, pages 18-20, 
for the full text of this article. 

   Russia:  Yeltsin Restructures Media Bureaucracy 

   Using his decree power to reorganize the media bureaucracy, 
Russian President Boris Yeltsin has consolidated his control over 
the broadcast media and attenuated the influence of the other 
branches of government and the cabinet.  At the same time he has 
taken the first step in what is likely to be a far reaching, if 
reversible, reduction of the state's role in television by giving 
a private television company access to Russia's 4th television 
channel.  The reorganization appears to signal that long-time 
close Yeltsin adviser Mikhail Poltoranin, who once shaped 
Yeltsin's media policy, no longer enjoys the President's 
confidence in this area. (See Note 7) 

(Note 7)  See the FBIS Trends of 2 March 1994, pages 11-19, for 
the full text of this article. 

   Russia:  RTV Blasts Yakovlev, Poltoranin 

   On 16 March Russian Television's primetime edition of its "Vesti" 
news program launched a scathing attack on media bigwigs, 
including Aleksandr Yakovlev, head of both the Federal Service of 
Russia for Television and Radio Broadcasting and the Ostankino 
Television and Radio Broadcasting Company, and Mikhail 
Poltoranin, head of the State Duma Committee for Information 
Policy and Communications.  Showing video of the two taking in 
the performance of an exotic dancer at a club for media elite, 
the program juxtaposed the officials' expensive and decadent 
perquisites with state television's acute shortage of operating 
funds. (See Note 8) 

(Note 8)  See the FBIS Trends of 23 March 1994, pages 28-29, for 
the full text of this article. 

(AUTHORS:  ALLENSWORTH, CRIMMINS, ELDRIDGE, NERO, O'CONNELL, 
VILLHAUER.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHTEF, 
ANALYSIS BRANCH, RUSSIA DIVISION (703) 733-6070.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/DEW 29/1852Z MAR 

