BFN 

<F P=106> [Tianjin government work report delivered by Zhang Lichang, </F>
mayor of Tianjin Municipality, at the second session of the 12th 
municipal people's congress on 2 March: "Seize the Opportunity, 
Unite To Brave the Way Forward, and Create a New Situation in 
Reform, Opening up, and Development"] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies: 
  On behalf of the Tianjin Municipal People's Government, I 
will now present a government work report to this session for 
discussion. Members of the municipal committee of the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC] and other 
personnel attending this session as observers please give 
opinions. 
<H5>  1. Review of the Past Year's Work </H5>
  The year 1993 was one in which we comprehensively 
implemented 
the guidelines of the 14th party congress and advanced 
triumphantly along the road of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics. Under the leadership of the party Central 
Committee, the State Council, and the Tianjin Municipal party 
committee, the municipal people's government firmly relied on 
the people throughout the municipality, worked hard together, 
actively made progress, fulfilled the annual tasks defined at 
the first session of the 12th municipal people's congress fairly 
successfully, scored new achievements in reform, opening up, and 
economic development, and effected new changes in the work in 
all fields. 
  A. The national economy developed in a rapid and healthy 
manner. 
  Tianjin's GNP was expected at 50.3 billion yuan, an increase 
of 11.8 percent, which was the second highest annual growth rate 
since reform and opening up started. The industrial output 
value totaled 124.7 billion yuan, an increase of 24.5 percent, 
the marketing rate rose, economic efficiency picked up, the 
endeavor to end deficits and increase profits yielded good 
results, and deficits declined in terms of comparable standards. 
The rural economy developed in a sustained manner, and bumper 
grain harvest was won for the 10th year in succession. The 
production of meat, eggs, vegetables, milk, and aquatic products 
remained stable, their quality was improved, and their supplies 
were ample. Township enterprises maintained the trend of fairly 
high growth continuously. Urban and rural markets were 
thriving, with commodity retail sales increasing by 18.4 
percent; and the retail price index remained at a fairly low 
level among the 35 large and medium-sized cities in the country. 
Cargo loaded and unloaded at ports totaled 37.18 million 
tonnes, up 26.9 percent. Post and telecommunications, banking, 
insurance, and real estate businesses all registered fairly 
rapid development. Local revenue totaled 7.31 billion yuan, an 
increase of 21.8 percent, which was the largest annual increase 
in more than a decade. 
  B. Reform continued in various fields. 
  The methods to implement the "regulations on transforming 
the 
operating mechanism of the industrial enterprises owned by the 
whole people" and 26 supporting policy measures were issued. We 
gave approval to 25 new shareholding enterprises and limited 
liability companies to bring the total number to 58, and three 
of them had their shares listed. Over 60 percent of our 
commercial enterprises and over 1,000 rural collective 
enterprises switched to private management while retaining their 
state-owned status or became shareholding cooperatives. 
Individual and private economies continued to expand. We made 
an important step ahead of others in the country in extending 
the separation of tax payment from profit delivery in an 
all-round manner and in unifying the income tax rate. 
Construction of large markets was notably accelerated in the 
past couple of years, and 28 markets for iron and steel furnace 
charge, petrochemicals, coal, chemicals, textile raw materials, 
motor vehicles, and other means of production were built. 
Forty-one consumer goods markets were built last year. 
National trade fairs for rolled steel, building materials, and 
motor vehicles were held successfully. Our total amount of 
money lending in the monetary market ranked second in the 
country. Fifty securities institutions of various categories 
were approved. Labor service, technology, personnel, 
information, and real estate markets also made new headway. 
Coverage of old-age pension insurance and unemployment 
insurance was expanded, and social security upgraded. The 
government changed functions and improved work styles to form a 
system where work is handled by departments jointly and finished 
within a fixed time, and strengthened service to grass roots. 
  C. A good trend emerged in opening to the outside world. 
  The scope of foreign capital Tianjin used and the fields of 
investment were expanded continuously, and a number of 
well-known large international companies and consortia made 
investment vigorously. Contracts for 3,538 new foreign-funded 
enterprises of the three types, an increase of 118 percent, were 
signed; and the contracted amount of investment totaled $3.5 
billion, an increase of 82.5 percent, of which $2.25 billion 
would be made by foreign firms, an increase of 85 percent. The 
development of the development zone was accelerated, industrial 
output value, taxes, and profits doubled and redoubled, and 14 
of its indicators ranked first in all of the development zones 
in the country. The bonded zone developed rapidly, with 2,148 
enterprises approved and $1.06 billion worth of goods entering 
and leaving the zone. The construction of the 12 small zones 
entered a stage of substantial development. Construction of 
Tianjin's ports was notably accelerated, and their volume of 
imports and exports totaled $12.5 billion, an increase of 20 
percent. Tianjin's exports totaled $1.928 billion, an increase 
of 10.9 percent. Contracted overseas labor and tourism all 
witnessed growth. Lateral economic ties expanded continuously 
and domestic funds brought to Tianjin approached 1 billion yuan. 
  D. Construction of key projects proceeded smoothly. 
  Tianjin's investment in fixed assets totaled 22.43 billion 
yuan, up 32.1 percent. This breaks down into an increase in 
local investment of 42.3 percent, and 66.5 percent in the 
investment in equipment renewal and technical transformation 
66.5 percent. The progress of all the 55 key projects was up to 
the requirement, and 21 of them were completed or by and large 
completed. The seamless steel tube project began trial 
production, and a number of projects of joint investment with 
manufacturers of brand-name products in the world, such as 
Zanussi compressors, Honda motorcycles, and Samsung video 
recorders, completed smoothly. The no. 8 generating unit of the 
Junliangcheng Power Plant was fed into the power grid and began 
to generate power; the Beijing-Tianjin-Tanggu Expressway opened 
to traffic in all sections; the Tianjin port took the lead in 
the country in possessing the capacity to transport the fourth- 
generation container ships, and its construction of piers was 
completed. The sewage treatment plant with a daily capacity of 
400,000 tonnes was built and commissioned. The domestically 
advanced three-tier interlinked Wangdingdi overpass was 
completed at a high speed and in high quality to improve the 
traffic of this area; and the underground passage of the north 
station was successfully renovated to put an end to the 
long-standing traffic congestion and leakage on rainy days. The 
Jili Mansion and the commercial city of the development zone 
opened business. All these projects upgraded the city's 
function as a carrier, improved its investment climate, and 
enhanced its economic strength. 
  E. Science and technology, education, culture, and sports 
made new headway. 
  The principle of developing Tianjin through the application 
of science and technology was further implemented. We won 694 
new scientific and technological achievements, of which 67 
percent were put into production and application. Industrial 
enterprises produced 1,400 new products to increase their output 
value by 7.17 billion yuan, or 38.4 percent. Total income from 
technological and industrial undertakings and trade in the 
new-tech industrial park registered a 100-percent increase. 
Education developed continuously. We successfully held the 
municipal educational work conference, accelerated educational 
reform, and further increased the educational investment. The 
nine-year compulsory education was made universal in 95.5 
percent of the rural areas, and elimination of illiteracy among 
young and middle-aged people met state requirements. The 
educational structure and establishment of disciplines were 
improved upon. Sports undertakings were strengthened. 
Six-hundred eighty-nine hospital beds and a basic emergency 
medical network was established throughout the municipality. 
Family planning yielded notable results, with the birth rate 
and natural population growth lower than the state-assigned 
norms. Culture, sports, broadcasting, press, publications, and 
social sciences developed. Breakthroughs were made in film and 
television program production, and a number of them won prizes 
at home and abroad. 
  F. Living standard improved steadily. 
  The 20 practical jobs designed to improve urban and rural 
living standards set by the municipal government were all 
accomplished. New houses totaling 2.42 million square meters 
were built, an increase of 620,000 square meters over the 
preceding year; floor space equipped with heat supply systems 
increased by 2.1 million square meters; and households supplied 
with gas increased by 21,000. A number of major pollution 
sources were brought under control, tree-planting tasks 
fulfilled, and basic facilities for environmental protection 
strengthened, thus enabling Tianjin to maintain the title as one 
of the 10 most clean cities. Urban and rural people's income 
continued to increase. Urban people's per capita cost of living 
income was 2,579 yuan, up 5.4 percent when allowing for price 
rises; and rural people's per capita net income was 1,593 yuan, 
up 13 percent, and the per capita net income of poverty-stricken 
villages grew by 100 yuan. 
  By earnestly studying the socialist theory of Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping with regard to building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and vigorously developing the pioneering spirit 
of the new historic period, governments at all levels paid 
attention all along to successfully building the spiritual 
civilization. The struggle against corruption was carried out 
in a down-to-earth manner and these governments scored 
periodical results in it. Leading cadres conducted self 
examination and correction in line with the five regulations of 
building administrative honesty and exercising self-discipline. 
A large number of major and appalling cases were investigated 
and handled, malpractices cropping up among various industries 
and trades were corrected, and 296 illegal charges were 
abolished. The municipality further enhanced the construction 
of democracy and legal systems; earnestly accepted the 
supervision over law enforcement, work, and democratic 
implementation; and implemented the procedural law of 
administration. These governments extensively solicited and 
listened to the opinions and suggestions raised by the deputies 
of the municipal people's congress and the members of the 
municipal CPPCC committee and broadened the exposure of the 
people's government work. They expanded the channel of making 
contacts with the masses by establishing a special telephone 
line and doing a good job in handling people's petition letters 
and visits. They also further enhanced the comprehensive 
management of public security and steadily maintained the 
honorary title of the municipality that is one of the regions 
across the country, which have been the best in social peace. 
  The municipality scored achievements and made progress in 
its 
work of 1993. However, it also suffered some problems and 
shortcomings. The economic results of a large number of 
enterprises were poor and the income of some staff members and 
workers was low. Progress in foreign trade and exports was not 
fast enough. The proportion of tertiary industrial enterprises 
was not high enough. The market scale required further expansion 
in the year. Some government personnel still indulged in 
formalism and bureaucracy and engaged in corrupt practices. 
Malpractices cropping up among various industries and trades 
still needed to be continuously and vigorously corrected in the 
year. We should pay great attention to these problems and 
earnestly resolve them. 
  Fellow deputies: Achievements scored in 1993 resulted from 
people throughout the municipality in doing pioneering work 
arduously and uniting as one in making progress, which can not 
be separated from the fine foundation laid over the long time, 
which are the embodiment of wisdom and energy of veteran 
comrades, and which benefit the predominantly favorable 
environment of the country as a whole. Hereby, on behalf of the 
municipality people's government, I would like to extend 
heartfelt thanks to various fronts; to workers, peasants, 
intellectuals, and public security cadres and policemen, who 
have industriously worked for the prosperity and development of 
the municipality; to all commanders and fighters of the Tianjin 
garrison district, the People's Liberation Army [PLA] units 
stationed in the municipality, and the armed police forces, who 
have shared weal and woe and worked side by side with the 
municipality; and to various democratic parties, industrial and 
commercial federations, nonparty personages, and mass 
organizations, who have shown utter devotion to and given full 
cooperation to the municipality. 
<H5>  2. The Work Guideline and Major Tasks of 1994 </H5>
  The sixth municipal party congress and the first session of 
the 12th municipal people's congress held in 1993 defined the 
general target of development for the coming period, in which 
the municipality should strive through its 20-year struggle to 
become one of the regions to take the lead in basically 
realizing modernizations. Economic development should be 
improved to the following two new levels: The municipality 
should fulfill the target originally set for the year 2000, of 
quadrupling 1980's GNP, by 1997. By 2010, the municipality 
should double the GNP again and build itself into a center of 
commerce, trade, and finance for north China; into a 
comprehensive industrial base with advanced technologies; and 
into a large city with modern international harbor facilities 
opening up to all directions of the world. To fulfill the 
aforementioned target, we feel that duties imposed on us in this 
regard are great and heavy. We must make efforts to work hard, 
to pioneer the road of advance, and to work out details for the 
target and tasks so as to enable leadership at all levels to 
sense the responsibility and pressure as well as to enable the 
people throughout the municipality to be hopeful and encouraged. 
Based on earnestly summarizing the experience gained in the 
practice over the years, and in line with the new situation and 
the desire of the people across the municipality, we have 
defined the following four targets for implementation: The 
municipality will exceed the target of quadrupling the GNP in 
three years by 1997 and maintain the annual average growth rate 
of 11 percent. In five or seven years, the municipality will 
basically fulfill the task of rebuilding the dangerous and 
shabby residential houses on a large scale and create conditions 
for realizing the per capita housing acreage of 8 square meters. 
In about eight years, the municipality will take reform as 
motivation to improve the state-owned large and medium-sized 
enterprises by conducting technological grafting, readjustment, 
and renovations. In about 10 years, the municipality will 
basically complete construction of a new coastal region. 
Simultaneously, we should regard the increase in the peasants' 
income as the focal point of agriculture and rural economic work 
and double the peasants' per capita income in the next five to 
seven years. These targets are related to one another. In 
making the economic work arrangements, we should lay emphasis on 
developing new areas and rebuilding old city proper. In regard 
to the priorities of development, we should attach importance to 
enlivening large and medium-sized state-owned enterprises and 
developing the rural economy. In regard to the relationship 
between production and livelihood, we should base ourselves on 
developing production and regard the improvement of the people's 
livelihood as a point to start with and conclude our work. To 
realize these targets, we should further deepen reform and 
expand the scale of opening up. We should not only grasp new 
economic growing points and accelerate the development of new 
economic areas but also grasp the reconstruction of old city 
proper and the transformation of old enterprises and accelerate 
the pace of readjusting and enlivening the existing enterprises. 
We should grasp the work of every year, make good strides, and 
be sure to make new changes every year and to make big changes 
in five years. 
  The year 1994 is a key year to maintain the good economic 
development trend as well as to promote reform. The basic 
principles governing the work of the whole party and the whole 
country in 1994, as set forth by the party Central Committee, 
are: Take Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics and the basic line of the party as 
a guidance; comprehensively implement the 14th party congress 
and the third plenary session of the 14th party Central 
Committee; accelerate the setup of the socialist market economic 
system; maintain fast, sustained, and sound development of the 
national economy; safeguard political stability; and 
comprehensively promote social progress. The overall work 
situation of the whole party and the whole country is as 
follows: Grasp favorable opportunities to deepen reform, expand 
the scale of opening up, promote development, and maintain 
stability. All of our work should submit to and serve this 
overall situation. It is necessary to grasp the relationship 
among reform, development, and stability. We should 
conscientiously implement the tasks as set forth at the second 
(enlarged) plenary session of the sixth municipal party 
committee. All localities, departments, and trades and 
professions should foster the sense of high urgency and the 
sense of high responsibility; keep forging ahead; and attain 
high standards, high efficiency, high quality, and high 
benefits. Major economic targets should be better than those of 
last year. New headway should be made in the work in various 
spheres. The major economic and social development targets and 
tasks are as follows: The national economy should develop in a 
sustained, fast, and smooth manner. The municipality should 
ensure a 9-percent increase of the GNP and strive to register a 
12-percent increase in order to attain the requirements for 
fulfilling the quadrupling target three years ahead of schedule. 
The local revenues should increase by over 15 percent if 
calculated in terms of comparable items. It is necessary to 
further deepen reform. According to the state unified 
arrangements, we should positively organize forces to implement 
the major measures for reforming the financial and tax, 
monetary, investment, planning, foreign trade, and price 
systems; accelerate the change of the state enterprise 
mechanisms; explore effective ways for setting up the modern 
enterprise system; focus on cultivating the markets for 
production factors; expand the scale of markets; and enhance the 
influential power. We should make a breakthrough in opening to 
the outside world. The amount of foreign capital that are 
really used should increase by over 29 percent and the foreign 
export trade volume should increase by 14 percent. People's 
livelihood should greatly improve. The increase in the urban 
and rural residents' income should be higher than that of last 
year. The municipality should set a historical record in 
building urban residential houses. A total of 3.6 million 
square meters of houses should be completed during the year. A 
stable social environment should be created for reform and 
development. 
  Fellow deputies! Our development goals are grand, and 
tasks arduous. To attain these goals, we should have a correct 
understanding and control of the situation. It will become a 
general trend for some time after the 14th party congress and 
the third plenary session of the 14th party Central Committee to 
promote the establishment of the socialist market economy system 
in an all-round manner, deepen reform, open wider to the outside 
world, and facilitate development. Development throughout the 
country, especially in coastal areas, is very fast, and some 
medium-sized cities are rapidly rising. The situation is 
spurring us on. As China's important coastal open city, Tianjin 
should and can develop faster in compliance with the 
requirements of the central authorities. It has great 
potential. Since reform and opening up started, it has effected 
profound changes in all economic and social undertakings and 
notably enhanced its economic strength. It has notably 
accelerated its reform and opening up over the past two years 
and created a trend of rapid and healthy development in the 
economy. A number of old enterprises have transformed their 
mechanisms, increased their vigor, and become more adaptable to 
the market. This should be attributed to the foundation we have 
laid over the past many years. Cadres and the masses in the 
municipality have a high spirit and morale to change the outlook 
of their hometowns as soon as possible. All this provides a 
favorable condition and foundation for us to achieve better 
development. 
  Of course, we should also remain clear-headed to note the 
numerous contradictions and difficulties on our road of 
advancement and the possible factors difficult to predict. 
However, favorable conditions can be transformed into 
unfavorable ones, and vice versa. Favorable conditions depend on 
our efforts to apply and create; and unfavorable conditions 
depend on our efforts to transform and overcome. With same 
conditions and difficulties, all work depends on human efforts. 
The key to whether Tianjin can create a new situation and 
achieve faster development lies in our mindset, morale, 
determination, and work level. In short, our reform and 
development are faced with a golden opportunity, and favorable 
conditions are the main stream. Such a good historical 
opportunity is rare and extremely valuable. Time and tide wait 
for no one. As long as we firmly rely on the people throughout 
the municipality, emancipate our mind more, and work harder, we 
will be able to attain our goals! 
<H5>  3. Maintain Sustained, Rapid, and Healthy Economic </H5>
Development 
  The basic way to accelerate development lies in reform and 
opening up. We should properly handle the relationship between 
quantity and quality and between growth rate and efficiency in 
line with the law governing economic development, make great 
efforts to restructure the economy, promote technological 
advance, and conscientiously channel economic work to the track 
focusing on improving economic efficiency. 
  A. We should deepen reform to invigorate the existing amount 
of the economy. 
  To achieve faster development, we should focus on deepening 
the reform of state-owned enterprises, add impetus to the 
reform, transform the mechanism more rapidly, devote more 
efforts to invigorating the existing amount of the economy, 
ensure that state-owned assets maintain and increase their 
value, and fully develop the potential of large and medium-sized 
state-owned enterprises. 
  First, we should comprehensively deepen enterprise reform, 
continue to thoroughly implement the "enterprise law" and the 
"regulations," and make sure that enterprises have 
responsibilities, powers, and profits. We should achieve 
success in the reform of the three systems within enterprises 
and make more than 80 percent of the state-owned enterprises 
meet the requirements for transforming the operating mechanism. 
We should make arrangements for 180 large and medium-sized 
state-owned enterprises to conduct multiform reform of the 
property right system and select 30 enterprises to try out the 
modern enterprise system. Small state-owned enterprises may be 
managed on a contract or leasing basis, reorganized into 
shareholding enterprises, or sold to collectives or individuals. 
While promoting reform, all enterprises should attach importance 
to management and master skills to increase efficiency and 
improve enterprise quality to become more adaptable to the 
market and more competitive. 
  Second, it is necessary to combine reform with grafting 
transformation, readjustment, and reorganization. We should 
apply different methods to solve different enterprises' major 
problems and make sure that the remedy suits the case. The 
enterprises with good economic results, wide markets, and 
prospects for development should exert efforts to expand the 
scale of development and upgrade their quality. The enterprises 
with ordinary efficiency should exert efforts to renew their 
equipment and technology and to develop readily marketable 
products. Money-losing enterprises should exert efforts to 
enliven themselves separately, halt deficits, and increase 
profits. At present, money-losing enterprises should ensure the 
basic income of its staff and workers. The enterprises that 
suffer long-term losses and whose assets cannot cover the debts 
should declare bankruptcy according to laws. The municipality 
should delegate as soon as possible the rights to managing the 
enterprises that the municipality find it inconvenient for 
management and that the districts are not willing to manage. 
This year, we should comprehensively accelerate the pace of 
grafting transformation. All enterprises, no matter what sizes 
they are and no matter how many economic results they can 
create, can be developed so long as foreign traders are willing 
and we can gain benefits. We should have a number of large and 
medium-sized enterprises establish contacts with foreign 
businessmen. By conducting grafting transformation, we should 
solve problems related to capital, technology, products, and 
sales; change mechanisms; and promote enterprise management. 
  Third, it is necessary to positively encourage trades and 
industries to shift lines of operation. This year, we should be 
determined to adopt effective measures, including necessary 
administrative methods; guide and promote enterprises to break 
the bounds of trades; and carry out the method that trades and 
industries shift the lines of operation. Particularly, the 
enterprises that are located in the "golden" areas and fail to 
create good economic results should be encouraged to shift the 
lines of production and to develop a diversified economy. All 
enterprises should go into action, determine their course of 
action according to market demands, and liberate themselves. 
  Fourth, we should accelerate the reform of the social 
security system. We should continue to expand the scale of 
unified social arrangements, upgrade socialized progress of 
insurance for the aged, expand the extent of insurance coverage 
for the unemployed, and have insurance cover the staff and 
workers of private enterprises. We should further reform the 
current system of medical treatment with public funds and labor 
insurance, and further reform the insurance process for 
job-related injuries, and create conditions for state- owned 
enterprises to change their mechanisms. It is necessary to 
accelerate urban housing reform and set up, in a step-by-step 
manner, a new system of commercializing the houses dominated by 
market regulation and supplemented by social guarantees. 
  B. We should comprehensively enliven the construction of the 
new coastal area. 
  Cultivating new economic growing points is a key way for 
developing incremental and increasing aggregates. At the time 
of vigorously developing new high-tech industries, town and 
township enterprises, three types of foreign-funded enterprises, 
collective enterprises, and private and individual sectors of 
the economy, we should concentrate energy on building the new 
coastal area, accelerate the pace of development and opening up, 
and create some new economic advantages. 
  With the accumulated efforts of the municipal party 
committee 
and the municipal government, the ideas of accelerating the 
construction of the new coastal area have matured. The general 
ideas are as follows: Take Tianjin Harbor, development zone, 
and bonded area as a framework; take metallurgical industry and 
chemical industry as a foundation; have commerce and trade, 
banking trade, and tourist trade vie with one another for 
development; and form a new, highly opened, modernized, economic 
zone with new industries and the export-oriented economy playing 
a dominant role, with the free harbor area as an orientation 
area of development, with complete sets of infrastructural 
facilities, with complete sets of service functions, and with 
the capability to cater to the 21st century. Through the 
development and construction in the next 10 years or so, we 
should have the new area's GNP and foreign exchange earnings 
from exports account for more than 40 percent of the 
municipality's total. Along with the gradual realization of 
this target, we will be able to create conditions to 
rehabilitate and revitalize the old enterprises and to create a 
situation where the old city proper supports the new area, the 
new area promotes the development of the old city proper, and 
both the new area and the old city proper make common 
development. 
  We should make a unified plan to develop and construct the 
new coastal area, implement the plan in a step-by-step manner, 
mobilize the enthusiasm of all fronts and concentrate energy to 
rapidly develop the new area, ensure that the new area's GNP 
will increase by more than 20 percent annually, and make it the 
fastest area of economic development in Tianjin. First, we 
should accelerate harbor construction and carry out in an 
overall way the construction of docks for energy resources. We 
should also accelerate the construction of Nanjiang bridge and 
basically fulfill the task of doing the earth work for the 
sewage disposal center project. We should increase the 
capability of loading and unloading international containers to 
more than 500,000 containers per annum and the annual loading 
and unloading volume of the harbor to over 40 million tonnes. 
We should build Tianjin Harbor into a first-grade one for the 
country. Second, we should promote the fast development of 
economic development zones and bonded zones. The development 
zones should continuously broaden their operation of inviting 
business, further raise funds for development, realize their 
industrial output value of 11 billion yuan, and continuously 
maintain their leading positions in various economic targets in 
the country. The bonded zones should accelerate the 
construction of the second-phase development projects and 
vigorously develop international trade by drawing on the methods 
of international free trade to promote the connection between 
domestic and foreign markets. They should also foster the 
auxiliary service system among storage, transport, and 
processing so as to build themselves as soon as possible into a 
showcase of north China in international trades. Third, we 
should do a good job in building heavy and chemical industrial 
zones. The original enterprises in this regard should be 
improved to a new level. The pace of new projects under 
construction should be accelerated. Hereafter, in formulating 
key industrial projects we should merge these projects with 
those in the heavy and chemical industrial zones in principle. 
Old enterprises located downtown, which require renovation, 
should accelerate their production merger with the projects in 
these zones. Fourth, we should accelerate the construction of 
infrastructures. By making full use of funds in various fields, 
we should ensure the construction of the overpass on Xinhua 
street in Tanggu district, the Tianjin highway section on the 
Shan-Guang highway, the Gang-Tang highway. We should build the 
heating and power plant, water plant, and the project of 
diverting the Luanhe water to Hangu district as soon as possible 
in the development zones. Efforts should be made to actively 
seek foreign funds to build the express highway between the 
downtown area and the new coastal region. In line with the 
development of the new coastal region, we should accelerate the 
construction of the communications network among maritime, land, 
and air transportations. 
  C. We should broaden the utilization of foreign funds in all 
directions. 
  Being a coastal, open city, Tianjin Municipality must 
successfully concentrate its efforts on opening itself to both 
fraternal provinces and foreign countries so as to foster a 
situation in opening up in various fields, at the high level, 
and in all directions. 
  We should utilize foreign capital on a large scale. We have 
fostered an upsurge in utilizing foreign capital this year so 
that we could take the advantage to make progress and to 
accelerate the utilization in this regard. We should chiefly 
make great and important progress in directly utilizing foreign 
capital and also actively broaden the channels of seeking 
government loans, the loans of international financial 
organizations, and credit offered by foreign countries for 
exports. As long as they conform with the state policies, all 
primary, secondary, and tertiary industry enterprises in various 
fields are welcome to seek these loans for their large, 
medium-sized, and small projects and will be allowed these loans 
with the adoption of cooperative measures. In particular, we 
should firmly grasp loans for the basic industries that will 
make use of an imported technology so as to promote the 
production of a large number of plants and make efforts from top 
to bottom to ensure the loans for the key projects of building 
infrastructures. We should regard the volume of introduced 
foreign capital and of used foreign capital as well as the 
benefits exerted by the foreign capital that is introduced as a 
yardstick measuring the work done by the departments concerned 
in this regard. 
  We should vigorously create a new situation in foreign trade 
and exports. Efforts should be made to deepen reform in the 
system of foreign trade, to accelerate the structural 
readjustment of export commodities, and to upgrade the standard 
of intensive processing. We should also increase the export 
proportion of machinery and electric commodities and support the 
enterprises that are exporting their products on a large scale. 
Efforts should be made to actively open markets of multiple 
categories, to do a good job in sponsoring a China export trade 
fair in Tianjin, to develop enterprises established in outside 
places, to broaden the fields of sales in various industries and 
trade, to expand the export standardization of Tianjin export 
harbor, and to bring into full play the municipal harbor's role 
of linking Europe and Asia. We should vigorously increase 
incomes earned from the non-trade business, expand labor 
migration and contracts for construction projects in foreign 
countries, and develop the undertakings of tourism as well as of 
ocean shipping and air cargo that can earn foreign exchanges. 
  We should vigorously improve the investment environment. 
Various social circles, every department, and every resident 
across the municipality should set an example in this regard and 
regard the work of making business more convenient for foreign 
businessmen as their work emphasis. On the premise of mutual 
benefits and interest, we should not fear the money-making of 
foreign businessmen but should be able to account for it in an 
overall way as well as to have benefits in mind. We should 
persist in the methods of coordinated service and all-embracing 
service stations to provide quick and highly efficient service. 
Based on the opinions of most foreign firms, we should revise 
and improve policies in a timely manner to promote the 
development of more projects, but we will never force the 
projects to start when conditions are harsh. We should continue 
to send people out and invite people in; take advantage of 
various channels and opportunities more successfully to 
extensively publicize Tianjin and make it better known; make 
friends with others widely; and bring in investment from abroad. 
In particular, we should attach importance to developing the 
role of influential persons and large companies and consortia 
throughout the world in bringing in funds from abroad and strive 
to turn Tianjin into the most attractive place for investors. 
  We should play the "service card" well. Tianjin's opening is 
multi-directional, and its service should be as well. People 
all over the municipality should embrace a strong sense of 
service. We should do a good job both in opening to the outside 
world and in serving domestic places; serve both the areas 
around the Bohai Bay and the areas in north, northeast, and 
northwest China; and serve both central departments and other 
provinces and municipalities. Meanwhile, we should also serve 
the offices of other localities stationed in Tianjin. We should 
open Tianjin's door wide, win a good reputation and bring in 
more information, personnel, and funds with first-rate service, 
and promote cooperation and achieve development in service. 
  D. We should accelerate the cultivation and development of 
the market system. 
  To develop Tianjin's role as an economic center, we should 
cultivate large markets, develop large-scale commodity 
distribution, and speed up construction of a center for 
commerce, trade, and finance. We should consider the 
cultivation and development of the market an important part of 
the government's endeavors to change functions and serve 
enterprises and place it in a more prominent position. We 
should further adopt preferential policies and effective 
measures to consolidate and develop existing trade markets, 
expand their business scope, and improve their trade environment 
to form a greater climate. We should build another group of 
markets for essential elements of production and open some 
futures exchange centers on a trial basis. We should 
continuously expand the scope and categories of various types of 
securities to provide favorable conditions for opening the third 
stock exchange in the country. We should make active efforts to 
prepare for the establishment of the gold exchange center. We 
should step up construction of the northern property rights 
exchange market, technology exchange market, and personnel 
market geared to the entire country. In coordination with the 
renovation of the old city proper, we should expand and improve 
the real estate market. We should strive to build another group 
of large trade markets. We should actively develop the various 
kinds of intermediary service organizations; make the national 
spring commodity trade fair and national rolled steel trade fair 
successful; and strengthen the monitoring, regulation and 
control, and management of the market. Meanwhile, we should 
strive to develop transportation, post, telecommunication, 
information consultation, catering service, tourism, and 
recreational undertakings to make Tianjin more vigorous and 
prosperous. 
  E. We should pay attention to construction of key projects. 
  To promote its economy to a new height, Tianjin should 
strive 
to establish a number of pillar industries and produce a number 
of highly competitive products that are of a large scale and 
high level and that hold a large share in the market in order to 
increase its competitive edges and capacity for sustained 
development. We should step up the "222" project [The project 
in which Tianjin focuses on the automobile industrial 
corporation, the steel tube company, and 20 municipal-level key 
enterprises, and in which various bureaus, districts, and 
counties focus on 200 key enterprises]. We should establish the 
capacity to produce 150,000 Xiali-brand cars a year and make the 
seamless steel tube project meet the designed capacity as soon 
as possible so as to gain better returns on investments. 
Construction in the ethylene and polyester projects should be 
expedited. The production of 20 key products, such as program- 
controlled exchanges, video recorders, engineering machines, 
metal products, and chemical fibers, should be expanded and 
upgraded so as to improve efficiency. We should actively 
support the development of petroleum, chemical, and other 
enterprises stationed in Tianjin. Light industry, textile 
industry, medical industry, and building material industry 
should be restructured and renovated with imported technology 
and funds according to established priorities, and we should 
make sure that good results are achieved after every 
restructuring. All districts, counties, and bureaus should also 
direct attention to their own key projects. 
  It is necessary to accelerate the construction of urban 
infrastructure. This year, we should ensure that the whole 
inner-ring road be joined, build four new overpasses, and expand 
and rebuild a number of roads to clear up traffic congestion. 
It is necessary to make good preparations for the pre-phase 
project of diverting water from south to north. We should 
continue to build the second-phase project of Xinkaihe water 
works, accelerate the construction of Jixian power plant and 
Chentangzhuang thermal power plant, install 450,000 urban 
telephone lines, positively arrange the construction of the no. 
3 coal gas plant, and ensure the completion of projects for 
supplying heat for 3 million square meters of houses. It is 
necessary to accelerate the development of a group of projects 
that have been signed, including Huaxin Commercial Building, 
Yongji Garden, Fuyu Square, and Hechuan Building. Some 700,000 
square meters of commercial areas will be built during the year. 
  F. We should ceaselessly expand the rural economy. 
  We should comprehensively implement the central authorities' 
"policy measures for developing agriculture and the rural 
economy," take the increase of the peasants' income as the main 
target, strengthen agriculture's role as the foundation of the 
national economy, and make faster development in the rural 
economy. We should vigorously improve the agricultural 
production conditions and upgrade the overall agricultural 
production capability. It is necessary to speed up the 
readjustment of the agricultural structure and develop 
high-yield, good-quality, and high-efficiency agriculture. We 
should pay high attention to the "vegetable basket" project, 
increase the varieties of products, upgrade the quality of 
products, and expand the scale of production. 
  It is necessary to improve the production bases for 
foodstuffs. Governments at various levels should vigorously 
increase the input to agriculture and exert great efforts to 
achieve the construction of farmland water conservancy projects 
and the basic service system. It is necessary to enhance the 
disaster-fighting capability, to strictly bring the occupation 
of cultivated areas under control, to accelerate the development 
of town and township enterprises, to deepen internal reform, to 
clearly define property rights, to keep flexible mechanisms, to 
gradually set up dominant industries and dominant products, and 
to form regional economic advantages. We should increase, by a 
big margin, the proportion of the export-oriented economy, 
accelerate the construction of 12 small development zones, and 
expand the capability of creating foreign exchange through 
exports. It is necessary to accelerate the construction of 
small, modern towns. This year, we should first build 10 
central towns on a trial basis and gradually form a system of 
reasonably-distributed small towns of different scales and with 
different special features. It is necessary to accelerate the 
construction of comparatively well-off villages. The villages 
that have become comparatively well-off should upgrade their 
standards. Those that approach the level of being comparatively 
well-off should accelerate the pace of development. We should 
concentrate energy to help the small number of poor villages and 
have them free themselves from poverty within fixed time. The 
per capita net income of the rural people in the municipality 
should increase by over 200 yuan per annum. 
  G. We should promote the combination of science and 
technology with the economy. 
  Science and technology are the first productive forces. 
Under the market economic conditions, commodity competition is 
essentially technology competition. We must exert efforts to 
accelerate technological progress and to increase technological 
contents. We should further implement the principle of relying 
on science and technology to rejuvenate the municipality, deepen 
the reform of the scientific and technological system, apply the 
market mechanism, take science and technological as a guide, and 
cultivate new economic growing points. It is necessary to grasp 
the "10 billion" project dominated by industrializing new 
high-tech; to comprehensively develop 20 key scientific and 
technological projects; to assimilate, absorb, and blaze new 
trails in advanced technologies; to accelerate the development 
and application of new products; and to popularize agricultural 
experimental projects. We should accelerate the construction of 
new technological industrial gardens; bring into play our 
advantages of scientific research organizations being 
concentrated and having a good new high-tech foundation and 
strong research and developing abilities; positively use foreign 
capital; and make great progress in jointly and cooperatively 
developing scientific and technological projects and new 
industries. It is necessary to set up the scientific and 
technological service system and grasp the construction of 
scientific and technological cooperation centers and 
technological exchange centers. It is necessary to bring into 
full play the functions of the institutions of higher learning, 
including Nankai University and Tianjin University; the 
scientific research units stationed in Tianjin, and the 
scientific research organizations attached to the municipality. 
We should positively support the commercialization and 
industrialization of key scientific and technological findings. 
We should further strengthen the cooperation with the 
scientific research institutions and universities of Beijing and 
brotherly provinces and municipalities and extensively attract 
outstanding science professionals and technicians at home and 
abroad. We should further foster the social practice of 
respecting knowledge and skilled persons, bringing the 
intellectuals' role in reform, opening up, and modernization 
into full play. 
  H. We should accelerate renovations of dangerous, shabby, 
one-story houses. 
  There are many dangerous, shabby one-story houses in 
Tianjin, 
and a considerable amount of people still live in such houses. 
In some houses, three generations live under the same roof, and 
they suffer from leaky roofs on rainy days and suffer from cold 
in winter. Going all out to solve this problem is an unshirkable 
duty of governments at all levels. Renovating dangerous, 
shabby, one-story houses will not only directly benefit the 
masses but will also help improve urban traffic conditions, help 
rebuild old city proper, and help develop the tertiary industry. 
It will provide more job opportunities for urban residents, and 
make urban areas more civilized. This is good and will event 
benefit many sides. This year is the first year to carry out 
the goal of rebuilding all dangerous, shabby, one-story houses 
in five to seven years. We must win in the very first battle. 
Six urban districts must strive to set a high record in the 
fields of removing old houses, renovating houses, and completing 
construction of houses. Within this year, efforts should be 
made to complete the building of 2.795 million square meters of 
houses. We should mobilize the initiative of all fields to 
raise funds through every possible means. In particular, we 
should actively utilize foreign funds. We should make overall 
arrangement and reasonable layout in line with the overall urban 
construction plan. Designs should be advanced and applicable, 
construction should be meticulous, and quality should be 
guaranteed to satisfy the masses. We should rebuild houses in 
strict accordance with policies, make the construction situation 
visible to the public, do away with unhealthy trends, curb all 
sorts of expenses, and try our best to reduce the burdens on 
enterprises and the masses. 
<H5>  4. Strive To Promote the Development of Social Undertakings </H5>
  In the course of accelerating reform, opening up, and 
economic construction, we must go all out to build the socialist 
spiritual civilization and develop various social undertakings, 
as demanded by the principle of taking a two-handed approach and 
being tough with both hands, in an effort to maintain the 
coordinated development of the economy and society and promote 
the all-round progress of society. 
  A. We should make great efforts to bring educational 
undertakings to a new height. 
  To invigorate Tianjin and education, we should 
conscientiously implement the "China's Programs for Educational 
Reform and Development" and Tianjin's "opinions on educational 
reform and education" and put education in a strategic position 
of development on a priority basis. This year, the basic 
education should be aimed at accomplishing the task of making 
the nine-year compulsory education universal and at 
consolidating the achievements in wiping out illiteracy. The 
secondary vocational education should be devoted to training a 
large number of specialized talents of various kinds and skilled 
laborers. The higher education should be geared to the demand 
of Tianjin's economic and social development and should be aimed 
at readjusting structure and layout, at building a number of key 
subjects, and at training a number of top qualified persons. 
Adult education should be devoted to continuously improving the 
quality of workers, with emphasis on personal training. We 
should accelerate the reform of educational structure and 
gradually establish an open and diversified system of running 
schools through the common efforts of various circles in 
society, with the government operation as the mainstay. The 
system of having headmasters of primary and middle schools 
assume responsibility for running schools should be actively 
popularized. A good external condition should be created for 
developing education. To this end, the proportion of 
educational allocations in the total financial expenditure 
should be raised to 19 percent, and additional educational 
allocations in urban areas should be raised to 3 percent. 
School-run enterprises should be developed to enhance the 
schools' ability of replenishing their own educational expenses. 
The whole society should pay attention to and give support to 
the basic education. We should conscientiously implement the 
"law on teachers," strengthen the building of the ranks of 
teachers, and safeguard teachers' treatment according to law in 
order to form a good atmosphere of respecting teachers and 
valuing education. 
  B. We should vigorously strengthen ideological and cultural 
construction. 
  We should arm all the people in the municipality with the 
theory of building a socialism with Chinese characteristics. We 
should do research on theories in philosophy and social 
sciences. We should firmly and unremittingly conduct education 
on patriotism, collectivism, and socialism. Heroic and model 
figures on all fronts should be commended on a large scale to 
inspire the workers' sense of being the masters of the country. 
Efforts should be made to strengthen the education on 
professional ethics and social ethics to form a good atmosphere 
of forging ahead in a healthy manner and making active progress. 
  We should continue to uphold the orientation of serving 
socialism and serving the people and the principle of "letting a 
hundred flowers blossom and a hundred schools of thought 
contend," inherit and carry forward the Chinese nation's 
outstanding culture, and learn from the achievements of the 
advanced civilizations of the world. We should greatly develop 
literature and art, press and publications, radio and 
television, and other cultural undertakings, uphold correct 
guidance of media, and make the cultural market thrive. We 
should exert active efforts to promote the reform of the 
cultural system, increase the investment in cultural 
undertakings, carry out the activities to build the "districts 
and counties with advanced community culture," strengthen the 
basic work for the culture of the masses, and improve the 
cultural networks at the municipal, district, and county levels. 
We should actively expand cultural cooperation and exchanges 
with foreign countries and do a good job in the protection, 
development, and utilization of scenic spots and historical 
sites to serve Tianjin's endeavors to open wider to the outside 
world and develop tourism. 
  C. We should actively prepare to host the world table tennis 
games. 
  The 43d world table tennis games will be the largest 
international sports event with far-reaching influence ever held 
by Tianjin and a major event in the social life of the people in 
the municipality. It will play an important role in displaying 
the outlook of Tianjin people and the achievements in its 
reform, opening up, and economic construction and in making 
Tianjin better known. Preparations for it will enter a crucial 
stage this year. People across the municipality should work 
actively, carry out extensive activities to "build a civilized 
city and be civilized citizens," and be a successful host to win 
honor for the state and for Tianjin. Construction of various 
facilities should be conscientiously built well, and the sports 
center, international radio and television news center, and 
satellite ground station should be built. Hotels should be 
built or rebuilt so that we will have full capacity to receive 
guests. We should actively and successfully raise funds through 
various measures and channels. We should step up efforts to 
improve the environment, do a good job in the greening the city 
and make it clean, conduct education on civility and politeness, 
improve service, and strive to turn Tianjin into a city good in 
caring for the environment, service, and order. We should do a 
good job in hosting the 12th Asian table tennis games and the 
eighth municipal sports games, and further facilitate Tianjin's 
sports development. 
  D. We should continue with the good job in family planning 
and public health. 
  We should pay close attention to and achieve success in 
family planning, which is a major event concerning the overall 
situation in economic construction and social development. We 
should strengthen supervision over food hygiene and hygiene in 
public facilities, do a good job in the prevention and treatment 
of frequently occurring, contagious, and endemic diseases, and 
prevent serious epidemic. We should improve medical service and 
emergency-aid networks to make it more convenient for the people 
to see a doctor. We should persist in the combination of 
Chinese traditional medicine with western medicine, hold 
vocational training, strengthen medical research work, and 
strive to raise the level of medical service. We should also do 
a good job in rural cooperative medical work. 
  E. We should strive to create a good public security 
environment. 
  With a high spirit of responsibility, governments at all 
levels should defend the political and social stability 
throughout the municipality and continue to maintain Tianjin's 
leading position in the country in public security. They should 
organize forces to deal strict blows to serious criminal 
activities and wage special struggles, resolutely crack down on 
serious criminal activities according to law, strictly 
investigate and handle major and serious cases, and punish, 
according to the law, those guilty of economic crimes. We 
should make unremitting efforts to "wipe out pornography" and 
"eliminate the six vices." We should implement the "regulations 
of Tianjin Municipality on comprehensive management of public 
security," rely on the concerted efforts of the masses, advocate 
courage to defend a just cause, and establish a good social 
practice. We should further improve public security contingents 
and raise the political and vocational quality of cadres and 
policemen so that they uphold the sacred mission of safeguarding 
social security. 
  The People's Liberation Army [PLA] and the armed police 
force are the strong pillars of reform, opening up, and 
modernization. Governments at all levels should actively 
support the work of the PLA units in Tianjin, actively conduct 
activities on supporting the army, giving preferential treatment 
to families of revolutionary martyrs and servicemen, supporting 
the government, and cherishing the people, deeply conduct 
education on national defense, enhance the sense of national 
defense of all the people, do a good job in building people's 
air defense projects, and give full play to the important role 
of PLA units stationed in Tianjin and soldiers of the militia 
reserve service in economic construction and in safeguarding 
social security. 
<H5>  5. We Should Further Strengthen the Building of Government </H5>
  Governments at all levels have to shoulder heavy 
responsibilities to realize Tianjin's development objectives and 
fulfill this year's arduous tasks, therefore, they must 
realistically strengthen self-development. Leading cadres at 
all levels should renew their concepts, cultivate greater 
courage and vigor, promote the pioneering spirit of the new 
period, and lead the broad masses of cadres to create a new 
situation in reform, opening up, and development. 
  We must uphold the ideological line of emancipating the mind 
and seeking truth from facts, continue to deeply study volume 
no.3 of the "Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping," enhance 
consciousness and steadfastness in implementing the party's 
basic line, uphold the "three criteria," thoroughly free 
ourselves from the shackle of ossified and old concepts, and 
boldly practice and blaze new trials. It is necessary to further 
implement the important directive given by Comrade Deng Xiaoping 
during his inspection of Tianjin on "being bolder and striving 
for more rapid development," act freely on what we think is 
conducive to Tianjin's development, and never disappoint the 
heavy trust of the party and the people of the municipality. 
  We should actively conduct organizational reform and 
realistically change the government functions. Governments at 
all levels should further simplify administration and delegate 
powers with the spirit of "giving less intervention but more 
services," and do more practical things for enterprises. All 
powers that are clearly defined for delegating to the lower 
levels must be in place. We must give all decisionmaking powers 
to enterprises that should be given to them, let the markets 
solve their own problems, reduce procedures while handling 
things which we should manage in an all-round manner, raise 
working efficiency, and realistically manage all things well. 
Reform of the administrative management system and organizations 
should be actively promoted in line with the principles of 
separating government functions from enterprise management, 
simplifying structures, and promoting unity and efficiency, and 
in accordance with the central plans. In all levels of state 
administrative organs, we should comprehensively promote the 
public service system, further improve the relationship between 
the municipality and various districts and counties, and give 
full play to the role of districts and counties in developing 
the economy and all social undertakings. 
  We should quicken our tempo to seek high efficiency and 
creatively carry out our work. Leading cadres at all levels 
should have the sense of urgency and mission to invigorate 
Tianjin, accelerate our pace in carrying out all tasks, strive 
to scale the height, and be the first. We should prepare to 
accomplish several things with strenuous efforts, go deeply to 
the reality and the masses to conduct investigation and study, 
keep our eyes inward to find out where we are lagging behind, 
keep our eyes downward to serve the lower levels, pay attention 
to unity, denotation, the overall situation, and discipline, 
give encouraging talks, and make efforts to boost the enthusiasm 
of the people. It is necessary to comprehensively promote the 
work target responsibility system, and make the people feel the 
pressure on their shoulders, all levels have responsibilities, 
each level to grasp the work of the next level, do a lot of 
thinking on their work, and never delay their work. Before 
making policy decisions on things related to the overall 
situation, we may air our views. But when the decisions are 
decided, we must resolutely implement them and guarantee that 
all government orders will be smoothly carried out. At present, 
the situation is pressing, and we have no way to retreat. We 
should allow no delay, no obstacles to running when we are on 
track, and no obstacles to strictly enforcing orders or 
prohibitions. 
  We should pay attention to democracy and the legal system. 
Governments at all levels should further promote democracy and 
the legal system, conscientiously safeguard the democratic 
rights of the masses of people in their political, economic, and 
social life, establish and improve a democratic, and scientific 
policymaking system, prudently listen to opinions from all 
sectors, pool the wisdom of all, and enhance the policymaking 
level. We should conscientiously implement the relevant 
resolutions and decisions of the people's congresses and their 
standing committees, actively handle the motions, suggestions, 
criticism, and opinions raised by deputies, and consciously 
receive legal supervision and work supervision from the people's 
congresses of corresponding levels. We should give full play to 
the role of the CPPCC in political consultation and democratic 
supervision, respect the opinions of democratic parties, the 
federation of industry and commerce, people's organizations, and 
personages without party affiliation on the administration of 
government and state affairs, and make sure that consultation is 
conducted before decisions are made on major issues. We should 
fully develop the role of mass organizations, such as trade 
unions, the Communist Youth League, and women's federation, as 
bridges and channels. We should strengthen grass-roots 
democratic politics and improve the democratic management of 
enterprises and the systems of neighborhood committees and 
villagers' committees. We should conscientiously implement the 
party's policies on nationalities, religions, Taiwan affairs, 
and Overseas Chinese affairs. The government should do a good 
job in establishing the legal system, step up efforts to draft a 
number of local laws and regulations, actively formulate the 
government rules, and strive to use the legal means to manage 
the economy and society. All government personnel should 
perform official duties according to law and resolutely correct 
the phenomenon in which laws are not abided by or strictly 
enforced and law violations are not investigated. We should 
strengthen and improve the supervision of law enforcement by 
administrative departments, improve the contingents of 
law-enforcement personnel, and perfect legal service 
institutions. We should conduct in-depth education on 
disseminating laws to raise people's awareness of laws and the 
legal system. 
  We should conscientiously intensify the building of a clean 
government. Persistent struggles against numerous corrupt 
phenomena is the basic task of government building and an 
important guarantee for the smooth progress of reform and 
development. Governments at all levels should attach great 
importance to it and make it successful. All government 
personnel are only obligated to being honest and diligent in 
serving the people and never abusing power for personal gains. 
They should never do what the masses do not like and should 
always be the first to do what they ask the lower levels to do. 
We should establish and improve the mechanisms of supervision 
and restraint to ensure honesty, strengthen auditing and 
supervisory work, prevent and eliminate corrupt phenomena, and 
never allow trade of money with power. Leaders at all levels 
should take the lead in honesty and self-restraint and take the 
initiative in resisting unhealthy trends. Major cases on 
embezzlement, bribe- taking, and serious dereliction of duty 
should be strictly investigated and handled thoroughly no matter 
who is involved. 
  We should always adhere to the basic work idea of "doing 
everything for the people and relying on the people in doing 
everything." Seizing the opportunity to accelerate development, 
in the final analysis, depends on the enthusiasm, initiative, 
creativity, wisdom, and effort of the masses, without which, 
nothing can be accomplished. As all our leading cadres come 
from the masses, they must never forget the masses at all times 
and under all circumstances. They should think what the masses 
are thinking, be concerned about their hardships, and adopt 
every means possible to do practical and good work for them. We 
should persistently carry out the 20 practical jobs designed to 
improve urban and rural living standard and accomplish more in 
work closely related and directly benefitting the masses. All 
work concerning the basic life and vital interests of the masses 
is of prime importance. We should exert greater efforts to 
realize a larger and faster increase in the people's income by 
developing the economy and broadening the channels for 
employment. Governments at all levels should give particular 
consideration to the staff members, workers, and retired 
personnel of the enterprises which have suspended production 
totally or partially and actively adopt measures to help them 
tackle difficulties. They should pay attention to people's 
petitions that come up in their letters and visits, and continue 
the special telephone line so that people will have places to 
rely on to take care of their difficulties. We should further 
develop our political advantages, conscientiously strengthen 
ideological and political work, most extensively mobilize and 
rely on the masses, mobilize all positive factors, and develop, 
protect, and guide the enthusiasm of the masses well. 
  Fellow deputies! 
  The current situation is very good, opportunity is rare, 
people's expectations are ardent, and our tasks are heavy and 
journeys long. Guided by Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics and the party's 
basic line, let us rally closely round the party Central 
Committee with Comrade Jiang Zemin as the nucleus and, under the 
leadership of the party Central Committee, the State Council, 
and the Tianjin municipal party committee, unite as one, raise 
spirits, brave the way forward, work hard, and strive to win new 
success in Tianjin's reform, opening up, and modernization drive 
in 1994. 

