Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Chuan Hsun-che (0278 6061 5074): "Jiang Zemin </F>
on All-Party Ideological Education"] 
  [Text] On 28 January, the CPC Central Committee 
Secretariat sent a classified document to the party committees 
of various provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities; 
the party committees of various ministries, commissions, and 
offices under the central authorities; the party committees of 
various military regions, armed services, and arms of the 
services; and the party committees of various military 
academies. The document was about an important speech on party 
work made by Jiang Zemin at a recent Political Bureau meeting. 
Jiang Zemin talked about 12 problems in his speech: 
  1. The question of firm belief in Marxism and 
communism. 
  2. The question of understanding the inevitable trend 
of societal development and the superiority of socialist system. 
  3. The question of understanding the importance of 
ideology. 
  4. The question of the serious harm caused by 
slackened party organization and the changes in party work style. 
  5. The question of how party members should possess 
advanced thinking and function models. 
  6. The question of the importance and necessity of 
political and ideological work. 
  7. The question of the mood existing in the whole 
society. 
  8. The question of political and ideological education 
and propaganda and ideology work in the new period and under the 
new situation. 
  9. The question of organization and discipline in the 
party and party spirit among party members. 
  10. The question of deepening understanding of the 
hegemonist strategy against China and its antagonistic nature. 
  11. The question of the existence of bourgeois 
liberation thoughts within the party. 
  12. The question of understanding and watching the 
existence of class struggle in the society. 
  The document demanded that party committees seriously look 
at 
the 12 problems, carry out strict self-examination, profoundly 
understand them, and be able to unify understanding, thinking, 
and work. 
  The document pointed out that understanding, handling, and 
solving these 12 problems is the main political and ideological 
work this year and in the years to come. 

