BFN 

  [Text] Santo Domingo, 8 Jun (EFE) -- The Dominican Foreign 
Secretariat declined to comment today on the possible arrival of 
U.S. troops to the Dominican Republic as "logistic support" to 
oversee the compliance of the embargo against Haiti. 
  Fabio Herrera Cabral, deputy foreign secretary of state, 
according to Foreign Secretariat sources, has maintained 
"intense contacts" this week with Apostolic Nuncio Fortunato 
Baldelli, UN representatives, the UN high commissioner for 
refugees (ACNUR), and other Latin American diplomats. 
  Today, Chamber of Deputies President Norge Botello warned 
that thousands of Haitian women and children are planning to 
stage a protest march along the border on 12 June to demand that 
food be allowed to enter Haiti from the Dominican Republic. 
  Botello said a "misfortune could occur" should the Dominican 
military attempt to oppose the Haitian demonstration. "I 
believe it is a difficult situation, the reason why our 
authorities must try to control the situation, discern what is 
taking place, and try to resolve it," he added. 
  He called on the Dominican authorities and UN 
representatives 
in Santo Domingo to allow food and medication to reach "a 
population that is dying of famine." 
  Likewise, the opposition party Independent Revolutionary 
Party (PRI) called on Dominican President Joaquin Balaguer to 
"break the blockade" against Haiti so as to prevent a "genocide 
along the border." 
  PRI Vice President Hector Guzman contends the OAS and the 
United Nations "are not fulfilling their obligation to the 
Dominican Republic, the reason why President Balaguer does not 
have to fulfill his obligation to the embargo against Haiti." 
  He said the "total shutdown" of the Dominican-Haitian border 
is to the detriment of both nations, which share the island of 
Hispaniola. 
  Also today, the group of progovernment deputies of the 
Social 
Christian Reformist Party (PRSC) requested Balaguer and the 
United Nations lift the embargo against the military, who 
deposed Haitian President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in September 
1991 because it only affects those lower income Haitians. 
  The Dominican Armed Forces, responsible for enforcing the 
embargo, reiterated "the border is under control." 
  The Defense Ministry's position was adopted following U.S. 
Ambassador Robert Pastorino's visit to the border with Haiti 
this past weekend so as to supervise the implementation of the 
embargo. 
  Pastorino stated in Dajabon, a Dominican city near the 
border 
with Haiti, that the United States and the Dominican Republic 
are assessing the possibility of allowing food and medications 
to reach the Haitian people. 
  On 6 June, after blocking passage, the Dominican soldiers 
stationed along the border, allowed a select group of Haitians 
to cross the border to purchase medications, but only in 
household amounts. The Dominican soldiers allowed their Haitian 
colleagues, relatives, and civilians to cross the Dominican 
border for two hours. 
  Since the total embargo against Haiti went into affect, as a 
result of violent incidents that have broken out, at least two 
Haitians have been killed attempting to cross the border to 
purchase food and fuel. The victims are a man who was shot by a 
Dominican soldier on 5 June and a woman who was found dead on 7 
June in what is believed to be a score-settling incident between 
smugglers. 
  With respect to the total embargo, the Dominican military 
expressed its concern that it may have to "kill several hundred 
Haitians who would rather die here (in Dominican territory) and 
not in their own country." 

