BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 14 KYODO -- The Japanese economy is 
expected to start recovering from around summer if recent 
positive signs continue to spread and absorb such prevailing 
concerns as the yen's rise, a banking industry leader said 
Tuesday [14 June]. "If things go smoothly, I expect an economic 
recovery will become clear from around summer," Toshio Morikawa, 
chairman of the Federation of Bankers Associations of Japan, 
told a regular news conference. 
  Morikawa joined Bank of Japan Governor Yasushi Mieno and 
government leaders in painting a brighter picture of the economy 
following last Friday's release of the central bank's quarterly 
"Tankan" business sentiment survey for May. The survey showed 
improved sentiment on a broad front for the first time in five 
years. 
  "The Tankan indicated that the economy is heading toward 
improvement," Morikawa said. Also echoing comments by Mieno and 
government leaders, however, Morikawa remained cautious about 
declaring the economy has hit bottom. "Both positive and 
negative factors still exist," he said, particularly citing such 
risks as the yen's rise, tough labor conditions, and sluggish 
capital investment. 
  As upcoming positive factors, Morikawa said consumers will 
receive at the end of the month the first of two payments from 
the 5.5 trillion yen in income tax cuts, and that Diet passage 
of the fiscal 1994 budget has come into sight. Regarding labor 
problems, Morikawa, expressing his view as president of Sumitomo 
Bank, indicated his opposition to the idea of reducing starting 
salaries to boost recruitment, an idea proposed last week by 
Takeshi Nagano, president of the Japan Federation of Employers 
Associations (Nikkeiren). "It is difficult for companies to 
increase recruitment when they are restructuring," he said, 
noting that his bank intends to cut back hiring of new graduates 
next spring as part of a plan to reduce the overall workforce. 
Management has already presented the plan to the labor union, 
he said. 
  Asked about the direction of interest rates, Morikawa said 
both short- and long-term rates will remain stable at low levels 
for the time being as the economy is not yet recovering. 
Commenting on a reported plan by the finance ministry to 
deregulate private housing loans, Morikawa said deregulation 
will help "improve user convenience," welcoming the plan and 
brushing aside user concerns that rates will be set higher. He 
said that banks are expected to develop new services to meet 
demand, such as loans with fixed rates amid the current low-rate 
trend. 
  The ministry is reportedly planning to include the 
deregulatory step in a second market-opening package to be 
issued by the end of June. 

