BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with President Francois Mitterrand by Josette </F>
Alia, Bernardo Valli, Julian Nundy, Javier Valenzuela, Jean 
Daniel, and Rudolph Chimelli at the Elysee; date not given: 
"Our Turn of the Century"] 
  [Text] Five years ago, at the request of a group of 
newspapers -- THE INDEPENDENT, EL PAIS, LA REPUBBLICA, 
SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG, and LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR -- the president 
of the Republic assessed the state of the world. Since then, 
although the Soviet threat has vanished with the fall of the 
Berlin Wall, nationalism is being reawakened, Yugoslavia is 
being torn apart, unemployment is growing worse everywhere, and 
Europe is taking a long time to be built. Should we see 
everything in black at the end of the second millenium? 
Francois Mitterrand now tells the same newspapers where he 
thinks the dangers lie and what can still be achieved. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Our last interview, Sir, dates back 
to July 1989, in other words before the collapse of the Berlin 
Wall, the collapse of the Soviet Union, and German unificiation. 
Nobody at that time had foreseen, foresaw, or, it seems, could 
foresee what was going to happen. Should this degree of 
unpredictability in history fill with humility not only 
observers and strategists, but also heads of state? How real is 
the power of a president of the Republic when a presumed control 
of events escapes him to this degree? 
  [Mitterrand] Without claiming to see into the future, I had 
considered the hypothesis of the Soviet Union's disappearance, 
from which everything resulted, and especially German 
unification. At my election in 1981, I told my aides, 
especially Pierre Beregovoy, who was then secretary general of 
the presidency: "Start with the premise that the Soviet Union 
will have broken up before the end of the century." I was off 
by 10 years. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] On what was your prediction based? 
  [Mitterrand] All the signs seemed to show it in my view: the 
weakening of the central government; the chaos; the internal 
economic crisis, whose effects are still being felt because most 
of the countries of the former USSR and Russia itself have not 
yet picked up again. The deterioration was visible before 
Brezhnev's death. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] In July 1989, you probably 
envisioned 
the possibility of German reunification, but with some 
hesitation, or even reservations, and in any event very little 
enthusiasm. 
  [Mitterrand] I see no sign of those reservations in the 
interview I granted to you at the time. We discussed 
reunification. That was four months before the collapse of the 
Berlin Wall. And I observed that this reunification was 
legitimate and that it had to be carried out democratically and 
peacefully, in other words the German people would have to give 
their verdict in free elections and those powers having special 
rights in Germany would have to agree. That has been done and 
within a reasonable period of time. On the other hand, I always 
stressed that the eastern border should first be recognized by 
the German leadership. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] However, were you not taken by 
surprise, like everybody, by the emergence, in this new Europe, 
of the old specter of nationalism which are reminiscent of the 
19th century? The euphoria which followed the liberation from 
Bolshevik oppression was brief, and you seemed to be anxious to 
warn of the dangers, even running counter to the current of 
history. 
  [Mitterrand] I do not see what you mean here either. You 
must remember that in the course of the century, Europe has seen 
the fall of the Ottoman Empire, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, two 
German empires, two Russian empires, and, outside Europe, of the 
colonial empires. That is a lot. Wherever these empires have 
disappeared, various national movements, hitherto stifled, have 
emerged, even going so far as to take on the shape of ethnic 
groups. I remember stating at the end of 1989 that it was much 
better because it was good for peoples to be free, but that 
problems of a different nature were going to increase. It was 
rather a short-sighted view to think that freedom itself would 
solve everything! 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] You reached agreement with 
Chancellor 
Kohl that German unification should be accompanied by a speeding 
up of European unification. 
  [Mitterrand] Yes. Helmut Kohl constantly stated: "I only 
see German unification in symbiosis with European unity and 
progressing at the same pace." I did not think any differently. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] This unity, of which the Maastricht 
Treaty was an important stage, had been drawn up on the basis of 
situations preceding 1989. Did you foresee the scale and 
effects of expansion? 
  [Mitterrand] Nobody predicted that it would be so quick. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] If the new candidates open up the 
discussion of membershi qualifications, is Europe not likely to 
lose its substance? 
  [Mitterrand] The risk exists. With regard to the four new 
arrivals, the conditions put forward are not destructive. Of 
course, concessions have been made. But the basic treaty, the 
Maastricht Treaty, has not been distorted. After all, Britain 
was granted a long probationary period. The same was done for 
Spain. The essential thing in these expansions is not to alter 
the structures of the European Union [EU], not to empty them of 
their content. This is a crucial problem. France has a duty to 
be alert to this. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] The new arrivals, Finland, Austria, 
Sweden, and Norway, view Europe as a free trade area rather than 
a political union. 
  [Mitterrand] Of course. But Europe itself is for free trade, 
and I regret that it is to an excessive extent. This will 
change because people are beginning to realize that liberalism 
harms social systems and aggravates inequalities. Look at what 
is happening in Lithuania, Poland, and Hungary. These countries 
are not returning to Communism, but they are abandoning the 
liberal parties and voting for the former Communists who have 
become Socialists. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] The feeling which is growing in 
public opinion is that the Maastricht Treaty is a damp 
firecracker. 
  [Mitterrand] You are exaggerating. This treaty is being very 
unfairly blamed for all problems, and all the disappointments 
resulting from the crisis. However, the crisis is not coming 
from Europe. If a referendum had to be held again next month on 
the same subject, I would hold it again, and if all the 
supporters of the EU were mobilized, explained their views, and 
fought, although we have not heard much from them for some time, 
we would win. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] That is a dangerous gamble. 
  [Mitterrand] It was already dangerous back in September 
1992. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Bonn's desire to expand Europe to 
East Europe in order to be surrounded by friendly countries is 
seen by some as the expression of a new German hegemony. 
  [Mitterrand] It is possible to put forward any hypotheses 
you 
wish. But the expansion of the EU argues more in favor of the 
attraction it exerts. We are not complaining about that. 
Germany is in fact playing a major role in it. So is France, 
and other countries too. I think that in the future new 
expansions will require a really firm concept. Nothing should 
be accepted which would weaken the Union's achievements. In 
this respect, Germany and France would stand to gain from a 
better coordination of their actions. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Do you see signs that Germany might 
become less European following the possible departure of 
Chancellor Kohl? 
  [Mitterrand] During a journey between Stuttgart and Mainz on 
his special train, Willy Brandt, who was then chancellor, told 
me: "I am likely to be the last European chancellor; there was 
first a chancellor for the West, namely Adenauer. I tried to 
ensure that there was a Germany and a Europe turned toward the 
East. It is likely that my successor or my successors will want 
to make a Europe for Germany." This forecast did not prove to 
be accurate, because Schmidt and Kohl have been very committed 
Europeans. We know that history is being built each day. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Did Mrs. Thatcher suggest to you an 
alliance against Germany, as she wrote in her Memoirs? 
  [Mitterrand] Talking of "alliance" is an exaggeration. But, 
at one time, when she was very hostile to Germany's unification, 
she thought that France and Britain should prevent it. I 
replied that although I wanted the Federal Republic to give 
clear pledges on the guarantee of borders and on the recognized 
principles of European stability, I would not repudiate 
Franco-German friendship, without which there could be no 
European unity. France and Germany have achieved a great deal 
together, whereas with Mrs. Thatcher's Britain we went no 
further than planned, except for the Channel tunnel, of course. 
Moreover, the accord with Germany did not rule out an accord 
with Britain, which is equally desirable. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] In Europe today, there is reason to 
fear new extremes. For instance, in Italy we are seeing the 
emergence of political methods which are based on marketing: 
The chairman of a big communications company uses his private 
means and becomes prime minister. 
  [Mitterrand] Yes, it is an approach to democracy to which we 
were not accustomed and which strikes me as formidable. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] And which nonetheless strikes you 
as democratic? 
  [Mitterrand] The Italian people have given their verdict in 
democratic conditions. However, the means of informing the 
citizens must be equal and fair for all. That is where the 
problems may arise. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Is this true of Italy, in your view? 
  [Mitterrand] What I know is that, when you have the largest 
means of information, you have the opportunity to impress the 
public, at least temporarily, and hence to win in dubious 
conditions. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Could the Italian example 
contaminate 
other European countries? 
  [Mitterrand] I would avoid the word "contaminate." But it is 
a model which others will try to imitate. There is a risk of 
democracy being seriously debased. The time has come to say 
"Take care, danger!" 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] In Italy there is also an attempt to 
make ideologies, which were condemned after World War II and 
which are reappearing, an ordinary part of life. 
  [Mitterrand] Is this how the question is presented? There 
are certainly forces in Europe which would like to rehabilitate 
what I found most reprehensible in my youth: fascism, Nazism, 
Francoism, and so forth. These are the characteristics of 
extremist groups. But I would be surprised if the parties called 
upon to govern did so without considerably altering their 
ideological apparatus. Although the Italians gave many votes to 
the neofascist party, represented in Mr. Berlusconi's 
government, that party is a long way from having a majority. Of 
course, if it were to dominate Italian politics one day, 
everything would have to be reviewed. Let us trust the Italians. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] What do you think of the criticism 
that Europe is paralyzed with regard to a common foreign policy? 
  [Mitterrand] A common foreign policy dates from the 
Maastricht summit and its resulting treaty which was only 
ratified a few months ago. To build Europe requires stamina, it 
is a long-distance race, not a sprint. Having said that, the 
war in the former Yugoslavia and other events are factors which 
speed things up. The criticism of the EU is based on distorted 
documents. It is now that we will find out whether our 
Maastricht ambition can be realized. However, you have to 
consider the fact that to achieve this, we have to overcome 
several centuries of confrontations and struggles for influence, 
which do not disappear overnight. Having said that, the 
European idea will be the great idea of the future, or it will 
be lost. I have made my choice. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Is it possible to compare the 
situation which the war in Spain created in Europe with the 
situation which the former Yugoslavia is now creating? 
  [Mitterrand] No. In the Spanish Civil War, in 1936, Nazism 
and fascism saw a test ground for their own armaments. This is 
not the case now in Bosnia. It is Serbia, Croatia, and Bosnia 
which are at stake, and not powers outside the Balkans. 
Although this situation is tragic, the comparison is not 
justified. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Yes, but Bosnia is testing the 
credibility of the international bodies, the presumed guardians 
of the new world order, be it the United Nations or NATO. 
  [Mitterrand] Yes, sorely testing. But denying the role and 
usefulness of the United Nations which is organizing the 
negotiations, which is sending in intervention forces, which is 
preventing the spread of the conflict, is also aggravating the 
war, behind an apparently pacifist front. Sarajevo and Gorazde 
can breathe, thanks to whom? 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] But after what tragedies! 
  [Mitterrand] Bosnia is suffering a great misfortune, but the 
safe areas have finally been respected and must continue to be 
respected. In Gorazde, time was wasted, and thus credibility 
was lost. I deplore that fact. All in all, UN policy has been 
asserted. Condemning negotiations amounts to preferring war, 
and this war will spread, we can be sure of that. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Some intellectuals criticize you for 
thinking in this way and not remembering the Bosnian Muslims, 
who are right when they demand the lifting of the arms embargo. 
We cannot both refuse to send our military forces to fight 
alongside them and refuse them the weapons they need. 
  [Mitterrand] This is a serious argument. This request for 
the lifting of the embargo which Mr. Izetbegovic made to me, has 
been examined. The permanent members of the Security Council 
did not act on it after detailed consideration. A likely 
aggravation of the conflict was feared. And, in the final 
analysis, I think that was wise. Today the chances of peace are 
emerging. They must be seized. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Could France not do more for Bosnia? 
  [Mitterrand] It has done more than anybody. But two years 
ago I announced that I would not send our Army into the former 
Yugoslavia other than for humanitarian reasons. I have been 
criticized. I have not deceived anybody. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] In France, a large section of the 
parliamentary majority seems to be in favor of withdrawing the 
blue helmets. 
  [Mitterrand] The question would arise if the conference in 
which the Americans, the EU, and the Russians will participate, 
were to be delayed. The French proposal has the aim of bringing 
together, around one table, the interested parties and the three 
big powers, which have hitherto expressed themselves separately. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Could the conflict in the Balkans 
spread? 
  [Mitterrand] It could. But now that there is a sound 
agreement among the European powers, I hope that they will 
prevent contagion and have not forgotten the lessons of the past. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] The French and the Germans did not 
have the same positions in 1991 on the eve of the recognition of 
the independence of Croatia and Slovenia. 
  [Mitterrand] At all times in this century, the Germans and 
French have had different views in this region of the world. 
But these disagreements are no longer a pretext for a conflict 
between them. Instead, they prompt us to have discussions, to 
coordinate our approaches, to prepare solutions in keeping with 
the interests of the EU. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Do you think that the United States 
looks favorably on the gradual and slow emergence of a common 
European policy? 
  [Mitterrand] At the beginning, the United States was very 
favorable to the Europe of the Treaty of Rome. Its attitude 
cooled later, fearing some competition. When Communist Europe 
collapsed, it saw the possibility of reducing its military power 
on our continent, which corresponded to the wishes of a large 
section of its public and Congress. But it tried to compensate 
for this reduction in military influence by an increase in 
political influence. Hence its initiatives on NATO's new 
missions. Any plan which, in its view, is likely to question 
NATO's role worries it. For instance, it did not like the plan 
for a European Confederation which I presented on 31 December 
1989 and which I have not abandoned. On the other hand, the 
CSCE, which encompasses the United States and Canada, suits it 
very well. The Partnership for Peace which it designed 
corresponds to its true thinking. But the Americans still have 
reservations about a strengthening of the European Community. 
It would be a good thing for them to support the Pact for 
Stability, which is a French initiative. I expect 
open-mindedness on the part of President Clinton which will 
change the present climate. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Will you accept Russia into the 
group 
of seven industrialized countries, as it has requested? 
  [Mitterrand] To give it associate status, yes. That is what 
we are already doing. It will be present in Naples, and that 
will be a good thing. Aside from that, it will have to 
stabilize and fully launch its economic recovery. It can do so. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Will you allow the Russians into a 
European security system? 
  [Mitterrand] Yes, Russia is European, it is in Europe, and 
it 
must form part of the European structures. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] From this viewpoint, is it possible 
to envision placing the French nuclear force at Europe's service 
one day? 
  [Mitterrand] French deterrence is intended to protect 
national territory and defend France's vital interests, which 
are not defined in advance but are interpreted by the head of 
state. If Europe reaches a point at which it can be regarded as 
a territory which is united enough to be defended against the 
same dangers, for the sake of the same vital interests, then I 
will be prepared to start such negotiations in France's name. 
This presupposes, we must be clear about this, a great deal of 
progress made in Europe. One of my successors will one day have 
to decide. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] The principle of French deterrence 
was one of deterrence of the strong by the weak. Some people 
now think that, because the East-West confrontation has ended 
and faced with countries like Iraq or North Korea, which are 
trying to equip themselves with nuclear weapons, it is 
appropriate to envisage deterrence of the mad by the strong. Is 
this your view? 
  [Mitterrand] Anybody who responds to a madman in this way is 
mad himself. We are not going to settle civil wars and regional 
or ethnic conflicts by nuclear bombs! As for preventive wars, 
you can see how they start but not when they end. At all 
events, my answer is a categorical no. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Do events in Algeria represent a 
threat for Europe? 
  [Mitterrand] Yes, certainly. We have the right to fear the 
victory of fundamentalism. Of course, the Algerian people will 
do what they intend to do. You cannot be democratic at home and 
dispute another people's right to decide their own future. I 
hope that the economic crisis, which is greatly affecting the 
Algerian people, will not lead them to confuse the causes of 
their suffering and, in a reaction against the problems of their 
everyday life, reject everything which makes them a people of 
future and progress. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Does the information you have on 
the Algerian situation prompt you to think that we in France or 
the Latin countries are capable of encouraging a dialogue among 
those involved? 
  [Mitterrand] We have not reached that stage. The war of 
independence has left mental scars. France's cooperation may be 
useful and even necessary, but any form of paternalism or 
moralizing must be absolutely ruled out. France is a free 
country addressing a free and dignified country. This must 
govern our relations. Let us continue to be ready to help 
Algeria if it so wishes, when it so wishes. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] The situation in Algeria is already 
causing and could continue to cause further political rather 
than economic immigration in southern Europe, and in France in 
particular. Would it not be possible to grant visas and the 
right of asylum more freely? 
  [Mitterrand] We cannot yet talk of a wave of immigration. 
But the people whose lives are threatened, especially because 
they are opting for progress, should be able to find help and 
support in our country. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Given that the bloc system no longer 
exists, in what way would the existence of fundamentalist 
regimes across the Mediterranean hamper our economic exchanges 
and our political relations? 
  [Mitterrand] I do not claim that fundamentalism is an attack 
on the European countries. That is not in its interests. It is 
difficult to imagine what the fundamentalist leaders would make 
of their foreign policy. They would not be able to isolate 
themselves from the rest of the world. They will perhaps 
realize that nobody can impose his faith without failing in what 
gives dignity to any belief: respect for others. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Let us return to France. What is 
your assessment of the Socialists' experience in power? What 
are the major errors that have been committed? 
  [Mitterrand] Your question would really require lengthy 
consideration. First, it must be said that the Socialists have 
had a minority tradition in France, as has the Left as a whole. 
It takes extraordinary circumstances, in the real sense of the 
word, in order for the Socialists to prevail. This will occur 
again, as in 1981 and 1988. But the conservative forces remain 
predominant in major sectors of the media and in major financial 
centers, and the administration is still permeated with their 
ideology. We have probably imposed ourselves insufficiently on 
this administration. Teams that come to power with no 
experience of it find it difficult to redirect fundamental 
options, in the economic and financial field in particular. 
This is something that I would criticize on our part. The 
result is that we have reached certain compromises that gave the 
inaccurate impression that the Socialists were no longer 
Socialists. 
  But we must not exaggerate. Much has been done that bears 
our stamp and that cannot be abolished. We have transformed 
France, and we have tranformed it for the better: freedom, 
culture, social legislation, scientific research, 
decentralization, and so forth. But we have had to deal with 
the most serious crisis since the thirties, and this has reduced 
our scope for maneuver. Furthermore, European construction, a 
Socialist issue par excellence, has developed at a time when 
most of our partners were following Liberal ideas. Having said 
that, I am proud of the work done by the Socialist governments. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] What do you think is the biggest 
mistake you have made in your political career? 
  [Mitterrand] My political career is not over. We have not 
yet reached the time for a stocktaking. Historians will judge 
it. My greatest regret (I am not saying, my biggest mistake) is 
to have had to govern France during the worst of the crisis and 
to have been unable to end unemployment, or at least to reduce 
it, just as my predecessor could not, and just as the other 
Western governments, whatever their political color, could not. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] What is the difference between the 
Right and the Left today? 
  [Mitterrand] It is usually right-wingers who ask this 
question. As far as I am concerned, the difference is clear. 
Without espousing Marxist teachings, I think that what Marx 
wrote (and he was not the only one!) about the social classes 
remains true. There are some people who want to conserve, and 
others who want to change. There are those who profit from other 
people's work, and there are those who suffer exploitation by 
others. There are those who refuse to acknowledge that women at 
work are underpaid, even if equally qualified. Then there are 
those who want to correct this grave injustice, and so on and so 
forth, as in the Michel Sardou song. A great deal remains to be 
done with regard to equality of opportunity. The Left has made 
some progress, though not enough, in this direction. The Right, 
by nature, can only remain what it is. This will be apparent 
when its administration comes to an end. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Do you think that there is a crisis 
of democratic representation, a questioning of politics and its 
representatives, a success for populism and its demagoguery? 
  [Mitterrand] This is what everyone is saying. But I, who 
have reached the age of 77, have heard this old story many 
times. I heard it at home when I was 7 or 8, then when I was a 
student. I heard it during the war. I heard it during the 
Fourth Republic. This old story has not changed. Of course, 
sometimes this criticism is well-founded. Let us not turn it 
into a theory. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Did people use to say the same 
things? 
  [Mitterrand] Almost. As a child, I lived in a small village 
in Charente where the priest, who was a good man, owned a pig 
and a bull. The pig was called "Herriot" and the bull 
"Painleve." That was not very respectful of the democratic 
institutions. But it did not alter the fact that the vicar 
became a very active member of the Resistance, and at the end of 
his life he told me: "There is nothing better than the 
Republic." 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Are the political classes bound to 
find other means of expression apart from the political parties? 
  [Mitterrand] Democratic life can only be expressed through 
groups of men and women that gather round a central idea, an 
ideal, a blueprint. This is called a party or a movement, a 
program and an ideology. They are indispensable to the 
Republic. Of course, they need to shed some bad habits. Now 
that the laws introduced under my incumbency by Michel Rocard's 
government have created the conditions for the establishment of 
higher ethical standards in public life, they have no excuse for 
not doing so. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Does a society dominated by images 
not change the qualities demanded from a politician? 
  [Mitterrand] Additional communication skills must be 
acquired. For that matter, you can find your answer in 
Ecclesiastes, which did not appear yesterday: "There is nothing 
new under the sun." 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Do you think history repeats itself? 
  [Mitterrand] No. I mean, situations change, but the major 
issues, the major struggles, the major historical movements 
remain. It is the same struggle through the ages. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Of the politicians you have known, 
are there any that left a strong impression on you? 
  [Mitterrand] I have known some very intelligent men such as 
Austria's Chancellor Kreisky, whom I admired; Gorbachev, a man 
whose role was a decisive one in world developments; Willy 
Brandt, who was particularly astute perception, as were Schuman 
and Mendes France before him. I liked Leon Blum. I did not 
know de Gaulle or Churchill well. Their historical record 
speaks for them. Moreover, Mohammed V, Gandhi, Ben Gurion, and 
Mandela have shown that we can and must always hope. I have 
strong memories of Mao and Fidel Castro. I will not mention our 
European neighbors who are still in power in their own 
countries. But some of them will leave their mark on our era. 
We already know that. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] It is said that the end of 
communism, 
of the communist utopia, which was an extremist expression of 
reason, brought about a crisis of reason itself, and that we are 
therefore moving toward a form of messianism. 
  [Mitterrand] I believe, as you do, that forms of messianism 
will develop, but, because of a kind of permanent dialectic, so 
too will the forces of reason. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Will there be a great confrontation? 
  [Mitterrand] The great debate, as always! I am confident in 
the ultimate victory of reason. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Three years ago, speaking to UNESCO, 
you expressed your joy at seeing the peoples freed from 
communism. Having experienced the changes of the end of this 
century, do you maintain your optimism and your faith in mankind? 
  [Mitterrand] I have not been on bad terms with mankind, but 
I 
have always judged it true to itself. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] Do you mean that it is sadly 
consistent? 
  [Mitterrand] Consistent, period. 
  [LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR] What feelings do world developments 
prompt in you? 
  [Mitterrand] I believe strongly in the institutions. There 
would be no social peace in a country without institutions, 
without elected representatives, without justice, without moral 
rules, without people to defend rights. Otherwise there would 
be so many instances like the shameful situation in Rwanda, 
which it is the responsibility of the world's most senior 
institutions to salvage from disaster. 

