BFN 

<F P=106> [By Geoffrey Crothall in Beijing and Willy Wo-lap Lam] </F>
  [Text] Top leaders of the Communist Party and Government 
have reached consensus on boosting centralised control over the 
economy, which will be the theme of the upcoming Fourth Plenum 
of the Central Committee. 
  The national press yesterday highlighted a relatively 
conservative speech given by President Jiang Zemin to cadres in 
Fujian Province, which he had visited. 
  Mr Jiang, who is also party chief, admonished local 
officials 
to heed the central line on issues including agriculture, the 
reform of state enterprises, and the relationship between the 
rich coast and impoverished heartland. 
  He said even industrialised cities along the coast should 
contribute to the national goal of self sufficiency in 
agriculture. Each province and district should guarantee the 
acreage devoted to grain stability of grain output and 
sufficient storage. 
  On the transformation of state enterprises, Mr Jiang said 
the 
state sector should continue to be the mainstay of the economy. 
Moreover, in restructuring government units, officials and 
entrepreneurs must guard against excessive privatisation and the 
loss of state assets, he warned. 
  On co-operation between coastal and heartland regions, he 
said everybody must strive to achieve the goal of"common 
prosperity", hinting that Fujian and Guangdong must make more 
contributions to the poorer areas. 
  Chinese sources said a team appointed by Mr Jiang is 
drafting 
the document on "macro-level adjustments and controls" that will 
be passed by the Fourth Plenum. They said many of the ideas 
raised by Mr Jiang during his recent tour of Fujian and 
Guangdong would be incorporated. The plenum also will recommend 
ways to restore fiscal discipline over the economy and to cool 
inflation. 
  It is understood that measures used since mid-1993 by 
Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji, including a tight money policy, will be 
endorsed. 
  Before leaving for Europe yesterday, premier Li Peng 
expressed satisfaction over the efficacy of "macrolevel 
adjustments and controls". 
  China had achieved "initial success" in bringing inflation 
and economic growth under control, he said. "Although the 
growth rate has not yet been reduced to the nine percent target 
level, growth has been slowed down and inflation has also 
levelled off and in some areas has actually declined," he said. 
"Therefore we can say the overall trend of China's economic 
development is quite good.". 
  Mr Li said that to bring down inflation, China had used such 
measures as curbing demand and reducing the scale of capital 
construction. "We have also made vigorous efforts to develop 
agriculture and introduced the so-called vegetable basket 
project in order to bring down the cost of living for the 
people," he said. 

