Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prime Minister of Kazakhstan S. Tereshchenko </F>
by KazTAG correspondents Amangeldy Akhmetalimov and Gennadiy 
Lunev; place and date not given: "Three Support Points of 
Kazakhstan's Sovereignty: Political Independence of the State, a 
Socially Oriented Economy, and Interethnic Harmony"] 
  [Text] On the eve of the session of the Supreme 
Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan our KazTAG correspondents 
were granted an interview by Prime Minister S. Tereshchenko. 
  [KazTAG] Sergey Aleksandrovich, one must assume that the 
implementation of the anticrisis program is now the focus in the 
government's activity. Tell us, please, about the course of this 
work, about the difficulties arising with its fulfillment, and 
how our ministries and departments can work harder for it. For 
we know that the president criticized them harshly for 
unsatisfactory activity in this area. 
  [Tereshchenko] You know, developing and adopting a program 
for bringing the country's economy out of the crisis is only 
half of the job. The difficulties lie elsewhere: how to 
implement it in such a way that people will have a concrete 
sense that production has started to operate with the required 
rhythm and products and goods have begun to appear on the 
shelves of the stores. Therefore in keeping with the president's 
decision in January of this year the National Council for 
Economic Transformations was created. It was entrusted to 
effectively monitor the course of the implementation of the 
anticrisis program. A calendar plan-schedule of immediate 
measures for implementing this program was also approved. It 
consists of eight sections, which include 163 points which are 
the points of departure for the program's implementation. It 
will be necessary to adopt a number of new laws and presidential 
edicts, to make a number of amendments to existing legislation, 
and to issue the corresponding resolutions of the Cabinet of 
Ministers. 
  Practically all ministries and departments, the National 
Bank, and also divisions of the apparatus of the president and 
Cabinet of Ministers have become involved in the fulfillment of 
the plan-schedule. The basic load here, of course, is being 
carried by the economic ministries and departments; they are the 
developers of all provisions envisioned by the plan-schedule. 
  During the time that has passed the National Council on 
Economic Transformations has held 11 meetings. The discussion at 
these meetings was about what we have done to implement the 
program and deepen the socioeconomic reforms. More than 70 
questions have already been considered. I wish to emphasize at 
the outset that the work is proceeding but not at the rates we 
would like. There are plenty of reasons for this: The newness of 
the problems, the instability and unexpected turns in the 
economics and politics of a number of CIS countries, and so 
forth are taking their toll. 
  A great deal of effort, time, and resources will have to be 
enlisted in order to resolve unforeseen situations related to 
the natural disasters in Atyrau, Western Kazakhstan, and other 
oblasts, and the difficulties in trade relations and the sphere 
of cash-monetary circulation. Of course the blunders in 
administration, the lack of coordination of the actions of the 
ministries, the mismanagement, bureaucratism, and red tape are 
also impediments. 
  In this respect the president's criticism of the government, 
ministries, and departments is fair. Unfortunately, problems 
arising with providing rural areas with petroleum products 
during harvesting made our work somewhat less active. But I am 
convinced that we have both the forces and the material 
resources to implement the anticrisis program. 
  The achievement of this goal is the objective of the 
president's Edict of 23 June 1993 "On Improving the System of 
Economic Management Organs." After its publication six national 
and 18 joint-stock companies were created and also 16 state 
holding companies. 
  The existence of these companies makes it possible on state 
initiative to regulate the transfer of state property to private 
hands through the creation of joint-stock companies and 
privatization. 
  On the organizational plane we have also regulated the 
interactions among all state enterprises, joint-stock companies, 
and corporations with the ministries and departments. 
  At the present time the Republic State Committee on the 
Administration of State Property is working to determine the 
proportion of the state block of shares and is developing a 
mechanism for control and management of state property in 
conjunction with holding and joint-stock companies. And the 
latter, in turn, are evaluating the property of the enterprises 
and organizations included in them, and they have begun to 
prepare for creation of joint-stock companies from state 
property and sell it through the privatization funds to the 
population for coupons. I think that after these measures are 
implemented we will finally succeed in getting the economy going. 
  [KazTAG] The problem directly encountered not only by the 
banks, enterprises, and commercial structures but also by 
ordinary residents is the financial problem or, to put it 
simply, money. It was aggravated after certain actions taken in 
Russia. Recently there seemed to be a new beginning in this 
matter. We have in mind the agreement on the creation of a new 
type of ruble zone. Tell us, will it be viable and what will it 
bring to Kazakhstan? We would also like to know your opinion 
about the introduction of our own national currency in the 
Republic. 
  [Tereshchenko] It is generally known what colossal efforts 
have been undertaken by the leadership of Kazakhstan to preserve 
the ruble zone and strengthen trade-economic and financial 
relations with Russia and other CIS countries. It was not easy 
to solve these problems. Nonetheless approaches to them that 
inspire optimism have finally been found. On 7 September in 
Moscow representatives of the governments and national banks of 
Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan 
concluded an agreement on the creation of a new type of ruble 
zone. This document confirmed the desire of the aforementioned 
countries to have a common monetary system using the Russian 
ruble as the legal means of payment on their territories. 
  At the same time it was necessary to regulate all questions 
related to the standardization of the basic principles of 
customs control at the borders, tax, banking, and currency 
legislation, methods of monetary-credit regulation, provision of 
free movement of goods, investments, and others. 
  The agreement stipulates the possibility for one country or 
another to introduce its own currency. If one of the parties 
intends to take this step it must notify its partners ahead of 
time and take measures aimed at preventing the movement of old 
monetary notes from its territory into the neighboring countries. 
  Another thing that is especially important is that the six 
countries that signed the document made a commitment to conduct 
a unified policy with respect to currencies of third countries. 
  Following Armenia, Belarus, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan, 
Kazakhstan also signed a bilateral agreement with Russia 
concerning the unification of monetary systems. This occurred on 
23 September in Moscow and I, responding to questions from 
journalists after the ceremony, emphasized that the agreement 
that had been reached would undoubtedly contribute to 
stabilizing the economy in our Republic. This is my deep 
conviction. True, it can become a reality if the parliament 
ratifies this agreement at the session that is beginning. I am 
convinced that our people's deputies will arrive at the correct 
decision after soberly evaluating all aspects of the situation 
that is developing in the new type of ruble zone. 
  Regarding the introduction of a national currency in 
Kazakhstan, I shall be brief. Our president has spoken about 
this repeatedly in recent times, and in particular he spoke very 
convincingly in Semipalatinsk and his speech on Republic 
television... I have nothing to add to this and I completely 
share the opinion of the head of state. 
  [KazTAG] The rupture of economic relations with republics of 
the former Union dealt a painful blow to our economy. Everyone 
knows that Kazakhstan is making active efforts to restore the 
previous cooperation and business partnership. This is not a 
simple process. What difficulties is the government experiencing 
in this work, why can it not seem to get things off the ground; 
after all, it would seem that it would be easier for economic 
managers to find a common language than it would be for 
politicians? 
  [Tereshchenko] I agree with you, there are plenty of 
difficulties and unsolved problems in the national economy. In 
spite of the measures that have been taken, the economy of 
Kazakhstan, like those of other CIS countries, is experiencing a 
difficult period. Traditional economic and cooperative ties and 
the system of monetary circulation and mutual payments that have 
developed over long years among the enterprises have been 
destroyed. The restrictions on importing goods that have been 
introduced by certain states of the Commonwealth, the 
application of higher customs duties and taxes, the violation of 
commitments that have been made for delivering the most 
important kinds of products, and also the further growth of 
prices of products have seriously complicated the economic 
situation. 
  The crisis situation in the economy of the CIS countries is 
the result of the lack of coordinated joint actions, above all 
in the financial and monetary-credit spheres. For example, last 
year the Central Bank of Russia unilaterally introduced standard 
correspondent accounts for settlements for deliveries of 
products and thus greatly complicated mutual settlements among 
enterprises. And this April this bank again unilaterally 
abolished the granting of technical credits and has now 
paralyzed all settlements through the correspondent accounts. 
  At the same time the government of the Russian Federation 
does not recognize the indebtedness of its state enterprises to 
Kazakhstan for products received in a volume of more than 200 
billion rubles [R], which was formed with the introduction of 
the correspondent accounts. The results are pathetic: Many of 
our enterprises for whose products there is a demand have been 
forced to halt production because of the lack of financial means 
for acquiring raw materials, processed materials, and batching 
items. As a result industry has fallen into the category of 
Russia's debtors. 
  It is no secret to anyone that from the moment of the 
formation of the Commonwealth of Independent States Kazakhstan 
has persistently defended the need for preservation of a unified 
economic space, integration of the Republic economy, and the 
establishment of coordinating structures and interstate bank and 
payment and customs unions. 
  The proposals from Nursultan Abishevich regarding this (he 
even allowed the possibility of creating superethnic 
coordinating organs) were not supported by certain states. But 
time showed the expediency of creating such organs, and a 
coordination-consultation committee of the Commonwealth was 
formed at the beginning of this year. In April, again at the 
insistence of our president, the heads of the CIS states agreed 
on conditions for closer integration of the economies, and in 
May they signed the Moscow declaration on the need to create an 
Economic Union. One might say that it was not until after this 
time that the agreements reached within the framework of the CIS 
began to be filled with real meaning and content. 
  At the present time we already have the agreement on the 
creation of the Economic Union of the Community, signed on 24 
September in Moscow, and it is open to other states. 
  After ratification by the parliaments of the participating 
countries the agreement will make it possible to resolve many 
problems related to effective functioning of the economic space, 
to create conditions for free movement of goods, services, work 
force, and capital, to conduct a coordinated policy in the 
monetary-credit and currency spheres, to organize interstate 
settlements, and to remove or gradually equalize customs duties 
and tariffs. It has also reflected questions of the 
implementation of a coordinated antimonopoly policy, the 
coordination of foreign economic activity, the application of 
measures of economic accountability of states for failure to 
fulfill intergovernmental agreements, and so forth. 
  At the same time, the Republic government is looking for 
principally new forms of interrelations and ways of placing 
commodity producers in close contact with one another. On 
Kazakhstan's initiative meetings were organized among leaders of 
the most important branches of the national economies of the CIS 
countries: in Surgut--petroleum workers, Akmol--agrarians, and 
Karaganda--industrial workers. These were conducted with the aim 
of improving interstate relations among these complexes, 
creating a unified market, and providing for mutual deliveries. 
The corresponding coordination councils were established. 
  Today we are trying to bring new content to our relations 
with all states of the former Union, and above all with the 
Russian Federation. Thus in March 1992 in Uralsk there was the 
first meeting of the full complement of heads of the governments 
of the two countries where they adopted joint decisions 
regarding many vitally important issues. The implementation of 
these decisions made it possible to save the harvest last year. 
These meetings then became a regular occurrence. 
  Special attention is being devoted to the preservation and 
development of mutually advantageous ties with the neighboring 
regions of Russia. This year there have been two meetings of 
governments in Omsk and one in Kokchetav with the participation 
of the heads of the administrations of 20 adjacent oblasts of 
Kazakhstan and Russia. Direct ties were established for trade 
and economic cooperation with the administrations of Khabarovsk 
Kray, Irkutsk, Saratov, Vologoda, Sverdlovsk, Tyumen, and other 
oblasts, the republics of Bashkortostan and Sakha (Yakutia), and 
the Moscow mayor's office. The Nizhniy Novgorod-Taldykorgan and 
St. Petersburg-Almaty trading houses have been organized and are 
functioning. Taking into account the prospects for this kind of 
cooperation where the initiative proceeds from below, the 
government intends to continue such work with the regions in the 
future as well. 
  Since the subject has already come around to Russia I cannot 
but say a couple of words about recent events in Moscow. All 
citizens of Kazakhstan have been following them with alarm. And 
one can now state with satisfaction that the provocative actions 
of the destructive forces that led to the bloodshed have been 
resolutely halted. This inspires hope that Russia will not stray 
from the democratic path. And this is also in keeping with the 
basic interests of citizens of Kazakhstan. 
  Over the centuries the destinies of the peoples of Russia 
and 
Kazakhstan have been inseparably intertwined in a close bond 
that cannot be severed. The policy now being conducted by the 
leaders of the two countries is also aimed at preserving and 
developing good-neighbor relations. Our agreements of recent 
times are beginning to be filled with living content that is 
working for the good of the people. 
  As usual, we are maintaining stable relations with Ukraine, 
Belarus, and the states of Central Asia. Recently the rates of 
integration processes have increased, particularly with 
Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan. During a recent meeting of Presidents 
N.A. Nazarbayev and I.A. Karimov and agreement was signed 
concerning measures for deepening economic integration of the 
two countries during 1994-2000. It is intended to sign the same 
kind of agreement with the Kyrgyz Republic. 
  We are hoping that these processes will continue to develop. 
  [KazTAG] And now a question about our daily bread. The 
harvesting is being completed on the virgin land and from the 
looks of things the crops were fairly good. What measures is the 
government taking to fill our granaries with grain as it did 
last year? 
  [Tereshchenko] At the present time harvesting work is 
continuing in all oblasts of Kazakhstan. Here I have in mind not 
only the grain crops, but also the harvesting of industrial 
crops, vegetables, and potatoes, and the procurement of feeds. 
  Indeed, the crops on the virgin fields have now formed and 
they are expected to be just as good as last year's. But nature 
has made its own adjustments. Because of the frequent rains and 
cool weather at the end of August the ripening of grains was 
prolonged somewhat and therefore the harvesting of grain crops 
was postponed for almost two weeks. 
  And now the harvest is being held up because of the 
unstable, 
severe weather, and snow has even fallen in certain oblasts. As 
a result, the volumes that were to be received from threshing 
grain per hectare turned out to be 2-3 quintals less. In order 
for the losses not to increase it is necessary to complete the 
harvesting of cereal crops as quickly as possible. 
  Before the harvest the government rendered a considerable 
amount of financial aid to the rural areas. The commodity 
producers were given an interest-free advance of R120 billion 
before the harvest. Credit for preparing technical equipment for 
harvesting amounted to R300 billion. Now another R140 billion 
has been found for laying in the grain. 
  Measures have also been taken to support the northern 
oblasts 
with automotive transportation and machine operators. More than 
18,000 trucks and a good deal of other equipment was sent to the 
Republic's main grain region. As we know, great difficulties 
arose with providing fuel and lubricants for the harvesting 
work. Therefore the government was constantly dealing with these 
issues. A good deal has already been done so that the rural 
areas will not have difficulties in acquiring gasoline, diesel 
fuel, lubricants, or spare parts. 
  All these issues are being resolved operationally through 
harvest commissions that have been especially created in all 
oblasts. There is only a small part of the grain fields left to 
harvest and the farmers are taking advantage of every hour of 
good weather. 
  If you recall, in the middle of last summer while the 
weather 
was still good they were speaking about a grain yield from the 
new harvest of 30 million and even more. Because of objective 
factors, of course, this goal can no longer be reached. But one 
thing is for certain: the state order will be fulfilled, the 
farms will be fully supplied with seeds and forage, and there 
will be sufficient grain for free trade. Kazakhstan remains a 
reliable supplier of grain under interstate agreements as well. 
  Fairly good potato and vegetable crops are expected. And 
here 
too it is necessary to reduce to a minimum losses during 
harvesting and preparation for storage. 
  More than last year's amount of feed has been stored up for 
animal husbandry. On the whole, according to our indications, 
the year should end productively for agriculture. 
  [KazTAG] A new class is being born in the 
Republic--entrepreneurs. Judging from the press, relations 
between commercial structures and the government do not always 
develop smoothly. In your view, what has caused this--the 
inability of our businessmen to do their work correctly or 
mistakes in legal, credit, and other questions? 
  [Tereshchenko] The transition of society from one condition 
to another, as experience in other countries shows, cannot be 
easy. Therefore relations between the government and the new 
classes being born in society cannot be easy either. But the 
reason for this is not simply the inability of the businessmen 
to conduct their business or mistakes of the government in 
legal, credit, or other questions. No. The reason lies 
elsewhere. The Republic has not yet fully developed the 
necessary legislative base. This makes it impossible for private 
entrepreneurship to develop normally. Therefore the government 
anticrisis program is aimed at resolving a number of issues 
concerning this problem, and it should be carried out in stages. 
  In keeping with this, on the basis of previously adopted 
laws 
on entrepreneurship, a draft codified law on entrepreneurship 
was recently adopted and a draft of a new law on the activity of 
stock exchanges was submitted to the Supreme Council. The fund 
for support of entrepreneurship was audited, a statute on the 
fund and a complex of primary measures for developing 
small-scale and medium-scale entrepreneurship have been 
developed, and a work group is being formed for drawing up 
programs for the development of entrepreneurship during 
1994-1995. 
  And quite recently a decision was adopted to create a 
ramified system of centers for small business. We are also 
preparing to conduct the first large forum of representatives of 
nearby and distant foreign countries this autumn. 
  But the basic problems of entrepreneurship share a common 
nature for all the economy: the growth of inflation, 
nonpayments, and so forth, and therefore a great deal will 
depend precisely on their solutions. 
  As for the relations between the government and the 
entrepreneurs, in my opinion, these are quite normal working 
contacts. There are, of course, differences of opinion and 
certain misunderstandings, but these are unavoidable in work. 
The government and the entrepreneurial structures that have 
appeared in business are cooperating more and more closely. And 
we intend to continue to strengthen this partnership in the 
future. 
  [KazTAG] In our society a great deal of interest is being 
manifested in the condition of Kazakhstan's foreign economic 
relations and the prospects for its cooperation with countries 
of the so-called distant foreign countries. How advantageous is 
this for the Republic and are our misgivings regarding our 
concessions to foreign businessmen justified? Is there a 
concrete return from foreign visits of government delegations? 
  [Tereshchenko] These are very important questions and I 
would 
like to answer them in more detail. The more so since I can 
sense a certain subtext: Why do these government bureaucrats 
like to visit the well-off countries of the West and East, is it 
not for their own satisfaction or to search for personal 
advantage? Whoever thinks that, I dare to assure you, is 
profoundly mistaken. 
  The truth is that for the current stage of the establishment 
of our young sovereign state active foreign economic activity is 
as necessary as the air we breathe. And only competent people 
should engage in this. Because of its geographical position, its 
wealth of natural resources, and the scientific-technical and 
production potential that has been created, Kazakhstan attracts 
attention from many foreign countries. Therefore, in spite of 
the deep economic crisis, more than 2,000 of our enterprises, 
associations, and concerns are participating in the foreign 
economic sphere, and we have created 1,140 joint ventures and 
more than 30 various associations. 
  The results are promising: During 1992 the Republic's 
overall 
foreign trade turnover amounted to $1,958.1 million, of which 
$1,489.3 million was exports and $468.8 million was imports, and 
during the first half of 1993 the volume of export-import 
deliveries reached $879.9 million. Foreign trade relations were 
maintained with 56 states of the world and export deliveries 
were made to 53 countries. 
  Especially large volumes were reached in exports of items of 
nonferrous and ferrous metallurgy, mineral-ore raw material, oil 
and petroleum products, and products of the chemical industry. 
An important position in exports was occupied by deliveries of 
products of the agro-industrial complex. At the present time 
there has been a considerable expansion of economic relations 
with the United States, the PRC, Turkey, the Republic of Korea, 
Germany, England, France, Italy, Canada, Switzerland, Spain, 
Austria, and the countries of Eastern Europe. 
  Along with export-import operations on an ever-increasing 
scale, the Republic is consistently conducting a policy to 
enlist foreign investments and credit resources necessary for 
the development and modernization of the economy. This pertains 
above all to searching, prospecting, extracting, and processing 
hydrocarbon raw material. 
  One of the largest projects in joint entrepreneurship is the 
creation, with the participation of the American firm Chevron 
Overseas Company, of the joint venture Tengishevroyl. The profit 
received by this enterprise will make it possible to resolve not 
only the social problems of Atyrau Oblast but also questions of 
financing other joint projects on the territory of Kazakhstan. 
Large-scale projects are also being carried out in conjunction 
with the French concern Elf-Aquitaine, with the Sultanate of 
Oman, the Turkish Republic, and a number of European and 
American firms, and the preparation of contracts is being 
completed with an alliance of the firms British Gas (England) 
and the AGIP Company (Italy) as well as the international 
consortium for developing the Caspian shelf. 
  With the participation of foreign partners we have organized 
the production of radio and television equipment, refrigerators, 
computers, household pneumatic heat pumps, and electronic 
watches, the processing of leather-fur and other agricultural 
raw material, and the output of construction materials and 
sanitary porcelain items as well as other products. 
  In order to further develop the export potential and solve 
socioeconomic problems, the Republic now has a number of target 
credit agreements worth a total of $1 billion, through which we 
have already begun financing and assimilation. Of the overall 
number of projects financed from the credit that has been 
granted, 28 percent are facilities of processing branches of the 
agro-industrial complex; this includes the production of 
children's food and the processing of milk and meat. Some 20 
percent of the credit has been used for the construction of 
facilities for producing consumer goods, and 44 percent--for 
modernizing production of the petroleum and gas industry and 
other branches of the national economy. 
  The rapid development of foreign business ties has required 
that we further improve state management of foreign economic 
activity and form a modern legislative and normative base which 
would meet all international requirements. 
  And a considerable amount of work has been done in this 
direction. Laws adopted on foreign investments, currency 
regulation, and others create favorable conditions for the 
entrepreneurial and economic activity of foreign partners. The 
Republic can now cooperate with the international community 
under equal conditions and be a full-fledged guarantor of its 
foreign economic activity. 
  The government is also actively pursuing a policy for 
strengthening the impact of foreign economic relations on all 
aspects of management. To these ends it has developed and is 
implementing a special program for the development of foreign 
economic activity. Decisions have been adopted concerning the 
procedure for forming the Republic currency fund, currency funds 
of local organs of power and enterprises, and a number of other 
documents that make it possible to coordinate work for 
mobilizing existing resources and possibilities of solving 
pressing economic problems. 
  But there are also many still unsolved problems related to 
difficulties of the transition period. We are taking a sober 
look at things and are aware that as a result of the rigidly 
centralized policy of the former Union and the unlimited 
dictatorship of the command-administrative system, the economy 
of Kazakhstan has acquired a clearly marked raw material 
direction. In order to become a full-fledged developed state 
that is capable of offering its citizens normal conditions for 
material life, we will have to eliminate this ugly distortion as 
quickly as possible and achieve effective structural 
transformations in the economy. Let me say directly that we will 
not be able to solve this problem without close cooperation with 
industrial powers or without extensive enlistment of foreign 
investments. This is precisely why we must sometimes find 
compromise solutions with our foreign partners. 
  We would like to use foreign investments primarily for more 
rapid development of the Republic's consumer complex, that is, 
for the construction of enterprises of light industry and for 
processing agricultural products, and producing 
science-intensive, technically complex durable goods. 
  Modernization of the material and technical base in the 
fuel-energy, metallurgical, chemical, and petrochemical 
complexes, which constitute the basis of Kazakhstan's economy 
and its export capabilities, require a good deal of attention 
and money. And here the interests of foreign states will not 
always coincide with ours. Yet we are placing a great deal of 
hope in close cooperation with international financial and 
economic organizations, primarily with those such as the 
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development, the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development, and others. 
  As for the results of foreign visits of government 
delegations I can say the following. 
  We have been convinced repeatedly that for our foreign 
partners a serious guarantee of the development of economic ties 
with Kazakhstan is the level of its interstate relations with 
other countries, the existence of contracts and agreements that 
determine priority spheres of cooperation, direct participation 
in negotiations on large projects by the head of our state and 
other leaders, and the course that is being pursued toward 
strengthening political stability in the Republic. 
  Based on this, during the course of the visits we have 
discussed questions of mutually advantageous political, 
economic, scientific-technical and cultural cooperation, and 
conditions for enlisting foreign investments in our economy. 
This is producing results. Thus, for example, the visit by the 
president of the Austrian Republic, negotiations with Federal 
Chancellor Franz Vranitzky and the government, and meetings with 
business circles of the country made it possible to conclude an 
agreement to open an unlimited line of credit for Kazakhstan. It 
is difficult to overestimate the political significance of this 
agreement, which actually marked a breakthrough into the world 
credit market. 
  The president's visit to the United States in May 1992 made 
it possible to expand possibilities of cooperation with America 
and to conclude important bilateral agreements, including in the 
area of trade. Pursuant to this agreement Kazakhstan was granted 
most favored nation status, it placed our relations on a 
qualitatively new level, and it was a guarantee that the 
Republic would be granted credit by the U.S. government, 
including for the implementation of investment programs of the 
Commercial-Credit Corporation and the Export-Import Bank of the 
United States. 
  Another concrete step toward extensive enlistment of 
American 
capital in the Republic were the agreements on encouragement and 
mutual protection of capital investments and stimulation of 
investments. 
  During the course of the visit of the government delegation 
to China a number of documents of great political and economic 
significance were signed. Among them were agreements on state 
credit from the PRC for a total of 30 million yuans under 
preferential conditions and the opening on the territory of 
Kazakhstan of Chinese stores for selling goods for rubles. 
Agreement was reached regarding questions of automotive 
shipments, strengthening of cooperation in the area of rail 
transportation and the use of air transportation, and also 
points for crossing over the state border and mutual travel of 
citizens. 
  There were similar visits from official delegations of the 
Republic to Pakistan, India, Turkey, the FRG, France, the 
Sultanate of Oman, Iran, Israel, Mongolia, Thailand, and 
Australia. All this made it possible to considerably raise the 
level of our mutual relations with foreign countries, to step up 
trade and economic cooperation with them, and to discover new 
partners in various spheres of the economy. 
  I would like to especially emphasize that the Cabinet of 
Ministers, its presidium, the ministries and departments, and 
the local executive organs are now working under unusual 
conditions and are constantly searching, sometimes to no avail. 
The task is to promptly draw conclusions from the lessons that 
have occurred and not don sack cloth and ashes. I am convinced 
that we citizens of Kazakhstan are like-thinkers. We must make 
every effort in the name of the noble cause of strengthening the 
sovereignty of our young state, the main components of which, in 
my view, are the country's political independence, the 
possibility for all healthy forces in a socially oriented 
economy to manifest themselves, and the provision of interethnic 
harmony for all citizens of Kazakhstan. 
  [KazTAG] We know, Sergey Aleksandrovich, that you returned 
from Moscow late in the evening last Saturday. What was the 
purpose of your trip? 
  [Tereshchenko] In the capital of Russia, in spite of the 
difficult situation, there was a meeting of a bilateral 
Russian-Kazakh commission. We considered the question of 
supporting practical measures aimed at fulfilling 
intergovernmental agreements on the unification of monetary 
systems. Our delegation was headed by First Deputy Prime 
Minister Daulet Sembayev. It did a great deal of work, and I too 
became involved in the final stage. 
  Let me say outright that not everyone in the Russian 
government agrees about the need to unify monetary systems. But 
Russian Prime Minister Viktor Stepanovich Chernomyrdin and the 
chairman of the Russian Central Bank, Viktor Vladimirovich 
Gerashchenko, have shown that they understand our serious 
problems and are firm in their intention to help Kazakhstan 
solve them. 
  Groups of experts from interested ministries and departments 
are already working in all areas of monetary-credit, budget, 
price, tax, and trade policy, the regulation of foreign economic 
activity, and customs work. They have drawn up an initial list 
of legislative acts in the aforementioned areas. The commission 
has noted that they contain no fundamental disagreements, and 
this creates good preconditions for the most rapid completion of 
work for unification of legislation. To put it briefly, the 
commission has not found any obstacles to the adoption of a 
decision on the unification of monetary systems. 
  In our discussion we have already touched upon this 
complicated issue which is so vitally important for Kazakhstan, 
but allow me to repeat myself. The Republic's immediate future 
with respect to emerging from the economic credit-monetary and 
financial chaos will depend largely on how seriously and wisely 
our people's deputies approach the ratification of this 
agreement. 

