BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Richard Savill: "Leave World of Violence, </F>
Reynolds Urges IRA"] 
  [Text] Belfast -- Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime 
minister, urged the IRA to break out of its "cocooned world of 
idealistic violence" yesterday and make a positive response to 
the Downing Street Declaration on Ulster's future. 
  His appeal came as the RUC [Royal Ulster Constabulary] said 
it expected an increase in violence after the IRA launched a 
spate of weekend attacks to mark the end of its 72-hour 
cease-fire. 
  Police suspected the IRA of involvement in at least six 
incidents, including gun and mortar attacks on police and Army 
checkpoints, after the failure of the cease-fire to draw Mr 
Major into dialogue with Sinn Fein. 
  Mr Reynolds voiced his disappointment at the cease-fire's 
short duration and he said time was running out for Sinn Fein 
and the IRA. 
  "I think the time for deliberations should end now," he 
said. 
"There are too many lives lost already. It is not worth the 
loss of another innocent life." 
  Despite the end of the cease-fire, Mr Reynolds said the 
search for a permanent end to violence would continue. 
  "One has to appreciate that the IRA are in a cocooned world 
of their own, of idealistic violence, and it is going to take 
some time for them to break out of that and recognise the world 
around them wants peace and that the people in both communities 
want peace and they want it now. 
  ``I think there is an urgency about their own deliberations 
and they cannot keep deliberating forever. We need decisions 
and we need them fast. At the end of the day, the momentum that 
is there among the ordinary people for peace will win through 
and everybody will eventually come back to the Downing Street 
declaration.'' 
  He believed the cease-fire was a "very small step" along the 
long road to peace. "Now that they have taken the first step, 
let's hope the second step will be for a much longer period that 
will eventually lead to a permanent peace." 
  Mr Reynolds said he had not expected Mr Major to contact 
Sinn 
Fein during the cease-fire. "Everybody recognises the position 
of John Major at the moment and I certainly wasn't expecting him 
to do that at this stage." 
  "They would need a longer cease-fire than just three days 
for 
people to expect them to respond." 
  He promised that Dublin would not "go soft" on the IRA in 
the 
coming months. "We have never been soft with them. Our 
security forces will continue to do their job as they have 
always done." 
  Mr Reynolds's comments came as the outlawed Loyalist 
paramilitary group, the Ulster Defence Association [UDA], 
threatened to extend its terror campaign to the Irish Republic. 
  The statement comes in the wake of a recent warning by Sir 
Hugh Annesley, RUC Chief Constable, that loyalists are 
developing a sophisticated bomb-making ability which might be 
used in the Republic . 
  In an interview with The Sunday Telegraph, two men who said 
they represented the UDA, also said it would continue its 
activities even if the IRA calls a permanent cease-fire. 
  The men, who described themselves as the heads of the UDA's 
south-east Antrim and south Belfast battalions, said the 
organisation had drawn up contingency plans in the event of 
civil war which they believed was moving closer. 
  They said loyalists should also be given clarification of 
the 
declaration and they said Dublin had to abandon its 
constitutional claims on Northern Ireland. 
  Meanwhile, Mr John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and 
Labour Party, said British soldiers patrolling Ulster's streets 
were backing his peace efforts. 
  Mr Hume, who has engaged in dialogue with Mr Gerry Adams, 
the 
Sinn Fein president, criticised Rightwing Tory MPs and urged 
them to put peace in Northern Ireland above the "internal 
squabbles" in their party. 
  "The young soldiers in the streets know more about our 
problems than those Right wing backbenchers," Mr Hume said on 
GMTV's [Good Morning Television] Sunday Best programme. 

