BFN 

<F P=106> [Sylvie Lepage report: "The South Pacific and French </F>
Nuclear Testing"] 
  [Text] Suva -- Although the relations between France and 
the countries of the South Pacific have improved thanks to the 
moratorium on nuclear testing declared by the president of the 
Republic, the recurring debate on whether or not it is necessary 
to restart explosions and the possibility of a decision running 
counter to that made by Francois Mitterrand after the next 
presidential election still give the countries of Oceania some 
cause for concern. However, it is uncertain whether all the 
governments of this zone will react with the same virulence. 
  Ieremia Tabai, general secretary of the South Pacific Forum 
[SPF] based in Suva said: "Relations between France and the 
countries of the SPF have taken a turn for the better. However, 
any restarting of testing at Mururoa [a French-owned South 
Pacific atoll and nuclear test site] would be a considerable 
step backward. France has always maintained that the tests do 
not endanger anyone, but we doubt this. The long-term 
consequences are still not known and people fear them." 
  For many Polynesians and Melanesians who catch their food in 
the sea, it is unbearable to think that fish could be poisoned 
and reefs destroyed. There is little point in publishing report 
after report proving that there are no leaks or pollution. They 
will not change convictions that are widely held among the 
peoples of the South Pacific. Cold reasoning and Cartesian 
logic do not work against an emotional discourse. A French 
diplomat pointed out to us that the people of Oceania consider 
nuclear testing to be "rape and sacrilege." 
  When the United States transferred their nuclear tests from 
the Pacific to Nevada, France was perceived as being the only 
country that was active outside its own region, even though the 
tests were being carried out on French soil. Don McKinnon, New 
Zealand's conservative foreign minister, asked us: "If these 
tests are really not at all dangerous, why are they not 
performed closer to mainland France?" 
<H5>  New Zealand Activism </H5>
  New Zealand is one of the few countries to have a minister 
for disarmament, "a strange creature, no doubt," Doug Graham 
says of himself. He explained: "As a small country, we have 
never gone along with the idea that a few nuclear powers -- 
previously five -- could threaten the whole world and could have 
the power, if things went wrong, to bring about the apocalypse." 
  Mr. Graham recommends that sanctions be brought against 
countries which, like North Korea, refuse a complete inspection 
of their nuclear installations by the International Atomic 
Energy Agency [IAEA]. Everyone we spoke to agreed that the fact 
that new countries are looking to obtain the atom bomb in no way 
justifies the nuclear powers launching an arms-perfecting 
program implying a restart to testing. 
  This aversion is deeply-rooted in New Zealand. Former Labor 
Prime Minister David Lange (1984-1989) told us: "At a time when 
antinuclear demonstrations in Europe were confined just to 
left-wing movements, this tendency in New Zealand was much more 
widespread, to the extent that the government itself led the 
demonstrations. The fact that it sent one of its ministers, 
Paul Fraser, and two frigates to Mururoa to protest against 
atmospheric tests merely strengthened New Zealanders in their 
conviction." 
  This indignation is now shared by most neighboring 
countries. 
It is above all the opposition to nuclear testing that led to 
the creation of the Forum in 1971, an organization that aims to 
be essentially political, unlike the South Pacific Commission 
which was then still under the aegis of the colonial powers. 
  Four years later, New Zealand, Fiji, and Papua New Guinea 
managed to convince the United Nations to agree by a unanimous 
vote to pass a motion in favor of a denuclearized zone in the 
South Pacific. France and the United States abstained. In 1985, 
Wellington's efforts resulted in the denuclearization treaty 
being signed at Rarotonga, in the Cook Islands, by the 13 
countries of the Forum, with the exception of Vanuatu which 
considered that the text of the treaty did not go far enough. 
The treaty specifically bans tests and the dumping of nuclear 
waste in the waters of the zone. 
  Three protocols invited the nuclear powers to apply the 
provisions of the treaty in their territories situated in this 
region. These were rejected by France, which had just sunk the 
[Greenpeace protest ship] Rainbow Warrior in Auckland harbor, 
and by the United States, whose relations with New Zealand had 
been frosty since Wellington had banned nuclear weapon-carrying 
or nuclear-propelled vessels from entering its ports. 
  Despite the election of a new Conservative government in 
1990, Wellington did not revoke the law of 1987 which enforced 
this ban. Jim Anderton, head of the opposition Alliance party, 
stated: "Their deputies would not allow it. It would be an 
unacceptable about-turn for the people. We are proud of the 
fact that our tiny country has been able to say no to the United 
States, even though our decision means that we are still 
excluded from ANZUS (the military pact between Australia, New 
Zealand, and the United States]." 
<H5>  Danger to the Environment </H5>
  While there is no question of New Zealand going back on its 
antinuclear policy, France has nonetheless found greater 
flexibility in Fiji and Vanuatu since they changed governments. 
When Colonel Rabuka overthrew the predominantly Indian 
coalition government in 1987, Fiji lost the support of its main 
donators of aid -- a gap that France rushed to fill. In 1989, 
Mr. Rabuka was awarded the Legion d'Honneur for services to 
Lebanon...nine years after the event. Now the head of an 
elected government, Sitiveni Rabuka is calling on France, "in 
accordance with the wishes of the people of the Pacific, not to 
restart testing." 
  However, as Steven Ratuva, director of the Fijian 
antinuclear 
group, points out: "Rabuka is a soldier by training and, given 
his links with France, it is highly unlikely that the Fijian 
Government would overly pressurize Paris were testing to 
restart." Perhaps that explains why Sir Ratu Kamisese Mara, 
who, in 1985, gave a speech at the UN General Assembly 
condemning French nuclear tests on Mururoa, as Fijian president 
today refuses to grant us an interview on this specific subject. 
This is the same man who, on a visit to Paris in 1988, received 
an aid package five times greater than the one awarded in 1987. 
Issue 17 of the JOURNAL OF PACIFIC STUDIES published by the 
South Pacific University (SPU) in Suva wonders whether it is any 
coincidence that, for the following two years, the Forum toned 
down its criticisms of France. 
  In Vanuatu, the position of Maxime Carlot, elected in 1991, 
differs considerably from that taken by former Prime Minister 
Walter Lini who, since 1980 (when the French-British condominium 
of the New Hebrides gained its independence), had taken every 
opportunity to condemn Paris, especially on the subject of 
nuclear testing. Since the French-speaking group came to power, 
Vanuatu has been something of a bridgehead between mainland 
France and the countries of the South Pacific, and Mr. Carlot 
has taken care not to cause offense to any of the parties. 
  He told us: "France must take into account the wishes of the 
independent countries of the South Pacific. We, like them, 
believe that nuclear testing represents a danger for the 
environment. If France can find other solutions to perfect [its 
weapon design], then all the better." "However, those who are 
interested in Mururoa must also take an interest in the world 
balance, and my government will always be on the side of the 
free world." 
  However, here as elsewhere, everyone would be greatly 
relieved if France could banish the doubts hanging over the 
South Pacific once and for all. The credit it has gained since 
the then-Prime Minister Michel Rocard negotiated the Matignon 
Agreements on New Caledonia in 1988 by the implementation of a 
cooperation policy with these territories and the moratorium, 
will then be unlimited. 

