CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vasiliy Golovnin under the rubric "Fish": "The </F>
Japanese Are Asking Us Not To Fire. Tokyo Advises Its Fishermen 
Not To Mess With `Putina-94'"] 
  [Text] Tokyo--An influential official in Tokyo stated: "If 
your border guards begin shooting, this will be the end of 
normal Russian-Japanese relations." Official Tokyo responded 
quite nervously to "Putina-94," a large-scale operation to put 
an end to foreign poaching which began on 20 April in the waters 
of Russia's Far East. Now the Japanese are anxiously 
anticipating the results of this action. However, so far the 
newspapers have been reporting on the operation of Russian 
border guards which has begun in an unemotional and markedly 
informative manner. 
  As is known, in addition to the vessels, aircraft, and shore 
installations of the border guard troops, the forces of the 
Pacific Fleet, the patrol craft of the Russian Federation 
Committee on Fishing, specialists from the Customs Committee, 
and even a surveillance satellite have been pressed into service 
for "Putina." The objective of the operation is to restore 
control over Russian waters in the Far East where poachers from 
Japan, North and South Korea, China, and even representatives of 
a faraway Poland have operated with virtual impunity in recent 
years. At the same time, at issue is restoration in the region 
of the prestige of the Russian border guard troops, which have 
recently been referred to with compassion in, for example, 
Japan: They lack fuel, their patrol craft are old, their engines 
are weak--how can they keep up with border violators? 
  There are a few very attractive regions in the Far Eastern 
zone to which foreign fishermen are drawn as if by a magnet. 
These are the shores of Kamchatka, with the best crabs in the 
world, and the famous zone in the center of the Sea of Okhotsk 
where an entire army of poachers from the world over literally 
scoops out pollock and other valuable marine life, taking 
advantage of the fact that technically this area is considered 
to be open water. From this standpoint the South Kuril zone, in 
which the confrontation between Russian border guards and 
Japanese fishermen has become particularly acute, is the least 
favorable. Naturally, a long-standing dispute between Moscow and 
Tokyo over title to these islands makes the situation 
particularly piquant. 
  According to data from the border guards, more than 7,000 
incursions by Japanese vessels in the Russian waters of the Far 
East were registered last year; the South Kuril zone accounted 
for most of them. The violators are apprehended, kept in dirty 
pretrial confinement cells, put on trial, fined, and even have 
their vessels confiscated. Recently the captain of one of the 
trawlers caught was wounded in the leg when a Russian patrol 
craft fired warning shots. However, so far these measures have 
failed to bring about a radical change in the situation because 
poachers are apprehended quite infrequently, after all. 
  The Russian authorities displayed their determination to 
take 
harsher measures for the first time early this year, when about 
80 Japanese vessels entered the zone of the South Kuril island 
of Kunashir on 21-22 January all at once; the vessels stayed 
there for a long time, despite numerous warnings from Russian 
border guards. The incident was widely publicized and for the 
first time caused vigorous protests from Moscow bolstered by a 
conspicuous pick-up in the activity of the border guard troops. 
However, incursions into the waters of the islands in dispute 
continued on a smaller scale until the beginning of April, 
causing the irritation of our marine guards to mount. 
  Tokyo's position with regard to all these events is 
ambiguous. On one hand, Japan calls on its fishermen not to 
invade Russian waters. As a representative of the Japanese 
Marine Safety Directorate has communicated, his department 
intends to convince potential violators "not to cross the 
border" of the Russian Federation zone, warning them of possible 
consequences, especially in the course of "Putina-94." 
  However, it is well known that for the most part a 
particular 
variety of fishermen who are closely associated with the yakuza 
mafia engage in poaching in our waters. As a rule this element 
could not care less about admonitions; besides, it is a mark of 
special valor for them to "rub the noses" of the Russian 
occupiers of the South Kuril Islands in it, since most of the 
yakuza subscribe to an extreme variety of nationalism. 
  Tokyo's official position objectively prompts incursions 
into 
this zone. Tokyo considers the South Kuril Islands its own 
territory and, correspondingly, does not consider the passage of 
its vessels there to be a "violation of the state border." The 
Government of Japan has consistently rejected all protests from 
Moscow on this occasion, and approaches revealed cases of 
poaching strictly from the standpoint of its domestic 
legislation, which virtually eliminates any opportunity to 
punish the culprits. 
  Nonetheless, statements by influential officials in Tokyo 
who 
have a direct involvement in relations with Russia indicate that 
Japan is alarmed by the pick-up in the activity of our border 
guards, since the Japanese are afraid that the border guards 
will start firing on violators. In essence, the authorities here 
have nothing against poachers being apprehended, as they believe 
this to be unavoidable, and even useful in a way. However, even 
a chance killing of a violator-fisherman while being chased and 
apprehended would unavoidably cause an unpredictable surge of 
hatred for Russia in Japan, which apparently is not to the 
liking of a majority of local politicians. On the other hand, 
there are quite influential forces in Japan that might even be 
waiting for blood to be drawn in order to dispense once and for 
all with all attempts at normalizing relations with Moscow by 
making a racket about "Japanese being killed by KGB soldiers," 
as our border guards are still called locally. 
  In view of this, statements by Andrey Nikolayev, commander 
in 
chief of the border guard troops, to the effect that "Putina-94" 
is not aimed at a coercive resolution of the issue of unlawful 
fishing but is mainly called upon to be a powerful psychological 
influence on potential violators, are hopeful. It appears that 
the essence of the issue is in making the apprehension and a 
substantial financial penalty for the poachers virtually 
unavoidable, because shooting in the Far East is caused only by 
the inability of the border guards to compete as equals with 
poachers on fast vessels. This problem has another aspect, too: 
There are virtually no continuous working contacts between the 
border guard services of the two countries which could get the 
ball rolling. 

