BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement issued by Brigadier General Muhammad Bashir </F>
Sulayman, spokesman of the Armed Forces General Command, on 11 
June; place not given] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] O you struggling, truthful 
Sudanese citizens: While we commemorate the hijrah of the 
Prophet which changed the course of world history, your sons 
from the combatants of the Armed Forces, and the People's 
Defence carried the message of this nation's first combatants to 
the best of their abilities. This was due to the firm 
determination of men, struggle by the brave, faithful Sudanese 
nation, and belief in the unity of the country. In response to 
the stratagem of the enemies, routing the scattered remnants of 
the treacherous army of the rebellion, your brave sons from the 
Armed Forces and the Peoples Defence at 0900 this morning on 11 
June, invaded enemy positions in the usurped town of Kajo Kaji 
bravely and forcefully restored to the bold an honored and 
respected wedding feast. Praise be to God. The scattered 
remnants of the outlaws' army fled leaving behind their 
equipment and abandoning their positions. 
  O you, the generous people of Sudan, the Armed Forces which 
is advancing from one position to another in order to restore to 
this country its respectability, power, and territorial 
integrity, confirms to the distinguished people of Sudan that it 
will [words indistinct] in defence of this soil and its people, 
in response to the stratagems of the enemies and their lackeys. 
At the same time it stresses to the rebel John Garang and to 
all who help him that the path of peace and the vision of peace 
is as clear as the midday sun and the march of the proverbial 
heroes who recaptured Kajo Kaji today will continue until final 
victory is achieved by God's grace. 
  We hope this message will be accepted. Congratulations to 
the distinguished and heroic people of Sudan. Congratulations 
to the Armed Forces and the People's Defence. God is great and 
glory be to Sudan. 

