BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Husayn Succeeds in Rearranging Priorities"] </F>
  [Text] His Majesty King Husayn has succeeded in breaking, 
and removing completely, the ice that accumulated on relations 
between Jordan and the United States. 
  King Husayn also succeeded in convincing President Clinton, 
his administration's officials, and the U.S. Congress of the 
importance of the effective and influential Jordanian role in 
the achievement of comprehensive peace and restoring security 
and stability to the region. 
  During his meetings and talks with President Clinton and his 
administration's officials, and with various economic, security, 
and political U.S. institutions, His Majesty King Husayn managed 
to confirm his knowledge and experience in managing crises and 
confirmed that the Jordanian role in the region cannot in any 
way be marginalized or ignored. 
  His Majesty King Husayn also persuaded the U.S. 
Administration to take care of priorities and to work on 
addressing the standing issues and problems with Israel before 
talking about the possibility of reaching peace with it. 
Through the U.S. Administration, he managed to convince Israel 
of these requirements, which are the requirements for peace. 
Therefore, an agreement must be reached on delineating borders 
and restoring Jordan's share of water since it is a question of 
sovereignty before anything else. 
  His Majesty King Husayn managed to explain to the U.S. 
Administration and the U.S. Congress the economic and social 
difficulties facing the country as a result of the second Gulf 
War, the blockade of al-'Aqabah, and the Arab boycott and the 
damage it has brought to the Jordanian economy. He stressed 
that unless these issues are addressed, it will be difficult to 
talk about peace and mutual goodwill in the bilateral ties. 
  His Majesty King Husayn succeeded in presenting all these 
facts to President Clinton and his administration officials. He 
received a positive response to his demand and an 
acknowledgement of the soundness of his view and positions and 
the sincerity of his intentions and tendencies. 
  Therefore, His Majesty King Husayn's visit to Washington and 
his meetings and talks there were, by all standards, a success. 
  This success, however, particularly on the level of the 
peace 
talks, will not be at the expense of the Arab brothers or their 
rights. Jordan has from the beginning been committed to, and 
will continue to be committed to, the comprehensive peace. 
  This Jordanian commitment made President Clinton stress his 
administration's commitment to support a settlement on all 
tracks in order to reach a comprehensive peace. 

