BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by unidentified correspondent under general headline </F>
"Is `Foreign' Radioactive Waste To Be Buried in Our Country?": 
"Position of the Ministry for the Protection of the Environment 
and Natural Resources: This Decision Will Exacerbate the 
Radiation Pollution Situation in the Country"] 
  [Text] The appearance of the government document to which 
was appended the draft protocol providing for the burial of 
vitrified radioactive waste on the territory of the Russian 
Federation came as a total surprise for the Ministry for the 
Protection of the Environment and Natural Resources 
[Minprirody], Aleksandr Shuvalov, head of the press service of 
Russia's Minprirody, told ROSSIYSKIYE VESTY's correspondent. 
Minprirody did not agree with the document in this form, and in 
principle could not agree with it in such a version. 
  Moreover, back in December 1993 the ministry sent its 
comments on the draft protocol, clearly stating the need for 
strict observance of the "Procedure for Receiving Spent Nuclear 
Fuel From Foreign Nuclear Electric Power Stations for Subsequent 
Reprocessing." Incidentally, this regulatory document was 
ratified by the Ministry of Atomic Energy and completely 
unambiguously requires reprocessed spent nuclear fuel to be 
returned to the supplier. 
  Strictly speaking, there is nothing surprising in the stance 
taken by the environmental protection organs. They dismiss out 
of hand any idea connected with the burial of radioactive waste 
-- indeed, of any other toxic waste -- in our country. 
Moreover, a legal norm also exists -- in the Law "On the 
Protection of the Natural Environment," Article 50 of which 
expressly forbids "the importation of radioactive waste or 
materials for the purpose of storage or burial." And references 
to the existing practice of receiving and burying spent nuclear 
fuel from the Czech Republic, Bulgaria, and Finland, do not 
apply in this case, since this practice is based on agreements 
concluded before the adoption of the law, and which therefore do 
not come under that law. 
  In the agreement with Hungary the clause on the acceptance 
of 
nuclear fuel was "omitted." And now attempts are being made to 
repair this omission by means of the enticement that this is 
very profitable for Russia. Yet the latter argument is highly 
dubious. What is beyond doubt is that such a decision would 
exacerbate the already serious radioactive pollution situation 
[radioekologicheskaya obstanovka] in our country and open a 
"door" through which other waste, no less harmful to the 
environment, will flood in. And then what? We buy a clean 
environment on import, perhaps...? 
  The agreement on the burial of nuclear waste on Russian 
territory signed by Viktor Chernomyrdin in Hungary is within the 
framework of the obligations which Russia, as the USSR's 
successor, must fulfill. The head of state's press secretary 
Vyacheslav Kostikov set out this position at a briefing in the 
Kremlin at the request of the Russian Federation president and 
prime minster. 
  In Kostikov's words, the agreement signed in Hungary 
concerns 
the reprocessing and recycling of nuclear waste from nuclear 
electric power stations built to Soviet plans and using Soviet 
technologies. "As soon as the international treaties elapse, 
Russia will avoid concluding such agreements," Vyacheslav 
Kostikov remarked. 

