Media 

<F P=102>   94P20689A </F>
<F P=103> 94P20689A </F>
<F P=104></F>

  CSO 

  [Editorial Report] Recent Kurdish protests in 
Germany--including blockading highways with burning tires and 
cars--have highlighted the extension of Turkey's conflict with 
the Workers Party of Kurdistan (PKK) to Germany and prompted the 
German press and politicians to take sides. Although German 
media commentary condemned the Turkish campaign and applauded 
Bonn's decision to halt temporarily arms deliveries to Turkey, 
the press has been more ambivalent and divided on the legitimacy 
of Kurdish protests in Germany and Bonn's right to deport those 
responsible. Turkish television and print media, appearing more 
concerned with the overall state of German-Turkish relations, 
mostly downplayed the Kurdish protests in Germany and reported 
on the incidents without comment. One exception, however, was 
the widely respected daily MILLIYET of 24 March, which carried a 
frontpage report with the headline "The German Hatred Toward the 
PKK." Turkish commentary on the temporary embargo on German 
weapons sales was circumspect. 
<H5>  German Opinion Split on Kurdish Demonstrations </H5>
  The center-right press, although it does not support the 
Turkish campaign against Kurdish separatists, has roundly 
condemned the Kurdish protests in Germany, which some 
commentators claim have been spurred on by the German left wing. 
A front page commentary in the FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE on 5 
April declared that the Kurds had overstepped the limits of 
hospitality: "Turkey must settle its minority problem itself. 
If they attempt this by abusing human rights, the Federal 
Republic will give those affected refuge under the condition 
that a fire not be ignited here that will be fueled by conflicts 
in the homeland." Two other articles in the 3 April DIE WELT AM 
SONNTAG and the 28 March weekly FOCUS took a very unsympathetic 
view of the PKK, detailing the claim that the organization 
finances itself through drug deals and extortions of Kurds 
living in Germany. Several media commentaries claimed that 
German left-wing support for the Kurds encourages protest 
actions. FOCUS noted that "Kurdish groups are uncritically 
supported by elements of the German left wing. ...when the 
Kurds unroll red PKK flags at demonstrations, German 
antifascists and militant Greens are not far away." Almuth 
Baron claimed in a 30 March FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE commentary 
that "the sometimes naive enthusiasm for Kurds in Germany makes 
it possible for Kurdish organizations to organize themselves 
better." 
  The leftist dailies, in particular DIE TAGESZEITUNG and 
NEUES 
DEUTSCHLAND, have shown sympathy for the Kurds, strongly 
condemning the Turkish Government's campaign in Kurdistan and 
speaking of a double standard applied to the Kurds in Germany. 
These papers stressed that German weapons sales to Turkey have 
made Germany a legitimate target for Kurdish attacks. In a 
commentary in the 24 March TAGESZEITUNG, Jurgen Gottschlich, who 
has written several commentaries on the issue, asserted that: 
"The Federal Republic is embroiled in the dirty war in 
Kurdistan. Therefore the demonstrations in the Federal Republic 
are not a misuse of the privileges of guests, but legitimate 
protest that is directed to the right address." Similarly, a 
commentary in NEUES DEUTSCHLAND on 29 March claimed that "with 
weapons deliveries, Chancellor Helmut Kohl is supporting the 
terrorism of the Turkish Army against the Kurds." In an article 
on 25 March entitled "[Interior Minister Manfred] Kanther 
Militant, Kurds Peaceful," a TAGESZEITUNG commentator made the 
inflammatory assertion that the Turkish Government desired a 
"final solution" to the Kurdish problem. Both newspapers 
deplored the German Government's double standard toward Kurdish 
demonstrators. Gottschlich, in his TAGESZEITUNG commentary, 
charged that when German workers blocked highways, it was 
regarded as a legitimate attempt to express grievances; but when 
Kurdish protestors did the same thing, it was labeled "terror in 
a new dimension," and they were threatened with deportation. 
<H5>  Ambivalence on Deportations </H5>
  Media commentaries have been ambivalent about calls by 
Interior Minister Kanther and other government officials for 
deportation of those Kurds responsible for the demonstrations. 
All commentaries demanded, and most were skeptical about 
receiving, assurances from Turkey that the Kurds would not be 
imprisoned, tortured, or killed upon their return to Turkey. 
For example, Almuth Baron, writing in the 3O March FRANKFURTER 
ALLGEMEINE, acknowledged the danger that the Kurds would be 
punished upon arrival, explaining that "in Turkey everything 
that has to do with the PKK has developed a certain dynamic of 
its own with the security forces." The leftist FRANKFURTER 
RUNDSCHAU, in a 9 April commentary, put it more bluntly: "There 
must be an end to suggestions that Turkey is a country to which 
people can be deported. Anyone committing an offense in Germany 
must be put on trial in Germany and put in German prisons." 
Jurgen Gottschlich claimed in the 5 April TAGESZEITUNG that by 
deporting the Kurds to western Turkey, Germany would be 
contributing to escalation of the Kurdish conflict in that part 
of Turkey, which would "have an effect on relations between 
Turkish and Kurdish immigrants here." He added: "German 
politicians think they have gotten rid of [the Kurdish] problem. 
Instead they have brought it home again." 
<H5>  Reactions to Weapons Embargo </H5>
  After media reports that German weapons were being used by 
the Turkish military against the Kurds and ensuing protests from 
the Left, the German Government announced on 7 April that it was 
instituting a temporary embargo on weapons sales to Turkey until 
it could determine what the weapons were being used for. On 3 
May Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel lifted the embargo, because, 
in the ministry's view, the evidence was not clear that the 
weapons were being used in Kurdistan. The centrist SUEDDEUTSCHE 
ZEITUNG commented on 14 April that the question may be 
irrelevant because "German armament aid was not `Kurd neutral' 
right from the start"; even if German arms were not being used 
in Kurdistan, the deliveries allowed the Turks to redeploy other 
military equipment from other parts of the country to Kurdistan. 
  Turkish commentary on the embargo was notably circumspect, 
emphasizing the importance of German-Turkish relations and the 
need to refrain from overreacting. A commentary in the 9 April 
MILLIYET by respected columnist Sami Kohen called Germany's 
behavior "irreconcilable with the concept of a serious state," 
because it acted "rashly" without verifying allegations. He 
warned, however, that although "we may be angry about the latest 
German decision, ...it is necessary not to overreact and 
especially not to allow a serious crisis with Germany." Kohen 
noted that the greatest value of the embargo is "symbolic," 
perhaps prompting similar actions by other countries that 
provide aid to Turkey, in particular the United States. Echoing 
remarks by Foreign Minister Hikmet Cetin that the decision was 
not an embargo, Mehmet Ali Birand wrote in the 9 April SABAH 
that the suspension of aid is not that big a problem because 
most of the weapons shipments to Turkey have already been 
delivered: "The German officials have considered placing an 
embargo on the last consignment." He judged that "Germany and 
Turkey need each other...both stand to lose a great deal if we 
disrupt our relations." Turkish reports on the embargo hint 
that it was more a product of German domestic politics than 
anything else. Birand asserts that "the lastest situation on 
arms supplies has been created by the problems in Germany's 
domestic politics," and goes on to point out that the German 
Government faces elections this year. 

