CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Helena Sjogren: "Favorites Jump the Gun" -- </F>
introductory paragraphs in boldface as published] 
  [Text] Ingvar Carlsson's policy led Sweden into the 
crisis. Carl Bildt's made it worse and delayed a recovery. 
  Repartee filled the air as the two candidates for prime 
minister met on TV for their first duel in preparation for this 
fall's election. 
  The Social Democrats were accused by Prime Minister Bildt of 
having driven investments, companies, and jobs out of the 
country during the 1980's. Social Democratic Party [SDP] 
Chairman Ingvar Carlsson replied that investments, especially in 
industry, had increased considerably more during his time as 
prime minister than they had under the nonsocialist government. 
  Bildt held up the first page of a February 1991 issue of 
AFTONBLADET carrying the headline "1,000 New Unemployed Every 
Day." 
  "That trend continued in 1992 and 1993. It was a misfortune 
affecting everybody. But now the curves have reversed 
themselves," Bildt claimed as he pedagogically turned the page 
upside down. 
<H5>  Historic Chance </H5>
  "Optimism is beginning to spread throughout society, and we 
have a historic chance for a golden era," he said, presumably 
referring to the next election period under continuing 
nonsocialist rule. 
  His challenger for the job of prime minister acknowledged 
that economic recovery "is now coming, happily enough." 
  "Not even a nonsocialist government can prevent an economic 
recovery," Carlsson joked, eliciting one of the evening's many 
delighted giggles from the audience. 
  But Carlsson emphasized the seriousness of the high level of 
unemployment and promised that the Social Democrats would combat 
it by every possible means, including the investment program 
that the party has proposed. 
  The SDP leader also stressed that with a Social Democratic 
government, more emphasis would be placed on a fair distribution 
of the burden. 
  "High income groups and stockholders must bear their share 
of 
the burden," he said, criticizing the fact that the government 
has lowered taxes for those groups by 25 billion kronor. 
  Bildt called that a misleading picture. The government 
lowered those taxes on the firms in order to create new, 
genuine, and lasting jobs, he explained. 
  "Isn't it fair to have a policy that creates new jobs? How 
can you believe that your policy creates new jobs? The Social 
Democrats' new jobs are just welfare jobs," Bildt said, adding 
that "we can't all work for the AMS [National Labor Market 
Board]." 
  In fact, the most frequently repeated argument in the debate 
was the prime minister's rhetorical question as to whether the 
Social Democrats really thought that "higher corporation taxes 
and punitive taxes on venture capital" would reduce the number 
of unemployed. 
<H5>  Bickering Over Taxes </H5>
  Here Carlsson was at a loss for an answer. For his part, he 
wondered how Bildt could defend the fact that a metalworker's 
taxes had been increased by 6,000 kronor per year while Minister 
of Industry and Energy Per Westerberg had received a tax 
reduction of 6 million kronor per year as a result of the 
government's tax policy. 
  The Moderate Party leader answered that as far as the 
metalworker was concerned, his tax increase was a result of the 
emergency agreement signed with the Social Democrats, and he 
claimed that in Per Westerberg's case, Carlsson was wrong. 
  After the debate, Carlsson questioned whether the minister 
of 
industry and energy had really gotten a tax reduction that big, 
but he promised to verify his statement. 
  Carlsson held out his hand during the debate and suggested 
that Bildt go along with the Social Democratic proposal not to 
change employer payroll taxes into personal taxes under the new 
pension system. 
  He said that in that way, the Moderates could reduce 
marginal 
taxes. But Bildt rejected the proposal. He said it was aimed 
simply at making things easier for the Social Democrats, who 
plan even higher marginal taxes. 

