Language: <F P=105> Norwegian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aslak Bonde: "Svalbard Demands Will Not Be </F>
Raised"] 
  [Text] Norway will not bring up the problems concerning 
Svalbard in the European Union (EU) negotiations. Our demands 
have met with so much opposition that we do not dare raise them. 
  "Norway thinks the area between Svalbard and the Norwegian 
mainland is part of Norway's continental shelf, but inquiries 
have shown that the EU countries do not share this view. 
Therefore we suggest that this problem not be taken up in the EU 
negotiations." 
  That, in plain language, is the conclusion concerning the 
Norwegian list of demands with respect to Svalbard--in addition 
to making a request that Svalbard be kept outside the EU, as we 
did in 1972 and in the EEA negotiations. The latter is not 
particularly controversial, but it is surprising that we will 
not take up the problematic issues where Svalbard is concerned. 
  In the fishing section of the EU negotiations, Norway has 
made demands that logically lead to a new demand to retain full 
control over the fishing resources around Svalbard. 
  In addition, Norwegian senior officials spent several months 
visiting the capitals of all the EU countries in order to 
ascertain the possibility of taking up the unsolved Svalbard 
problems in the EU negotiations. Norway was considering asking 
the EU to accept the Norwegian interpretation of the area 
covered by the Svalbard treaty. So far Finland is the only 
country that supports us. 
<H5>  Interpretation Dispute </H5>
  The divisive issue is this: Norway thinks the Svalbard 
treaty 
applies only to the islands and a small strip of coast around 
them, while most other countries think the treaty also applies 
to the ocean areas off Svalbard. These contain rich fishing 
resources and possibly other potentially valuable resources. If 
the Svalbard treaty applies in this area, all the countries that 
have signed it (around 40 so far) have an equal opportunity to 
utilize the resources. 
  The interpretation dispute arose in the 1970's, and since 
then Norway has behaved as if the area around Svalbard is 
Norwegian. We have established a protected zone for fish where 
we have assumed/usurped full administrative responsibility. This 
has been accepted in practice by most other nations, but both 
the Coast Guard and the Ministry of Fisheries wanted Norway to 
use the EU negotiations to secure better international legal 
protection for the ocean areas off Svalbard. 
  Thus the government's decision not to bring the problems 
into 
the negotiations may be initially controversial. However, there 
is little to indicate that there will be loud protests. 
  This is because of the reasons cited by the government: If 
we 
had taken up these problems in the negotiations, we would have 
lost. There was a big risk that we would have actually forced 
the EU to formulate written standpoints that are directly 
opposed to the Norwegian position. Today the opposition is only 
tacit. 
  The list of demands concerning Svalbard refers to the short 
timetable for the EU negotiations. The Norwegian consultations 
in the EU countries apparently showed that much more time would 
be needed to win support for the standpoints that are 
specifically Norwegian in terms of international law. 
  An overall evaluation of the negotiation situation also 
indicated the advisability of dropping the Svalbard problems. 
Norway has enough problems with its uncompromising demands with 
respect to fishing and agricultural and regional subsidies. 
There was a reluctance to introduce new ones unnecessarily. 
  Those who are most concerned with maintaining Norwegian 
sovereignty over the ocean areas around Svalbard can also point 
out that Norway actually does establish Norwegian sovereignty in 
the document of demands. All we are saying is that we will not 
fight for it just now. 
  One can also point to the Norwegian demand to manage all the 
fish resources in northern waters. It is only logical to assume 
that Norway has the same view when it comes to fish in the 
northern waters around Svalbard. It is true that the European 
Commission did not interpret it that way in its reply to the 
Norwegian fishing demands, but that is of secondary importance 
in this context. 

