BFN 

<F P=106> [Ivan Rodin report in the "Parliament" column: "The Duma </F>
Had No Time To Protect the Constitution. Everybody Reacts 
Differently to the Presidential Edict"] 
  [Text] The criminal world does not seem to pay any 
attention to the presidential edict on combating it. Since the 
edict was promulgated, shooting on Moscow streets and explosions 
in cars and banks have continued very much as usual. 
Incidentally, especially suspicious are those explosions which, 
from the point of view of terrorists, end with practically no 
result. It is not ruled out that what really matters is not the 
indifference of criminal clans to the paper issued by the 
guarantor of the Constitution, but that this seeming 
indifference allows the authorities, primarily in Moscow, to 
start translating the edicts' provisions into life. 
  According to some reports, the unabating activity by 
criminal 
groups can be used as a reason for the Internal Affairs Ministry 
to ask the army for assistance, backing this request by a 
corresponding presidential order. As became known, the 
metropolitan authorities, who have already increased the number 
of police equipped with automatic weapons on city streets, are 
planning to enlist army units that proved themselves back in 
October. True, assistance from the army is not an easy thing so 
far, and this must be why rumors have been spreading recently 
that troops will be seen in the city only after the hand of the 
criminal world has been raised not against a businessman but a 
politician, not necessarily a prominent, high-profile one, but 
sufficiently known, primarily to the president. 
  Unlike organized crime, the State Duma noticed the edict. 
Yesterday the legislation and security committees moved a draft 
resolution titled "On Protecting the Citizens' Constitutional 
Rights and Freedoms in Enforcing Crime Control Measures". The 
document notes that Edict 12/26 is in direct contradiction to 
Articles 4, 10, 17, 19, 22, 34, 50, and 55 of the Constitution 
as well as a whole number of articles of the Criminal Law Code 
now in force. The administration of justice system is thereby 
disrupted, the resolution stresses, proposing to reaffirm the 
fact that the Constitution and federal laws are supreme while 
human rights and freedoms may not be limited by any subordinate 
enactments. Therefore, the Supreme Court, in considering 
corresponding cases, must be guided by the Constitution and 
laws, the Duma believes. The resolution tasks its committees 
with speeding up the drafting and presentation of legislative 
enactments on crime control and the law on the Constitutional 
Court. The Duma recommends to the president to suspend his 
edict and bring it into line with the current laws. 
  Having bogged down in amendments to the corruption law, 
however, the deputies failed to discuss and adopt the resolution 
and therefore defend the Constitution as they had planned. 

