SUMMARY 
                              Reports that Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev called for 
maintaining Russia's military presence in the states of the 
former Soviet Union have sparked vehement protests from the 
Baltic states.  Although he and other foreign ministry officials 
later claimed that his remarks had been taken out of context and 
that Russia's policy on withdrawing troops from the Baltics 
remains unchanged, they nonetheless defended Russia's right to 
protect Russian interests and criticized negative Western 
reactions to the reports.  Boosted by strong support for Russia's 
"new" foreign policy course from domestic media and pressed by 
critics in the Duma, who have attacked him for neglecting Russian 
interests, Kozyrev will very likely continue his course of more 
aggressively championing those interests despite Western 
concerns. 
                        END SUMMARY 
   In a speech to a 18-19 January gathering of Russia's ambassadors 
to the CIS and Baltic states, Foreign Minister Kozyrev reportedly 
called for maintaining a Russian military presence in former 
Soviet republics and stressed that Russia must protect its 
interests and the rights of ethnic Russians in the near abroad. 
The text of Kozyrev's speech has not been observed to have been 
published, but ITAR-TASS reported that Kozyrev told the 
ambassadors that "Russia should not withdraw from those regions 
which have been the sphere of Russian interests for centuries." 
Kozyrev reportedly added, "We should not fear these words about a 
military presence" (18 January).  The ITAR-TASS report also 
indicated that Kozyrev labelled the CIS and Baltic states a 
region of "priority vital interests for Russia" where there are 
also "major threats to [these] interests."  Kozyrev was also 
quoted as contending that as soon as Russian troops leave the 
region, a "security vacuum" will emerge, and it will "inevitably" 
be filled by forces "often not friendly and, in many cases, 
directly hostile" to Russian interests. 
   Baltic Protests 
   The Baltic states immediately protested Kozyrev's remarks, 
charging that Moscow had departed from its previous official 
position supporting a complete withdrawal of troops.  The prime 
ministers of the three Baltic states signed a statement on 19 
January, stating that this "new" policy is "contrary" to Russia's 
international obligations and complicates the troop withdrawal 
talks (Riga radio, 19 January).  In a press release, the Estonian 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) characterized Russia as a "big 
bully terrorizing smaller, weaker neighbors" and charged that 
from Kozyrev's statements it was "clear" that Russia views Baltic 
independence as a "temporary annoyance" ( Estonian MFA press 
release, 18 January).  Estonia's representative to the CSCE 
requested that the CSCE security forum make an official inquiry 
(Tallinn radio, 19 January). 
   Russian Clarifications 
   Apparently stung by what Kozyrev termed the "hysterics" and 
"panicky" reaction from abroad (Interfax, 19 January), he and 
other ministry officials responded with a series of 
recriminations, denials, and clarifications: 
   -- Kozyrev, appearing on Russian television on 19 January, 
charged that "Latvia... and some of the mass media in the other 
Baltic states" had launched a "completely artificial" campaign 
that "deliberately distorted" his words with the "obvious aim" of 
"yet again gaining the sympathy" of the West.  He said that 
rather than raising "this absolutely unfounded screaming," Latvia 
should concentrate on drawing up agreements on the conditions for 
a troop withdrawal, adding that Russia would then be ready to 
continue the withdrawals.  Clearly miffed at what he termed the 
"hurried," "inappropriate," and "unbalanced" reaction of the U.S. 
State Department, Kozyrev also complained that "our partnership 
merits having the State Department spokesman get [the facts] 
right" before criticizing Russia's foreign minister. 
   -- Kozyrev's foreign policy adviser Galina Sidorova claimed that 
ITAR-TASS had distorted Kozyrev's remarks.  She insisted that the 
foreign minister had not advocated the continued presence of 
Russian troops in the Baltics (Moscow radio, 19 January). 
   -- MFA press chief Grigoriy Karasin also claimed that the ruckus 
resulted from an "inaccurate choice of quotes" which "several 
politicians" had tried to use as "an argument of insinuations" 
(Interfax, 19 January).  Karasin stressed that there is "no 
question" of any change in Russia's approach toward the Baltic 
states.  He explained that although Kozyrev had started 
discussing the former Soviet republics, including both the CIS 
and the Baltics, when he stated that Russia should maintain a 
military presence, he was referring only to those states in the 
CIS that have bilateral agreements with Moscow.  In later 
remarks, Karasin said that the "hullabaloo" over Kozyrev's 
comments generated "incomprehension and indignation" in Moscow 
and he called for an evaluation of the full text of Kozyrev's 
speech.  Complaining that unnamed persons either still retain an 
"enemy image" of Russia or are trying to restore it, Karasin 
huffed that rather than criticizing a Russian minister the West 
"should concentrate its attention" on how to "properly safeguard" 
the rights of Russians in Latvia and Estonia (ITAR-TASS, 20 
January). 
   Baltic Anxieties Persist 
   Apparently unmollified despite Russian explanations, Latvian and 
Estonian officials continued to criticise Kozyrev's remarks: 
   -- Estonian MFA official Raul Malk said that the Russian view 
that it had "stragetic interests" in its "near abroad" should 
cause anxiety in the international community.  He added that such 
a stance contradicts the US.-Russian summit declaration that no 
dividing lines should be drawn in Europe, noting that calling 
some states the "near abroad" in itself draws dividing lines 
(Tallinn ETA news release, 20 January). 
   -- After receiving the full text of Kozyrev's comments that the 
Russian MFA apparently supplied him, Latvian Foreign Minister 
Georgs Andrejevs, stressing that Kozyrev's comments were 
"ambiguous" and allow for "various interpretations," said that 
Latvia stands by its negative assessment (Tallinn BNS, 20 
January). 
   -- Latvian President Guntis Ulmanis, who reportedly received a 
call from U.S. President Bill Clinton (ITAR-TASS, 21 January), 
said that the call had "dispell[ed]" many "suspicions" about the 
talks between the U.S. and Russia, adding that the U.S. 
President's words "allow Latvia to calm down somewhat."  He 
emphasized, however, that Latvia "should always be prepared" for 
an "agressive" Russian policy. 
   Russian Media Reaction 
   With the exception of the reformist and usually pro-Yeltsin 
Izvestiya, the Russian media's reaction to Kozyrev's remarks was 
largely supportive.  In some cases, the media applauded outright 
both his speech and his complaints about the international 
reaction. (See Note 1)  Despite some continued disagreement about 
what Kozyrev said--Rossiyskiye Vesti, for example, maintained 
that Kozyrev did include the Baltics in his statement about 
keeping a military presence in the near abroad, thus 
contradicting MFA denials--most commentators, using remarkably 
similar arguments, gave short shrift to what they viewed as a 
biased Western response to justified remarks about legitimate 
Russian interests. 
   (Note 1)  Sovetskaya Rossiya, whose commentators have criticized 
Kozyrev for a pro-Western orientation, was not observed to have 
commented on the foreign minister's remarks. 
   -- A 21 January article in the government-owned Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta alluded to double standards, asking why, after the "world 
community" regarded "with understanding" U.S. actions in Panama 
and Grenada and the "punishment" the United States meted out to 
Libya for terrorist acts against Americans in Berlin, Russia 
should be "forbidden" to be "firm and resolute if the life and 
safety of its compatriots are at stake?"  The article stressed 
that the MFA's "new course," focused on the countries of the 
former Soviet Union and on "its own compatriots," reflects the 
interests of Russians "first and foremost," adding that "whether 
some people like it or not, a great power has to protect its own 
interests."  Charging that "some people are quite willing to play 
the tired old record of 'imperial pretensions,'" against Russia, 
the article warned that "if [Moscow and Washington] want our 
peoples to remain friendly and our states partners," it is 
"necessary to spike the propaganda guns" and for the West to 
adopt a "serious attitude" toward Russia. 
   -- A 21 Moscow radio commentary by Vladislav Kozyakov chided the 
U.S. spokesman for expressing his "displeasure" at Kozyrev's 
comments with "surprising" "haste."  Asking why there should be 
this "hasty desire" to "put in doubt" Russia's political course, 
Kozyakov stressed that such a critical response, "even at the 
high level of cooperation between Moscow and Washington," serves 
as a reminder that the American side still "sometimes displays 
signs of the past policy of double standards."  Echoing 
Rossiyskaya Gazeta, the article noted that the United States had 
resorted to military intervention in Panama, Grenada, and other 
"zones of its national interests," and contended that for the 
United States and other countries to maintain "partnership" with 
Russia, an "understanding of Russia's vital interests" in states 
of the former Soviet Union is "essential." 
   -- The Defense Ministry's newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda in a 20 
January article titled "Neighboring Foreign Countries Were, Are, 
and Remain a Zone of Russia's Vital Interests," strongly, if 
somewhat ironically,  supported Kozyrev for "unambiguous[ly] and 
definitive[ly]" stating that the CIS and Baltic countries are 
regions of Russia's "paramount interests."  After declaring that 
Russia cannot "close [its] eyes" to the "shameless and at times 
humiliating pressure on our fellow countrymen" in neighboring 
states, which the article called acts of "criminal disrespect," 
the article warned that "attempts by anyone anywhere to assume 
the role of interpreter and organizer" of Russian affairs in such 
countries will be viewed as "unfriendly acts."  The article ended 
by noting that Russia is "making it plain" that states that want 
to live "in love and fond accord" with Russia should take account 
of its "geopolitical interests." 
   -- In a 19 January article, the reformist Kommersant-Daily 
maintained that Kozyrev's speech--and the whole tenor of the 
conference--constituted an "urgent" foreign policy revision in 
response to the December elections.  Claiming that the thesis 
that the Liberal Democratic Party's electoral success resulted 
from a backlash on economic issues, and not nationalism was 
partly a "delusion," the article claimed that the USSR's 
disintegration is still "painfully perceived" by many Russians--a 
fact understood by Kozyrev who was now making "adjustments." 
Commenting on the "masses of Russian refugees" in 1993, the 
article also noted with apparent approval Kozyrev's statement 
that the protection of ethnic Russians in the near abroad was now 
a strategic priority--a sharp contrast, the article pointed out, 
to the provisions of the Concept on Foreign Policy adopted by the 
Russian Security Council in March 1993 which ignored the subject. 
   Izvestiya Dissents 
   In contrast to most of the media, Izvestiya, which in the past 
has supported Kozyrev on many issues, (See Note 2) took issue 
with both his statements and the MFA's subsequent actions.  In a 
a 20 January report, Maksim Yusin castigated Kozyrev and the MFA 
for responding with "remarkably limp" denials to ITAR-TASS' 
initial "annoying blunder," adding that this response had led to 
"far from favorable" foreign commentary.  Even stronger criticism 
appeared in a 22 January article titled "Lithuania Takes Fright 
and Changes Foreign Policy Orientation; But This Is Not the Way 
To Help the Russian Minority."  The article distinguished between 
an idealistic "early Kozyrev" and a "late Kozyrev" whose "new 
tough-talking approach" is, it contended, only apt to increase 
the Baltic states hostility toward their Russian minorities and 
drive the Baltics into NATO.  The article noted that "it is the 
task of diplomats not to cause frictions between their country 
and its neighbors, but to make them friends," as the "early 
Kozyrev" had done. 
   (Note 2)  For example, Izvestiya supported Kozyrev after his 14 
December 1992 "shock" treatment speech to the CSCE in Stockholm. 
See the Trends of 23 December, 1992, page 10. 
   Outlook 
   Kozyrev has been under pressure from critics such as Liberal 
Democratic Party leader Vladimir Zhirinovskiy and Vladimir Lukin, 
the new head of the State Duma's International Affairs Committee 
and a longtime rival, who have championed protection of Russian 
national interests while criticizing what they have portrayed as 
Kozyrev's inattention to those interests.  Now that these two are 
perched in positions in the new State Duma, they may turn up the 
heat on Kozyrev.  In apparent response to the critics, Kozyrev 
has become progressively more assertive on Russian interests over 
the past year.  He may backtrack or tone down statements--in 
Krygyzia, for example, he apologized for what he termed "fascist 
statements" that he had made in Moscow recently, while continuing 
to emphasize that Russia cannot "remain indifferent to violations 
of Russians' rights (Interfax, 25 January).  Nevertheless, 
Kozyrev is unlikely to substantially retreat from his tough 
stance on the rights of ethnic Russians, despite international 
concerns. 
   (AUTHOR:  BELLINGER.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, ANALYSIS BRANCH, RUSSIA DIVISION, (703) 733-6070.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/CB 29/0020z Jan 

