BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Christer Kallstrom: "Fishing War Now Being Waged </F>
at Political Level"] 
  [Text] Oslo -- The fishing war between Norway and Iceland 
continues to become more intense with every day that passes. 
Early yesterday morning Norway's military Coast Guard cut the 
trawl of yet another Icelandic vessel that, according to the 
Norwegian authorities, was fishing illegally in the protection 
zone around Svalbard. 
  Yesterday there were several Icelandic fishing boats fishing 
in the protection zone that stretches 200 nautical miles from 
the coast of Svalbard. When Norwegian Coast Guard vessel Senja 
approached the boats, all but one were able to haul in their 
trawls. The Mar failed to haul in its trawl in time and as a 
result had its trawl cable cut by the Senja. A trawl is worth 
almost 400,000 Finnish markkas. Trawls can as a rule be 
salvaged, but this takes 10 to 12 hours. 
  Lieutenant Captain Arne Simonsen, the Senja's captain, said 
that all safety rules were followed during the action. But the 
Icelandic fishermen do not agree. They claim that there were 
crew members on deck when the cable was cut. Because of the 
tension of the trawl, a cable that is cut can produce a violent 
whiplash effect and sever both the arms and the legs of 
fishermen who happen to be on deck. This also happens now and 
then when cables break. 
  There are now rumors that around 30 Icelandic fishing boats 
are on their way to Svalbard. Four Norwegian Coast Guard 
vessels and an aircraft are closely following what is happening 
in the area. No Icelandic vessel can enter the protection zone 
without being spotted by Norwegian radar. 
  The Norwegians are determined to protect their interests in 
the area with all the means at their disposal. Norway views as 
clearly illegal the Icelandic fishing in the area. If the 
cutting of cables or warning shots do not help, the Norwegian 
Coast Guard could in the end resort to firing on boats fishing 
illegally. 
  The fishing war between Norway and Iceland is now being 
taken 
up at the highest political level in both countries. Icelandic 
Foreign Minister Jon Baldvin Hannibalsson describes the 
Norwegian Coast Guard's actions off Svalbard as a danger to life. 
  "On two occasions they have endangered the lives of 
themselves and our fishermen. On Tuesday [21 June] the 
Icelandic Government will decide whether Iceland will take the 
conflict before the International Court in The Hague," Jon 
Baldvin Hannibalsson said. 
  "If Norway invites us to negotiations about fish quotas in 
the Svalbard area I will ask the Icelandic trawlers to withdraw 
from the protection zone," the Icelandic foreign minister said. 
  But the Norwegian side is not interested in starting 
negotiations with Iceland about quotas in the protection zone. 
  "The Icelandic authorities have misunderstood the Svalbard 
Treaty, which 30 countries have signed," Norwegian Foreign 
Minister Bjorn Tore Godal said. 
  "The treaty gives no country the right to fish there. If 
Norway were to give Iceland fishing rights in the protection 
zone we would have to give the countries that have signed the 
treaty the same rights. That is why opening quota negotiations 
with Iceland is not on the agenda." 
  The reason why Icelandic fishermen are sailing to the area 
around Svalbard is that fish stocks around Iceland have 
decreased dramatically in recent years. According to the 
Norwegian authorities, this is because the Icelanders have 
overfished their own waters. 

