Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report of interview with former Ukrainian Premier Leonid </F>
Kuchma in Odessa by Leonid Kapelyushnyy; date not given: 
"Leonid Kuchma: Ukraine's Current Leadership Dangerous for 
Country and People"] 
  [Text] Odessa -- Leonid Kuchma's gloomy prophecy is being 
fulfilled: Inaction is leading the Ukrainian economy toward 
destruction. Does he feel to blame for the fact that in his 
time as head of government he was unable to transform the 
situation? 
  "I have often regretted that I became prime minister, and 
even more so that I did not resign in May 1993, having satisfied 
myself, six months into the job, that parliament and president 
seemed to be all in favor of reforms and economic recovery -- 
provided nothing changed," Kuchma says. "Unfortunately, 
economics also turned out to be politics.... Until the land and 
means of production become a commodity, scarcely any government 
will be able to stabilize the financial system and switch the 
economy to the track of market relationships." 
  Leonid Danilovich often cites examples: When the government, 
according to the powers it had received, adopted its first 
decree on transferring farmstead plots to private ownership, 
such a fuss was kicked up that you would have thought that the 
nation's taproot had been cut right through. The attempt to 
sell uncompleted construction projects was also blocked -- its 
value was put at 7 trillion rubles. And every time Kuchma made 
an assault on "the fundamentals" he met with more than a mild 
rebuff.... His favorite comparison: "They wanted us to walk a 
narrow path between parliament and president and imagine that we 
were on the high road of reforms." 
  The former premier considers the National Bank to be the 
main 
culprit for hyperinflation in Ukraine -- its credit policy is 
"direct sabotage against the state," in which the whole banking 
system participates. The cabinet had no chance of controlling 
corruption and rampant crime because all the power ministries 
were not under its jurisdiction. It was Kuchma who uncovered 
the monstrous abuses involving oil resources and openly accused 
the structures of state power of corruption and links with mafia 
circles; serious evidence, including evidence of violations of 
currency and financial discipline in the Black Sea Shipping 
Line, was passed on to the General Prosecutor's Office, but 
nothing come of it. 
  Having resigned, Leonid Kuchma "held back" for long enough. 
The president took charge of the government; all power, as 
Leonid Danilovich had been long and unsuccessfully seeking, was 
finally concentrated in one pair of hands. But the destructive 
processes in the economy continued. Industrial production fell 
by 36 percent in the first month of the new year; metallurgical 
and chemical enterprises are shutting down; the Donbass is in 
the grip of profound crisis. And Kuchma has broken his 
silence.... 
  "The Ukrainian national economy has become hostage to 
politics and to political intriguers. Today's economy has 
nothing in common with the needs of society. The decimation of 
industry being carried out by the Kravchuk-Zvyahilskyy 
government, the monopolization of the entire hard-currency 
sphere, the destruction of the state's financial and credit 
system -- this is being carried out in the interests of mafia 
and semi-mafia groups, and not in the interests of the Ukrainian 
people. The political leadership's inability to make state 
decisions is spilling over into heightened activity at the level 
of petty political intrigues. Executive power in Ukraine as a 
system of real government has already fallen victim to these 
intrigues; next in line is the Ukrainian state itself. I 
categorically assert that the current Ukrainian leadership is 
dangerous for the country and the people." 
  In his time the new premier (the third in the last few 
years) Kuchma set about building diplomatic bridges between 
Ukraine and nearby foreign parts. Leonid Danilovich brought 
back packages of specific accords, aimed at restoring shattered 
economic ties, from oil-rich Tyumen, from Turkmenia [Turkestan] 
and Kazakhstan, from Kirghizia [Kyrgyzstan] and Uzbekistan, from 
Belorussia [Belarus] and other fellow republics of the former 
Union. Although even then he said that Ukraine's problems were 
only 35 percent due to the disruption of ties and 65 percent due 
to internal disorder, poor discipline, and slovenliness. Today 
too he also believes that the head of state, instead of (or as 
well as) going on expeditions to the West, where they have 
difficulty making us out, should visit our near neighbors and 
negotiate -- on payments and deliveries of energy resources and 
raw materials. Incidentally, Kuchma never tires of repeating 
that the state's main problem is its balance of payments 
deficit. He cites a figure -- $13.5 billion. This sum is 
mainly due to the cost of oil, gas, and nonferrous metals for 
Ukrainian industry. 
  "Many of Ukraine's problems are offshoots of Belovezhskaya 
Forest," the former premier believes. "In the seventies Ukraine 
invested around 100 billion foreign currency rubles in the 
development of the West Siberian oil and gas complex. And it 
did not expect to receive oil resources before the end of 
perestroyka.... Not to mention the fact that Ukraine sent 
around 500,000 of its citizens to exploit the new territories, 
citizens who are to this day extracting oil and gas in Tyumen." 
  Social psychologists believe that a person's activity 
between 
the ages of 30 to 35 has a decisive influence on the formation 
of the individual. At this age the foundations are laid which 
determine behavior in subsequent life. What was the 30-year-old 
Leonid Kuchma up to? Building rockets and teaching how to fly 
them. The future director of "Yuzhmash," the top-secret defense 
enterprise, was at home in the circle of the engineering elite 
and guided space crews into orbit from blast-off. He was 
noticed and appreciated by Korolev, Yangel.... 
  In two year's of sitting in parliament no one saw him 
standing in line for the microphone, but the command personnel 
of Ukrainian industry well knew the worth of the taciturn Deputy 
Kuchma. He was confirmed in the post of premier without the 
tedious procedure of hearings and discussions -- within 15 
minutes. In May 1993, as a rocket specialist, he made 
parliament ponder deeply; as a result, the treaty with Russia on 
nuclear weapons was not ratified. Kuchma does not regret this 
even now. Kuchma's stance vis-a-vis Leonid Kravchuk's triumph 
during his recent visit to Washington is also curious. 
  "I have the suspicion that we are calling an outstanding 
achievement what is no more than a protocol of intentions signed 
by Ukraine, Russia, and the United States. Essentially, 
President Clinton has given his consent to our looking for 
purchasers of our uranium in the United States. And I do not 
see in this any guarantee that Ukraine will receive compensation 
for its nuclear warheads. 
  "The removal of nuclear missiles from alert status is a 
complex and expensive program. According to the assessments of 
U.S. specialists, it will cost Ukraine roughly $3 billion. We 
were initially promised $170 million, and now Leonid Makarovich 
has come back in triumph with $700,000. You can count the 
difference yourself." 
  "Will the problem be resolved if, with the aid of U.S. 
specialists, we remove the warheads, send them to Russia, and 
even receive the fuel elements back? No -- it will be the 
prelude to a major headache. There are 130 liquid-propellant 
missiles in Ukraine today whose guarantees have expired. For 
one type of fuel -- gintil -- we do not have the reprocessing 
technology. What will we do with it? A further point. It will 
be necessary to blow up every silo to a depth of 8 meters. Can 
anyone in Ukraine imagine what the explosion of just one missile 
silo signifies? I think not. A plant to neutralize missiles 
removed from alert status is necessary; moreover, these missiles 
will contain residual fuel, which promises considerable 
unpleasantness. Do not imagine that things will be any better 
or easier with solid-fueled missiles. The first stage of these 
missiles consists of a 50-tonne 'cigar.' Special conditions with 
a temperature regime of from 5 to 35 degrees are needed in order 
to store them. We do not have the technology to recycle them. 
We do not have a plant in which to do so. If we take the step 
of burning the solid fuel in the open we will present Ukraine 
with another Chernobyl. 
  "I am afraid that after Ukraine has been praised for 
seeking nuclear-free status, they will wash their hands of us, 
and we will be left to face this gravest of problems on our own." 
  Leonid Kuchma is extremely cautious over predictions when it 
comes to personalities. But he considers Leonid Kravchuk's 
further continuation in the office of president as problematic, 
and believes that a decision on his part to voluntary resign his 
post would be timely. 
  Kuchma sees the solution to the crisis in uniting healthy 
forces in a future parliament. Together with Vladimir Grinev 
(many political commentators consider this alliance to be very 
successful and reliable) he has set up the Interregional Bloc of 
Reforms, whose basis is the Ukrainian Union of Entrepreneurs and 
Industrialists headed by Kuchma. The bloc offers Ukraine 
guidelines for a future political policy -- the creation of a 
mechanism for mutual aid and mutual support with all the CIS 
countries, and with Russia first and foremost, and the creation 
of conditions for jointly overcoming the crisis and defending 
geopolitical and geoeconomic interests by combined efforts. 
  "Nowadays no one will survive alone. This is already 
understood by Russia, Kazakhstan, and Belarus. But the current 
Ukrainian leadership does not yet understand this." 

