Language: <F P=105> Norwegian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Morten Fyhn report: "Warm Defense of Whaling"] </F>
  [Text] Strasbourg -- Yesterday Gro Harlem Brundtland 
defended Norwegian whaling in a heated showdown with opponents 
in the European Parliament. 
  "There is a logic in our arguments, and that is something 
that they must understand," a pugnacious Norwegian prime 
minister said after a short and intense debate with the many 
friends of the minke whale at an open meeting with the European 
Parliament. But the Members of the European Parliament [MEPs] 
did not allow themselves to be convinced in any way by Norway's 
well known scientific arguments regarding whaling. For them 
this is and remains a question of emotions and morals. 
  Whaling became a central topic when the MEPs were able to 
put 
questions. But none of them threatened to vote against 
Norwegian EU [European Union] membership if hunting of the minke 
whale continues. On the contrary, a large number of the critics 
of whaling said that they would very much like to have Norway as 
a member of the EU. 
  The parliament's criticism of whaling was chiefly voiced by 
British animal lovers -- both Conservative and socialist. 
  Norwegian seal hunting is also a popular hate issue in 
Strasbourg, and several MEPs mentioned the use of clubs on 
innocent seal cubs. Nor could they understand why Norway wants 
to sell sealskins. 
  Prime Minister Harlem Brundtland was both well prepared and 
ready for action yesterday. She lectured the gathering on what 
will happen if we start to make emotions instead of scientific 
arguments the basis for international decisions on the 
defensible management of animal species. She admitted that it 
would be much more pleasant for Norway to give in, but made it 
clear that there can be no question of this. 
  "And why do we want to sell sealskin? Because we believe 
that we have a logical and a good ecological policy," she said. 
However, the prime minister seemed to be hinting that this is a 
demand that Norway could give way on in the negotiations with 
the EU: "We will have to wait and see what we can achieve," she 
said. 
  The prime minister zealously defended Norway's attempts to 
be 
allowed to retain not only its monopoly on alcohol sales, but 
also its wholesale and production monopolies. British socialist 
MEP Gary Titley was unable to understand why the solution agreed 
with Sweden and Finland is not good enough for Norway. Harlem 
Brundtland admitted that in the context of the EEA [European 
Economic Area] the Norwegian Government had been dependent on 
the support of the Christian People's party, but said that 
another consideration is the ability to limit the freedom to 
open the doors to alcohol everywhere. "This is not 
protectionism," she said. 
  In her introductory remarks to the MEPs the prime minister 
gave a detailed account of why Norway has applied for EU 
membership. She assured them that Norway is working hard to be 
able to complete the negotiations before the March deadline that 
has been set so that the European Parliament will be able to 
debate and vote on the outcome of the negotiations in May, and 
said that after that Norway will need five to six months to 
prepared a referendum. 

