BFN 

  [Text] Bonn (DPA) -- According to the Federal Office for 
the Protection of the Constitution (BfV), the Republikaner are 
obviously developing toward a right-wing extremist party, which 
is hostile to the constitution. BfV spokesman Hans-Gerd Lange 
told DPA on Tuesday [31 May] upon inquiry that the resignation 
of Udo Boesch, federal organization manager and security adviser 
of the Republikaner, and of federal secretary Martina 
Rosenberger confirm the process of erosion, which has been under 
way in this party for some time now. "The trend of the 
development toward a right-wing extremist party is shown in many 
findings, which can be used in court and which the BfV has 
gathered in more than one year of observing the Republikaner," 
Lange stated. 
  According to Lange, an increasing number of Republikaner 
members, such as Boesch and Rosenberger, realize that their 
"idealistic ideas fail because of the authoritarian claims on 
leadership by federal chairman Franz Schoenhuber and because of 
a lack of inner-party democracy or are overlaid by right-wing 
extremist trends that have emerged." The intensive observation 
of the party has enabled the BfV "to gain profound insights on 
the structure of the party, on the structure of its 
organization, on the current state of the Federal Executive 
Committee and the land associations, as well as on the financial 
situation of the Reublikaner." According to the findings, 
individual land associations are "in a desolate organizational 
and financial situation." According to documents obtained by 
the BfV, individual land executive committees think that orderly 
party work and a successful election campaign are impossible. 
  According to Lange, the Republikaner have been "permeated by 
right-wing extremists at all levels." The BfV has obtained a 
statement in lieu of oath that Schoenhuber was sufficiently 
informed as early as in 1993 (November/December) by Uwe Goller, 
acting land chairman of North Rhine-Westphalia, about the 
party's involvement in the arson attack on the asylum-seekers' 
hostel in Bergheim-Zieverich. In contrast, in a press 
statement, which was published on 27 April 1994, Schoenhuber 
claimed that he learned about the events in Zieverich only on 22 
April 1994. According to Lange, the BfV has also learned of a 
flier, which was distributed in the area of Dresden at the end 
of 1992 and in which President Richard von Weizsaecker was 
slandered as a participant in international arms deals and as 
someone who is to be partly blamed for the death of tens of 
thousands of Vietnamese and Laotians. 
  As Lange explained further, during its observations the BfV 
also found out that the Republikaner have conducted intensive 
recruiting of members in particular in the security authorities. 
In the five new laender "it was attempted to include members of 
the former GDR security organs in party work," Lange explained. 
In addition to former officers of the National People's Army 
(NVA) and SED [Socialist Unity Party of Germany] members, the 
acceptance of former employees of the Ministry of State Security 
(MfS) was also considered possible. 

