CSO 

  [Text] Guwahati, February 17 -- There seems to be a 
resurgence of militancy in Assam after a respite of nearly two 
years. 
  The killing of a top tea company manager by the United 
Liberation Front of Asom (ULFA) activists in Upper Assam 
yesterday, evoked memories of the days when this underground 
insurgent outfit held the industry to ransom by killing or 
kidnapping senior tea executives. 
  The top brass of the tea industry attended Mr. Rameshwar 
Singh's cremation yesterday afternoon. The fact that the chief 
minister, Mr. Hiteswar Saikia, rushed to Tinsukia from New 
Delhi, speaks of the seriousness of the matter. 
  The last three months have witnessed a dramatic return of 
the 
ULFA and to some extent the Boro Security Force to the 
centrestage. In the second week of December last year, 15 ULFA 
activists attacked a police station in Nagaon and killed four 
policemen in their sleep. A few days later, they killed a 
district Congress chief. In the second week of January, the Boro 
Security Force ambushed a police truck and gunned down eight 
policemen. 
  Early this month, ULFA activists shot dead a Congress leader 
and his bodyguard in Nalbari. Shortly afterwards, the officer 
in-charge of the Gohpur police station in Tezpur was killed in a 
bomb explosion in the police station. The bomb was planted under 
his bed by a trusted constable. 
  Senior police officers say that the militants are trying to 
demoralise the police force, which had achieved major successes 
against them last year. They describe the latest spate of 
killings as "acts of desperation," as the police had kept up the 
pressure on the insurgents. 
  However, the police are alarmed at the new pattern that has 
emerged in the recent killings -- the infiltration into the 
police force by supporters of the insurgents. Two bodyguards of 
the Darrang district deputy commissioner were arrested under 
TADA [expansion not given] and dismissed from service early this 
month after they lost their stenguns, allegedly to the ULFA. 
  "The objective of the militants is to break the force from 
within by brainwashing vulnerable policemen to kill their 
colleagues," said a top police officer. But, he added, the 
militants have not made a significant dent into the force. 
  Perhaps the only thing which goes against ULFA is its latest 
directive to leading Assamese businessmen of Nalbari district to 
cough up hefty sums. While some of them paid clandestinely, most 
defied the directive. "This has not earned the ULFA much 
sympathy, says Mr. Biren Dutta, a deputy commissioner. 
  Meanwhile the Punjab chief minister, Mr. Beant Singh, has 
cleared the despatch of two Punjab police commando battalions to 
Assam to combat ULFA insurgency. 
  Mr. Beant Singh said this today while inaugurating a two-day 
all India seminar on police commandos here. 
  Mr. Beant Singh said that the Assam chief minister had 
requested the Punjab government for police commandos and the 
move had been cleared by the home ministry. The commando 
battalions are likely to reach Assam and start assisting in 
anti-insurgency operations by mid-March. 
  The Punjab police chief, Mr. K.P.S. Gill, said that the 
Assam 
police has only two companies of commandos which are inadequate 
to meet the ULFA challenge. He said the Punjab police commando 
battalions had played a crucial role in crushing militancy in 
the state. 
  Mr. Gill said that more than 10,000 police personnel have 
been trained as commandos, including 5,521 from the district 
police. 

