Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> ["Discussion" among unidentified SANKEI SHIMBUN reporters: </F>
"The Way To Look at the `Non-LDP Coalition'"] 
  [Text] [Moderator] The Hosokawa cabinet has finally 
started, but the meaning of this upheaval is yet to be clearly 
understood. What is your view on this? 
  [Reporter C] The citizens and voters don't seem to 
understand 
the situation well, about what the non-Liberal Democratic Party 
[LDP] coalition government means and how it will develop in the 
future. This is a new situation for us, too. 
  [Reporter A] Television has something to do with it, also, 
stirring up momentary moods. Interesting, but it doesn't give us 
time to contemplate the essential issue; it only follows 
situational changes. 
  [Reporter C] A housewife called our political desk, and said 
that the public had never wanted a non-LDP coalition, and that 
she didn't expect this at all. 
  That program on NHK [Japan Broadcasting Corp.], which was 
aired for two days following the balloting, had considerable 
influence on the public, I think. It polled public opinion by 
telephone in real time as it aired a symposium of political 
parties. At that time, an overwhelming majority of the callers 
said, "We want a non-LDP coalition government." Having seen 
that, Hosokawa had to take up a "non-LDP" coalition, I think. 
  As things gradually calmed down, however, opinion surveys 
began to show recently that the majority of people "want a 
coalition with the LDP in it." This change shows that the public 
has begun to wonder "if the situation is right as it turned out." 
  [Moderator] What do you think of the members of the Hosokawa 
cabinet? 
  [Reporter A] Sankagetsu [this family name means "three 
months" in Japanese], a former dean of the law school at the 
University of Tokyo, was appointed as justice minister. They 
found a man with a really peculiar name. I thought that his name 
signified the destiny of the cabinet--an end in three months.... 
(laughter) Overall, the cabinet consists of the heads of six 
political parties, two civilians, and three women. Hata is the 
only one who had experience as a cabinet minister. The cabinet 
looks new as far as its form is concerned; it is quite different 
from what we saw in the past when the LDP factions took turns. 
The issue here is the ability to perform. Frankly, I think the 
cabinet looks poor in many respects. 
  [Reporter B] Prime Minister Hosokawa is quite shrewd in 
appointing the minister of home affairs and the minister in 
charge of political reform from the Social Democratic Party of 
Japan [SDPJ]. The most important agenda for the Hosokawa cabinet 
is political reform, which by all means needs to be completed as 
soon as possible. Considering that there are many within the 
SDPJ who speak strongly against the system of proportional 
representation, the creation of a shift toward political reform 
by appointing Chairman Yamahana and Kanju Sato will make the 
SDPJ follow. This strategy became quite clear. 
  [Reporter C] Many negotiations seem to have taken place 
within the coalition, but in the end, quotas were used, like 
five posts for Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party]. Things haven't 
changed much from the LDP system, where factions took turns. 
There were some efforts to change, like changing the place for 
commemorative picture-taking, but they were minor. 
  [Reporter A] It resembles balancing of power among factions, 
but it had to enlist at least one person from each party because 
it is a coalition government. The rest is balancing within the 
number of seats for the cabinet. The issue is to what extent 
these seven political parties can band together from now on. For 
the time being, they will probably converge into three groups or 
so, such as an in-cabinet unification group and so on. Here, I 
think the issue is how they will be able to cooperate with each 
other at the party-to-party level, or if they will be able to 
unite as a new New Party. 
  [Reporter B] During the LDP's reign, I don't think there was 
a time when all of the heads of the factions became cabinet 
members at the same time. In the case of the current five-party 
group, the head of each party became a cabinet member. 
Therefore, some people say that as all of them are in the 
cabinet, negotiations will go smoothly. In a sense, a cabinet 
meeting is now a conference of the heads of political parties. 
  [Moderator] The SDPJ, which had lost big in the election, 
gained the largest number of posts. The coalition cabinet is 
like being led by the SDPJ, and it doesn't seem right. 
  [Reporter A] In the end, the number speaks itself. Without 
the SDPJ's 70 seats, the non-LDP coalition could not have been 
created. What was said during this process was the possibility 
that Doi would create a pro-Constitution party with 10 or 20 
members. However, she didn't have enough power to take that 
step. If she created a new party, it could have been 
interesting, but it's likely that no one would follow her even 
if she did that. (laughter) However, if 20 of the SDPJ's left 
wing created a pro-Constitution party, saying that they would 
follow their noble cause, the LDP might have gone through 
another breakup, and 20 of its members might have joined the 
party. 
  [Reporter B] There were two votes for "Sadao Yamahana" on 
the 
ballot to appoint a prime minister. Probably Iwatare and Okazaki 
voted for him. There was talk at the beginning that he would get 
a few votes. But, once Doi was taken in, that hope was crashed. 
  [Reporter A] As Doi used to say all sorts of things, if she 
wanted to maintain her lot as a politician, she should have 
created a pro-Constitution party at that time. 
  [Reporter C] As she had vehemently opposed to the idea of 
joining a coalition government, it seems illogical that she 
accepted the post of chairperson of the coalition government. I 
remember Yamahana visited her many times to change her mind, and 
two or three days before then, people from Shinseito and Komeito 
went to see her, believing that she was just putting on a show 
and would accept their offer eventually. So she deserves the 
rumor that she just wanted a post. 
  [Reporter B] Right after the general election, Kazuo Saito, 
an extreme leftist of the SDPJ, tried to have a meeting with Doi 
and other members of the left wing to create a pro-Constitution 
group. But, the only person who came to the meeting was Saito 
himself. (laughter) 
<H5>  How Hosokawa Became Head of the Cabinet </H5>
  [Moderator] Soon after the general election, Hata looked as 
if he were saying, "I'll be in charge." But, all of a sudden, 
Hosokawa came into power. What happened? 
  [Reporter C] There are many theories about the process. From 
the beginning, Hosokawa looked to the possibility of forming a 
coalition. Takemura was somewhat inclined toward the LDP. He had 
close contact with the Mitsuzuka faction, to which he used to 
belong, and was involved in talks to form a coalition with a 
condition that only if Gotoda would become [LDP] president. Of 
course, this kind of information reached the coalition of seven 
parties. Therefore, the coalition side, especially Shinseito, 
pulled Hosokawa in by offering him the position of prime 
minister. 
  [Reporter A] Hosokawa wanted to "take the third road" and 
retain a casting vote. He was quite ambitious from the start. He 
is shrewd, indeed. (laughter) 
  [Reporter C] I think so. He seems to have determined to go 
either way as long as his name was mentioned. He didn't decline 
any offer. 
  [Reporter A] Both the LDP and the non-LDP fought for 
Hosokawa. There was the possibility of a Hosokawa administration 
with the LDP as an ally. Therefore, the LDP changed its party 
resolution willingly to accept the parallel system, I think. 
  [Reporter C] In fact, some within the LDP argued in favor of 
voting for Hosokawa if he became a candidate representing the 
seven parties. That would be a massive coalition, wouldn't it? 
  [Reporter B] After all, Hosokawa is a lord, wanting to be 
always on top of everything by nature. And, although his father 
was a secretary, his grandfather was a prime minister. Reaching 
the father's level first, and then going beyond it--this seems 
to be a man's way of life. (laughter) I get this kind of 
impression. 
  [Reporter C] According to his wife, he used a negative image 
of his grandfather in his mind as a motive for creating the 
Japan New Party--that is, his grandfather became a prime 
minister during the time of radical changes, but he couldn't 
stop the path toward the war. Therefore, he wanted to become a 
prime minister to change the course of Japan's politics, 
steering it toward a positive path. 
  [Reporter A] Speaking of the character of Morihiro Hosokawa 
as a politician, he is a kind of guy who can't be bought. 
(laughter) His statements fluctuate left and right. He projects 
a very modern image. But, speaking from my long career as a 
political reporter in Nagata-cho, I would say that he cannot be 
considered a trustworthy person in the old political world. The 
same can be said about Yohei Kono. Frankly, he is disliked 
within the LDP. Passion and a noble cause exist in the political 
world. When you pursue them straightforwardly, you will gain 
trust. In this sense, they are far from this ideal. 
  [Moderator] Knowing this, did Hata accept this situation? 
  [Reporter A] According to Ozawa's scenario, Hata's turn will 
come much later. If nothing changes, the LDP will win the 
majority in the next general election, assuming that each of the 
non-LDP parties will fight the election battle independently. 
Therefore, to what extent the non-LDP parties can coordinate 
their candidates will be the key. If all goes well, they will be 
able to fight the election battle as a new party. Ozawa 
considers this as the most important contest. Hata's turn will 
come after that. 
  [Moderator] Don't they think, the sooner the better? 
  [Reporter A] Ozawa himself could have become a prime 
minister 
at the time of the birth of the Miyazawa administration. If 
Ozawa had said "yes" then, he could have created the Ozawa 
administration. But, most likely, his administration would have 
gone to pieces. After all, Ozawa has set his eye on such changes 
as restructuring the political world, carrying out political 
reform, and then creating a two-party system in Japan. He is 
right on track for this scenario, although he may go forward and 
backward from time to time. 
  [Reporter B] Ozawa, Yuichi Ichikawa of Komeito and Takashi 
Yonezawa of the Democratic Socialist Party [DSP] were not 
included in the current cabinet. This can be explained simply 
because they are all general secretaries, but we must pay close 
attention to the fact that they are not cabinet members. I think 
we can safely say that these three individuals have already 
started the work of coordinating candidates, taking into account 
a new electoral system based on small constituency districts. 
<H3>  The Future of Political Reform--Weaknesses of the Coalition 
Cabinet </H3>
  [Moderator] What do you think about the future of political 
reform? 
  [Reporter C] An extraordinary session of the Diet will be 
convened in early September. What are they going to do during 
the session? Essentially, they will have a debate on a political 
reform bill. The focus, of course, will be on reform of the 
electoral system. Although the governing and opposition parties 
have already agreed on adopting a parallel system, there are 
some specific issues to be dealt with. For example, there is the 
issue of how to allocate seats, including some specific 
problems, such as whether to divide them into 250 and 250, or 
into 300 and 171 as the LDP advocates; and whether to have 
proportional representation nationwide, or by blocks, or by 
prefectures. All this will take time to iron out, I think. 
  [Reporter A] The point is how to come to terms with each 
other in that area. Basically, the non-LDP members agree on the 
allocation into 250 and 250. However, if the number of seats is 
less than 280, they will have to break up the boundaries of 
self-governing municipalities to a considerable degree in order 
to limit the differential of one vote within one to two. In this 
sense, it is significant that Norihiko Narita, former chief of 
the Politics and Parliamentary Affairs Division at the National 
Diet Library, has become Hosokawa's top secretary. Also, from 
the political viewpoint, if the non-LDP side can increase the 
probability of unification, then it will be able to go along 
with a small constituency system. The mood will change so that a 
system tilting toward the small constituency can be accepted. 
  [Reporter C] The LDP may suddenly change its position. They 
changed their party resolution from the simple small 
constituency system to the parallel system after the general 
election. Why did they do that? They didn't change their way of 
thinking, but they made the decision at the eleventh hour, 
thinking that if they supported the parallel system, they might 
be able to form a coalition with the Japan New Party and 
Sakigake [Harbinger Party]. But, in reality, they lost their 
ruling power. Now, some people within the party may begin to 
voice their dissent. In the parallel system, the more seats that 
are in a small constituency district, the better off the LDP 
will be. In the past, the LDP normally had 320 to 330 candidates 
nationwide. Therefore, if the number of seats for the small 
constituency is set at about 300, the LDP will be able to send 
its candidates to all of the electoral districts. If so, it will 
be able to gain approval from its members. If the coalition 
governing parties reach an agreement on 250 and 250, and if the 
LDP doesn't want to yield and insists on 300, it will be 
difficult to reach an agreement. 
  [Moderator] What is the weakest point of the coalition 
government? 
  [Reporter A] On the issue of allocating seats for political 
reform, the coalition will probably not go into infighting that 
is strong enough to break itself up. That's because Yamahana and 
Sato were installed as ministers in charge of this issue so as 
to contain the opposition group within the SDPJ. Also, the 
government will not touch the Constitution lest it should kindle 
the fire. I wonder how it will deal with such issues as 
reduction of income tax, deficit-covering national bonds, and 
consumption tax. The non-LDP side will muddle through somehow 
until the next budget is compiled. 
  [Reporter B] During the general election, the SDPJ, Komeito, 
and the DSP joined forces in advocating income tax reduction. 
But, soon after becoming ministers, Ishida of Komeito and Ouchi 
of DSP began to say something like, it's not necessary to 
implement income tax reduction. Once they assumed responsible 
positions, they changed their tunes. 
  [Reporter C] In favorable terms, this coalition government 
is 
flexible; in unfavorable terms, it is haphazard. For example, 
the SDPJ insisted that the Ozawa problem was a very important 
issue, and said that, unless it was resolved, they would not 
participate in deliberation on budget bills. They stopped the 
budget deliberation, and summoned witnesses. However, once they 
got involved in formation of the coalition government, they said 
that the [Ozawa] issue was trivial. They have no principles; 
they are haphazard. The consumption tax will become a key issue 
when they review the tax system, because the SDPJ is against it. 
Therefore, this issue in fact is worrisome for the cabinet. But, 
as the SDPJ is a very irresponsible party, it may compromise 
readily. If there is kindling, it is a down-to-earth human 
relationship. For example, I think a fire will erupt when the 
conflict between Ozawa and Chief Cabinet Secretary Takemura 
comes to the fore. 
  [Moderator] Are they really not able to get along with each 
other? 
  [Reporter C] Takemura hates Ozawa. He is quite distrustful 
of 
Ozawa. On the other hand, Ozawa is going to try to manage the 
cabinet as well as the seven parties of the coalition. 
  [Reporter A] In observing politics, we can't ignore human 
emotions. Underlying the series of big political changes was the 
fight between Ozawa and Kajiyama. Kajiyama wanted to get rid of 
Ozawa even if he had to destroy the LDP. In personnel 
appointments for the current cabinet, the key person is Hiroshi 
Kumagai, minster of international trade and industry. Kajiyama 
is the don of the zoku Diet members of the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry [MITI]. From now on, with his 
power as MITI minister, Kumagai is going to act as a financial 
pipeline for Kajiyama and make a radical change in relationships 
with industries. This is going to be a bitter war. Hidden behind 
such open and clean issues of political reform and restructuring 
of the political world, machinations in the dark and gloomy side 
will take place further and deeper. 
  [Reporter C] Kumagai is capable of setting up big traps, 
although he has been working behind the scenes all the time. 
  [Moderator] How about Ozawa and Hosokawa? Are they getting 
along? 
  [Reporter A] Frankly, Ozawa doesn't think highly of Hosokawa 
at all. He must be thinking that Hosokawa will dance to his tune 
as long as he is on a pedestal. In Ozawa's grandiose scenario, 
Hosokawa is probably playing only a small part in the first 
stage. 
<H5>  Is Ozawa Hurrying To Create a New New Party? </H5>
  [Moderator] How will the second stage of the Heisei upheaval 
unfold? 
  [Reporter C] I can think of many possible 
developments--within the coalition governing parties, between 
the coalition governing parties and the LDP, and within the LDP. 
Within the coalition governing parties, power struggles will 
develop. By ignoring the request from Shinseito, the Japan New 
Party and Sakigake installed Yukio Hatoyama as a deputy chief 
cabinet secretary. Shinseito wanted to appoint [Yoshihiro] 
Nikai, who is a close associate of Ozawa. This by itself has 
created a foundation for power struggles. 
  Within the LDP, on the other hand, when, for example, a new 
election system becomes effective, a few or dozens of its 
members may decide to leave the party. These people will get 
together to form a group. The speed of politics in Japan is now 
so fast that I don't know what kinds of upheavals will ensue. 
  [Reporter A] After the general election, the number of 
conservatives as a whole, including in Komeito, the DSP, and the 
SDPJ, increased all of a sudden. I'm thinking it would be the 
best if they divide themselves up cleanly into something like 
Republicans and Democrats. Before getting to that point, there 
will be a situation where the non-LDP parties converge into two 
or three groups. If that happens, a few or dozens of LDP members 
may leave the party, I think. 
  Ozawa's scenario seems to be moving along very well, but his 
most critical Achilles' heel is that he joined hands with 
Komeito. Komeito and the Soka Gakkai as a unit are a limited 
organization that will not be able to expand their influence any 
further in Japanese society. By forming an alliance with this 
organization, Ozawa has been able to take control of political 
affairs. The SDPJ is considered as first among the non-LDP 
parties because 70 of its members were elected. However, with 
the combined total of more than 100 Diet members, Shinseito and 
Komeito together are the leading party. This situation has 
served the purpose so far; it has been well orchestrated by 
Ozawa and Ichikawa, the so-called Ichi-Ichi combo. But, Komeito 
should not come forward any further; it should be identified as 
part of a larger organization. Otherwise, there would be no 
future. 
  [Reporter B] Certainly, there seems to exist something like 
Taisaku Ikeda's scenario, in addition to Ozawa's scenario. 
Taisaku Ikeda is chairman of the SGI (Soka Gakkai 
International), and he's been focusing his attention on this 
job. Leaving the affairs of the Soka Gakkai in the hands of 
Chairman Akiya, he's been busying himself with some sort of 
cultural activities. I guess he has visited 60 countries or so. 
And, probably in exchange for the money he brings to these 
countries, he's been collecting all sorts of honorary medals and 
degrees. I think he wants to get a Nobel Peace Prize, 
eventually. For him, therefore, the label of founder of Komeito, 
a political party in Japan, is no longer a blessing. Because of 
this, Ichikawa, general secretary of Komeito, said at last 
year's convention that he was resolved even to remove the 
party's name to accomplish political restructuring. Therefore, 
if Ozawa's strategy brings Komeito to the foreground, it will 
cause some problem for Ikeda. 
  [Reporter A] To avoid that situation, Ozawa will probably 
rush to create a new new party. the Japan New Party and Sakigake 
don't seem to have much future. They had their boom during the 
last election. Although they played a very important role in 
taking a step toward restructuring of the political world, they 
only have a bunch of amateurs. The idea of their running the 
government gives me goose bumps. 
  [Reporter C] Hosokawa also said honestly that his party 
didn't have people who could be instrumental in policymaking and 
that, because of this, he had to cooperate with Sakigake. And, 
since the day after the general election, Shinseito has been 
trying to recruit some defeated candidates from the LDP. In this 
respect, I think the momentum for creation of a new party or for 
restructuring will accelerate further. 
  [Moderator] Does Ozawa not want to come to the forefront--to 
take political power--till the end? 
  [Reporter A] He's only 51; he still has 10 years or so to 
go. 
He's probably thinking that he will take power during a 
relatively stable period after the two-party system is firmly 
installed. He also knows that he is disliked. 
  [Moderator] Is he disliked? 
  [Reporter C] Yes, he is, and he's acutely aware of it. In 
maneuvering to create a coalition, he told Hosokawa that he 
wouldn't mind leaving his party. I don't know whether he really 
meant it. But if he came to the forefront, he might run into 
trouble; if he stayed in the background, he might be called a 
behind-the-scenes strongman. So, he probably thought that it 
would be best to bring Hosokawa to the cabinet. 
  [Reporter A] A dual structure of power, isn't it? If it 
involves Taisaku Ikeda, that's not good. But, if it is a dual 
structure with Ozawa in the background, I can live with it. It 
provides us a sense of security in the administration. But, if 
Hosokawa alone runs the administration, I will be worried. 
  [Moderator] As I listened to what you said, I've come to 
wonder if Ozawa is the only person who thinks seriously about 
Japan and the world. 
  [Reporter A] When the factional politics of the LDP--the era 
of Miki, Tanaka, Ohira, Fukuda, and Nakasone--was at its best, 
each faction head spoke on world affairs and ran the 
administration according to his particular style. For example, 
Ohira propounded a nation of culture and Zenko Suzuki left his 
legacy of harmonious politics, although he was called 
feebleminded. Nakasone dealt with postwar politics, and 
Takeshita introduced consumption tax. Then, Abe, Takeshita, and 
Miyazawa were called neo-new leaders following Miki, Tanaka, 
Ohira, and Fukuda, but when they were about to get organized, 
they plunged into the era of political restructuring. 
  Yoshio Mori is a kind of politician of whom much was 
expected 
for his future and should have been nurtured to grow. The same 
is true of Koichi Kato. Although we want former neo-new leaders 
and neo-neo-new leaders to flex their muscles, they look forlorn 
these days. 
  [Reporter C] Yes, indeed. 
<H5>  Will the LDP Be Able To Regain Power? </H5>
  [Moderator] What do you think about the possibility of the 
LDP, the opposition party, regaining power? 
  [Reporter A] The LDP has clearly realized since it yielded 
power that it is a fragile, weak, and uncoordinated 
organization. It stayed in power for 38 years, and the secret 
was that the LDP was very good at election campaign--each member 
had his own solid supporters association. Faced with the biggest 
crisis, they are now trying to reenforce these old-style 
supporters associations. 
  The LDP sees the small constituency system in a way that is 
quite different from that in England. As each electoral district 
will shrink from a medium to a small constituency district, they 
will have to strengthen their local-oriented services. Reduction 
of seats from four to one means that the size of one's electoral 
district becomes a half or a third, counting the effect of the 
parallel system. Now, there are some people who talk seriously 
about introducing a computer system, in which they enter the 
names of households and family members in a computer and mail 
birthday cards to them. (laughter) Using such a system, they are 
hoping to win under the small constituency system. 
  Ideally, we'd like to see establishment of new parties, 
representing the LDP versus the non-LDP, each having its own 
policy and ideology, and carrying out election campaigns pitting 
party against party. But this won't happen in the Japanese-style 
small constituency system. 
  [Moderator] As soon as it became an opposition party, the 
LDP 
lost its centripetal force. Who is running the LDP now? 
  [Reporter C] It's surely not Yohei Kono. (laughter) Opinions 
abound. For example, some say that the LDP will not exist in a 
year's time. But, even though it split during the last election, 
it secured 223 seats. And, people said that some of its members 
would leave the party during the nomination of the party 
president, but even the Kato group lost only some of its 
members. The LDP barely retained its members. To be sure, it has 
lost its centripetal force. Factional control is quite different 
from that in the old days. But, I think there are many members 
who are staying with the LDP because they can't find any other 
place to go--if they leave the party and join Shinseito, it's 
like a repeat of the same old thing; and if they create a new 
party, it also seems like repeating the same old line. 
Therefore, Kono's role is to prevent these people from leaving 
the party, and to prepare the party for victory in the next 
election, I think. 
  On the other hand, what they can do as a political party is 
to change its system so that they will be able to cope in the 
new era. They've been studying various means, such as changing 
the administrative procedures completely or running the 
Executive Council differently. But, in order to gain recognition 
from the public, they must do something bold, like eliminate 
party resolutions on each individual policy. Unless they do 
that, it would be difficult for them to regain power and create 
an LDP empire like in the old days. 
  [Reporter A] When there was a division between conservatives 
and reformists under the backdrop of the cold war, the reformist 
side, being led by the SDPJ, wasn't a group that aspired to 
create a reformist administration. Instead, it was simply a 
receptacle of complaints and dissatisfaction against the 
conservative administration. This time, the conservative group 
as a whole became large. It doesn't matter whether you vote for 
the LDP or for the non-LDP. Then, how are they going to compete 
for voter support? I think the focus of competition is how well 
they can address the needs of the time and appeal to public 
sentiment. Of course, there are many factors, such as policy, 
ideology, and party image. But, since it's no longer a matter of 
ideology, it will be a competition based on each other's image, 
to which one the public will decide to entrust Japan's future. 
The LDP hasn't understood this point yet; it is way behind. 
  [Moderator] Has the new coalition government truly overcome 
such ideologically divisive issues as the Constitution and the 
Self-Defense Forces [SDF]? 
  [Reporter B] During the press conference for inauguration of 
ministers, a reporter from ASAHI asked pointed questions, 
focusing on issues relating to the Japanese flag and the SDF. In 
general, ministers from the SDPJ responded with flexible 
statements. But I don't know what their actual thoughts are. 
They need to convene a party assembly and straighten their basic 
policy stance on various issues, including the Japanese flag and 
the SDF. 
  [Reporter A] I wonder how vigorous the SDPJ will be when 
that 
time comes. (laughter) 
  [Reporter B] If they don't do that, it doesn't make sense. 
Having different basic policies, the SDPJ should stay outside 
the cabinet. 
  [Moderator] After all, the LDP and the non-LDP have 
differences that center on the Constitution. When they try to 
iron out these differences, will there be some kind of force for 
restructuring again? 
  [Reporter A] At the time of the merger of conservatives, the 
need to establish our own Constitution acted as a driving force 
for the merger. When the current restructuring of the political 
world gained momentum last year, people thought that the issue 
of our Constitution would become a driving force, and everyone, 
including the United Social Democratic Party, Komeito, and the 
DSP, began reviewing the issue for a while. After all, that was 
a signal to the Ozawa group. Ozawa himself, however, is playing 
both ends, even on the issue of Article 9, saying that even 
without a revision, we can carry out armed operations under the 
supervision of the United Nations. He's not gung ho about 
revising the Constitution. Therefore, although I feel that the 
Constitution will certainly become a driving force, I can't 
predict how it will set the stage for restructuring. 
  [Reporter C] The reason the recent election turned out as it 
did is that voters wanted to let their wishes be known that when 
a two-party system becomes effective, they want the LDP to be 
one of the two parties. Even though they didn't want the LDP to 
assume power this time, they hoped that the party would play an 
important role in the future two-party system. On the other 
hand, I think they also showed that they didn't want the SDPJ to 
assume an important role. The LDP should recognize this point 
clearly. They have to improve the nature of their party so as to 
cope in the new era as a political party capable of governing. 
After the election, the office of Mitsuzuka, chairman of the 
Policy Affairs Research Council, was investigated for violation 
of election law. Some employees of Tohoku Kashima who had been 
assigned to the office were arrested. What's amazing is that 
they were still following the old campaign practices. Such 
practices are not fit for the next election. 
  [Reporter A] Mitsuzuka worked hard during the process of 
installing Kono as the new party president, but behind this were 
scandals--the Ibaragi scandal for Kajiyama, the violation of 
election law for Mitsuzuka, and the scandal involving the mayor 
of Sendai before them. Because of all this, these people were 
all tied up, and therefore Kono became the new party president. 
We can't ignore this fact. The LDP is not facing the fundamental 
question of why it lost the majority. 
  [Moderator] What was Gotoda's role in the recent upheaval? 
  [Reporter C] Public prosecutors have very strong political 
clout right now. They act politically. What they are trying to 
do is cut the foundation of the old-style political practice 
that depends on construction companies. The reason Gotoda 
promoted Kono rather than Mitsuzuka during the election for 
party president is that, as justice minister, he was aware of 
various facts. In other words, he warned indirectly that the 
public prosecutors would mobilize their resources if political 
reform were not taken up seriously. 
  [Reporter A] The Miyazawa administration was created by the 
Takeshita faction and the Kanemaru-Ozawa line. But it faltered 
due to the arrest of Kanemaru and the breakup of the Takeshita 
faction. I think Miyazawa mistook the situation. Seeing the 
breakup of the Takeshita faction and the collapse of its 
political structure, he tried hard at one point to restructure 
his power base with the help of bureaucratic control as in the 
old Ministry of Home Affairs, by trying to ally himself with 
Gotoda. But, it didn't last long. I think Gotoda was keenly 
aware of this situation, too. 
<H5>  What Did the SDPJ Mean? </H5>
  [Moderator] In this age, when everyone seems to have become 
a 
conservative, what is the raison d'etre for the SDPJ and the DSP? 
  [Reporter B] There are no more distinctions as to ideology 
or 
between conservatives and reformists. In this sense, a 
middle-of-the-road may no longer exist. Coalition of the SDPJ 
and the DSP is an old story. Politics has advanced further than 
that, and now it is a coalition of non-LDP parties. The DSP has 
already become a full conservative party. But, in the case of 
the SDPJ, its organization, especially in local areas, is 
problematic -- ultraleftists called the Tokenkyo till control at 
the local Dietmen's level. There is a possibility that the 
SDPJ's ultraleftists and the Japanese Communist Party [JCP] 
persist as the third axis. 
  [Reporter A] If the people who have been advocating Marxism 
want to pursue their noble cause, they should form their own 
group. When you visited a town assembly in some local area, 
didn't you run into only one member from the JCP? If they occupy 
few seats in the Diet like that, they will cause no trouble. 
  [Moderator] What was the role of Yamagishi of Rengo? Some 
say that he is one of leading players in restructuring the 
political world. 
  [Reporter B] In the recent election, Rengo made clear to the 
SDPJ whom it would support as candidates. It also supported 51 
candidates from the three new parties--Shinseito, the Japan New 
Party, and Sakigake. Reportedly, Yamagishi made the strategic 
decision, but actual maneuvers were made by industry-based 
unions that comprise Rengo. Frankly, the method used by 
Yamagishi, who tends to speak as he pleases, seems outmoded. 
People like Teruhito Emoto of the Federation of Japan Automobile 
Workers Unions and Etsuya Washio of the Japanese Federation of 
Iron and Steel Workers Unions have already had the idea of 
introducing the small constituency system for some years. 
Yamagishi might have been the one who wrote the scenario of 
restructuring the political world, but the actual movers were 
those who will assume leadership roles in Rengo in the future. 
Yamagishi used to push vehemently for a coalition of the SDPJ 
and the DSP. This idea was completely crashed due to the results 
of the upper house elections. Still, that man is like a 
loudspeaker. (laughter) Such being the case, there are strong 
criticisms against Yamagishi within Rengo. 
  [Reporter A] That will become an issue during their 
convention in October, which may well be a turning point for 
Rengo. I think it will be better if he [Yamahana] is replaced by 
a new leader--someone in the level of Emoto or Washio. 
  [Reporter C] I don't mind that the head of the SDPJ comes 
in, 
but Yamahana should resign. If a new party leader was chosen and 
became a cabinet member, it could have been understandable. They 
don't seem to understand when to stop and when to start. 
  [Reporter B] Speaking of logic, I really don't understand 
the 
SDPJ. For example, it's so strange that a minister appointed 
from the SDPJ is chairman of the national security. 
  [Reporter A] They fought in the Narita struggle to such an 
extreme extent, and some people died. Now, there aren't any SDPJ 
Dietmen who don't use the Narita Airport when they go abroad. 
(laughter) Though, I heard that there had been one such person 
until recently. 
  [Moderator] The Chiba section of a newspaper had a list of 
landlords who own one tsubo [3.954 square yards] each. Most of 
them are SDPJ Diet members. 
  [Reporter B] Shigeru Ito was also involved in the Narita 
struggle. But, now, he is transport minister. (laughter) 
  [Reporter A] But the same kind of things can be said for the 
LDP. When they changed their party resolution from the simple 
small constituency to the parallel system, Takayuki Sato made a 
memorable remark: "Time changes." 
  [Reporter C] Yes, he said, "Time will change." That was 
funny. 

