BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, June 15, BNS -- The parliament today voted 
down 48 to eight and one abstention the bill of ratification of 
a government guarantee for a loan from the American 
Export-Import Bank, the parliament press office reported. 
  The controversial loan guarantee, referred to after the name 
of the Estonian beneficiary company as the Lekto loan, has 
served as a main argument in the hands of anti-prime minister 
opposition during recent political disputes. The Lekto company 
and America's Western AG Resources in April last year signed an 
agreement on potato farming in Estonia. According to the 
document, the U.S. company was to supply the Estonian partner 
with quality seed potatoes, technologies and chemicals, as well 
as buy the yield grown on 400 hectares in Estonia. 
  The Estonian Land Bank at Lekto's instructions last May 5 
issued three letters of credit worth 1.055 million U.S. dollars, 
payable by the Bank of Washington. The American Export-Import 
Bank, acting as guarantor of the credit, sought the Estonian 
Government's guarantee for the loan. The guarantee was signed 
by Prime Minister Mart Laar May 20, 1993. 
  Shortcomings in the equipment supplied by the American 
company, delayed delivery of the seed potatoes, and choosing a 
sort not fitted for growing in the Estonian climate, led to a 
failure of the potato crop, Lakto says. The Estonian Land Bank 
has turned to an internationally well- known U.S. law firm to 
sue the American company for the damages. 
  The Estonian parliament earlier this month in a 18 to 16 
vote 
turned down the first proposal to refuse to ratify the loan 
guarantee. Finance Minister Heiki Kranich, who by now has 
entered his resignation, then said that in case of the 
parliament's refusal to ratify the loan, the American 
Export-Import Bank will reclaim the money from the Estonian Land 
Bank. Claims by the Land Bank would lead to Lekto's bankruptcy 
and takeover from the state, which currently owns 87 percent of 
shares in Lekto. Lekto's share capital is 4.63 million kroons. 
Kranich then expected the Land Bank to be able to repay the loan 
with money to be gained in Lekto's bankruptcy proceedings and 
from the bank's own reserve. The minister said that if the bank 
fails to manage with money from these two sources, the rest will 
be taken from government funds. The minister said his opinion 
was that the parliament should ratify the guarantee issued by 
the government, as refusal would negatively affect Estonia's 
credibility with foreign partners. 

