BFN 

  [Text] The Creston Energy Company of Colorado, USA, issued 
a press release on 18 April 1994, announcing that it is 
conducting a seismological survey and preparing for exploratory 
drilling to evaluate the latent oil and gas potential of the 
so-called WANANBEI-21 Contract area which is, in fact, the Tu 
Chinh coral reef located entirely within Vietnam's exclusive 
economic zone and continental shelf. 
  The press release also stated that the exploration cited 
above and the potential commercial exploitation plan for that 
area will be a continuation of the history of China's research 
and exploration in that sea area, which began since time 
immemorial, as far back as 200 years B.C. 
  In view of this matter, a spokesman for the SRV Foreign 
Ministry gave the following remarks on 20 April: 
  Right from the time when the Creston Company signed a 
contract on oil exploration and exploitation with the Chinese 
Offshore Oil Company in May 1992, the SRV Foreign Ministry 
issued a statement declaring that this contract is invalid and 
that it constitutes a grave violation against Vietnam's 
sovereignty over its continental shelf and economic zone as well 
as against international law. The statement also pointed out 
that according to international law, Vietnam has long exercised 
its sovereignty over that area. As early as before 1975, this 
area was divided into lots for bidding to conduct oil and gas 
exploration and exploitation. The then Provisional 
Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam also issued a 
statement asserting its sovereignty. After the unification of 
the country, the SRV Government issued its statements dated 12 
May 1977 and 12 November 1984, asserting Vietnam's sovereignty 
over its territorial seas and continental shelves. In 1988, the 
Vietnamese side made public a chart of concession lots divided 
for oil exploration and exploitation purposes. Vietnam has 
since conducted exploration and exploitation of its oil and gas 
resources in that area, including its cooperation with many 
foreign companies. As decided by the SRV Government, an 
economic, scientific, and service detachment has been 
established there since 1989 with the presence of a system of 
Vietnamese lighthouses and a hydro-meteorological station. 
  A seismological survey by the Creston Company and its 
arrogant declaration of its planned oil exploration and 
exploitation in the area within Vietnam's exclusive economic 
zone and continental shelf -- an area which is, both legally and 
practically, totally under Vietnamese sovereignty -- constitutes 
a new, very grave step of escalation. 
  The spokesman for the Foreign Ministry once again asserted 
that the contract of the Creston Company is invalid. Its 
actions are illegal. No countries or companies will be allowed 
to conduct any exploration or exploitation of natural resources 
within Vietnam's continental shelf and exclusive economic zone 
without permission from the Vietnamese Government. The Creston 
Company will have to bear full responsibility for the 
consequences arising from its actions. 

