BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ihsan Bakr: "Questions About the Role of Full </F>
Partner"] 
  [Text] It is everybody's expectation, including the 
pessimists', that the parties to the Middle East conflict are 
about to return to the bilateral negotiations, not consequent to 
a pause for consultations with their governments or for more 
study and examination, but in the wake of the overwhelming 
popular anger that swept the Arab world in the wake of the 
massacre of worshipers inside the al-Ibrahimi Mosque in Hebron. 
  The aftermath of this massacre continues to pose big 
question 
marks about the usefulness of the negotiations themselves 
considering the U.S. Administration's decisive and firm bias 
toward Israel and the Rabin government's total refusal to comply 
with the international resolutions. 
  After three weeks of consultations, pressures, and 
postponements, the Security Council condemned the ugly massacre 
after the martyrs' blood had cooled, the martyrs' and injured 
people's blood had dried, a lethal blow had been dealt to the 
peace efforts, and acts of violence and counter-violence had 
engulfed the occupied Arab territories. The resolution 
condemning the massacre was clear and unanimous but has left two 
major issues unresolved. 
  Yes. The resolution underlined the need to provide 
protection for Palestinian citizens inside the occupied 
territories. But it has not told us how this protection will be 
provided and who will be responsible for it. That was an 
intentional lapse to negate the essence of the international 
resolution, especially as Israel has declared that it refuses to 
let UN forces do the protecting. But it appears that the 
Security Council resolutions are always deficient whenever they 
concern an Arab issue. The Council was asked to take a clear 
and frank stand on the issue of protecting the Palestinian 
citizens because it is difficult to restore calm to the occupied 
territories while there are armed criminal settlers with their 
fingers always pressing the trigger to kill innocent people. 
  The resolution, which took a long time to formulate, was 
adopted after the United States expressed reservations over the 
clause dealing with Jerusalem because Washington does not 
recognize Jerusalem as part of the occupied Arab territories, 
and it even appears that it does not admit that there is such a 
thing as occupied territories. President Clinton underlined 
this stance twice, once during the presidential elections when, 
as the Democratic candidate, he declared that Jerusalem will be 
Israel's capital. The second time was a few days ago when he 
stressed during a meeting with the leaders of the 
American-Israeli Political Action Committee that the United 
States regards unified Jerusalem as the capital of the State of 
Israel. 
  The U.S. Embassy in Cairo has issued a clarification of 
President Clinton's statements, and the U.S. State Department -- 
after a silence that lasted more than a week -- has said that 
there is no change in the U.S. stand on the Jerusalem issue. 
But the U.S. reservations in the Security Council over the 
clause on Jerusalem casts doubts and suspicions on the real U.S. 
stand on this issue, an issue that is close to the heart of all 
Arabs and Muslims. 
  The Security Council issued its resolution of condemnation 
and then sat back! It appears that this Council issues two 
types of resolutions: ones that are liable to be implemented 
and applied -- such as the cases of Iraq and Libya -- and other 
resolutions that cannot be implemented, especially if they deal 
with Israel and Arab rights. 
  Is it not strange that at a time when Israel is asking the 
Arabs to negotiate, achieve peace, and establish and normalize 
relations, and is demanding an end to the economic boycott and 
resumption of trade, it is also practicing organized terrorism 
against the Palestinians and building up its military arsenal? 
  The United States has raised a major hue and cry against 
Libya and imposed a comprehensive international embargo against 
it merely on the suspicion that two Libyans might have been 
involved in bombing an American plane over Lockerbie in 
Scotland. It is demanding that the two suspects be extradited 
to stand trial. And in its bizarre arrogance, the United States 
insists on maintaining the full international embargo on Iraq, 
plunging the Iraqi people into isolation, hunger, and medicine 
shortages; and it is leading a broad international campaign to 
remove Iraq's nuclear weapons and all other weapons. 
  While the United States is taking all these measures against 
Arab peoples, it does absolutely nothing about Israeli acts 
against the defenseless Palestinian people, and it observes the 
silence of the dead over Israel's possession of more than 200 
nuclear bombs that threaten all Arab peoples of the region. The 
United States is doing nothing to Israel despite its refusal to 
join the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty! 
  This being the fact, we have a right to ask about the true 
U.S. role in the region and about U.S. objectives in the peace 
process. Is the United States seeking peace for Israel without 
returning the Arab land to its rightful owners? 
  The United States is telling everybody that it is a sponsor 
of the peace process, and it says it is a full partner. Indeed, 
it is preventing any other international party from intervening 
in the process, on the pretext that it is the "only mediator" 
that can intervene in the crisis. Even Russia, the other 
cosponsor of the peace process that was launched in Madrid, is 
not allowed to go beyond a decorative role. Having all these 
broad powers, when the United States is pushed into a position 
where it must make a difficult decision it hurriedly announces 
that it will not intervene in the negotiations, leaving the two 
sides, the Palestinians and the Israelis, face to face! 
  The political situation in the occupied territories 
threatens 
dire consequences due to this intentional disregard of Arab 
rights, total bias toward Israel, and insistence that the ball 
is in the Palestinian negotiators' court, portraying them as the 
obstacle to returning to the negotiating table. 
  It is Yasir 'Arafat's right to make inquiries, be skeptical, 
and demand genuine guarantees of protection for his people. He 
has a right to receive specific answers about the role of 
settlers and why the settlements have been planted in the middle 
of the Palestinian masses. 'Arafat's primary duty is to not be 
rushed, to be careful, and obtain all international guarantees. 
Their constant pressure on the PLO leadership to resume the 
negotiations unconditionally only shows that the United States 
and Israel want 'Arafat to accept unconditional surrender. 
  The United States is gravely deceiving itself and the whole 
Arab nation if it believes that this policy will lead to peace. 
The Palestinian people, together with all Arab peoples, will 
not accept the desecration of Arab land and Arab sanctities in 
return for a false peace. The peace that Yasir 'Arafat aims at 
and all the Arabs demand is based on the return of the land and 
the end of occupation. 

