Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk by </F>
Stanislav Prokopchuk; place, date not given: "Leonid Kravchuk: 
Let's Take Account of Today's Realities"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage on social problems, economy omitted] 
  Prokopchuk: By ratifying START I and the Lisbon 
Protocol with a number of substantial provisos did Ukraine not 
doom itself to a further, tighter credit blockade and 
uncompromising political pressure from the United States and 
other nuclear states? 
  Kravchuk: The Supreme Council decree includes 
provisos which are perfectly normal and natural, as they say. 
Yes, Ukraine is entitled to compensation for its nuclear 
weapons, Ukraine must have reliable guarantees of its security, 
Ukraine needs assistance to eliminate its nuclear weapons. 
  But the fact that the Supreme Council did not vote to join 
the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty is a major mistake by our 
parliament. I have said and will continue to say this, I will 
insist that the only correct path for us is to join the treaty. 
We cannot change the already adopted course toward nuclear-free 
status. You can build any illusions you like, even about 
creating our own nuclear industry, but they are only illusions. 
It is clear to everyone that we do not need the weapons we 
inherited from the USSR. And nobody will ever use them. 
  Everybody knows that, even if such an insane idea was to 
come into somebody's head, it is practically impossible today 
for Ukraine to launch the missiles. Any of these 176 missiles 
can be launched only on orders from Moscow. This is clear to 
everyone, but nevertheless attempts continue to be made to turn 
us into a bogeyman. 
  In signing the trilateral statement and the annex to it in 
Moscow on 14 January, Ukraine won a political, economic, and 
human victory. The United States, Russia, and the entire world 
community shared it with us. Nobody will now say that Ukraine 
is standing still on the nuclear disarmament road. The road to 
START II and even START III is now open. Mankind has gained 
real hope of the complete elimination of nuclear weapons. 
  There is something else I also wish to stress. Most of the 
demands formulated in the Ukrainian Supreme Council's provisos 
relating to ratification of the START I treaty were met. In the 
documents which were signed the United States and Russia stated 
that they respect Ukraine's territorial integrity and 
independence, that is, they are becoming guarantors of our 
security. After acceding to the nuclear nonproliferation treaty 
-- and I am confident that our parliament will now adopt such a 
decision -- Ukraine will be safeguarded against nuclear attack. 
And, equally importantly, we will receive compensation for the 
uranium in the strategic missile warheads which will be sent to 
Russia, plus financial, scientific, and technical assistance in 
eliminating our nuclear weapons. 
  As for the part of your question relating to a tougher 
credit 
blockade, in December there was indeed a real threat of 
isolation. But now broad political and economic cooperation 
prospects are opening up for us. 
  Prokopchuk: And a final, purely personal point, 
Leonid Makarovich, if you will permit me. Since you also became 
head of government there has been an obvious increase in your 
workload. Do you manage to carve out time for your family and 
grandchildren? And in general what is your life like outside 
work? 
  Kravchuk: My grandson Andrey is 13 and as tall as 
me; he's an early developer. And my granddaughter Mashenka is 
six. She's so sweet and interesting. When they are with me 
it's the only time I get completely away from all the worries 
and problems. You have to answer their endless questions, you 
see. When we get involved in their games I myself also become 
like a child. I can play hide-and-seek with my eyes 
blindfolded; when they crawl around on their knees, I crawl 
around on my knees; when they jump, I jump. Those are the times 
I really relax.... 

