BFN 

<F P=106> [By Kevin Davie] </F>
  [Text] Labour Minister Tito Mboweni says his department is 
not an extension of the trade-union movement. He has begun a 
two-week series of meetings with unions, forums and business to 
acquaint himself with the most pressing labour issues. He then 
intends briefing the Cabinet on the programme of action for this 
year. 
  Ad-hoc planning must be avoided, he says. "We must try to 
prevent a situation of firefighting." 
  Mr. Mboweni, sworn in on Wednesday, had met COSATU [Congress 
of South African Trade Unions] leaders before an interview with 
BUSINESS TIMES on Thursday. A meeting with outgoing Manpower 
Director-General Joel Fourie was planned for Friday. 
  "I expect he'll show me to my office, where the telephone 
is, 
where to make tea ...," says Mr. Mbowenni, asking that he be 
called Tito, not minister. 
  He says personnel of the Department of Manpower, which has 
been renamed the Department of Labour, are not representative of 
SA [South African] society. A programme of training, 
re-training and affirmative action will begin. 
  Mr. Mboweni was due to meet David Brink of Business SA and 
Anglo American's Bobby Godsell, as well as representatives of 
the National Economic Forum, the Chamber of Mines, Seifsa [Steel 
and Engineering Industries Federation of South Africa], NUM 
[National Union of Mineworkers] and Fedsal [Federation of 
Salaried Staff Associations]. 
  The ANC has identified a four-point mission statement to 
guide its approach to the labour market. Economic and human 
development and social justice will be promoted through support 
for collective bargaining, development of fair labour standards 
and practices, human resource development and the facilitation 
of tripartite relations among social partners at national 
industrial levels. 
  Mr. Mboweni says labour-based public works projects, as 
outlined in the Reconstruction and Development Programme (RDP) 
may be housed in the Department of Labour. 
  One of six cabinet ministers in their 30s, Mr. Mboweni sees 
a 
period ahead of acclimatisation in which Cabinet procedures, 
rules and protocols will be learned. He was told he had been 
chosen for the labour job after the ANC's national working 
committee meeting last Wednesday. 
  Ministries will have to help implement the RDP. Mr. 
Mboweni's job will be to ensure jobs are created, that a 
descent, living wage is paid and that workers have safe 
conditions. 
  The Department of Labour intends developing existing forums 
and wants more professional and efficient delivery of services, 
such as skills training. Mr. Mboweni says policy will be less 
about spending more money and more about using more efficient 
systems. 
  Another challenge is to extend basic rights of workers to 
farm labourers. 
  Leslie Maasdorp, who has been co-ordinating labour market 
policy for the ANC, sat in on the interview. He says close to 
6-million people are outside the formal system. Formal 
representation of the unemployed in the process is difficult, 
but the ANC wants it to be as broad as possible. 
  Mr.Maasdorp says past economic policies distorted the labour 
market. Freeing the market will not in itself redress the 
situation. "But we're not arguing for extensive regulation." 
  Government's role will be to protect the vulnerable while 
supporting negotiated settlements. 
  Mr. Mboweni says "job creation must be seen in the context 
of 
a stable and growing economy. Sustainability in very important." 

