BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by President Carlos Roberto Reina and </F>
General Luis Alonso Discua Elvir, commander in chief of the 
Honduran Armed Forces, with unidentified reporters in Palmerola; 
broadcast in progress -- live or recorded] 
  [Text] [Reina] ...institutions that have social claims 
should return to the bargaining table, and from there we will 
ensure the harmony necessary for national peace. 
  [Reporter] Mr. President, I for one have faith in you. Do 
you believe there is some sort of plot to destabilize you behind 
all of this? 
  [Reina] I do not think so. What there has been is 
uneasiness, impatience, and disharmony. For example, government 
changes bring about too many expectations, and all of these 
expectations cannot be satisfied immediately. Therefore, we are 
asking for time. After we are in office for 100 days, we will 
make a public statement. I have asked the Liberal Party for a 
two-year truce to avoid all internal strife until the government 
has stabilized. 
  [Reporter] Honduran civilian workers at the U.S. base here 
are worried, and a group of them asked me to ask you whether 
this base will be closed, leaving them without work. I told 
them not to worry, that everything is fine. What is your 
opinion, Mr. President? 
  [Reina] Everything is indeed fine. The new situation in 
America and in the world makes bases like this useful in times 
of peace. Not everything can be viewed within the context of 
war. These discussions are going to produce the greatest benefit 
in terms of U.S-Honduran relations. 
  [Reporter] With all due respect, Mr. President, I want to 
ask 
General Luis Alonso Discua Elvir a question. General, does the 
kidnapping of this deputy worry you? You look worried. 
  [Discua] Yes, this situation is regrettable. Proper orders 
have already been issued to all Public Forces command posts and 
to the various Army units in the departments where they might 
have taken the deputy. All appropriate steps have been taken, 
but it is regrettable that something like this could take place. 
We had enjoyed relative calm up until now and have not had 
cases such as this one. 
  I believe I once mentioned that open borders would give us 
plenty of problems because of the entry of undesirables. I 
theorized that in the decade of the 1980's and the beginning of 
this decade, problems linked to internal conflicts in Guatemala, 
El Salvador, and Nicaragua would cause us problems if we 
maintained an open border. Honduras has remained relatively calm 
and, therefore, has kept acts such as this one more or less at 
bay. I had forewarned of this, however, and this justifies my 
concern right now. 
  [Reporter] Mr. Luis Alonso Discua, can we assume this is a 
political problem, or is it common crime? 
  [Discua] No, I do not think so. I believe it is likely to be 
common crime. We must remember that recently police and Army 
patrols have clashed with criminal gangs from Nicaragua. We 
have already had one death -- a 9th Infantry Battalion corporal 
-- and another person was wounded. This worries us, and we have 
stepped up our patrols all along the Nicaraguan border. We 
should take note of the geographical location of the kidnapping 
-- a place called Las Delicias, 15 km from San Esteban. The 
deputy was on his way to his lumberyard. It seems the 
kidnappers knew who was traveling, and they left a note trying 
to give credit to an armed political group called Los 
Chinchoneros. I tend to believe they are most likely common 
criminals. 
  [Reporter] Gen. Discua, the social segment of this 14 April 
homage to President Reina has been interrupted. We have also 
seen that in an extraordinary meeting moments ago you have also 
taken measures to protect members of the legislative branch in 
various parts of the country. 
  [Discua] Yes, I have already issued all of the necessary 
orders. I will await any information the police director, Army 
unit commanders, or Army intelligence might be able to gather. 
We want to do away with this sort of situation, which disrupts 
domestic order and creates uneasiness among the Honduran people. 
  [Report] Gen. Discua, we see that however united the Armed 
Forces stand around you as their leader, there is still 
criticism from both within and outside the service. 
  [Discua] This is understandable. We are starting a new 
government. There are great expectations. There are groups 
that want to act to grab power, and there are groups that are 
trying to detract from the institution and its leaders. This is 
normal, and I believe things will quiet down in due course. 
There are great expectations within Honduran society. The 
president has already mentioned this, and this is what is 
causing all of this unrest. 
  [Reporter] Finally, Gen. Luis Alonso Discua: These events 
are worrying the Honduran people. The president has spoken, and 
now you speak as the person who is in control of the nation's 
security. What do you recommend the Honduran family do to 
maintain calm, order, and tranquillity? 
  [Discua] The police have been alerted as well as the Army. 
This situation is regrettable, although we have already seen 
this type of thing taking place in other Central American 
countries, although not in Honduras until now. We were aware 
that this could happen in Honduras, as well as many other 
things. Although Honduras is relatively calm, we can 
nevertheless expect violence because we have open borders 
without any immigration controls on entering Honduras, and this 
has helped undesirables enter the country to carry out violent 
acts such as this one. 
  [Reporter] Gen. Discua, last night I listened to the Voice 
of 
America, and the comments made about you were excellent after 
your statements at midday. 
  [Discua] Yes, this is the way the Armed Forces feels. As its 
representative, I am clearly identified with the process that 
has been going on for a little more than a decade. The Armed 
Forces has been the main factor behind the country's return to 
legality. 
  [Reporter] VOA analysts used you as an example for all of 
Latin America. 
  [Discua] This pleases me. It inspires me to continue my 
mission -- a mission that is not easy at this moment. We have 
left behind difficult times such as the Cold War and the 
ideological war, and we are beginning a process in which the 
factors are different, events are different, and other enemies 
have to be faced. I am asking all of the Honduran people to 
give their support and all of their trust to the president. As 
he has said, these are expectations that have arisen, but we 
hope to find the proper road to the development the country 
needs so much. 

