Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Carlos Eduardo Lins Da Silva] </F>
  [Text] The Brazilian Government last night studied the 
suitability of answering the declarations of U.S. Trade Deputy 
Secretary Jeffrey Garten at the World Trade Center in Miami. 
Garten said Itamar Franco's administration is "resuming trade 
protectionist practices." 
  Garten mentioned two areas (telecommunications and 
informatics) where this protectionism is, in his opinion, more 
obvious. He also cast doubts on the chances for success of 
Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso's economic programs, 
although he recognized Brazil's "potential." He added that the 
country's economic future is full of "uncertainties." 
  Garten's speech comes during a week when relations between 
Brazil and the United States are affected by friction in various 
points. Talks on the issue of intellectual property rights 
continue in Washington and there are good possibilities the 
United States will apply commercial sanctions against Brazil on 
28 February unless there is an unexpected and radical change in 
Brazil's policies on the issue before then. 
  Brazilian Ambassador to Washington Paulo Tarso Flecha de 
Lima 
is in Brasilia. He delivered a personal message from U.S. Trade 
Representative Michael Kantor, with whom the ambassador talked 
on Friday [not further specified] about the issue, to Minister 
Celso Amorim. 
  The harsh Planalto Palace note of 2 February answering the 
State Department report on human rights in 193 countries 
continues to have bad repercussions in the U.S. Government, 
where many people think the study has even been soft on Brazil. 
  Despite the difficulties, the Brazilian Government thinks 
the 
strategy of swiftly and harshly answering any attack against the 
country is proving to be appropriate and must be maintained. 
The most recent example of the success of a quick answer was 
World Bank President Lewis Preston's letter to Ambassador Flecha 
de Lima regretting "the embarrassment" provoked by criticism 
against a Bank of Brazil's vice president, which was rejected in 
harsh and unusual terms by the ambassador on 31 January. 

