Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The prime minister, Mr. P.V. Narasimha Rao, has 
said that there is a disinformation campaign against India on 
the Kashmir issue. 
  Addressing the Indian community at the Guild Hall in London, 
he said we live in a world in which mastery over technique of 
disinformation creates the possibility of more massive 
disinformation. Mr. Rao regretted that Kashmir valley has been 
a victim of proxy war from across the border. The prime 
minister expressed surprise that a country on the verge of being 
declared a terrorist state should talk of human rights. He 
reiterated India's willingness to resume dialogue with Pakistan 
to resolve the bilateral issues despite the provocative and 
unreasonable attitude of the neighboring country. Mr. Rao said 
if the external factor is removed from Jammu and Kashmir, 
normalcy can be brought back there. He expressed confidence that 
the government will achieve normalcy in Kashmir through the 
time-tested democratic method and commitment to the Indian 
values based on a political and consensual approach. 
  During the one-to-one talk with his British counterpart Mr. 
John Major, Mr. Narasimha Rao said India is very much interested 
in resumption of political process in Jammu and Kashmir even 
though the fear of the gun instigated from across the border 
continues. He told Mr. Major that New Delhi is always in favor 
of a dialogue with Islamabad. Mr. Rao also drew Mr. Major's 
attention to the six concrete proposals put forth by India in 
January. 
  Earlier, India and Britain signed an agreement on the 
promotion and protection of investment. Three other memoranda 
of understanding were also signed in the field of power 
generation, telecommunications, and electrical transformers. 
  Later, in an interview to BBC, Mr. Narasimha Rao expressed 
the hope that the bilateral trade would be further stepped up. 
He said the Indo-British Partnership Initiative has been 
extended by another year so that it can complete its tasks. 
Though it has made significant progress certain things still 
remain to be done, Mr. Rao added. 

