CSO 

<F P=106> [Article under the rubric "Crimes and Punishments" by Juozas </F>
Aras: "Narcobusiness Spreading in a Menacing Fashion"] 
  [Text] A few years ago, I had occasion to drive with 
officials of what was then the militia to "apprehend" a little 
old lady, who, with poppy capsules clutched to her bosom, was 
waiting near the Virsuliskes shopping center for "some man in a 
black overcoat" to show up. After she was taken to the militia 
station, the old woman moaned: "Let me go, I knew Snieckus 
himself: I was in the underground with him..." 
  Later I got to drive through the streets of nighttime 
Vilnius 
in an ambulance transporting a young man crazed by narcotics to 
the hospital, who kept yelling the whole time: "My head! Give me 
back my head!"... 
  It is difficult to say, even using the terminology of that 
other time, to what extent these events represented a "mass 
phenomenon" or, on the other hand, "isolated instances." When 
the staffers of the current Interior Ministry counternarcotics 
section visited their colleagues in Denmark, the Danes noted 
almost in jest: "You don't see the problems until you begin 
working at this." 
  Statistics show that the Danes are correct. 1990 was the 
year 
in which the fewest narcotics-related crimes were committed--in 
that year, a reorganization of the Interior Ministry system was 
taking place, and the police were pulled away from their actual 
duties to meetings and other events. In the following year, a 
special counternarcotics group was established in the criminal 
police, and individual agencies and customhouses began to work 
more consistently. And in 1993, 302 narcotics-related crimes 
were recorded, which represented a 26 percent increase over 
1992. This number, however, is not the limit: to get a true 
picture, we would have to multiply it by 10. 
  The charted curve of these crimes is increasing not only in 
length, but also in breadth, and the geographical area they 
affect is expanding as well. Every third crime recorded in 
Lithuania is committed in Vilnius. However, crimes are committed 
in the other large cities as well--Kaunas, Klaipeda, Panevezys, 
Siauliai, Visaginas, and Druskininkai. Of late, some new trends 
are becoming apparent: narcotics-related crimes are also moving 
into rural districts such as Anyksciai, Kupiskis, Pasvalys. 
Border districts are not spared either. 
  Every tenth organized crime group is involved in 
narcobusiness, and quite a few group members, even some of their 
leaders, "are on the needle." A certain category of criminal is 
starting to appear: the narcotics transport courier. Despite all 
this, narcobusiness can still not claim the same degree of 
organization as prostitution, which has existed here under all 
governments. According to one Interior Ministry official, who 
wished to remain anonymous, narcobusiness is still a new 
phenomenon in Lithuania. A couple of years ago we were afraid 
that we might become the bridge for narcotics between the West 
and the East. It looks like this has not occurred, but the 
situation is changing in menacing fashion. 
  The route through the Balkans is already uncomfortable--the 
war going on there creates supplementary worries for the 
narcotics transporters. This is why it is thought that the new 
route might go through the Baltic countries. The aforementioned 
official characterized the situation in this way: there are no 
concrete facts, but there have already been some signals. For 
the time being, events are concentrated along the border with 
Latvia, Kaliningrad, and Belarus. Narcotics transit Lithuania 
on the "Moscow-Kaliningrad" train. Lithuanian poppies, the 
primary narcotic, are transported not only to Latvia, Estonia, 
Saint Petersburg, and Moscow, but have also already reached 
Sweden. The largest quantity of narcotics encountered last year 
by our criminalists consisted of bags containing 60 kilograms of 
poppy capsules. We are now talking in terms of tens of 
kilograms, even though one kilogram of narcotics is already 
considered to be a large quantity. Cases involving quantities of 
up to 10 grams of narcotics are subject to the provisions of the 
administrative code, with quantities in excess of 10 grams 
falling under the criminal code. 
  A new narcotic appeared in circulation recently, when traces 
were found in one addict's syringe. And incidentally, statistics 
tell us a few things about the addicts themselves. 42 percent 
are 30-49 years of age, 30 percent are 25-29, and 25 percent are 
18-24. 72 percent of addicts do not work anywhere. Keeping in 
mind that this is an expensive amusement, the majority of 
addicts encounters serious difficulties, because a jar of poppy 
capsules costs 25 litas at the market, and the total outlay 
approaches 50 litas when the cost of acquiring the most 
essential supplemental chemicals is included. And that is just 
for one day. So the knowledge of life indicates that narcotics 
are the cause of many a crime (thefts, robberies, even murders), 
and there are now few days without them. 
  To tell the truth, it would be quite strange if the 
situation 
were any different, because one could say that the laws tolerate 
everything: from growing narcotic substances to using them. 
Article 107.2 of the "Administrative Code" provides for a 
penalty of from 50 cents to 1 litas for the planting and growing 
of narcotic substances, and article 44 provides for a penalty of 
up to 1 litas or correctional labor--which is not used by anyone 
as a punishment--for illegal acquisition and possession of small 
quantities of narcotics, or their use. So maybe one politician 
of the not so distant past was correct when he said that only an 
utter fool cannot earn money in these times. 
  Although the time for sowing of poppies and hemp is still 
far 
off, advance contracts are possibly already being made with farm 
inhabitants: I'll give you 8,000 litas now, and you will give me 
a field of 10 ares planted with poppies later. Such fields 
cannot be seen in the summer even when you drive by, because 
they are either hidden by bushes or by grain planted along the 
edges of the plot. There are fields of poppies which are 
specifically guarded. This is not new, but rather an element of 
a classic structure. Unfortunately, the police are powerless, 
because they are not authorized to write up an administrative 
report. Only agricultural workers can do that, but of course 
thus far not a single one of them has done so. 
  We do not believe that such laws are being drawn up 
maliciously. The men in the government lack foresight. People 
are simply living for the day. In this case, however, society's 
view is not correct either. Poppies are certainly more dangerous 
than, let us say, marijuana, because opium-based narcotics are 
used intravenously--and this is a real way in which AIDS is 
spread. 
  For many, poppies are just blossoms. What are we going to do 
when the fruit suddenly appears as well? 

