BFN 

<F P=106> [Maksim Yusin report: "Kiev Has No Grounds for Accusing </F>
Kremlin of Inflaming Conflict in Crimea, Russian Foreign 
Ministry Believes"] 
  [Text] "Our stance regarding Crimea remains immutable. 
The peninsula is an inalienable part of Ukraine. We are ready 
to develop economic relations with the Republic of Crimea 
without placing those relations on a political level," Russian 
Deputy Foreign Minister Sergey Krylov told IZVESTIYA. 
  According to Krylov, Moscow is interested in a political 
solution of the problems between Kiev and Simferopol. On the 
morning of 20 May the Russian Foreign Ministry still had no 
clear picture of what was actually happening on the peninsula. 
"We were receiving contradictory information," Krylov said. 
"If the reports that only `planned exercises' are being carried 
out in the Crimea are corroborated, then, given the tense 
situation, advance notification was necessary to avoid any 
unnecessary fuss." 
  Another high-ranking Foreign Ministry staffer, who wished to 
remain anonymous, voiced the hope that the Crimean leadership 
will show restraint and will not take matters to the point of 
confrontation with Ukraine: "According to the information at 
our disposal, Yuriy Meshkov has adopted a moderate stance and 
has advised the Supreme Council to defer examination of the 
question of restoring the Constitution of Crimea in the form it 
was adopted 6 May 1992." Moscow fears that if parliament does 
nevertheless go ahead and makes changes to the Constitution, 
this will result in a new bout of tension. IZVESTIYA has been 
given to understand that Moscow is in favor of the Crimean 
legislators' deferring examination of this explosive issue. 
  According to information from Smolensk Square [Russian 
Federation Foreign Ministry], the diplomatic departments of 
Russia and Ukraine are in constant contact. According to our 
Foreign Ministry, Kiev has no grounds at all for accusing the 
Kremlin of inflaming the conflict: Both President Yeltsin and 
the Foreign Ministry have repeatedly stated that Russia has no 
territorial claims on Ukraine and will not interfere in its 
internal affairs. At the same time IZVESTIYA's interlocutors did 
not deny that the increased number of trips made to the Crimea 
by Duma deputies, who sometimes make provocative statements, is 
destabilizing the situation. 

