BFN 

<F P=106> ["Epistle by the Anti-Fascist Committee of the Ukrainian </F>
Nationalist Assembly"; date not given] 
  [Text] The alliance of the left- and right-wing forces 
within the Supreme Council of new convocation against the people 
has opened up the road toward political fascism in Ukraine. As 
has always been in history, irresponsible liberal-bourgeois 
political intriguers are the motive force for the political 
fascistization of Ukrainian society. Mr. Chornovil's political 
blocs in the Supreme Council are nothing more than an attempt to 
reduce the pro-fascist factors of various denominations to a 
common denominator. The comprador-like Ukrainian bourgeoise and 
its master -- transnational capital -- have sensed a threat to 
their own existence. Hence the hysterical appeals to "law" and 
"force" that both the "left-" and "right-wing" to which 
candidates are resorting. 
  The fascistization of Ukrainian society proceeds to the 
accompaniment of the loud cacophony of the bourgeois mass media. 
The self-styled "political scientists" and "analysts" 
deliberately misinform the audience on the situation in the 
country. The only difference between their views lies in the 
fact that some of them do this to their own advantage and 
ambitions, while others do this to satisfy the social demands of 
a certain class. Through the efforts of the Ukrainian press and 
television, reality has been transformed into a distorting 
mirror. They even went so far as to declare the UNA-UNSO 
[Ukrainian Nationalist Assembly-Ukrainian National Self- 
Defense] a "pro-fascist organization." Some people believe this! 
  Some people believe because alongside the political 
fascistization of Ukraine, a cultural one is taking place -- 
something that is bringing about a fascistization of society at 
a social level. Editorials of Ukraine's leading bourgeois 
newspaper, which claims to be liberally unblemished, consist of 
dirt: slander against the UNA-UNSO as a basis for political 
disinformation, corruption of spiritual values by criminal 
chronicles, and the cultural ersatz of provincial banality. 
  Is it anything but the ideal of "total mediocrity" -- the 
goal of fascism in culture? 
  Direct agents of foreign forces in the person of various 
left-wing, right-wing, and "ethnic" radicals are playing a 
provocative role in the fascistization of Ukrainian society. 
  The political phraseology of the Ukrainian "eternal past" 
figures betrays their master. The liberation movement of 
Russian Slavs could be destroyed by the simple trick with 
internationalism ["mondalizm"] and was driven underground. This 
recipe is now being implemented in Ukraine. 
  Beware of Gallic coachmen bringing the gifts of the Danaans. 
People, the UNA-UNSO loves you. Take care! 

