BFN 

  [Text] Pale, 10 Jun (TANJUG) -- Bosnian Serb President 
Radovan Karadzic said at a news conference in Pale today that 
the Serbian side made the maximum effort to save the latest 
peace talks in Geneva. The Muslim side was successfully 
torpedoing the talks all the time. They began by setting 
nonsensical preconditions concerning Gorazde, and when even the 
minutest details were ironed out, they proposed the signing of 
some kind of four-week cease-fire, Karadzic said. 
  "We could have refused, but we wished to give the conference 
a chance and we finally accepted Akashi's proposal for a 
month-long truce," Karadzic added. He assessed that the world 
media finally realized after the Geneva gathering that the 
Serbian side is for peace, while it became clear to everyone 
that the Muslim side is for war. Karadzic also said that the 
Geneva agreement is not at the level of a cease-fire, but that 
it carries certain weight nevertheless, primarily applying to 
POW swaps, which is an element of a cessation of hostilities. 
We have succeeded in this respect, because our opponents 
promised to carry out the exchange. 
  Commenting on the vote in the U.S. House of Representatives 
with regard to lifting the arms embargo against Bosnia's 
Muslims, Karadzic said that this decision is not legally 
binding. "I do not know how this decision could be translated 
into practice when the embargo itself does not exist. The 
Muslims are receiving arms on a daily basis. This could help 
certain countries unilaterally lift their embargo against us," 
he said. 
  The republic of Srpska president recalled that Clinton could 
use his power of veto, and that this decision is a form of 
pressure aimed at effecting the acceptance of a new peace plan. 
"I believe that a new map is being prepared, a map unacceptable 
to us, and partly acceptable to the Muslims. That is why we 
should establish cooperation with the international community as 
soon as possible and take part in drawing up these maps, so we 
can tell them precisely what is and what is not acceptable," 
Karadzic said. 
  Commenting on hints that the sanctions against the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia might be lifted, Karadzic said that this 
is an attempt to create the illusion of America's impartiality. 
The sanctions should nevertheless be lifted, regardless of the 
outcome of the talks on Bosnia, because these sanctions are 
affecting a country that is not at war. 
  Speaking about the latest cease-fire which came into effect 
at noon today, the republic of Srpska president said that the 
republic of Srpska would now assume a position of passive 
defense. However, if the Muslims fail to honor the cease-fire, 
we will turn this into active defense, so they risk losing 
everything, Radovan Karadzic concluded. 

