BFN 

<F P=106> [By Bao Pu] </F>
  [Text] Five years after the Tiananmen Square crackdown, 
many Chinese live in enforced silence. They suffer helplessly 
and are consumed with anger and dismay. 
  My father, Bao Tong, was arrested suddenly on May 28, 1989, 
in connection with the student movement that spring. Still in 
prison, his health is being ruined by these years of solitary 
confinement. Our family endures endless worry and constant fear. 
  Before his incarceration, Bao Tong was Director of the 
Central Research Institute for Political Reform and a senior 
adviser to the then party general secretary, Zhao Ziyang. Their 
plans for political reform included separating the powers of 
party and state, setting up a fair civil service policy, and 
promoting democratic procedures in the Government. 
  But by 1989, after two years of quiet work, Bao Tong's plans 
for political reform had become virtually impossible to pursue 
due to enormous resistance from the threatened old guard. That 
spring, when the conservatives in the government used the 
student demonstrations to prepare to oust the reformers, Bao 
Tong, along with Mr Zhao, attempted to protect the fragile 
future of political reform and also avoid what they knew could 
be a bloody crackdown on the movement. 
  When the situation intensified and ultimate bloodshed seemed 
unavoidable, Mr Zhao resigned. Later, Mr Zhao was denounced for 
"supporting the turmoil" and "splitting the party." But Bao 
took the blame as the key person behind the unrest, he was 
formally arrested, accused of "counterrevolutionary incitement," 
and finally sentenced to seven years' imprisonment. His 
institute was dismantled and political reform in China came to a 
halt. 
  The efforts of those who attempted to reform the existing 
system were crushed in their efforts to elevate the rights of 
the Chinese citizen. 
  The June 4 crackdown, the imprisonment of Bao Tong, and the 
continuous political repression are not only attacks to crush 
political dissent but also attacks on a fragile idea, the 
recognition of personal dignity, which is just beginning to take 
root in the minds of the Chinese people. 
  In the past, lack of respect for individual lives has led 
the 
Chinese people into numerous catastrophes: Horrors created by 
senseless political campaigns. The Great Leap Forward, the 
People's Communes, and the Cultural Revolution all ended in 
massive devastation. 
  Decisions made by the Chinese leadership in the 1990's have 
continued to reveal a disregard for the individual. Plans to 
displace millions of people for the building of a dam are made 
with no attempt to gain the support of those whose lives would 
be disrupted. Government bonds are frequently given to 
employees in place of wages. The coastal belt and some urban 
areas receive privileged development conditions while the rural 
populations in interior provinces have been left out. 
  These are all potentially volatile situations and if they 
accumulate over time the likelihood of disaster increases. 
  It is unreasonable for Americans to depend on an institution 
such as business, whose bottom line is profit, to be the major 
driving force for promoting lofty principles in China. Yet, 
business itself may be increasingly frustrated by the system of 
coercion and autocracy that remains in China. The nation's 
already rampant corruption is likely to worsen, as there is 
nothing to inhibit its flourishing. 
  China has always fallen into dynastic cycles of the 
establishment of an autocratic regime, corruption and 
oppression, and finally internal rebellion. The longer the 
oppression, the more violent the revolt. The economic boom 
today can be overturned overnight in this unstable system of 
totalitarianism. Patriarch Deng Xiaoping's death followed by a 
power struggle could release the pent-up dissatisfaction of the 
people. 
  Ideas of respect for the individual need to be promoted at 
all levels of Chinese society, or the dynastic cycle will 
continue to take its course. Above all, to respect all human 
lives, to be concerned with human suffering: That is what the 
June 4 movement and human rights are all about. 

