BFN 

<F P=106> [Announcer-read report over video] </F>
  [Text] An agreement was signed in Ashgabat on the 
transportation of natural gas from Turkmenistan via pipeline 
through Iran and Turkey to Europe. 
  According to TRT correspondent Yavuz Kocak, the relevant 
ministers of the cosignatory countries attended a committee 
meeting this morning under the chairmanship of Turkmen President 
Saparmurad Niyazov. Representing Turkey at the committee was 
Energy and Natural Resources Minister Veysel Atasoy. The topics 
discussed and decisions made at the committee were later relayed 
to representatives of organizations and firms, which will 
undertake the project, during a consortium meeting chaired by 
Niyazov. 
  According to the agreement, which was signed among Turkey, 
Turkmenistan, Iran, and Russia, the section of the 
Turkmenistan-Europe natural gas pipeline extending up to the 
Turkish border will be undertaken by Iran. The section through 
Turkish territory will be constructed by Botas [Pipeline and 
Petroleum Transport Corporation] and the firms in the 
consortium. The construction of the Turkmenistan-Europe natural 
gas pipeline, which is expected to cost approximately $9 
billion, will take five years. 
  Atasoy said that with the conclusion of this project and 
agreements to be reached with other countries, Turkey will be 
consuming 40 billion cubic meters of natural gas in the 2000's. 
Pointing out that efforts are under way to increase the natural 
gas imported from Russia, Atasoy said the following to TRT: 
  [Begin Atasoy recording] In addition to this, we want to 
purchase natural gas from Iran. We may receive natural gas from 
Iran in a short time. Negotiations to this effect will be 
conducted with the Iranian minister this afternoon. Moreover, 
the arrival of natural gas from Turkmenistan will take at least 
five years. This will enable us to supply our industrialists in 
Kayseri, Adana, and Icel with natural gas. With the realization 
of the projects on natural gas from three main sources, namely 
Turkmenistan, Iran, and Russia, we will have diversified our 
natural gas sources. This will allow Turkey to consume 40 
billion cubic meters of natural gas in the 2000's. In other 
words, natural gas will occupy a more important place in our 
energy policy. A significant part of the power stations we are 
planning will consequently depend on natural gas. [end 
recording] 
  It was reported that this subject was discussed during the 
meeting held between Atasoy and Iranian Petroleum Minister 
Gholam Reza Aqazadeh-Kho'i in Ashgabat this afternoon. 

