BFN 

  [Text] [Studio announcer] President of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency Alija Izetbegovic today visited 
the free Brcko territory. On his tour of this commune, 
President Izetbegovic was accompanied by Army General Rasim 
Delic, Commander of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army 2d Corps Hasim 
Sabic, and (Izet Hadzic), president of the Tuzla Commune's local 
government. Hamid Deronjic reports. 
  [Begin Deronjic recording] The distinguished guests were 
received by the highest civilian and military representatives of 
the Brcko Commune, while Colonel Ramiz Kljakic, commander of the 
legendary 108th Motorized Brcko Brigade, acted as host to 
President Izetbegovic. Immediately upon arrival in our commune, 
President Izetbegovic expressed the wish to visit the forward 
front lines, [words indistinct]. Touring the forward front 
lines of the fiercest front in Bosnia-Herzegovina, President 
Izetbegovic particularly stressed the high morale of the members 
of the 108th Motorized and 108th Infantry Brcko Brigades and 
accentuated the well organized coexistence of Muslims and Croats 
in our commune. The manner of organizing mutual life of Muslims 
and Croats in the Brcko Commune will probably serve as a model 
and example throughout our young state of Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
President Izetbegovic stressed. 
  Army General Rasim Delic reiterated that after the ugly 
experience of Gorazde and the international community's 
impotence in restraining the crazed Serbian aggressor, we must 
primarily base our struggle on our own potential and strength, 
and must create an impenetrable fortress of the remaining free 
parts of our state, which will be the basis for the further 
liberation of the territory under chetnik control. Brcko is the 
key to the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina, and for our part, we shall 
do everything to see that preparations for the final showdown 
with the Chetniks proceed in the best possible way. We have 
nothing to fear because in these decisive moments of the war for 
a free and independent Bosnia-Herzegovina, the Presidency, the 
government, and the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army Command will help, 
added General Delic. 
  After touring the forward front lines, the delegation 
visited 
several places in the free Brcko territory. The visit ended 
with a chat with the wounded and the seriously and slightly 
wounded veterans of the legendary 108th Motorized Brcko Brigade, 
who were presented with appropriate awards. [end recording] 

