Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] After an eight-month investigation, the National 
Police of Ecuador have broken up a powerful drug trafficking 
gang that had been operating internationally. This operation was 
coordinated with Mexican authorities who, through Operation 
"Azteca," have in recent days confiscated almost a ton of 
cocaine in Mexico. 
  The drug traffickers were illicitly sending cocaine from 
Colombia to the United States through Mexico, and a large part 
of their illegal profits were returned to Ecuador to be invested 
in real estate and luxury items. 
  On 28 December 1993 the police began the antidrug operation. 
The organization in Mexico was led by Humberto Segundo 
Montenegro Freire, a Colombian citizen now being held by the 
Mexican authorities; 20 other persons in his organization, who 
were Colombian, Mexican, and Spanish nationals, were also 
arrested. 
  A number of Humberto Montenegro's close relatives lived in 
Quito, including his mother, Clara Freire, his siblings, 
Fernando Montenegro, Cecilia Montenegro, Carlos Montenegro, and 
Liliana Montenegro, and his brother-in-law, Modesto Polo Perez. 
They received the money that Humberto Montenegro sent from 
Mexico, and invested it in real estate, luxury cars, jewels, and 
other items. These funds were brought to Ecuador by couriers who 
traveled back and forth between Mexico and Ecuador. 
  Operation "Azteca" was set up after the seizure of almost a 
ton of cocaine in Mexico on 18 and 19 December 1993, leading to 
the arrest of Humberto Montenegro and 20 of his colleagues. 
After this operation in Mexico, and with confirmation of 
intelligence reports on money transfers to Ecuador, the National 
Police initiated Operation "Azteca" in Ecuador, acting in 
coordination with Mexican authorities. This operation led to the 
arrest of 11 persons and the seizure of a number of properties, 
weapons, jewels, and numerous luxury cars. 
  After the operation, numerous bank accounts used by members 
of the organization were identified. The police, acting in 
coordination with the appropriate authorities, are investigating 
the identities and movements of these accounts. Police sources 
have said that since these inquiries have just begun, it will 
not be possible to provide further information at this time. 
  The police stated that, at the time this report was 
released, 
there were no indications that Ecuadoran banks were supporting 
or abetting these illicit activities. However, the 
investigations are continuing, and they remain in contact with 
officials from the Office of the Attorney General of Mexico, in 
order to exchange information that may aid in the investigative 
process in both countries. For that reason, an Ecuadoran 
National Police delegation will soon visit Mexico. 
  The Ecuadoran police are working every day to maintain civil 
peace in Ecuador, reported official police spokespersons. 

