Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Marina Lebedeva report: "United Nations To Help Russia </F>
Solve Refugee Problem"] 
  [Text] This was stated at a press conference held at the 
International Press Center by Juan Amunategi, the first 
accredited representative in Russia of the UNHCR. 
  He announced that, according to UNHCR figures, there are a 
total of 20 million forced migrants and 19 million refugees in 
the world who have left their countries for various reasons. 
Their fate is complex, they endure terrible trials and risk 
their lives, but as long as persecution and discrimination 
persist a refugee problem will be inevitable. This has been 
confirmed by life -- the UNHCR was set up in 1951 for just three 
years, but still exists today. It has already solved problems 
for 13 million refugees and has twice been awarded the Nobel 
Peace Prize -- in 1954 and 1981. 
  Speaking about the situation in Russia, the UN 
representative 
noted that the refugee problem is still a new one for this 
country. Until recently the former Soviet Union was aware of 
just one "sort" of refugees -- Communists who had fled from 
their own countries and were accepted by the USSR for 
exclusively political reasons. This happened following the 
Spanish Civil War and the Chilean coup. It was only after 
perestroyka and the collapse of the Union that the top Russian 
authorities joined the world community, which deals with refugee 
issues in humanitarian terms, in terms of the protection of 
their rights. 
  Juan Amunategi drew attention to the fact that, despite 
recognizing international documents and despite its own laws on 
refugees and forced migrants, Russia is often incapable of 
meeting its own commitments, because its economic position is 
failing to improve. 
  In this connection, the UN representative noted, the 
Commission considered it necessary to give Russia all the 
assistance it could in solving this complex problem. This 
assistance will be implemented in six areas. Juan Amunategi 
said that priority should go to the defense of refugees' rights 
and to aid to the country's government in creating institutions 
and organs capable of skillfully tackling the problem. 
  Amunategi also noted that the law on refugees envisages the 
creation of transit camps for them. Four such camps already 
exist near Moscow, currently housing around 1,000 refugees. It 
is planned to give them material aid. 
  One other important area is to curb emigration -- in 
particular, by informing citizens planning to leave their own 
countries and come to Russia of the real living conditions 
facing refugees. Conditions should be created for arriving 
refugees to integrate into the local community -- this will 
benefit not only the refugees but the locals. 

