Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The Husayn-'Arafat Meeting"] </F>
  [Text] The quick working visit of Palestinian President 
Yasir 'Arafat to Jordan to brief his brother, His Majesty King 
Husayn, on the outcome of the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations 
held in Cairo, comes as a reaffirmation of the vital historic 
relations between the Jordanian and Palestinian political 
leaderships. This visit also stressed the deep and strong 
bilateral understanding and coordination between them. 
  The Jordanian leadership has always been eager for 
coordination, particularly with the Palestinian side. Moreover, 
Jordan has continued to call incessantly for increasing the 
level of coordination on every occasion, including the 
Palestinian president's visit yesterday. His Majesty King 
Husayn once again emphasized the importance of continued 
coordination and consultations among all Arab parties, 
especially since such coordination will enable the Palestinian 
side, in particular, to consolidate its negotiating position and 
regain its rights. 
  Jordan welcomed the Palestinian-Israeli Declaration of 
Principles that was signed approximately four months ago. While 
maintaining its adherence to the option of a just and 
comprehensive peace, Jordan can only express its support for the 
recent Cairo agreement. This is because the agreement is a 
strong mechanism for implementing the Declaration of Principles, 
and it will open the way for Israeli military withdrawal from 
Gaza Strip and some areas in the occupied West Bank. 
  The Husayn-'Arafat meeting yesterday, and the deep fraternal 
talks the two leader held, were a good opportunity for Jordan to 
stress its constant position of extending full and absolute 
support for the Palestinian kinsfolk and brothers. At the same 
time, this meeting was another opportunity for the Palestinian 
president to express the Palestinian people's thanks and 
gratitude to His Majesty King Husayn for his courageous 
positions in sharing the Palestinians concerns and defending the 
causes of the one Jordanian-Palestinian family. 

