BFN 

  [Excerpts] The capital of Cuanza Norte Province, 
N'dalatando, has once again been transformed into a scene of war 
by the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola 
[UNITA] rebels. Over the past 24 hours, the UNITA soldiers have 
shelled the city with heavy artillery. By now there are more 
than 30 wounded people in the provincial hospital, and there is 
a shortage of medicine. Our correspondent Abilio Correia 
reports from the area: 
  [Begin Correia recording] After a calm day yesterday, the 
UNITA rebels at dawn today began shelling Angolan Armed Forces 
[FAA] positions on the outskirts of the city. Lieutenant 
General Manuel Jose Nego, commander of the Cuanza Norte Military 
Region, has told our reporters that government forces are 
continuing its follow-up operations, causing heavy losses to the 
rebels. More than five Armed Forces for the Liberation of 
Angola soldiers were killed yesterday. The FAA officer also 
said that the eight soldiers captured in N'dalatando recently, 
when UNITA commando and regular battalions coming from Huambo 
tried to take over the city, include a high-ranking officer. He 
said the government forces are in control of the situation. 
Since 15 June, when Jonas Savimbi's soldiers began shelling the 
city with long-range arms, more than 300 C-30 and 85-mm shells 
fell on the city of N'dalatando and outlying areas. About 30 
civilians who were seriously wounded in UNITA shellings may soon 
die due to a shortage of medicine in the local hospital. [end 
recording] 
  The sound of guns is still heard in Kuito. Jonas Savimbi has 
given an ultimatum to his men to take over the city within the 
next few days. Fernando Luis, Radio Nacional de Angola 
journalist in Bie, was seriously wounded following the latest 
shellings of UNITA. Abel Abraao reports: 
  [Begin Abraao recording] Jonas Savimbi, leader of the rebel 
organization, has given an ultimatum to his men to take the city 
of Kuito within the next few hours. To this effect, huge 
military convoys, including some battalions operating [words 
indistinct] carrying highly sophisticated military equipment are 
still arriving in the outskirts of the city of Kuito and Cunje 
commune. In the continuous shelling of the city of Kuito by 
UNITA soldiers over the past 24 hours, more than 50 civilians 
have been killed and 72 others wounded. The wounded include 
Fernando Damiao Luis, Radio Nacional de Angola journalist, who 
is seriously injured in the [word indistinct]. [passage omitted] 
[end recording] 
  The night was also not calm in the city of Malanje. All the 
night UNITA has been shelling the city's outlying areas, but its 
action was unsuccessful. [passage omitted] 

