Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Profile": "Gaydar Rejecting Post in New Cabinet" -- XINHUA </F>
headline] 
  [Text] Moscow, January 16 (XINHUA) -- Russia's First 
Deputy Prime Minister Yegor Gaydar, 37, said today he will not 
joint the new cabinet, the list of which is expected to be 
issued on Monday [17 January]. 
  At a news briefing, Gaydar, the "shock-therapy" economic 
reform architect in Russia, said: "I have decided to reject the 
offer made by the chairman of the government (Viktor 
Chernomyrdin) and not to take the post of the first 
vice-premier." 
  He said he categorically disagreed with the decisions taken 
by the government, including the signing of an interbank 
agreement on Belarus entering a monetary union with Russia and 
the government's decision to build a new parliamentary building 
which will cost 500 million U.S. dollars. 
  "I cannot be in the government and in the opposition at one 
and the same time," Gaydar said. 
  Gaydar, who is President Boris Yeltsin's top aide in charge 
of market-oriented economic reforms, told reporters that he 
discussed the issue with Yeltsin on Thursday and the president 
understood his position. 
  The "Russia's Choice" bloc's leader said that he intends to 
concentrate on his work in the state Duma, the lower house of 
the Parliament, adding that the bloc intends to do its best not 
to admit representatives of the Liberal Democratic Party led by 
Vladimir Zhirinovskiy to key committees of the lower chamber -- 
the defense, security and international policy committees. 
  Last Monday, only one day before the new parliament's two 
chambers opened their first sessions respectively, Yeltsin 
signed a presidential decree on reshuffling the federal 
government with an aim to "improve the efficiency of the 
government's work." 
  In accordance with the order, there will be four deputy 
prime 
ministers instead of one, and two of them will be first deputy 
prime ministers. In addition, the government staff and the 
number of ministries and committees will be cut. 
  Meanwhile, the current government head Chernomyrdin was 
ordered to submit a reshuffle list as soon as possible. Gaydar 
had been seen most possible to become one of the first deputy 
prime minister in the new cabinet. 
  However, he himself rejected the possibility today. 
  Gaydar, who graduated from the economic faculty of the 
Moscow 
State University, is a master of economic sciences. 
  In the 1980s, he worked at several scientific, system 
research or economic institutes, and as an editor of the 
COMMUNIST journal and as an editor of the PRAVDA daily. 
  Between 1990 and 1991, Gaydar was director of the Institute 
of Economic Policy of the Soviet Economic Academy. In 1991-1992 
period, he was deputy chairman of the Russian Government in 
charge of economic reform and economics and finance minister of 
the former Soviet republic. 
  In the second half of 1992, he worked as acting prime 
minister chairman of Russia. 
  But in a secret ballot at the 7th Congress of the former 
Russian Parliament headed by Ruslan Khasbulatov, Gaydar failed 
to win the required majority of votes to be elected head of the 
Russian Government, and he was removed from the post of the 
acting prime minister. 
  In 1992, Gaydar was appointed by Yeltsin director of the 
Institute of Economic Problems of the Transitional Period, and 
became Yeltsin's chief adviser for economic issues. 
  Last September, Gaydar was named by Yeltsin first deputy 
prime minister and performed the duties of economics minister. 
  Since last November, weeks before the Parliament elections 
started, Gaydar has been leader of the "Russia's Choice" bloc, 
now one of several big factions in the lower house. 

