BFN 

  [Excerpts] A new poll conducted by Ibope [Brazilian Public 
Opinion and Statistics Institute] reveals how Brazilians would 
vote if the presidential elections were held today. 
  The poll took into account three different candidates for 
the 
PMDB [Brazilian Democratic Movement Party] because the party has 
not yet elected its presidential candidate. 
  According to Ibope if the elections were held today, Workers 
Party candidate Inacio Lula Da Silva would be in first place 
with 33 percent of the votes. Former Finance Minister Fernando 
Henrique Cardoso of the PSDB [Brazilian Social Democracy Party] 
would be in second place with 14 percent. Sao Paulo Mayor Paulo 
Maluf of the PPR [Progressive Renewal Party] would be in third 
place with 10 percent. Rio de Janeiro Governor Leonel Brizola of 
the PDT [Democratic Labor Party] would be fourth with 8 percent, 
and Bahia Governor Antonio Carlos Magalhaes of the PFL [Liberal 
Front Party] would be fifth with 5 percent. If the PMDB 
candidate were former Sao Paulo Governor Orestes Quercia, he 
would be in sixth place with 4 percent. Flavio Rocha of the 
Liberal Party would be seventh with 1 percent. The undecided, 
blank, and null votes would be 25 percent. [passage omitted] 
  If Senator Jose Sarney were the candidate of the PMDB, Luis 
Inacio Lula da Silva would still be in first place with 30 
percent of the votes. Former Finance Minister Fernando Henrique 
Cardoso would keep second place with 13 percent of the votes. 
Jose Sarney would be in third place with 11 percent of the 
votes. Mayor Paulo Maluf would be fourth with 10 percent. 
Governor Leonel Brizola would be fifth with 7 percent. Governor 
Antonio Carlos Magalhaes would be sixth with 5 percent. Flavio 
Rocha would be seventh with 1 percent. The undecided, blank and 
null votes would be 23 percent. 
  The Ibope poll does not show what the results would be if 
Governor of Parana Roberto Requiao runs for the PMDB. 
  The poll also shows the people's preferences after Sao Paulo 
Mayor Paulo Maluf withdrew from the race. Maluf's decision to 
withdraw, made in Sao Paulo yesterday afternoon, led Ibope to 
conduct another poll. The following are the first four 
candidates: 
  According to Ibope if the elections were held today Luis 
Inacio Lula da Silva would continue to lead with 37 percent of 
the votes. Former Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso 
would be second with 19 perecent. Governor Leonel Brizola would 
be third with 10 perecent, and former Governor Orestes Quercia 
would be fourth with 6 percent. The undecided, blank, and null 
votes would be 28 percent. [passage omitted] 

