Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Tim Kelsey and Martin Himmelheimer: "Royal </F>
Ordnance Exported Weapons to East Germany"] 
  [Text] Britain's largest state-run arms company was at the 
centre of a network for the secret supply of arms to the Stasi, 
the East German security police, the INDEPENDENT can reveal. 
The evidence implicating Royal Ordnance in the traffic to the 
former NATO enemy is in the possession of the German 
authorities, which are prosecuting a subsidiary of the British 
company for illegal arms exports. 
  The evidence points to systematic breaches in export rules 
by 
British companies on a scale far greater than that so far 
exposed by the Scott inquiry into arms for Iraq. Harry Cohen, 
the Labour MP, has asked Lord Justice Scott to consider evidence 
implicating Royal Ordnance in these breaches but he has said it 
falls outside the remit of his investigation. Royal Ordnance 
has repeatedly denied breaching any arms export rules. 
  In August 1991, it emerged in German press reports that 
weapons manufactured by Heckler and Koch [H and K], a renowned 
German machine gun and rifle manufacturer, had been discovered 
in a Stasi office in Berlin. An investigation by German 
prosecutors has shown the weapons were exported from H and K to 
Royal Ordnance in the UK, to evade tight German rules on the 
arms trade, then reassembled and exported using false paperwork 
to East Germany. The export licences said the ships were 
heading for Columbia. In fact, they sailed across the Baltic 
Sea to Rostock. 
  Evidence for three shipments has emerged: in 1985 and 1986, 
when Royal Ordnance was a state-run company, and in 1988 when 
the company had been privatised and sold to British Aerospace. 
The 1988 shipment appears to have been aborted, and the weapons 
were not sold. 
  Inquiries by the INDEPENDENT have established that an 
intermediary of the East Germans met a representative from H and 
K's office in the UK and told him that the Columbians were 
interested in the purchase of H and K weapons. He provided an 
end-user certificate for Columbia, which prosecutors believe was 
acquired by bribing a senior official of the Columbian military. 
The British provided an export licence on the basis of this 
end-user, according to the German state prosecutor. 
  The weapons were ordered through Royal Ordnance, apparently 
on behalf of H and K's UK representative, from the H and K 
factory in Oberndorf. They were then handed to a British export 
agency. The ship, the MS Neuhausen, was managed and licensed to 
an East German company. A spokeswoman for the shipping agents, 
Deutsche Seereederei of Rostock, confirmed the ship served the 
UK, but did not comment on these specific shipments. Royal 
Ordnance and H and K have denied that they were aware the 
weapons were going to East Germany. In 1988, the false end-user 
did not satisfy the British authorities and the export was not 
allowed to go ahead. 
  It later emerged that the intermediary, identified in 
documents as Karlheinz Schulz, was contracted by the state-run 
East German firm, IMES, to arrange the shipments from the UK. 
IMES was run by a Stasi official. It was later discovered that 
Schulz worked for the East German security services as an arms 
procurement agent. 
  Documents show that H and K sold 100 MP5 machine guns -- the 
same kind used by the British SAS [Special Air Service] -- and 
100 sniper rifles to Royal Ordnance for the 1985 shipment. They 
were sold in parts and reassembled at the Royal Ordnance small 
arms plant in Enfield, which closed in 1987 when the company was 
privatised. In 1986, there was a second shipment of 100 rifles. 
These were among those found at the Stasi headquarters in 
Berlin in 1991. 
  After the discovery of the weapons, the German authorities 
began an investigation. Two years ago, an H and K spokeswoman 
denied any responsibility for exporting them to the Stasi and 
said "We have exported those weapons to a West European 
country." And that, it can now be confirmed, was Britain. 
  A senior executive from Heckler &amp; Koch is currently on 
trial 
in Rottweil, Baden-Wurttemberg, charged with illegally exporting 
weapons to the Middle East. Royal Ordnance has so far declined 
to comment on the allegations, which have caused uproar in 
Germany. 
  It has also emerged since the trial started that the same 
network was used to allegedly supply the Contras in Nicaragua, 
and the Middle East, including Iraq. The INDEPENDENT revealed 
last year that H and K weapons have been exported to Serbia 
since the UN embargo was imposed in 1991. H and K have denied 
any knowledge of the destination of these weapons. 

