Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] The Council of Ministers held a session today 
under Prime Minister Dr. 'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali, during which 
it discussed several issues, including the measures taken in the 
port of al-'Aqabah and the Straits of Tiran against 
al-'Aqabah-bound vessels. The council also discussed the 
situation in the occupied territories in the wake of the 
arbitrary Israeli measures there. 
  Dr. Jawad al-'Anani, minister of state for Cabinet Affairs 
and Information Minister, held a news conference on the issues 
that the cabinet discussed today. 
  [Begin al-'Anani recording] The Council of Ministers today 
reviewed the measures that are being taken in the port of 
al-'Aqabah and the Straits of Tiran to search vessels on their 
way to Jordan, and the great losses the Jordanian economy incurs 
due to these measures. These losses have been estimated at more 
than $1.3 billion from 1990 until now. These sums have been 
paid by the Jordanian consumer and importer as a result of the 
unreasonable measures that are used to search the vessels or to 
send them back. This has made the prices of cargo spiral to a 
point that has greatly affected the Jordanian economy. 
  The government believes that the current search operations 
are a means of putting pressure on Jordan to have it adopt 
political stands during the current peace process that it cannot 
condone. This method will come to no avail with Jordan. From 
this premise, the government takes great pride in and completely 
supports his majesty's statements yesterday, as well as the 
press statement issued after his Majesty King Husayn met with 
the ambassadors of the five UN Security Council permanent 
members. 
  We have taken note of the reactions, especially by the 
United 
States, and believe these reactions contain positive points that 
could contribute to ending the present problem of the methods 
used in inspecting al-'Aqabah-bound vessels. 
  We emphasize that the government is still waiting for the 
United States and the other concerned parties to make a decision 
expeditiously and without delay in this respect to end this 
problem as soon as possible and to allow the Jordanian economy 
to return to its normal activities and vigor and tackle the 
problems from which it suffers, particularly unemployment and 
poverty. 
  The prohibitive price Jordan has paid could, of course, be 
compensated and Jordan should call for such compensation. 
  The second point I wish to speak about today, and which is 
connected to this, is that the Jordanian Government, or the 
Council of Ministers reviewed today the violence in the occupied 
territories, particularly the massacre that took place in 
Jabaliyah camp in Gaza yesterday, martyring eight Palestinians. 
We believe that the continuation of violence in the West Bank 
and the Gaza Strip proves that Israel until now still prefers to 
resort to military methods. This massacre has taken place two 
days before Land Day. As you know, Land Day falls tomorrow. 
This day reminds us all of the arbitrary measures the Israeli 
authorities carry out in a manner that conflicts with the 
atmosphere of peace that should prevail for the attainment of a 
just and comprehensive solution in the region. While it 
denounces the killings, woundings, and persecution operations 
against our people in the occupied Arab territories, the 
Jordanian Government would like too to celebrate Land Day 
tomorrow to emphasize that peace cannot be attained unless all 
the occupied Arab territories, including of course occupied Arab 
Jerusalem, are regained and the Palestinian people are given 
their full rights on their land and national soil. 
  Thus, we also believe that the current pressure on Jordan, 
along with the cases of violence fabricated by the Israeli 
authorities in the Arab territories and the killing of innocent 
people, are both a form of pressure and an expression of will 
that causes us to cast doubt on Israel's intentions toward the 
peace process. Jordan fully insists that a just and honorable 
peace should ultimately prevail. 
  We should also talk about some domestic issues. Today, the 
Council of Ministers reviewed the many reports published in the 
newspapers and the statements by some trade unions accusing the 
Jordanian Government of seeking to weaken or undermine them, and 
similar rumors. The Council of Ministers reviewed this issue. 
  The Jordanian Government wants to emphasize that it 
completely respects the trade unions; it respects their 
organizations, institutions, and individuals. The government 
also appreciates the great role these trade unions are playing 
in the service of the Jordanian community. We also take pride 
in the achievements of engineers, doctors, pharmacists, 
agricultural engineers, geologists, dentists, journalists, and 
other trade union members who serve the Jordanian community. 
This, however, does not mean that differences can never arise 
between a trade union and various ministries or government 
bodies. This state, which enforces the law and has 
self-respect, acts with methods approved by the Jordanian law 
and constitution. 
  In light of the fact that some trade unions have very large 
memberships and important members, we expect these trade unions 
to play their role in building the community together with the 
government. Differences of views or interpretations does not 
mean that democracy, God forbid, is endangered. On the 
contrary, we want to consolidate the trade union's role and wish 
to grant a very profile value to this role in building the 
community, especially since we are talking about a young 
community that needs all its capabilities to build itself and 
face future challenges. 
  Thus, the government does not have differences with the 
trade 
unions, and does not want to belittle the trade union's 
importance, God forbid. Moreover, it does not want to subject 
these trade unions to anything. However, in the event of 
differences with the trade unions, we will resort to the lawful 
methods approved by the constitution and law. This can occur at 
any time. [passage omitted] [end recording] 

