BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow May 28 (ITAR-TASS) -- Today's Moscow 
newspapers concentrate on Aleksandr Solzhenitsin's return to 
Russia. Here are some of the headlines: "I Believe in Russia's 
Revival" (TRUD), "Fates of Real Russian Writers Are Similar in 
One Thing: They Return Dead or Alive" (KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA). 
  The SEGODNYA newspaper states that neither Leonid Brezhnev 
with Gerald Ford, nor Mikhail Gorbachev, nor still Boris Yeltsin 
drew so many journalists to Vladivostok. 
  The NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA newspaper compares Solzhenitsin with 
a Roetgen unit which will x-ray in public some souls, minds and 
characters to his countrymen. There are some discordant notes 
in generally good-willed statements. 
  Quoting author Eduard Limonov, the PRAVDA newspaper believes 
that Solzhenitsyn returned "not on the white horse", since he is 
allegedly responsible "for the false image of Russia and 
Russians he presented to the West". 
  The entire world was following for over 24 hours another 
drama which began at the ill-starred Mineralnye Vody airport on 
Thursday. All newspapers report the favourable end of the story 
with hostages who were freed and terrorists arrested. 
  The commentary in TRUD on this issue differs from mere 
statements of the terrorists' detention in the KRASNAYA ZVEZDA 
newspaper, NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA, PRAVDA and other periodicals. 
  TRUD notes that this terrorist action "is another argument 
in 
favour of those who allege that all law-abiding Russians, 
without exception, even now are captives of trigger-happy 
mafiosi and other criminal organisations". 
  KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA writes with sarcasm: "It becomes 
boring: 
a chopper and sacks with greenbacks again". 
  Moscow periodicals continue to cover events in the Crimea. 
Newspapers' opinions on this issue are diverse. "Passions are 
coming down," PRAVDA writes. "Crimean residents are not storing 
salt and matches for the time being," KOMSOMOSLAYA PRAVDA claims. 
  "The Moscow-Kiev-Simferopol triangle threatens to turn into 
the Bermuda one," KRASNAYA ZVEZDA writes with alarm. The 
newspaper notes that the Russian-Ukrainian talks "stumbled 
again". 
  To all appearances, the daily writes, Russia will have to 
lead them patiently and consistently, defending its position 
both from Kiev impromptu actions and calls from extremists who 
live in the Crimea too. 
  "Let us hope that those who would like to turn the fleet 
into 
a hostage of political gambles, will remember that the matter in 
question is a major naval group equipped with advanced weapons," 
the newspaper notes. 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA precedes its analytical article on 
Russia's military budget with a cartoon, showing a sickly 
intellectual swinging a nightstick. In the newspaper's opinion, 
"the force- wielding ministries, free from the president's and 
the government's control, form their budgets on their own". 
  The newspaper continues: "Our legislators are very 
credulous. 
The Army evidently has very weighty arguments, since 
tender-hearted ladies and gallant antimilitarist democrats, 
without digging into details, intend to okay military 
expenditures at a level characteristic of countries engaged in 
warfare". 
  "Is it possible to cut defence outlays?" the newspaper asks 
and replies: "The legislative and executives arms of government 
have been trying to tackle this task for several years now but, 
alas, unsuccessfully". 
  KRASNAYA ZVEZDA carries an article on a specific military 
topic where member of the Russian Academy of Sciences Nikolay 
Khlopkin appraises the future of nuclear-powered fleet. 
  The scientist writes that Russian submarines have, as a 
rule, 
higher speeds than foreign ones, yielding to them in 
secretiveness. To achieve it, researchers work on cutting 
noisiness of warships. 
  The ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI newspaper notes that the main aim of 
the ongoing visit by Russian Premier Viktor Chernomyrdin to 
China is to step up considerably Russian-Chinese business 
relations. As a result, it is planned that the volume of 
bilateral trade will double by the end of the century. 

