BFN 

<F P=106> ["International Forum" column by Shui Ming (3055 2494): </F>
"The Nonaligned Movement Is Still Full of Vigor and Vitality"] 
  [Text] Foreign ministers and representatives of foreign 
ministers from 109 nonaligned nations gathered recently in Cairo 
to discuss the role and mission of the organization in the 
post-Cold War period. They then signed the "Cairo Declaration" 
and other documents. This was another gratifying event in the 
development of the Nonaligned Movement. 
  The Nonaligned Movement mounted the world's political stage 
in the 1960's. In those years, being sandwiched between the two 
major military blocs in the East and the West, the small and 
medium-sized Third World countries were deeply harmed by this 
confrontation. Therefore, Tito, al-Nasir, Nehru, and some other 
statesmen put forward the idea of "independence, 
self-determination, and non- grouping." Their proposal won 
extensive support in the Third World, and the Nonaligned 
Movement arose, rapidly developing into a dynamic political 
force representative of the Third World. The Nonaligned 
Movement produced a major impact on the world pattern and the 
balance of strength in the Cold War period, and made indelible 
contributions to the just struggles of various peoples against 
imperialism, colonialism, and hegemonism. 
  Today, as the Cold War has come to an end, there is an 
opinion negating the Nonaligned Movement. This opinion holds 
that the environment for the appearance and development of the 
Nonaligned Movement no longer exists, so the historical mission 
of the Nonaligned Movement has been completed. However, foreign 
ministers of the nonaligned nations attending the Cairo meeting 
disagreed with this point of view. At the concluding session, 
the Egyptian foreign minister said: "We have not reached the 
end of the history of the Nonaligned Movement. We must become 
the voice of the Third World." 
  The objective facts also show that the mission of the 
Nonaligned Movement is still far from being completed. Although 
the Cold War has come to an end, power politics and hegemonism 
remain in international relations. The Nonaligned Movement, 
which is not outdated, should continue to play a role in 
international affairs so as to safeguard the interests of the 
Third World countries. 
  In addition, although many nonaligned nations have won 
political independence, most of them remain in a relatively 
backward economic condition because they were plundered and 
exploited over a long period of time by imperialism and 
colonialism, and are still constrained by the current 
unreasonable international economic order. They must be united 
and must strive jointly for equal development rights. This has 
become a new and major task for the Nonaligned Movement, and 
this also will be a more arduous and complicated struggle. At 
the Cairo meeting, the nonaligned nations began to stress the 
issue of economic development. The document published at the 
end of the meeting explicitly criticized the trade protectionism 
pursued by the developed nations under the guise of 
environmental protection and human rights, and also urged the 
developed nations to help reduce the foreign debts borne by the 
developing countries and to fulfill their solemn promise of 
using 0.7 percent of their gross national product to assist the 
undeveloped countries in the Third World. 
  As the world is developing into a multipolar pattern, the 
Nonaligned Movement is still full of vigor and dynamism, and 
remains a weighty political force in the international arena. 
In the ongoing trend of international economic integration, the 
countries of the Nonaligned Movement will shift the focus of its 
activities to the field of developing their economies, 
strengthening South-South cooperation, and promoting North-South 
dialogue. This will bring new vigor to the Nonaligned Movement. 

