CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial by Bo Stenstrom: "Playing Security Policy EU </F>
Solitaire"] 
  [Text] As commander in chief of the Armed Forces, 
Gustav Haegglund is accepting a position of unusually great 
responsibility in the midst of this transitional phase of our 
security policy, writes Bo Stenstrom. 
  When General Haegglund succeeds Admiral Klenberg as 
commander 
in chief of the Armed Forces this fall, he will be doing so in a 
highly unusual phase of transition. Just as the exchange rate 
floats among other European currencies, so the security policy 
is bobbing up and down among the various overlapping and 
concurrent European security policy elements. 
  No one knows how it will end. 
  Much depends on whether the EU's [European Union] Common 
Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP), the Western European Union 
(WEU), NATO, NATO's North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC) 
with the former Warsaw Pact states, NATO's new Partnership for 
Peace (PFP) network, and the Conference on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) can continue to seek their 
respective main emphases and roles in the new arrangement under 
peaceful conditions or whether, on the other hand, a new and 
primarily political state of conflict will emerge in Europe. 
  But at least on the domestic level, Haegglund knows the 
stand 
Finland has taken on the EU. Even if Finland says no in a 
referendum, we will not be back where we started before our 
membership application in March 1992. 
  Not only have we expressed our readiness to determine 
whether 
we can join in the CFSP, but we have done so through a 
negotiating process. Our foreign policy leadership has confirmed 
this. 
  Unlike Denmark, we have pledged to remain loyal to a 
possible 
expansion of the EU's defense dimension beginning with the 
government conference in 1996. Denmark's exemption means that 
the Danes will not participate in making the decision. What have 
we ourselves actually promised concerning 1996 on the basis of 
our statements? 
  "Free of alliances and with an independent defense" is the 
formula of the day in both Sweden and Finland. In Sweden there 
is one report after another saying that Sweden was not neutral, 
but the self-perception among large segments of the Swedish 
electorate has nonetheless come to be one of neutrality. Among 
the same groups that are most critical of the EU. 
  In Finland, the break with the old pattern set by the Treaty 
of Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance was so abrupt 
that a large segment of the public is still disconcerted, while 
leading politicians have been unwilling, and not without reason, 
to speculate too much about future security policy models. 
  We do not know how Finland will fit into a West European 
model of some kind or how that in turn may be integrated into an 
all-European security arrangement. 
  The report on the effect that the EU will have on our 
foreign 
policy was leaked to SUOMEN KUVALEHTI. It talks about a new 
intermediate step between "alliance free" and "allied." The 
negotiations with the EU have already put us in the position of 
being politically allied with a strong actor in the 
international arena. 
  The same will apply if (as Haegglund outlined in his lecture 
at Helsinki University) we become observers in but not members 
of the WEU. 
  If the people say yes to the EU, we presumably ought to 
become at least observers in the WEU. The WEU has become 
increasingly linked to both the EU and NATO. It could not be 
otherwise, since the central countries are the same in all three 
cases, and all three organizations have a very strong political 
dimension. 
  The WEU has been called a paper tiger, and people have joked 
about the fact that it has only a little over 100 employees, but 
a division of labor is currently taking shape in such a way that 
NATO will be the defense alliance in case of a major military 
conflict, while the WEU will take charge of more limited crises 
and conflicts with the help of various European and NATO forces. 
  The ultimate consequence of this is that if we became 
members, the WEU's full defense guarantee would have to be 
fulfilled by NATO -- even though we would be members not of NATO 
but of the CFSP, which would handle conflicts on behalf of the 
EU in international top-level politics. How does one solve that 
equation? 
  At the same time, we would have to be prepared to make 
(volunteer) troops available for WEU operations. All too many of 
us Finns believe that we would only be on the receiving end or 
that we could join the PFP, the WEU, and even NATO with no 
increase in our current defense spending. Actually, the result 
would probably be a tripling of that spending. 
  That also says something about the concept of independent 
defense in the prevailing doctrine. 
  An interesting link in the EU-WEU-NATO triangle is that the 
WEU has a cooperation forum with the Baltic states, Poland, the 
Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria for the 
purpose of giving them "a special relationship with the European 
defense dimension." 
  Considering the gap between the WEU's cooperation forum and 
the PFP, in which Russia, Belarus, and Ukraine are to 
participate, there is reason to wonder whether the sides of the 
new European security triangle may develop so far out of step 
with each other that the whole will be affected if and when the 
WEU's role is in fact strengthened. 
  In Finland, a parliamentary commission is to "revise" our 
foreign policy doctrine perhaps before the March elections. If 
such central elements as the EU agreement are settled by then, 
such a timetable may be more justified than if too many elements 
remain unresolved. 
  The new commander in chief, if anyone, is going to have 
experience with parliamentary defense commissions. In other 
respects as well, Haegglund's background is unusually well 
suited to the demands of the moment. That is what is needed, 
since there are probably not many who have had so many open 
European cards to play security policy solitaire with. 

