Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Newsletter From China" by Leng Mou (0397 4188): "Females </F>
Bear the Brunt of Drastic Social Changes: More Than Two Percent 
of Mainland Female Staff Lose Their Jobs"] 
  [Text] As disclosed by the blue book entitled "Analyses 
and Predictions on China's Social Situation," which has just 
been published in Beijing, a survey conducted by the All-China 
Federation of Trade Unions in 1993 on 900,000 female staff and 
workers and more than 1,000 enterprises on the mainland 
discovered that female staff and workers who were forced to 
leave their original jobs (to be referred to as "go off posts" 
hereinafter) as a result of "optimum organization" within 
enterprises accounted for 60 percent of the total number of 
staff and workers having "gone off posts" and 2.3 percent of the 
total number of female staff and workers. The mainland's 
women's organizations and social personalities feel that the 
achievement of "stable employment for women," resulting from the 
emancipation of women since 1949, now is on the wane. 
  The mainland's "Regulations on Labor Protection for Female 
Staff and Workers" provide that women at work can take 90 days 
of maternity leave, but in the course of optimizing 
organizations in enterprises, some enterprises in various 
localities took pregnant and post-delivery women on rest leave 
at home as an excuse to dismiss redundant personnel, forcing 
them to take leave for as long as three to seven years, or up to 
10 years and more. Punishment was meted out to those who 
refused to obey. Under the circumstances of drastic social 
changes, whether these female personnel will be able to take up 
their jobs again is a difficult question to predict. 
  At present, mainland enterprises generally practice the 
regulations that personnel should retire ahead of time, at 45 
for women and 50 for men, which means five years earlier than 
the retirement ages stipulated by the state. Moreover, 
enterprises with poor performance have even adopted punitive 
measures to force personnel to retire. In the first half of 
1993, the Female Staff and Workers Department of the All-China 
Federation of Trade Unions conducted a survey in various 
localities, in which it discovered that many enterprises had 
lowered the retirement age for women to 40. However, among the 
female staff and workers who are over 40, only approximately 20 
percent favor retirement ahead of time. These are mostly women 
personnel who are capable of seeking employment by themselves, 
some have a better family financial situation, and a small 
number are in poor health. However, more than 80 percent of 
female staff and workers are unwilling to retire ahead of time, 
and are enduring extremely onerous mental and physical pressure, 
and struggling to survive. 
  Tan Shen, a specialist on women's issues from the Institute 
of Sociology under the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, 
pointed out: Today, women's issues on the mainland can be 
divided roughly into two types: One is the issue concerning 
reform, which mainly shows that in the course of reform, urban 
women are losing some of the protection they enjoyed under the 
former structure, so that new problems have emerged for six to 
seven years, during which women have undergone a process of 
feeling deeply frustrated and knowing that they have to find a 
way out for themselves. Now, a new pattern is gradually taking 
shape. The other issue is the one concerning development, which 
mainly shows that rural women, as well as urban women who are 
not working under the current structure, have paid a high price 
in the course of development, in which problems such as the 
"blood-and-sweat salary system," prostitution, the abduction and 
sale of women, and so on have cropped up, and serious attention 
has been paid to them from various quarters. However, there are 
still no effective measures at present. 
  Today, women on the mainland have fewer opportunities for 
development, but more troublesome matters than men. This is not 
attributed primarily to child-bearing, but to the division of 
labor in the families for the difference of sex: the revival 
and escalation of the old practice of men in charge of social 
affairs and women in charge of household routines. It has 
further developed into the division of labor in society for the 
difference of sex: the emergence of occupations requiring a 
certain sex, as well as sex discrimination pertaining to them. 
Therefore, in the tendency toward diversification, the choice 
and development for women are unavoidably restricted to their 
sex and matrimony. This tendency is still developing now. 

