Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Sergey Yushenkov, head of State Duma defense </F>
committee, by Oleg Odnokolenko; place and date of interview not 
given: "Sergey Yushenkov: Defense Should Not Be Subject of 
Political Quarrels"] 
  [Text] Sergey Nikolayevich Yushenkov was born in Tver 
Oblast in 1950. he graduated from the Novosibirsk Higher 
Military Political College and the Military-Political Academy. 
He is a colonel and candidate of philosophical sciences. In 
1990 he was elected a Russian Soviet Federated Socialist 
Republic people's deputy. Since 1992 he ha been first deputy 
leader of the Russian Federation Federal Information Center. He 
now heads the State Duma defense committee. 
  [Odnokolenko] Sergey Nikolayevich, you are now quite a well 
known figure. Nonetheless his public statements give a very 
superficial idea of a man's inner world. What do you live by, 
what are your world view and ideals? 
  [Yushenkov] The answer to that question is a lengthy one. 
My views have undergone a quite substantial evolution. There 
was a time when I, like many people in our country, was carried 
away by communist ideas. Actually, even now I consider it true 
to assert that the comprehensive development of each person is 
an essential condition for the comprehensive development of all. 
It is another matter that it was considerably later that I 
discovered that this idea is not actually a communist one but 
rather a general human one. That became clear when I was able 
to read other books, not only the recommended ones, on history 
and philosophy. 
  Actually, the process of my reassessment of values was not 
that simple or rapid. Back at the Novosibirsk higher 
military-political college my comrades and I reached the 
conclusion that something completely different from what was 
written in the textbooks was being implemented in the country in 
practice. And we tried to create -- this was in the second year 
-- a "genuine Marxist-Leninist party." We even held several 
secret sessions with all the attributes appropriate in such 
cases. 
  In general it must be said that at that time secret 
organizations were a kind of epidemic. And specifically in 
military-political colleges. These organizations appeared at 
the Leningrad and Donetsk colleges and other humanitarian higher 
education establishments. As a result many boys were put in 
prison. We avoided that fate. Why? To be honest, we were 
frightened and took no further steps. But that is not the only 
reason. Even then we realized that there was nothing left to 
"perfect." The documents which we had drafted in secret with 
great exertion could be categorized as communist or rather 
social democratic. 
  [Odnokolenko] How big was your organization? 
  [Yushenkov] Big enough -- about 15 people. What surprises 
me pleasantly to this day is that there were no traitors among 
us. That means we knew how to choose friends and even now we 
are pleased to meet. Incidentally, we dissolved our secret 
organization on a sufficiently plausible pretext: We said we 
still did not know much so we could not assess correctly what 
was happening in the country. It was decided that each of us 
must enter the academy because only there was broader access to 
the sources of knowledge possible. 
  That was somewhat naive, of course, but what else could be 
expected from young boys? 
  [Odnokolenko] But later you not only graduated from the 
military-political academy but also taught in it. Incidentally, 
what course did you read? 
  [Yushenkov] I read logic and dialectical and historical 
materialism but mostly dialectical materialism. 
  [Odnokolenko] How was a teacher preaching democratic 
convictions received in the political academy? 
  [Yushenkov] When I, for one, read lectures and said that we 
needed a multiparty system and private ownership for every 
possible reason, initially this generated keen hostility not 
only with the party commission but also with the students 
themselves. But later, when proof and references to the classic 
Marxist writers had been cited the tone of our talks changed. 
Of course, it was mainly creative people who entered the 
military-political academy, although they were adepts of 
communist ideology. If there was a need to investigate 
something, they would go to the roots, to the essence.... Only 
the most slow-witted resisted the obvious. 
  [Odnokolenko] Consequently we should not be surprised that 
it was from the military-political academy and other political 
and humanitarian higher educational establishments that there 
emerged people who were the first to criticize their own 
convictions? 
  [Yushenkov] Take the church. In which milieu did heresy 
first arise? Among the adepts of religion. There is nothing 
surprising in that. Who could know the true situation better 
than "its own people?" 
  [Odnokolenko] Nonetheless, when, at what time, did you 
finally burn your bridges, so to speak, and switch to the 
democratic camp? 
  [Yushenkov] In about 1987, after I had defended my 
dissertation, I began to engage actively in a study of the 
informal movement in the country. Just in case I thought up a 
"cover" for myself -- I said I was collecting material for my 
doctor's thesis. But in fact I was meeting with likeminded 
people and testing the accuracy of my views. 
  [Odnokolenko] Which democratic leader of the time most 
influenced your views? 
  [Yushenkov] I am not one of those whose convictions can 
easily be influenced. I have never blindly followed any 
authority. Most often I made decisions for myself and made my 
way independently. Not under anyone's influence but under the 
influence of the conditions which had actually taken shape in 
the country. 
  But of course there was some influence. But not only 
personal. Do you remember what items were published at the time 
in newspapers and journals? How many disputes there were? Even 
the academy named for Lenin resembled a beehive that had been 
stirred up.... 
  [Odnokolenko] Now all that is in the past. Big changes have 
occurred in your fate -- you have become chairman of the State 
Duma defense committee. Incidentally, how do you see the 
defense committee in this scenario? 
  [Yushenkov] It seems to me that this is one of the 
committees in which an excessively politicized nature should not 
predominate. First of all the defense committee should accord 
with its main function -- being concerned for the legal backup 
for the country's defense and legislative guarantees for the 
rights of servicemen and their families. Naturally the approval 
of the defense budget is also the committee's responsibility. 
That is perhaps the main thing right now. 
  [Odnokolenko] What is the disposition of political forces in 
the committee right now? 
  [Yushenkov] The committee has been joined by representatives 
of the Liberal Democratic Party, "Russia's Choice," the 
Communist Party, the Agrarian Party, "Women of Russia," and so 
forth. But to judge from the first sessions I hope that such a 
broad spectrum of political priorities will not have an adverse 
effect on our work. Since, as we can already see, everyone is 
well aware that defense should not be the subject of political 
disputes. 
  [Odnokolenko] What about the legacy bequeathed to us from 
the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet committee for questions of 
defense and security? Will it be suitable? 
  [Yushenkov] We treat with respect the activity of our 
predecessors and will try to retain continuity. Especially as 
Aleksandr Piskunov, who was deputy chairman in the former 
committee, has become my deputy. In brief, the good things 
worked out by our predecessors will be retained without fail. 
And the developments which they did not manage to implement and 
which are of value we shall try to implement, but with regard to 
the new conditions. 
  [Odnokolenko] But on the other hand not all legislative 
acts on military questions which your predecessors launched have 
proved workable. 
  [Yushenkov] That is true. So one of our priority tasks is 
to carry out an "inventory" of all laws, to investigate which 
articles are not working, and to decide what to do: Whether to 
back up these articles with the relevant life support mechanism 
or whether to alter them. It is entirely possible that they 
were adopted as it were in the abstract, in isolation from 
reality. In brief, we must investigate. 
  [Odnokolenko] I realize the question is probably premature, 
but anyway: Perhaps the present defense committee already has 
its own legislative proposals? 
  [Yushenkov] Yes, it does have such proposals. They are 
mainly connected with putting a more thorough legal basis under 
the reform of the Army. 
  [Odnokolenko] So much is said about the Army, and what is 
said is so diverse, that it is time to specify what content you 
personally put into this term? 
  [Yushenkov] The Army should become a professional army. 
That is already axiomatic. But the Army's transition to a 
professional basis should be implemented with a consideration 
for the real economic situation. Otherwise we will simply fail 
and our plans will remain only plans. 
  [Odnokolenko] As far as I remember, previously parliament 
did not always find a common language with the Defense Ministry. 
It was particularly difficult at first. Now everything is 
starting from the beginning.... 
  [Yushenkov] Life is a complex thing and the future will show 
how our relations with the military department take shape. But 
the fact that from the very first sessions of the committee they 
have been attended by a Defense Ministry representative instills 
the confidence and hope that there will be productive 
collaboration, and we do not want it any other way. It is 
simply mad to work any other way. 
  [Odnokolenko] Yes, but in my opinion the problem is more 
complex. After all, you will have to check your positions not 
only with the Defense Ministry but also with specific state 
structures. Moreover, you will have to take someone's side on 
vexed issues. 
  [Yushenkov] In my view the parliamentary defense committee 
should not be a kind of lobbying instrument for the Armed 
Forces. But nor are we opponents of the military department. 
We have a common interest -- the country's defense capability. 
Therefore, I stress once again, in reality we have one path 
left -- the path of agreement and collaboration. Which, 
incidentally, does not rule out and in no way impedes the 
separation of functions. 
  [Odnokolenko] Although our talk has not been on an economic 
subject, we can hardly avoid this problem. Why do you believe 
the democrats have not managed to completely fulfill their 
economic commitments to society? 
  [Yushenkov] That is the eternal problem of the failure of 
aims and the results of activity to coincide. If everything 
were to coincide ideally there would be no problem. But that is 
never what happens. 
  [Odnokolenko] But perhaps it has all come out this way 
because the democrats lacked cohesion and purpose? For 
instance, when they came to power the bolsheviks -- unless, of 
course, the sources lie -- worked more harmoniously and 
selflessly. 
  [Yushenkov] That is probably not the point. The democrats 
in general do not know how to wield power. That is both their 
merit and their shortcoming. It was not for nothing that 
Churchill said that democracy is the worst form of government 
but man has not yet thought up anything better. 
  That means there is one thing left -- we must learn how to 
govern. 

