BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Moscow Russian Television Network in 
Russian at 1625 GMT on 12 May, in its "Details" program, carries 
an eight-minute report by Sergey Dorenko on the Social Accord 
Treaty, showing first some extracts from today's proceedings of 
the signing of stage three by various organizations from the 
world of sport, schools, tourism and also women's organizations, 
and then extracts of what the opposition is doing to rally its 
supporters, showing scenes at a festival of the former DEN 
newspaper, attended by Aleksandr Rutskoy. 
  Interviewing Rutskoy in his study early today, Dorenko asks 
him why he is not at the Kremlin signing the Social Accord 
Treaty. Rutskoy gives his reasons. Asked about his plans to take 
power, Rutskoy says: "As you know, the deadline for elections 
to parliament runs out in 1995. That's the first stage. I will 
do everything to ensure that the majority in parliament -- not 
20 or 25 percent, but 90 percent -- are representatives of the 
Social Patriotic Party, the social patriotic movement. The next 
stage will be the preparations for the presidential elections in 
1996." Asked if he will be standing as its candidate, he said 
he is too modest to call himself a leader or an ideologist. He 
says that depends on other people who listen to him or read what 
he writes. "If I see someone capable of implementing these ideas 
which are set out here, then I will stand down," he says. 
  Dorenko states that "Aleksandr Rutskoy is preparing to 
disappoint his allies with the supposition that it is 
unproductive to have more than one emperor. This will hardly 
delight other leaders. Moreover, Aleksandr Rutskoy is capable of 
rapidly disappointing the opposition if he tells his allies the 
same as he told us about his views of the future structure of 
Russian life. Rutskoy advocates combining popular capitalism 
and broad state socialist participation." 
  Over further footage of today's opposition festival, Dorenko 
points out that Ruslan Khasbulatov was expected to appear, but 
failed to do so. Dorenko sums up the program with the surmise 
that Rutskoy has lost his opportunity, pointing out that he does 
not suit all the opposition hierarchy and that they may have to 
seek a candidate from "less problematical personages." 

