Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Willy Wo-lap Lam] </F>
  [Text] Patriarch Deng Xiaoping is being looked after by a 
large medical team, including a group of about 20 consultants 
and specialists well versed in Western and Chinese medicine. 
  Chinese sources said yesterday that, while the 89-year-old 
senior leader had no life threatening diseases, he was too weak 
to attend the NPC. This is despite the fact he was elected a 
member of the NPC presidium last week. The sources said the 
patriarch, who was "exhausted" after a two-month sojourn in the 
Shanghai area would likely spend the spring recovering. 
  An informed source said Mr Deng was being looked after by a 
medical team on a 24-hour basis and doctors in the team could at 
any time call upon the expert advice of another group of 
consultants and specialists. 
  The Chinese media, however, is anxious to allay widespread 
fears about Mr Deng's health, caused by the fact that he looked 
sick during his television appearance in Shanghai on the eve of 
Lunar New Year. Most national newspapers gave prominent 
treatment on Tuesday to remarks by the two Deng daughters, Deng 
Nan and Deng Rong, that their father was in "excellent health." 
The same stories were repeated in yesterday's edition of the 
Guangming Daily, which is read by most intellectuals in the 
country. Ms Deng Rong, also Mr Deng's private secretary, told 
the paper her father was in good health. "The most important 
thing is that he is not sick, he doesn't have any illness, he 
doesn't even catch colds from other members of the family," Ms 
Deng said. She said Mr Deng played bridge three or four times a 
week with family members and other retirees, and spent two hours 
daily reading more than 10 newspapers. 
  Analysts said, however, that Ms Deng had used similar 
phrases 
to describe the state of Mr Deng's health many times. They 
pointed out that the fact a few Deng offspring had kept to their 
regular travelling schedules showed Mr Deng's life was not in 
imminent danger. 

