CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Anatoliy Chubays by Yegor Yakovlev; place </F>
and date not given: "The Deputy Prime Minister of Whom There Is 
a Continual Desire To Be Rid"] 
  [Text] 
  [Yakovlev] We have not seen one another for several months. 
Let us for a start determine where we are in time. The first 
stage of privatization is ending, the second is beginning. What 
does this mean? 
  [Chubays] To explain it altogether briefly, one was 
privatization for checks. At the second stage, for money. If we 
are speaking about the reasons for the change of stages, 
however, it should be mentioned that privatization is a 
contradictory phenomenon. It requires of the authors of the 
program and those implementing it a combination of the 
uncombinable: On the one hand we need to ensure that ordinary 
people (although I do not like this term) take part in 
privatization, on the other, it is essential that privatization 
secure financial sources for the enterprises, which are 
necessary for their development. This is why we will say in the 
second phase: That is it, privatization without charge is over, 
now only for money. And in exactly the same way that we are 
being violently criticized today--no one needs checks!--the same 
people will as of 1 July be declaring just as bitterly that the 
ordinary people have been cut off from privatization--it is all 
for the rich people. 
  [Yakovlev] I will not assert that Chubays is privatization. 
Nonetheless, for me, as for the readers also, there is no 
privatization without Chubays. You have, most likely, merited 
the title of gravedigger of public property. 
  [Chubays] I would prefer something different: creator of 
private property. 
  [Yakovlev] Very well. And if we go by the fact that 
revolution means a change in the form of property, has a 
revolution occurred? In the name of what was it accomplished? 
  [Chubays] I will merely repeat what I said before: I believe 
that there has been a revolution. And it was bloodless. We 
cannot, it is true, speak of bloodlessness after October. 
Nonetheless, transformations in the forms of property have, the 
Lord be praised, been managed without civil war. 
  [Yakovlev] What kind of society are you serving? For what 
kind of lifestyle are you working? 
  [Chubays] I do not believe for one moment that a picture of 
the market economy of the United States should be the 
determining features of this society. But I am absolutely 
convinced here that there is no third way in the form in which 
it is being presented by some of our so-called socialists, in 
reality, converted communists. We will build a normal market 
economy. A capitalist economy--I have no desire to avoid this 
term. That it will assume its own, highly significant Russian 
distinctiveness is another matter. 
  [Yakovlev] Do you have a chance to influence the formation 
of 
this society? You stated plainly in one interview that there 
would be a rapid redistribution of property at the 
check-privatization stage even. Even today there are people who 
have become fabulously wealthy on vouchers. A process that is 
beyond your control is under way. 
  [Chubays] In order to get rich on vouchers, they have to be 
purchased. And for this money is needed. There is, therefore, no 
"enrichment" here--there is the investment of funds accumulated 
earlier. As far as a process beyond my control is concerned, 
this is good. Were it dependent on me, I would, consequently, be 
in some way separating some people from others: Some people, 
according to my ideas, are good, I shall let them get rich here, 
others are bad, I will prevent this. 
  [Yakovlev] I had hitherto believed that the state and its 
representatives were not engaged in the division into good or 
bad but were resolving problems of social regulation, curbing 
the enrichment of some and preventing the ruin of the majority. 
  [Chubays] The state, making use of the known mechanisms, 
should influence the extreme categories both from above and from 
below. From above, by providing for a mechanism of 
redistribution, from below, with a support mechanism. But under 
no circumstances should it operate within these categories, 
helping some social groups. 
  [Yakovlev] Thanks for the explanations, but they are 
unrelated to the current practice of official decisions. You 
have carried out privatization, but there is no social 
regulation in the country. This is why I believe that your 
influence ends at the moment of denationalization. 
  [Chubays] I have to agree that the present crime situation 
and the social inequality are glaring. Nor would I take issue 
with the fact that the present scale of social inequality is 
connected to a considerable extent with the reform itself. I 
would, however, take issue on other grounds. Many people think: 
Abandon the reforms or implement them gradually, and all will be 
well, not like now, in any event. Absolute rubbish! Yes, 
mistakes were made in the course of the reforms. And not only 
those connected with the opposition of the Supreme Soviet but 
with our miscalculations also--this is true. But it cannot be 
forgotten here that the state had to a considerable extent lost 
control of the conversion of property before the start of 
privatization even. The embezzlement of public property on a 
particularly large scale had been developing since the end of 
the 1980's: Funds were being pumped elsewhere, and public 
property was being moved into the small-scale enterprises that 
were being created everywhere. And by January 1992 it was not a 
question of whether to undertake privatization rapidly or 
slowly. The alternative was either to place some legal 
foundation beneath this process or have the plunder continue. In 
short, there was the privatization act, which I did not like all 
that much. Had I remained a scientific associate, I could have 
written another--far better. But Petr Filippov was able to get 
this act through the Supreme Soviet. And a monument should be 
put up to him for this. 
  [Yakovlev] If you don't mind, don't make a Karl Marx out of 
Filippov.... 
  [Chubays] There was no time to argue about a good law, we 
had 
to implement the one there was. If, however, you wish to see in 
practice what a slowdown of privatization leads to, let us take 
our favorite example--Ukraine. With the decelerated 
privatization the mass theft of public property, which no one 
wants and which is totally uncontrolled, is taking place here. 
  [Yakovlev] You are, perhaps, the sole person in the 
government today who, having started something right at the 
beginning, is continuing it. And the gossip passes you by, 
although it is swirling around the present cabinet. You do not 
even figure in "Version 1." Nor do you rank on the endless list 
of candidates for the office of president. Perhaps this is the 
reason for the opinion: Privatization will end, and with it, 
Chubays also. How do you view this? 
  [Chubays] With composure. In each phase of privatization, 
and 
there have already been many, there has hovered in certain 
circles: Chubays has to be removed. I can even reveal a 
political secret. Negotiations were conducted in the fall of 
1992 with the very spiteful "Change. New Policy" faction. It was 
necessary somehow to ward off a vote in parliament on the 
government's resignation. Agreement had been reached on 
everything, only Chubays was a hindrance. And then our side 
said: Very well, but let him issue the checks, he will come to 
grief here immediately, and then we will remove him. 
  I frankly confess, it would have been very annoying were I 
to 
have found myself out of the government in the middle of the 
privatization process. I am prepared and want to bear full 
responsibility for privatization in Russia, within, naturally, 
the framework in which I find myself. If my activity ends at the 
first stage of privatization, I will leave with a clear 
conscience. I have something to show. For some people this is an 
ugly decrepit thing, for others, the reverse. There is something 
for me to look back on, at least. And there are certainly things 
to do. 
  [Yakovlev] And how do you combine your beliefs with the 
position of your cabinet colleagues--you could hardly call them 
your fellow thinkers. 
  [Chubays] I can argue with my colleagues on the point at 
issue to my heart's content. I express to them my opinion. But I 
do so within the government. I consider it impermissible for 
myself to judge it from the sidelines, as it were. Various 
forces are assembled in the government. There are also 
representatives of parties with which I categorically disagree. 
I have to say absolutely sincerely that the government remains 
integral thanks to the prime minister. 
  [Yakovlev] But you are here a leader of the Russia's Choice 
faction, which recently distributed a document on the excesses 
in government supply, on the Mercedes in which the deputy prime 
ministers ride around. 
  [Chubays] A painful instance. Did they really write 
something 
about Mercedes? I do not have one. And in point of substance 
Russia's Choice is not in opposition to the government but in 
constructive dialogue with it. 
  [Yakovlev] An activist of your bloc, Poltoranin, treats the 
government as a Carthage which has to be destroyed. 
  [Chubays] Russia's Choice and Poltoranin are not one and the 
same thing. His speeches have evoked the sharply negative 
evaluation of the bloc itself. 
  [Yakovlev] You are among those who are in the front ranks of 
the new party. What is inducing you to participate so actively 
in party building? 
  [Chubays] I have to confess that I came to government not as 
a politician but as a professional economist. But in doing my 
work I became increasingly convinced that it is essential for 
its realization to become involved in politics. At the present 
stage, the creation of a party.... I was recently watching a 
television program in which you were taking part and in which 
you said that you did not want to be continually choosing the 
lesser of two evils. This is a matter of principle. Choosing 
between two evils is a nasty business, of course. And you are 
deciding to step aside. But those who will be forced to choose 
the lesser of two evils will remain. You retain the comfortable 
position of an appraiser, who points out all the drawbacks. 
  [Yakovlev] You are wrong about the comfortable nature of 
such 
a position: It causes irritation on both sides. As far as the 
reluctance to choose the lesser of two evils is concerned, it 
should not be absolutized. I am sure, for example, that the 
demand that a choice be made between the Supreme Soviet and the 
president merely exacerbated the confrontation. As a result the 
president signed Edict No. 1400, not having had a chance to 
assess its consequences, and, in my opinion, a national 
tragedy--the shooting up of the White House--occurred. 
  [Chubays] This is where the divide runs. I consider this 
edict correct. It should have been made even more stringent, 
with more detailed reflection on all the measures of its 
realization. I say this inasmuch as I know very well about the 
blood that would have been spilled had this edict not appeared. 
This is the sort of country we have, it is always necessary to 
choose the lesser of two evils here. Had we not chosen, Yegor 
Yakovlev, like many others also, would today be discussing 
nothing. 
  [Yakovlev] Everyone has a right to his opinion. You consider 
it right that in the anticipation of greater bloodshed society 
was deprived of the lives of at least 150 persons. And what is 
the result? It was you who said recently that a coup should be 
expected by fall. 
  [Chubays] It was not I who said this but Zhirinovskiy. I was 
simply repeating what he said inasmuch as I know his friends: As 
distinct from Zhirinovskiy, these are very serious people, with 
great experience of professional work. They cannot be captured 
by intellectual arguments. 
  [Yakovlev] But how can it be a question of accord if we are 
under the threat of a coup? 
  [Chubays] It depends what is meant by accord. If a common 
political platform, this is absolutely hopeless. But the 
president's message is invested with an entirely different 
thought: accord based on respect for the current constitution 
and the impermissibility of the use of unconstitutional methods. 
If this procedure is realized, it will separate those who accept 
such rules from those who are against them. 
  [Yakovlev] Had an accord on no violation of the constitution 
been reached in the times of Rutskoy and Khasbulatov, do you 
believe that Yeltsin would not have signed Edict No. 1400? 
  [Chubays] I believe he would have. [end Chubays] 
  I could argue with Chubays as much as you like, until I 
am hoarse. But on our path since 1985 he has been and remains 
for me one of the decisive figures who has ensured that there 
will be no return of the monopoly of developed socialism. We may 
respect Anatoliy Borisovich for this. We may hate him. But this 
is a matter of our beliefs. 

