CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dr. Mahir Mahran, population and family </F>
affairs minister, by Suhayr al-Husayni; place and date not 
given--first five paragraphs are AKHIR SA'AH introduction] 
  [Text] What comes next now that the population clock has 
sprung on us the surprise that Egypt's population has reached 
60.283 million people, compared to 58 million last year? What 
about the population minister's statements that we have been 
able to control the population explosion and that there is 
evident response from citizens to family planning? Will our 
media continue to confront this population catastrophe with 
television and newspaper advertisements? Can this dangerous 
figure motivate the government to adopt firm decisions to deal 
with this problem that has become a matter of life or death for 
Egypt's future development? When will family planning become a 
national issue, and when will all factions be called upon to 
contribute to solving it? 
  Numerous questions and inquiries that abound with anxiety 
and 
that are reiterated on the Egyptian scene gathered in my mind 
while I was on my way to interview Dr. Mahir Mahran, the 
population and family affairs minister, who said promptly, "The 
declared figure is incorrect and it doesn't reflect the true 
number of Egypt's population. There is an actual response to 
family planning and the number of women using contraceptives has 
amounted to 50 percent." The minister added, "We cannot do more 
than this or issue firm decisions similar to those issued by 
China because of our social circumstances. Therefore, we rely on 
persuasion and leave the choice up to the citizens." 
  It was natural for me to begin the dialogue with Dr. Mahir 
Mahran, the population and family affairs minister, by asking 
him for an explanation on the report circulated by all the 
media, saying that the population of the Arab Republic of Egypt 
has amounted to 60.283 million people, compared to 58 million 
last year. 
  Explaining, Dr. Mahir Mahran responded, "This figure is 
incorrect because it doesn't reflect the true number of the 
population of the Arab Republic of Egypt. When we speak of 
Egypt's population, we shouldn't include citizens who reside in 
Libya and Kuwait and emigrants to Canada and Australia because 
we aren't responsible for educating, feeding, or treating them. 
So, the actual number of Egypt's population is 57.673 million 
people. This is the number with which government officials deal 
when they consider the provision of housing, food, schools, and 
hospitals. This certainly isn't in conflict with our moral 
responsibility for expatriate Egyptians." 
  The population affairs minister added, "The danger of the 
population problem lies in the fact that there is disparity 
between population growth and available resources. Expatriate 
Egyptians aren't included in these calculations." 
<H5>  We Have Exceeded Targeted Figure </H5>
  [al-Husayni] Far from the census figures and from how 
correct 
they are, you have announced that the population explosion 
process has been brought under control and that the citizens 
have responded to family planning. If this has actually 
happened, then why haven't its effects shown clearly in the 
population surveys? 
  [Mahran] What I have announced is completely true. The proof 
is that the normal population growth rate was 30 per 1,000 or 3 
percent. This rate dropped to 22 per 1,000 or 2.2 percent in 
1992. Moreover, we have recently received indications confirming 
that normal population growth has dropped to less than 20 per 
1,000 or 2 percent. This is undoubtedly great, especially if we 
consider the recommendations of the national population 
conference that was attended by President Husni Mubarak in 1984. 
If we review those resolutions, we find that they hoped that 
contraceptive use among women would amount to 36 percent by 1991 
and to 43 percent by 1996. But what has happened, and this is 
confirmed by statistics, is that contraception use among women 
of child-bearing age amounted to 47.6 percent, or close to 48 
percent, in 1990. This means that in 1990, we were able to 
surpass the figure targeted for 1996. This percentage is 
significant because it undoubtedly reflects on the number of 
births. Consequently, statistics indicate that from 1991 to 
1992, the number of births dropped by 100,000. 
  [al-Husayni] Mr. minister, this 100,000 figure is very small 
and it doesn't signify the evident response about which you have 
talked. 
  [Mahran] When dealing with this issue, we must take into 
account that Egypt's illiteracy rate amounts to 46 percent now, 
as shown by the population plan prepared under the supervision 
of 80 experts and professors representing the ministries 
concerned, universities, research centers, and private 
organizations. Despite this high illiteracy rate, we find that 
there is response among women of child-bearing age to the use of 
contraceptives, especially in Upper Egypt. The proof of this is 
that the population and health survey, conducted every four 
years, has confirmed that in some governorates, especially in 
Upper Egypt, contraceptive use among women increased by 100 
percent from 1988 to 1992. 
  [al-Husayni] But statistics also confirm that Egypt's 
population has been increasing by 1.2 million annually for 
several years. So, why doesn't the effect of increased 
contraceptive use show in population figures? 
  [Mahran] Population growth is a must. It exists and it will 
continue to exist for the next 20-25 years because Egypt has now 
a broad segment, amounting to nearly 45 percent the population, 
aged below 20. This segment will have its turn to marry and to 
think of family and of producing children. This is normal and 
expected. 
<H5>  Continued Increase </H5>
  [al-Husayni] This is a foregone conclusion. But in light of 
the efforts you have talked about, it is possible to reduce the 
increase to just 1 million instead of 1.2 million? 
  [Mahran] This is actually what has been happening. 
Population 
growth rose to 1.4 million annually and then dropped to 1.2 
million. We should note that even though Egypt's population is 
growing steadily, we have maintained this rate [of 1.2 million] 
for several years. This is a good sign. If the response I am 
talking about wasn't there, this [1.2 million] figure would have 
increased year after year. 
<H5>  Television Advertisements Aren't Enough </H5>
  [al-Husayni] Mr. Minister, many believe that at a national 
population center and then at the population affairs ministry, 
you have relied fundamentally for family planning on television 
and newspaper advertising. You spend on this advertising 
millions of pounds that you get either from foreign 
organizations or from the state budget. But this isn't enough to 
confront Egypt's population growth problem now that it has 
become so serious. 
  [Mahran] To begin, the phase of strong emphasis on the media 
has been essential for enlightenment. If you are talking about 
the futility of television advertising campaigns for the 
educated, then this is true. But the educated account for no 
more than 20 percent of the Egyptian people and most of them do 
their own family planning without the need for any other party. 
But the rest of the Egyptian people, especially the Egyptian 
rural population and those who live in poor quarters and who 
constitute the overwhelming majority of Egypt's population--they 
are greatly influenced by television and it has produced obvious 
results among them. For example, television has disseminated 
information beneficial to the service recipients, whether the 
information is about finding the places where the service is 
rendered or about various types of contraception and about how 
to get them. This has led to an increased number of women who 
frequent family planning clinics. Therefore, the means of 
television advertising is, within the bounds of our resources 
and circumstances, an effective means, especially since we are 
talking about a country where the illiteracy rate amounts to 46 
percent. 
<H5>  China's Experiment </H5>
  [al-Husayni] Other countries, such as China, have employed 
swift means to solve this problem by issuing firm requirements 
that citizens observe and apply or else be exposed to negative 
incentives. Consequently, these countries have been actually 
able to deal with this problem within a few years. 
  [Mahran] The Egyptian citizen will not accept the means used 
by China, especially since China has employed just two specific 
means, namely compulsory abortion and sterilization. These means 
are prohibited by law, except in a few cases, such as when the 
mother's health is in danger. Moreover, China has determined 
that urban families will have one child and rural families two. 
If a citizen fails to observe this limitation, he is subjected 
to negative incentives. But we cannot employ this method in 
Egypt. The citizen will reject it and some clergymen will object 
to it. Moreover, Egypt's leaders believe that it isn't 
appropriate to force citizens to implement something through 
pressure and punishment, especially under the difficult economic 
circumstances that Egypt is experiencing currently and that 
cause hardship to many citizens. 
  [al-Husayni] Mr. Minister, the direct cause of the economic 
and social crisis experienced currently by Egypt is the fearful 
annual population growth. If the problem of population inflation 
isn't dealt with, pressures and hardship will increase year 
after year. 
  [Mahran] This is true. But even if the government agrees to 
establish family planning controls and to compel citizens to 
apply them, we will be surprised by a revolution by clergymen, 
perhaps even before citizens object. We will begin hearing 
phrases such as, "each infant comes with his livelihood" and 
"you are interfering in God's will." Therefore, the means we 
have used so far is the means of persuading people of voluntary 
family planning with gentle words and without the use of 
coercion or pressure. 
  [al-Husayni] Will you continue to use gentle and voluntary 
means even if they fail to produce the desired results, thus 
making the population problem more serious and complex? 
  [Mahran] We are proceeding along the right path, but not 
with 
the required speed. This saddles the government with some 
economic burdens. However, the government accepts this burden so 
the citizens will not experience more pressures. We don't wish 
to speak pessimistically about this issue, especially since 
there is response to family planning, even though it isn't as 
quick as one desires. But it suffices that we have gotten to the 
point where one of every two women uses contraceptives. 
<H5>  National Issue </H5>
  [al-Husayni] Mr. Minister, many demand that we establish the 
population growth issue as a national issue to which all 
factions contribute their ideas and efforts, especially since 
this issue has become a matter of life or death to Egypt's 
future development. 
  [Mahran] Everybody will participate and cooperate with us 
when he is convinced of the need for family planning. This is 
what we are trying to accomplish now as a first step. 
  [al-Husayni] To deal with this problem, we can make our 
national issue for the coming phase the issue of applying the 
law that prohibits truancy at the basic education level and that 
calls for punishing truant children. I believe that applying 
this law is enough to deal with a major part of the problem. 
  [Mahran] How? 
  [al-Husayni] Most urban families are content with one or two 
children because to these families, a child is a financial 
burden when it comes to schooling, food, and clothing. But most 
families who produce a large number of children view a child as 
a source of income, considering that such a child leaves school, 
goes into the labor market, and starts earning a monthly income 
of 100 pounds or more while still in his tender years. This is 
why a child is a source of wealth for such families and why they 
cannot respond to or be persuaded by the principle of family 
planning, which will deprive them of this income. This is the 
class of people who produce 10 or more children and who create 
the population crisis we are all experiencing now. Therefore, if 
the law prohibiting school truancy is applied, if a fine is 
levied on a truant child, and if the family begins to shoulder 
the expenses of feeding, clothing, and educating the child, it 
will think a thousand times before it produces this immense 
number of children. 
  [Mahran] We have no objection to adopting any measure as 
long 
as it is in society's interest. But this must be done in light 
of conclusions reached by studies on this issue. 
  However, we are currently conducting field studies in 
cooperation with Egyptian research centers. We await the outcome 
of these studies on the rural family's size, on labor among 
children, and on school truancy numbers. We can then make the 
right decision on this issue in light of the conclusions made by 
these studies. 
<H5>  Lowered Service Standard </H5>
  [al-Husayni] So, in addition to advertising in the various 
media, what is the ministry's plan to tackle this problem in the 
coming phase, especially since one of the important reasons for 
creating this ministry is to confront Egypt's population growth 
problem? 
  [Mahran] To start, barely three months have passed since the 
ministry was created. Moreover, we are dealing with all elements 
of the population issue, not just with family planning. There is 
no doubt that family planning is an important element on which 
we focus in our effort to solve the population growth problem. 
But the population problem has three main dimensions: 

  -  The first dimension is increased population growth. We try 
to curtail this problem through family planning activities 
designed to curb the rush to produce children. 
  -  The second dimension is the poor distribution of Egypt's 
population. For example, 99 percent of the population lives on a 
narrow strip along the Nile. If we redistribute the population, 
we will eliminate numerous problems. We will reduce population 
density, haphazard housing, terrorism, and crimes. We have 
actually begun to work to achieve this end. If we look at 
Egypt's map, we will find that efforts have been made by the 
government to redistribute the population. For example, numerous 
new towns and villages have been built in the Red Sea 
Governorate and citizens have begun to move there, inhabit, and 
develop them. Moreover, a number of villages have appeared along 
the northern coastal highway all the way to Marsa Matruh 
Governorate. This is in addition to new towns in Upper Egypt 
where we find, for example, al-Minya and al-Minya al-Jadidah 
[New al-Minya], Asyut and Asyut al-Jadidah, plus the towns 
created in recent years, such as al-'Ubur, al-Sadat, 10 Ramadan, 
6 October, and other towns. All these towns have been built to 
redistribute the population. But to accomplish this goal, 
greater awareness is needed among the population so people will 
move and reside in these new towns, especially if work 
opportunities and housing and residential resources are secured 
for them. 
  -  The third dimension is the so-called low standard of 
services. 
Here, it is required to enhance the standard of services 
provided to the population. What I mean is that in the area of 
education, the number of the educated should be increased. In 
the area of health, mortality rates among infants and pregnant 
mothers should be reduced. For example, the mortality rate among 
pregnant women is 174 per 100,000. This is a very high rate when 
compared with the advanced countries, where the mortality rate 
among pregnant women is 5-11 per 100,000 pregnancies. The more 
we enhance the population characteristics, the greater 
population awareness grows. Thus, we can develop the idea of 
what the appropriate family size is, making this size compatible 
with the family's material and social capabilities, which is 
what is happening in the West. 
  The family planning services plan of the Ministry of 
Population and Family Affairs focuses on spreading health 
services to villages, especially since one-half Egypt's 
villages, totaling 4,200 in number, are deprived of family 
planning services. The plan also focuses on greater use of the 
media in all its forms; on manufacturing contraceptives locally 
under all circumstances, regardless of the nature of our 
relations with the countries from which we acquire these 
contraceptives; and on providing the service permanently. The 
plan calls, moreover, for securing a rural female advisor for 
every 5,000 families. Currently, one advisor is allocated for 
every 30,000 families. Consequently, she cannot perform her 
duties at all. The plans also calls that greater attention be 
given to the issue by local governments and that family planning 
committees be formed that are headed by village chiefs. This is 
what we have actually begun to do in a number of villages, 
especially since a village chief has strong relations with his 
village inhabitants ordinarily and since he can influence and 
persuade them. The plan further calls for increasing the number 
of mobile medical units, especially since there are villages 
that are so remote from family planning centers and units that 
the clinics and units cannot provide the required services to 
the inhabitants of these villages. 

