Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, Jan 29 (CTK) -- Today's Slovak dailies 
concern themselves primarily with the dispute between President 
Michal Kovac and Premier Vladimir Meciar, which prevented the 
signing of a Slovak-Polish trade agreement during the 
president's visit to Warsaw this past week. 
  "President Kovac's visit to Poland stayed under the shadow 
of 
domestic disputes," writes the independent daily NARODNA OBRODA. 
"At the beginning of the visit many Polish officials dropped 
remarks that in the case of the year-old state (Slovakia) it was 
necessary to show some understanding for everything," the daily 
writes. "Officially they remained diplomatically polite even 
after the mysterious elimination of Economics Minister Jan Ducky 
from the delegation, after the announced and then unsigned 
(trade) agreement, and especially after the explosion of the 
'Panic letter' affair. Press reactions and indications from 
backstage have given rise to the impression that Slovak politics 
is less reminiscent of a hopeful youth than of an irresponsible 
adolescent." 
  The left-leaning PRAVDA calls the results of the 
presidential 
visit less than satisfying. It had been indicated beforehand 
that at least one agreement would be signed, but in the end 
nothing was even initialed, and so Polish journalists lost 
interest. "If it had stopped there, it could have been said that 
it was just an ordinary, routine visit," the daily writes. "Only 
when the affair with the alleged letter from Panic to our 
premier blew up on the first day of the president's stay in 
Warsaw did things start to get more serious." 
  The paper adds ironically that "for the visibility of 
Slovakia it was a nice piece of work," but the conclusions the 
average person will draw from it are something "of which we 
should take not the slightest bit of notice." 
  The trade union daily PRACA writes that "relations between 
the head of state and the chief of the cabinet and their staffs 
cannot be like those between quarreling and outraged spouses. 
Both sides will say that the other is at fault. But the end 
result will be that the citizen draws a picture which disgusts 
him, and which brings him not only illusions, but motivation. 
(Meanwhile) His interests remain somewhere off to the side." 
  Most regrettable is that the source of friction is foreign 
policy and the presentation of the state, the paper concludes: 
"The disoriented citizen shakes his head, all the more baffled 
when he sees that the fights are taking place not between 
government circles and the opposition, but between those who 
should without question be pulling together toward the same end. 
It is only natural to ask: Who should I trust at all...? It's 
no wonder public opinion polls show that the largest group of 
people by far is those who would rather not vote for anyone. 
All this theater would possibly be funny if it weren't so sad." 

