BFN 

<F P=106> ["Round-up" by Wang Nan: NAFTA, Five Months in Effect] </F>
  [Text] Washington, June 6 (XINHUA) -- Uncle Sam's imports 
from Mexico are rising faster than the country's exports to the 
south of its border. 
  And its trade surplus with Mexico, long a pride for 
Washington, is shrinking. 
  Who is to blame? The North America Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA), the sluggish Mexican economy, or the U.S. economy, 
where recovery is steady with growing appetite for anything that 
is foreign? 
  In the first quarter of this year, the Department of 
Commerce 
reported, U.S. imports from Mexico increased by 22.5 percent, as 
compared with the increase of its exports to Mexico, which stood 
at 16 percent. 
  During the same period, the department said, the U.S. trade 
surplus with Mexico declined by 45.1 percent, to 560 million 
U.S. dollars. 
  NAFTA, effective since the beginning of this year, 
eliminated 
the tariffs of half of the goods traded between Washington and 
Mexico city. The tariffs of others are scheduled to be phased 
out in 15 years. 
  Mexico's trade barriers are high. Peso is strong. And it is 
almost the consensus of economists and trade analysts that once 
the tariffs are eliminated, Mexico's imports from the U.S. will 
grow faster. 
  The big three U.S. automakers in Detroit already said that 
they are able to export some 55,000 vehicles to the south of the 
border in 1994. 
  But at the same time, Mexico's car exports to the U.S. 
climbed 48.3 percent in the first quarter to 728 million dollars 
as compared with the same period last year, according to the 
Department of Commerce. 
  NAFTA is expected to create some 200,000 jobs in this 
country 
before the end of 1995, the government said. Some 30,000 jobs 
have been created so far. 
  Speaking over the weekend, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey 
Kantor stressed that the content of the U.S. trade with Mexico 
and the increase in U.S. exports to Mexico are more important 
than the balance of trade. 
  In a recent poll of 1,500 manufacturers across the country 
by 
the Coopers &amp; Lybrand, half of the companies said that they 
are 
considering doing business in Mexico. 
  More than 76 seminars on exporting to Mexico were sponsored 
by the Department of Commerce across the country in the first 
three months of this year, joined by 17,000 enterprises. 
  Observers, meanwhile, argued that the projected job creation 
in the U.S. is based on the continually rising U.S. trade 
surplus with Mexico. 
  Now the trade surplus is declining, the Mexican economy is 
not as good as before, and the growing U.S. imports of foreign 
goods sees no end, the jobs created by a single free trade 
agreement won't be too many. 
  Adding to the complexity, observers noted, are the 
provisions 
of the NAFTA, which, until today, are making many of the 
American businessmen willing to go to Mexico more bewildered 
than willing. 

