Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Santiago, Chile, 12 Jan (PL) -- Chilean Foreign 
Minister Enrique Silva Cimma today had a private meeting with 
Humberto Hernandez, Cuba's recently appointed general consul to 
Santiago, with whom he discussed the current situation and 
bilateral ties. 
  At the end of the meeting Hernandez said that the two 
governments have assessed as positive the evolution of relations 
since their reestablishment at consular and economic trade 
levels. 
  Of course, he noted, in such a short time it is not possible 
to make an in-depth analysis of the issues, however, we agreed 
that we have made progress in the economic and trade fields as 
well as in political understanding on overall issues such as 
Latin America's mandatory integration. 
  When questioned by reporters on comments published in the 
press with regard to possible reestablishment of diplomatic 
relations, Hernandez said that his government's position is to 
have total patience, noting that Chile must take this step when 
it considers it convenient. 
  Hernandez added that it is not up to Cuba to take these 
specific steps, as it is not our policy to impose preset 
conditions for the establishment of diplomatic or consular 
relations with other nations. 
  Hernandez noted that in effect there is interest on the part 
of Cuba to resume ties, while remarking that Chile and Cuba are 
two brotherly nations whose relations have advanced in many 
fields. Diplomatic relations, therefore, "would be a step that 
we would regard as normal and logical," he noted. 
  With regard to the delay by Patricio Aylwin's government in 
taking that foreseen step, the Cuban consul recalled that there 
is still one month to go before the change of government and 
that Cuba will continue waiting without anxiety. 
  Nevertheless, he noted that this is an issue of utmost 
importance for the island as it would imply higher level 
relations that in turn would favor increased economic and trade 
relations. 
  Changing the subject, Hernandez talked about the difficult 
conditions that Cuba is currently experiencing. However, he 
expressed his belief that with effort, intelligence, and 
international solidarity, the island will get ahead without 
changing the spirit of its socialist regime. 

