Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ambarish Mishra: "German Team To Review </F>
Projects"] 
  [Text] Bombay, February 12--A high-profile delegation from 
the Federal Republic of Germany is on a two-day visit to 
Maharashtra to review the on-going projects of technical 
co-operation between India and Germany. 
  The German minister for economic co-operation and 
development, Mr C.D. Spranger, leads the delegation of top 
officials, technical experts and 20 journalists. 
  Sources said the visit has been prompted by widespread 
criticism in Germany that financial aid to India be reviewed in 
the wake of New Delhi's alleged human rights violations in Jammu 
and Kashmir. Also, the popular opinion in Germany is sharply 
critical of the ruling coalition's aid policy because of acute 
resource crunch at home. Mr Spranger's visit is not only to 
consolidate the economic ties between the two countries, but 
also to publicise the Indo-German works in Maharashtra as proof 
of "good work," said a top Maharashtra government official. 
  The delegation visited Mendhwan and Kasare villages in 
Ahmednagar district yesterday and inspected the watershed 
projects funded by Germany. Maharashtra's agriculture and water 
conservation minister, Mr Harshavardhan Deshmukh and Mr Ashok 
Basak, secretary, water conservation, accompanied the delegation. 
  Under an agreement between India and the Federal Republic of 
Germany, the Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau offered 
a whopping aid of DM 12 (Rs 216 million) to Maharashtra in 1991 
to develop micro-watersheds in the state, a dream project of Mr 
Sudhakarrao Naik, then chief minister of Maharashtra. The 
National Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) is 
the Centre's nodal agency which monitors the watershed works in 
close co-operation with non-governmental organisations (NGOs) 
and local villagers. The project aims to support the sustainable 
production systems in drought-prone villages such as Jadgaon in 
Aurangabad, Mendhwan and Kasare in Ahmednagar, Vilvandi in 
Nasik, Upale-Agave in Ratnagiri, Rejani in Yeotmal, Nidhal in 
Satara and Shillimb in Pune. 
  From the aid received from Germany, NABARD provides grants 
for preparing projects and the overhead expenditure, the actual 
work of watershed development and the promotional and training 
activities for the village community as well as the NGO 
activists. 
  Till date, NABARD has received an amount of Rs 20.4 million 
and disbursed grants to the tune of Rs 10.3 million to nine 
village watershed committees and the NGOs. Nine projects are 
underway in different parts of Maharashtra covering an area of 
about 16,022 hectares, it is learnt. 
  The watershed projects have yielded "encouraging" results, 
according to a senior official. "There are visible signs of 
improvement in agriculture production," he added. The project 
villages which previously depended on tankers for the supply of 
drinking water during summer now have a year-round supply of 
well water, thanks to conservation measures. Also, the watershed 
work has resulted in the expansion of rabi areas and a 
remarkable increase in the kharif output. 
  With a marked improvement in the ground-water potential, 
pumping devices and water-saving irrigation equipments such as 
sprinklers and drips are much in demand, particularly for 
raising horticulture crops. In some villages, the community has 
decided to ban free gazing [as printed] and felling of trees 
resulting in the improvement of biomass production. 
  Mendhwan, a major beneficiary of the Indo-German technical 
co-operation, is a classic example of how soil and water 
conservation measures can transform a semi-arid, drought-prone 
area into a self-sufficient village where the agriculture season 
has doubled and villagers have clean drinking water near their 
homes. 


