BFN 

  [Text] Tartu, Estonia, May 10, BNS -- Polish President 
Lech Walesa today finished a two-day visit to Estonia which 
included talks with President Lennart Meri, Prime Minister Mart 
Laar, parliament Chairman Ulo Nugis, as well as meetings with 
MP's [member of parliament] and the country's Polish community. 
  The Polish leader today had meetings in Estonia's 
second-largest town, the southern regional capital Tartu with 
local leaders and the rector of Tartu University. 
  Walesa at a press conference before leaving Estonia today 
said the two countries should establish a common system of 
political- economic development patterns and concepts to help 
the countries in their integration with Europe. "The 
independence of one country also means sovereignty of the other 
country and, in the final account -- the freedom of Europe on 
the whole," the Polish president told reporters. 
  He said Poland has enough economic, political and military 
strength to influence Russia to take Estonia as an equal partner. 
  Walesa in his comments on last week's statement by Russian 
Defense Minister Pavel Grachev in which the Russian minister 
threatened that Moscow might leave its army units in Estonia or 
even bring in additional troops, reminded that the remarks had 
come from one single politician which didn't mean that being 
Russia's official policy line. 
  But Walesa said a problem of ethnic minorities exists in 
Estonia and added that each country must protect its ethnic 
minorities. 
  While seeking a solution to these issues one must not 
proceed 
from the concept of nationality, but must be able to see the 
people's concrete worries, the Polish leader said. 
  Estonian President Lennart Meri said Estonia is very much 
interested in attracting Polish investments. But he added that 
the politicians can only create the conditions for active 
economic collaboration, while the real work remains to be done 
by the businesses themselves. 
  Meri said that since Estonia and Poland are both equally 
lacking oil or natural gas resources of their own, they must 
join forces to build a pipeline that would connect the Baltics, 
Poland, and some other North European country with the gas 
region off the Norwegian coast. 
  The Estonian president also pointed at the political and 
cultural aspects, beside the economic ones, of the Via Baltica 
-- a car transit route planned to connect the three Baltic 
countries and Finland with Central Europe via Poland. 

