BFN 

<F P=106> ["Round-Up" by Wang Nan: "In Banking Business, It's American </F>
vs. Foreign"] 
  [Text] Washington, June 15 (XINHUA) -- With declining 
credit quality, lower profits and efficiency, foreign banks are 
being squeezed out of America's lucrative financial markets. 
  And it was not long ago when fears were raised in financial 
circles that foreign banks would be out-competing U.S. banks in 
their home market. 
  Recent developments, observers here pointed out, called into 
question the argument that the role of U.S.-owned banks is 
declining. 
  It also suggested that despite having captured a bigger 
share 
of U.S. banking businesses, further penetration into the U.S. 
market by foreign banks is far from certain. 
  "It's clear foreign banks have gained significant U.S. 
market 
share in business lending, but that growth seems to have reached 
a plateau," said Daniel Nolle, economist in the Department of 
Treasury. 
  According to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 
(OCC), in 1991, foreign banks accounted almost 24 percent of 
banking industry assets in the U.S. and 45 percent of business 
lending to U.S. firms. 
  But since then, primarily due to reduced assets of Japanese 
banks in the U.S., foreign banks' market share has declined, 
dipping to 28 percent at mid-year 1993. 
  Meanwhile, for every year since 1983, except 1987, foreign 
banks in the U.S. consistently recorded lower return on assets 
and return on equity as compared with U.S.-owned banks. 
  After 1991, while U.S. banks saw a surge in profits, with 
return on assets at 0.95 percent in 1992, foreign banks' profits 
were lower than their 1980s average, with 1992's return on 
assets at 0.03 percent. 
  The return on equity in 1992 was 0.41 for foreign-owned 
banks 
and 13.21 for all U.S. banks. 
  "Foreign banks have paid a price in terms of efficiency and 
profitability for the U.S. market share they have captured," 
said the latest report by the OCC's Bank Research Division. 
  "From a broad perspective," the report asserted, "This 
result 
should not be surprising." 
  A year ago, when the latest data were available, there were 
700 foreign banks' branches, agencies and subsidiaries in the 
U.S., with total assets of 948 billion U.S. dollars. 
  Observers said that foreign banks entered the U.S. market 
mainly to service the international trade and direct investment 
needs of their home country clients. 
  Meanwhile, the observers said, cross-country differences in 
bank capital requirements also are likely to have an impact on 
the growth of foreign banks in the U.S.. 
  More recently, foreign banks from a number of countries have 
reduced their presence in the U.S. due to banking sector 
problems in their home countries. 
  In particular, Japanese-owned banks operating in the U.S. 
have been affected by credit quality and capital requirements 
problems of their parent banks. 
  Despite the integration of the global financial community, 
observers said, banks expanding abroad still have significant 
hurdles to overcome in order to operate successfully in a 
foreign market. 

