Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] The following information on contagious 
diseases in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia [FYROM] is 
provided by the Skopje dailies, NOVA MAKEDONIJA and VECER: 
<H5>  Hepatitis </H5>
  On 1 February on page 8, VECER reports that the rumors 
circulating in Skopje, to the effect that three coffee shops, 
"Mejk-ap," "Akademija," and "Apolon" [names as transliterated] 
were sources for the outbreak of hepatitis, are unfounded 
according to Dr. Tomislav Popov of the epidemiological section 
of the Institute for Preventative Medicine. According to Dr. 
Popov, only one of the patients has any connection to any coffee 
shop, in this case, the "Mejk-ap" coffee shop, but the 
individual did not actually work there. The article does not 
cite the number of cases in Skopje, but Dr. Ljupco Ivanovski, 
the manager of the hepatitis section at the clinic for 
infectious diseases, claims that "the number of `jaundiced' 
patients who have been hospitalized, and those who are 
recovering at home, is within the limits of the normal level, or 
that which is customary for the season of the year." 
<H5>  Influenza </H5>
  On 2 February on page 9, NOVA MAKEDONIJA reports that the 
first few cases of influenza have been treated at the institute 
for preventative medicine in Skopje and an undisclosed number of 
cases elsewhere in the country. On 11 February on page 9, VECER 
notes that 23 cases of influenza have been reported in Skopje, 
575 in Titov Veles, 479 in Gostivar, 329 in Kicevo, and 159 in 
Prilep. Preliminary serological tests indicate that the patients 
are suffering from Type-A influenza. On 17 February on page 5, 
NOVA MAKEDONIJA reports that the number of registered cases of 
influenza has risen to 2,986. The newspaper cites Dr. Dusko 
Panov, director of the Institute for Epidemiology and 
Microbiology at the Institute for Preventative Medicine: 
"According to the available data, it is possible to say that in 
some opstinas [districts], an epidemic stage has already been 
reached. These opstinas are Titov Veles with 574 cases, Prilep 
with 546, Gostivar with 472, Kratovo with 330, Kumanovo with 
250, Stip with 219, and Kocani with 163." The type of virus has 
not yet been isolated, but specialists think that it is probably 
Type-A influenza. 
<H5>  Tuberculosis </H5>
  On 14 February on page 8, VECER reports that approximately 
1,650 cases of pulmonary tuberculosis have been registered in 
Macedonia. Of these, 630 are new cases. According to official 
statistics, there are 677 cases in Skopje, 218 in Gostivar, 89 
in Kumanovo, and 42 longstanding cases in the Bitola region. 

