Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Part 2 of 4-part article on Nuclear Power White Paper's </F>
focus on nuclear fuel recycling] 
  [Text] This year's White Paper states, with respect to an 
international environment conducive to promoting nuclear fuel 
recycling, that ``international circumstances concerning 
plutonium, from the viewpoint of non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons, has changed greatly and is quite harsh,'' thus 
expressing a new sense of crisis. Concerned that tremors in the 
nuclear non-proliferation system will be an obstacle to the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy, the white paper stresses that 
Japan should take the lead in strengthening that system. 
  The White Paper raises issues such as (1) North Korea's 
declared intention to withdraw from the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), (2) suspicions about Iraq's 
development of nuclear weapons, and (3) Ukraine's possession of 
strategic nuclear weapons; and it warns that ``these cannot help 
but have a restraining effect on peaceful use of nuclear energy, 
and are reasons for serious concern.'' 
  The White Paper also expresses concern by stating that, as 
nuclear disarmament in the United States and the former Soviet 
Union advances, ``the problems of accumulation, storage, use and 
disposal of plutonium and other nuclear materials from 
dismantled nuclear weapons are expected to grow more serious.'' 
The White Paper cites an estimate of about 125 tons of plutonium 
extracted from the dismantling of Russian nuclear weapons alone. 
  Based on this international situation, the White Paper 
states 
that ``It is crucial to get the full understanding of all 
countries concerned about the use of plutonium,'' thereby 
advocating full openness of information about Japan's plutonium 
use policy. It also stresses that ``It is important for Japan to 
contribute actively to strengthening the global nuclear 
non-proliferation system.'' 
  As a way of strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation 
system, Japan is doing a full-scale study of the creation of a 
framework for international control of plutonium. Science and 
Technology Agency (STA) Director General Eda proposed the 
concept of international control at the International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA) general session at the end of September. 
The concept basically called for each country to reveal the 
status of planning and use of plutonium for commercial purposes 
and the status of the plutonium from the dismantling of nuclear 
weapons. and for verification of this information by an 
international organization. 
  Moreover, in October, Japan and Russia signed an agreement 
concerning assistance to Russia in the fields of storage and 
peaceful use of nuclear materials created from the dismantling 
of nuclear weapons. Preparations are underway for the 
establishment of an ``international science and technology 
center'' by Japan, the United States, the European Community and 
Russia aimed at preventing a brain drain of scientists and 
technicians from Russia. 
  The White Paper states that the estimated amount of the 
world's plutonium as of 1990, was about 257 tons for military 
use and about 654 tons for civilian use. Of the plutonium for 
civilian use, about 532 tons is in spent nuclear fuel, about 72 
tons has been separated and stored, and the rest exists in the 
nuclear fuel cycle. As of June 1993, Japan had about 1.6 tons of 
crude plutonium. 

