Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jan Bazyl Lipszyc: "Rosati Intends To Give Up; </F>
Who Is Next?"] 
  [Text] "I have the intention of withdrawing my candidacy 
very soon," we were told yesterday [28 March] by Dariusz Rosati. 
"I am only waiting for a talk with Prime Minister Waldemar 
Pawlak and Aleksander Kwasniewski. I find it difficult to 
imagine circumstances that would make me change my decision." 
  Dariusz Rosati said that he considered the arguments 
concerning his participation in the affair of the Foreign Debt 
Service Fund [FOZZ], submitted by the president, to be unfair 
and that he would like the prosecutor's office to finally 
complete the investigation because he has had to prove for two 
years now that he is innocent. 
  The Monday communique by the Government's Press Office 
stated 
that Professor Rosati was still the candidate of the coalition 
and the prime minister for deputy prime minister and finance 
minister, "until the Democratic Left Alliance [SLD] or Mr. 
Dariusz Rosati himself change their stands on this issue." 
  After a meeting with Waldemar Pawlak that lasted almost two 
hours, Aleksander Kwasniewski would not talk with journalists. 
We merely learned that the prime minister had assured him that 
Rosati was still the candidate for the post of deputy prime 
minister and finance minister. Kwasniewski would not comment on 
Rosati's intention of giving up; he said that he is a serious 
man and that he would not do anything like that without 
previously discussing it. 
  (After the meeting with Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak, the 
SLD leader spent a few hours in the Sejm. The evening 
"Wiadomosci" and "Panorama" showed Kwasniewski sneaking out of 
the Sejm premises by way of a ladder; however, later on he did 
talk to journalists.) 
  Commenting on the information about the coalition's 
maintaining his candidacy, Prof. Rosati said that he might still 
be a candidate in only one case: if Lech Walesa changed his mind. 
  President's Spokesman Andrzej Drzycimski informed PAP that 
the president would very soon forward a reply to the prime 
minister and that "it will be a reply, not a justification, 
because the president does not have to justify this decision--it 
may be made on the basis of his constitutional powers." Andrzej 
Drzycimski stressed that the president's decision is irrevocable 
and stated that he did not know anything about any possible 
meeting between the president and the prime minister concerning 
this issue. 
  Jozef Oleksy said on Radio Zet that he could not imagine the 
SLD's giving up the candidacy of Prof. Rosati. He said that the 
crisis caused by Lech Walesa's rejecting this candidacy was 
"mainly a crisis of ambitions, as well as a political crisis." 
He also stated that this weakened the coalition and the prime 
minister. 
  "If we assume that neither one nor the other party--that is, 
neither the president nor the coalition--will change their 
minds, this is a deadlock and a conflict, which are the least 
necessary here. What we really need are talks that would 
explain what should be explained and that would outline possible 
scenarios because a deadlock or a conflict means a war, and no 
one today needs a war," stated Oleksy. 
  "The resignation of Dariusz Rosati would give us some 
maneuverability; however, in this way, we would lose another 
expert that we pinned enormous hopes on," said SLD Press 
Spokesman Zbigniew Siemiatkowski. 
  Wieslaw Paga is mentioned quite frequently as the new 
candidate for the post of deputy prime minister and finance 
minister. However, now that Paga has received support from Lech 
Walesa, it is not very likely that the SLD will want to have 
another "Belweder-related" minister. No new names are 
mentioned. It may therefore all wind up in the appointment of 
Finance Ministry Director Henryk Chmielak to the post of 
minister; this possibility has also been entertained. One thing 
is certain: The Coalition, mainly the SLD, is stalling for time 
by insisting on the candidacy of Dariusz Rosati. It may well 
mean either that Aleksander Kwasniewski has some new idea or 
that he does not have any idea at all. 
  PAP said that the prosecutor's office had not interrogated 
Dariusz Rosati during the FOZZ investigation, which has lasted 
for over two years now, because it did not consider this 
necessary. The indictment, which was prepared last year, 
includes three members of the Supervisory Board. In November 
1993, the Appellation Court returned the FOZZ documents to the 
prosecutor's office and ordered that the investigation be 
complemented; it ordered, among other things, that Rosati be 
interrogated as a witness. The court did not specify when this 
interrogation should take place. 

