BFN 

  [Text] Zhengzhou, May 22 (XINHUA) -- Vice-Premier Zhu 
Rongji has recently stressed that implementing the agricultural 
policies and efficiently running the state-owned enterprises are 
the keys to developing the good economic situation and 
stabilizing the overall situation at present. 
  Zhu, who is also a member of the Standing Committee of the 
Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party 
of China (CPC), presided over two economic forums respectively 
at Wuhan, capital of central China's Hubei Province, and 
Zhengzhou, capital of Central China's Henan Province, from May 
13 to 22. He also inspected the production of grain and cotton 
in Hubei and Henan Provinces. 
  Attending the two forums were leading officials of the 
ministries and departments under the State Council, who gave a 
brief introduction to the current macro national economic 
situation and a plan for reforming the system of grain purchase 
and sale. Also present at the first forum were leaders of the 
four provinces of Hubei, Hunan, Anhui and Jiangxi, and present 
at the second were leaders of the three provinces of Hebei, 
Shandong and Henan. They delivered reports on their local 
current economic situation. 
  Vice-Premier Zhu said at the forums that in order to 
consolidate and develop the current good economic situation, 
leading officials at all levels should lay emphasis in their 
economic work on promoting agriculture and running state-owned 
enterprises. This is at present the key to handling the 
relations between reform, development and stability, he added. 
  He stressed that it is necessary to conscientiously 
implement 
all the agricultural policies of the CPC Central Committee and 
the State Council, fully arouse the farmers' enthusiasm for 
growing grain and cotton, and strive for bumper harvests of both 
grain and cotton to lay a solid material foundation for 
effectively bringing the prices under control. 
  Meanwhile, Vice-Premier Zhu said, it is imperative to make 
thorough surveys of the conditions of enterprises, help them to 
solve their problems, further deepen the reform of state-owned 
enterprises, transform their operational mechanism, and make the 
experiment in establishing a modern enterprise system successful. 
  He said that at present, the national economic situation is 
very good and reforms in various fields are proceeding smoothly 
and are being constantly improved. The new systems have 
gradually become situated on the right track. Practice has 
proved that the series of decisions on strengthening and 
improving macro control and further deepening the reform to 
restructure the economy made by the CPC Central Committee with 
Jiang Zemin as the core is fully correct and has won support 
from the broad masses of the people and is highly regarded by 
the world. 
  The vice-premier stressed the importance of promoting 
agriculture. He pointed out that in the first four months of 
this year, the tendency toward excessive increases in investment 
in fixed assets has been brought under control, that the prices 
of capital goods have started to fall again, and the supply of 
industrial consumer goods is rich and the prices tend to be 
stable. Therefore, he said, the major tasks in bringing 
inflation under control and maintaining social stability are to 
further implement the spirit of the National Conference on Rural 
Work, or to promote the production of grain, cotton, edible oil 
and vegetables. 
  At present, he stressed, all localities should make every 
effort to accomplish the purchase of the summer crop's grain and 
oil- bearing farm produce and to strengthen the administration 
of the grain and edible oil market. 
  Zhu also said that at present, the tendency of the reform 
and 
development of state-owned enterprises is good. The profits of 
the enterprises in the first four months of this year did not 
drop but increased compared to the same period last year and the 
percentage of enterprises with general debility decreased rather 
than rising, he said. 
  However, he said, a few state-owned enterprises, mainly 
small 
and medium-sized ones, are indeed faced with under-capacity 
operation or even shut-downs. He called on leading officials of 
economic ministries and departments concerned and banks to take 
the lead in going deep into the grassroots units to make surveys 
and help the enterprises to resume production and get out of 
these predicaments. 
  He also said that those enterprises which have recorded 
losses for a long period and have no hope to make up deficits 
should declare bankruptcy according to the law after making good 
preparations. 

