CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "A Follow-On Plan for the Heisei Slump"] </F>
  [Text] However the power relationships shift within the 
coalition government in the change from the Hosokawa to the Hata 
administration, there ought to be no change in the direction the 
Japanese economy takes. This means choosing to improve the 
qualitative life of the Japanese people by opening Japan's 
markets to the world. In order for the Hata administration to 
stimulate the structural changes that are finally underway, more 
than anything, deregulation and the opening of markets must not 
be allowed to play out as nothing more than religious 
incantations. 
  The shopping districts of Kanda, Tokyo are changing to a 
degree where we scarcely can believe our eyes. No sooner do new 
discount stores appear than they quietly disappear to be 
followed even cheaper outlets. At the forefront of the price 
revolution is the competition emerging between discount stores. 
  The leading supermarket chain, Daiei, has begun selling beer 
more cheaply while the department store, Mitsukoshi, has lowered 
prices on brand-name merchandise with the aim of lowering the 
differential between foreign and domestic prices to less than 
one and a half times. 
  The phenomena simultaneously making headway of correcting 
the 
differential between foreign and domestic prices and of reducing 
internal price differences has been called "price wrecking." 
However, perhaps it should be seen more as price normalization. 
Moreover, this is not a temporary trend in reaction to the 
bubble economy. It is the beginnings of structural change. 
<H5>  With the Earthshaking Changes in the World Economy </H5>
  Japanese just returning from living in the United States are 
surprised by the high prices found in Japanese discount stores, 
which ought to be appreciably cheaper. Suits and coats made in 
South and Central America and former East European countries 
sold in the United States are much cheaper than the same 
products sold in Japan manufactured in Asia. 
  The price revolution is spreading worldwide, reflecting the 
earthshaking changes in the post-Cold War world economy. Not 
only the newly industrializing economies [NIEs] of Asia but 
Central and South American and former East European countries 
are coming on stage as new exporting countries in the world 
market with a manufacturing base not much different from that of 
the industrialized nations. Moreover, they are beginning to 
produce lower priced products with lower wage rates than the 
industrialized nations. 
  In the United States and Europe, the view has strengthened 
that the continued apprehension over employment in 
industrialized countries is due to the labor situation in the 
developing countries, and they are trying to establish the issue 
of labor and trade as the central issue before the World Trade 
Organization (WTO). 
  Although how to respond to the advancing price revolution is 
an issue common to all the industrialized nations, the worst 
option is to revert to protectionist means in order to maintain 
employment levels in one's own country. This will only invite a 
shrinkage in world trade while generating trade friction and 
will only increase the number of unemployment. Japan has no 
choice but to link economic structural change to the worldwide 
price revolution by aiming to open its markets. 
  The falling price of goods and services has company managers 
on edge. With profits worsening, income shrinking, demand 
falling, and prices dropping, managers find themselves in a 
wicked deflationary environment, forcing them to worry about 
employment and the hollowing out of industry. 
  However, the earthshaking changes accompanying economic 
globalization and the shift of the world toward a market economy 
will bear costs the Japanese economy must accept. If we change 
our point of view, lower prices will increase real purchasing 
power and create new demand. If so, change the industrial 
structure with lower prices so that to expand the Japanese 
economy substantially. 
  Many firms are already responding to the price revolution. 
Even among automobile makers, some who have come to have a close 
transactional relationships with the steel makers, such as 
Mitsubishi Motors, are using steel plate manufactured relatively 
cheaply in South Korea. The research department of the 
Industrial Bank of Japan has come to the conclusion that this 
trend will spread to all industries. 
  An important player in the price revolution is the consumer. 
Consumers are sensitive to prices and shy away from those higher 
priced products which they used to purchase during the bubble 
economy--the phenomenon no longer exists. Instead, consumers 
will vie for quality goods to be purchased as cheaply as 
possible. While the Japanese consumers are certainly smarter 
than before, looking at the phenomenon by international 
standards, they are still an easy mark. 
  A study done by the Economic Planning Agency calculating the 
differential in foreign and domestic prices estimated that in 
November 1993 prices were 1.4 times as high in Tokyo as in New 
York City. This level is unchanged from 1988 and demonstrates 
that domestic prices in Japan do not at all reflect the advance 
of the high yen. From this, we can see that aside from housing 
costs, which were not included, the cost for someone to live in 
Tokyo is considerably higher than for someone in New York. 
<H5>  Don't Let Regulations Hinder Change </H5>
  It will not do for the Hata administration, which will be 
launched this week, any more than the LDP and Hosokawa 
administrations up to now, to merely mouth deregulation and the 
opening of markets. No government, with the earthshaking changes 
taking place in the world economy, has the right to hinder the 
restructuring of the Japanese economy by the retention of 
regulations. 
  Establishing conditions for strengthening competition 
through 
deregulation is the common business of the government. This 
means graduating from the industrial policy we've had up to this 
point and strengthening antimonopoly policies. It is appropriate 
that Japan, which has the largest current account surplus of any 
country, fully open its markets to the world. No result will be 
achieved by ministries and agencies pushing deregulations and 
opening of markets. We must not repeat the failure of the 
Hosokawa administration, who left this to the bureaucrats. 
  With open markets providing a lever for structural change, 
of 
particular importance will be a new cooperative existence with 
Asia. Until now, Asia has imported capital and interim resources 
in response to the influx of capital from Japan and has 
developed by exporting products to the United States. The 
relationship between Asia and Japan in the future will shift 
from a vertical division of labor to a horizontal one. Japan 
will be a market for Asia and Asia a market for Japan. 
  The prerequisite is nothing less than a high degree of 
pushing Japanese industry forward. For that, we need an 
industrial vision, but this is certainly not the business of 
government. Rather, it is best that this sprightly vision emerge 
from research organizations and private companies and not be 
government manufactured. In the vision will be depicted the 
throng of diverse small and medium-sized companies that will 
give birth to new demand. Fresh competition and employment 
opportunities will surely emerge with smart consumers and 
through the creative ability of private companies. 

