BFN 

  [Text] New York, April 20 KYODO -- North Korea has 
indicated it is willing to permit further inspections of its 
nuclear facilities if the United States simultaneously announces 
the postponement of joint military exercises with South Korea 
and reopens a third round of high-level talks with Pyongyang. 
  A special envoy of North Korean President Kim Il-song 
earlier 
this month also reportedly told Indonesian President Suharto 
that North Korea also wants a postponement to the deployment of 
U.S. patriot antimissile batteries in South Korea. 
  Pyongyang's conditions for resuming inspections of its 
nuclear facilities were revealed in a copy of an April 7 letter 
from Suharto, head of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), to UN 
Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali made public Wednesday. 
  In the letter, Suharto said North Korean Vice Foreign 
Minister Kim Chang-kyu told him Pyongyang is willing to permit 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) inspections but 
emphasized the conditions that should be applied simultaneously. 
  Suharto said the envoy mentioned the ``postponement'' of the 
Team Spirit military exercises and the deployment of the Patriot 
missiles, but dispatches from Pyongyang in the past have firmly 
demanded the suspension of the exercises and a halt to the 
missile deployment. 
  Suharto suggested to Butrus-Ghali that North Korea is 
seeking 
the simultaneous commencement of all the steps to avoid any 
impression that it has capitulated to the demands of the IAEA, 
the U.S. and others. 
  Suharto also told North Korea that only way to resolve the 
nuclear issue peacefully would appear to be through ``a 
comprehensive and thorough implementation of inspections by the 
IAEA.'' 
  Suharto said, ``We conveyed to (North Korea) our considered 
view that it was crucial for the cause of peace in the region 
that it resolve the issue of nuclear inspection with the IAEA 
and that (North Korea's) withdrawal from the (Nuclear) 
Nonproliferation Treaty would only intensify suspicion of its 
nuclear intentions.'' 

