Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Lennart Meri on the occasion of the </F>
76th anniversary of the Republic of Estonia, in the "Estonia" 
Concert Hall on 24 February -- received via Internet E-LIST] 
  [Text] Your Excellencies, 
  Honored members of the Riigikogu [parliament] and the 
Government, 
  Dear compatriots in Estonia and throughout the world. 
  Firstly permit me to congratulate you on the occasion of the 
76th anniversary of the Republic of Estonia, and to thank you 
for the support which you have expressed to the Republic of 
Estonia on the occasion of today's anniversary - not only by 
letter and telegram, but also in your conversations and 
handshakes. These radiate hope - yet also concern, satisfaction 
about what has been achieved - yet heartache about what has not 
been achieved, a dignified confidence of a free people - yet an 
uncertainty, a willingness to make sacrifices - as well as the 
anxious question: For how much longer? How long will we be able 
to sacrifice ourselves, to feed ourselves on this immense 
longing for independence, which we accumulated into our hearts 
during the long night that was the fifty years of Soviet 
occupation? 
  Are these the first signs of weariness? 
  No, we are not weary, and we will not become weary. We have 
never tired, throughout the seven centuries, of carrying our 
country within ourselves, and therefore we will not tire seven 
months before the last of the foreign troops leave the holy soil 
of Estonia. No, it is rather impatience, which has been born of 
suffering. It is rather our illusionary optimism, that once 
totalitarian communism collapses, all our longings and wishes 
will magically come true. Fifty years outside Europe, outside 
the practicality of democratic politics, which daily teaches 
people the balance between rights and duties - has taught us 
only how to circle our wagons for protection, how to personally 
survive, the stealthy avoidance of the commands and instructions 
coming from the capital of the colonial empire. Our romantic 
optimism has been, and is still, a nurturing source, which has 
nurtured, and still nurtures, the dangerous illusion that the 
restoration of an independent state should be simple and speedy. 
  A nation is not born simply nor speedily. Even before I 
entered politics, when I spoke to you, my dear compatriots, in 
the language of a writer, I quoted Churchill, saying that the 
road we have chosen demands blood, toil, tears and sweat from 
all of us. The world can be proud of Estonia, because 
everything we have achieved in our 76 years has been achieved 
with hard work and patience, sweat and toil, but without a drop 
of blood being spilled, as is characteristic of a lawful nation. 
Today, standing here before you in this historic hall, I can 
assure you that our major difficulties are behind us, but that 
new trials await us. These, too, we will overcome if we unite 
our forces and abilities, instead of fragmenting them; if we 
soberly assess how much has been done and how much is yet to be 
done; and what is most important: No matter how many differing 
opinions there are between our political parties, and in 
ourselves, that the Estonian's calm confidence and friendly 
desire to cooperate must rise above all this, and unite us into 
a Republic of Estonia, of which we can be proud. 
<H5>  1. The Estonian Nation and Its People </H5>
  The Constitution adopted by referendum declared the 
steadfast 
will of the Estonian people to safeguard and develop their 
nation. A nation which is founded on liberty, justice and law. 
A nation which defends internal and external peace. 
  It would now be an appropriate time to say that culture is 
politics, and politics is culture. 
  Culture is politics because it is primarily in culture where 
the national identity becomes apparent - identity is a necessary 
element, a substance which is difficult to describe, but from 
which nations are born. 
  Politics is culture primarily because the ultimate aim of 
politics is to defend the individual, to assist the individual 
to determine and deepen the characteristics of a person. The 
primary characteristic of a person is the phenomenon: That a 
person does not exist outside a culture. 
  The Estonian people have therefore created a nation for 
themselves. The supreme power of the state is held by the 
people. The state must secure the development of all the people, 
as well as the opportunity of every person for self-fulfillment. 
The mechanism for this is determined by the Constitution as the 
separate and balanced supreme bodies of state power - the 
Riigikogu, the Government of the Republic, the court system, 
with the President of the Republic as the balancing factor. 
During the last year, the supreme bodies of state power have 
been formed and have begun operations. The Riigikogu has done 
an enormous amount of work, and to date, as we heard in the 
speech by the Speaker of the Riigikogu Mr. Ulo Nugis, at the 
flag-raising ceremony this morning, the Riigikogu has adopted 
one-fifth of the body of legislation, and has therefore created 
a working legislative basis. All the components are there. But 
the total of this is not yet a state - at least not such a 
state, which has the usual characteristics of European nations. 
  And so we are confronted by a paradoxical problem. 
  The Estonian people, who have been liberated from a colonial 
yoke, have more idealism, more willingness to sacrifice in the 
name of freedom, than the peoples of welfare states, who lack 
our tragic historical experience. Despite this, there is an 
increase in a skeptical attitude towards the Riigikogu and the 
Government. Demeaning law and order, the police in particular, 
has become almost a competition. The mentality of the 
Soviet-era serf-worker, which we have thrown out via the door, 
is now creeping in through the window - the attitude of: It's 
the master's rope, let it run loose. 
  Citizens do not understand the balance between their rights 
and obligations. 
  At this stage, my dear compatriots, we should ask: Is this 
the way to build the Estonian nation? 
<H5>  2. Post-Communist Nightmare </H5>
  Let us try to soberly analyze the reasons for this problem. 
  My learned colleagues in the West see the reasons for the 
collapse of the Soviet totalitarian regime in the command 
economy. They say, this system was biased towards the armaments 
industry of the Soviet Union and simply collapsed due to the 
excessive burden. 
  This simplified explanation is only partially true. Rather, 
it is completely erroneous. The Soviet totalitarian regime was 
taken to the extreme. It commanded not so much the economy, but 
peoples' ability to think, the creativity of people. The 
ceiling for people's creativity was determined by the low 
ceiling of the Politburo's thinking prowess. The most tragic 
result of this was the complete and final liberation of people, 
the liberation of people from their heaviest burden -- the 
obligation to think, to make independent decisions, and to bear 
the responsibility of their decisions. 
  In restoring our nation and economy, we must also 
simultaneously restore the citizen who thinks and voluntarily 
takes responsibility, because democracy can only be based on 
such a citizen. And only a thinking citizen comprehends the 
unavoidable dangers of belittling the Estonian nation: Economic 
success itself does not guarantee the security of the nation, 
and following on from this, does not guarantee the continued 
existence of a state, of the people, their language and culture, 
and, therefore, the continued existence of the world. Estonian 
society is currently resolving the problems of its own 
re-organization, a process that only few Western academics can 
appreciate. The transition to democracy and a free market 
economy is like a leap across a crevice: The feet no longer 
rest on the steep cliff edge, but they have not yet landed on 
the other side. This instant of unsupportedness, this moment, 
this frightening uncertainty, has brought about chaotic 
phenomena in our society and, if these tendencies persist, they 
could open a Pandora's box. 
<H5>  3. Let's Restore Order </H5>
  I see crime as the prime domestic threat. Performances in 
the theater begin at 5 pm. because people are afraid of walking 
on the streets in the dark. Even during daylight people are 
afraid of walking in the park. People are afraid of country 
roads. People are afraid of a knock on their door. Estonians 
do not feel secure in their own country. This is only one step 
away from a nostalgic longing for the past, and of alienation 
from the state, when we prefer to peek out from behind the 
curtains in the evenings. If crime rules the streets and the 
stairwells, we must be honest and say: Estonia is approaching 
dual power. A year ago, at a meeting on state security on 
February 25, I indicated that our priority is to guarantee 
security for our population. I am very concerned that today, a 
year later, this task is even more important. There are many 
reasons for this: Firstly, lack of security may keep foreign 
investors away, because nothing will attract investors to a 
region of high risk; secondly, it places in doubt our 
trustworthiness as a partner; thirdly, it opens Pandora's box - 
the yearning for a strong hand. The recent rash proposal by 
some adventurers to use state terror to fight crime shames the 
Republic of Estonia. 
  From this podium, allow me to assure you: There is no 
fertile ground for either left or right wing extremism in 
Estonia. There is no fertile ground for the use of a "strong 
hand" in Estonia. But we have to reach consensus on 
strengthening features of our state which have become blurred. 
Let our first and common priority for the following year be to 
restore order. This is not a call to arms. This is the second 
article of our Constitution which guarantees basic rights, 
liberties and duties. Our principal right, our thousand year 
old right, has been, and is, to have a safe home in Estonia. No 
more, but not an inch less. 
  Nobody should waver from this goal. The establishment of 
order must start from the grassroots and end with the ministers. 
Here it is suitable to use the words of John Kennedy: Don't 
ask what your country can do for you, but what you can do for 
your country. And let us not forget that the Constitution and 
the rights derived from it can and should be defended only 
through legal means and with legal arguments. 
<H5>  4. National Security </H5>
  The aforementioned forces me to discuss priorities. 
  A controlled border is one of the main features of a state. 
  I regret that negotiations with the Russian Federation have 
been progressing at a snail's pace. I am nevertheless convinced 
that the Russian Federation will fulfil the obligation that it 
has undertaken and that it will withdraw its armed forces from 
the Republic of Estonia by August 31st. In reference to this, I 
am pleased to recall that last year President Yeltsin based his 
congratulations on the 75-year continuity of the Republic of 
Estonia. During his visits to Poland, the Czech Republic, 
Slovakia and Hungary, President Yeltsin distanced himself from 
the aggressive foreign policy of the former Soviet Union in a 
way that also corresponds to our hopes. Despite all this, we 
have preferred to build up our defense forces at the expense of 
effective border control. Now we are suffering the consequences 
of this decision. The loss of the feeling of security and the 
rise in organized crime is a direct consequence of this 
miscalculation. If the Republic of Estonia becomes a corridor 
of illegitimate trade of human beings, radioactive scrap metal, 
precious stones and who knows what else, it will add 
international security problems to our domestic ones. The 
international community will have difficulty regarding the 
Republic of Estonia as a trustworthy partner and will find it 
difficult to integrate her into the collective security system. 
A controlled border should be understood here as a feature of 
the state, and not as some kind of Asiatic iron curtain, the 
task of which is to separate the Russian Federation from Europe. 
The foreign policy of the Republic of Estonia has always been 
open, open to all of the states with which we share common 
democratic ideals. Rapid integration is taking place in today's 
changing world. In a small country like Estonia, we must 
integrate our domestic and foreign policy into one Republic of 
Estonia security policy. That concept is based upon equitable 
economic integration, upon concentric circles, where the first 
circle is the Baltic states, the next the Baltic Sea states and 
the European Union. No matter how far away the goal may be, the 
time factor is stalking us like a bad dream. Like Alice in 
Wonderland, we have to run fast to stay in the one place, in 
order that we may survive. Up until now we have accomplished 
this, even if it has been through great effort and with great 
sacrifice. The highest price was paid by our older generations, 
our pensioners who have given life to the people, have brought 
them up and have fed them with the hope for independence. Now it 
is our time to say: Independence is not born, and will not 
live, merely through longing. Independence endures and grows 
stronger, if longing and will marry. Much depends upon will, 
and in difficult times everything depends upon it. 
  In Osterby village in Swedish north-western Estonia, Adeele 
Paavelt sat on the edge of her bed and knitted a pair of socks 
as an Independence Day present for an unknown soldier in the 
defense forces of the Republic of Estonia. Many decades ago she 
also knitted socks for her husband, who lies buried in Siberian 
earth. Now Adeele Paavelt asks you, my dear compatriots, have 
you knitted socks for the soldier boys. She has not run out of 
longing and will. Adeele Paavelt is 94 years old. We remain in 
her debt, and she remains our example. I hope that in 
ninety-four years time, someone will say the same words about 
our generations. 

