Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Anatoliy Shmyrev under the rubric "Problem": </F>
"Not Departing From the Main Thing: A New Wave of Activation of 
Russian-German Relations"] 
  [Text] The end of January and the beginning of February 
were marked by a resumption of the German-Japanese dialogue, 
which had been interrupted after President Boris Yeltsin's visit 
to Japan last year. The reasons for this were the elections to 
the Federal Assembly and the reorganization of the government in 
Russia. The Japanese noted with satisfaction the fact that 
Andrey Kozyrev would continue to be in charge of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of Russia. At the same time the resolution of 
the recent government crisis in Japan, which ended with a 
compromise between the ruling coalition and the opposition of 
liberal democrats, is of no small importance to the Russian side. 
  Trilateral talks were held in Tokyo among Russia, Japan, and 
the United States on problems of regional security in Northeast 
Asia. Then there were Russian-Japanese talks on problems of 
foreign policy and defense. Problems that are extremely 
sensitive for Russia and Japan were discussed there. It is well 
known that there are still many Russians who, under the 
influence of propaganda of the recent past, believe in the 
"aggressiveness of the Japanese-American military alliance" and 
regard Japan as Germany's ally in World War II. Articles 
referring to the British newspaper THE SUNDAY TIMES concerning 
Japan's readiness to create its own nuclear weapon will 
contribute considerably to the negative attitude toward Japan. 
And they say nothing about this same readiness on the part of 
the DPRK, which is incomparably weaker than Japan in terms of 
its scientific, technical, and financial potential, or of the 
fact that Japan's capabilities of creating a nuclear weapon and 
its components have never been denied by anyone. The question 
can be reduced to the political will of the Japanese ruling 
circles, and it does not seem to exist. While the South Korean 
leaders seem to have plenty of political will. 
  On the other hand, people in Japan are concerned about 
Zhirinovskiy's success and his threats to "arrange for another 
Hiroshima" and they are trying to understand how serious all 
this is. Statements about the territorial problem in the old 
style made by the head of the Russian Government Viktor 
Chernomyrdin and the chairman of the Council of the Federation 
Vladimir Shumeyko, of course, have not gone unnoticed by 
Japanese public opinion either. And Shumeyko's words to the 
effect that the position of the Russian Government on the 
territorial question diverges from Russia's official position 
sounded strange to citizens of the Russian Federation, not to 
mention how mysterious they must have seemed to Japanese. 
  All this could not have failed to have had an effect on the 
meetings in Tokyo. Judging from reports from the Japanese 
capital, the arrival of the eminent deputy of the State Duma and 
one of the leaders of Russia's Choice, Gennadiy Burbulis, could 
not clarify the overall picture. The Japanese have an extremely 
favorable attitude toward Burbulis, and therefore he was 
received by Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Tsutomu Hata. It is noteworthy that Kozyrev's 
wish, conveyed by Burbulis, to conduct regular meetings of the 
two ministers, Hata, on the one hand, expressed his intention to 
visit Russia and, on the other, made his visit conditional on 
satisfactory results of Russian-Japanese talks which had been 
postponed by the Russian side under the pretext of 
unpreparedness and are now scheduled for the end of February. 
  One should keep in mind that the talks are to be conducted 
within the framework of the bilateral work group on the peace 
treaty. But the problem of the Russian-Japanese peace treaty 
amounts essentially to the same territorial problem. Although 
Moscow concludes various kinds of agreements with Tokyo--like 
all 17 joint plans for environmental protection--and they 
jointly discuss questions of politics and security, this does 
not determine the overall picture of the condition of our 
bilateral relations. Different facts are more important to the 
Japanese side: the use of weapons by Russian border guards 
against Japanese fishermen fishing in the region that the 
Japanese consider theirs; appeals from the head of the 
administration of the South Kuril region "to take a strict 
position of power regarding the problem of illegal fishing by 
Japanese fishing boats in Russian territorial waters"; arrests 
of Japanese fishermen and their trials; maintenance of a 
powerful Russian military presence in the Kuril Islands; and 
everything else in this spirit. 
  The territorial problem cannot be avoided, and to consider 
it 
"resolved once and for all in 1945" will be for Russia an error 
with more serious consequences than all this was for the Soviet 
Union: The Russian Federation will undermine its already weak 
positions in the Asia-Pacific Region, ending up on the sidelines 
of the process of the development of regional cooperation, not 
to mention the prospects of relations between Russia and Japan. 

