Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Nairobi, 23 Feb (AFP) -- Somali warlord Mohamed 
Farah Aidid on Wednesday [23 February] said the withdrawal from 
Somalia of western contingents in the UN operation there would 
be good for peace and not lead to factional strife as aid 
workers fear. "The departure of the foreign troops will have 
salutary rather than adverse affects on the search for peace and 
a negotiated political settlement," General Aidid told a press 
conference here in the Kenyan capital. "We are surprised about 
the hysteria being drummed up in the media and in some other 
quarters that the withdrawal of the U.S. troops will somehow 
trigger off sudden explosions of fighting among Somali 
factions," he said. 
  Some 3,000 troops currently remain in Somalia, the spearhead 
of the UN force there, but Washington and other western 
governments plan to pull out their soldiers by the end of March, 
in a move that has sparked fears of renewed heavy fighting in 
the Horn of Africa nation. 
  Aidid, the strongman in much of the capital Mogadishu and 
southern Somalia since 1991, said the prospect for peace was 
"now much better than it was last year," and called for 
continued UN relief assistance to his country, where conflict 
caused widespread famine. "One wonders if (the) doomsayers have 
ever stopped to think what the U.S. troops have been doing in 
Somalia since their arrival, or in what part of the country they 
have been deployed, or whether they have ever separated warring 
factions," Aidid said. [passage omitted] 
  Referring to weekend clashes in the southern port of 
Kismaayo, where some 60 people reportedly died, Aidid said: 
"Kismaayo is on fire, despite a 'peace conference' last year 
orchestrated, choreographed, staged, conducted and starred in by 
UNOSOM (the UN Operation in Somalia)." He added that he was 
ready to meet one of his Somali rivals, General Mohamed Hersi, 
known as Morgan, who is battling his allies for Kismaayo, if his 
grass-roots supporters backed the mood. Peace prevailed where 
no foreign soldiers were deployed, Aidid claimed. 
  "We are aware of the concern by the donor countries about 
the 
security situation in the country and the level of the cost of 
the aid programs," he added. "We wish to assure the donor 
countries, aid workers and all concerned that we will do 
everything possible to improve the situation. We hope the donor 
countries will continue to assist Somalia overcome its current 
difficulties." 
  He stressed that he was "not adverse to the UNOSOM troops 
protecting humanitarian aid as prescribed by the Security 
Council Resolution 897. But there must be humanitarian aid to 
protect." [passage omitted] 
  Aidid said his Somali National Alliance had "advised and 
warned the UN against using the foreign troops as an occupation 
force, against usurping the authority and functions of Somali 
political leaders and against treating Somalia as if it were 
under trusteeship." 
  He had remained in Nairobi for almost three months, after 
the 
UN- sponsored peace conference which ended without agreement, to 
pursue talks with other Somali clan leaders and members, adding 
that while consultations were "time-consuming" they were not 
leading nowhere. Aidid said he was leaving later Wednesday or 
Thursday for Eritrea and talks with President Isayas Afewerki. 

