CSO 

  [text]-TACHILEK (Myanmar), Wed. - Myanmar Government troops 
have seized hundreds of people from this border town to serve as 
porters in nearby hills where they are battling Golden Triangle 
opium warlord Khun Sa, residents said today. 
  The troops have swept through tea shops, restaurants and 
gambling dens, seizing able-bodied men to carry ammunition and 
other supplies to frontline positions. 
  The roundups have sent hundreds fleeing across the nearby 
border to Thailand to escape the draft, they said. 
  "More than 500 people have been rounded up and trucked to 
the 
battlefield over the past five days," one Myanmar trader said. 
  Traders and shopkeepers said people were living in a state 
of 
fear and a self-imposed curfew was in effect with businesses 
closing early and residents disappearing indoors to avoid the 
regular evening sweeps for porters. 
  Hundreds sought refuge on the Thai side of the border. 
  "Soldiers stormed my village a few days ago and arrested 
everyone they could find," said 48-year-old Nan Hinh, now hiding 
out in the Thai border town of Mae Sai. 
  Almost 200 Myanmar people took refuge in a Buddhist temple 
in 
Mae Sai on Monday but were told by Thai authorities to return to 
Myanmar the next day, the temple's abbot told Reuters. 
  An officer in Khun Sa's guerilla army told Reuters many of 
the seized people had been killed in recent heavy fighting. 
  "At least 17 porters were among 47 people killed on their 
side over the last five days at Doi Kong Mon," Khwan Muang, a 
regional commander in Khun Sa's Mong Tai Army (MTA) said. 
  Doi Kong Mon is about 20km west of Tachilek in the hills of 
Shan State. 
  Khwan Muang said 27 Myanmar troops and porters were killed 
fighting on Sunday and about 20 more died in a clash yesterday 
morning. 
  He said eight MTA soldiers were killed and 27 wounded in the 
battles. 
  The guerilla commander said he expected fighting to 
intensify 
and about 500 Myanmar government reinforcements had been moved 
into the area where the MTA had a similar strength. 
  Khun Sa declared independence for a Shan state in December 
and ordered his troops to begin an all-out offensive against 
Myanmar forces from the beginning of May, Kwan Muang said. 
  "We are convinced that now is the time to begin our war 
against Myanmar. We have the strength to fight them and the 
Shan people support us," he said. 
  He said the MTA had 20,000 troops and was better equipped 
than the government infantry. 
  Khwan Muang said MTA guerillas have launched offensives 
against government positions in 13 different parts of 
northeastern Myanmar's Shan state this month. 
  Khun Sa, alias Chang Sifu, the 60-year-old half-Chinese, 
half-Shan MTA commander, controls some of the richest 
opium-producing areas in the Golden Triangle, the area where 
Myanmar, Thailand and Laos meet. 
  He says he merely taxes opium traders to finance the 
struggle 
for the independence of Shan state from Yangon buy he was 
indicted by a US Federal court on heroin trafficking charges in 
1990.-- Reuter 

