Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Urve Repp: "Financial Ministry Satisfied With </F>
Past Year"] 
  [Text] 
  Summarizing the past financial year, Finance Minister 
Madis uurike said that a rather strict financial 
policy 
has been followed and efforts made to balance the budget. In 
cooperation with Bank of Estonia, the rate of inflation has been 
slowed down. "To some extent, we also had to police the 
economy," the minister remarked. 
<H5>  Economy Has Stabilized Significantly </H5>
  Even though inflation is still high, it has been brought 
down 
from 900 to 35 percent, compared to 1992. 
  uurike said that stabilization of the economy 
is also 
evident from loan policies. Right now, loans are geared 
primarily to investments. Due to that, several necessary loans 
have been obtained, since the state budget has very little money 
allocated for investments. 
  To liven up investments, a state investment program has been 
created, the listing for which spans several years and exceeds 
23 million kroons. 
  Last year, loans totalling $109 million were taken out, and 
$63 million of it put to use. These loans were used to support 
banking, heating plants and local governments. Last year, 6 
million ECU's and 73.5 million German marks were received from 
the Europeam Community for the development of energetics. Loans 
have also been used to solve transport-related and environmental 
problems. 
  The direction of foreign aid has also changed, according to 
uurike. There is more talk now about cooperative 
projects, as discussions on crises have disappeared. The biggest 
loans have been received from the European Community, Germany, 
Sweden, Finland and Italy. 
  The foreign aid total for 1992 was 1.1 billion kroons, and 
it 
has continued at the same level through 1993. Aid is given 
primarily for carrying out projects, and not as cash grants. 
<H5>  Last Year's Revenues Smaller Than Anticipated </H5>
  The 1993 base budget called for 4.3 billion kroons, but 
actual proceeds were 100 million kroons lower than anticipated. 
The budget deficit was due to poor collections in several tax 
areas, said deputy chancellor Tiit Saat. Even local governments 
did not come up with the budgeted amounts. Proceeds from Tallinn 
fell short by 60 million, from Maardu by 27 million, and from 
Narva by 10 million kroons. Because of the budget shortfall, 
investments ran at a lower level than planned. 
  Tiit Saat said that many problems were encountered in 
preparing the 1994 budget. District governments are not happy 
with the excessive dependence of local budgets on the state 
budget. This year's plans call for supporting local governments, 
and for making allocations to districts from the state budget. 
  Saat thinks that the 1994 financial year will turn out to be 
quite complicated. A vigorous search is on for coming up with 
additional funds to meet the budget. 
<H5>  Supplementary Budgets Not Being Planned </H5>
  At the end of last year, after the state budget bill was 
passed by Riigikogu [Estonia's parliament] Valve Kirsipuu, 
chairman of the parliamentary budget and taxation commission, 
spoke of the need for a supplementary budget to raise the 
pension amounts. The word from the finance ministry to 
PaEVALEHT was that there can be no talk of supplementary 
budgets, unless additional sources of revenue are found. 
Additional sources could be created by raising taxes, and that 
is not up to the ministry. No supplementary budget will be 
created, at least not during the first quarter. 
  Employees of agencies on state payroll had their wages 
increased 1.5 times, yet funds could not be found to raise the 
pension amounts, which have been eroded considerably by 
inflation. Enn Pant, chancellor of the finance ministry, said 
that this is a case of different orders of magnitude, and that 
became the deciding factor in this instance. 

