BFN 

  [Excerpts] The South Yemen leaders announced today that the 
southern forces totally crushed the northern al-'Amaliqah 
Brigade during its advance toward Aden. 
  Aden radio announced in a statement broadcast today that the 
members of the al-'Amaliqah brigade are fleeing like frightened 
cats, as the radio put it, and that the southern forces are 
gradually taking control of the situation. 
  [Aden correspondent Ayhab 'Abd-al-Rahman 'Ali] Fighting has 
continued until the time of compiling this report, while the 
rest of the al-'Amaliqah forces, which are the forces stationed 
at the Abyan-Minzu-1990-Unity [as heard] area 40 miles to the 
east of Aden [sentence as heard]. These forces were joined 
yesterday by the remaining part of the (Kibsi) brigade, the 
second armored corps belonging to Sanaa. These forces fled the 
al-Rahah region in neighboring Lahad province following their 
defeat. All sorts of weapons are being used in this fierce 
battle. The troops of Vice President 'Ali Salim al-Bid are 
pursuing these forces, which are fleeing toward the west. 
  In Lahad province in the north of Aden, President Salih's 
forces made an attempt to invade Kirsh village which is on the 
former border between the north and the south. Aden troops 
resisted these forces and made considerable progress. 
  Observers here agree on the superiority of the southern 
forces in Abyan and Lahad. Aircraft are playing a big role in 
this battle. Observers note that the forces retreating from 
Abyan and Lahad are doing so slowly, in the hope that help will 
reach them from Sanaa. The al-'Amaliqah battalion retreating 
from Abyan is in a tragic situation. It has fallen into a trap 
between the forces coming from Aden and those belonging the 30th 
brigade which came from Hadramawt. [passage omitted] 
  It is noted here that many of those who have surrendered 
from 
the northern army are soldiers, [word indistinct], and officers 
from the governorates of 'Ib, Ta'iz, al-Bayda', and other areas. 
They preferred to surrender because of the hardship they 
suffered at the hands of their commanders; as Lieutenant Mustafa 
Haris said, they were being treated like third-class citizens. 
Eyewitnesses coming from Lahad governorate said that forces of 
Vice President 'Ali Salim al-Bid were able to repell an attack 
launched against al-Dhala', which is 96 miles north of Aden. 
This took place after forces from Lahad, north of Aden, joined 
the troops of the 'Abud brigade stationed in al-Dhala. These 
forces have since yesterday midday moved to offensive positions. 
With the fierce fighting and battles, Sanaa's forces have lost 
control and carried out random shelling of al-Dhala, the capital 
of al-Mudiriyyah. This shelling involving the use of missiles 
resulted in damage to many of the villages near al- Dhala, such 
as Hajaf, al-Shu'ayb, Jabal Harir, Khuwayr, and others. 
  For the second consecutive day, life in Aden is normal. An 
under secretary at the Ministry of Public Service and 
Administrative Reform has inspected work at some institutions 
which are directly linked to the life of the citizens. The only 
thing that upset the normal course of life was an attempt by a 
military plane at 2015 to enter Aden airspace; the plane, 
however, had to flee as a result of intense gunfire and was not 
able to drop its load on vital installations in Aden. 
  Well-informed political sources in Aden have disclosed that 
'Ali 'Abdallah Salih is experiencing internal problems in Sanaa 
following the losses incurred by his military forces and their 
collapse after the blows they received from the Armed Forces in 
Aden. 

