Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Why Cold Attitude Toward Close Allies?"] </F>
  [Text] Foreign Minister Sardar Aasif Ahmed Ali, soon after 
taking over his office, called a press conference and said that 
relations with China, Iran, and the Gulf countries are becoming 
cooler, and that India is making a place for itself among 
Pakistan's friendly nations. At the same time, he promised to 
improve foreign policy. He also made it clear, however, that no 
basic changes would be made in it. 
  India has been working very hard and diligently during the 
last two and one-half years to improve its relationship with 
China. It not only resolved many of its border disputes with 
China, but also improved relations by exchanging visits by the 
leaders of both countries. The situation is not like it was in 
the past; both countries have become quite warm to each other. 
Prime Minister Narasimha Rao recently visited Iran and not only 
discussed political affairs with the leaders there, but also 
signed an agreement to increase trade between Iran and India. An 
almost similar situation exists with the Gulf countries. India 
is making room for itself in these countries by offering 
thousands of workers at very low wages. Pakistan has very close 
and friendly relations with China, and China will never 
establish a close relationship with India at the cost of its 
relationship with Pakistan, because it knows well that the 
United States and its allies are preparing India to confront it. 
Pakistan has similar relations with Iran and the Gulf countries. 
It also has a religious and cultural relationship with these 
countries, which have a centuries-old tradition. India, by 
increasing trade with these countries, is trying to weaken their 
relations with Pakistan. In the present era, the importance of 
economic relations cannot be ignored. In our beloved country, 
because of political instability over the last few years, we did 
not pay much attention to our relations with other countries. We 
should expect that the present government should not only 
eliminate the reasons behind this coolness in our relations, but 
also make efforts to strengthen Pakistan's relations with these 
countries. 

