BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Real Danger"] </F>
  [Text] The importance of the transition from the URV [Real 
Value Unit] to the real has gone beyond our borders and worried 
Argentine Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo. Cavallo, whose 
dollarization plan inspired the economic team of former Minister 
Fernando Henrique Cardoso, recommended haste in the 
implementation of the new currency. 
  Minister Cavallo's concerns go beyond the academic field. 
Given that Brazil is Argentina's largest trade partner and is 
responsible for Argentina's negative trade balance of more than 
$1 billion, he hopes the new currency will help stop or even 
reverse the Argentine trade deficit. 
  Brazil's cautiousness is linked to the fact that the 
Brazilian economic team does not intend to repeat the Argentine 
mistake of establishing a fixed parity of one peso equal to one 
dollar. The Argentine fixed exchange rate has become a trap: 
The accumulated inflation under the dollarized economy 
surpasses 30 percent, but the exchange devaluation necessary to 
equalize the Argentine trade balance cannot be implemented 
because the Argentine Central Bank does not have enough exchange 
reserves to pay for the pesos in circulation. 
  From the academic point of view we respect the reason of the 
plan masterminds who are waiting for a more favorable moment to 
implement the real. The reason is: the synchronization of all 
the prices and production factors that adopted the URV. Once the 
economy is less worried about past accounts, it will be ready to 
readjust prices and calculate short-term costs. 
  Since the URV is a short-term indexation factor, the costs 
of 
salaries, financial operations, school fares, and public utility 
rates will begin to reflect the present and influence the 
composition of prices. Finance Ministry special adviser Jose 
Milton Dallari admits that it is naive to believe that all 
prices will be synchronized in URV's when the real comes into 
circulation. If 85 percent of prices are adjusted in URV's, it 
will be very good, therefore leaving very small inflationary 
residues for the new currency. 
  JORNAL DO BRASIL has verified that the adoption of the URV 
has slowed the increase of wholesale prices, but the trend still 
has not affected retail prices. Commerce, with supermarkets at 
the head, is trying to recover -- through price increases -- the 
financial profits it conceded to industry when it established 
prices in URV. 
  The loss of financial profits obtained through the float 
[preceding word in English] between purchases in installments 
and sales in cash is forcing commerce to adopt new strategies. 
Other sectors of the economy also will be seriously affected if 
the transition from the URV to the real brings stability to the 
economy. The most affected sector will doubtlessly be the 
financial sector, which is making large profits and broadening 
its portion in the composition of the GDP thanks to the float 
provided by the effect of inflation on cash deposits that do not 
earn interest. 
  In a lecture to foreign diplomats in Brasilia, Central Bank 
International Affairs Director Gustavo Franco was not impressed 
by reports of a slowdown in price increases. According to 
Franco, the important issue is to reduce inflation to one digit. 
Prices that dropped somewhat in January and February, increased 
1 percent in March with the adoption of the URV. 
  Despite the good news on the wholesale prices, independent 
economists fear for the plan's credibility in retail commerce. 
If the population continues feeling inflation in URV's, the 
credibility of the real will be undermined. Former Finance 
Minister Mario Henrique Simonsen already has mentioned this 
danger, which now is worrying Cavallo. 
  Former Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso has given his 
successor Rubens Ricupero freedom to choose the moment to put 
the real into circulation. A recent meeting between Cardoso and 
the economic team -- when he asked them to put the new currency 
into circulation soon -- created political uneasiness. 
  Given that Congress has neither redefined the role of the 
state in the economy in the constitutional revision, nor 
promoted a deep social security reform or a new federal pact to 
redistribute income and responsibilities among the federal 
government and the states and municipalities -- which should 
have a considerable impact in the fiscal policy -- the people 
will suspect that the stabilization plan has been reduced to a 
short-term election campaign banner. Nothing should be used as a 
pretext to make Brazil lose another opportunity to defeat 
inflation. 

