Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 3 Feb (MENA)--Interior Minister Hasan al-Alfi 
has stated that the recent confrontation with terrorists in the 
al-Zawiyah al-Hamra' area was the result of careful planning and 
reflected the high standard of physical and mental training of 
the members of the police force. It also reflects the high 
standard they achieved in intensive training to deal with such 
crimes in Egyptian society. 
  In statements to newsmen today, the interior minister said 
the security services have much information about the financing 
and recruitment efforts of the terrorists and some misled 
individuals who harm and betray their religion and homeland in 
return for a small sum of money. 
  Answering a question about a REUTER report that some 
terrorists issued a statement threatening to carry out terrorist 
operations, al-Alfi said the Interior Ministry rejects what 
could be called a statement by the terrorist groups, because 
terrorism has no voice, opinion, or aim in Egypt. The ministry 
does not permit criminals to address the Egyptian public as if 
they impose the rule of crime on the millions of honorable 
people in Egypt. 
  The interior minister added: The security services now have 
the initiative and the ability to strike at the terrorists' 
criminal rackets. They will not hesitate to confront and deter 
those who think they can impose their distorted views by force. 
  The minister explained that the police now fully believe 
that 
it is their responsibility to purge the country of the last 
terrorist, irrespective of the sacrifice. 
  Al-Alfi said that any criminal who thinks for one moment 
that 
he can threaten any Egyptian must realize that the security 
services can reach him and punish him for his crimes. It has 
become clear to the public at home and abroad that ugly 
terrorism represents a shallow ideology for people who have 
deviated from the teachings of their religion and loyalty to 
their country. 
  Al-Alfi added that the Interior Ministry announced that it 
will take any terrorist who wants to repent before the honest 
Egyptian courts and that the door will remain open to all those 
who wish to repent and return to the right path to serve the 
interests of their country and people. The ministry can protect 
and assist him provided his repentance is sincere. 
  Al-Alfi said that the Interior Ministry emphasizes that the 
blood of the police and civilian martyrs will not be wasted and 
that any criminal will be punished quickly for any crime he has 
committed. 
  He added that the ministry also thinks that popular support 
for the police has become a strong front for achieving security 
and stability and for promoting development in Egypt. 
  The interior minister affirmed that the security service's 
success in containing terrorism is not the only success they 
seek but a first step to be followed by others, supported by all 
the national forces to impose complete security control. 
  He explained that the ministry's standing instructions to 
the 
police are to confront [words indistinct] shooting with force. 
Al-Alfi said that the Interior Ministry will not be lenient with 
any policeman who fails to use his personal weapon when 
necessary, because the confrontation has become total on the way 
to ending terrorism throughout Egypt. 

