Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> ["Decree of the Supreme Council of Ukraine: On Procedures </F>
for Enactment of the Law of Ukraine On the Antimonopoly 
Committee of Ukraine"] 
  [Text] The Supreme Council of Ukraine resolves: 
  1. The Law of Ukraine On the Antimonopoly Committee of 
Ukraine shall be enacted on the day of its publication. 
  2. Until legislation is brought into conformity with the Law 
of Ukraine on the Antimonopoly Committee of Ukraine, the acts in 
effect shall be used insofar as they do not contravene the 
present law. 
  3. The Commissions of the Supreme Council of Ukraine for 
Issues of Economic Reform and Management of the National 
Economy, and for Issues of Legislation and Legal Order, jointly 
with the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, shall be instructed to 
prepare and submit for consideration to the Supreme Council of 
Ukraine: 
  before 1 January 1994--draft laws of Ukraine on amendments 
and additions to the Constitution (Main Law) of Ukraine; on 
amendments and additions to the Law of Ukraine on Restricting 
Monopoly Practices and Preventing Unfair Competition in 
Entrepreneurial Activities; on amendments and additions to the 
Code of Ukraine on Statutory Violations of Law; 
  before 1 February 1994--a draft of the Code of Antimonopoly 
Procedure of Ukraine. 
  4. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall: 
  before 1 January 1994, develop proposals for bringing 
legislative acts into conformity with the Law of Ukraine on the 
Antimonopoly Committee of Ukraine and submit them to the Supreme 
Council of Ukraine for consideration; 
  bring the decisions of the Government of Ukraine into 
conformity with the present law, as well as ensure revision and 
repeal, by ministries and other central organs of state 
executive power, of regulatory acts that run counter to the 
present law; 
  envision, for 1993 and subsequent years, allocation of the 
necessary amount of transportation vehicles, computer equipment, 
other material and technical resources, housing construction 
quotas, and funding of expenditures to ensure the operation of 
the Antimonopoly Committee of Ukraine and its territorial 
offices; 
  jointly with the government of the Republic of Crimea, local 
state administrations, and executive committees of the local 
councils of people's deputies, allocate, in the second half of 
1993, official premises to the territorial offices of the 
Antimonopoly Committee of Ukraine necessary for their 
accommodation and operation. 
  5. Within one month, the Antimonopoly Committee of Ukraine 
shall approve temporary rules for the consideration of cases 
concerning violations of antimonopoly legislation which shall 
apply until the relevant legislative acts are adopted. 
  [Signed] Chairman of the Supreme Council of Ukraine I. 
Plyushch 
  Kiev, 26 November 1993 

