Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Bosnia-Herzegovina Prime Minister Haris </F>
Silajdzic by Stevo Latinovic; place and date not given -- 
recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Latinovic] Bosnia-Herzegovina Prime Minister 
Haris Silajdzic this afternoon returned home from a two-day 
visit to Pakistan. 
  Mr. Prime Minister, you visited Pakistan on the invitation 
of 
Pakistani Prime Minister Mrs. Benazir Bhutto. Could you assess 
your meetings? What are the results of your visit to Pakistan? 
  [Silajdzic] Yes, I was received in Islamabad by Pakistani 
President Mr. Leghari, who is the new president of Pakistan. I 
briefed him on the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the 
situation regarding negotiations. Considering that Pakistan is 
a country that has been expressing a solid and consistent 
support for the just (?cause) of Bosnia-Herzegovina, I was told 
that Pakistan will continue to support Bosnia-Herzegovina 
bilaterally and multilaterally. The multilateral plan 
essentially boils down to support in the United Nations and the 
Organization of Islamic Countries. 
  Regarding the Organization of Islamic Countries, the 
ministers of the so-called contact group will meet in Geneva on 
17 [January]. These are the foreign ministers of eight member 
states of the Organization of Islamic Countries. At this 
meeting they will evaluate and direct the activities of these 
countries with regard to Bosnia-Herzegovina. Therefore, the 
Pakistani president reiterated that Pakistan's support to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina will remain the same, that Pakistan will not 
[words indistinct] with regard to humanitarian help, and the 
help to our diplomatic efforts aimed at halting the aggression 
on Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The assessment of that meeting is that we have a big friend 
in Pakistan, as has been the case in the past. I must tell you 
that I was surprised by the (?depth) of the concern shown by not 
only the official organs, the government and the presidency, but 
also the people and the media. The presence of the problems of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina is felt everywhere in Pakistan. This country 
is some 6,000 kilometers away, and it is a bit strange that our 
problem is more present there than in some European countries. 
  This meeting took place in Karachi on 9 and 10 [January]. I 
also held a meeting with Prime Minister Mrs. Bhutto. We reached 
several specific agreements on bilateral cooperation between 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and Pakistan. As in the case of Turkey, a 
question was raised about an agreement on friendship and 
cooperation, an intergovernmental agreement on friendship and 
cooperation between Bosnia-Herzegovina and Pakistan. 
Considering that such an agreement is already being worked on, 
that the draft of such an agreement with Turkey is being worked 
on, it could happen that the drafts of both agreements, the 
agreement of Bosnia-Herzegovina on friendship and cooperation 
with Turkey and Pakistan are reached very soon, as early as 2 
February, and that these agreements are signed during the visit 
by Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto and Turkish Prime Minister 
Ciller to Sarajevo. 
  I am not sure that [words indistinct] but in any case we 
will 
try, if this [words indistinct]. The agreement would mean that, 
as of now, all matters of bilateral and multilateral cooperation 
will have one basis, namely that a certain ministry in Pakistan 
or Turkey will have the basis that they could refer to in 
determining some course of action. They will not need to seek 
the (?approval) of the president of prime minister. Individual 
cases will not need new decisions. The decision will already 
exist and all government organs in Turkey or Pakistan or 
Bosnia-Herzegovina will be able to refer to this agreement. 
This will in turn speed up and intensify cooperation. 
  Of course, such agreements are very important for 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. We are talking about the traditionally 
friendly countries, the countries with great potentials, the 
countries that are of great importance in their regions. 
  Moreover, the Pakistani prime minister told me that Pakistan 
has set aside $1 million for the organization and work of the 
court for crimes in Bosnia-Herzegovina. We did not know 
anything about this. Pakistan (?decided on this) a few days ago. 
I was informed about this in Islamabad. The problem lies in 
the fact that the war tribunal does not have sufficient funds 
and that because of that it [words indistinct]. I was surprised 
by this to a great extent. Some European countries have shown 
interest in the work of the tribunal for war crimes but the 
funds were lacking. This is a move by the Pakistani Government 
that deserves every praise. [passage omitted] 
  [Latinovic] According to our information, Pakistan said that 
it will do everything in it power and in diplomatic circles to 
influence, via the Organization of Islamic Countries, the 
international community to change its stand on 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. What are in your view the real chances of 
such [word indistinct] 
  [Silajdzic] The meeting of ministers of the contact group of 
the Organization of Islamic Countries in Geneva on 17 January is 
certainly connected with this. The meeting will reexamine the 
efforts of the Organization of Islamic Countries in this 
direction. A new (?demand) could be set that direction. In any 
case, we are talking about a group of countries with 
exceptionally strong economic potential. It is possible to 
direct this potential in the direction of [word indistinct] the 
international community, in the direction of (?increasing) 
humanitarian aid, in which everyone is interested, when the 
roads in Bosnia-Herzegovina become free. There is plenty of 
aid, and aid could be sent if communications are free. [words 
indistinct] [passage omitted] 

