BFN 

  [Text] Last month, the British SUNDAY TIMES came up with 
allegations that Russia is developing biological weapons. The 
Russian Defense Ministry has strongly denied the allegations. 
Nevertheless, THE WASHINGTON POST has issued the same statement 
again recently. Vladislav Kozyakov comments: 
  What is surprising is that the authors of the publications 
about a biological weapons program allegedly under way in Russia 
refer to the White House, sources which in their turn quote 
statements by some anonymous defectors from Russia. And, 
moreover, the authors contradict each other. For one, an 
anonymous author says in THE WASHINGTON POST that he has got all 
the necessary evidence that the program exists, while another 
author states in the same newspaper that there is no evidence to 
prove the charges and therefore it can be only non-military 
equipment that should be dismantled as well. 
  Hence, a question arises -- what are the reasons for 
spreading such unfounded accusations concerning the Russian 
policy in the American mass media, with reference to the 
administration's officials? 
  An agreement is effective between Russia, the United States, 
and Britain on mutual visits to biological facilities of the 
three countries. Russian experts visited several facilities of 
the kind in the United States in February-March this year. 
British and American experts carried out similar inspections in 
Russia in 1992, last October, and last January. They were 
allowed to visit any laboratories and talk with employees and 
take pictures as well. And Western experts revealed no claims 
as to the observance of the 1972 convention banning biological 
weapons. 
  As for visiting American biological facilities, Russian 
experts faced serious obstacles. For one, they were not allowed 
into a number of laboratories and one building of a former plant 
of the (Phaser) firm, producing biological weapons. Certain 
restrictions were posed on them to take pictures and they were 
also denied to make biological tests. One of the facilities was 
opened for inspection only after the Russian Embassy interfered. 
Besides, experts from Russia found out that the (Phaser) firm 
not only preserved but was modernizing the equipment designed 
earlier to produce biological warfare formulas. The information 
to that effect has been published in the Moscow-based newspaper 
IZVESTIYA. 
  Apparently there is only one way to provide strict 
observance 
of the 1972 convention banning biological weapons. The sides 
should work out a more effective control mechanism over the 
convention's implementation. Russia, for its part, intends to 
help promote the idea at the forthcoming session of the 
preparatory committee dealing with the control measures to 
observe the convention. Will the Western countries be ready for 
a stricter control system? 

