Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by C.M.: "`Military Parliament' Is Already in </F>
Session"] 
  [Text] Belgrade -- The president of the Republic wanted a 
parliament to be proud of, that is, a parliament that would be a 
voting machine for endorsing the national policy. Since he did 
not get it, he intends to give us a parliament made up of the 
military, the police, the judiciary, and the prosecution, and 
this "parliament" is already in session. 
  Addressing journalists at a news conference yesterday, Vuk 
Draskovic, president of the Serbian Renewal Movement, thus 
expressed doubt that the new Serbian parliament will be set up 
at all. 
  "The army is practicing beating up those who do not have 
anything to eat in front of the television, while the chief of 
the General Staff, threatening that he will not allow the 
violation of the Constitution, holds the view that all political 
parties except the Socialist Party of Serbia are a political 
evil, not realizing that the causes of this evil are sitting 
opposite him at the meeting of the Supreme Military Council. The 
District Public Prosecutor's Office is filing charges, while the 
police are arresting miners, railroad workers... and tomorrow 
students, workers, and peasants... thinking that they will fill 
the empty bakeries with bread by filling prisons with the 
hungry. We cannot go to Szeged [in Hungary], Sofia, or Skopje 
without paying a tax in German marks, and if Serbia continues in 
this way, I am afraid we will end up in Bucharest," Draskovic 
said. 
  The leader of the Serbian Renewal Movement mainly handled 
the 
many questions from journalists "with gloves." He mentioned a 
possibility of federal elections being held in April or May (and 
perhaps even new republican elections). He rejected the 
possibility of the Serbian Renewal Movement supporting the 
minority government of the Socialists. He indicated that 
electricity shortages before New Year happened because energy 
was being exported.... 
  However, the leader of the Serbian Renewal Movement assessed 
much more positively the current role of Vojislav Seselj ("we 
have not forgotten what he did, but he has now taken a correct 
stand toward the Socialist Party of Serbia"), confirming that he 
has been in telephone contact with the leader of the Radicals. 
The leader of the Serbian Renewal Movement also promised that 
the dispute between the Radicals and DEPOS [Democratic Movement 
of Serbia] concerning the setting up of a board of enquiry in 
the Chamber of Citizens will soon be resolved, "because mistakes 
were made by both sides." 

