BFN 

  [Text] His Majesty King Husayn has met the chairman of the 
Foreign Relations Committee at the U.S. Senate, Mr. Claiborne 
Pell, and a number of other senators. During the meeting at the 
Congress in Washington, Mr. Pell praised his majesty's wise 
leadership and his policy towards various regional and 
international issues. 
  His majesty said Jordan has always sought to bring about 
peace in the region, adding that serious work was to begin soon 
to solve all issues on the coming agenda with Israel, signed in 
Washington following the Israeli-Palestinian agreement. His 
majesty pointed that the coming phase is critical and sensitive, 
expressing hope of a new dawn in the region. 
  In answer to a question on Jordan's economy, his majesty the 
king told the senators that Jordan is rebuilding its economy and 
explained the impacts of the Gulf war on this economy. His 
majesty added that such crisis had left Jordan under the big 
burden of debts and voiced hope that peace would ease this 
burden. 
  On Arab coordination, his majesty expressed dissatisfaction 
for the lack of such coordination until now and stressed that 
Jordan is keen on solving all problems on all tracks so as to 
bring about a comprehensive peace capable of improving the 
standard of living for peoples of this region. 
  On the Jordanian-Palestinian relationship, his majesty told 
the U.S. officials that Jordan will do all it can to support 
Palestinian brethren and make their self-rule a success. 
  His majesty's meeting with the senators was attended by the 
prime minister, the chief of the Royal Court, his majesty's 
political and military advisers, and the Jordanian ambassador in 
Washington. 
  His majesty told reporters after the meeting that he 
discussed several issues of common interest with the U.S. 
senators and described the meeting as taking place in a friendly 
atmosphere. 
  Meanwhile, the White House issued a statement on his majesty 
the king's summit meeting with U.S. President Bill Clinton last 
night. The statement said President Clinton discussed with King 
Husayn the peace process in the Middle East, in addition to 
regional developments and bilateral relations. 
  President Clinton praised the courage and vision of his 
majesty the king in pursuing peace with Israel and pledged 
ongoing U.S. support for the Mideast peace process. Mr. Clinton 
reaffirmed the support of the United States for a comprehensive 
settlement in the Middle East, including the Syrian track. 
  President Clinton also said the Mideast peace process 
remains 
a very important priority for him and for the administration and 
added that he was very encouraged by what has been achieved in 
the whole process. 

