BFN 

  [Text] The office of the Vietnamese National Assembly held 
an international news conference in Hanoi on the afternoon of 24 
May on the occasion of the opening of the Ninth National 
Assembly's fifth session. 
  The conference was attended by a large number of 
representatives of the foreign news media and by many press and 
cultural attaches from various embassies. 
  Vu Mao, head of the Office of the National Assembly, said: 
This time the National Assembly session will open on the morning 
of 26 May. According to the main agenda and contents of the 
session, deputies will study and pass a labor code; examine the 
draft law on domestic investment encouragement and four other 
draft laws; hear a government report on its activities in the 
first six months of the year; and discuss activities to be 
carried out by the National Assembly in the last six months of 
1994. 
  The National Assembly will also heard a topical report on 
its 
activities of the National Assembly, on foreign relations and 
managerial work -- and on the Supreme People's Organ of Control. 
It will examine and ratify the United Nations' Convention on the 
Law of the Sea, and so forth. 
  Asked by an AP correspondent about whether the labor code 
provides any guarantee for workers' right to go on strike and 
under what circumstances, Vu Mao said: The labor code has one 
point stipulating workers' right to go on strike. The purpose 
of this is to guarantee the rights of workers and employers as 
well. Of course, such a labor strike must not be allowed to 
effect the common activities of the community. 
  As for a question raised by a REUTER correspondent about 
whether the labor code stipulates the minimum wage for workers? 
Vu Mao said: The code of law in question does not stipulate the 
minimum wage. This is because a law can remain stable for a 
relative period, but the wage scale may vary according to the 
economic development situation in each period of time. If there 
is ever a need to stipulate the minimum wage, a by-law is 
suffice. 
  With regard to a question raised by a Cuban news agency 
correspondent about whether the National Assembly, while 
examining and ratifying the United Nations' Convention on the 
Law of the Sea, will discuss or make any declarations on the 
Truong Sa [Spratly] archipelago, Vu Mao said: While the deputies 
are examining and ratifying this convention, they will not 
discuss nor make public any documents on the Truong Sa 
archipelago. He went on: Vietnam consistently wishes to resolve 
the Truong Sa issue through peaceful and friendly negotiations 
with the countries concerned. 

