BFN 

<F P=106> [All quotation marks as published] </F>
  [Text] La Paz, 12 May -- Through a Supreme Decree signed by 
President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada and his cabinet, the 
government has approved the "Regulations for the 
Industrialization of the Coca Leaf," in compliance with the 
agreements signed last week by the executive branch with the 
five Federations of Coca Producers of the Chapare region of 
Cochabamba and Yungas, La Paz. 
  This supreme decree, which will take effect once it is 
published in the official gazette, states the following: 
  "Whereas: 
  Article 4 of the Law on the Regulation of Coca and 
Controlled 
Substances No. 1008 defines the legal use and consumption of 
coca, the social and cultural practices of the Bolivian 
population in their traditional manners, such as the "aullico" 
or chewing, medical, and ritual uses; 
  Article 5 of Law No. 1008 defines: "Other forms of legal use 
of the coca leaves that are not harmful to human health nor 
cause any kind of addiction, as well as its industrialization 
for legal uses, will be the object of special regulations;" 
  The Bolivian Government has signed and ratified the 1988 
Vienna Convention, which in Article 14, Clause 2, states that 
the measures to eradicate the illegal cultivation of plants from 
which narcotics are extracted "must respect the basic human 
rights and must take into account the traditional legal uses of 
coca for which there is historical evidence as well as the 
protection of the environment;" 
  It is the government's obligation to regulate the 
industrialization process of coca leaf for medical uses, food, 
and other uses within the framework of current Bolivian and 
international norms; 
  With the purpose of promoting the industrialization of the 
coca leaf and to facilitate the application of Law No. 1008 
according to the definitions of Articles 96 and 133 of the 
Bolivian Constitution and the international conventions on the 
subject; 
  It is hereby decreed: 
  Article 1. The regulations on the industrialization of coca 
leaf, made up of four chapters and 15 articles, and which 
constitute an annex of this Supreme Decree, are hereby approved. 
  Article 2. The regulations approved through this Supreme 
Decree refer to legal coca, not meaning that it is 
decriminalized, and authorizing its industrialization in certain 
volumes from coca leaf extracted from the traditional regions 
listed in Article 9 of Law No. 1008. 
  Article 3. Any product derived from coca leaf must not 
exceed 
an alkaloid content beyond what is established by our laws, 
international conventions, and the World Health Organization. 
  This Supreme Decree must be executed and enforced by the 
ministers of foreign affairs and worship, government, justice, 
finance and economic development, human development, national 
defense, sustainable development and environment, and social 
communication. 

