Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "The New Line-Up of the Toyoda-led </F>
Keidanren"] 
  [Text] Shoichiro Toyoda, 68, chairman of Toyota Motor 
Corporation, has been chosen as the next chairman of Keidanren 
[Federation of Economic Organizations of Japan]. It will be a 
heavy burden for business leader Toyoda, even though he is 
younger than incumbent Keidanren Chairman Gaishi Hiraiwa, 79, an 
adviser to the Tokyo Electric Company. 
  The job will include maintaining economic growth through 
reform of the structure of the Japanese economy, forming new 
relationships between political and business sectors, and 
promoting cooperation with other Asian countries which enjoy 
rapid economic growth. 
  His first task will be to appoint influential figures as his 
assistants so that he can use them as part of a team to tackle 
difficult tasks. This article looks at the likely new Keidanren 
line-up under Toyoda, including the candidates for vice chairman. 
  Hiraiwa originally expected Sony Corporation Chairman Akio 
Morita, 72, to be his successor. But when Morita fell ill 
recently he had to consider someone else. Toyoda, head of the 
nation's top manufacturer, was "the safest selection" for 
Hiraiwa. The names of other Keidanren vice chairmen had to be 
dropped from consideration as chairman because of such factors 
as their companies' business slump. They included Hiroshi 
Saito, 73, chairman of Nippon Steel Corporation [NSC]; Yoichiro 
Iida, 73, chairman of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries [MHI]; and 
Yutaka Kume, 72, chairman of Nissan Motor Company. Hiraiwa 
selected Toyoda because he was younger than others and his 
company had performed well and was known internationally -- 
requirements Hiraiwa wanted his successor to meet. 
  At the very beginning of this year, Hiraiwa started to 
prepare the way for the appointment of Toyoda. He began the 
preliminary work and consensus building needed in seeking 
agreement from all related parties before making an official 
decision. He told influential business leaders such as Honorary 
Keidanren Chairman Eishiro Saito, 82, and Keidanren Council 
Chairman Takuji Matsuzawa, 80, an adviser to Fuji Bank, that "I 
am planning to appoint Mr. Toyoda as my successor." 
  Having been convinced there was no strong opposition to the 
appointment of Toyoda, the second youngest Keidanren vice 
chairmen, Hiraiwa on 13 January asked Toyoda, who was leaving 
for Britain on a business trip the next day, "to be his 
successor." 
  Hiraiwa made the offer at a party given in appreciation of 
the services of the Economic Reform Research Council (an 
advisory panel to the prime minister) held at the prime 
minister's official residence in the afternoon. 
  Toyoda replied: "I accept your offer." His acceptance made 
him the unofficial head of Keidanren. 
  Toyoda served as Keidanren vice chairman for four years, 
while Hiraiwa became chairman after serving as vice chairman for 
12 and a half years. There is no denying that compared to 
Toyoda, Hiraiwa had accumulated much more experience by the time 
he became chairman, so it is certain that Keidanren will adopt a 
group leadership system to help Toyoda. Under the system the 
head of the Kendanren Council, an advisory body to the Keidanren 
chairman, and influential vice chairmen participate in the 
chairman's decisionmaking. Taking this into consideration, 
Hiraiwa and Toyoda will together decide on the new lineup. 
  Keidanren rules say the chairman and vice chairman should 
be 70 years or younger and they are limited to two four-year 
terms. Hiraiwa and council chairman Matsuzawa are to resign 
before their terms expire six months from now. Among the vice 
chairmen, those who will resign after serving two terms are 
Komatsu Ltd. Chairman Ryoichi Kawai, 76, MHI Chairman Iida, NSC 
Chairman Saito, and Toyoda. Four vice chairmanships are to be 
vacated by them. There is a possibility that with the exceptions 
to the rule, Iida and Saito will remain vice chairmen. However, 
the possibility is slim. Instead, there is strong probability 
that one of them will be appointed as successor to council 
chairman Matsuzawa. 
  Among other vice chairmen, those who will complete their 
fourth year term in December this year are Isao Nakauchi, 71, 
chairman and president of Daiei Inc.; Kenji Kawakatsu, 69, 
chairman of Sanwa Bank; and Katsuhiro Utada, 68, honorary 
chairman of and an adviser to Ajinomoto Company. There is a 
widely-accepted view that "to avoid confusion, these three vice 
chairmen should resign after completing their four-year terms 
and not in mid-term as Hiraiwa is doing." 
  If things go as expected, Keidanren will select four new 
vice 
chairmen at its general meeting in May and the remaining three 
at its extraordinary meeting in December. 
  At any rate, Keidanren will select seven new vice chairmen 
this year. 
  Those considered the most likely candidates for vice 
chairmanship are Sho Nasu, 69, chairman of Tokyo Electric Power 
Company; Kenichi Suematsu, 67, president of Sakura Bank; and 
Yotaro Kobayashi, 60, chairman of Fuji Xerox Company. Like 
Hiraiwa, Nasu is in the electric power business. Suematsu is 
expected to represent the Mitsui Group in Keidanren because 
there is currently no representative from the group serving as 
vice chairman. Komatsu is the acting chairman of the 
Japanese-U.S. Economic Council [name as published]. In 
addition, NSC President Takashi Imai, 64, is expected to take 
the vice chairman's seat to be vacated by NSC Chairman Saito. 
  Hiraiwa and Toyoda are likely decide whom they should 
appoint 
as the remaining vice chairmen after taking into account future 
Keidanren management plans. 
  Currently, the idea has surfaced of appointing as vice 
chairman Reiichi Yumikura, 65, president of Asahi Chemical 
Industry Company, or Katsunosuke Maeda, 62, president of Toray 
Industries Inc. Yumikura is chairman of a council which 
discusses important topics such as the antimonopoly law and 
distribution, for future economic reform. In addition to them, 
Sukenari Ito, 65, president of Nippon Life Insurance Company, 
could possibly be named new vice chairman to represent the 
insurance sector. Appointing Takeo Shiina, 64, chairman of IBM 
Japan, as Keidanren vice chairman is also under consideration in 
the expectation that he will work to strengthen ties with 
foreign economic organizations. 

