Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nuno Ribeiro in Madrid: "Assault on the </F>
Portuguese Border"] 
  [Text] It was with amazement that the Spanish 
Interior Ministry found its records out of date because of the 
presence of more illegal than legalized residents. With the 
alarm sounded, and owing to the surveillance, the first signs of 
an alternate itinerary, passing through Portugal, have been 
added to the traditional routes. According to international 
reports, this phenomenon will not stop, and it has forced the 
police to devote particular attention to the activity of the 
"triads." 
  In 1993, the Spanish authorities detected an increase in the 
illegal immigration of Chinese citizens, some having crossed the 
Portuguese border. From an almost insignificant phenomenon at 
the beginning of the decade, this flow has become a genuine 
"headache" for the Spanish police during recent years. 
  PUBLICO learned from the Madrid administration that over a 
fifth of the 336 Chinese whose entry into Spain was refused as 
of 30 September of last year had attempted the "leap." They came 
from Portugal, crossing the borders at Vilar Formoso/Fuentes de 
Onoro, in Salamanca, and the Caceres area, in Spanish 
Extremadura. The data for the first nine months of 1993 attest 
to the increase in this clandestine movement, which rose 208 
percent over the figure for the same period of 1992. 
  Although the Iberian Peninsula's borders are in the 
spotlight, with attempts at entry through Portugal tripling last 
year, the Spanish authorities appear more concerned over the 
movement from Eastern Europe, with obligatory passage through 
Barajas airport, in Madrid. In this instance, the number of 
native Chinese citizens denied entry rose fivefold; hence, the 
border issue is not considered too troublesome. One official 
assured PUBLICO: "The phenomenon concerns us, but the situation 
on the Portuguese border is not dramatic." 
  Moreover, the matter was not discussed at the 
Portuguese-Spanish summit during December, in Palma de Mallorca, 
at which the attention of the Internal Administration's 
ministers was focused on the battle against the drug traffic and 
the creation of mobile checkpoints. 
<H5>  "Stop-Offs" on New Route </H5>
  On the other hand, the Spanish administration stresses the 
good cooperation existing between the two nations' border 
services. It cited the speed with which clandestine Peruvian 
immigration rings were curbed in the past, as well as the 
increased control over natives of Brazil and of the former 
Portuguese colonies. 
  However, the possible presence of a network of Chinese on 
both sides of the border has evoked some dismay in Madrid. One 
official revealed: "We really don't know where the Chinese 
attempting to enter through Portugal are coming from; however, 
much of their documentation is false." 
  According to the known data, there have been two main routes 
thus far. The clandestine persons, most of whom are natives of 
Fujian and Zheijang Provinces (the poorest in China), traveled 
through the East, gathering in Germany. They departed, bound for 
various European destinations and for the other side of the 
Atlantic, in the United States and Canada. As an alternate 
itinerary, also detected now, the escape route is to Thailand 
and, later, to Western Europe, as the main destination. In many 
cases, upon their arrival in European territory they present a 
Japanese passport, since no visa is required to enter the 
European Union, and because of the similarity of the the 
Oriental physical features. 
  In view of the police harassment and surveillance on the 
borders, there is every indication that the routes have been 
diversified: something also admitted by the United States 
immigration services. The spokesman for the U.S. Embassy in 
Madrid told PUBLICO that the Iberian Peninsula has been used as 
a launching pad for Chinese, whose path is later interrupted by 
the border services at John. F. Kennedy Airport in New York. 
Hence, according to that official, Porto and Madrid are the 
"stop-offs" on this new route. 
<H5>  The Power of the "Triads" </H5>
  This route, like others, could be abandoned as a result of 
the surveillance, although it is considered certain that the 
clandestine Chinese immigration will not decline. A report from 
the European Parliament published on 23 April 1992 even revealed 
that Hong Kong's integration with China in 1997 will foster a 
massive exodus. The Spanish administration does not conceal the 
lack of cooperation on the part of the Beijing authorities. 
  The Strasbourg report also notes that "triads" associated 
with this immigration movement have developed, and are 
exploiting labor that is attempting to find better living 
conditions. The report from the European Parliament members 
claims that Hong Kong and Taiwan are the present bases of the 
"Chinese mafia" which, faced with the imminent administrative 
change in the British colony, is seeking alternatives for its 
criminal businesses and activities. 
  In 1992, during the process of rectifying the status of 
foreigners in Spain, the Interior Ministry officials came across 
7,000 Chinese citizens who were not entered in their records. 
The first investigations led to the conclusion that the death of 
a member of the Chinese community was "compensated" by turning 
over the deceased person's documentation to another. This was 
the secret of a record longevity because, during the past five 
years, the deaths of only eight out of 5,000 legalized residents 
were reported. 
  The investigators also detected rings engaged in clandestine 
immigration, extortion (the payment of the so-called protection 
tax), illegal gambling, and, to a lesser extent, drug 
trafficking. According to the Spanish police general director, 
the "triads" (the existence of about 10 in Spain is admitted) 
have made a qualitative leap in their organization and 
entrenchment. Their offices are located in certain Chinese 
restaurants, the proliferation of which is shocking: In Spain, 
they changed from being a rarity to a supply exceeding 2,000. 
This has prompted the investigators to admit that, in some 
instances, they are expedients for money laundering. It is in 
these establishments that the illegals attempt, by working 14 
hours a day, to pay the 1,400 contos of the debt owed for the 
"leap." In addition to waiting on table, they work in small 
textile shops in the cellars, which also serve as their homes. 
  Engaged basically in immigration and the collection of the 
"protection tax" (which can amount to nearly 5,000 contos), the 
"triads" are connected with murders of Chinese merchants. Their 
first blow was the kidnapping of the son of an owner of a 
restaurant chain in Madrid, during August 1992. The most recent 
was the stabbing of a shop owner in the locality of Baix 
Llobregat, in Catalonia, on 31 December. A day earlier, in 
Gandia, Valencia, five Chinese working at the Ciudad del Mar 
restaurant were tortured and killed, with their bodies horribly 
mutilated. 

