Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unatribbuted "Exclusive"] </F>
  [Text] Informed political sources have said Kuwait is most 
likely the Arab capital to which his majesty the king referred 
in his speech to the Senate's Foreign Affairs Committee. 
  The sources base this conclusion on information which said 
that the killers of late Na'ib al-Ma'ayitah belong to Fatah-the 
Revolutionary Council organization, led by Abu-Nidal [Sabri 
al-Banna]. Abu-Nidal left Libya after the Gulf war and decided 
to settle in Kuwait after he established new links with the Gulf 
states. 
  Libya officially rejected suggestions that it is responsible 
for the assassination. A statement reminded that relations 
between Amman and Tripoli are good and untarnished. 
Additionally, the statement adds, Libya is interested these 
days in strengthening its relations with all Arab states in view 
of the conspiracies hatched against it and the blockade which 
the United States and some European countries imposed through 
the United Nations under the pretext of the Lockerbie plane 
incident. 
  Information published on the assassination of late 
al-Ma'ayitah is still ambiguous and led to conclusions that 
perplexed the Jordanian citizen. 
  Following the statement issued by the Lebanese security 
authorities on the arrest of four Palestinians, who, according 
to the statement, belong to a Palestinian organization, the 
official Jordanian media, as well as the "undeclared official 
media" began to emphasize the fact that the killers are 
Palestinians. The average Jordanian citizen was dismayed by the 
language, which, in the end, does not serve the national unity 
between the two peoples. A former House of Representative 
member said that certain parties are fuelling regionalism in 
this country, especially after certain analyses and conclusions 
made in certain political salons went as far as saying there is 
a Palestinian interest in al-Ma'ayitah's assassination. [three 
blank lines follow] 
  Fatah-the Revolutionary Council issued an official statement 
in which it said it is not responsible for the attack. The 
statement said the arrest of a group of the organization's 
members in Lebanon falls within the framework of the unending 
campaign against it. 

