BFN 

  [Excerpt] His Majesty King Husayn on Monday [20 June] held 
talks with U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher and said 
he was very pleased with the progress achieved in the 
Jordanian-Israeli tracks of negotiations and expressed hope that 
the other tracks in the Arab-Israeli peace process would also 
achieve similar progress. 
  The King, speaking at the State Department, also paid 
tribute 
to the U.S. efforts that went to advancing the negotiations. 
  "We are indeed optimistic as far as the future is concerned 
in our quest for a just, durable and comprehensive peace," the 
King told reporters. "We are very happy indeed that on the 
Jordanian-Israeli track we are about to begin to address the 
problems that were part of the agenda worked out earlier and 
beginning with border demarcation, delineation. 
  "We appreciate certainly the role of our friends in 
supporting us and our effort to arrive at this point." 
  The King was asked whether Jordan would sign a peace accord 
with Israel without waiting for Syria. The King replied, "We 
hope to see better support. But regarding us, we follow the 
Jordanian dimensions of the problems which we have started 
together from the same point... and as our brethren in Syria are 
negotiating, we are negotiating at the same time." 
  Asked if Jordan would sign a peae treaty with Israel if the 
Kingdom and the Jewish state could reach one before Syria and 
Lebanon did, the King said: 
  "It is a difficult question, and I would like to say that 
Jordan is practising its sovereignty and is dealing with its 
causes and the way to finding a solution to them. I hope that 
progress would take place on all other tracks to achieve 
comprehensive peace." 
  Asked whether he had recently met with Israeli Prime 
Minister 
Yitzhaq Rabin in London as suggested in some reports, the King 
said: "I do not confirm or deny such news." 
  At another point the King said, "I've never been afraid of 
daylight" and "the opportunity will come sometime soon for a 
meeting between Israeli and Jordanian officials." [passage 
omitted] 

