BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "How Should We Deal With North Korea?"] </F>
  [Text] How should the international community deal with 
the DPRK (North Korea), which has taken actions that can be 
interpreted as destruction of evidence of its suspected nuclear 
arms development program by going ahead with changing fuel rods 
at its experimental reactor? 
  In their meetings in Washington, Japan, the United States, 
and South Korea agreed to call on the UN Security Council [UNSC] 
to study measures against North Korea, including possible 
economic sanctions. The UNSC will start full-scale discussions 
on the matter on 6 June. 
  The United States has formally announced that the rationale 
for holding the third round of high-level U.S.-DPRK talks has 
ceased to exist. At this meeting, not only the nuclear issue, 
but also improvement of U.S.-DPRK relations were supposed to be 
discussed. 
  Meanwhile, U.S. President Bill Clinton implicitly urged 
North 
Korea to accept special inspections to avoid economic sanctions 
-- special inspections meaning the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) conducting inspections of two facilities which 
North Korea has refused to list in its report. This action is 
the only way left to resolve the question of the suspected 
nuclear arms development program. 
  North Korea countered this, declaring it will regard 
implementation of economic sanctions as a declaration of war. 
Furthermore, North Korea has hinted at the possibility of 
formally withdrawing from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 
(NPT) -- something which the country has temporarily withheld 
from doing -- and demanded all matters be resolved in one 
package at high-level U.S.-DPRK talks. 
  Our goal on the North Korean nuclear issue is clear: It is 
to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons to pave the way for 
global peace and to have North Korea abandon its nuclear 
development program. To do so, nuclear suspicions must be 
cleared up through complete inspections by the IAEA. 
  Five permanent member nations of the UNSC as well as Japan, 
South Korea, and an overwhelming majority of nations in the 
international community share this view. 
  The problem is how to achieve it. We must be calm and 
realistic. It goes without saying that the best way is to settle 
the problem peacefully is through dialogue. 
  However, past experience has shown that tenacious efforts 
for 
holding dialogue alone cannot produce results. In fact, current 
conditions stem from North Korea's negative stand of trying to 
continuously cause problems. 
  Imposing sanctions on North Korea itself is not our goal. It 
should be avoided if possible. But with the situation having 
come to where it has, there is no choice but to start studying 
full-scale sanctions at the United Nations. At this point, 
China's role of persuading North Korea is most important, while 
the only way left to avert sanctions will be for North Korea to 
accept special inspections. 
  What the UNSC should do is first pass a resolution warning 
North Korea that it is willing to implement sanctions if 
necessary, while watching the situation closely. And if North 
Korea still does not change its position, the UNSC has no choice 
but to make a move toward implementation of sanctions. Taking 
North Korea's behavioral pattern into consideration, the UNSC 
must make the international community's determination clear and 
leave no doubt. 
  If North Korea withdraws from the NPT and goes on with 
development of nuclear weapons, it must be prepared for the 
possible consequence of its national governing system sooner or 
later being destroyed by the effects of sanctions. It is 
necessary to make the DPRK leadership realize that all its 
efforts up to now will go down the drain. The soft-line 
position alone is unlikely to be enough to change North Korea's 
brinkmanship policy. 
  In case sanctions are taken, it is desirable for them to be 
done within the framework of the United Nations. But depending 
on what China with its veto right decides to do, there may be no 
other choice but to think about the possibility of taking 
actions outside the UN framework, led by Japan, the United 
States, and South Korea. 
  There is a possibility that North Korea will resort to an 
adventuristic course of action. Japan's concerns dwell on 
possible contingencies of sabotage operations occurring in the 
country or refugees flooding in. The crisis management system 
needs to be improved without delay. 
  The DPRK problem is also a threat to Japan's security. We 
must overcome the situation and dissipate such a threat through 
concerted action under the United Nations, and also in close 
cooperation among Japan, the United States, and South Korea if 
necessary. 

