Language: <F P=105> Greek </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Foreign Minister Karolos Papoulias returned from 
Geneva late this evening. Our political correspondent Mirela 
Kalostipi has the following telephone dispatch with details: 
  [Begin Kolostipi recording] Good evening, Ladies and 
Gentlemen. The foreign minister returned from Geneva a short 
while ago. Naturally, correspondents were waiting for him at 
the airport and he made a statement. 
  Concerning the question of U.S. diplomatic recognition of 
Skopje, the foreign minister was asked whether the Skopjeans now 
have a reason to withdraw from their intransigent positions. 
Mr. Papoulias said that the form of recognition has room for 
the U.S. diplomacy. Today the foreign minister said the same 
thing he said when he returned from his visit to the United 
States. He made the appraisal that the normalization of 
Athens-Skopje relations is of more interest to Washington than 
any recognition. In any case, the foreign minister admitted 
that this development was not pleasant for Athens but added that 
on the chess board of international relations and balances the 
Greek Government aims at exploiting whatever is best. 
  Mr. Papoulias was asked about the statement by Andonios 
Samaras [opposition Political Spring party chairman] today that 
the U.S. diplomatic recognition of Skopje would have a negative 
effect on Greek-U.S. relations. Mr. Papoulias said he would not 
like to comment on this statement by Andonios Samaras. However, 
he said, in a critical period Andonios Samaras, who is a former 
foreign minister, should be more careful in his statements 
because, as Mr. Papoulias noted, he knows how difficult the 
issues are and how sensitive this period is. 
  The foreign minister was then asked about the Bosnian issue 
and the imminent decision regarding bombing Serbian targets 
around Sarajevo. Mr. Papoulias said that Greece's reservations 
are a clear answer to the No that we have already given on 
military interventions because, as he stressed, we have not been 
convinced by the arguments of those who support the bombings as 
to what will happen the next day. I do not bring any messages 
of optimism, Mr. Papoulias said, because many times we have had 
experiences of agreements that were upset the next day. 
Nevertheless, he stressed, the latest news is such that they 
might turn a NATO decision for bombings out of context. 
  This is all from the airport where Karolos Papoulias 
returned 
from Geneva late this evening. [end recording] 

