Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota, 30 Dec (DPA) -- Colombian 
Senator Everth Bustamante today lodged a formal complaint at the 
Attorney General's Office against President Cesar Gaviria for 
having authorized the entry into Colombia of U.S. troops, who 
according to the official version, will build a school and 
repair roads. 
  Bustamante, who is a member of the leftist-center 19 April 
Movement Democratic Alliance, said that Attorney General Carlos 
Arrieta must establish if Gaviria violated the Constitution, 
which empowers Congress to authorize the presence of foreign 
troops. 
  According to the government and the U.S. Embassy in Santa Fe 
de Bogota, 133 military engineers (25 have already arrived) will 
have the mission of building a school and repair roads near the 
village of Juanchaco, on the Colombian Pacific coast. 
  Nevertheless, today the press asks about a possible 
"undercover objective" by the U.S. soldiers, in view that "heavy 
equipment" began arriving that seems "exaggerated" for 
accomplishing the announced mission. Reporters who with 
difficulty observed the landing of the first troops due to 
severe security measures, spoke of the arrival of four vessels 
with five tanker trucks (to transport fuel), more than 20 
trucks, backhoes, ambulances, and 10 jeeps. 
  In the opinion of Bustamante, "no one is so naive to believe 
that U.S. troops are needed to build a little school ... I 
believe that the Armed Forces seek other objectives rather than 
carrying out simple social cooperation work." 
  The governments of Santa Fe de Bogota and Washington have 
explained that the soldiers' mission is part of a cooperation 
agreement and specifically is a plan to improve conditions of 
the inhabitants of Juanchaco, an impoverished village of about 
1,500 inhabitants. Some of the media, especially Santa Fe de 
Bogota's LA PRENSA newspaper, do not rule out that the soldiers 
are carrying out an "undercover" operation against Cali Cartel 
drug traffickers who operate in southwestern Vallde del Cauca 
Department. 
  Nonetheless, Acting Defense Minister General Ramon Gil said 
that the soldiers will only carry out social work "for everyone 
to see," after stressing that no weapons will be used for their 
work. Gil added that the fact that the soldiers bear no arms 
allowed Gaviria to unilaterally authorize their entry into 
Colombia, without requiring advance permission from Congress, an 
idea that is not shared by several political leaders. 

