Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Air Force yesterday won Cabinet approval for its 
planned use of forest land in Phuket to build a radar station, 
but with a condition that it must strictly comply with a 
10-point environmental measure. 
  Prime Minister Chuan Likphai defended himself against 
accusations that the Cabinet's agreement to the Air Force 
request was aimed at appeasing the top brass in the wake of sour 
government-military relations caused by his firm stand on the 
"arms-through-barter" policy. "This is a different issue," Prime 
Minister Chuan said. "It's a question of necessity. Moreover, 
the land requested for the radar station site has already been 
encroached upon for rubber cultivation." 
  Under the Cabinet decision, the Air Force will be able to 
use 
27 rai of first-grade forest land in the Nak Koet Mountain Range 
in Katu District to build a radar station as part of its air 
surveillance system over the South. Prime Minister Chuan said 
the Cabinet's resolution to bar the use of first-grade forest 
land was still in force but the relaxation on the restriction 
was ordered for security reasons. The installation of the radar 
system would cost the Government thousands of millions of baht 
and the relaxation of the ban was made exclusively for security 
purposes, the premier added. 
  He said the Cabinet yesterday extensively debated the Air 
Force request, which was opposed by the Agriculture and 
Cooperatives Ministry and the Science, Technology and 
Environment Ministry which wanted to conserve the area for water 
catchment. The agriculture and science ministries as well as the 
National Environment Board have closely looked into the Air 
Force proposal and have drawn up a set of measures which the Air 
Force agreed to comply with. 
  The Air Force had previously studied two alternate sites at 
Hat Yai and Samui island before choosing Phuket, taking into 
consideration the investment as well as maintenance aspects. 
Government Spokesman Aphisit Wetchachiwa said the Air Force, 
under the Cabinet's decision yesterday, would be allowed to cut 
a 2-km road into the site where the radar station would be 
located. 
  In using the spot, the Air Force must comply with the 
measure 
which requires that it: 
  -- Avoid levelling the landscape for the construction work; 
  -- Keep the road into the site as narrow as possible; 
  -- Prepare measures to prevent soil erosion which may be 
caused by the construction work; 
  -- Limit earth preparation work to the construction site. 
Dirt must be collected and properly disposed of; 
  -- Strictly look after the forest in the vicinity to 
prevent encroachment and fire 
  -- Plant trees to replace those to be cut down both in the 
construction site and the surrounding area; 
  -- Provide for a waste water treatment system; 
  -- Improve the landscape of the project site and the 
vicinity; 
  -- Build fences and a drainage system in and around the 
project site; and 
  -- Report on the progress in the implementation of all the 
measures to the science ministry every six months during the 
first three-year period. 
  Industry Minister Sanan Kachonprasat said the Cabinet agreed 
to approve the request after hearing a full explanation of the 
need for the facility. He also said the project would not cause 
damage to the national reserve as the chosen location was no 
longer forest land but had been used as a rubber plantation. 
  Maj-Gen Sanan also denied that the Cabinet had quickly 
approved the Air Force request to avoid further straining 
Government-military relations caused by last week's decision to 
reject the Air Force's request to forego a ruling requiring it 
to try negotiating with Italy to help buy some Thai farm goods 
in return for its plan to purchase six G222 transport planes. 

