Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Fuzhou, February 5 (CNS)--The Fujian authorities 
recently staged a campaign cracking down on the trafficking and 
smuggling of the state-protected rare species of animals and 
their parts, including rhinoceros horn and tiger bone. People 
found involved in such activities face harsh punishment. 
  Deputy Director of the Fujian Wild Life Protection Fund Mr 
Bao Yingsen said that the trend of trafficking and smuggling 
rare species of animals had been on the rise in recent years. 
Incomplete statistics showed that a total of 520 cases of this 
kind were investigated and dealt with in the province last year 
alone with the seizure of a large number of items related to 
rare animals under state protection, including the skins of 
giant pandas, the skin and bones of tigers, a species of 
leopard, big lizards, rare species of cats, rhesus monkeys, 
pangolins and black bears, with all the confiscated items valued 
at over RMB 10 million [renminbi]. 
  Illegal elements trafficking and smuggling rare species of 
animals for big profits mainly came from some ten provinces 
while others were Taiwan businessmen. 
  The large-scale killing and poaching of rare species of 
animals has aroused serious concern. The fund joined forces 
with departments of forestry, public security and industry and 
commerce in launching a crack-down on these illegal activities, 
staging raids and sudden inspections on guesthouse, hotels, 
restaurants and agricultural and trade markets for the illegal 
handling of rare animals. They also dealt with the seized 
traditional Chinese ready- made medicines containing rhinoceros 
horn or tiger bone available in some drugstores and 
foreign-related guesthouses. 
  The Fujian authorities investigated 84 guesthouses and 
hotels 
found illegally handling wild animals during last October alone 
with the seizure of some 700 wild animals under state protection 
and over 10,000 animals including masked civet cats and snakes, 
none of which belong to the key category of rare animals under 
state protection. A number of illegal elements were dealt with 
and punished. A criminal found guilty of profiteering by 
selling a giant panda skin was sentenced to 15 years 
imprisonment by the Dongshan County People's Court and was 
deprived of his political rights for five years. 

