Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Oscar Merlo: "Precautionary Measure Against </F>
Humberto"] 
  [Text] General Humberto Ortega, commander of the Sandinist 
People's Army [EPS], has been forced to sign a restraining order 
issued against him by Judge Advocate Lieutenant Lester Gallo. 
In signing this order, Gen. Ortega has agreed not to leave his 
quarters. If he does, he could face stronger restrictive 
measures. 
  In what is an unprecedented event in our country's legal 
history, Gen. Ortega took the stand donned in an impeccable 
military uniform on which his laurels and stars glistened. 
Ortega gave a deposition -- which lasted nearly six hours -- as 
a defendant [indiciado] in the Jean Paul Genie Lacayo murder 
trial. 
  Following the session, Judge Advocate Gallo issued the 
restraining order, which some journalists have interpreted as 
giving Ortega "the city for a jail." This also failed to 
satisfy the plaintiff. 
  In announcing the order, Gallo cited Articles 92, 98, and 
100 
of Section 2 of the Judge Advocacy Organizational Law under the 
Provisional Military Procedural Code, as well as Article 34, 
Section 4 of the Constitution as legal grounds for his action. 
  The judge advocate said the order was issued because of the 
specific nature of the defendant's occupation and because he has 
assumed his own defense. 
  The measure against Gen. Ortega prohibits him from leaving 
the capital unless he has permission from the judge advocate and 
only in cases related to performing of his duty, for health 
reasons, or for self-improvement purposes, such as when his 
studies take him outside of Managua. 
  Once the restraining order was announced, Humberto Ortega 
held a news conference and said he accepted the order only to 
clear the EPS' name, which Ortega said some have sought to 
tarnish by taking the Genie case to the Inter-American Human 
Rights Court. 
  The military chief said his taking the stand as a defendant 
in no way lessens his authority as Army commander. 
  On the contrary, he said: "The law recognizes those who 
honestly submit to it. In no way is it degrading to comply with 
the law and justice." 
  Humberto Ortega argued throughout his deposition that the 
accusations filed against him and eight members of his security 
escort in connection with the death of Jean Paul Genie are 
purely political in nature. 
  Before entering the courtroom, Gen. Ortega disclosed a 
letter 
in which he denies any wrongdoing whatsoever in the Genie murder. 
  He also made it clear that this case was "a tangible example 
of how political hatred and revenge have made it possible to use 
this tragic and painful event, which still must be clarified, as 
a shameless weapon to escalate the campaigns directed at 
destroying the EPS." 
<H5>  Asks To Be Relieved of Duties </H5>
  Humberto Ortega also referred to a letter he sent on 18 
March 
to Colonel Alvaro Baltdodano, secretary general of the EPS 
General Command, asking to be relieved of those duties directly 
linked to military justice because he considered this to be "a 
legal and moral obligation." In other words, the Army chief 
asked to not be informed, as the law mandates, about any direct 
or indirect action related to the Genie murder trial. 
  In this letter, Gen. Ortega said he accepted the judge 
advocate's decision to summon him to testify as a defendant in 
keeping with Article 22 of the Military Organization Law, which, 
among other things, states that the EPS commander in chief must 
respect and obey, comply, and, within the Army, ensure 
compliance with the Political Constitution, constitutional law, 
and other laws. 
<H5>  His Testimony </H5>
  Humberto Ortega started to testify at 1100 sharp. He replied 
to nearly identical questions posed to the others by the judge 
advocate and Dr. Olivas Zuniga, who, in this case, were the ones 
who spent the most time interrogating the officer. 
  Although he remained seated for several hours, Ortega 
appeared serene, and, with aplomb, he answered all questions 
posed to him on his alleged connection to the slaying of Jean 
Paul Genie. 
  He was coherent in his statements, and, apparently, he 
managed to exasperate Dr. Olivas Zuniga and Mr. Raymond Genie, 
who are receiving counsel from two other lawyers and a 
representative of the ANPDH [Nicaraguan Human Rights 
Association], an anti-Sandinist human rights organization. 
  Humberto Jose Ortega Saavedra -- 47, five feet, 11 inches 
tall, born in Juigalpa, Chontales -- described himself as "a 
professional in political and military affairs." 
  His criminal record only shows prison sentences imposed by 
the Somozist dictatorship for his revolutionary activities that 
led to the toppling of Anastasio Somoza Debayle on 19 July 1979. 
  The Army chief's statements about his schedule on 28 October 
1990 -- the day of the murder -- agreed with those of his 
bodyguards. It was at last known why he had stopped by the home 
of Col. Lenin Cerna, even though he was out of the country on 
that day. 
  According to Humberto Ortega, he entered the home of Cerna, 
who was single at that time, to pick up several documents that 
would be useful for a meeting with demobilized members of the 
Nicaraguan Resistance the next day. Ortega explained that he 
had keys to Cerna's home for security reasons. 
  During his testimony, Ortega rejected reports issued by the 
Venezuelan Commission, which "investigated" the case in record 
time and even issued conclusions, and by the Tripartite 
Commission headed by the current Deputy Foreign Minister Jose 
Pallais. Ortega described both groups as "biased and 
politicized." 

