Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Salwa al-Ustuwani report:"Syria Accuses Israel of </F>
Pulling Out of Peace Formula"] 
  [Text] Damascus -- Diplomatic sources in Damascus said 
yesterday that urgent high-level contacts have been held over 
the past two days between Damascus and Washington to give a new 
impetus to the peace negotiations in Washington, especially as 
the United States has managed to stop the security deterioration 
witnessed recently in southern Lebanon as a result of the 
Israeli military escalation, which threatened a large-scale 
military operation. 
  The diplomatic sources said that Washington stressed to 
Damascus that it had sought to calm the situation in the south 
in order to prepare the atmosphere for new efforts to be made by 
it to secure better conditions for the negotiations' success so 
that they can produce tangible results. 
  The sources added that Washington reemphasized to Syria its 
determination to push the peace process forward, whatever the 
obstacles obstructing it. It also emphasized that prospects for 
achieving peace still exist and that it needs to make further 
contacts to secure an atmosphere of trust among the parties. 
According to the sources, Washington reemphasized that the U.S. 
Administration will not allow the negotiations to fail and that 
it will work to create the atmosphere needed to achieve progress 
that serves the peace process with its real foundations. 
  The sources said that achieving peace and securing a kind of 
trust among the parties requires time and hard work. 
  The situation in southern Lebanon is still shrouded in 
anticipation and caution. No significant development had been 
recorded until midday yesterday. Lebanese sources have told 
AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT that the Syrian-Lebanese meetings held at 
summit level and other levels stressed the resistance's right to 
exercise its role against the occupation. 
  Meanwhile, a Syrian official has accused Israel of 
continuing 
to seek to abort the peace process and thwart the round of 
negotiations currently being held in Washington. The official 
told AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT that, instead of withdrawing completely 
from the occupied territories, Israel has begun to pull out of 
the comprehensive peace formula. This is why it has since the 
launch of the negotiations been practicing various forms of 
provocations and methods to obstruct these negotiations and 
evade all commitments. 
  The official added: "Israel has begun to play numerous 
tunes: 
The Arabs have not ended the economic boycott, opened the 
borders, or established diplomatic relations; Syria does not 
want peace; and Lebanon has not halted resistance operations. 
The aim of all these pretexts is to obstruct all the efforts 
exerted to lead the peace process to its objectives, as though 
the Arabs must offer measures of trust to Israel." 
  The Syrian official went on to say that Israel is actually 
looking for pretexts to abort the present peace process and is 
planning to conduct separate contacts to secure separate 
agreements in order to impose its conditions on the Arabs and 
obtain concessions from them. It has shown this through its 
aggression and continued shelling of southern Lebanon. 
  Of course, that will not lead to any progress toward peace. 
The official stressed that "Syria participated in the 
negotiations after the U.S. assurances and commitment to the 
peace process, and after the world supported its elements. 
Syria has been patient with all Israeli maneuvers and 
procrastinations, but this patience cannot continue. And Syria 
is not going to beg for peace, nor will it accept the separate 
secret deals: Either a real peace or no peace at all. Syria 
cannot accept an incomplete Israeli peace. And Israel must 
realize very well that as long as the land is occupied and Arab 
rights usurped, it will never enjoy peace or security." 

