Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Baghdad, Feb 3, INA -- A senior Ministry of 
Information and Culture aide has exposed means used by the 
United States and its allies, through their media, to prepare 
the atmosphere for war against Iraq well before January 17, 1991. 
  In a lecture he gave on the role of the Iraqi media during 
the war in the Gulf at the Iraqi Society for Libraries and 
Information here on Monday [31 January], Information 
Undersecretary Naji al-Hadithi said the Western media resorted 
to all means of distortion, depicting Iraq as an aggressive 
state. 
  The media, he said, claimed that Iraq was preparing to 
attack 
Saudi Arabia while Iraq had no intention whatsoever to launch 
such aggression. They also used the fabricated story of 
incubators in Kuwait which later proved to be a public relations 
ploy by the American Hill and Norton company. 
  Mr al-Hadithi said that the Western media also played an 
important role in foiling the diplomatic attempts to resolve the 
situation. Western media had communicated to the whole world 
that Iraq was against diplomatic attempts to solve the problem, 
while on the contrary Iraq wanted to sit down with Kuwaiti and 
Saudi officials to resolve the issue. 
  Mr al-Hadithi said the Western media had distorted the 
minutes of a meeting between President Saddam Husayn and the 
U.S. charge d'affaires in Baghdad. They said President Husayn 
had told the U.S. envoy that Saudi Arabia "is not far away and 
the use of force is our only means", al-Hadithi said, adding 
that such a statement is not in the minutes at all. 
  the undersecretary said the Iraqi media with its limited 
potentialities had to face huge media facilities of the West 
which were all directed against Iraq. He said three of the 33 
nations which launched the war against Iraq in 1991 possess the 
largest media establishments in the world. The U.S.A. possesses 
a large news agency, the Associated Press, Voice of America 
radio which dispatches its programmes in all languages, Mr 
al-Hadithi said, adding that the U.S. also possesses the largest 
television networks in the world such as CNN, NBC, ABC and CBS. 
  Britain also possesses big media means such as the BBC and 
REUTERS news agency while dispatch their news to hundreds of 
million of people in the world. France also has large media 
establishments, he added. 
  The undersecretary said the war against Iraq started with 
the 
idea in the West that Iraq was only a military camp full of 
nuclear and other weapons. Iraq's media means directed abroad 
had to change this Western image against Iraq, al-Hadithi said. 
  "Therefore, we allowed, as from September 20, 1990, few 
months before the war, hundreds of American, other Western and 
Arab journalists to come to Iraq and write about the real 
situation here". They visited historical sites, agricultural 
projects and eventually wrote about the normal life in Iraq. 
  Mr al-Hadithi said there was no way for planners of Iraq's 
media but to open the door wide for foreign journalists to come 
to the country before and during the war. 
  "While the U.S. and the allies had prevented journalists 
from 
visiting front lines in Saudi Arabia and enforced a heavy 
censorship on what they wrote or pictured, Iraq allowed 
journalists to go wherever there were U.S. and allied raids in 
various Iraqi provinces". 
  He said the U.S. Administration had tried to prevent Western 
journalists from staying in Baghdad in order not to report on 
the casualties among Iraqi civilians and the destruction of 
civilian facilities. He added that they invented a lie, namely 
that al- Rashid hotel, where foreign journalists used to stay 
during the war, was a bunker for Iraqi Army commanders and they 
threatened to attack it. All these propaganda means were used 
to force journalists to leave, al-Hadithi concluded. 

