BFN 

  [Text] Bilateral relations, the development of friendship 
and cooperation between our two countries, and the regional 
situation were the main topics discussed today between President 
Sali Berisha and German Foreign Minister Kinkel. 
  Albania and the Albanian people are very grateful and 
cherish 
the friendly feelings toward the German people, President 
Berisha said. These feelings emanated from the invaluable 
contribution by German scientists studying Albanian culture and 
the immense assistance that Germany has provided to the 
democratic processes in our country since the very beginning. 
  We are grateful to the German Government and Germany for 
supporting Albania's efforts to change from a dictatorship to a 
rule-of-law state and market economy. He said that excellent 
political relations exist between our two countries, and the 
economic cooperation with Germany is among one of the most 
effective. 
  Albania was the most isolated communist country, Mr. Kinkel 
said, and, as a consequence, democratization and promoting 
economic reforms has been most difficult. I can say that your 
efforts and achievements during the transition period are 
astonishing. We understand your difficulties fairly well 
because we Germans have encountered difficulties of such a phase 
twice -- in 1945 after the dictatorship and in the last years in 
the eastern part of the country, where the transition rate has 
not been as speedy as yours. 
  The meeting extensively dealt with the further assistance 
that Germany can render by supplying water to cities, the energy 
field, an improvement in electricity, the traffic 
infrastructure, the solution to the problem of Albania's foreign 
debt, and the opening of a branch of the German bank. 
  Mr. Kinkel committed himself to intervene to the relevant 
German authorities and the European Union [EU] so that Albania 
be helped to complete these demands that he considers priority. 
He will try to see that his government encourages private 
investors as well. He said that Germany will support Albania's 
further integration into the EU, NATO, and the Council of 
Europe, and I will be your attorney to my European colleges. 
  President Berisha expressed his special gratitude for the 
invaluable assistance that Germany has given and is giving by 
allowing the refugees to stay. He informed the German minister 
that those refugees are supporting one or two families with what 
they are earning in Germany. Their deportation would constitute 
a problem for them and the country because they would be 
unemployed and homeless. President Berisha asked that a more 
tolerant stance be adopted toward them and that they be not 
deported. 
  Concerning the situation in the region, President Berisha 
said that the newly created Croat-Muslim federation is an 
important factor in achieving peace in the former Yugoslavia. 
In the same way, the solution to the Albanian question is also 
very important for a stable peace, in which the problem of 
Kosova is the main one. We think that the most efficient means 
for this is the bond of UN sanctions against Serbia by reaching 
an agreement between Belgrade and the legitimate Kosova leaders 
on the status of this province. 
  Concerning Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia], the president expressed once again Albania's 
determination to help and cooperate with this republic. He said 
that Albania is deeply interested in the stability of Macedonia. 
However, he stressed that it is necessary that Macedonian 
authorities carry out the census and meet their commitments to 
guarantee the human rights and freedoms of the Albanians who 
live there. 
  President Berisha also expressed his regret over the current 
crisis with Greece -- namely the criminal and premeditated act 
committed by a terrorist unit from Greece. He said that Albania 
is consistent in its policy of reducing the tension and 
preserving stability in the region. Since the first day, we 
proposed to cooperate with the Greek authorities to discover the 
culprits. Unfortunately, today we received an official response 
from the Greek side. We agree to establish a dialogue at a 
ministerial level to overcome the crisis and accept the creation 
of a joint commission to find and convict the culprits of this 
ugly crime. 
  President Berisha invited President Weizsaecker and 
Chancellor Kohl to visit Albania. 

