Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["OANA/pool" item; all quotation marks as received] </F>
  [Text] Colombo, 14 Jan (LANKAPUVATH) -- Army commander 
Lieutenant General Gerry De Silva said Thursday [13 January] 
that he is confident that Sri Lanka's security forces will 
defeat the LTTE [Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam] and force the 
terrorist organisation to lay down arms and accept a settlement 
on terms laid down by the government, despite the LTTE being 
stronger today than they ever were before. 
  The Army commander in an interview with LANKAPUVATH said the 
best form of defence was offensive action. He said there are no 
stops. Once launched into battle, it has to be decisive. 
  "The offensive action against the LTTE consists of two 
things. The short term and the long term. The short term action 
is on already, except that we have been put back by the floods 
that are prevailing now (on the battlefront)." 
  He said that with regard to long term plans, "as soon as 
possible we will go ahead and it will be a long term big 
offensive. This offensive, he said, would be launched with the 
idea of defeating the LTTE without there being any stops. He 
said: "I don't think there will be any stops. Once you launch 
into battle it has to be decisive. 
  The Army commander said 14 new battalions, 700 to 1,000 men 
in each, would be sent to the battlefront, soon. 
  He said the Sri Lankan soldier was a fighting soldier. 
  "We have been fighting (the LTTE) for over 10 years without 
a 
break. Unfortunately, the Sri Lanka Army has had to deploy its 
entire bayonet strength without respite. It has been a big 
strain on the Sri Lankan soldier. But despite all odds and very 
trying circumstances, he has come out of it on top. I pay 
tribute to our soldiers for having fought for so long and so 
well." 
  Lt. Gen. De Silva said that nowhere else in the world was a 
soldier deployed continuously for very long periods without a 
turnaround in troops, a period of rest and recuperation. 
Usually soldiers were required to serve only three to six 
months on the battlefront. There had been no time for proper 
training. This and many other problems will be solved. 
  He said that initially, the Army had made the mistake of 
stretching and holding on to real estate which in some cases was 
not that vital. 
  The Army commander said that the offensive capability of the 
Army was being brought up to levels as required in professional 
Army. 
  He said the Army was being rebuilt and restructured after 
recent setbacks which have caused worry to the people of this 
country as well as the government. He was happy to state that 
when the toured the battlefront a few days ago, he saw smiling 
faces. 
  The fighting spirit, motivation and professionalism, new 
thinking, planning, new concepts, restructuring , reorganising, 
hand picking field commanders for proper leadership required to 
win the war, infusion of military hardware more suited to meet 
requirements of the current ground conditions which will give 
greater mobility and fighting capability to the soldier, and the 
introduction of new concepts are some of the matters which are 
being urgently dealt with. 
  He said he will not place a time frame. Invariably, you get 
caught up with and boxed in. An enemy reacts to a time frame, 
he said. 
  With regard to battlefield casualties caused by terrorist 
mines, Lt. Gen. De Silva said that most of the casualties have 
occurred by troops dropping their guard and not carrying out the 
drills correctly and they get caught up in mine explosions. 
  He said that the LTTE were now using Johnny mine explosions 
to detonate a chain of larger, powerful Claymore mines. 
  As a counter to landmines, the purchase of vehicles with 
ploughs attached in front of the tank tracks, was beijing 
seriously considered. 
  These matters were being dealt with on a top priority basis. 
  Lt. Gen. De Silva said that the bunkerline concept can be 
done away with and replaced with more tactical forward defense 
localities which could encompass not only the bunkerliners but 
the areas forward of them also. There should be also early 
warning elements and obstacles built to prevent waves of 
terrorists attacking the bunkerlines and to break up their 
momentum. These obstacles can be used as a killing ground to 
inflict maximum casualties on terrorists. 
  In response to a question as to how strong the LTTE was 
operationally, the Army commander said they (the LTTE) have 
never been as strong as they are today, in the sense that first 
of all their capability to take on even large camps. Next would 
be the change of tactics or earlier practise of hitting camps, 
attacking with smaller numbers. Today we find large 
concentrations of force on isolated camps. They have put in 
everything and coordinated and well controlled and we see a mix 
of their land operations and sea borne operations to have a 
telling effect. 
  The LTTE have been well trained and devised certain 
(?drills) 
to meet up with capabilities in offensive as well as in defence 
postures. 
  The LTTE, he said, also have effective drills to counter 
tank 
capabilities. There has been a lot of thinking done on their 
part. It has brought them a lot of success. 
  The LTTE has shown a very high degree of training. There has 
been no numerical increase, but the LTTE had enhanced their 
strength such as in the Sea Tiger capability where women are 
playing a prominent role. 

