Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS diplomatic correspondent Georgiy Shmelev] </F>
  [Text] Moscow, 13 Jan -- A wide spectrum of questions 
concerning bilateral Russian-Moldovan relations and Russia's 
contribution toward the settlement of the Dniester problem were 
at the center of discussion at a meeting between Russian Foreign 
Minister Andrey Kozyrev and Moldova Acting Foreign Minister Ion 
Butnaru, which has just ended at the Russian Foreign Ministry. 
"This is a very complex process and it is most important for us 
to convince both sides -- the Government of Moldova and the 
Dniester leaders -- that they should seek ways of reaching a 
political agreement, a political solution", the Russian foreign 
minister told journalists after the meeting. He described the 
talks as useful and constructive, held "in a professional, 
businesslike manner." In their general conversation the 
ministers discussed, in particular, the situation with and 
status of the 14th Army as well as the progress of talks between 
the two sides and relations between their leaders. 
  In response to a question from the ITAR-TASS correspondent, 
Andrey Kozyrev said the Dniester problem will apparently be 
examined during the present Russo-American summit in Moscow. 
"We are conducting a dialogue with the United States and with 
other states because the region is one of the conflict zones 
under discussion in the CSCE and the United Nations," the 
minister noted. "We are trying at all bilateral meetings to 
bring in a wider circles of states to assist our efforts to 
settle this kind of problem. 
  "Of course, no one is going to supplant domestic dialogue; 
this is first and foremost an internal matter for Moldova as an 
integral state to find a `modus vivendi' to resolve the issues. 
Here we can only assist, but Russia, for obvious reasons, plays 
perhaps a special and perfectly defined role here in helping to 
find a settlement." At the same time, the Russian minister 
called for other states to participate "as positively as 
possible" in this process, because the overall problem is an 
armed conflict -- which it has been -- in the heart of Europe 
and cannot fail to worry other countries. 
  In the opinion of Ion Butnaru, essentially all the main 
issues concerning relations between Moldova and Russia were 
discussed. These talks were "one specific step in implementing 
the understandings reached at the last meeting between the two 
countries' presidents." The exchange of views, he believes, was 
useful, particularly in that it helped to dispel all doubts 
about the future of Moldovan-Russian ties. At the same time, 
the Moldovan minister favors involving other "European 
structures" in assisting the efforts being made on a bilateral 
and multilateral basis. 

