Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aleksey Yablokov, chairman of the Security </F>
Council Interdepartmental Commission for Environmental Safety: 
``The Ecological Condition of the Country Is Catastrophic: 
Response to the Minister of Environment and Natural Resources of 
Russia''] 
  [Text] ``In the past three years there has been no 
deterioration in the ecological situation in the country as a 
whole,'' ``...today's situation may be assessed more 
optimistically than before,'' ``...the most dangerous spheres 
... we are keeping under constant supervision.'' All these 
assessments of Viktor Danilov-Danilyan, minister of environment 
and natural resources of Russia, contained in his interview in 
NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA (No. 251 (675) of 30 December 1993) are so 
different from what is actually happening in Russia that it is 
hard to remain silent. I cannot remain silent for the added 
reason that the gentleman minister has also appreciably 
distorted my positions in the sphere of the country's 
environmental safety. 
  In fact, the ecological state of the country is not simply 
disturbing, it is catastrophic. Russians' life expectancy is 
falling precipitously, and the number of diseases connected with 
the poor state of the environment is growing. A boy born in 1993 
has few chances of reaching retirement age. Inasmuch as the 
state of the environment is responsible for approximately 30 
percent of our health, one year out of the three years of 
decline in average life expectancy in 1993 is accounted for by 
the environment. 
  Soil-degradation processes are intensifying. The scale of 
the 
country's radiation contamination has not been reduced. Each 
year in Moscow and other large and small cities there are 
hundreds of sources of dangerous radiation. Among the reasons 
for the radiation contamination are the accidents at sites of 
radiation danger, the unthinking use of radioactive materials, 
the destabilization of the work of the radioactive waste burial 
services, and the penetration of our territory by foreign waste. 
The ozone hole over the country is getting larger. Last year it 
was the largest in all the years of observation. This means 
thousands of additional deaths and dangerous consequences for 
agriculture and live nature. 
  The expanding poaching has brought the Amur tiger and a 
whole 
number of other protected animals to the brink of extinction. 
The state of fish resources is characterized by a single word: 
plunder. The poaching of sturgeon in the Caspian and the Volga, 
which has exceeded all conceivable bounds, is making realistic 
the complete termination of their catch within two years and the 
destruction of a number of sturgeon as species within a few 
years. The Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources has not 
yet complied with President Yeltsin's instructions of more than 
a year ago that sturgeon be accorded the status of federal 
natural resource (some attempt at protecting them, at least!). 
  The broad-based contamination of the country as a result of 
breaks in the oil and gas pipelines continues. The area of 
forest is being reduced, and serious pollution of Baykal 
continues. The destruction of the sites of the traditional use 
of natural resources of the small peoples of the North is not 
being reduced but expanded. The scale of the rise of ground 
water on the country's territory is increasing (40 percent of 
the territory is threatened with rising ground water in Moscow). 
  I have listed far from all our ecological disasters. But 
even 
this is sufficient for evaluating the words of the gentleman 
minister quoted above as being very far from reality. 
  ``Neither I nor the Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources have yet been defeated on a single matter of 
principle,'' the minister maintains. How much self-deception 
there is in this claim is not that important. In actual fact, 
the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources has not won on 
a single major issue. In the two years and six months of its 
existence the ministry has not resolved one of the main problems 
of state administration in this sphere: A formula of the optimum 
combination of the need for federal regulation of the use of 
natural resources and supervision of wildlife management with 
the right of components of the Federation to use their natural 
resources has not been found. The public funding of the sector 
is such that the entire system of the Ministry of Environment 
and Natural Resources is close to collapse. The plunder of 
natural resources is not diminishing but increasing. The 
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources has yet to devise 
all the necessary standards and rules ensuing from the law on 
environmental protection adopted more than two years ago. The 
minister, as chairman of the government commission, held up for 
more than a year the development of a system of measures ensuing 
from the decisions of the UN Conference on Stable Development 
which Russia signed in Rio de Janeiro. The ministry has on 
dozens of occasions in the past two years occupied the position 
of detached observer at the time of the government's adoption of 
decisions dangerous for the ecological state of the country. The 
principle of the separation of state administration of the use 
of natural resources from state supervision of wildlife 
management, which has been established by law, has not been put 
into practice (hunting and fishing resources, for example, are 
used and supervised by the same structures). The ministry has 
not organized the efficient work of the federal Ecology Fund. 
The system of wildlife areas, which was for a long time a model 
for other countries, is falling apart on account of a lack of 
funds. The interestingly conceived ``Environmental Safety of 
Russia'' program has one foot in the grave. The natural-resource 
bloc in the government has not succeeded in realizing the idea. 
If none of this is not called a defeat, what, then, is a defeat? 
  I shall dwell in more detail on the government's decision on 
the development of nuclear power engineering of 28 December 
1992, which the gentleman minister mentions repeatedly. I spoke 
at that session about the impermissibility of a resumption of 
the construction of nuclear electric power stations for 
ecological, legal, and economic reasons. The law does not permit 
the adoption of such decisions without the positive findings of 
expert ecological appraisal. This was confirmed at that same 
session by Justice Minister Nikolay Fedorov (today president of 
Chuvashia) also. All was decided, however, by the speech of the 
minister of environment, who supported, however monstrous, the 
position of the Ministry of Atomic Energy. Public anger at this 
decision of the government developed into an appeal to the 
Constitutional Court, which, as we know, took over this case. 
  I emphasized once again at that session that I am not an 
opponent of nuclear energy in principle (as the gentleman 
minister tries to portray me), but I am for its environmentally 
safe development. In Russia, however, the development of nuclear 
power engineering according to the proposed plans entails 
unacceptable environmental risk. It is indicative, incidentally, 
that several months later the State Expert Ecological Appraisal 
(in the absence of the gentlemen minister, it is true--perhaps 
the status of ``politician,'' as he calls himself, was reflected 
here) declined to approve the program of development of the 
country's nuclear power engineering presented by the Ministry of 
Atomic Energy. And, of course, our gentleman minister 
dissembles, to put it mildly, when he says that that ill-fated 
decree made no provision for the funding of the Ministry of 
Atomic Energy. It was merely to untie the Ministry of Atomic 
Energy's hands in the funding of the sector that this decision 
was adopted! 
  I am forced to censure the gentleman minister at least for 
incompetence for his claim that that decree contained no 
``specific projects that experts could examine.'' Both in 
accordance with the law and in accordance with IAEA rules, the 
choice of site is the first part of construction. To what expert 
ecological appraisal was the decision on the choice of sites for 
the Far East, Kostroma, and other nuclear powers stations, of 
which the government decree makes mention, put? 
  There has long been the need for public discussion of all 
problems of the development of power engineering: It first needs 
to be decided how much energy we need and where, and then we 
need to determine from which sources to obtain this energy. 
Meanwhile, however, it would seem that we do not have a shortage 
but a surplus of energy, and we should not be building up 
capacity but learning from other countries how to consume half 
as much energy per unit of manufactured product. 
  I would add that the Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources has done little as yet to attract attention in Russia 
to the new progressive sources of energy--steam and gas 
turbines, the technology of the combustion of coal in a 
fluidized bed, and others. Yet there are calculations showing 
that the replacement of all nuclear power station units (not 
only those being withdrawn owing to old age) by environmentally 
acceptable energy sources would be for Russia several times (!) 
cheaper than bringing the current nuclear power stations up to 
safety requirements similar to their Western counterparts. 
  Now a little about the minister as a politician (this, I 
would recall, is what he called himself). 
  It had become clear at the start of 1992 that neither the 
ministry, nor the government, nor the Supreme Soviet had the 
resources for resolving the problems of environmental 
protection. A ``mustering of all units'' was needed, and the 
First All-Russia Ecology and Environmental Protection Congress, 
which could have adopted a program of Russia's ecological 
revival, was seen as being such. Earlier such programs had been 
adopted by the CPSU Central Committee and the Council of 
Ministers, but this could no longer be done now by the competent 
structures alone without the most active participation of 
industrialists, science, the banks, and the public. All were 
agreed that such a congress needed to be prepared as a matter of 
urgency, and the corresponding action program, which had been 
discussed at the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources 
Collegium, was drawn up. But the minister personally revised the 
decision of the collegium and persuaded A. Rutskoy to head the 
organizing committee preparing the congress. The latter agreed, 
provided, it is said, that he would not be burdened with any 
congress business. This buried with full honors the whole idea 
of the congress: The minister needed not a congress but 
political proximity to Rutskoy, and Rutskoy needed a congress 
even less. So an ecology congress did not take place in 1993. 
Now the idea of the congress has been taken up by the trade 
union movement. I very much hope that such a congress will be 
held, for all that, and will assist this as best as I can. 
  And I would like to say this, further, about politics. The 
gentleman minister explains his involvement in the elections on 
the Russia's Choice platform by the fact that this movement 
``expressed interest in the development of a strong ecological 
program.'' But where is it, this strong ecological program, and 
why has our government up to now declined to develop and 
implement it? For anyone with an interest in the parties' and 
movements' ecological programs it is obvious that the Russia's 
Choice ecological program is far from the strongest. It would 
seem that it was not ecological but some other policy which 
guided the minister in this case, as in the case with A. Rutskoy 
also. 
  Not only my attention, I believe, was attracted by the 
minister's attempt to justify the combination of positions in 
the government and in parliament by an analogy with other 
countries. In other countries the situation is fundamentally 
different from ours, there the members of the party which is the 
winner at the elections become ministers. With us, on the other 
hand, ministers occupy the seats of deputies. And it is quite 
odd when a minister is elected by territorial constituency. How 
can he combine the duty of serving primarily the interests of 
his constituency with his federal obligations of not having 
``favorites'' in the regions? I would recall that our minister 
attempted to get elected from Nizhegorod Oblast (because, 
perhaps, there are many Ministry of Atomic Energy enterprises 
there) and that only after having failed there was he included 
in the extraterritorial part of the Russia's Choice federal 
slate. 
  A progressive economist who understands that a sound economy 
may exist only with a sound ecology was proposed for the 
position of minister in November 1991. It is said that Suvorov, 
shaken by the scale of the embezzlement of public funds, 
maintained that any supply officer could after a year be 
executed without trial or investigation. It would seem that the 
minister of environment, even if very good at the time of his 
appointment, needs to be removed after 18 months at the most: A 
person is incapable of resisting for any longer than this the 
pressure of his superiors, minister friends, and foreign 
companies. 
  The gentleman minister's striking super-optimism, whatever 
the subject--the efficiency of the work of the ministry or of 
himself or the quality of the environment--is helping him, 
evidently, justify his own inconsistency and indecisiveness in 
defense of the environment. But for the state and society and 
for us all this political position of the minister is simply 
dangerous. 
  P.S. As presidential adviser for the environment and health 
care in 1991-1993, I was largely responsible for the failures in 
the sphere of ecology that have been described, as also for the 
self-appointment of Professor V.I. Danilov-Danilyan as minister. 
The Statute on the Security Council of Russia Interdepartmental 
Commission for Environmental Safety, recently approved by the 
president, records: ``The commission's decisions... are to be 
examined by the organs of state power....'' If also I fail to 
achieve serious results here, I will have to move to 
nongovernment structures in order to start all over again--to 
organize public pressure on the persons adopting ecologically 
dangerous decisions. 

