BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature No. 88 (578); </F>
compiled by Nikolay Zherebtsov, Andrey Petrovskiy, edited by 
Vladimir Shishlin] 
  [Text] President Lennart Meri believes unacceptable the 
threat of use of military methods by one UN member towards 
another UN member. This is utterly inadmissible in the United 
Nations, the CSCE, where Estonia plays an active role, he said. 
  This is how the Estonian president commented in an interview 
granted to the national television on the recent statement by 
Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev who said that Russian 
servicemen will stay in Estonia as much time as they are needed, 
and the contingent will be increased if there is need to protect 
military sites. 
  Meri is sure that the possible threat of the increase in the 
number of the Russian troops in Estonia should be the subject of 
discussion at the conference of foreign ministers of the Baltic 
States Council due to open on May 25. 
  On Monday Meri summoned Russian Ambassador in Estonia 
Aleksandr Trofimov and demanded that he should provide official 
explanations on Grachev's statement. 
  A spokesman for the Estonian president has told Interfax 
that 
Meri told the Russian diplomat that Estonia would continue to 
maintain neighborly relations with Russia, which has always been 
the main aim of the state's foreign policy. 
  Trofimov promised to provide explanations shortly. 
  Meanwhile, the spokeswoman for the Estonian Foreign 
Ministry, 
Mari-Ann Rikken described the statement by the Russian Defense 
Minister as an attempt to add pressure on Estonia's position in 
terms of the Russian troops pull-out. She described Grachev 
words as "the pressure on a small republic which is not in line 
with Russia's intention to solve problems in the spirit of 
compromise." 
  The spokeswoman believes the statement was timed to coincide 
to the 19 round of the inter-state talks which ended on the same 
day (May 6) near Tallinn. At the talks the pull-out problem was 
the main one. Rikken said that the failure of the talks where, 
contrary to expectations, the package of agreements on the 
pull-out was not initialed, "was not accidental". Russia's 
toughened stance towards the pull-out treaty which was drafted 
several rounds before, reflect the sentiments reigning in the 
Defence and Foreign ministries of Russia. 
  The spokeswoman said that Grachev's statement was probably 
intended by Russia to probe the reaction in the world. IF Note: 
The chairman of the Lithuanian parliament in an interview with 
Interfax expressed hope that Grachev statement reflects his 
personal view, not the position of President Yeltsin. "The 
delay with the pull-out, the more so, the deployment of an 
additional contingent, would be not only the manifestation of 
pressure on the sovereign state, but the ignorance of the 
opinion of the world public, the violation of the laws 
registered in the UN documents, the CSCE and other authoritative 
international organizations, he said. 

