Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Turkish Prime Minister Tansu Ciller by </F>
Nicole Pope and Luc Rosenzweig in Ankara on 5 January: "Tansu 
Ciller: `We Are Aiming at Democratization for All of Turkey'" -- 
first paragraph is LE MONDE introduction] 
  [Text] Ankara -- Since assuming power in July 1993, Tansu 
Ciller -- 47 and Turkey's first female prime minister -- has 
primarily aimed to consolidate her position at the head of her 
coalition government comprising the True Path Party (DYP) and 
the Social Democratic Populist Party (SHP). As a result of the 
implacable repression against the Kurd separatists of the PKK 
[Workers Party of Kurdistan] in the southeast of the country and 
abroad, Turkey seems to be a country in the region whose 
stability could be threatened. This is an impression Mrs. Ciller 
tried to dilute by meeting with representatives of the western 
press on 5 January at her residence in Ankara. 
  [LE MONDE] The latest elections in Russia ended with a 
breakthrough by Mr. Zhirinovskiy's ultranationalist party. He 
has made provocative statements about your country. Does that 
worry you? 
  [Ciller] Of course it does. Things are changing in Russia, 
and this process is going to continue. There is a reactionary 
movement in the former Soviet Union, probably caused by the 
economic and political situation in Russia. No matter what 
Boris Yeltsin might think, one theme has now come to the 
surface: A return to the old borders, which is reflected in a 
nationalist attitude toward the republics that have obtained 
their independence. 
  As for the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), I think 
Russia is trying to exert pressure on the independent states by 
forcing them to sign bilateral military agreements that will 
result in them being isolated from the rest of the world. From 
whom, for example, are they trying to protect Azerbaijan? From 
Armenia or from the NATO countries, like the United States and 
Turkey? Russia has a tendency to see itself as the sole 
protector of that region against the entire world, and 
especially Europe. We have already stated that Turkey wishes to 
coexist and cooperate with Russia. When I was in Moscow, that is 
what I said to Boris Yeltsin, while at the same time emphasizing 
that we had cultural affinities with those (Turkish speaking -- 
LE MONDE editor's note) countries that have become independent. 
  [LE MONDE] What form could this cooperation take? 
  [Ciller] We are well aware that these countries are destined 
to have close relations with Russia, but we too want to enter 
the playing field -- and why not in the form of triangular 
cooperation instead of competition? For our part, we have 
granted credits on the order of $1.5 to 2 billion to the 
countries of this region, including Armenia, to which we gave 
wheat and medicine when I was economics minister. 
  By way of comparison, the G7 gave between $4 and 5 billion 
in 
credit to Russia alone. This demonstrated our commitment to 
maintaining stability in this part of the world. We are not 
tempted to recreate the old Ottoman empire, nor to return to our 
old borders. What we want, above all, is economic cooperation. 
  [LE MONDE] Does that mean that you will never make a 
military 
commitment in the region, even if the Armenians arrive in Baku? 
  [Ciller] No, I never said that. We are watching what is 
happening very closely -- from one day to the next -- because it 
concerns us. I also told Boris Yeltsin: We feel the Armenians 
should pull out of the conquered territories. When there were 
attacks made recently, Turkey showed that it was rational: When 
Kuwait was attacked, we were there to protest, even though we 
had a border with Iraq. As for Bosnia, we have made a 
commitment, and I intend to go there soon to draw the world's 
attention to the fact that yet again we are watching a massacre 
that is incompatible with human rights. We were in Somalia too. 
  [LE MONDE] Is Turkey ready for customs union with the 
European Union in 1995? [Footnote 2] [The principle of the 
elimination in 1995 of customs barriers between Turkey and the 
European Union has been adopted. Negotiations are under way 
between Ankara and Brussels to settle the details of the matter.] 
  [Ciller] Oh yes! We are moving toward that very quickly. 
It is costing us dearly and is putting a heavy burden on our 
economy. Despite that, we are persisting in pursuing our 
objective. Turkey is one of the most open countries, especially 
toward eastern Europe. This must be acknowledged by our friends 
in Europe and in the European Union, and we must pursue the 
negotiations in this area. There is no other country that has 
taken this step by itself, without receiving some help. If you 
look at what Spain, Portugal, and Greece obtained, there is no 
comparison. It must be acknowledged that Turkey, which is at the 
crossroads of North and South, East and West, is essential for 
the stability of Europe. 
  [LE MONDE] One of the obstacles to your entrance into the 
European Union remains the Cyprus question. Will there be any 
change on this point? 
  [Ciller] First of all, I am anxious to state that we have 
nothing to gain from the impasse in Cyprus. We are in favor of 
a solution accepted by all the parties involved and we want to 
make a contribution to that solution. Please note that I have 
never used this problem in our debates on domestic policy, as I 
could have done. 
  [LE MONDE] Do you think that the arrival of a new government 
in northern Cyprus will help solve the problem? Are you 
prepared to hand back part of the territory conquered to reach a 
solution? 
  [Ciller] We are more open to peace than we have ever been. I 
would like to see a similar attitude from the Greek side. The 
return of territory is not the main issue. It is essential that 
the two communities agree on a durable solution. To achieve 
that, many things must be done. As for us, our hands are not 
tied. 
  [LE MONDE] Do you think that the Greek Presidency of the 
European Union will hinder you in the next six months? 
  [Ciller] That is just a minor point. The essential thing is 
that the other countries of the European Union see our vitality 
and feel that rapprochement with Turkey is something that can 
benefit everyone. 
  [LE MONDE] In recent months we have seen a worsening in the 
conflict between the government forces and the Kurd separatists. 
How do you gauge the attitude of the European countries on this 
matter? 
  [Ciller] We have always said that, according to the 
principle 
of communicating vessels, if organizations are declared illegal 
in one country -- in Germany for example -- terrorism will move 
to another country. The United Kingdom, France, and even the 
Netherlands, where no [Kurd] organization has ever been banned, 
have become aware of this. I think it is high time to tackle 
this problem. We share the same values: democracy, the 
protection of human rights, and we must support each other. We 
must not mix up the problem of the PKK with the problem of the 
Kurds living in Turkey or elsewhere in the world. In 1993, 
2,000 people were killed in Turkey. The vast majority of them 
were Kurds killed by the PKK. We are trying to protect our 
citizens, whatever their origin. 
  [LE MONDE] For you, is not the only solution to the PKK 
problem a military solution? 
  [Ciller] I spent the New Year in southeast Anatolia. In the 
streets and on the balconies, the attitude of the people toward 
me was the same as in any other Turkish town: There were large 
displays of affection for me in a relaxed atmosphere. That is 
the situation. The people are afraid of the PKK and they want 
the Turkish state to protect their lives and give them work. We 
are investing more than 11 times the amount in this region than 
we are taking out. 
  We believe in the process of democratization and we are 
going 
to take major steps in that direction. Please note that this is 
not a concession to the PKK. Democracy has already traveled a 
long road in this country since the 1940's. We are going to 
continue. We are aiming at democratization, not only for this 
region, but for all of Turkey. 
  I would emphasize that there is no minority in this country: 
Everyone has the right to vote and can be elected to Parliament. 
Some of the most important members of my government are Kurds 
and, when I appointed them, I did not even ask myself about 
their origin. 

