Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Victor Torres, Humberto Rios, and Juan de Dios </F>
Garcia] 
  [Text] San Cristobal de las Casas, Chiapas, 28 Feb -- 
Subcommander Marcos has warned there are "ghosts," such as the 
influence of cattle breeders, the white guards [not further 
identified], and the holding back of the electoral reforms, that 
threaten the peace process. While he has said the issues on 
national matters are still unbroached at the negotiating table, 
he has said the greatest problem concerns democracy. 
Furthermore, he did not rule out the talks could be extended to 
Thursday or Friday. 
  During a meeting in Catedral, he has said "we do not go so 
far as" to request the resignation of the president of the 
republic and his cabinet, but he did insist on the need "for 
electoral power to be turned over" to the people for assessment 
and supervision. 
  During a meeting with local reporters that lasted more than 
one and a half hours, the Zapatist subcommander has said there 
is nothing definite for the peace declaration, as there is still 
a long way to go. He has said there are no definite agreements, 
because upon whatever is agreed, the communities and the 
Zapatist National Liberation Army [EZLN] must reach a consensus, 
and they must be consulted at government levels by Manuel 
Camacho Solis, government peace commissioner. 
  The EZLN, he has said, has no guarantees, because, in 
addition to the fact that organization is not recognized, 
Camacho Solis "is unreal," given he has no legal status. "Our 
middleman does not exist," Marcos said upon insisting Camacho 
has no power of decision. The subcommander has anticipated an 
agreement is a long way off. 
  Marcos has said the Indian communities' autonomy is the 
issue 
that made the most progress at the negotiating table. There was 
even talk about holding a special period of congressional 
sessions to deal with the reform of the fourth constitutional 
article. Nevertheless, prior to this the reforms must obtain a 
consensus from the Indian communities. The idea is for the 
communities' form of government to be recognized legally, he has 
said. 
  He has said in Catedral the Zapatistas hardly have any 
contact with the peace commissioner, because communications are 
conducted via Bishop Samuel Ruiz. Marcos has said "we are quite 
fed up," because the proceedings are being translated into 
several dialects in order for the delegates to take them back to 
the communities. 
  The agreements, he has insisted, are only on paper. 
Nevertheless, he has recognized one can see a political 
willingness to find a solution to the problem. 
  Subcommander Marcos, who answered more than 20 questions, 
one 
per medium, has said the movement is starting to be recognized 
as authentically Indian, a point that "justifies life or death." 
He has said there must be changes. 
  Marcos has reiterated no consensus has been reached in the 
talks, because the power of decision on one side or the other is 
not definite. He has added this stage of the talks is 
threatened not by intolerance, rather, by the "ghosts" that loom 
over the process such as, for example, the incidents in Altamira 
and the events prior to possible electoral reforms. But even 
more serious are the regional ghosts that loom over pacification 
as a third force: the power of the cattle breeders and the white 
guards. To achieve peace this must be considered, because if 
the civil power cannot control that third force, there will be 
no peace. 
  The subcommander asked: "How can they [not further 
identified] ask the EZLN to disarm if one cannot disarm a white 
guard who wants to annihilate the Zapatists or other sectors 
they see as enemies. These include those who carry a camera, a 
pen, a notebook, and a badge that reads press, ONG 
[Nongovernment Organizations], National Commission on Human 
Rights, or whatever. If they consider them to be enemies they 
are going to....them. It is the most anachronistic mentality 
that abounds in these areas. Altamiro is just an example; the 
same goes for Ocosingo, Las Margaritas, Comitan, San Cristobal, 
and all the other places. Where landownership is concentrated 
the same will occur. What was previously known as the citizens 
defense committees or the unity of citizens defense are now the 
ghosts that will loom over the peace process and its 
fulfillment," he has said. Even though a peace agreement is 
reached, the ghosts will be there to hamper it, he has said. 
  Meanwhile, the Zapatist subcommander has dissociated the 
EZLN 
from the church, because he said the movement's purity and 
independence must be made clear. 
  Regarding the provision to engage in a dialogue with Camacho 
Solis without cover-ups, he has said the EZLN members will 
remove their ski caps and uncover their faces when they are 
recognized. They will continue to keep their faces covered, 
however, to protest the lack of recognition, he has said. 
  The peace agreements will be a fraud, will only be cosmetic 
if changes are not made nationwide. If there is resistance to 
change there will be warring operations throughout the nation. 
Then there will not be enough cathedrals to engage in 
negotiations nor enough jails to hold the Indians. 
  In conclusion, when he reiterated the points on national 
matters are still at a stalemate, Subcommander Marcos said the 
peace commissioner has set deadlines for a reply to the EZLN's 
list of demands that go up to 180 days for land matters. Marcos 
promised to deliver to the press the list of petitions and how 
Camacho Solis has responded. 

