Language: <F P=105> Swedish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Finnish News Agency/RITZAUS Bureau report from Tallinn: </F>
"Crime in Estonia Increasing Explosively"] 
  [Text] Estonia today is among those countries of Europe 
suffering from the worst crime situation, and Tallinn is one of 
the most dangerous cities in the world. This emerges from the 
Estonian police statistics for 1993. 
  "The number of murders has increased by 60 percent since 
1992, and measured by 10,000 inhabitants, this is 1.5 times more 
homicides as in New York," states Priit A. Kelder, chief of the 
International Division of the Estonian Police. 
  Estonia has only 1.6 million inhabitants. 
  There are three clearly different categories of homicides: 
family murder, arbitrary murder, and organized criminal gang 
murder. 
  Only 66 percent of homicides are solved, and the clearing 
percentage in cases involving other types of violence is 
significantly lower. 
  "Our legislation is obsolete, our controls on the border 
with 
Russia poor, and police personnel lack training," explains 
Kelder. 
  The job of policeman in Estonia is not prestigious, training 
is brief, and the pay is under the national average. Twenty 
percent of policeman quit the force annually to work in the 
private sector, which pays significantly better. 
  Organized crime in Estonia is especially tied to the Russian 
mafia, where there are many former Red Army officers. 
  "According to what we have detected, all homicides have been 
committed with illegal weapons and weapons coming from the 
Russian Army," says Kelder. 
<H5>  55 Bombings -- All Unsolved </H5>
  An entirely new phenomenon that the Estonian police have 
been 
presented with is that of bombings. The number of bombings rose 
last year to 55. The bombs are homemade or originate from 
Russian military depots. 
  "Not one bombing has been solved. But we have strong 
suspicions that the perpetrators belong to the organized 
underworld, the mafia, and we have good leads to pursue. In the 
future, many bombings are going to be solved," assures Kelder. 
  The explosions often are directed at at business owners who 
refuse to pay the mafia so-called protection. There are owners 
in Tallinn who have been forced to pay from 10 to 50 percent of 
their monthly gross in order to avoid being bombed. 
  Bombings have also been directed at the police. Two police 
stations in Tallinn were subjected to bombings last year, and 
three police cars were blown up. In some cases the police have 
been almost in a position to arrest the perpetrator. 
  In May an Italian experts group that has specialized in 
combating the Mafia is coming to help the local police in 
fighting it. 
  Finnish and Swedish police have also trained and equipped 
some units of the Estonian police force. From Germany the police 
have received new police cars and communications equipment. 
<H5>  Meri Warns </H5>
  Estonia's President Meri has warned of the wave of violence 
and the explosive increase in crime. 
  "Two poles of power may arise in this country: the legal and 
illegal," says the president. He has appealed abroad for help in 
case the police are not successful against this violence wave. 
  "If Estonia becomes a smuggling corridor for Kurdish 
refugees, radioactive substances, precious stones, and other 
illegality, the international community will find it difficult 
to regard us as a responsible and credible trade partner," said 
the president recently. 
  Among other things, Meri seeks a more effective guarding of 
the border with Russia. He refers to the human smuggling in 
February, when 66 Kurds were detected inside a closed container 
on a ferry from Tallinn to Stockholm. The Estonian police 
suspect a human-smuggling chain with headquarters in Moscow and 
Kiev. From there, the refugees are smuggled to Sweden and 
Finland via Estonia and Latvia. 
  A couple of weeks ago, police also found a 2.5-kg 
radioactive 
object in a container in Tallinn harbor. It was from Russia and 
on its way to Scandinavia. 
  An equally intensive smuggling activity is also occurring in 
the car market. A third of all expensive automobiles driving 
around the streets of Tallinn have been stolen in West Europe. 
It seems there is currently a gang in Tallinn that has 
specialized in attacking owners of expensive luxury cars. As the 
car owner is walking to his vehicle, he is beaten up and his car 
keys are taken. The thieves then drive away with a new Volvo, 
Mercedes, or BMW. 

