Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Di Jingyao (5049 2529 5069) and correspondent </F>
Mou Jingjun (3664 2529 0689)] 
  [Text] Harbin, 20 Jan (XINHUA) -- Heilongjiang Province 
has firmly implemented the State Council's "Circular on Banning 
Rhinoceros Horn Trade" and "Circular on Speedily Investigating 
and Dealing With Illicit Activities of Smuggling and 
Profiteering in Rhinoceros Horns, Tiger Bones, and Other 
Endangered Species." Recently, it openly destroyed by burning on 
the bank of the Songhua River some 50 kg of tiger bones and 
rhinoceros horns confiscated since last year. This action has 
been well received in various quarters. 
  This is the first time China has resorted to burning 
confiscated rhinoceros horns and tiger bones which were to be 
resold at a profit. According to people concerned, 
Heilongjiang's action demonstrates China's seriousness in 
implementing the "Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species." 
  Tigers and rhinoceroses are valuable and endangered wildlife 
that have been categorized as the state's first class key 
protected animals. Although China does not have a rhinoceroses, 
it has attached great importance to the animal. Since 1981, it 
has never allowed rhinoceroses to be imported into the country, 
and has imposed a series of protective measures on tigers within 
Chinese territory. 
  Heilongjiang, which has relatively rich resources in wild 
animals, has all along paid due attention to protection of wild 
animals. During the statutory inspection organized by the 
Environmental Protection Committees under the National People's 
Congress and the State Council last year, Heilongjiang mobilized 
more than 3,800 people to carry out inspections in nature 
reserves, drug stores, pharmaceutical factories, ports, as well 
as guesthouses, markets, and trade fairs; and it adopted various 
measures to crack down on smuggling and profiteering in 
rhinoceros horns, tiger bones, and other rare wildlife; and the 
measures have had a positive effect on protecting wild animals. 

