Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Corporation 
[PRNFC] has compiled the results of its study of the actinide 
recycling process, a process by which fast-breeder reactors 
[FBR] can burn plutonium retrieved from spent nuclear fuel 
together with transuranium elements, which are the byproducts of 
reprocessed plutonium. As it is now technically possible to use 
as reactor core fuel a mixture of up to 5 percent transuranium 
elements with plutonium, prospects have brightened for the 
practical use of the process whereby an FBR can burn 
transuranium elements generated by six light-water reactors of 
the same scale as the FBR. The PRNFC plans to step up research 
efforts, including the start of irradiation tests this summer 
using transuranium elements at "Joyo," an experimental FBR. 
  The PRNFC set up a simulation at a "Monju" reactor [a 
prototype FBR]. For reactor core fuel it used an approximately 
5-percent mixture, or about 500 kilograms, of three types of 
transuranium elements -- neptunium, americium, and curium -- in 
combination with two tons of plutonium and about seven tons of 
uranium. The tests suggested that increasing the mixture of 
transuranium elements to more than 5 percent adversely affected 
reactor core performance. It can, for example, lower the 
melting point of the nuclear fuel. 
  In the simulation it was found that a yearly average of 
about 
40 kilograms of transuranium elements can be eliminated using 
the actinide recycling process. The spent nuclear fuel 
resulting from this process can be reprocessed, separating 
bred-plutonium from radioactive waste. To produce new fuel, the 
reprocessed plutonium can then be combined with the necessary 
amounts of uranium and transuranium elements to supplement those 
eliminated in the initial process. This new fuel can then be 
burned under the same conditions again. 
  According to the PRNFC, a 1-million-kilowatt-class 
light-water reactor annually generates an average of 40-50 
kilograms of transuranium elements, of which neptunium and 
americium account for close to 50 percent each, while curium 
accounts for about 5 percent. Although it has been found that 
neptunium and americium can be efficiently eliminated with 
FBR's, curium, on the other hand, has been found to increase 
three-fold in volume. 
  In order to grasp actual physical properties of transuranium 
elements when they disintegrate, irradiation tests using 
imported samples will be conducted with the Joyo. Moreover, 
there are plans to begin experiments with americium-based 
nuclear fuel, possibly in fiscal year 1998. 

