BFN 

  [Text] Ulaanbaatar, April 16 (OANA-MONTSAME) -- The 
newspaper "ARDIYN ERH" informs about the arrival in Ulaanbaatar 
yesterday of the Governor General of Australia B. Hayden with 
his spouse on an official visit at the invitation of the 
president of Mongolia P. Ochirbat. On his arrival Bill Hayden 
has met with the President P. Ochirbat. It is reported also 
that the President P. Ochirbat gave a dinner in honour of the 
Governor General of Australia B. Hayden. 
  The newspaper informs that the President P. Ochirbat has 
discussed with the chairman of the Great State Hural N. 
Bagabandi and the Prime Minister P. Jasray the political 
situation shaped down due to the hunger strike by the 
representatives of the Mongolian Democratic Association (MDA) 
demanding the resignation of the government. The President P. 
Ochirbat met with the leaders of the parties having seats at the 
parliament and exchanged opinions in connection with the 
above-mentioned circumstances. 
  The newspaper reports that the spring session of the Great 
State Hural has set to the consideration of the draft of the 
supplementary law due to be effective under the period of 
transition from the social insurance system being in force prior 
until the new ones being discussed by the parliament right now 
to be put into effect. [sentence as received] At the session 
took the floor by consent of the prime minister Vice Premier L. 
Enebish to answer the inquiry of some members of the parliament 
concerning the introduction of the Mongolian traditional script 
into the official business and documentary keeping In 
particular he notes that the government has worked out the 
information relating to the preparations for using the Mongolian 
script provided during the years 1991-1993 and the tasks and 
objectives due to be submitted for consideration to the Great 
State Hural within a week. A number of members of the Great 
State Hural have applied to the prime minister with a request to 
report about existence of the information available in the 
Central Intelligence Board concerning the statement by an 
observer of the newspaper "IL TOBCHU" referring to the 
preparation in 1991 for a coup-d'etat to be provided by 
anticonstitutional methods. 
  The Prime Minister P. Jasray said that to bear 
responsibility 
for the actions of the Central Intelligence Board does not mean 
that he is interfering with its operational work. 
  In this respect he noted that he did not mind answering by 
the head of the board D. Samdag a number of inquiries made by 
members of the parliament. Speaking at the session D. Samdag 
said that in the line of the organizations he heads there are 
not any documents corroborating the preparations for such a 
coup-d'etat. The session regards as being expedient to consider 
the answers by the prime minister and the head of the 
intelligence board on a closed sitting. At the session also 
spoke a member of the parliament T. Elbegdorj with a request 
that the chairman of the parliament N. Bagabandi and the Prime 
Minister P. Jasray would express their opinions meeting with the 
participants of the hunger strike announced by a group of 
representatives of the MDA who demands the resignation of the 
government. 
  The chairman of the Great State Hural said in this 
connection 
that the issue must be settled by the Hural. 
  According to the newspaper, at the last regular sitting of 
the government there has been discussed and adopted the draft of 
the law on securities. At the sitting were also discussed the 
outcome of the inspection of the activities of the Ministry of 
Food and Agriculture and a decision has been taken on carrying 
out a revaluation of the basic funds. The government has 
charged the Ministry of Trade and Industry to draw up proper 
decision on the enforcement of the recommendations of the Board 
on National Security in terms of issues of improving the control 
over the quality of exports and imports. 
  The newspaper "UNEN" issued by the ruling Mongolian People's 
Revolutionary Party (MPRP) informs that the steering council of 
the MPRP has discussed the progress of implementation of the 
pre-election programme of the MPRP in aymags and cities. The 
council has drawn attention of the aymags and city party 
committees and heads of the local administrations to the 
necessity for the development of cattle breeding with due regard 
to the local peculiarities, the enforcement of the law on 
preserving the genofund [as received] of the cattle, the 
undertaking measures necessary for backing small and medium 
businesses for increase in the production of food stuffs. Taken 
were also proper recommendations referring to the solution of 
social problems of the population. 
  The newspaper publishes some letters by its readers 
concerning the improvement of the supply with food and consumer 
goods of the population. 
  It noted particularly that excepting the enterprise being 
set 
up currently under the auspices of Finland for processing 
horse's meat it is difficult to name another enterprise where a 
new technology is being introduced else. [sentence as received] 
Some readers stressed that an increase by the company "Altan 
Taria" in the prices for homemade flour last autumn has led to 
the overstocking of warehouses and opened before the profiteers 
some possibilities to bring into the country from abroad and 
resell here bad quality flour. 
  The newspaper also carries the information regarding the 
cooperative company dealing with the processing and exporting of 
industrial wastes. The company has organized the production and 
sale in the country of knitwear and leather goods attaining a 
high proficiency of its activities. In the last year the 
company was awarded a golden cup of the reliable partner of the 
International Centre for Management of Production Quality. The 
newspaper notes that for the last February month the supply of 
copper molibdenum concentrates and melting spar accounted for 
more than 90 percent of the export of the country. The 
newspaper stresses the need for processing mineral raw materials 
for producing finished products which would be promoting the 
efficiency of the export. 

