Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Oear Li] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, Feb. 9 (CNA) -- President Li Teng-hui 
Wednesday [9 February] urged people here to work hand in hand to 
create a more promising future for the nation. 
  "We are determined and confident that we will be able to 
begin a new era based on what we have achieved in the past," the 
president said in a message issued on the eve of the Chinese 
Lunar New Year. 
  President Li in his message, which was broadcast on TV and 
radio in Mandarin, Taiwanese and Hakka, wished his fellow 
countrymen a joyous holiday. 
  "Positive results were made in internal, foreign and 
economic 
affairs as well as in cultural and cross-strait relations during 
the past year," the president said. 
  He said that the successful outcome of the two local 
elections last year was evidence that Taiwan's democratic 
efforts have begun to pay off. 
  In economic affairs, he said that Taiwan registered a 
remarkable six percent growth amid worldwide stagnation last 
year. Besides, he added, a solid foundation has been laid for 
Taiwan to become an operations center in the Asia and Pacific 
area. 
  As to foreign affairs, Li said, Taiwan's effort to 
aggressively enter the international community have successfully 
won admiration and respect from many foreign nations. 
  President Li pointed out that Taiwan has created the most 
energetic new culture in Chinese history as a result of its 
success in harmonizing traditional and modern culture. 
  Referring to cross-strait relations, the president said that 
as a result of frequent civilian exchanges, mutual-understanding 
is increasing and the Taiwan experience is now exercising its 
influence on the mainland. 
  Li, however, said that Taiwan' development will not lead to 
its eventual separation from the mainland, though it is now 
aggressively seeking to play its part in the international 
community. 
  But the mainland has to shrug off its outdated ideology and 
systems so as to accelerate its economic modernization and 
political democratization. Only then can it work hand in hand 
with Taiwan to strive for Chinese glory. 

