BFN 

<F P=106> [By Graham Brown] </F>
  [Text] Luxembourg, April 18 (AFP) -- The European Union 
[EU] has ruled out an escalation of military force in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina to stop the Serb assault on Gorazde, British 
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said here Monday [18 April]. 
  Instead, the European Union made it clear it was relying on 
Russia to help pressure Serbia into withdrawing from the mainly 
Moslem enclave and agreeing to a peace settlement in Bosnia. 
  Hurd was speaking during a meeting of EU foreign ministers 
which urged a new UN Security Council resolution backing a joint 
United States, Russian and EU initiative for a ceasefire in 
Gorazde and elsewhere in Bosnia. 
  French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said the European Union 
should neither abandon Gorazde and the UN peacemaking effort in 
Bosnia, nor escalate military action there. 
  Hurd added: "I do not think anyone (at the meeting) is ready 
to participate in a war which has no end." 
  Faced by the near-collapse of efforts to protect Gorazde 
from 
Serb attacks, the EU ministers called for an immediate ceasefire 
around the enclave, followed by the deployment of UN troops 
there. 
  They were preparing a statement calling for a Serb pull-back 
and an exclusion zone around Gorazde, followed by a more general 
ceasefire in Bosnia. 
  There was general support for a French initiative calling 
for 
a conference in Geneva involving the United States, Russia, the 
European Union and the United Nations to hammer out a joint 
negotiating approach. 
  Juppe said this was necessary to stamp out "double language" 
in negotiations with the Bosnian Serbs. 
  The French minister said he had proposed such a conference 
to 
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev and to U.S. Secretary of 
State Warren Christopher, and neither had said "no." 
  Hurd appealed to the international community to quickly 
provide UN peace-keeping troops to send into Gorazde. 
  He said that France and Britain had provided the lion's 
share 
of 1,300 troops so far available to deploy in the enclave, but 
that this number was unsatisfactory. 
  "It will certainly need more troops. That is an urgent 
need," Hurd said of the European Union's ceasefire call, and 
urged countries which were not sending troops, such as the 
United States, to help finance the peacekeeping action. 
  German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel told journalists that, 
as a last resort, the international community should be ready to 
stop a Serb capture of Gorazde by force. 
  "In the last resort, a Serb take-over of Gorazde should be 
militarily stopped," he said, adding that any plans to relax 
sanctions against Serbia should be dropped because the Serbs had 
shown no flexibility. 
  The German minister appealed to Russia to exert all possible 
influence on Serbia, adding that Moscow had no interest in a 
further escalation of the fighting in Bosnia. 

