BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Vasil Puhachow, head of the Scientific and </F>
Technical Committee in the Belarusian Defense Ministry, by Valer 
Kalinowski under the "Demilitarization of Belarus" rubric; place 
and date not given: "Disarmament, Like an Arms Buildup, Costs a 
Lot of Money"] 
  [Text] Belarus has been and, most likely, will remain the 
most militarized country (in terms of arms per 1,000 residents) 
in Europe. It is obvious that we do not need so many weapons. 
Yet disarmament, like an arms buildup, costs a lot of money. 
Foreign aid does not fully cover all of our expenses. When 
Belarus resolved to dismantle its nuclear weapons as well as 
shouldered the burden for disarmament within the framework of 
the Treaty on the Reduction of Conventional Armed Forces in 
Europe, it was an undoubtedly humane step that cannot be 
disputed. However, we must know how the process of 
demilitarization in Belarus is going on and what problems are 
being encountered. Our correspondent asked Vasil Puhachow, head 
of the Belarusian Defense Ministry Scientific and Technical 
Committee, to tell us about these issues. 
  [Kalinowski] How is nuclear disarmament in Belarus being 
conducted, and to what degree is it being financed by Russia? 
  [Puhachow] This is regulated by appropriate interstate 
agreements, of which the Republic of Belarus is a successor. 
These agreements determine the list of sites, while the 
schedule of withdrawal of strategic nuclear forces has been 
prepared by Belarus and Russia at the governmental level. The 
withdrawal of forces is fully financed by the Russian side. 
Russia has also obliged itself to return all cleared sites to 
appropriate environmental conditions. Some of the missiles have 
already been withdrawn. In Pastavy, for example, launch sites 
are already cleared out, but practically no rehabilitation work 
has been carried out there as of yet. Earlier, the region of 
Smarhon was a deployment site for old missile systems and SS-25 
missiles. According to an agreement, fixed structures there 
have been blown up. Naturally, blowing up the fixtures is far 
from the best way of disarming, therefore, I am not sure if it 
is possible to restore the land at that site in the future... 
Along with representatives of our National Agency for Control 
and Inspection, I was in this, now desolate, village. The 
environmental situation is not being controlled seriously by 
anybody there... Naturally, the term of withdrawal has not yet 
expired; in addition, monetary problems are plaguing both the 
Belarusian and Russian Governments... 
  [Kalinowski] You assume that Russia will withdraw its 
missiles, but the environmental problems will be left to us? 
  [Puhachow] No, I hope that Russia will meet its commitments 
and, by way of joint efforts, we will return evacuated sites to 
their proper condition. 
  [Kalinowski] Are nuclear weapons in Belarus being maintained 
in a state of combat readiness? 
  [Puhachow] Yes. There are Russian units, temporarily 
deployed on our territory, which will operate as a single organ 
until 1996-97. 
  [Kalinowski] I have heard that the Ukrainian president has 
the possibility of blocking any hypothetical launching of 
missiles from Ukrainian territory. Have we such a mechanism, 
too? 
  [Puhachow] There is an appropriate agreement on the 
intergovernmental level, which regulates the participation of 
Belarus in the resolution of any such problems. 
  [Kalinowski] Who controls the withdrawal of rocket forces 
from our side? 
  [Puhachow] The Defense Ministry has a special group in the 
National Agency for Control and Inspection to deal with this. 
The group is headed by General Major Ya.I. Nikulin. 
  [Kalinowski] Following the visit of the Pentagon chief, U.S. 
Defense Secretary W. Perry, to Belarus, there were rumors that 
Belarus will receive more U.S. aid for its demilitarization than 
other states. Is that true? 
  [Puhachow] Yes. The United States has come up with an 
initiative known as the Nunn-Lugar law (these are the names of 
U.S. senators who proposed this law) to all nuclear states of 
the former USSR. This law regulates assistance to CIS countries 
in dismantling nuclear weapons, and is seen by the United States 
as the most efficient political mechanism for achieving this 
goal. Due to the Supreme Soviet resolution on the withdrawal of 
nuclear weapons, Belarus was the first country to establish 
contacts with the United States for cooperation in the sphere of 
demilitarization. Initially, only a "framework" agreement was 
adopted on 22 October 1993, which was called "On dealing with 
consequences of disastrous situations and the prevention of 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction." Following the 
provisions of this fundamental agreement, five other documents 
were signed: 
  1. On supplies of equipment for dealing with the 
consequences of a disastrous situation, for a total of $5 
million; 
  2. On the establishment of a permanent communications line 
between Washington and Minsk (it is already established and 
operational); 
  3. An agreement on the creation of a system of export 
controls in the Republic (with an approximate cost of $10 
million); 
  4. On conversion and demilitarization, including the 
construction of housing for servicemen (as of today, 10,000 
servicemen's families are without housing); 
  5. On resolution of environmental problems in 
demilitarization -- here, the largest sum of assistance is 
expected -- $25 million. 
  The Americans are very willing to cooperate -- primarily on 
this last problem -- promising to supply necessary equipment, of 
which we are lacking -- devices for remote sounding and for 
detailed analysis of soil in areas vacated by military units. 
It is foreseen that a map of environmental pollution will be 
prepared and first-priority measures to restore these areas for 
the national economy will be worked out jointly. In particular, 
People's Deputy Volkaw is already conducting very active work to 
set up rehabilitation centers for Chernobyl children at former 
strategic military sites, which are ecologically clean. We are 
planning to cooperate on this program, in particular, in 
Pastavy... 
  [Kalinowski] My colleague, Ales Kastsen, has reported in 
ZVYAZDA on the dubious environmental conditions at this site. 
  [Puhachow] As of today, we do not have at our disposal an 
adequate estimate of the environmental situation in the 
Republic, not to mention at former military sites. At the 
beginning, one must carry out a general examination and take 
samples -- only then may we make conclusions about soil 
conditions, determine the flow of water currents, and so on. I 
think that some of your colleagues' fears may be substantiated. 
  [Kalinowski] Let us return to the agreements with the United 
States and detail what the system of export controls means. 
  [Puhachow] It concerns controls over exports of dual-purpose 
goods, or so-called critical technologies, which can be utilized 
in creating weapons of mass destruction. This is a topical 
problem. The presence of a system of export controls in a 
country is considered by the West as the first necessary element 
for including this country in the global market system. 
Therefore, the United States is willing to cooperate in this 
area. 
  [Kalinowski] How much U.S. material assistance has been 
allotted and how much of it has already been utilized? 
  [Puhachow] It is envisioned that we will receive $100 
million in 1994. However, it should be added here that the 
agreements signed by the U.S. side do not provide for some 
direct financial investment in Belarus, that is, assistance will 
be rendered in equipment, training, services... 
  [Kalinowski] By U.S. firms? 
  [Puhachow] Yes. Originally, by U.S. firms. In their turn, 
they may either hire cheap labor (for example, to build housing) 
or conclude contracts with our subcontractors. Still, the 
general contractors will be U.S. firms. True, the creation of 
U.S.- Belarusian joint ventures is not excluded. In special 
situations, for example, the environment, the possibility of 
Belarusian firms carrying out certain work financed by the 
United States has been stipulated. 
  [Kalinowski] In this way, the U.S. Government is taking care 
of not only Belarus, but also of its business interests? 
  [Puhachow] Such a strategy has been chosen. Of course, this 
is not the best version for us, because we, particularly in the 
housing sector, require purely financial means. This way, as it 
was resolved, a large percentage of allotted means will go to 
middlemen. Unfortunately, we are not able to control it for the 
time being... With regard to your question about the volume of 
U.S. assistance, which has already been realized in Belarus, the 
total sum amounts, for the time being, to 10 percent of those 
agreements concluded for last year. 
  [Kalinowski] How were these means utilized? 
  [Puhachow] For the establishment of the permanent 
communications line, supplies of equipment for dealing with 
disaster systems, the creation of the system of export control, 
and the organization of retraining centers for officers. 
  [Kalinowski] Is the U.S. assistance commensurate to our need 
for demilitarization? 
  [Puhachow] I would say that this assistance has a rather 
political nature, since $100 million, which is to be allotted to 
assist us, will not suffice to resolve even a single 
environmental problem. Demilitarization is a very complex and 
expensive process. The experience of Western firms testifies to 
the fact that the treatment of 1 cubic meter of polluted soil 
cost 700-900 German marks... Another complex problem for us is 
the detoxification of liquid rocket fuel and oxidizers. They 
must be removed from the territory of the Republic by some 
means. Russia refuses to accept such shipments. On the other 
hand, it is known that literally a spoonful of such rocket fuel 
can poison the entire water table. As of today, there is no 
other technology for utilizing toxic fuel other than burning it. 
However, burning costs a lot of money, as well. The German 
firm "Buk" has implemented a system for burning solid rocket 
fuel -- it cost hundreds of millions of marks... 
  [Kalinowski] How high are our expenses for the reduction of 
conventional arms? 
  [Puhachow] Taking into account our cheap labor force and 
certain deviations from environmental norms, experts estimate 
that the destruction of our tanks, BMP personal carriers, and 
aircraft under the Treaty on the Reduction of Armed Forces in 
Europe will cost us $33 million. 
  [Kalinowski] Excuse me, but Lithuania or Latvia have no 
tanks at all. These countries would probably like to buy them. 
Is it not better to sell our tanks to them, regardless of how 
low the price may be? 
  [Puhachow] That is a justified question. This could be 
possible if a more far-sighted policy were adopted during the 
negotiating process. However, the current agreement does not 
allow us to exceed the quota that was specified in the agreement 
on destruction. It was agreed that we would destroy them -- and 
we should do just that. An inspection commission takes into 
account only those pieces of equipment that are brought into a 
state of uselessness and cannot be updated or restored. Only 
such items are registered. There is also an agreement allowing 
us to reequip a certain number of BMP personal carriers and 
tanks for utilization in the national economy. Specialists at 
the 140th Tank Repair Plant have already prepared drafts and 
models of fire engines which are fairly effective in putting out 
forest fires. There are also projects for installing telescopic 
cranes on tank or BMP undercarriages, as well as numerous other 
ideas. However, taking into account the short service life of a 
tank engine or its "voracity," such a project cannot be 
competitive. 
  [Kalinowski] It is because they were intended to serve for 
purposes other than work. Let us leave the conversion of tanks 
and speak about the conversion of enterprises in the military 
industrial complex... 
  [Puhachow] Actually, there was never such a thing as the 
military industrial complex in Belarus. We had a number of 
enterprises -- totalling 100 -- which participated in the 
production of completing units, blocks, and elements of military 
equipment. Yet, unfortunately, we had, and still have, no 
integrated system, no complex. Due to the halt in orders for 
our products from Russia and Ukraine, as well as to the fact 
that those enterprises are incapable of satisfying the needs of 
our Army, our military industrial complex has been brought to 
such a state of crisis. Despite the fact that about 40-50 
percent of Belarusian industry had been engaged in military 
production, as of today, only 3-5 percent of the listed 
requirements of the Belarusian Army can be satisfied by our 
industry. Our country is compelled to buy completing units, 
blocks, and assemblies in Russia or Ukraine... The means that 
these purchases, unfortunately, cannot be utilized in our 
economy. 
  [Kalinowski] It seems that Belarus cannot be classified as 
an arms exporter. 
  [Puhachow] That is true. Belarus will not be an exporter of 
arms. Our Republic has never produced completed arms, and we do 
not produce them now. 

