Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] 
<H6>  THE CITIZEN </H6>
  Tripartite Talks `Becoming Farcical'--The talks between the 
Freedom Alliance (FA), the African National Congress (ANC), and 
the government "are becoming farcical," according to the page-6 
editorial in Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in English on 7 February. 
"Yet, unless there is agreement, the election will not be 
inclusive and the possibility of civil war will become more 
insistent." "Deadline after deadline passes." THE CITIZEN 
urges the negotiators to "stop playing political games with our 
future." 
<H6>  THE STAR </H6>
  Banks Must Head Off ANC's Compulsory Lending Directives -- 
"It becomes increasingly clear that South Africa's major banks 
are going to have to take the initiative in ensuring that 
previously disadvantaged borrowers have greater access to loans 
than in the past," remarks Johannesburg THE STAR in English on 7 
February in a page-10 editorial. "If not, it is probable they 
will be forced to do so." The banks must "go the extra mile to 
head off the compulsory lending directives threatened by the 
ANC's draft Reconstruction and Development Programme." The 
banks "have prepared themselves to provide services to the 
nation's hitherto unbanked regions and have supported the 
Community Banking project," but the question is "whether or not 
they've gone far enough." 
<H6>  BUSINESS DAY </H6>
  Advantages of Government of National Unity--"The government 
of national unity which will rule for five years after the April 
election may not be universally popular in the ANC, particularly 
with hardliners who would prefer an all-ANC government and want 
the NP [National Party] consigned to the scrapheap," notes 
Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY in English on 7 February in a page-6 
editorial. However, the new government is a "transitional 
system designed to alleviate white fears and reassure foreign 
investors nervous of the ANC and its communist allies, but it 
has practical advantages. It will provide continuity, not of 
ideology but of experience." "Wholesale change may be 
politically satisfying, but it dumps a wealth of experience." 
<H6>  SOWETAN </H6>
  TEC Responsible for Peacekeeping Force Shambles--The bid by 
the Transitional Executive Council (TEC) to establish a national 
peacekeeping force "seems to be off to a shambolic start," 
points out a page-10 editorial in Johannesburg SOWETAN in 
English on 7 February. Expectations were perhaps ""too high 
several weeks ago when a ragtag group of about 3,500 recruits 
started training." "Much of the blame for the shambles should be 
laid at the door of the TEC. Many of its decisions are taken 
with undue haste and under pressure of deadlines. The 
impression is created little forward or thorough planning is 
done." The newly appointed commander of the peacekeeping force 
takes up his post "under the cloud of the Venda pension 
scandal." SOWETAN hopes he can "salvage the situation and 
create a force able to ease the country's transition to 
democracy." 

