Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Estonian President Lennart Meri by </F>
Frederikas Jansonas in Tallinn on 23 February: "The Day of Sun, 
Hope, and Happiness"] 
  [Excerpts] Today, the Republic of Estonia is celebrating 
the 76th anniversary of its independence. The flags of 
neighboring states will fly not only in Tallinn, but also in 
Vilnius, because it is our common holiday. The Estonian 
president will make a festive speech this evening. On the eve 
of this holiday, his Excellency Lennart Meri answered some 
questions from RESPUBLIKA reporter Frederikas Jansonas. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Jansonas]Mr. President, former communists are 
returning to power in many East European countries. They call 
this a shift from romanticism to realism. You have never been a 
member of the Communist Party. Does this mean that you are a 
romantic? 
  [Meri] Yes.... I have been fortunate or maybe unfortunate -- 
this is for you to decide -- to be a writer. My critics, in 
Estonia or Finland or Germany, often accuse me of being a 
romantic (laughs).... 
  However, this is hardly the reply that you expect to hear 
from me. Yes, the return of former forces to power is becoming 
a tendency in Central Europe. (By the way, I have never used 
the term East Europe because, in my opinion, East Europe is 
primarily Russia. East Europe is to the east of the borders of 
Estonia, Lithuania, Poland, and Hungary). 
  First of all, we should study why such a tendency has 
emerged. 
  It is absolutely clear that such foreign secret services of 
the Russian Federation as the KGB or the Chief Intelligence 
Administration continue to operate. If they are expanding their 
activities in the United States, Canada, France, Sweden, or 
Finland, it would be somewhat naive to think that Lithuania, 
Latvia, or Estonia would be an exception. It is also evident 
and commonplace that some Russian political groups are 
desperately trying, and will continue to try to revive their 
economic and political influence not only on the Baltic states, 
but by "step after step" on the entire region which they have 
become accustomed to call the "Warsaw Pact countries." 
  On the other hand, we are freeing ourselves of the Soviet 
economic model, and this is a painful process that must be 
completed as soon as possible. We can liken the 
de-Sovietization of the economy to a complicated surgery 
performed without anesthesia. 
  Moreover, we cannot forget that after those 50 years, we are 
like children who just finished secondary school. I remember 
quite well how I myself felt as a school graduate -- it seemed 
that I knew everything about the entire world. True, my 
feelings were quite the opposite when I graduated university. 
The current authorities of Central European states have 
acquired their knowledge about democracy and a market economy 
not through experience, but by reading theoretical books written 
by outstanding authors who live in Paris and receive their 
salaries from one of the 200 or so Soviet Union research 
institutes in the United States. 
  I do not want to say anything negative about these books. 
The tragic thing is, however, that they are theoretical and 
abstract, while we must do something that has never been done in 
the history of mankind. 
  Even such classic countries as Germany do not have a market 
economy that existed in Great Britain during the times of Queen 
Victoria. Unfortunately, we often overlook such "details," 
which inevitably causes social problems. 
  The current problem is whether the price we must pay for the 
leap from one economic system to another will not become an 
explosion interrupting this surgery. 
  The Soviet Union does not exist on geographic maps or in the 
Soviet Army. However, it does exist, as A. Christie said, in 
the matter that every one of us has between our temples. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Jansonas] The "Partnership for Peace" program has been 
the political issue of the last two months. It has evoked very 
different assessments from Central European states. What is 
your view of this program? 
  [Meri] I have already mentioned to one reporter that it 
reminds me of a nice bottle of "Channel" perfume, which seems to 
be empty, or -- and this is even worse -- filled with Mr. 
Molotov's favorite eau de cologne, "Krasnaya Moskva" [Red 
Moscow]. 
  Nevertheless, this is much better than nothing, although it 
does not provide any security guarantees. A difficult 
transitional period is in store for all of us, and we must 
honestly say this to our nations. 
  I have never expected anyone to provide us with certain 
security guarantees before we show that we intend to defend 
ourselves. One cannot wait for security guarantees as if they 
were a Christmas gift. 
  [Jansonas]There have been many different ideas about 
economic and political cooperation among Lithuania, Latvia, and 
Estonia. Mr. V. Landsbergis [opposition leader in Lithuania] 
has even spoken about an Eslalia project -- something similar to 
Benelux -- on the Baltic Sea. What is your attitude toward the 
past, the present, and the future of Baltic cooperation? 
  [Meri] This is one of the key issues for our country. If we 
cooperate only in searching for security guarantees or foreign 
policy issues, everything may remain bare rhetoric. We must all 
understand that in our geopolitical situation we can cooperate 
in resolving security issues and foreign policy only on a common 
economic basis. This is a painful process -- Europe wasted more 
than 30 years before it created the European Union [EU]. 
  I hope that the process of economic integration among the 
Baltic states will be easier. First of all, we have a tragic 
historical experience when before World War II our economies 
competed among themselves rather than cooperated. In my 
opinion, the second reason is that sometimes it is better to be 
a small state -- in this way we can maneuver better and more 
promptly. 
  I explained my position during the very first meetings with 
Latvian and Lithuanian leaders: We must begin our economic 
cooperation by integrating our energy systems. Knowing that 
Finland will face a shortage of energy resources in the coming 
five years, seeing the industrial potential in eastern Germany, 
and bearing in mind the fact that Poland depends on gas imports 
from Russia while the latter's situation is extremely unstable, 
we have a possibility of creating a basis for the future 
integration through a gas pipeline running from Norway to 
eastern Germany through Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and 
Poland. 
  We cannot expect to become EU members before we begin our 
economic cooperation. No one will understand such an attitude 
in the West, where some people have difficulty in telling the 
difference between the Balkan and the Baltic states as it is. 
  As the conclusions of EU experts show, of the three Baltic 
states, Estonia has made the greatest economic progress toward 
the EU. However, we do not intend to boast about this. The 
most important issue is which country will join the EU last, 
rather than first. 
  Apart from other positive aspects, the integration of the 
Baltic energy systems would help us free ourselves from our 
dependence on Russia. The feeling of independence would allow 
us to look at Russia in a considerably friendlier manner, 
because it will always be our neighbor. [passage omitted] 

