BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, June 2 (TANJUG) -- The Serbian Academy of 
Arts and Sciences (SANU) warned Thursday of a dramatic 
deterioration in the demographic structure of the Yugoslav 
republic of Serbia which has a population of ten million. 
  Population experts say this is the result of a continuing 
drop in the birth rate and economic and social difficulties 
caused by the violent break-up of the former Yugoslav federation 
and the current international blockade of the new Yugoslav state 
which comprises the republics of Serbia and Montenegro. 
  The situation is especially dramatic in central Serbia and 
in 
the northern province of Vojvodina, which both have a negative 
birth rate. In the southern province Kosovo, on the other hand, 
the majority ethnic Albanian population has had a very high 
population growth for years. 
  The decrease in the birth rate of the Serb population in the 
breakaway Yugoslav republics of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia, 
whose Croat and Moslem population does not encounter these 
difficulties, further aggravates the problem. 
  In Serbia, the major drop in the birth rate has been 
followed 
by what demographic experts describe as depopulation. This is a 
situation in which many young people leave the country, in which 
there are major migrations, resettlement of populations because 
of war and exposure to psychological and social stress. 
  All these factors have long-term negative effects on the 
biological reproduction of the population, population growth and 
the future of the Serb people, as well as on the psychological 
and genetic health of the new generations. 
  Experts say the roots of the problem are the unfavourable 
financial situation which does not allow families to have more 
children, unawareness of the dramatic proportions of the 
situation, social and economic measures which discriminate 
against families with children, and a low level of family 
planning activities where abortion seems to be the most popular 
birth control method. 
  The tendency of the dropping population growth in Serbia has 
been noted since the end of the Second World War. Negative 
population growth has been registered in 105 of 189 
municipalities in Serbia, according to data from 1991. 
  Municipalities with the highest population growth are always 
the ones with a majority ethnic Albanian or Moslem population. 
Not a single municipality in Kosovo has registered a negative 
population growth and even municipalities with a majority 
Serbian population have registered a population growth in this 
area. Population experts predict that by the year 2,050 almost a 
third of the total population of central Serbia and Vojvodina 
will be lost in relation to 1991. Serbia will have a population 
of 4.1 and Vojvodina of 1.4 million. Montenegro's population 
will be 600,00, a 10 per cent drop. 
  At the same time the population in Kosovo will reach 3.64 
million, population say. [sentence as received] 

