BFN 

  [Text] In the negotiations on lowering tariffs at the 
multilateral trade negotiations (the Uruguay Round) that were 
finally concluded in late March, the Japanese decided to abolish 
Japan's duties on a major imported American product produced in 
Arkansas as a "gift" to President Clinton. This was disclosed 
on 6 April. The view is surfacing that in an effort to patch up 
Japan-U.S. relations strained by the rupture of the recent 
Japan-U.S. summit, the Japanese made the decision as a "present" 
to the President. 
  At the final phase of the negotiations, the Japanese 
proposed 
that Japan abolish its duties on imported bromine compound, 
which is used to manufacture plastics and fire-resistant fibers. 
In the United States, Arkansas, where President Clinton was 
born, is a major producing state of the bromine compound. Japan 
imports most of its bromine compound and American bromine 
compound makes up two-thirds of Japan's imports. 
  U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor is believed to have 
asked Japan to abolish the duties on imported bromine compound 
in tune with the President's hopes. The Japanese, fully aware 
of the U.S. political situation, made the decision as a "gift" 
to both the President and Mr. Kantor with the aim of using the 
gift as a last trump card to wring trade concessions from the 
United States. 
  The United States has dropped its demand for lowering 
Japan's 
duties on imported electronic products after the conclusion of 
the Uruguay Round. The United States made another trade 
concession to Japan in late March. The United States is 
believed to have made those trade concessions to Japan out of 
full consideration to the trade concession made by the Japanese 
at the Uruguay Round. However, the United States is said to have 
dropped only one-third of its trade demands on Japan it 
expressed a willingness to drop and it is still unclear as to 
what extent the gift will generate the effect of making the 
United States drop its trade demands on Japan. 

