Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Mikheyev report: "Duma Recommendations on </F>
Ambassador Candidacies Will Not Be Mandatory"] 
  [Text] A session of the Duma's Committee for International 
Affairs devoted to structural and organizational questions has 
decided to form six subcommittees. These being subcommittees on 
problems of the United Nations and international organizations 
and also on interparliamentary relations; an international-legal 
subcommittee that will tackle human rights; a subcommittee on 
foreign economic problems; a subcommittee for cultural, 
scientific, and humanitarian cooperation; and one dealing with 
the international aspects of security and disarmament. 
  The subcommittee on cadre policy, whose task is primarily to 
examine the candidacies of Russia's future foreign ambassadors, 
was a separate issue. The discussion of its activity aroused 
the greatest commotion since it is directly linked with Article 
83 of the Russian Federation Constitution, which reads as 
follows: The president "appoints and recalls after 
consultations with the relevant committees or commissions of the 
chambers of the Federal Assembly diplomatic representatives of 
the Russian Federation in foreign states and international 
organizations." 
  Members of the committee agreed that the Committee for 
International Affairs is responsible for all appointments to 
distant foreign countries, while the Committee for CIS Affairs 
is left with nearby foreign countries. 
  The clause of the Constitution was interpreted as follows: 
On the one hand, holding consultations is a mandatory part of 
the procedure for "appointing or recalling ambassadors," but, on 
the other hand, the recommendations of the relevant committees 
are not binding on the president. It is advisable to hold 
consultations in the period between the new ambassador's being 
ratified by the Foreign Ministry Collegium and the president's 
issuing an edict. 
  Ambassadors' candidacies will be discussed at committee 
sessions and not coordinated with the head of the committee or 
with any of its members which should, according to Vladimir 
Lukin, chairman of the Committee for International Affairs, 
"ensure openness and glasnost." 
  "However, the candidate for the responsible post must answer 
questions. The presence of experts and the press, barring those 
cases when delicate aspects of national security may be 
involved, is not prohibited," the head of the committee told 
IZVESTIYA. 
  This procedure for conducting hearings will be recommended 
for inclusion in the Duma's standing orders, after which it will 
have the force of law. 
  "At this stage there are no differences of opinion with the 
Foreign Ministry or the president's administration on this 
matter," Vladimir Lukin added. 

