Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by News Research and Commentary Group] </F>
  [Text] According to news reports, the joint U.S.-Pakistani 
maneuvers have commenced in the mountainous areas of the 
[Northwest] Frontier Province. These maneuvers are significant 
in view of the fact that U.S.-Pakistani relations have entered a 
new phase after two years of tension. 
  Pakistan's location in the midst of three countries--India, 
Afghanistan, and Iran--and especially its proximity to the Gulf 
of Oman, the Persian Gulf, and the Indian Ocean, has resulted in 
the United States attaching special importance to this country 
since its independence. 
  As a result of the communist coup d'etat in Afghanistan and 
the subsequent presence of Russian forces in the region, and in 
general a change in the political circumstances in southwest 
Asia, the United States sought to increase its financial and 
military assistance to the erstwhile Pakistani regime on the 
pretext of protecting its interests and combating the 
proliferation of communism. It was for this reason that until 
the end of General Ziaul Haq's tenure, Pakistan was transformed 
into the third largest recipient of U.S. assistance. 
  However, with the lapse of a few years of a continued 
distinctive regional strategy in southwest Asia, the advent of 
certain conditions such as the departure of Russian forces from 
Afghanistan and the establishment of an independent government 
in Pakistan, as well as the end of the Cold War era, the United 
States adopted a new stance on its relations with Pakistan. 
Thus, the importance of Pakistan waned in the U.S. political 
arena. 
  With the emergence of such developments, Washington sought 
to 
bring the military capability of Pakistan in its capacity as a 
powerful Islamic country under control. For this purpose, it 
strove to mobilize world public opinion against Pakistan's 
nuclear capability. Simultaneously, it severed its financial 
and military assistance to Pakistan. 
  During the past one or two months, the two countries have 
taken steps to improve relations. Earlier, with the suspension 
of its assistance to Pakistan, the United States could not 
persuade Islamabad to relinquish its nuclear program and 
Islamabad, which had distanced itself from the United States by 
a change in its foreign policy, sought to get closer to other 
countries, particularly European countries. The vacuum 
resulting from the halt of U.S. financial and military 
assistance was filled by European and non-European countries. 
  As an example, Pakistani experts have investigated 
British-manufactured Tornado fighter planes, Mirage-2000 
aircraft from France, and the Sukhoi-27 and 28 made by Russia on 
their technical aspects. Eventually, the United States, which 
imposed this embargo against Pakistan, lost the lucrative $85 
million market of this country, which would have been of vital 
importance to the insolvent U.S. economy. 
  These strategic considerations motivated the United States 
to 
readjust its hostile policy toward Pakistan, and a month ago 
Clinton proposed a bill for Congressional approval that would 
allow the President to lift embargoes and resume relations with 
certain countries, including Pakistan, for strategic 
considerations. Following its approval, a politico-military 
delegation arrived in Islamabad to iron out differences. Of 
course, Pakistan was inclined to favor improving its relations 
with the United States as it is dependent [vabasteh] on the 
United States regarding its Armed Forces in general, and its Air 
Force in particular, and it is possible that any kind of tension 
in its relations with the United States would result in the 
weakening of its Armed Forces in comparison with those of India. 
  In any case, the joint maneuvers of these two countries, 
which are currently in progress, can be considered as part of 
the process of improving relations between them. 

