Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Norman Patterton] </F>
  [Text] Pretoria Jan 29 SAPA--The government and the African 
National Congress [ANC] should take cognisance of the angry mood 
of militant rightwingers who gathered in Pretoria demanding 
self-determination and a volkstaat [homeland], Afrikaner 
Volksfront [Afrikaner National Front, AVF] leader Ferdi 
Hartzenberg said on Saturday [29 January]. He was speaking at a 
news conference after a meeting of the AVF's own Transitional 
Assembly during which the audience clearly displayed their 
impatience for the creation of a volkstaat. 
  The orderly proceedings momentarily broke down when the 
assembly rejected resolutions proposed by Afrikaner Volksfront 
General Constand Viljoen, apparently because they were not 
militant enough and did not provide for the instant creation of 
a volkstaat. A suggestion by Gen Viljoen that conservative 
Afrikaners participate in the April elections to prove the AVF's 
support was dismissed with derision by a large section of the 
audience. 
  In the confusion Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging [Afrikaner 
Resistance Movement] leader Eugene Terreblanche, who was not on 
the speakers programme, took the stage and said the Afrikaner 
could not live without freedom and if necessary would acquire it 
with the necessary violence. "Tell our leaders, give us an 
election, let the nation vote `yes,' but not at the ballot box 
for the ANC." The Afrikaner Volksfront was on the way to a new 
third, free Boer republic, Mr Terreblanche said. 
  Before the temporary breakdown in the programme, Gen Viljoen 
said the Afrikaner Volksfront could field tens of thousands of 
men at short notice if necessary, and also, eventually, hundreds 
of thousands if required. Politically, the Afrikaner was less 
powerful because it lacked numbers, but its salvation lay in its 
defensive capabilities, Gen Viljoen said. "Nothing but nothing 
can stop the Afrikaner from obtaining its freedom," he said. 
  Thousands of people packed the showground's hall where the 
assembly was held, while more gathered outside to follow the 
proceedings over loudspeakers. 
  Gen Viljoen said a constitutional threat was one of a number 
of dangers that faced the Afrikaner, and if the nation did not 
rise up to meet these challenges, it would lose its freedom 
without even knowing. 
  Candidates for the assembly sat in the front rows, their 
wives dressed and wearing hats as if for the annual opening of 
parliament. 
  It had become clear that the Kempton Park negotiations could 
not deliver the volkstaat by April 27, Gen Viljoen said. There 
was no simple solution to the complex problems of a volkstaat. 
"Today we'll have to decide: If we want a volkstaat before 
April 27 we would have to seize it violently..." 
  The crowd chanted "now, now". 
  Gen Viljoen continued: "I am thankful for that reaction 
because it shows you have resolution. The other option would be 
a strategic alternative to violence, and both involve risks." 
When he explained that a violent volkstaat cessession would 
have serious economic and security implications, and would 
probably lead to total anarchy, the crowd changed its stance and 
shouted, "no." Gen Viljoen added though that the violent option 
would be considered if the AVF was driven into such a position. 
  When he proposed that the Afrikaner volk [people] should 
vote 
for the AVF in April to prove its support among Afrikaners, the 
idea was raucously dismissed. Gen Viljoen said the possible 
borders of a volkstaat could also be determined in such a poll. 
  He proposed three resolutions: 
  -- That the Afrikaner won't accept the loss of freedom, and 
that the Afrikaner should demand the right to self-determination 
in an own area, and that the borders of such a region be 
determined; as well as the possible creation of cantons 
elsewhere in South Africa. 
  -- That the meeting authorises the Executive Council of AVF 
to realize Afrikaners' ideals by means of the most peaceful 
means possible. 
  -- That all methods, including a poll to determine whether 
to 
use minimum violence, be employed in order to secure a volkstaat. 
  But when it came to voting, the crowd became restless and 
the 
stage was swamped by people who surged forward, some groping for 
the microphone. 
  Another resolution from the floor was adopted, namely that 
any attempt to prevent the Afrikaner from ruling itself be 
rejected, and that the AVF be mandated to establish a 
Transitional Assembly. This assembly should function until free 
elections in the volkstaat could be held. This resolution 
seemed to cool tempers and the gathering elected Mr Frank le 
Roux as chairman of the Transitional Council and Dr Hartzenberg 
as president. 
  Addressing a news conference, Dr Hartzenberg said he 
believed the angry mood of the crowd would have a "positive" 
influence on Monday's tri-lateral talks between the Freedom 
Alliance, the government and African National Congress. The 
government and the ANC did not believe the AVF when it said the 
mood among Afrikaners was angry and impatient. Now they could 
judge for themselves, he added. The "bottom line" of Afrikaners 
was self-determination in an own volkstaat. 
  Dr Hartzenberg said the AVF would reveal later if they were 
going to take part in the general elections, but "these people 
are only prepared to vote on their own ballot paper for a 
volkstaat council", he said. Addressing the assembly, Dr 
Hartzenberg said the Afrikaner Volksfront's Transitional 
Assembly would try to establish a volkstaat through peaceful 
means, but would keep the violence option open. 
  Dr Hartzenberg said the Afrikaner nation wanted to vote in 
its own white election and wanted to elect its own government in 
its own country. There was no power in South Africa capable of 
suppressing the Afrikaner, he said. He predicted the failure of 
South Africa's interim constitution, claiming it represented 
only the interests of communists. Although the rightwing 
assembly would have no legal clout, its power lay in the 
authority the Afrikaner nation conferred on it. 
  Dr Hartzenberg said the assembly's task would be to mobilise 
the volk. One of its first tasks would be to establish citizens 
councils at local levels to obtain orders from the rightwing 
leadership and carry them out. 
  It would be irresponsible to pursue a volkstaat by violent 
means if it could be established through peaceful means, he 
said. "This nation has never been the aggressor and won't be 
now, but if our freedom is taken violently the Afrikaner volk 
would have the right to defend its freedom with all the means at 
its disposal." 
  If the Afrikaner was granted his freedom, he would become 
the 
best neighbour imaginable, but if his freedom was not granted, 
he would have to seize it by means of a "freedom programme", Dr 
Hartzenberg said. The AVF's executive council would also become 
the Transitional Assembly's executive council, he added. 
  Earlier in the day, a black journalist who wanted to cover 
the proceedings was escorted away by marshals. His colleagues 
charged that he had been jeered and called a "kaffir". 

