Language: <F P=105> Vietnamese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Last part of article by Vu Oanh, party Political Bureau </F>
member: "Developing Combined Forces in Mass Motivation Work and 
Renovating the Work Content and Method of the Fatherland Front 
and Mass Organizations"] 
  [Text] Cadres working for mass organizations must get close 
to the people to understand them and create favorable conditions 
for the masses to understand among themselves so that they can 
sympathize and share their ups and downs, develop personal 
feelings to support one another, and provide needed 
encouragement and advice in life. Every citizen must be a mass 
motivation cadre to create a wide mass motivation network for 
the settlement of social issues that impossible for the law to 
cover all. We must form mutual assistance to support one 
another in production, life, crisis, and poverty. We must 
instill family and local traditions to mutually preserve our 
virtues and morality and to strive for more contributions to the 
government and the public. We have to negotiate and reconcile 
disagreements and disputes in the community to limit and reduce 
public grievances. 
  Party committees provide guidance to mass organizations by 
offering thoughts, conceptions, and directions but not orders. 
We understand that revolution is the people's undertaking, and 
revolution is creation. Living things are very diversified and 
continuously changing. Every party directive and resolution and 
state law must meet the people's aspiration. We also have to 
find out how much the people support party directives and 
resolutions in different localities. Therefore, the mass 
organizations must create favorable conditions to arouse and 
develop the public creativeness to match the diversified changes 
of things in life. Mass organization leaders will emerge and be 
selected from those vivid realities. Public movements will 
create new faces who will represent their aspirations and social 
classes. We must avoid subjectively appointing cadres who are 
not suitable to the mass motivation work. 
  The mass organizations' programs of action must be suitable 
to the people's daily activities. For example, if the local 
youths are producing ceramics for sale in the market, the Youth 
Union must outline its program to encourage ceramic production 
and inventions. It cannot introduce programs not relevant to the 
youths' daily activities. 
  What are the masses? What do they want? Why are 
cooperatives inefficient? Why do many people return to their 
old residence from new economic zones? The mass organizations 
must understand these issues, work out resolutions, and suggest 
corrections for better appropriate amendments to create 
favorable conditions for the development of the mass 
organizations. If the mass organizations are inflexible, 
domineering, and neglect the people's aspirations, the public 
movements will be limited and revolutionary achievements will be 
fewer. 
  2. Activities from one organization must be uniformly 
coordinated with other organizations. At the same time, the 
mass organizations must voluntarily carry particular tasks 
suitable to them. 
  The work of a mass organization and its ultimate goal are to 
bring benefits to the people, government, and society. 
Therefore, when a mass organization is doing a particular job, 
other organizations must help to bring about better results. 
For example, if the Peasants Association is implementing a 
program to introduce scientific technologies into rural areas 
without active participation of the Youth Union, Women's Union, 
War Veterans Association, and other professional associations, 
the results will not be high. The development of the family 
economy is also similar. Despite different family members 
joining different organizations and associations, they all 
contribute their efforts to improve the family economy. One 
particular organization alone cannot improve all families' 
economy, but all must join hands to help different members of 
all families to strongly improve their economies. 
  Mass organizations must aim at family units and members in 
their motivation work. A family has all the functions of race 
preservation, education, culture, society, convalescence, 
relaxation, living activity, production, and consumption. In 
future, children can receive their education at home. Teachers 
will teach them from afar via computers. The relations between 
school, family, teacher, and student will be different. 
Therefore, mass motivation must pay attention to the motivation 
in each family. 
  When carrying out any task in a community, a mass 
organization needs the guidance of local party committees and 
the participation of other organizations. To better coordinate 
among different mass organizations, their executive committees 
should include people who are also members of other mass 
organizations. For example, the peasants association executive 
committee should include people who also are leading cadres of 
the youth union, the women's union, the war veterans 
association, and vice versa. 
  On the other hand, public movements also have their own 
natural way of grouping based on professions. People in the 
same profession must correctly evaluate their group capacity and 
rightly chose their main tasks. Every professional group, 
depending on their function, duty, demand, and skill should 
voluntarily carry some major tasks of the common undertaking. 
This will eliminate overlapping, many organizations doing the 
same work, or nobody doing a particular task. We must respect 
the initiative of each organization and help unite all 
fatherland front activities to implement common socioeconomic 
duties. 
  Mass organizations must practically help members to improve 
knowledge, education, profession, and work experience; to solve 
difficulties in life; to meet their healthy demands and hobbies; 
and to actively partake in social activities. 
  The successful division and unification in different works 
among different fatherland fronts and mass organizations will 
create wide and practical public movements to improve the local 
economy and to settle social issues. Guidance for mass 
organizations must be continuous and uniform. We must avoid 
giving inconsistent guidance. And we must regularly review our 
work to draw more experiences in order to expand public 
movements. 
  Mass organizations must build practical programs of action. 
Then they must supervise the grassroots to implement closely the 
program. In these programs, we must define important tasks in 
each period and assign able cadres to execute and supervise 
them. We have to reduce the practice of sitting at our desks 
and managing by directives and reports. We must limit the 
issuance of resolutions and increase public contacts. 
Management must be done with planning, goals, and projects. 
Through the implementation process of a particular project, 
mass organizations will establish better connections with their 
grassroots and with their members's benefits and creative 
capacity. In carrying out goals, the mass organizations must 
establish regular professional, technical, and service contacts 
with related state organs to improve their funding, technical 
knowledge, training, and other activities. 
  Fatherland front and mass organizations must help to build 
strong local party organs and governments. They can contribute 
to party building through discussions of party draft documents 
in their local meetings and mass media. They should suggest 
what the party can supplement or how it can correct policies 
that are not quite meeting the people's legitimate interests. 
  Fatherland front and mass organizations motivate the public 
to implement the party's line and policies. At the same time, 
they must supervise their implementation. They offer comments 
on party leadership, guide the public to offer opinions on 
cadres and members, participate in selecting cadres, and educate 
good people to introduce to the party. At the same time, they 
must create favorable conditions to build localities all with 
good party members and strong party committees. Fatherland 
front and mass organizations must uncover party opportunists and 
degenerated elements. They must actively participate in 
anticorruption movements. They must take part in the process of 
correcting loopholes in structures and policies and uncover 
corruption and smuggling committed by party members. They can 
help the party eliminate bad people from its organization. 
  Fatherland front and mass organizations protect the party by 
pointing out distortions against its history and theory and 
activities to tarnish party members' reputations and the party's 
undertakings, thus significantly contributing to the victory of 
our revolutionary undertaking. 
  The front and other mass organizations must participate in 
administration building so it will become one that is of, by, 
and for the people. The front and other mass organizations must 
recommend candidates of good talents and ethics to the people 
for election to the National Assembly and people's councils. 
Meanwhile, they must act on behalf of the people, monitor, 
supervise, and create work conditions for members of the 
National Assembly, people's councils, and government officials. 
They must contribute to gradually perfecting the system of 
democratically-elected representatves and developing the 
people's democratic rights. 
  They must formulate and enforce regulations, participate in 
enacting laws, and draft resolutions and government decrees in 
an effective fashion. 
  They must cooperate with the administration to work out and 
enforce various production and trade policies and plans and 
various forms of activities at the infrastructure. They must 
supervise the execution of labor contracts and the enforcement 
of legislative policies and those policies to educate citizens. 
This will protect the interests of the laboring people in 
their economic activities. 
  We must formulate and promulgate documents of a legislative 
nature, seeing to it that all resolutions of the front and other 
mass organizations are welcome and complied with. 
  We must apply the system of disciplinary actions and 
dismissals against those government cadres and employees found 
violating the people's interests. On a periodic basis, the 
front and other mass organizations must come to hear government 
briefings on the actual situation of the country, on government 
measures now in force, and on state-governing policies and plans. 
  One of the important goals of mass motivation work is to 
provide additional training for the mass motivation contingent 
of cadres. Our work has left much to be desired for quite a long 
time now. Attention has not been given to the conduct of 
training and additional training for mass motivation cadres who 
have not been given proper assignments. Benefits for cadres are 
still constrained. Many are working without peace of mind. We 
must renovate and build the contingent of cadres to meet mass 
motivation requirements in the new stage. This is of great 
significance for mass motivation work and for the general cause. 
  Depending on each category of professional cadres, we must 
adopt a proper system of recruitment, employment, training, and 
additional training. We must adhere to professional standards 
to recruit for long-term assignments. We must strive to reduce 
their numbers while increasing the number of semi-professional 
cadres and personal advisors. We must make full use of 
professional cadres' abilities and knowledge for the service of 
mass organizations. We must have an incentive system for them 
and must attach importance to the recruitment of nonparty cadres. 
  We must adopt a system by which youth union members and 
youth 
association members can directly participate in the election of 
those who have grown up in the renovation process and in various 
movements and who are noted for their shrewdness and abilities 
to lead mass organizations. 
  Building operating funds is important to ensure that mass 
organizations can work independently and objectively. We must 
create conditions for cadres to associate with youth union 
members, youth association members, and the fundamental elements 
of their respective organizations. 
  Mass organizations must seek ways to obtain operating funds 
aside from the state budget with some contributions from youth 
association members. They must strive to provide additional 
allowances to cadres so they can have enough money to live on, 
care for their families, and buy things needed for their work. 
Attention must be paid to stepping up economic activities 
within the framework of the law. Mass organizations must 
participate in carrying out various state- and international 
organization-run projects such as the International Monetary 
Fund. Operating funds and working conditions are important 
things needed for cadres and mass organizations. The state and 
mass organizations concerned must formulate plans and measures 
to ensure these things. 
  The mass motivation task in the new stage is very heavy. 
Renovating the contents and mode of operations of various mass 
organizations are important to ensure good success for mass 
motivation work. We must observe Uncle Ho's teaching that "the 
people's force is very large and mass motivation is therefore 
very important. Poor performance in mass motivation will affect 
other activities. Conversely, good performance in mass 
motivation will lead to the success for other activities." 
Satisfactorily carrying out mass motivation work will ensure 
success for our cause of building a prosperous people, a 
powerful country, and an equal and civilized society. 

