CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with A. Volgin, Chairman of the Moscow Public </F>
Committee for Stockholders' Rights, by reporter L. Lidrianov: 
"The Thorny Path of the Native Investor"] 
  [Text] It is no secret to anyone that man is the basis for 
all economic, social and political relations. In V. Dal's 
dictionary we read, "Man -- the individual, highest of earth's 
creatures, gifted with reason, free will and speech: a) carnal 
man -- hardly distinguished from the animal, in him the fitting 
spirit is hidden; b) natural man -- recognizes only the material 
and civil law, does not meditate on eternity, falls to 
temptation; c) spiritual man -- in good and truth because of his 
faith, his goal is eternity, conscience is his law and he 
withstands temptation. These levels of man can be achieved by 
man through his will." From the aforementioned an axiom can be 
formulated easily: The better man is, the better will he arrange 
life. The logical conclusion to what has been said is the 
following formula: we live badly because we ourselves are bad. 
However, the difficulty has to do not with this simple 
conclusion (even though this too is not easy) but with 
understanding what is good and what is bad. 
  A. Volgin, Chairman of the Moscow Public Committee for 
Stockholders' Rights, discusses today's everyday problems and 
the role of relations between people in the sphere of stock 
turnover with our reporter, L. Lidrianov. 
  [Volgin] As director of Adamant Financial Corporation and 
manager of two investment funds -- Derzhava and Radonezh, I, as 
no one else, experience the rigors and adversities of the 
Russian investor on a daily basis. In my opinion, most problems 
are related to serious violations of the rights of stockholders, 
which can be protected only through joint efforts. 
  I was able to organize a group of like-minded individuals 
from among representatives of investment funds, associations of 
privatized and private enterprises, associations of 
non-government pension funds and other organizations, and to 
unify them in a Public Committee for Stockholders' Rights. All 
of these people work professionally in the stock market, which 
is very important. We feel that such public intellectual 
centers, allowing everyone to move forward together in the area 
of improving laws and court practices, and increasing the 
knowledge of the population, should exist throughout the 
country. At the present time an enormous number of people are 
participating in the stock market (60 million stockholders and 
thousands of companies, enterprises, banks and investment 
funds). In practical terms it is possible to help each one only 
if an environment is created for honest business. Only by 
functioning in such an environment can we guarantee that the 
rights of the individual will be protected. 
  It is on this basis that we established the basic directions 
for our operations. 
  First, we wish to improve the legal system, and not only 
laws 
but normative acts as well. In this matter we wish to be 
completely professional, discussing not only the concept of the 
laws, but every letter and comma, and what impact they will have 
on the rights of particular participants in the stock market. 
After all, many things that may not appear to be very 
significant to public opinion actually seriously affect the 
rights of stockholders. Recently the Duma discussed in all 
earnestness the idea of increasing the tax rate from 0.3 to 3.0 
percent for stock operations. In patching the holes of an 
ever-expanding budget, we are often prepared to grasp at any 
means that turn up. Yet this measure may have enormous economic 
consequences. It will temporarily shut down the stockmarket and 
create hindrances on the path of moving capital from ineffective 
to effective spheres of the economy. All of this will result in 
a violation of the most important rights of the stockholder -- 
the right to sell his stock. I must say that in general, a tax 
on stock operations is unique. In Japan it was introduced only 
to combat the artificial stockmarket boom. But even under our 
conditions, in which the market is not at all developed and is 
characterized by a low liquidity, the purpose of introducing 
this tax is completely incomprehensible. This is only one 
example of how a question which does not appear to be directly 
related to the rights of stockholders in reality may affect them 
quite seriously. We are ready to participate professionally in 
discussing all such questions and in promoting the most 
important, in our opinion, point of view -- that of the man who 
has invested his money. 
  The second direction that is very important to us is 
education -- increasing the level of awareness of the 
population. It is difficult to defend a person if he has 
invested his money in some sort of doubtful enterprise. Despite 
the fact that they have been deceived thousands of times, our 
people continue to repeat previous mistakes with some sort of 
improbable stubbornness. For example, how many times have we 
talked about that notorious MMM? Articles have even appeared in 
the paper about it. Have you seen what is written on their 
stock? "The MMM closed joint stock company is the owner of ten 
stocks of the MMM open joint stock company." There is a seal and 
two signatures. There is no other information, no last names, 
and no registry number. What relationship a purchaser of this 
stock has to the MMM closed joint stock company is completely 
incomprehensible. But it is quite evident that if the rights of 
these people are violated not a single court will even examine 
the documents. Thus we have a flagrant example of man's 
stupidity, for which we cannot be responsible, of course. In my 
opinion the government also should not be responsible, otherwise 
we will never teach the people. After all, if you play 
"Lotto-million," you do not demand a return of your money if 
your ticket does not win. On the stockmarket, everyone wants to 
achieve the fabulous profits, but no one wishes to be 
responsible for decisions that have not been clearly thought 
out. The stockmarket is always risky, and one must think clearly 
before trusting anyone with one's money. 
  It is in the area of educating the Russian investor that the 
committee has been most active up until now. Over 100 
publications have been published and there have been radio and 
television spots devoted to explaining the basic principles of 
using the stockmarket. For example, we have explained many times 
that money should not be invested in a stock company if there is 
no knowledge of who manages it. Has anyone seen the manager of 
the Neft-Almaz-Invest firm, or members of its administrative 
council, or its chairman? Have they been on television, in the 
newspapers, at meetings of stockholders? After all, if the 
public does not know a single last name, if the representatives 
of a particular company are afraid to look people in the eye, 
one simply should not do business with such a company. Yet our 
people cannot seem to understand this, and "swallow" any 
advertisement. This is why the Committee for Stockholders' 
Rights will continue to steadfastly devote itself to educating 
people in this area while at the same time depending on the 
press, since a well-coordinated campaign on the part of the mass 
media could undoubtedly play a large positive role here. 
  The third important direction we will follow involves the 
collection and analysis of precedents for solving particular 
problems. Again, via the mass media we are prepared to discuss 
instances in which the rights of stockholders have been violated 
and how it was possible to successfully defend these rights. 
This has a very great effect on violators, who naturally would 
prefer to remain unknown. Of interest is a recent case involving 
Novomoskovsk's Novomoskovskbytkhim Joint Stock Company, which 
has among its stockholders the well-known American company, 
Proctor and Gamble, as well as Russian investors such as 
Alfa-Kapital and Derzhava investment funds. Thus, the American 
investor, with 15 percent of the stock and without having 
invested a single dollar as of yet, proposed to the joint stock 
company that it be given the right to veto any decisions that 
are made, even if they are passed by a majority of stockholders. 
Nowhere in the world, including in the U.S., do such practices 
exist. It is incomprehensible why in our market this company 
suddenly decided to attempt this innovation. With immediate 
action on our part we were able to block passage of such a rash 
decision which would have unequivocally violated the rights of 
native investors. 
  The next direction in the activities of the Public Committee 
for Stockholders' Rights is related to providing information 
services to large investors. In particular, we plan to establish 
ratings of regions based on investment attractiveness. We will 
use indicators such as the number of violations of stockholders' 
rights and the presence of a normative base in the region to 
defend such rights. Unfortunately, we now must often struggle 
with local authorities who indulge in protectionism with regard 
to homebred investment companies to the detriment of investors 
"from the outside." Moreover, we plan to become involved in 
making up lists of enterprises, all of the documents of which 
(charter, issuance prospectus) correspond completely to the 
existing laws on the rights of stockholders. 
  [Lidrianov] Doesn't Minfin [Ministry of Finance] carry out 
such work? 
  [Volgin] I do not know of any instance in which the finance 
ministry has demanded that changes be made in the charter of a 
particular joint stock company based on new laws, as required by 
the new State Privatization Program. Thus we will mention those 
joint stock companies that voluntarily alter their documentation 
to fully correspond to the requirements of the law. I think that 
with time this kind of approval by the Committee for 
Stockholders' Rights will be essential for both investors and 
joint stock companies. 
  [Lidrianov] You stated that the government should not become 
involved if the investor allowed himself to be deceived. Yet the 
recent incident involving Tekhnicheskiy Progress Joint Stock 
Company showed that government functionaries think differently. 
  [Volgin] This is a classic example of a government decision 
to compensate investors for losses based strictly on political 
gains. Moreover, the way this was done was fraught with many 
mistakes, which actually amounted to encouragement of the 
foolhardiness demonstrated by many people. From the very 
beginning of operations by Tekhnicheskiy Progress Joint Stock 
Company, we, then simply as directors of an investment fund, 
warned that fraud was clearly obvious. Compensating everything 
and everyone meant creating prerequisites for having such cases 
reoccur and for encouraging new fraud. 
  [Lidrianov] Have any lawsuits been initiated? 
  [Volgin] A lawsuit will begin now. But that is not the 
problem. These people and the money are no longer in the 
country. The fact is that this development of events was 
apparent 4 months before their disappearance. During this time, 
negotiations were carried out and possibilities for avoiding 
scandal were examined. As a result, there was a scandal anyway, 
and many more people suffered. I am afraid that the same thing 
can happen with some investment funds. After all, we know of no 
case of thorough revisions in the operations of any investment 
fund despite the fact that some of them should have interested 
competent organs long ago. 
  [Lidrianov] What advice could you give today to those 
stockholders who cannot obtain any information from their joint 
stock company because they simply cannot find it? 
  [Volgin] Here it is very complicated to give advice because 
no real instruments for proceeding exist. They can turn to the 
tax inspectorate or tax police. But in my opinion these two 
organizations are still very passive. If someone has promised a 
500-percent annual return this means that the budget should 
receive at least 250 percent, and for this reason a tax 
inspector's interest in this company should be aroused. But as 
of now this is not happening. In any case, right now I know of 
no case in which an advertising campaign has been halted because 
of the action of the tax police. 
  I could suggest turning to the office of the public 
prosecutor. It is also obligated to make sure that laws are 
adhered to, but as of now it does not note the majority of cases 
even though many violations have already been discovered in this 
sphere. 
  Of course in our country it is not only the rights of 
stockholders that are violated. But the rank and file find it 
more difficult to understand this sphere, and for this reason a 
particular level of professionalism is required of those who 
protect the rights of investors. 
  [Lidrianov] Thank you, Andrei Aleksandrovich, for the 
interesting discussion. It will clearly bring a great response 
from our readers. In conclusion I would like to turn to all 
those who, for the sake of their own advantage, have forgotten 
the moral principles that are the foundation of any flourishing 
society. What kind of society are you helping to build by 
deceiving your people? After all, you are a member of that 
society! 

