Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Foreign Minister Prasong Sunsiri yesterday welcomed 
Cambodia's call for urgent talks on the two countries' 
overlapping maritime boundary, saying that Thailand has long 
wished to settle the issue through dialogue. Prasong said 
Thailand is ready for talks with Cambodian authorities about the 
unclear land and sea boundary and for beginning joint 
development projects with the country in case an agreement 
cannot be reached on the disputed areas. 
  He was referring to a report that Cambodian Under Secretary 
of State for Industry, Mines and Energy Nheap Bunchin had called 
for urgent dialogue with Thailand over the unclear maritime zone 
following the discovery of local offshore oil in January. 
"Thailand welcomes the call for boundary talks and we hope that 
the countries involved can tackle the matter through dialogue," 
he said. 
  On January 17, a Japanese consortium, Kampek, struck oil in 
the Apsara Field's Block One about 200 km southwest of 
Sihanoukville in the Gulf of Thailand. Bunchin claimed that 
news of the find had sparked a rush of proposals from oil 
explorers. 
  Prasong said the proposed talks will help determine whether 
the oil is in Cambodia's waters or not. 
  Thailand and Cambodia have yet to set up a joint boundary 
committee, usually headed by a deputy foreign minister. 
Cambodia had initially put on the shelf Thailand's proposal for 
setting up the committee. During his official visit to Phnom 
Penh, Prime Minister Chuan Likphai had suggested the two 
countries form a joint boundary committee as a mechanism to deal 
with possible boundary disputes. In a joint communique signed at 
the end of Chuan's visit, the two countries agreed that the 
proposed boundary committee be set up in due course. 
  An informed source meanwhile said Phnom Penh probably lacks 
professional personnel to deal with the complex issues involved 
after two decades of wars, and because it is now in a difficult 
transitional period of reconstruction. 

