Table      of Contents 

   JAPAN:  Economic Trends - Japanese Manufacturers React to Higher 
Prices of Imported Pulp 

   Financial Issues - Securities Industry, MOF Encouraging Asian 
Equity Investment; Nippon Trust Bank:  Introducing New Type of 
Financial Restructuring; FTC To Promulgate Stockholding Guidelines 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - CHINA:  Iwatani International To 
Expand Industrial Gas Production Network; Mikuni, NORINCO Subsidiary 
Establish Motorcycle Carburetor Company 

   VIETNAM:  Keidanren Group Attends Joint Economic Conference; NEC 
To Build Communications System Linking Four Airports 

   Japan-U.S. Trade Issues - Draft of MITI Report on Unfair Foreign 
Trade Practices Revealed; BOJ Governor Mieno's Concern Over 
'Positive' Macroeconomic Policies; Matsunaga Recommends Government 
Change Tactics in Trade Talks 

   Machine Tools/Robotics - FEATURE:  JMTBA Creates New Machine Tool 
Market Forecast Model; Toyo Seimitsu Entering Korean Gear-Cutting- 
Machine Market 

   Semiconductors/Computers/Electronics - FEATURE:  Nikon, Canon 
Dominate World Stepper Market; NEC, Fujitsu To Build Supercomputers 
With CMOS Processors; Cray Research Japan Sells Mini-Supercomputers; 
Hitachi To Market Massively Parallel Processing Supercomputer 

   CHINA:  Domestic Developments - New Regulations Issued on Rural 
Enterprise Income Tax; Sichuan To Focus on Developing Products 
Promising Quick Results; Electronics Industry Output Up 35.4 Percent 
in First Quarter 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - Hong Kong Exports, Re-exports Said 
To Reflect Mainland Economic Slowdown; Hong Kong Firms See 
Opportunity in PRC Funding Cutback; China Credit Squeeze Causes Hong 
Kong Firm To Scale Back, Shift Investment; Hong Kong Executive Sees 
Limited Impact of PRC Land Tax; Guangzhou Closes loo Foreign- 
Invested Firms Breaking Contracts; Fujian Initiates Inspection of 
Foreign-Funded Firms' Contracts; Canadian Telecom Firm Launches 
Five-Year, $130-Million Program; Heilongjiang Imports Tire 
Production Line From Italy; Shandong's Yantai City Reports Foreign 
Investment Projects; Heilongjiang, ROK Jointly Invest in Sanjiang 
Plain; Beijing-Japanese Electronics Joint Venture Established; 
Shenzhen Stock Exchange Now Open to Individual Japanese Investors; 
Malaysian, Singapore Firms Invest in Xiamen Steel Company; Malaysian 
Company, Guangdong Sign Expressway Construction Contract; Swiss 
Pesticide Company Invests in Qingdao Farm Chemicals Joint Venture; 
Taiwan Industrial Village Established in Haikou Development Zone; 
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Sets Up Branch in Alma Ata; 
Beijing Reports Quarterly Statistics on Foreign-Invested 
Enterprises; Fujian Encourages Foreign Businesses To Develop Power 
Projects; Guangdong First-Quarter Industrial Output Increases 21.08 
Percent; PLA-Run Enterprises in Shenzhen Make Profits; Nearly 10,000 
Foreign-Funded Enterprises Operating in Shenzhen; Guilin Liangjiang 
Airport Listed as National Key Project; First Privately Operated 
Airport Begins Operation in Hainan; Hunan To Import 110,000-Set 
Program-Controlled Switchboards; Shanghai Exports Increase 22 
Percent in First Quarter; Jiangsu County Promotes Investment From 
Hong Kong; Hong Kong Bank Shifting Data Processing to Guangdong; 
Hong Kong Manufacturing Sector Continues To Shrink 

   Taiwan:  Cross-Strait Trade Slows in Wake of Boat Incident; 
Budget Frozen for Third Phase of Six-Year Plan Transportation 
Projects; Low Growth of First Quarter Exports 'Surprises' Economic 
Council 

   NORTH KOREA:  Mt. Paektu Development Plan Experiences 
Difficulties 

   SOUTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Cooperation Between Rival Enterprises 
Booming; FEATURE:  KAERI Head Calls For Restructuring ROK's Nuclear 
Industry; KIST Develops Super-Smooth Automated Metal Grinder; 
Corporate Technical Colleges 'Rapidly Increasing'; ROK Chip Makers 
Shifting R&amp;D to Non-Memory Devices; ROK Government Body Facilitating 

Transfer of Advanced U.S. Technology; KTB, SSTC Set Up Joint-Venture 
Consulting Firm in Beijing; Samsung Aerospace Establishes Research 
Center in Moscow; Researchers Develop Scanning Ion Microscope; 
Researchers Develop Semiconductor for Mobile Telephones; Hanil 
Scientists Develop Anti-Cancer Protein; Ssangyong Exports Mini- 
Diesel Generators to Philippines; Second Daewoo Mart Opens in 
Rangoon; Hanil Synthetic Fibers To Operate Plant in Shandong; 
Samsung To Export Mobile Telephone System to Russia; Daelim Receives 
New Overseas Construction Orders 

   SOUTHEAST ASIA - INDONESIA:  Oil Investment Continues Despite 
Falling Prices; Textile Exports Increase; Value Declines; Export, 
Import of Electronic Goods; Two-Way Trade With PRC Increases; 
Taiwanese To Develop Petrochemical Plant; Mitsui Petrochemical To 
Establish Manufacturing Plant; Open Bidding Expected for Power Plant 
Construction 

   LAOS:  Norway Grants Aid for Hydropower Project; Swedish 
Organization Provides Development Loan 

   MALAYSIA:  Trade, Investment With Sri Lanka Noted; NEC Wins Fiber 
Optic Cable Contract 

   PHILIPPINES:  Trade Agreements With Vietnam Signed 

   SINGAPORE:  Japanese Firms To Expand Petrochemical Complex 

   THAILAND:  Car Makers Get Export, Domestic Sales Incentives; 
Minister Comments on Energy Reserves; Burma Buys Electricity for 
Border Town; Firm To Open Cement Plant in Cambodia 

   VIETNAM:  FEATURE:  Mekong Delta Paddy Prices Decline Steadily; 
Foreign Investment Projects Licensed in First Quarter; Prospects for 
Coffee Exports; Sugar Production Down; Imports Authorized; French 
Firm To Build Mill, Export Processed Rice; Peugeot Prepares to Build 
Assembly Plant; Joint Venture With ROK in TV Assembly; Foreign Loans 
Guaranteed by State Banks; Vietcombank Signs Credit Line With Korea 
Eximbank 

   (Pacific Rim Economic Review FBPSP 94-09) 

   JAPAN:  Economic Trends - Japanese Manufacturers React to Higher 
Prices of Imported Pulp -- Major Japanese paper manufacturing 
companies have "voiced their disapproval" over announcements by 
several North American and European pulp companies that pulp export 
prices for May will rise about 13 percent higher than April prices, 
according to the 6 April NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI).  Japanese 
paper companies will most likely "accept the situation" because 
securing raw materials such as pulp is a major priority for them. 

   According to NIKKEI, Japanese paper companies reported that the 
U.S. firms Georgia-Pacific and Stone Container Corporation were the 
first to announce higher prices.  The U.S. firms are raising prices 
on leaf-bleached kraf t pulp to $490 or $500 a ton and on needle- 
bleached kraf t pulp to around $520 a ton.  NIKKEI added that one 
European pulp company, Enso-Gutzeit, has also announced that May 
prices for both types of pulp will be 12 to 13 percent higher than 
April prices. 

   NIKKEI noted that international pulp prices remained at depressed 
levels until late last year, while declining industry profits 
resulted in reduced production levels worldwide.  Since supply has 
fallen to match depressed demand, consumers are rushing to buy pulp 
for fear of rising prices.  This in turn has rapidly pushed market 
prices back up. 

   The 10 April NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN reported that Japanese paper 
manufacturers are "objecting" to the 10 percent price rise for June 
pulp exports announced by major Canadian pulp companies.  According 
to Japanese industry circles, the Harmac Division of Macmillan 
Bloedel and the Avenoir Co., a company spun off from Canadian 
Pacific Forest Products, have announced June prices for needle- 
bleached kraf t pulp of $560 per ton, $50 higher than May prices. 
NIKKEI SANGYO noted that Canadian pulp prices overall have risen 47 
percent since the end of last year. 

   Canadian pulp companies currently account for 40 percent of 
Japan's pulp imports, the highest share among foreign countries, 
according to NIKIEI SANGYO.  Canada has already reduced pulp 
processing activities because of the slump in the pulp market, and 
impending labor strikes in the Canadian paper industry could result 
in higher pulp prices. 

   According to NIKKEI SANGYO, some Japanese industry officials 
believe that higher prices for raw materials such as pulp will push 
up the domestic prices of paper products, although they believe the 
rise will not be as rapid as the increase in pulp prices. 

   Daishowa Paper To Import More Pulp From Canada - Despite the 
higher price of imported pulp, according to the 13 April NIKKEI, 
Daishowa Paper Manufacturing, Japan's second largest paper 
manufacturer, plans to rely on imported pulp from its Canadian joint 
venture company, the Kennel River Pulp Co.  This is because the 
domestic price of pulp is considerably higher even than imported 
pulp and because the high costs of processing have dramatically 
reduced the operational efficiency of Daishowa's Fuji plant, which 
is in Shizuoka Prefecture.  The company will gradually close down 
and eventually sell off the western block of its Fuji plant to 
reduce its debt obligations, as part of a restructuring program 
which was announced in March.  Beginning in June, the company will 
suspend pulp processing activities in the western block, which 
produces medium-grade and dyed paper products.  Daishowa will then 
suspend and transfer paper production operations in the western 
block to another plant. 

   NIKKEI reported that the price gap between imported and domestic 
pulp has widened further with the yen's appreciation.  By importing 
30,000 tons of pulp annually, Daishowa can save an annual 1 billion 
yen ($9.7 million) in total processing costs and 600 million yen 
($5.8 million) annually on the costs of raw materials alone. 

   Financial Issues - Securities Industry, MOF Encouraging Asian 
Equity Investment -- The Japan Securities Dealers Association has 
decided to register China's Shenzhen Stock Exchange as a "designated 
foreign securities exchange," according to the 19 April NIKKEI KINYU 
SHIMBUN.  The move will allow individual Japanese investors to begin 
trading stocks of Chinese state-run companies listed on the Shenzhen 
exchange through Japanese securities companies on Japan's over-the- 
counter market.  The association's decision closely follows a 
similar decision in March to register the Shanghai Stock Exchange as 
the first designated foreign securities exchange in China. 

   Previously, Chinese stocks could be purchased in Japan, but only 
if they were listed on a "designated" exchange in Hong Kong or New 
York, according to the 4 March MAINICHI SHIMBUN.  The move opens the 
way for Chinese state-run companies to list their stocks on domestic 
Japanese exchanges, MAINICHI reported, because the Ministry of 
Finance (MOF) will consider listing Chinese stocks on the Tokyo and 
Osaka exchanges once a performance track record on the over-the- 
counter market has been established.  Designating the Chinese 
exchanges increases opportunities for Japanese investment in Chinese 
equities. 

   On the domestic front, the Tokyo Stock Exchange is considering 
relaxing listing standards on its foreign section to encourage Asian 
firms to list there, according to the 21 April NIKKEI KINYU.  Issues 
the exchange must address include:  revising net asset requirements 
to allow the small-capital Asian firms to list and alleviating the 
cost of submitting Japanese-language documents required for listing, 
such as annual reports.  The amount of time a firm must be listed on 
its home exchange before it can list in Japan is also being 
reconsidered, according to the 5 April NIKKEI KINYU.  To this end, 
the exchange dispatched two teams to Asia in March to study local 
regulations, such as accounting and oversight systems. 

   To facilitate direct Japanese investment in South Korean stocks 
and bonds, the MOF has decided to make an exception to Japan's 
foreign currency exchange controls, according to the 9 April NIHON 
KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI).  Previously it was all but impossible for a 
Japanese investor to trade South Korean stocks directly from Japan 
because of a discrepancy in Japanese and Korean currency exchange 
policies--Japan's policy does not allow direct yen transfers abroad, 
while Korean policy is to allow yen into the country through direct 
transfers.  As a result, direct Japanese investment in South Korea 
has been limited and has always been channeled through a third 
country. 

   The MOF will make an exception by allowing domestic Japanese 
investors who have opened yen-won accounts at Korean banks to send 
funds from an account at a domestic foreign exchange bank to a South 
Korean yen account  through a securities company to clear the funds. 
The MOF will authorize two securities companies with branches in 
Seoul to handle these transactions, and a system is expected to be 
in place for brokering Korean equity investments by the beginning of 
May.  With this MOF initiative, the NIKKEI observed, capital will be 
allowed to flow between the two countries and "the way toward 
investment in South Korea will be opened." 

   Meanwhile, the Nihon Keizai Shimbun Co. has for the first time 
granted a license to a foreign stock exchange which authorizes that 
exchange to list futures and options based on its new Nikkei 300 
Stock Index.  The index is based on 300 representative issues listed 
on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.  The newly licensed foreign exchange, 
the Singapore International Monetary Exchange (SIMEX), will begin 
listing Nikkei 300-based instruments within the next few months, 
according to the 7 April NIKKEI KINYU SHIMBUN.  SIMEX already lists 
futures and options based on the Nikkei 225 Stock Index. 

   In this connection, Tomomitsu Oba, president of the Japan Center 
for International Finance, has been appointed an "outside advisor" 
to SIMEX to enhance the exchange's relationship with the MOF and the 
finance and securities industries in Japan, according to the 31 
March NIKKEI.  Oba was formerly vice minister of finance for 
international affairs and still has strong connections with the MOF 
and financial circles in Japan. 

   Nippon Trust Bank:  Introducing New Type of Financial 
Restructuring -- An analysis in the 21 April NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 
(NIKKEI) reported that Mitsubishi Bank, Japan's fifth largest 
commercial bank, has begun "comprehensive assistance" to Nippon 
Trust Bank, the smallest of Japan's seven trust banks.  It stated 
that the commercial bank's assistance to the trust bank could be the 
harbinger of a new type of financial restructuring because it may 
entail reorganization through one of two new methods in the 1993 
Financial System Reform Law that have not been used to date--a 
merger of a commercial and a trust bank, or having an existing trust 
bank become a subsidiary of a commercial bank. 

   Nippon Trust Bank has been weakened by nonperforming assets that 
amounted to 85.2 billion yen ($811 million) as of the end of 
September 1993 and by "irretrievable assets" that totaled 14 billion 
yen ($133 million) by the end of FY93.  Given the close ties between 
Mitsubishi Bank and Nippon Trust, the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and 
Mitsubishi Bank began deliberating assistance to Nippon Trust late 
in 1993, and came up with a plan that included dispatching 
Mitsubishi personnel to Nippon Trust.  Four consecutive Nippon Trust 
presidents have come from Mitsubishi and Mitsubishi is Nippon 
Trust's second largest stockholder.  Currently, the MOF is 
conducting an audit of Nippon Trust, and an assistance plan will be 
finalized in mid-May. 

   One proposal for assistance that is gaining strength is for 
Mitsubishi to provide Nippon Trust with deposits for an initial 
period, and then, if necessary, make Nippon Trust a subsidiary by 
purchasing additional stock.  A variation on this proposal would 
entail Mitsubishi purchasing new Nippon Trust stock immediately, 
without extending deposit assistance.  Whether Mitsubishi purchases 
Nippon Trust immediately or not will depend upon the results of the 
MOF audit and an agreement between the MOF and Japan's Fair Trade 
Commission. 

   The analysis observed that the Financial System Reform Law, which 
allows banks and securities companies to establish subsidiaries to 
enter financial sectors previously closed to them, enables Nippon 
Trust to restructure by becoming the subsidiary of Mitsubishi Bank, 
and that this will be the first example of this type of 
restructuring.  While commercial banks have been preparing to 
establish trust banking subsidiaries, Mitsubishi is said to have 
cancelled plans to do so since it is in the midst of providing 
assistance to Nippon Trust.  If Mitsubishi were to establish an 
entirely new trust banking subsidiary, as other commercial banks are 
doing, it would not be able to engage in the lucrative pension fund 
business itself.  However, by holding more than 50 percent of Nippon 
Trust's stock, Mitsubishi would control a subsidiary that could 
engage in the full range of trust banking operations, including 
pension fund management. 

   The NIKKEI analysis observed that Mitsubishi's approach could 
spawn a restructuring of Japan's beleaguered financial system that 
breaks down barriers between commercial, trust, and other financial 
operations and could "influence future strategies of commercial 
banks" as they prepare to establish trust subsidiaries. 

   FTC To Promulgate Stockholding Guidelines -- Japan's Fair Trade 
Commission (FTC) is currently devising criteria for screening the 
amount of stock a bank can hold in another company.  Under the 
Antimonopoly Law, a financial institution cannot hold more than 5 
percent of another company's stock, and must obtain FTC approval to 
hold a higher percentage.  Banks and financial institutions are 
urging the FTC to disclose its criteria for permitting stockholding 
in excess of 5 percent as they prepare to establish trust and 
securities subsidiaries in diversifying their operations. The FTC 
has decided to clarify these standards and will announce them in the 
summer of 1994. 

   As a rule, the FTC will allow banks to hold stock in excess of 5 
percent when it determines that no concerns exist that the financial 
or other markets will be "dominated" by them.  Specifically, it will 
disclose its criteria for such authorizations when a financial 
institution establishes a subsidiary either to enter a completely 
separate financial sector or conduct business that is ancillary to 
its core lending business, such as branch management or electronic 
clearing systems.  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 15 Apr 94 p 7) 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - CHINA:  Iwatani International To 
Expand Industrial Gas Production Network -- Iwatani International, 
Japan's largest LPG dealer, and the Shanghai Petrochemical 
Industrial Co., China's largest producer of industrial gases, will 
establish a joint venture company in Shanghai to produce carbon 
monoxide and propane.  The new company, Shanghai Petrochemical 
Iwatani Gas Development Co. Ltd., will be capitalized at $3.59 
million, with Iwatani International and Shanghai Petrochemical each 
contributing 40 percent and Iwatani Gas and Shanghai Jindong 
Petrochemical Industrial Development Co., a subsidiary of Shanghai 
Petrochemical, each investing 10 percent.  The joint venture company 
will build a plant in Shanghai by the summer of 1995 with a 
production capacity of 3,600 tons of propane and 30,000 tons of 
carbon monoxide annually, making it China's largest manufacturer of 
carbon monoxide. The carbon monoxide will be used to refrigerate 
food and the propane sold for household use. 

   Iwatani has also decided to form joint ventures in Daqing, 
Heilongjiang Province, and Shenyang, Liaoning Province to produce 
industrial gases. It hopes to build a gas production network with 
annual sales of 20 billion yen ($190 million) by the year 2000. 
(Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 9 Apr 94 p 9) 

   Mikuni, NORINCO Subsidiary Establish Motorcycle Carburetor 
Company -- Mikuni, an independent carburetor manufacturer, has 
signed an agreement with the Southwest Optical Instrument Factory, a 
precision instrument company belonging to the arms manufacturing 
conglomerate China North Industries Group (NORINCO), establishing a 
joint venture company to produce and market motorcycle carburetors. 
The joint venture firm, Sanguohong Optical Industry Co. Ltd., will 
be located in Chengdu, Sichuan Province, and will be capitalized at 
$8.6 million, with Mikuni investing 55 percent and Southwest Optical 
45 percent.  This is the first time a Japanese company has invested 
over 50 percent in an "automobile related" joint venture in China. 

   Total initial investment will be $20.5 million.  A new plant will 
be completed in mid-1995, and should begin operations in 1996 with 
about 60 employees producing 750,000 carburetors valued at 2 billion 
yen ($19 million) in the initial fiscal year. Plans are for the 
workforce to expand to 400 and production to increase to 1.5 million 
carburetors valued at 4 billion yen ($38 million) annually by the 
year 2000. 

   Southwest Optical already makes automobile and motorcycle 
carburetors for Honda Motor, Yamaha Motor, and Suzuki using 
production technology provided by Mikuni in 1992.  (Tokyo NIKKEI 
SANGYO SHIMBUN 18 Apr 94 p 11) 

   VIETNAM:  Keidanren Group Attends Joint Economic Conference -- On 
6 April a Japan Federation of Economic Organizations (Keidanren) 
delegation attended the second "Japan-Vietnam Joint Economic 
Conference" held in Ho Chi Minh City, according to the 7 April NIHON 
KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI).  The delegation, consisting of 117 
officials representing 60 corporations, was headed by Akira Nishio, 
chairman of Keidanren's Japan-Vietnam Economic Committee and 
president of the general trading company Nissho Iwai.  The 
Vietnamese delegation of 140 government and business leaders was 
headed by Deputy Prime Minister Tran Duc Luong, and included Do Quoc 
Sam, chairman of the State Planning Committee. 

   The aim of the Japanese side was to urge Vietnam to improve its 
investment climate so as to promote Japanese investment, NIKKEI 
observed.  Do Quoc Sam requested expanded Japanese investment, to 
which Chairman Nishio replied: "The reason for the small size of 
Japanese investment is due to problems in Vietnam's business 
climate." 

   In the conference proceedings, Keidanren reportedly spelled out 
improvements that must be made in five areas of Vietnam's economy in 
order to increase Japanese investment: 1) improvements in 
electricity supply, transport, communications, and other areas of 
the infrastructure; 2) improved commercial laws and development of 
the country's financial and capital markets; 3) simplified 
administrative procedures and making government approval and 
supervision standards more precise; 4) revealing information 
concerning the management situation of Vietnamese joint venture 
partners; and 5) improving macroeconomic statistics. 

   According to the 6 April ASAHI SHIMBUN, Nishio and the Keidanren 
delegation paid a call on Do Muoi, general secretary of the 
Communist Party of Vietnam, on 5 April in Hanoi.  Do Muoi 
specifically requested Japanese investment in Vietnam's machinery 
industry, the transfer of advanced Japanese technology, and the 
provision of business management know-how.  Nishio replied: "Japan's 
investment in Vietnam lags behind that of other countries, but Japan 
will be the largest investor." 

   The third joint conference will be held in Tokyo in 1995, NIKKEI 
reported. 

   NEC To Build Communications System Linking Four Airports -- NEC, 
a major manufacturer of communications equipment, has won a $1.9 
million contract from the Vietnamese Government to build a dedicated 
communications system linking Vietnam's four major airports. 
Kanematsu, a general trading company, will be the main contractor 
for the project.  NEC beat out France's Alcatel and other 
"influential" telecommunications companies in winning the contract. 

   The project will link Vietnam's four major airports--Hanoi (Noi 
Bai), Qui Nhon, Da Nang, and Ho Chi Minh City (Tan Son Nhat)--by 
installing two-way voice and data links for air traffic control via 
Indonesia's Palapa satellite.  The system will also incorporate low- 
noise amplifiers, ground communications equipment, multiplex 
equipment, and a command and control system. 

   Building on this contract, NEC will attempt to win other 
contracts in Vietnam as the country develops its transportation and 
communications infrastructure.  In the past, European firms such as 
Alcatel were strongest in Vietnam's telecommunications sector, but 
NEC has taken various steps, including opening a resident office in 
Hanoi, to develop business in Vietnam.  Two particular areas NEC 
will target are supplying PBX equipment and fiber optic 
communications systems.  (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 18 Mar 94 p 11) 

   Japan-U.S. Trade Issues - Draft of MITI Report on Unfair Foreign 
Trade Practices Revealed -- The 1 April NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 
(NIKKEI) has reported on the contents of the draft of the Ministry 
of International Trade and Industry (MITI) FY94 Report on Unfair 
Foreign Trade Practices, which is Japan's counterpart to the United 
States Trade Representative's (USTR's) annual report on foreign 
trade barriers.  The draft report was prepared by MITI's Industrial 
Structure Council.  The final report is due in May.  According to 
NIKKEI, the draft classifies the unfair trade practices and policies 
of Japan's major trade partners into thirteen categories, such as 
quantitative import restrictions, anti-dumping measures, and export 
subsidies.  The draft cited the United States as having unfair trade 
practices and policies in nine categories, South Korea in five, and 
the European Union (EU) in four.  According to NIKKEI, the 
Industrial Structure Council judged the "unfairness" of specific 
trade practices based on the agreement resulting from the GATT 
Uruguay Round negotiations and "basic principles of international 
law." 

   According to NIKKEI, the draft emphasized problems associated 
with U.S. trade policies, such as unilateral actions, "abuse of 
anti-dumping measures," and "buy-American policies" in government 
procurement.  In particular, the draft "strongly criticized" 
reinstitution of the Super 301 provision in the U.S. Omnibus Trade 
Law and the financial retaliation bill currently being debated in 
Congress.  The draft went on to criticize the U.S. practice of 
demanding that its trade partners set numerical import targets for 
lacking "economic rationality and violating the spirit of the GATT." 

   According to the 5 April YOMIURI SHIMBUN, MITI has decided to 
include in the FY94 Report on Foreign Unfair Trade Practices the 
U.S. Government's practice of using the multinational corporation 
clause of the U.S. Customs Law to charge foreign firms with dumping. 
The decision was in reaction to the U.S. Department of Commerce's 
(DOC's) recent charge that the Dutch subsidiary of Japan's Fuji 
Photo Film was dumping color photo paper on the U.S. market. 
According to YOMIURI, the DOC cited the multinational corporation 
clause as its rationale for using the production cost of Fuji Photo 
Film in Japan rather than that of the company's subsidiary in the 
Netherlands in imposing a high tariff rate of 321.23 percent on the 
Dutch subsidiary's shipments to the United States. 

   The 1 April NIKKEI added that the draft urged the Japanese 
Government to utilize GATT, or its successor, the World Trade 
Organization, to counter U.S. unilateral actions and numerical 
targets.  To prevent the United States from resorting to such trade 
measures or policies, the draft also urged the Japanese Government 
to make its own procurement process transparent, remove nontariff 
barriers, and promote further deregulation in Japan. 

   Concerning China and Taiwan, which are preparing to join GATT, 
NIKKEI reported that the draft requests China to make its trade 
systems and laws "internally consistent and transparent" and to 
lower tariff rates and quantitative import restrictions.  The draft 
requests Taiwan to lower tariff rates and to reduce its export 
subsidies. 

   BOJ Governor Mieno's Concern Over 'Positive' Macroeconomic 
Policies -- In a speech at the Foreign Correspondents Club of Japan 
on 19 April, Bank of Japan (BOJ) Governor Yasushi Mieno expressed 
concern that pressure to reduce Japan's large current account 
surplus may lead the Japanese Government to adopt looser 
macroeconomic policies, in particular, a more expansive fiscal 
policy and a more relaxed monetary policy, according to the 20 April 
ASAHI SHIMBUN.  Mieno argued that because Japan's large current 
account surplus is a "reflection of the high saving rates" of the 
Japanese people, "macroeconomic policies alone cannot reduce the 
surplus."  Instead, Mieno continued, "overly positive" macroeconomic 
policies tend to "cause inflation."  He also said that adoption of 
"short-sighted" means, such as increased government spending or a 
lower official discount rate, is a "very questionable approach" to 
reducing Japan's surplus. 

   The 20 April YOMIURI SHIMBUN reported that, in his speech, Mieno 
rebutted foreign criticism that Japan's large current account 
surplus is bad for the world by stating that a current account 
surplus or deficit had "nothing to do with virtue or vice."  Mieno 
stated that the important factor is whether a "country with a 
current account deficit can control its cash flow and eliminate its 
deficit based on a rational repayment schedule."  Mieno cited the 
example of some East Asian countries to show how Japan's surplus has 
been constructive.  He said that those East Asian countries which 
have had current account deficits imported Japanese capital in the 
1980's to promote investment and technical innovation and have been 
able to continue developing their economies in the 1990's. 

   Mieno concluded it will be difficult to reduce Japan's current 
account surplus in a short time period, according to the ASAHI 
article.  Mieno stated that "steady" efforts, such as "proper 
management of macroeconomic policies, improving market access, 
deregulation, and improving infrastructure," were needed to reduce 
Japan's surplus, even though such efforts might take a long time to 
produce results. 

   Matsunaga Recommends Government Change Tactics in Trade Talks -- 
In recent comments, a prominent Japanese official has urged Japan to 
take a more proactive approach in working out its trade differences 
with the United States.  Speaking at the Asia Institute, a private 
research organization he heads, on 20 April, Nobuo Matsunaga, the 
Japanese Government Representative for External Economic Affairs and 
former ambassador to the United States, urged the Japanese 
Government to "change its tactics to take the initiative to persuade 
the United States of Japan's positions," rather than responding to 
the United States in the Japan-U.S. framework talks, according to 
the 21 April ASAHI SHIMBUN.  Matsunaga emphasized voluntary efforts 
on Japan's part to open its markets and reduce its trade surplus 
with the United States.  Specifically, according to ASAHI, he urged 
the government to include "solid" economic structural reform plans 
and market opening measures in the package it plans to announce by 
the end of June.  Matsunaga visited Washington in early April to 
meet United States Trade Representative (USTR) Mickey Kantor, 
National Economic Council Chairman Robert Rub in, and National 
Security Council Chairman Anthony Lake to informally explore ways to 
reopen the framework talks. 

   According to the 21 April MAINICHI SHIMBUN, Matsunaga attributed 
the breakdown of the framework talks in February, at least in part, 
to "misjudgment" on the part of the Japanese Government.  According 
to Matsunaga, the Japanese Government "judged that the U.S. 
Government in the end would favorably evaluate the Japanese 
Government's efforts to resolve trade frictions with the United 
States," and did not actively try to persuade the United States of 
Japan's positions. 

   Regarding U.S. strategies in the framework talks, Matsunaga 
provided his assessment that the U.S. Government is "shifting the 
focus of the framework talks from sector-specific issues to 
macroeconomic policies," according to the 21 April YOMIURI SHIMBUN. 
To support his assessment, Matsunaga quoted USTR Kantor as saying 
that Japan-U.S. relations would "not escape gridlock unless Japan 
takes macroeconomic measures and sustains economic growth led by 
domestic demand."  The paper reported that Matsunaga added that it 
was his perception that U.S. negotiation strategies had been "firmed 
up to center on macroeconomic policies."  According to Matsunaga, 
USTR Kantor told him that "sector-specific issues must be resolved, 
but that negotiations on macroeconomic policies were most 
important." 

   The 21 April SANKEI SHIMBUN also reported that based on USTR 
Kantor's remarks, Matsunaga urged the Japanese Government to include 
income tax cuts and additional public works spending in the June 
package of economic structural reform plans and market opening 
measures.  Matsunaga implied that Japan "needs to make concessions" 
in the macroeconomic realm in order to resolve the framework talks 
successfully without committing to numerical targets.  He said 
"Japan should reject numerical targets, but rejection alone could 
not conclude diplomatic negotiations."  At the same time, Matsunaga 
also expressed his concern that the new government may not have 
enough time to formulate macroeconomic policies centering on income 
tax cuts and additional public works.  Matsunaga pointed out that 
the new government must first deliberate and pass the overdue FY94 
budget bill. 

   Machine Tools/Robotics - FEATURE:  JMTBA Creates New Machine Tool 
Market Forecast Model -- SUMMARY:  The Japan Machine Tool Builders' 
Association (JMTBA) has created a mid-range market forecasting model 
for machine tools to measure progress in reforming the industry's 
"supply and demand structure," according to press reports.  The 
JMTBA's other forecasting model, the machine tool recapitalization- 
cycle model, indicates that domestic demand will double in 1994, a 
trend not supported so far this year by actual market data. 

   According to the 25 March NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN, the JMTBA has 
compiled a five-year forecast for machine tool orders to serve as an 
index for gauging progress in "reforming supply and demand" in the 
machine tool industry.  Data for this model comes from intermediate 
range economic forecasts by the Nomura Research Institute, the 
Research Institute on the National Economy, Mitsubishi Research 
Institute, as well from private capital investment and mining and 
manufacturing indices.  The 25 March NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN added 
that the forecast uses theoretical macroeconomic values from a 
multiple regression analysis model to establish the upper limit of 
domestic demand, and then subtracts the standard deviation from 
these values to obtain the lower limit. 

   According to NIKAAN KOGYO, the model projects that domestic 
machine tool demand will increase between 5.0 and 80.3 percent, or 
between 341.1 billion yen ($3.25 billion) and 585.9 billion yen 
($5.58 billion) in 1994, and to between 522.1 billion yen ($4.97 
billion) and 800 billion yen ($7.62 billion) by 1997.  For the five- 
year period 1993-1997, cumulative domestic demand is forecast to be 
2.1278 trillion yen ($20.26 billion).  To reach this total, yearly 
averages must be between 425.6 billion yen ($4.05 billion) and 611.5 
billion yen ($5.82 billion). 

   NIKKEI SANGYO contrasted these figures with projections using the 
JMTBA's machine tool recapitalization-cycle model, which assumes a 
replacement period of 8.5 years.  This model predicts that domestic 
demand--production minus exports and adding imports--will double 
from the 1993 level of 311 billion yen ($2.962 billion) to 631.9 
billion yen ($6.02 billion) in 1994 and reach 774.1 billion ($7.372 
billion) in 1997.  JMTBA-compiled figures, however, show that 
domestic orders were down 28 percent and 24 percent in January and 
February 1994, respectively, and in the industry the prevailing 
opinion is "the first half of 1994 will be about the same as the 
second half of 1993, with orders finally picking up a little in the 
second half." 

   Toyo Seimitsu Entering Korean Gear-Cutting-Machine Market -- Toyo 
Seimitsu Kogyo, a machine tool and auto parts manufacturer 
affiliated with the Toyota Motor Group, has signed a contract with 
the U-Sin Machine Industry Company, a machinery manufacturer in the 
Hyundai Group that specializes in hypoid-gear-cutting machines, to 
provide it with Toyo Seimitsu's manufacturing technology for gear 
tooth chamfering machines.  U-Sin will use this technology to 
manufacture chamfering machines for Hyundai Motor Company.  Toyo 
Seimitsu will also hold technical exchange meetings with Korean auto 
companies. 

   Toyo Seimitsu decided to expand into the Korean market, where 
auto sales are spurring capital investment, because its high 
reliance on the domestic market caused it to be hit hard by the 
slump in domestic auto sales.  However, because the U.S. company 
Gleason Corporation has a large share of the Korean gear-cutting- 
machine market, Toyo Seimitsu chose to begin by providing technology 
to U-Sin and holding technical exchange meetings with Korean auto 
companies, such as Hyundai Motor and Daewoo Motors.  Toyo Seimitsu 
hopes to use these meetings to stimulate deeper technical 
cooperation and gain good "PR" for its technology.  The first 
technical exchange meeting was held in Korea and the second meeting 
is scheduled to be held this fall in Japan in conjunction with the 
Japan Machine Tool Exhibition.  (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 14 Apr 
94 p 13) 

   Semiconductors/Computers/Electronics - FEATURE:  Nikon, Canon 
Dominate World Stepper Market -- SUMMARY:  Nikon Corp. and Canon 
Inc., which together control 90 percent of the world's market for 
stepper equipment used to manufacture semiconductors and liquid 
crystal displays (LCDs), are strengthening their technological 
domination of the industry, according to media reports.  In the race 
to develop next-generation steppers, however, one competitor could 
be Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., which has developed an 
excimer laser stepper it feels is more efficient than similar 
steppers developed by Nikon and Canon. 

   Two Firms Dominate 'Critical' Stepper Market -- Nikon and Canon 
control nearly 90 percent of the 100 billion yen ($1 billion) annual 
world market for stepper lithography equipment, according to the 30 
March NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI).  Nikon has about a 70 percent 
share of Japan's market and Canon the remainder.  According to the 
12 February NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN, steppers, used to print circuit 
patterns on silicon wafers, are "critical" to the manufacture of 
semiconductors and LCDs.  For the most part, semiconductor 
manufacturers currently use "i-line" steppers to produce 4, 16, and- 
-soon--64 megabit (M) dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) chips. 

   The 16 March NIKKAN K0GYO SHIMBUN stated that the stepper market 
in reality is an "oligopoly" of Nikon and Canon.  The paper 
explained that the cost of stepper development has mushroomed while 
economic recession has hit the semiconductor manufacturing equipment 
industry particularly hard.  Until last year Hitachi was the only 
Japanese semiconductor manufacturer to also produce and sell 
steppers, but it had to "withdraw" from stepper operations because 
it could not make a profit.  (For reporting on Hitachi ending its 
stepper production, see the 31 June 1993 Pacific Rim Economic 
Review, Vol 2, No 13, page 15.)  According to NIKKAN KOGYO, this has 
left the domestic market "monopolized" by Nikon and Canon and has 
made it "very difficult" for new entrants. 

   In addition, there is little international competition.  The 16 
February NIKKEI SANGYO reported that an American firm, GCA, which 
was a leading stepper maker in the 1980s, dropped out of the market 
last year.  Further, the 16 February NIKAAN KOGYO reported that the 
only remaining U.S. manufacturer, SVG Lithography Systems (SVGL), 
has agreed to sell Canon the rights to manufacture and sell its most 
advanced equipment in Japan.  According to the paper, SVGL could no 
longer cope with its huge research and capital investment costs, so 
it approached Canon for a deal that also includes joint research and 
development.  This agreement occurred despite SVGL's membership in 
Sematech, the U.S. Government-sponsored consortium that helped SVGL 
develop its technology, NIKKAN KOGYO observed. 

   Recovering Demand Boosting Stepper Sales -- The 30 March NIKKEI 
reported that Nikon and Canon will greatly expand stepper production 
in FY94.  Demand has been brisk in the United States and South 
Korea, and it appears to be recovering in Japan.  In FY93 Nikon 
registered an 80 percent increase in stepper sales to more than 350 
units, of which 215 were for LCD production.  According to NIKKEI, 
this was Nikon's first sales increase in five years, and its Kumaga 
plant in Saitama Prefecture has been running at "full capacity" 
since last summer.  Nikon expects a 20 percent sales increase in 
FY94 to over 420 steppers, of which over 60 percent will be 
exported. 

   According to NIKKEI, Canon has not revealed the number of 
steppers sold in FY93, but its Utsunomiya plant in Tochigi 
Prefecture is also running at full capacity and Canon is projecting 
increased sales of between 50 to 60 percent in FY94.  Due to 
"delivery lead times" of between six to eight months for steppers, 
Canon's sales plans "for the most part" have been set until 
December, with nearly 70 percent destined for export, NIKKEI stated. 

   Taking Steps To Mitigate Next Downturn -- Despite increases in 
FY93 and expectations of higher sales in FY94, both Nikon and Canon 
are taking steps to protect themselves from the "ups and downs of 
the silicon cycle," in which stepper demand "crashes" until the 
semiconductor companies are ready to invest in the production of 
next-generation chips, the 21 February NIKAAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 
reported.  "To maintain cash flow stability and operational 
continuity," Nikon and Canon are preparing to offer stepper "make- 
over" services which will allow semiconductor makers to upgrade 
steppers already in use on production lines.  Thus, the paper 
stated, the two firms will have a source of regular income during 
the "down" years in the silicon cycle, while semiconductor makers 
will be able to improve "investment efficiency." 

   According to NIKI&amp;AN KOGYO, Nikon plans to begin its "function 
upgrade operations" this autumn.  The company plans to create a menu 
of over 20 "services" it can perform on a variety of models, such as 
revising the stepper's management software, reducing exposure 
irregularities, and speeding up reticle alignment.  The paper 
reported that Nikon has sold over 3,000 steppers, nearly all of 
which can be "targeted" for upgrade.  Consequently, Nikon hopes to 
earn over 3 billion yen ($28.5 million) from upgrade services in 
FY94. 

   Canon is also preparing to offer similar upgrade services as part 
of its sales-and-service contracts, according to NIKKAN KOGYO. 
Previously, service contracts were merely a guarantee to fix 
problems, but now Canon plans to include a menu of upgradable 
functions for existing steppers.  A Canon official stated that their 
service menu options should be comparable to Nikon's upgrade 
services. 

   Moving Fast To Remain Technologically Competitive -- Since i-line 
steppers have nearly reached their technological limit, Nikon and 
Canon are moving quickly to develop new stepper technologies.  The 
12 February NIKKEI SANGYO reported that the miniaturization of 
semiconductors is proceeding rapidly, so it is "crucial" for Nikon 
and Canon to introduce new technologies as soon as possible to 
remain competitive. 

   According to the February 1994 issue of NIKKEI MICRODEVICES, 
Nikon has developed and is preparing to market a krypton-fluoride 
(KrF) excimer laser stepper that can print circuit patterns at a 
width of 0.32 microns, which is suitable for mass producing 64M 
DRAMs.  The magazine reported that Nikon's "NSR-2005EX10B" stepper 
might also be used to produce 256M DRAMs if its resolution is 
increased by the "SHRINC" illumination-modification method.  Nikon 
hopes the machines will be used to produce the "second generation" 
of 64M DRAMs, but according to NIKKEI MICRODEVICES, some 
semiconductor makers complain that the price--between 400 and 450 
million yen ($3.9 and $4.3 million)--is too high compared to current 
i-line steppers, which are 30 to 50 percent cheaper. 

   Another article in the same issue of NIKKEI MICRODEVICES reported 
that Canon has delayed the commercialization of its "advanced KrF 
stepper."  The firm would not comment on the reason for the 
postponement, but instead revealed its pending agreement with SVGL 
to develop "mirror-scan" steppers that use reflections from mirrors 
to form circuit patterns.  According to the 16 February NIKKAN 
KOGYO, Canon has already developed a stepper that can be used to 
produce 64M DRAMs, but the company has decided that SVGL's mirror- 
scan stepper could become the principal stepper used in 256M DRAM 
production.  In addition to its ability to print extremely minute 
circuit patterns, SVGL's stepper can be used on larger sized wafers 
that are expected to be used in production soon.  In Japan this 
stepper will sell for 450 million yen ($4.3 million). 

   MEIC Plans To Market New Excimer Stepper Laser -- A great deal of 
research and development is still required for equipment to mass 
produce 256M DRAM chips and even more advanced chips, according to 
the 12 February NIKKEI SANGYO.  Thus, it is not clear which stepper 
technology will emerge as the "mainstream."  One new competitor 
could be Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. (MEIC), one of the core 
companies of the Matsushita Group, according to the 16 March NIKKAN 
KOGYO.  MEIC plans to enter the market for KrF excimer laser 
steppers that will be used to produce 256M DRAMs.  On 15 March, the 
group's research subsidiary, Matsushita Giken, announced that its 
Osaka Semiconductor Research Center bad completed development of a 
KrF excimer laser stepper capable of printing circuit patterns as 
narrow as 0.25 microns.  While Nikon and Canon purchase their 
excimer lasers from a U.S. firm, Cymer Laser Technologies Corp., 
Matsushita Giken claims that its internally developed lasers have 
greater stability and a longer life span, the paper reported. 
NIKKAN KOGYO observed that MEIC's stepper could pose a threat to 
Nikon's and Canon's hold on the market.  It quotes an industry 
analyst as saying that if MEIC does sell steppers outside the 
Matsushita Group, it could "blow a hole" in Nikon and Canon's 
monopoly. 

   NEC, Fujitsu To Build Supercomputers With CMOS Processors -- NEC 
Corp. and Fujitsu Ltd. are making "drastic" changes in the basic 
design of their supercomputers.  As a result of corporate downsizing 
efforts, both companies have decided to build new supercomputers 
with "inexpensive" complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) 
processing chips that will be compatible with existing equipment and 
software.  NEC and Fujitsu expect this move alone to improve cost 
efficiency by more than five times.  Both firms plan to introduce 
next generation machines based on the new designs by mid-1995. 

   NEC and Fujitsu are changing their designs because they realized 
that their current supercomputers which use bipolar-based processors 
cannot compete with U.S.-made parallel processing supercomputers 
with RISC-based processors and extremely efficient UNIX servers. 
Consequently, both firms are developing new parallel processing 
supercomputers loaded with "dozens" of CMOS processors.  CMOS chips 
are attractive because they can be made to be both small in size and 
energy-efficient, while their development and manufacturing costs 
can be tightly controlled. 

   NEC will load CMOS processors on all succeeding models of its 
current SX-3R series supercomputer.  Using the "close coupling 
method," NEC will be able to load up to 32 CMOS processors for a 
maximum vector processing speed of 2 billion floating point 
operations per second.  Fujitsu will load CMOS processors on all its 
lower- and middle-end VPP5OO series supercomputers, but will 
continue to equip its higher-end VPP500s with gallium arsenide 
large-scale integrated circuits.  (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 1 Apr 
94 p 1) 

   Cray Research Japan Sells Mini-Supercomputers -- Taisho 
Pharmaceutical Co.--Cray Research Japan has delivered an EL92 mini- 
supercomputer to Taisho Pharmaceuticals.  It is the first Cray 
supercomputer ordered by a Japanese pharmaceutical company.  Taisho 
will use the supercomputer as a high-speed server in the research 
and development of new drugs at its general research center in Omiya 
City, Saitama Prefecture. 

   At the low-end of Cray's supercomputer series, the EL92 system 
delivered to Taisho has two processors, each capable of running at 
133 million floating point operations per second, and possesses a 
512-megabyte memory capacity.  The value of the order was not 
revealed, but base EL92's usually sell for about 33.5 million yen 
($320,000).  (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 14 Apr 94 p 8) 

   Chiba University--Cray Research Japan won a bid from Chiba 
University for a computer education system that includes eight EL92 
mini-supercomputers.  Canon Sales and Cannon Supercomputing S.I. 
were co-bidders with Cray.  The contract is worth about 500 million 
yen ($4.75 million) and will be paid with funds from the Japanese 
Government's second FY93 supplemental budget. 

   The university is in the process of building a new computer 
system and by FY95 plans to require all 2,800 incoming freshmen to 
take a course in computers and information processing.  This is the 
first time Cray supercomputers will be used in a university-based 
"information processing" education system.  The order includes eight 
EL92 mini-supercomputers, one CS640O UNIX-based computer for 
information management, and 211 terminals.  (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI 
SHIMBUN 14 Apr 94 p 12) 

   Hitachi To Market Massively Parallel Processing Supercomputer -- 
Hitachi is planning to introduce a massively parallel processing 
(MPP) supercomputer equipped with "general purpose" reduced 
instruction set computer (RISC) processors by mid-1995.  The new 
supercomputer will meet the growing need for faster processing 
speeds while improving cost efficiency "well above" existing models. 
Although U.S. firms lead the field of MPP supercomputers, Fujitsu 
and NEC are close behind.  With Hitachi's entry into the market, 
competition should intensify. 
   The company plans to market an MPP supercomputer that will 
contain more than 1,000 Hewlett-Packard PA-RISC processors and can 
achieve operating speeds of 300 billion floating point operations 
per second, a ten-fold increase over the firm's current S-3000 
series supercomputers. 

   Hitachi also plans to commercialize a mini-supercomputer equipped 
with 128 PA-RISC processors and a parallel processing mainframe 
computer holding up to 128 CMOS processors.  These developments are 
a part of the firm's plans to "rapidly expand" its range of parallel 
processing computers to meet both scientific and business needs. 
(Tokyo NIKAAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 14 Apr 94 p 8) 

   CHINA:  Domestic Developments - New Regulations Issued on Rural 
Enterprise Income Tax -- The State General Administration of 
Taxation has issued new rules regarding rural enterprise income tax. 
Income tax on new rural enterprises will be reduced or remitted for 
one year.  New enterprises that engage in feed production or 
processing are exempt from income tax for three years.  Rural 
enterprise income tax will be calculated based on an eight-grade 
progressive tax rate.  Income from sales of rural enterprises 
engaged in feed processing and income from electric power sales by 
small hydropower stations are exempt from income tax.  Enterprises 
that produce products directly serving the fertilizer or pesticide 
industry are exempt from income tax for three years.  (Harbin 
HEILONGJIANG RIBAO 24 Mar 94 p 8) 

   Sichuan To Focus on Developing Products Promising Quick Results 
-- In the next four years, Sichuan will focus its efforts on 
developing eight major competitive products, including steel 
products, color television sets, videocassette recorders, and 
telecommunications equipment, which require more extensive use of 
technology and promise quick results and which will generate one 
billion yuan or more in profits and taxes on a total sales income of 
over 10 billion yuan.  The provincial party committee and government 
have decided that the provincial plan will emphasize the use of 
technological transformation loans of various financial institutions 
to develop such products.  Efforts should be made to attract more 
foreign investment to develop these products, and the establishment 
of processing factories and shops for such products overseas is 
encouraged.  (Chengdu Sichuan People's Radio Network 1100 GMT 14 Apr 
1994) 

   Electronics Industry Output Up 35.4 Percent in First Quarter -- 
Electronics industry output reached $4.1 billion in the first 
quarter, up 35.4 percent over last year, while sales rose 38.5 
percent to $3.2 billion, according to the Ministry of Electronics 
Industry.  In 1993 expansion was 26.4 percent.  Consumer electronics 
products output, stimulated by booming sales, rose 27 percent, and 
product investment rose by 21.5 percent.  In January and February 
output of color televisions rose 77.8 percent to 1.6 million, while 
output of videocassette recorders and radio and tape recorders 
increased by 35.7 and 15.6 percent respectively.  Foreign-funded 
enterprises grew 75.7 percent, exceeding state firms' 28.2 percent 
gain.  However, there are some problems that may have negative 
consequences.  Many businesses are short of capital.  Costs are 
rising, mostly caused by more expensive imported components and 
devaluation of the yuan.  The new tax system has placed a heavier 
burden on most electronics enterprises, and the number of 
enterprises in the red is rising.  (Beijing CHINA DAILY 26 Apr 94 p 
2) 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - Hong Kong Exports, Re-exports Said 
To Reflect Mainland Economic Slowdown -- Re-exports rose 12 percent 
to HK$71.1 billion last month, compared with March last year, 
government statistics show, but over the same period, the trade 
deficit rose more than HK$3 billion to HK$9.2 billion.  Domestic 
exports fell HK$1.4 billion, or 8.2 percent, to HK$15.9 billion 
during the month.  Total exports--re-exports and domestic exports- 
-increased HK$6.2 billion, or 7.7 percent, to HK$87.1 billion. 
Economists attribute the decline in domestic exports chiefly to the 
slowdown in the mainland economy.  Hong Kong Bank economic adviser 
Jim Wong said:  "These results are continuing the trend we have seen 
since the fourth quarter.  China's export performance in January and 
February was not very good and there was a time lag before it 
influenced Hong Kong's domestic exports.  We have seen a major 
slowdown in exports to China."  Domestic exports to China dropped 14 
percent during the first two months of this year compared with the 
same period last year.  The rate of increase in China's trade also 
slowed during the period.  In U.S. dollar terms, trade rose 19.2 
percent in the fourth quarter of last year compared with only 16.9 
percent in the first two months of this year.  (Hong Kong SOUTH 
CHINA MORNING POST (BUSINESS POST) 29 Apr 94 p 1) 

   Hong Kong Firms See Opportunity in PRC Funding Cutback -- 
According to a report by Peggy Sito, "China's decision to stop 
injecting capital into struggling mainland businesses" has opened up 
a "treasure chest of bargains" for Hong Kong-listed companies, which 
have been the first to spot buying opportunities.  Nick Ni, 
economist and associate director at stockbroker Nomura International 
(Hong Kong), said state companies had been actively courting funds 
from overseas firms as well as Hong Kong-listed, China-funded firms 
to make up a funding shortfall caused by Beijing's latest clampdown 
on bank lending.  Zhaoyuan Electronic Materials in Shandong was 
saved from bankruptcy when China Merchants' investment fund stepped 
in to form a $23.5-million joint venture.  Guangdong Enterprises has 
also taken advantage of the government's squeeze on cash by 
investing in Foshan Transformer Works, a voltage transformer 
company, and in Xinhui New Building Material, a ceramics 
manufacturer in Guangdong.  (Hong Kong EASTERN EXPRESS 25 Apr 94 p 
36) 

   China Credit Squeeze Causes Hong Kong Firm To Scale Back, Shift 
Investment -- China's credit squeeze has caused Hong Kong-listed 
Guangdong Investment to scale back real estate development 
activities there.  Although the group expects to see its future 
earnings boosted by hotels and tourism in Hong Kong and China, the 
company said that due to "the changing demand for property in China, 
the group has toned down the scale of its non-core property 
development."  Instead, the company was shifting its focus to 
Thailand.  The group expects stable income growth from 
infrastructure projects, such as the company's investments in the 
Zhongshan Power Station, the Shiqi section of the Guangzhou-Zhuhai 
Highway, and the New Pak Kong Bridge in Qingyuan.  Stable recurring 
income is also expected from the acquisitions earlier this month of 
the Guangdong Hotel in Tsim Sha Tsui and the Wharney Hotel in Wan 
Chai.  (Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (BUSINESS POST) 29 Apr 94 
p 3) 

   Hong Kong Executive Sees Limited Impact of PRC Land Tax -- A 
director of Hong Kong's New World Development Limited has said that 
China's purpose in drawing up a land value-added tax is to curb real 
estate speculation.  New World has many real estate development 
projects in China, which involve capital worth several billion Hong 
Kong dollars.  According to the executive, the implementation of the 
land value-added tax will only slightly affect the company's 
investments in China.  He indicated that returns on real estate 
generally amount to 50 percent, which he said was reasonable.  Some 
people expected an 80-percent return, but this could not be achieved 
in other countries.  (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 1206 GMT 25 Apr 
94) 

   Guangzhou Closes 100 Foreign-Invested Firms Breaking Contracts -- 
Guangzhou has closed over 100 overseas-invested firms which failed 
to meet their financial commitments.  Of investments worth a 
contracted $80 billion, only $29.5 billion has been injected.  Most 
of the firms had partners in Hong Kong, Macao, or Taiwan.  These 
places account for over 85 percent of overseas funds.  Unfunded, 
suspended operations were among those closed; and foreign partners 
who failed to leave when their joint-venture contracts came to an 
end also had their licenses revoked.  Chinese partners who failed to 
keep their end of bargains were responsible for some closures. 
Guangzhou, Shenzhen, and Zhuhai special economic zones have also 
cracked down on overseas cheats.  The 113 revoked licenses account 
for about 2 percent of overseas-funded firms in Guangzhou.  Only 30 
percent of the contractual foreign capital in Guangdong has been put 
into use.  The province has approved 47,000 overseas-funded 
enterprises, and half have begun operating.  (Beijing CHINA DAILY 22 
Apr 94 p 2) 

   Fujian Initiates Inspection of Foreign-Funded Firms' Contracts -- 
Commencing this year, Fujian's Foreign Economic and Trade Commission 
will annually inspect the implementation of the contracts and rules 
of foreign-funded enterprises.  Fujian is the first province to take 
this action, which is aimed at protecting the legitimate rights of 
various parties and promoting the growth of foreign-funded 
enterprises.  Of the 13,000 foreign-funded enterprises approved by 
the provincial authorities in the past 15 years, some 5,800 have 
gone into operation.  Xiamen Special Economic Zone started 
inspections early this year.  (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 0925 GMT 
21 Apr 94) 

   Canadian Telecom Firm Launches Five-Year, $130-Million Program -- 
Northern Telecom of Canada has agreed to a five-year, $130-million 
investment program establishing three joint ventures and a high-tech 
laboratory in research and development, manufacturing, and sales and 
servicing of telecommunications switching products, semiconductors, 
and other technologies.  The agreement was finalized between Vice 
Premier Zou Jiahua and Canadian Trade Minister Roy Maclaren in 
Toronto.  Formal contracts should be signed late this summer. 

   This is the first phase of a memorandum of understanding signed 
by Northern Telecom and the State Planning Commission in June 1993 
covering a broad range of manufacturing, research and development, 
technical, and training projects to help modernize China's 
telecommunications infrastructure.  Northern Telecom will hold 40 
percent of the stake of a manufacturing joint venture with Chinese 
partners in Shunde, Guangdong.  It will undertake the design, 
engineering, manufacturing, service, marketing, sale, and 
installation of switching products.  A research and development 
center will be set up to develop advanced hardware and software 
products related to telecommunications switching.  Northern Telecom 
will hold 55 percent of a very large scale integrated (VLSI) circuit 
joint venture in Shanghai with Shanghai IC Design Corporation, which 
will design and supply integrated circuits for the Shunde venture 
and other electronics manufacturers in China.  The third project 
will be another VLSI circuit manufacturing project in Shanghai. 
Northern Telecom will purchase a 25-percent direct equity stake in 
the existing joint venture, Philips Semiconductor Corporation of 
Shanghai.  The plant will provide VLSI circuits to Northern 
Telecom's joint venture in Shanghai.  (Beijing CHINA DAILY 25 Apr 94 
p 2) 

   Heilongjiang Imports Tire Production Line From Italy -- The 
Hualin Industrial Group of Heilongjiang Province on 22 April signed 
a contract with an Italian company in Harbin to import a tire 
production line.  The project, involving both technology and 
equipment, has been approved by the State Council.  It is estimated 
that by 1997, this industrial group will produce an annual tire 
output of 4 million tonnes and create 400 million yuan in profits 
and taxes and $40 million in foreign exchange.  (Harbin Heilongjiang 
Radio 2200 GMT 22 Apr 94) 

   Shandong's Yantai City Reports Foreign Investment Projects -- 
Yantai city in Shandong Province has made marked progress in opening 
to the outside world.  As of now, the city has introduced 101 large 
projects, each of which involves more than $10 million, and 154 high 
and new technology projects.  Since the beginning of 1993, Yantai 
has signed contracts on building 142 projects with foreign 
investments worth $340 million, accounting for 25.9 percent of the 
total foreign capital brought into the province during the year. 
(Jinan Shandong Radio 2300 GMT 22 Apr 94) 

   Heilongjiang, ROK Jointly Invest in Sanjiang Plain -- The 
Continent General Development Corporation of Korea, the Heilongjiang 
Government, and Heilongjiang Sanjiang Plain Agricultural Development 
Company Limited formally signed an agreement on taking a loan in 
U.S. dollars equivalent to 131.59 million yuan from the Korean side 
on 4 April.  The funding for carrying out the largest Sino-ROK 
joint-investment agricultural comprehensive development project is 
now in place.  Sino-ROK Heilongjiang Sanjiang Plain Agricultural 
Development Company was established on 17 April 1992; its 
subordinate enterprise, Touxing Farm, is located in Fujing City and 
covers an area of 570,000 mu.  This project includes the development 
of 200,000 mu of land in 1993, another 200,000 mu of land in 1994, 
and the rest of the land by the end of 1996.  The total investment 
is 227 million yuan, 170 million yuan of which will come from loans. 
The Chinese side is responsible for raising a loan worth 31.59 
million yuan, and the Korean side is responsible for raising a loan 
in U.S. dollars equivalent to 131.59 million yuan.  The annual 
interest rate for the loans raised by both sides will not be higher 
than 3 percent.  The loan period is 20 years and the loans will be 
evenly repaid within 15 years, starting on the sixth year after the 
loans have been granted.  The rest of the funds for this joint 
venture will come from bank loans.  (Harbin HEILONGJIANG RIBAO 5 Apr 
94 p 1) 

   Beijing-Japanese Electronics Joint Venture Established -- Beijing 
No. 3 Radio Equipment Plant and Murada Corporation of Japan recently 
signed a contract to form the Beijing-Murada Electronics Company 
Limited in Beijing.  With a total investment of $30 million, this 
company will mainly produce high-grade multilayered ceramic 
condenser sheets for various kinds of electronic machines.  It is 
expected that this company will go into production in the second 
half of 1994.  (Beijing BEIJING RIBAO 12 Apr 94 p 1) 

   Shenzhen Stock Exchange Now Open to Individual Japanese Investors 
-- The Shenzhen Stock Exchange was officially opened to Japanese 
retail investors on 20 April, becoming the 37th stock exchange to be 
endorsed by the Japanese Securities Dealers Association.  The 
Shanghai Exchange was approved by the association on 10 March.  The 
Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges were previously open to Japan's 
corporate and institutional investors, but individual investors will 
now be able to invest directly in B-share stocks listed on both 
exchanges, or indirectly through investment trusts.  Shenzhen hopes 
to recruit major U.S. and Japanese investment houses to its trading 
floor as part of its plan to catch up with Shanghai.  Japanese 
brokers believe Shanghai is likely to keep most of the business. 
(Hong Kong EASTERN EXPRESS 20 Apr 94 p 26) 

   Malaysian, Singapore Firms Invest in Xiamen Steel Company -- 
Malaysian, Singapore, and Chinese enterprises have jointly invested 
$150 million in building a steel company in Xiamen, Fujian Province. 
The signing ceremony was held in Xiamen on 15 April.  The company, 
which will have a production capacity of 500,000 tonnes of smelted 
steel and 500,000 tonnes of rolled steel, will go into operation in 
July next year.  (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO 16 Apr 94 p a6) 

   Malaysian Company, Guangdong Sign Expressway Construction 
Contract -- A contract was signed in Guangzhou on 21 April by 
Guangdong and a Malaysian company for the construction of a 180-km 
expressway from Yangjiang's Yangxi to Zhanjiang's Suixi, a section 
of the Foshan-Zhanjiang Expressway.  The Malaysian company is 
responsible for raising the total investment of 6.68 billion yuan. 
Construction will start in the second half of 1995, and the project 
will be completed in 1998.  (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO 22 Apr 94 p a3) 

   Swiss Pesticide Company Invests in Qingdao Farm Chemicals Joint 
Venture -- Qingdao Pesticides Factory has signed an agreement with 
Ciba-Geigy AG to set up an $11.6-million joint venture in Qingdao. 
The Swedish company will hold 55 percent of Qingdao Ciba Agro, which 
will produce highly efficient farm chemicals.  The joint venture is 
expected to begin operation in 1996 and will employ about 180 
people.  This is Ciba-Geigy's 11th investment in China.  (Beijing 
CHINA DAILY 27 Apr 94 p 2) 

   Taiwan Industrial Village Established in Haikou Development Zone 
-- A Taiwan industrial village covering an area of 2,000 mu was 
established in the Yonggui Industrial Development Zone of Haikou 
City on 7 April.  The zone has good access roads and an adequate 
power supply.  A 16-kilovolt-ampere special power transmission line 
will be installed by the end of April, along with a 120-gate 
program-controlled telephone capacity.  Projects to be built in this 
industrial village include electronics, bioengineering, precision 
equipment, machinery, plastics, clothing industry, hydropower, 
medicine, and food projects.  (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO 18 Apr 94 p a6) 

   Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Sets Up Branch in Alma 
Ata -- The Industrial and Commercial Bank of China announced in 
Beijing on 20 April the official inauguration this month of a branch 
in Alma Ata City of the Kazakhstan Republic.  This is the third 
subsidiary set up by the bank abroad, following the establishment of 
its Singapore branch and Seoul representative office.  The bank 
plans to open branches and representative offices this year in Hong 
Kong, New York, Tokyo, and London.  (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 
0912 GMT 20 Apr 94) 

   Beijing Reports Quarterly Statistics on Foreign-Invested 
Enterprises -- By the end of March, Beijing Municipality had 
approved the establishment of 8,158 foreign-invested enterprises, 
with a total direct foreign investment of $11.229 billion.  An 
official from the Beijing Municipal Foreign Economic Relations and 
Trade Commission revealed that the number of foreign-invested 
enterprises that had started production had increased to 418, or 5.5 
times the number in the same period last year.  Foreign-invested 
enterprises are playing a more important role in Beijing's economic 
development.  In the first quarter of this year there were more than 
200,000 employees in foreign-invested enterprises, which produce an 
aggregate output value of 2.78 billion yuan.  More foreign companies 
have established headquarters in Beijing, such as the U.S. General 
Motors Corporation, the Swedish ABB, and the German Siemens Company. 
Major projects, including the fifth route of the Beijing subway, 
have drawn the interest of foreign investors.  In the first quarter 
of this year, Beijing's exports amounted to $558.97 million, an 
increase of 35.6 percent over the same period last year.  Its 
imports and exports were basically in balance.  (Hong Kong TA KUNG 
PAO 19 Apr 94 p 29) 

   Fujian Encourages Foreign Businesses To Develop Power Projects -- 
Fujian has adopted a preferential policy encouraging foreign 
businesses to develop power projects.  To guarantee reasonable 
returns, the terms for project development can follow international 
practice.  Foreign power projects can be designed and managed by 
investors themselves, or the electricity authorities of Fujian can 
contract to build or manage them.  The enterprise income tax for 
foreign power projects will be 15 percent.  If a foreign business 
runs a Sino-foreign project for 15 years or more, it can, upon 
approval by the tax authorities, be exempted from the enterprise 
income tax in the first five years beginning from the year it begins 
to make profits and be exempted from half the enterprise income tax 
in the next five years.  Where a Sino-foreign cooperative enterprise 
or a foreign-funded enterprise has difficulty paying tax after its 
two years of exemption from the enterprise income tax or after its 
three years of half-exemption from the enterprise income tax, it 
can, upon approval by the taxation authorities, have its period of 
tax exemption appropriately extended.  All foreign electricity 
projects are exempt from local income tax.  (Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO 
22 Apr 94 p 21) 

   Guangdong First-Quarter Industrial Output Increases 21.08 Percent 
-- Guangdong's gross industrial output value totaled 105.128 billion 
yuan for the first quarter, 21.08 percent higher than for the same 
period last year, according to the Guangdong Industrial Production, 
Marketing, and Major Product Output Monthly Bulletin.  First quarter 
export value accounted for 26.99 percent and new product output 
value for 2.42 percent of gross output value.  In the first quarter 
both the gross output value and the sales of heavy industry grew 
faster than those of light industry, while the gross output value 
and sales of the state-owned and collective-run industrial sectors 
grew slower than those of other economic sectors.  There were 25- 
percent increases or decreases in fully 50 percent of the product 
categories compared with the same period last year, which indicates 
a readjustment of the province's industrial product mix. (Beijing 
ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 1332 GMT 10 Apr 94) 

   PLA-Run Enterprises in Shenzhen Make Profits -- The 192 
enterprises in Shenzhen run by the People's Liberation Army last 
year had a total turnover of 3.19 billion yuan, turning over 460 
million yuan in profits and taxes and earning $33.394 million in 
foreign exchange.  The most successful, Sanjiu Enterprise Group, 
which is run by the General Logistics Department, had a turnover of 
2.45 billion yuan and made a profit of 320 million yuan.  Another, 
Nanfang Pharmaceutical Plant, made a profit of over 100 million 
yuan.  The following enterprises made a profit of more than 10 
million yuan each:  Jiuxing Printing and Packaging Center; Sanjiu 
Travel Service Company; Sanjiu Real Estate Development Company; Heli 
Science and Technology Development Company, run by the Commission of 
Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense; and Great 
Wall (Huihua) Enterprise Group, run by the 42d Group Army.  (Hong 
Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 0700 GMT 16 Apr 94) 

   Nearly 10,000 Foreign-Funded Enterprises Operating in Shenzhen -- 
A Shenzhen City report said that by March this year the number of 
registered foreign-funded enterprises in Shenzhen had reached 9,676. 
Of the newly registered foreign-funded enterprises, 60 have 
registered capital of over 10 million yuan each, including nine with 
registered capital of over 100 million yuan each.  In the first 
quarter, 36 Hong Kong, Macao, and foreign enterprises set up offices 
in Shenzhen, and 31 foreign-funded enterprises set up subsidiaries 
in the city.  (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 1217 GMT 21 Apr 94) 

   Guilin Liangjiang Airport Listed as National Key Project -- The 
State Planning Commission has officially listed the Guilin 
Liangjiang International Airport project as a national key project 
this year.  This project, with an investment budget of more than 1.4 
billion yuan, is designed to serve large airliners such as Boeing 
747's.  The project began last July.  The work done so far includes 
the movement of more than 3.06 million cubic meters of earth and 
stone, equivalent to 30.8 percent of the total site-leveling work. 
Meanwhile, the roadbed of the 25.6-km airport road system has been 
completed.  The project is expected to be completed by October 1995. 
(ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 0711 GMT 13 Apr 94) 

   First Privately Operated Airport Begins Operation in Hainan -- 
China's first privately operated airport, Chuncheng Airport in 
Tongza City of Hainan Province, started operation on 13 April after 
a successful test flight.  The airport, built by a Macao businessman 
with capital of 88 million yuan, is five km to the northwest of 
Tongza City and covers 1,980 mu.  Phase one of the airport project, 
which has been completed, includes a helicopter landing field.  The 
airport is expected to accommodate four small airplanes and eight 
helicopters by late 1995, when phase two of the project is 
completed.  (Beijing ZH0NGGUO XINWEN SHE 1231 GMT 13 Apr 94) 

   Hunan To Import 110,000-Set Program-Controlled Switchboards -- 
The Hunan Post and Telecommunications Bureau will spend $10 million 
in low-interest loans on importing automated switchboards with a 
110,000-set capacity from Germany's Siemens Company for rural 
telephone development.  The contract was signed in Changsha today. 
Since the 165 Telecommunications Project was launched, rapid 
progress has been made in Hunan's rural telecommunications 
undertakings.  Now the rural areas have switchboards with a total 
capacity of 280,000 telephones, of which automated switchboards are 
capable of handling 100,000.  However, the present rural 
telecommunications sector is far from meeting social demand.  The 
bureau raises funds using such methods as payment by installments 
and low-interest loans to develop rural telecommunications 
undertakings.  (Changsha Hunan People's Radio Network 2300 GMT 14 
Apr 94) 

   Shanghai Exports Increase 22 Percent in First Quarter -- An 
official of the Shanghai Municipal Foreign Economic Relations and 
Trade Commission said Shanghai's export volume totaled $1.748 
billion in the first quarter, an increase of 22 percent over the 
same period last year, with  machinery enjoying the widest growth 
margin.  He said Shanghai's foreign trade will keep growing this 
year, as the in-depth development of reform and the introduction of 
a uniform exchange rate for the RMB have offered enterprises the 
opportunity of fair competition and will in turn favor export trade. 
He also noted that Shanghai's export volume in 1993 totaled $7.38 
billion, an increase of 12.68 percent over the previous year.  (Hong 
Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 1010 GMT 20 Apr 94) 

   Jiangsu County Promotes Investment From Hong Kong -- A 
representative of Jiangsu's Wuxi County says that Hong Kong's Ryoden 
Group will invest $25 million to build an air conditioner factory 
there.  In November last year, CITIC Hong Kong, a subsidiary of 
China International Trust and Investment Corporation (CITIC), 
invested 220 million yuan to merge the shares of three industrial 
enterprises in Wuxi County: the Wuxi County special steel tube 
factory, the postal and telecommunications cable factory, and the 
Huada electrical machinery factory.  CITIC Hong Kong holds more than 
51 percent of each of the three factories.  The county has 50 
investment projects for foreign investors to select from, including 
industrial projects, infrastructure projects, and real estate.  So 
far, the county has signed six contracts in Hong Kong involving a 
total investment of $12.55 million.  (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO 13 Apr 94 
p C3) 

   Hong Kong Bank Shifting Data Processing to Guangdong -- Hong Kong 
Bank is to shift much of its data processing to Guangdong Province 
to escape high labor costs and a serious shortage of clerical 
workers in the territory.  About 200 staff will be employed in the 
first phase of the project, and the move is expected to take place 
within the next two months.  Hong Kong Bank has already imported 
mainland Chinese staff to work as tellers in Hong Kong.  Citibank 
moved some clerical operations to Shenzhen in 1991, but 
"bureaucratic difficulties" forced it to move the operations back to 
Hong Kong shortly thereafter.  (Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA SUNDAY MORNING 
POST (SUNDAY MONEY) 17 Apr 94 p 1) 

   Hong Kong Manufacturing Sector Continues To Shrink -- Providing 
further evidence of Hong Kong's shrinking manufacturing sector, 
government figures show that industrial production and employment in 
manufacturing both fell last year.  The index of industrial 
production in 1993 fell by 0.8 percent from 1992, with the largest 
decline registered in the chemicals, rubber, and plastics sector, 
which fell 9.9 percent.  Production of metals and fabricated metal 
products was down 9.4 percent.  However, the output of the printing 
and paper products sector rose 12.8 percent and the production of 
machinery, parts, and components rose 12.7 percent.  Employment 
figures showed that 483,000 persons were employed in the 
manufacturing sector in December 1993, 14.4 percent fewer than last 
year, while factory workers average earnings fell 5.3 percent.  By 
contrast, employment in finance, insurance, real estate, and 
business services grew by 7.5 percent to 338,100, and earnings rose 
9.7 percent. (Hong Kong EASTERN EXPRESS 16-17 Apr 94 p 27) 

   Taiwan:  Cross-Strait Trade Slows in Wake of Boat Incident -- In 
the wake of the Chien-tao Lake (Qiandaohu) incident, which claimed 
the lives of 24 Taiwan tourists, the Ministry of Economic Affairs 
(MOEA) on 19 April decided to temporarily slow the import of semi- 
finished products and agricultural and industrial raw materials from 
the mainland.  The Ministry of Finance will also take measures to 
control cross-strait commercial exchanges.  According to the MOEA, 
1,788 kinds of mainland semi-finished goods and raw materials are 
currently allowed to be imported to Taiwan, and Taiwan had 
originally planned to deregulate the import of 2,500 more items this 
year.  That goal seems unattainable now because of the incident. 
(Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 20 Apr 94 p 1) 

   Budget Frozen for Third Phase of Six-Year Plan Transportation 
Projects -- Because construction of principal transportation 
projects under the Six-Year National Development Plan has seriously 
fallen behind schedule, the Directorate General of Budget, 
Accounting, and Statistics under the Executive Yuan has decided not 
to budget for the third phase of these projects for the time being 
to avoid expanding government debt.  According to the Finance 
Ministry, the Central Government's outstanding loans totaled $24.1 
billion by the end of March 1994, but it has only issued bonds worth 
$15.35 million so far.  Among the unissued bonds, $7.9 million is 
allotted to the first and second phases of the aforementioned 
projects. (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 14 Apr 94 p 1) 

   Low Growth of First Quarter Exports 'Surprises' Economic Council 
-- To the surprise of the Council for Economic Planning and 
Development, Taiwan's exports in the first quarter of this year grew 
by only 0.4 percent amid global economic recovery.  It seems that 
Taiwan's competitiveness in exporting to developed countries has 
also declined.  Exports to the United States, Japan, and Europe 
dropped by 5 percent, 0.7 percent, and 8.3 percent respectively in 
the first quarter.  Machinery imports in the first quarter were down 
2.6 percent from the same quarter of last year.  However, the export 
structure has continued to improve.  Exports of heavy chemical- 
industrial products accounted for 53.8 percent of the total, and 
exports of electronics and electric appliances rose by 10.8 percent. 
Shoe exports suffered the hardest blow, with a decline of 48.4 
percent.  A researcher from the council said that Taiwan's poor 
export results could be attributed to competition from Mexico and 
mainland China or because exports from a third location have 
increased.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 17 Apr 94 p 5) 

   NORTH KOREA:  Mt. Paektu Development Plan Experiences 
Difficulties -- According to a South Korean government publication, 
North Korea has launched a study to turn the country's scenic Mt. 
Paektu region into a modern tourist attraction, but the actual 
development of the site has not advanced very far because of a lack 
of investment and technology, the country's isolation, and 
international tension due to the nuclear problem.  A comprehensive 
study on the Mt. Paektu project reportedly began in 1988, when the 
DPRK government apparently conceived of the project as a way of 
earning foreign currency with relatively little investment and of 
bolstering the legitimacy of the regime by playing up Kim Il-song's 
and Kim Chong-il's links to the site. 

   As part of the development plan, the government has reportedly 
paved roads leading to the mountain, has been installing cable cars, 
and has begun the construction of tourist villages in nearby areas. 
However, progress at these sites has been slowed by a shortage of 
resources.  Log cabin-style hotel construction at various sites 
around Mt. Paektu has also reportedly advanced slowly, and so far 
only a 47-room hotel on the mountain and a small tourist village 
have been completed.  Total lodging capacity for tourists in the 
nearby towns has reportedly reached about 8,800 people.  (Seoul 
NAEWOE TONGSIN 7 April 94 pp C8-C13) 

   SOUTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Cooperation Between Rival Enterprises 
Booming -- SUMMARY:  According to ROK press reports, South Korean 
enterprises are increasingly entering into cooperative agreements 
with their domestic rivals.  Through such agreements, both parties 
can gain access to each other's technologies and expertise, reduce 
duplication of effort in developing new technologies, and move 
toward developing new technologies and products.  According to one 
source, cooperation even extends to joint research efforts between 
civilian firms and government research institutes. 

   The 6 April CHUGAN MAEGYONG reported that recently there has been 
a "boom" in cooperation between "rival" ROK enterprises.  The 
journal cited a university professor's comment that in the past 
coalitions had centered around production, while today's coalitions 
center more and more on sharing marketing and technology.  Indeed, 
cooperation between competing enterprises has spread from simply 
buying each other's parts or sharing certain tasks to jointly 
developing core technologies.  Examples of cooperation can involve 
ROK firms operating in the domestic market, ROK firms working 
together overseas, or even ROK firms teaming up with government 
research institutes to develop new technologies. 

   There are many cooperative arrangements between firms operating 
within South Korea itself, according to CHUGAN MAEGYONG.  For 
instance, Samsung Group and Kia Group are cooperating on a concrete 
pumping vehicle and an eight-ton hydraulic truck crane.  Samsung 
Heavy Industries will continue to maintain cooperative relations 
with Kia for commercial and technological reasons, even as it begins 
producing commercial vehicles in May.  In the airline industry, 
rivals Korean Airlines (KAL) and Asiana Airlines have agreed to use 
a joint ticketing system.  In addition, KAL has moved some offices 
into the city air terminal in Seoul, even though it is owned by 
Kumho Group, the parent organization of Asiana Airlines.  There is 
cooperation of a different sort in the petrochemical industry.  In 
order to shake off the recession that followed excess production of 
petrochemicals, producers are working on an agreement to halt 
excessive competition and to cut and regulate production.  Heavy 
machinery manufacturers are also cooperating by purchasing each 
other's domestically made parts.  By using these parts instead of 
imported Japanese- or German-made ones, the firms can effectively 
cut their components costs by more than 30 percent. 

   The electronics sector is where cooperation between firms has 
flourished most, CHUGAN MAEGYONG reported.  Thanks to a cross- 
licensing agreement between Samsung Electronics and Goldstar, the 
two companies can use each other's patented television technologies 
without compensation.  The journal commented that this is of 
symbolic" importance,  because it has allowed the firms to stop 
investing in redundant technology development and move ahead with 
other developments.  Last year Goldstar Industrial Systems and Kia 
Machine Tools used their core technologies to jointly develop an 
indigenous robot.  Also, in a technology-sharing agreement between 
Haitai Electronics and Samsung, Samsung supplies product ideas and 
technology to Haitai, which commercializes and sells the new 
product.  For its part, Haitai disburses to Samsung 1 billion won 
($1.25 million) annually in technology fees.  According to CHUGAN 
MAEGYONG, this is the first agreement in which domestic firms share 
product ideas rather than manufacturing technology.  The journal 
opined that in the future there would be additional strategic 
coalitions of various types between ROK firms. 

   The 8 March HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN reported an increase in 
manufacturers' efforts to cooperate on technology development. 
According to the daily, materials producers and consumers are 
working together to develop new materials or new products that use 
new materials.  For example, Pohang Iron and Steel (POSCO), Pusan 
Pipe, Kohap Steel, and Kyongan Industries are cooperating on 
materials development.  HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN noted that thus far 
they have developed a material called 304N1 that is stronger and 
more corrosion resistant than existing stainless steels.  Another 
example of such cooperation is Taehan Aluminum and Sam-young 
Electronics' success in developing an aluminum that is 99.999- 
percent pure.  In addition to working to develop new materials, 
firms also often work to find uses for their discoveries.  For 
example, Taehan Aluminum and Sam-young Electronics are working with 
electronics firms to develop manufacturing technologies for 
semiconductor components that would use their ultra-pure aluminum. 
In the steel sector, Kyoryang Housing plans to work with 
construction firms to develop strong structural materials and 
construction technologies, and thus increase the use of steel in the 
construction industry. 

   ROK firms are not just cooperating in the domestic arena.  They 
are also working together to build a "common front" overseas, CHUGAN 
MAEGYONG explained.  In these cases, firms feel they must cooperate 
to compete against foreign firms in overseas markets.  According to 
the journal, there are more and more examples of domestic firms 
"clearing away" foreign firms and accepting joint orders for ships 
or construction projects.  For example, in June 1993 Hyundai Heavy 
Industries and Samsung Heavy Industries joined forces to win a $260- 
million bid to build four oil tankers for India's state-run shipping 
company.  Hyundai Construction and Ssangyong Construction joined 
hands and won a bid for a $620-million building project in 
Singapore.  In Europe, ROK TV manufacturers are working with ROK 
parts manufacturers. 

   In addition to citing examples of cooperation between civilian 
firms, CHUGAN MAEGYONG reported on cooperation between civilian and 
government entities.  The journal cited the development of HDTV, one 
of South Korea's so-called G7 projects, as an example.  In this 
case, the Korea Academy of Industrial Technology (KAITECH) worked 
with three civilian firms--Samsung Electronics, Goldstar Micronics, 
and Orion Electronics--to develop a 34-inch braun tube for use in an 
HDTV set.  The development of the TDX is another example of 
civilian-government cooperation, according to CHUGAN MAEGYONG.  The 
government's Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
(ETRI) has worked with four firms over a long period to develop a 
TDX that could both satisfy domestic demand and be exported 
overseas.  The government did so in order to set up a domestic 
telecommunications industry that would be self-supporting, the 
journal noted. 

   The following is a list of current cooperative arrangements 
between ROK firms, as reported by CHUGAN MAEGYONG. 

                      Technical Cooperation 

   1.  Goldstar-Samsung Electronics (patent 
sharing):  share about 2,000 TV-related patents. 

   2.  Goldstar Electronics-Kia Machine Tools (joint development): 
development of  an indigenous robot. 

   3.  Orion Electronics-Korea Tungsten Mining (joint development): 
development of rhemium tungsten wire. 

   4.  Samyang-Pusan Pipe (joint systems management):  set up and 
management of a computer system (set up, manage Korea ICM) 

                     Production, Sales Cooperation 

   5.  Samsung Electronics-Goldstar-Daewoo (joint production, 
sales):  production and sales of large home appliances. 

   6.  Samsung Heavy Industries-Daewoo Heavy Industries (parts 
purchases):  purchases of each other's key machinery components. 

   7.  Hwasung-Kukje-Kolon (joint marketing):  set up shared 
salesrooms overseas, joint marketing. 

                     Overseas Cooperation 

   8.  Hyundai-Daewoo-Samsung (international bidding):  joint order 
for Saudi crude oil tanker. 

   9.  Hyundai Construction-Ssangyong Construction (overseas 
construction):  joint order for Singaporean construction project. 

   10. TV manufacturers-TV parts producers (moving into European 
market):  strengthened cooperation between parts producers, supply 
parts to TV makers. 

                      Civilian-Government Joint Research 

   11. KAITECH-Samsung-Goldstar-Orion Electronics (joint 
development):  development of braun tube for HDTV's. 

   12. ETRI-businesses (civilian-government joint development): 
development of TDX 

   FEATURE:  KAERI Head Calls For Restructuring ROK's Nuclear 
Industry -- SUMMARY:  The director of South Korea's Atomic Energy 
Research Institute (KAERI) complained in a recent press article 
about the possible impact of Uruguay Round (UR) limits on the ROK's 
nuclear industry and what he perceives as the "advanced countries'" 
efforts to restrict "proliferation" of nuclear technology.  These 
potential foreign challenges must be met, in his view, by taking a 
fresh look at the structure of South Korea's nuclear industry from R 
and D to management, and by greater efforts toward indigenous 
nuclear development. 
   Sin Chae-in, director of KAERI, stated his views in the February 
Seoul WONJARYOK SANOP on how the "new international rules" could 
affect South Korea's nuclear development.  According to Sin, the 
"Uruguay Round in part reflected the intention of the advanced 
countries to perpetually maintain the present system of advanced and 
backward nations."  The new world arena, according to Sin, though 
called "equitable" and "cooperative," is really a "gruesome game in 
which people without power are forced to submit" to those with 
power, particularly to those who possess advanced technology.  With 
the limitations created by the UR on the ability of less advanced 
countries to subsidize their own industrial technologies, and with 
other new "rounds" looming, "the most important thing for South 
Korea is to read the winds of change correctly" and act to protect 
itself. 

   Sin predicted that the December 1993 UR agreement would erode 
"the ROK government's ability to defend the country's beginning 
stage technology." According to Sin, special government subsidies to 
industry are to stop, with subsidies for technical development 
reduced from 100 percent of R and D costs to 75 percent.  Although 
such restrictions do not apply to the nuclear industry as yet, Sin 
observed, their scope will probably expand, making it "urgent" for 
the ROK to work out "countermeasures" to protect its developing 
nuclear technology.  South Korea has also signed the Government 
Procurement Agreement which requires companies located in signatory 
states, such as the Korea Electric Power Corporation (KEPCO), to 
open equipment and construction bids to foreign companies.  The 
United States and Canada's "insistence" on opening South Korea's 
markets, Sin asserted, is a "sure sign" these countries plan to 
compete with South Korea in the domestic nuclear power market. 
Thus, not only is the ROK's "technical independence" in nuclear 
power threatened, so is its "nuclear infrastructure." 

   The KAERI director also expressed his dissatisfaction with 
efforts being made by the "advanced countries" to limit the spread 
of nuclear technology.  In his view, "the moves t9ward strengthening 
the international nuclear non-proliferation system going on now in 
international atomic energy circles can also be seen as part of the 
tendency" of advanced countries to "control" those less advanced. 
In this "David vs. Goliath" world, &amp;outh Korea must rethink all 
"pending problems" that pertain to nuclear power from a fresh 
perspective, including nuclear power administration, the "direction 
of R and D," and securing of nuclear materials.  The strength to 
survive in today's world must come through technology based on 
indigenous R and D.  According to Sin, "The era when technology 
could be copied from other countries has already passed." 

   KIST Develops Super-Smooth Automated Metal Grinder -- The Korea 
Institute of Science and Technology's (KIST) electromechanical 
research division has developed a high-speed intelligent robot 
system able to finish-grind metal materials three times faster than 
existing equipment with double the smoothness.  Instead of using a 
conventional zigzag motion, KIST's device uses a computer-controlled 
"directionless grinding pattern" that increases surface smoothness 
from 9 to 4 microns (one micron = one millionth of a meter).  The 
system reportedly functions exceptionally well in corners "and on 
curved surfaces." 

   KIST claims the robot performs better than competitive machinery 
made in Japan, which reportedly is mechanically controlled, requires 
more manual operations, and can be used with only a limited number 
of shapes.  KIST, a government-funded institute within the Ministry 
of Science and Technology, recently contracted to transfer the 
technology to the South Korean firm Hwacheon Machinery Works, for 
which KIST will receive a two percent royalty on earnings until 
2001.  (Seoul HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN 22 Mar 92 p 17) 
   Corporate Technical Colleges 'Rapidly Increasing' -- The number 
of colleges established within ROK industrial enterprises is rapidly 
increasing, as South Korean companies seek to train a cadre of 
professionals able to deal with the challenges of 
internationalization.  At present, 29 such facilities are offering 
undergraduate and graduate level programs to some 3,000 employees; 
another 4,000 have already graduated.  Instruction is practically 
oriented with an emphasis on technologies of interest to the 
company.  Although graduates do not receive degrees honored by 
society, they are treated within the company the same as employees 
with regular diplomas.  College and junior (technical) college level 
programs running one to four years are offered by 25 major South 
Korean firms.  Four companies--Samsung, Hyundai, Korea Telecom, and 
the Korea Electric Power Corporation--offer two-year graduate 
programs with courses in foreign languages, computers, factory 
automation, management, information science, communications, and a 
wide selection of engineering courses.  Faculty are drawn from 
nearby colleges and are supported by employees with advanced 
degrees.  (Seoul CHUGAN MAEGYONG 13 Apr 94 pp 44-47) 

   ROK Chip Makers Shifting R and D to Non-Memory Devices -- South 
Korea's three major semiconductor manufacturers are pressing ahead 
"full-scale" with plans to become world class producers of non- 
memory chips.  Samsung Electronics is investing 96 billion won ($120 
million) in non-memory R and D this year, doubling last year's 
amount.  The company will use its Kihung laboratory exclusively for 
application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) research, and is 
setting up its Suwon lab as a "design research facility for high 
value-added set ASIC's."  Gallium-arsenide and special purpose chips 
are being developed through Samsung's U.S.-based subsidiary 
(formerly Harris Microwave Semiconductor) and through a joint 
venture with the U.S. firm Array.  Samsung expects to increase its 
ratio of non-memory to memory chip sales from 20 percent at present 
to 40 percent by 1996. 

   Hyundai Electronics will dedicate its No. 2 laboratory at Inchon 
to non-memory semiconductor research, and devote "most of its 
efforts" to developing high value-added products, such as chip sets 
for computers, reduced instruction set computing chips, and 
semiconductors for use with optical-electronic devices.  Domestic 
research will be enhanced by the transfer of personnel from the 
company's U.S.-based facility in Silicon Valley.  Hyundai is also 
setting up non-memory design centers in the United States and 
Taiwan, and plans to expand "exchanges" with foreign technical 
personnel.  Goldstar Electron, for its part, has raised its non- 
memory semiconductor sales target 300 percent over 1993.  Production 
will be facilitated by the introduction of inspection equipment 
worth 50 billion won ($62.5 million) by the end of April.  (Seoul 
HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN 3 Mar 94 p 10) 

   ROK Government Body Facilitating Transfer of Advanced U.S. 
Technology -- South Korea's Small and Medium Business Promotion 
Corporation is helping transfer advanced U.S. electrical, 
electronic, and computer technology to ROK firms by acting as an 
intermediary for Silicon Valley-based U.S. companies "looking for 
overseas partners."  The ROK government-affiliated corporation 
recently received information through "a U.S. organization 
specializing in technology evaluation and technology transfer" about 
seven Silicon Valley firms that are seeking foreign cooperation on a 
number of high-tech projects.  These projects include joint 
investment on a device to detect impurities in liquids; technical 
partnership or joint investment in a phone system that combines 
automatic answering and voice mail for private telephone exchanges; 
and technical partnerships for the following:  wireless data 
communications for new, low-cost personal computers; a commercial 
sprayer for high-density coatings on automobiles; a remote control 
switch for household electrical appliances; a computer main disk; 
and a high-resolution projection display.  The corporation expects 
to receive 5-6 references per month from the U.S. organization, 
which it will match up U.S. firms with the appropriate small and 
medium-size South Korean manufacturers.  (Seoul HANGUK KYONGJE 
SINMUN 2 Apr 94 p 10) 

   KTB, SSTC Set Up Joint-Venture Consulting Firm in Beijing -- KTB 
Consulting and China's State Science and Technology Commission 
(SSTC) are setting up a joint-venture consulting firm in Beijing. 
The venture will be called the Longhan High Tech Development 
Consulting Ltd. and will be capitalized at $1 million.  KTB will 
have a 60 percent interest in the venture and hold the managing 
rights, while Sinotechmart, an affiliate of the SSTC, will have a 40 
percent interest.  There are plans for 24 small and medium ROK 
businesses to invest $600,000 of KTB's investment share.  Longhan 
will help arrange Sino-ROK joint ventures, technology transfers, 
trade mediation, and market surveys.  KTB Consulting is also 
considering setting up a joint venture consulting company in 
Vietnam.  (MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 21 Mar 94 p 10) 

   Kim Chang-tal, the head of Longhan, noted that the consulting 
firm will give ROK small and medium businesses a route by which to 
move into the Chinese market.  He commented that previously these 
businesses had to depend upon their connections, and that their 
investments in China were of a piecemeal nature.  Now, with the help 
of Longhan, they will be able to systematically assess the 
commercial soundness of their investment plans.  This will help 
reduce investment risks and costs.  The joint-venture consulting 
firm will work to find superior Chinese technologies and guide ROK 
small and medium businesses toward commercializing these 
technologies.  In the long run, Longhan will set up a database which 
will include information (business and technological) on Chinese 
enterprises that could be potential cooperative partners for such 
ROK businesses. (HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN 28 Mar 94 p 10) 

   Samsung Aerospace Establishes Research Center in Moscow -- 
Samsung Aerospace Company has set up an ultramodern technology 
research center in Moscow, Russia.  The center, located at the 
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, began full operations on 
26 April.  The center will employ 1,300 researchers, and bring 
together Russia's advanced technology in various industrial fields. 
With the establishment of the center, Samsung Aerospace will 
accelerate its technology development in advanced fields.  (Seoul 
MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 27 Apr 94 p 9) 

   Researchers Develop Scanning Ion Microscope -- A Kwangwoon 
University research team has developed the ROK's first "scanning ion 
microscope," used to make semiconductors, medical micro-robots, and 
other advanced products.  The instrument, also called a "focused ion 
beam (FIB) system," has the functions of an electron microscope and 
microscopic processing equipment.  The research team began the 
project in 1988 with 800 million won ($1 million) in university and 
government support.  Advanced nations first developed the microscope 
in the mid-1980's.   Currently there are only about 300 in use 
worldwide, nine of them in South Korea, although next year ROK 
demand is expected to reach 20 microscopes.  If South Korea can 
produce the instruments domestically, it will be able to save about 
20 billion won ($25 million) in import costs annually.  (Seoul 
YONHAP 0213 GMT 21 Apr 94) 

   Researchers Develop Semiconductor for Mobile Telephones -- After 
two years of research, a semiconductor research team at the 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI) has 
developed a GaAs (Gallium Arsenide) powered MESFET (metal 
semiconductor field effect transistor), a key component in making 
super-lightweight mobile telephones.  The GaAs MESFET works on 3.3 
volts, has a maximum output capacity of 1.6 watts, and has a power 
converting efficiency of 64 percent.  Mobile phones currently on 
sale are equipped with 5.8- or 4.7-volt MESFET's.  While the United 
States and Japan have developed integrated circuits for ultra-light 
cellular phones, they have been slow in their research of 3.3-volt 
MESFET's.  The new MESFET will reduce the weight of a mobile phone 
battery to 30 grams, compared to current weights of 100 grams. 
Samsung and Hyundai Electronics will start manufacturing mobile 
phones equipped with the new MESFET in the latter half of 1994. 
(Seoul YONHAP 0514 GMT 21 Apr 94) 

   Hanil Scientists Develop Anti-Cancer Protein -- South Korean 
scientists have unveiled an anti-cancer mutant protein, which they 
call Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) alpha mutein.  The protein is the 
product of a three-year study on biotechnology applications by the 
Hanhyo Institute of Technology, which was set up in 1991 by the 
Hanil Synthetic Fiber Industry Co. to promote biotechnology and 
chemistry.  Unlike other anti-cancer agents, the TNF protein causes 
no side effects, because it attacks cancer cells without harming 
normal tissue.  Researchers claim the product is over 30 times more 
effective than existing tumor necrotizing factors.  Laboratory tests 
on animals show the product is effective against breast, uterine, 
and larynx cancer.  Hanil obtained an ROK patent for TNF last year 
and has filed for patents in the United States, Britain, Germany, 
France, and Japan.  (Seoul YONHAP 0531 GMT 14 Apr 94) 

   Ssangyong Exports Mini-Diesel Generators to Philippines -- 
Ssangyong Heavy Industries recently exported mini-diesel power 
generators to the Philippines.  The company has supplied 3,500- 
kilowatt diesel power generator facilities, worth 2.4 billion won 
($3 million), to the Philippine company Paper City.  Installation is 
scheduled to be completed by the end of June.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE 
SINMUN 24 Apr 94 p 6) 

   Second Daewoo Mart Opens in Rangoon -- Daewoo Corporation, the 
trading arm of the Daewoo Group, recently opened its second 
department store in Rangoon, Burma.  The company opened its first 
store there in February.  The new department store, "Daewoo Mart," 
was built at a cost of $200,000.  Myanmar Daewoo International, a 
textile maker set up by Daewoo, covered the cost.  Daewoo, which 
opened its first office in Burma in 1985, exported $16 million worth 
of products to the country last year.  (Seoul THE KOREA TIMES 24 Apr 
94 p 8) 

   Hanil Synthetic Fibers To Operate Plant in Shandong -- The 
Qingdao Hanil Spinning Co., Ltd., a joint venture between Hanil 
Synthetic Fibers and the Qingdao Number One Fiber Spinning Plant, 
will soon begin operations.  Hanil placed two conditions on its 
agreement to provide the $5 million plant for the venture.  First, 
it would be the sole provider of raw material to the Qingdao Number 
One Fiber Spinning Plant.  Second, it would receive royalties equal 
to 4.5 percent of the new plant's sales profits for the next 10 
years.  The plant is expected to earn $19 million annually from 
sales.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 21 Apr 94 p 10) 

   Samsung To Export Mobile Telephone System to Russia -- Samsung 
Electronics will export a mobile telephone system to Tumen, Russia. 
The system will include 6,400 lines of TDX-1B time division exchange 
and 1,600 lines of its modified TDX-10, developed with Samsung's own 
technology.  It will also include a microwave transmission system 
and private switchboards.  Samsung Electronics received the $20 
million order in April 1993, and hopes to export more mobile 
telephone systems to Russia in the future.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE 
SINMUN 21 Apr 94 p 21) 

   Daelim Receives New Overseas Construction Orders -- Daelim 
Industries recently received three overseas construction orders 
worth a total of $130 million.  These include a power plant in 
Egypt, a gas processing facility project in Saudi Arabia, and a 
construction project in Brunei.  The power plant order from the 
Egyptian Government is worth $63 million, and the project will last 
for 40 months.  The gas project in Saudi Arabia is a joint venture 
with a U.S. company.  The project will take 30 months.  Daelim has 
also received an order to renovate a Shell company building in 
Brunei.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 18 Apr 94 p 29) 

   SOUTHEAST ASIA - INDONESIA:  Oil Investment Continues Despite 
Falling Prices -- The director of exploration and production for 
Pertamina says that investment in oil exploration has continued 
despite declining prices over the past few months.  The government 
has introduced new incentives for foreign contractors to develop new 
fields in the frontier regions.  Pertamina's 1994 target is to 
secure $600 million worth of investment in the oil and gas 
exploration industry.  (Jakarta SUARA PEMBARUAN 30 Mar 94 p 4) 

   Textile Exports Increase; Value Declines -- Department of Trade 
data shows that exports of fabric, yarn, and other textiles 
increased in volume by 20 percent to 441,240 tons last year from 
367,560 tons in 1992, but a 22.5 percent decline in prices caused 
the export value to decrease 7 percent to $2.63 billion.  Exports of 
garments rose 17.8 percent to 227,690 tons, but a 6.1 percent 
decline in prices caused their value to increase by only 10.6 
percent to $3.5 billion.  Revenue from the export of textiles and 
textile products increased by 2.2 percent to $6.13 billion. 
(Jakarta THE JAKARTA POST 8 Apr 94 p 8) 

   Export, Import of Electronic Goods -- Department of Industry data 
shows that the export value of electronic goods rose by an average 
of 82 percent per annum from 1989 to 1992.  Between January and 
November 1993, export value reached $1.083 billion.  The import 
value of electronic components between January and November 1993 
increased to $838.74 million compared to $261.75 million during the 
same period in 1989.  (Jakarta SUARA PEMBARUAN 18 Mar 94 p 4) 

   Two-Way Trade With PRC Increases -- Minister of Trade Satrio 
Budiarjo said that two-way trade between Indonesia and the PRC 
increased from $1.14 billion in 1990 to $2.18 billion in 1993. 
Indonesia's trade surplus with the PRC grew from $182.1 million in 
1990 to $313.5 million in 1993.  (Jakarta THE JAKARTA POST 6 Apr 94 
p 9) 

   Taiwanese To Develop Petrochemical Plant -- A 45-member Taiwanese 
consortium has agreed to build a petrochemical plant in Tuban, East 
Java with a $1 billion investment.  (Jakarta KOMPAS 4 Apr 94 p 2) 

   Mitsui Petrochemical To Establish Manufacturing Plant -- Mitsui 
Petrochemical Industries, Ltd. recently announced plans to construct 
a high-grade terephthalic acid manufacturing plant in Merak, West 
Java.  The plant, which is expected to start operations in early 
1997, will have an annual capacity of 350,000 tons.  Mitsui 
Petrochemical will have a 45-percent share in this plant, the 
Chicago-based Amoco Chemical Co. 50 percent, and Nitsui and Co. the 
remaining 5 percent.  (Jakarta KOMPAS 5 Apr 94 p 5) 

   Open Bidding Expected for Power Plant Construction -- Samsudin 
Warsa, officer-in-charge of the East Java state-owned power company 
PLN stated that the government intends to use several contractors 
for the construction of the 800-MW thermal power plant in East Java. 
Samsudin said the company will soon open the bidding for the 
project.   (Jakarta KOMPAS 24 Mar 94 p 3) 

   LAOS:  Norway Grants Aid for Hydropower Project -- A Norwegian 
Government representative recently signed an agreement with Lao 
Deputy Industry and Handicraft Minister Khammon Phonkeo, to provide 
Laos with $5.5 million in aid for the construction of the Nam Theun- 
Hin Boun Hydropower Project. (Vientiane KPL English 0911 GMT 20 Apr 
94) 

   Swedish Organization Provides Development Loan -- Swedish Charge 
D'Affaires Rolf Carlman, representing the Nordic Fund,  and Lao 
Deputy Finance Minister Kikham Vongsai recently signed a $6.3- 
million loan for infrastructure projects, such as airport 
improvements, in Laos.  The loan carries a low interest rate and a 
long-term repayment plan.  (Vientiane KPL English 0800 GMT 27 Apr 
94) 

   MALAYSIA:  Trade, Investment With Sri Lanka Noted -- The 
Malaysian Chamber of Commerce and Industry reported that bilateral 
trade with Sri Lanka reached $135 million last year.  Malaysia 
exported $130 million in goods and services to Sri Lanka and 
imported only $5 million.  The Chamber of Commerce also reported 
that, to date, 15 companies have invested a total of $50 million in 
Sri Lanka.  These investments have been in the manufacturing, 
textiles, telecommunications, hotel, and catering sectors.  (Kuala 
Lumpur UTUSAN MALAYSIA 31 Mar 94 p 2) 

   NEC Wins Fiber Optic Cable Contract -- The Malaysian 
Telecommunication Company has awarded a $170.4 million contract to 
Japan's NEC Corporation to install a high-capacity fiber optic 
submarine cable system linking peninsular Malaysia with Labuan, 
Sabah, and Sarawak.  The 2,332-km link, called the Malaysian 
Domestic Submarine Cable System, will utilize the latest optical 
amplifier technology.  (Kuala Lumpur NEW STRAITS TIMES 16 Apr 94 p 
13) 

   PHILIPPINES:  Trade Agreements With Vietnam Signed -- President 
Ramos recently signed five trade agreements with Vietnam, two of 
which are expected to generate $110 million in bilateral trade, 
covering imports such as rice, nuts, corn, and anthracite coal, and 
exports such as agricultural equipment, fertilizer, garments, 
construction material, and motorcycles.  The other agreements 
involve infrastructure projects in Vietnam, joint-venture 
engineering-consultancy services, and a joint organic fertilizer 
research agreement between the Philippine Phosphate Fertilizer Corp. 
and the Vietnamese Institute of Agricultural Sciences.  (Manila 
BALITA 31 Mar 94 pp 1, 2) 

   SINGAPORE:  Japanese Firms To Expand Petrochemical Complex -- 
Three Japanese companies have secured $1.2 billion in contracts from 
companies who are expanding Singapore's petrochemical complex.  The 
contracts cover the engineering, procurement, and construction of a 
second ethylene plant by Petrochemical Corporation of Singapore 
(PCS) on Pulau Ayer Merbau and the construction of a new styrene 
monomer and propylene oxide complex--to be finished by mid-1997--on 
neighboring Pulau Seraya by Seraya Chemicals Singapore.  PCS will 
supply feedstock to Seraya Chemicals, which is a 70:30 joint venture 
between Shell and Mitsubishi.  The contracts, worth more than $600 
million, are for the construction of an ethylene plant by JGC 
Corporation, offsite facilities and utility plants by Chiyoda 
Corporation, and plants to produce aromatics, methyl-tertiary-butyl- 
ether, and butene-1 by Mitsui Engineering and Shipbuilding.  Shell 
has awarded the construction of the Seraya Chemicals complex to 
Chiyoda Corporation at a cost of over $600 million.  Using mainly 
Shell technology, the complex is expected to be ready for start-up 
in the second quarter of 1997.  (Singapore THE STRAITS TIMES 16 Apr 
94 p 47) 

   THAILAND:  Car Makers Get Export, Domestic Sales Incentives -- 
The Board of Investment (BOI) has decided to spur the auto industry 
by extending promotional privileges to factories--not in Bangkok or 
its immediate environs--that produce cars for export and domestic 
sales.  Plants in Zone 2 would receive a 50 percent tax reduction on 
machinery and a seven-year exemption from corporate tax on exported 
products.  Zone 3 factories would be exempt from import duties on 
machinery.  They would pay no corporate taxes for eight years and 
would get a 50 percent corporate tax exemption for an additional 
five years.  They would also enjoy a 25 percent reduction in costs 
related to transportation, electricity, and water supply. 
Additional privileges would be given to companies exporting over 
1,000 cars a year, including a tax reduction on local spare parts 
used to produce them.  The B0I reiterated a pledge to encourage 
relocation of industries to the provinces.  Auto plants doing so 
will receive corporate tax exemptions if they export products. 
(Bangkok BANGKOK POST 19 Apr 94 p 19) 

   Minister Comments on Energy Reserves -- Industry Minister Sanan 
Khachonprasat said that the discovery of 42 petroleum deposits will 
enable Thailand to produce crude oil for the next 20 years and 
natural gas for the next 44 years. These reserves are worth $36 
billion.  (Bangkok Radio Thailand Network 0000 GMT 25 Apr 94) 

   Burma Buys Electricity for Border Town -- Chunlaphong Chunlaket, 
governor of the Provincial Electricity Authority (PEA), disclosed 
that on 25 April the PEA signed a five-year agreement with the Shan 
State of Burma on the sale of electricity to Thachilek.  The Burmese 
will pay what Thai consumers do--about 10 cents per unit. The 
agreement will be renewable on a year-to-year basis.  Chunlaphong 
said that the PEA received permission from the cabinet on 22 April 
to sell electricity to border towns in Burma, Cambodia, Laos, and 
southern China.  The volume for each sale will range between 500 and 
2,000 kilowatts.  (Bangkok PHUCHATKAN 26 Apr 94 p 4) 

   Firm To Open Cement Plant in Cambodia -- Siam Cement Co will open 
its ready-mix concrete plant in Phnom Penh in the next two months 
according to Wira Phatanaphan, managing director of Concrete 
Products and Aggregate Co (CPAC) Ltd, a unit of Siam Cement.  The 
plant has a production capacity of 60,000 cubic meters per year and 
will cost $800,000.  CPAC Ready-mixed Concrete Co. Ltd. will own 40 
percent of the project with another 40 percent owned by Cambodian 
banks.  Annual demand for cement is -forecast to rise by 15 percent 
annually.  (Bangkok THE NATION 28 Apr 94 p B1) 

   VIETNAM:  FEATURE:  Mekong Delta Paddy Prices Decline Steadily -- 
SUMMARY:  Press articles report a steady decline in, paddy prices in 
the Mekong Delta.  The government has implemented 'emergency 
measures" to assure funding for rice purchases.  Prices are below 
production costs. 

   The 17 March THOI BAO KINH TE SAIGON reported that since mid- 
February, Delta paddy prices have been declining steadily and "will 
continue to do so."  In Vinh Long Province prices plunged from $2 to 
to $1.50 per bushel.  The 6 April THOI BAO KINH TE VIET NAM 
published in Hanoi stated that by 5 March, prices had declined to 
less than $2 per bushel for good quality paddy and had fallen to 
$1.40 or lower in Dong Thap and An Giang Provinces.  It was also 
reported that buyers are taking advantage of the situation to demand 
that peasants provide 22-kilo rather than the usual 20-kilo bushels. 
The paper stated that the winter-spring crop in the Delta's 11 
provinces will yield 4.5 million tons or six metric tons per hectare 
according to Agriculture Ministry estimates.  The paper reported on 
30 March that despite some improvement in prices, they are still 
lower than production costs. 

   The 17 March THOI BAO KINH TE SAIGON reported that farmers claim 
the winter-spring crop this year has been the best so far, but 
buyers are scarce.  State-run companies are short of funds to make 
purchases.  THOI BAO KINH TE VIET NAM on 23 March called the Delta 
price decline "alarming" and noted that the government had decided 
to intervene. 

   The 23 March SAIGON GIAI PHONG reported that the Prime Minister 
had already issued an order for "the banks the finance sector to 
urgently act so that state enterprises in the south can obtain 
suficient loans to buy paddy from farmers."  However, the article 
commented that, to date, nothing has been done. 

   In an effort to help the country's rice farmers, the government 
has also stepped in to assist rice exporters in purchasing rice. 
The 6 April THOI BAO KINH TE VIET NAM reported that the government 
had introduced a series of "emergency" measures.  According to the 
paper, the government will allow the use of a price stabilization 
fund to partially subsidize interest costs for rice exporters.  The 
level of support is the difference between the bank loan interest 
rate and the one percent per month interest the businesses have to 
pay on their loans.  In addition, the government has ruled that the 
14 major rice-exporting organizations in the South may use 70 
percent of 1994's export quota.  The remainder will go to lesser 
rice-export organizations.  If these organizations find new 
customers and business conditions are good, then the Trade Ministry 
will issue export permits.  The problem now, continued THOI BAO KINH 
TE VIET NAM, is to find enough cash to buy up the 2 or 3 million 
metric tons of paddy (about $300 million).  Many rice exporters are 
already in debt to the banks, having suffered severe losses in 1993- 
-some as much as $5.8 million--and it remains to be seen if the 
banks will make new loans.  Reflecting the rice exporters' problem, 
the 23 March THOI BAO KINH TE VIET NAM had noted that as of mid- 
March, Vietnam had exported only 66 percent of 1993's totals for the 
same period. 

   Foreign Investment Projects Licensed in First Quarter -- In the 
first quarter of 1994, 61 foreign investment projects capitalized at 
$707 million have been licensed.  Since the promulgation of the 
Foreign Investment Law, the State Commission for Cooperation and 
Investment has licensed 908 foreign investment projects with a total 
capital of $8.311 billion.  (Hanoi Voice of Vietnam 2300 GMT 17 Apr 
94) 

   Prospects for Coffee Exports -- Vietnam has exported more than 
100,000 metric tons (MT) of coffee in the first five months of the 
financial year, indicating that last year's exports of about 128,000 
MT will be exceeded.  The 1993-94 crop is expected to yield about 
135,000 MT, an increase of 5,000 MT over last year.  (Hanoi VNA 1421 
GMT 19 Apr 94) 

   Sugar Production Down; Imports Authorized -- Due to a poor 
harvest, the production of sugar for 1994-95, including reserves, 
may only reach 85,000 metric tons (MT). The total demand is 
estimated at 25,000 MT per month.  In the first quarter of 1994, the 
Ministry of Trade issued permits to import about 70,000 MT, half of 
it raw sugar.  By October, sugar imports may rise to 80,000 MT. 
(Hanoi Voice of Vietnam 1100 GMT 18 Apr 94) 

   French Firm To Build Mill, Export Processed Rice -- Aruco 
International, a French grain company, plans to build a $3 million 
joint-venture grain processing mill outside Ho Chi Minh City with a 
capacity to export 30,000 tons of processed rice annually.  Aruco 
will contribute 50 percent of the capital to build the plant through 
its Singapore subsidiary, and "local capital" from My Tho, on the 
outskirts of Ho Chi Minh City, will make up the other half.  The 
plant will be completed in May 1994. 

   The processing plant will parboil unhulled rice, which retains 
the nutrients, and then package it for export.  While there is 
little demand in Asia for parboiled rice, there are good markets in 
southern Africa, Saudi Arabia, and Europe. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO 
SHIMBUN 14 Apr 94 p 3) 

   Peugeot Prepares to Build Assembly Plant -- Peugeot's 
representative for Indochina and Myanmar said the auto manufacturer 
will build an assembly plant in Hanoi.  Investment is in the build, 
operate, transfer form.  Investment capital will be $30 million, 63 
percent of it will be supplied by Peugeot.  Initial production is 
planned at 1,000 vehicles per year.  Peugeot has been working with 
the Vietnamese company Formach on the project for more than a year. 
(Hanoi THOI BAO KINH TE VIETNAM 1994 special edition p 15) 

   Joint Venture With ROK in TV Assembly -- Thang Loi Joint Venture 
Company (a joint venture between between ROK's Seyong and the Thang 
Loi company in An Giang Province) have entered into a television 
assembly joint venture with the Gold-Star group.  The joint venture 
will start operations in April.  It is capitalized at $6 million, 
and is expected to produce more than 100,000 units per year.  (Ho 
Chi Minh City THOI BAO KINH TE SAIGON 26 Mar 94 p 3). 

   Foreign Loans Guaranteed by State Banks -- The Governor of the 
Vietnam State Bank on 21 Feb 1994 signed Decison No. 23/QD-NH14 to 
guarantee capital loans made from foreign countries, in order to 
attract foreign investment and promote development of the country's 
capital market. 

   From now on, Vietnamese businesses will borrow foreign capital by 
getting and repaying their own loans.  Businesses receiving foreign 
investment capital in accordance with the Foreign Investment Law 
will have their loans guaranteed by the State Bank and others 
authorized to engage in foreign operations.  These are state-owned 
commercial banks, joint stock commercial banks, joint-venture banks, 
branches of foreign banks, and investment/development banks. 

   When a loan is reguaranteed by a second bank, there is a 
guarantee of full implementation of the original guarantor's 
commitment.  Should the latter not fulfill its commitment, the loan 
will be repaid by the second bank.  Businesses with a guarantee pay 
the guarantor banks a maximum of 1 percent per year of the covered 
amount.  The fee to a second guarantor bank would be no more than .5 
percent per year. 

   According to THOI BAO KINH TE VIET NAM--published by the Vietnam 
Economic Association--acting as a guarantor for foreign loans is an 
entirely new function in Vietnamese banking.  It will help 
Vietnamese banks increase their competitiveness vis-a-vis the 
increasing number of foreign banks in the country.  (Hanoi THOI BAO 
KINH TE VIET NAM 9 Mar 94 p 1) 

   Vietcombank Signs Credit Line With Korea Eximbank -- The Bank for 
Foreign Trade of Vietnam (Vietcombank) and the Export-Import Bank 
(Eximbank) of Korea have signed a $10-million credit line, enabling 
Vietnamese businessmen to draw dollar credit from Vietcombank to 
purchase Korean capital goods.  Repayment ranges from 3 to 10 years, 
with an interest rate of 5.95 percent.  (Hanoi VNA 0604 GMT 27 Apr 
94) 
EAG/4May94/ECONF/TECHTF/East Asia Group/PF 05/0016z May 

