Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "We Fully Understand..."] </F>
  [Text] This is what Lithuanian President Algirdas 
Brazauskas said when he announced to the nation his official 
application to NATO Secretary General Manfred Woerner requesting 
admittance to this organization. There is no need to speak 
repeatedly about the Lithuanian nature of this application, 
because, most probably, the original was written in a foreign 
language [reference to Russian] and later translated into the 
state language, as is usually the case here. 
  However, the persistence which marked the long road to this 
decision is completely incomprehensible. Future historians may 
find a great variety of documents when trying to understand the 
evolution of the Lithuanian mentality toward NATO. There was a 
statement signed by nine political parties, including 
representatives of the ruling Lithuanian Democratic Labor Party. 
There was a series of news conferences, briefings, and 
debates.... Every government official was ready to kiss the 
cross to certify that the dream of their lives and the goal of 
their activities is to bring Lithuania into NATO. Many people 
still remember the discussion broadcast over radio, in which 
Foreign Minister P. Gylys asked a rhetorical question with 
indignation: "What else do you need to prove that we really 
want to join NATO? We have already stated that we want to." As 
it turns out, less than half a month later, a simple statement 
is in fact not enough. Who lied to whom? 
  The opposition can raise a glass of champagne. It has sought 
an official statement on joining NATO with persistence. 
However, only the resolution adopted by the Seimas [parliament] 
at the end of the year forced the president to make up his mind. 
All talk about the unpreparedness of both sides and NATO's 
indefinite future ended. It was only mentioned that this move 
would require "determination, new decisions, and large material 
resources." As of today, we can state the presence of 
determination alone, while no one has yet mentioned new 
decisions and the necessary resources. Lithuanian politicians 
have not yet begun to comment on the president's decision. Only 
Seimas opposition leader V. Landsbergis expressed his opinion on 
"Radio Free Europe" on Tuesday night [4 January] and later 
circulated it to the press. Certainly, the professor also tried 
to show some concern and to be a little intimidating. "The most 
important thing is that the process of independence, peace, and 
European consolidation was not disrupted in the Baltic region by 
any undemocratic attempts of imperial forces." Such a desire is 
really timely, the more so since V. Zhirinovskiy is getting 
restless while explaining his opinion about subsequent relations 
with the Baltic states. The British Baltic Council has applied 
to Prime Minister John Major, stating that "these threats cannot 
be interpreted as shouts of an emotional person." Remembering 
the fact that thus far, the Lithuanian Government has neither 
approved nor condemned V. Zhirinovskiy's statements concerning 
the Baltic states, maybe we should begin to understand the 
president's letter as a reaction to the escalation of fascism by 
the "liberals" in Russia. Might this be one of the 
aforementioned "new decisions?" 
  We were the first to state clearly that we want to join 
NATO, 
and this statement was confirmed by the president's signature. 
Latvia has not done this yet, but our example may be 
contagious. We have learned from the Estonian Foreign Ministry 
that it does not intend to follow Lithuania's example in the 
near future. However, our move will not encourage the 
enthusiasm of Russian politicians, because NATO's borders will 
run into Russia's frontiers and lead to, if not confrontation, 
then at least some sort of mutual supervision. Yesterday, B. 
Yeltsin's press secretary circulated a statement which does not 
question our right to join international organizations, however, 
our arguments and motives are deemed unconvincing. The 
expansion of NATO can even destabilize the military situation in 
the region. This idea is not new. It has already been voiced 
by Academician Y. Primakov, Russia's chief intelligence officer. 
Now, this idea has been raised to the presidential level. 
  We have made a determined move not only on our way to 
Europe, 
but also to the world. When doing this, we always discuss our 
plan of action. The president only mentions that this step will 
require large expenditures. Being aware of Lithuanians' 
"rational character," one does not doubt that there are no 
estimates of costs on the president's desk. Our authorities 
know how to hide government expenses for one or another action. 
In our opinion, in this case they confuse their personal 
pockets with the state's budget coffers -- not by wasting money 
but by hiding expenses. We have already heard about the 
Napoleon-like plans of the National Defense Ministry to teach 
all recruits and officers English, to standardize armaments, 
form a battalion of "blue helmets," and fund commanders' studies 
abroad. The public already knows a little about the military's 
habit of spending state money. What will happen now? Democratic 
countries announce such expenses and debate them. Certainly, it 
is difficult for Lithuanians to realize that this harms neither 
defense nor finances. 
  Every decision has its own price. Until now, we have known 
only the moral price of this move. We may learn the remaining 
issues later. Progress toward a civilized community is not 
easily predicted. Even trains are planning to avoid Lithuania. 
We wish this decision was not similar to the first steps of the 
restored state, when everyone was confident that others must 
fulfill our political instructions and economic ambitions. It 
would be praiseworthy if our state leaders explained to the 
Lithuanian people what we have won by this move, because 
politicians' shuffling is not clear to everyone. A clear 
understanding of goals would enhance the latter's trust. 

