CSO 

<F P=106> [Text of the statement of Azerbaijan Republic President H.A. </F>
Aliyev at the meeting of the CIS Council of Heads of State, in 
Moscow, 15 April 1994] 
  [Text] Extraordinary circumstances compel me to address 
you with the following statement. 
  On 10 April of this year, the armed forces of the Republic 
of 
Armenia began a new large-scale offensive in the direction of 
Geranboyskiy and Terterskiy Rayons, and on 11 April, in the 
direction of Agderinskiy and Agdamskiy Rayons of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan. Right now Azerbaijani units, repelling continuous 
attacks by the numerically superior units of the Republic of 
Armenia's armed forces, are conducting bloody defensive battles. 
A military contingent of about 3,000 troops has been transferred 
from the territory of Armenia into the zone of conflict, 
together with tens of units of armored vehicles and heavy 
artillery--including Grad systems--which are shelling populated 
centers of the aforementioned rayons of Azerbaijan. These 
villages have been ravaged, and there are numerous casualties 
among civilian population. 
  Thus, the Republic of Armenia, continuing its war of 
aggression on the territory of Azerbaijan, encroaches on the 
independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of the 
Azerbaijan Republic, threatening the very statehood of 
Azerbaijan. 
  By continuing its aggression, Armenia is blocking the 
process 
of peaceful settlement, in which Azerbaijan takes a most active 
part. By carrying out another offensive every time we are in the 
middle of or on the threshold of major mediating initiatives, 
the aggressor cynically defies the world community, which is 
undertaking--alas, unsuccessfully at this point--attempts to 
resolve this bloody conflict. 
  [Lines missing] a new stage of aggression by the Republic of 
Armenia, the purpose of which is to seize new Azerbaijani 
territories. Despite numerous declarations of a desire to 
resolve the conflict peacefully. By its latest offensive deep 
into the territory of a sovereign state--a CIS member--the 
Republic of Armenia demonstrates its true intentions, which are 
to put pressure on Azerbaijan and its leadership and block the 
peace process. 
  I want to particularly draw your attention to the fact that 
the Armenian armed forces' offensive began a day before the 
opening on 11 April of this year of a meeting of the CSCE's 
Minsk Group in Prague, with the participation, among others, of 
representatives of Azerbaijan and Armenia. 
  Escalation of aggression against Azerbaijan by the Republic 
of Armenia is taking place during the time of holding intensive 
negotiations within the framework of the Russian mediation 
initiative and at the time of the current meeting of CIS heads 
of states. 
  One has to admit that after the conference of CIS heads of 
States in Ashgabat in December 1993, when a meeting took place 
between Armenian President L. Ter-Petrosyan and myself, there 
have been no positive changes in the Republic of Armenia's 
policy regarding Azerbaijan Republic. Armenian armed forces 
continue to occupy more than 20 percent of Azerbaijan's 
territory and to conduct ethnic cleansing; people are dying, and 
a million Azerbaijani refugees huddled in tent cities experience 
unbelievable deprivation and suffering. 
  I want to point out that Azerbaijan took a most active part 
in all mediating efforts of the world community, including that 
by international organizations and great powers. These efforts 
include, in addition to my negotiations with the president of 
Armenia, the 18 February 1994 meeting of ministers of defense of 
Azerbaijan, Armenia, and the Russian Federation; a visit to 
Azerbaijan and Armenia of the Jan Eliasson, chairman of the 
CSCE's Minsk Group, in March 1994; the meeting of the speakers 
of the Azerbaijani and Armenian parliaments on 12 March of this 
year; negotiations in Baku and Moscow with V.N. Kazimirov, the 
special representative of the president of the Russian 
Federation; and the visit of a peacekeeping group of the CIS 
Interparliamentary Assembly in March of this year. However, all 
attempts on the part of Azerbaijan to find a mutually acceptable 
compromise solution have run into a coercive position by Armenia. 
  The Republic of Armenia torpedoes any constructive proposals 
by putting forward the terms it knows full well to be 
unacceptable. Their substance is that the Republic of Armenia, 
which has created a military beachhead on the territory of 
Azerbaijan, wants to trade occupied territories for independent 
state status for Nagornyy Karabakh, that is, to de facto 
dismember Azerbaijani Republic. 
  Azerbaijan's rightful position is to free all occupied 
territories and to restore its sovereignty; return refugees to 
places of their permanent residence and liquidate the 
consequences of Republic of Armenia's aggression. Azerbaijan 
does not want war and calls on Armenia to achieve peace on the 
basis of commonly accepted principles of mutual relations 
between sovereign states. Striving for civic peace and accord, 
the Azerbaijani Government is ready to guarantee the safety and 
civil rights of Armenian residents of the Nagornyy Karabakh 
region on the condition that they obey Azerbaijan's Constitution. 
  As you may remember, in Ashgabat Azerbaijan proposed to work 
out a system of bilateral and multilateral agreements aimed at 
stabilization of the political situation in the CIS states and 
ensuring mutual recognition and respect for the sovereignty, 
territorial integrity, and inviolability of borders of each CIS 
member state. 
  I am compelled to speak of this once again because life 
shows 
us that the indifferent attitude to the glaring fact of one 
member of the CIS--the Republic of Armenia--committing naked 
aggression against another CIS member--the Republic of 
Azerbaijan--practically brings to zero the prospects of forming 
a vital international 
organization, which we would like our Commonwealth to be. 
  I would like to urge you to discuss at this meeting the 
issue 
of Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict for the purpose of adopting 
concrete decisions for removing the aggression against the 
Azerbaijan Republic and its consequences. 
  In this address to the heads of states, we once again 
urgently call for: 
  --issuing a political judgment on the Republic of Armenia's 
aggression against the Azerbaijan Republic; 
  --demand that the Republic of Armenia cease military 
operations against Azerbaijan Republic and immediately, 
unconditionally, and without reserve withdraw its armed forces 
from the territory of sovereign Azerbaijan; 
  --demand from the Republic of Armenia firm political 
guarantees for not resuming military operations; 
  --apply sanctions with respect to the CIS member--the 
Republic of Armenia--that is carrying out armed aggression 
against another CIS member. 
  Further delay and inaction hold the threat of far greater 
trouble for all CIS states. 

