Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Shigeru Komago] </F>
  [Text] Waikoloa, Hawaii, 23 Mar -- The regular Japan-U.S. 
consultation on semiconductors closed on 23 March with both 
sides agreeing that both the government and private sectors 
should "exert further efforts to improve participation in the 
Japanese market" by foreign semiconductors. 
  "The two governments" agreed to "promote" the following 
concrete steps: 1) encourage joint development from the design 
phase (design-in); and 2) expand purchase in three priority 
sectors -- automobiles, telecommunications, and electronic 
games. The United States succeeded in clarifying the Japanese 
Government's involvement and the concrete actions to be taken. 
It has gained a new stepping stone to increasing market share. 
It also asked for the participation of the Nippon Telegraph and 
Telephone Corporation (NTT) and the automobile makers in future 
semiconductor meetings, aiming at direct deals with NTT and the 
other companies. 
  On the second day of the intergovernmental negotiations, 
only 
government officials, led by Hisamitsu Arai, deputy director 
general of the Machinery and Information Industries Bureau, 
Ministry of International Trade and Industry, on the Japanese 
side, and Assistant U.S. Trade Representative Donald Phillips on 
the U.S. side, were allowed to participate in the 
four-and-a-half hour session on the morning of 23 March (early 
hours of 24 March, Japan time). The central issue was 
government involvement in the new operational plan to promote a 
stable increase of foreign semiconductors' participation in the 
Japanese market, which had been basically agreed upon during the 
joint government and private sector session on the first day of 
the meeting. 
  According to sources in both delegations, the agreement 
reached in the present meeting reconfirmed the points agreed 
upon in the Japan-U.S. Semiconductor Accord. The meeting 
clarified government involvement in the form of "promotion and 
encouragement" [of private-sector efforts]. It decided on 
concrete steps to be taken, and thus reinforced the bilateral 
agreement. However, both sides affirmed that this does not mean 
increasing the share of foreign semiconductors in the Japanese 
market beyond 20 percent, and "will not be directly linked with 
an increase in share target." 
  With regard to concrete actions to be taken by the 
government 
to support the private sector, of the four items proposed by the 
United States on the first day, Japan agreed to campaign for 
design-in, while the United States pledged active participation. 
As to setting priority sectors for semiconductor procurement, 
it was agreed that measures will be taken to expand purchase in 
the automobile, telecommunications and electronic games sectors, 
as demanded by the United States. 
  Regarding the two other U.S. demands, the United States 
conceded and backed off on its proposal concerning the expansion 
of major Japanese companies' purchase of foreign semiconductors 
after Japan had explained that "we are already making efforts." 

