Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with UN expert Professor Volodymyr Butkevych, by </F>
Oksana Hutsul; place and date not given: "The President Says 
It's an Advantage. Time Will Tell"] 
  [Text] Hutsul: What consequences will Ukraine 
face after the signing of the tripartite Moscow accord? 
  Butkevych: In my opinion, Ukraine's prestige in 
the world community will increase. Everybody understands that 
Ukraine is the first owner of nuclear arms that has decided to 
get rid of them serving as an example to others. It is evident 
that we will pursue the declared policy. What will other states 
gain? Ukraine's decision will reduce the number of nuclear 
states and strengthen world security. 
  However, I want to avoid pompous phrases like "historic 
stage 
in the development of international relations." I only want to 
say that this is the first step taken by a nuclear state toward 
implementing the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty [NPT]. By the 
way, this is quite a complicated document. We have gained by 
joining the treaty, although many problems remain unresolved. 
Our joining the treaty will raise the issue of peaceful nuclear 
explosions currently used for building deep underground 
reservoirs for gas and oil. Experts cite at least 20 examples 
of when nuclear explosions are indispensable. There will be 
questions concerning the development and use of new nuclear 
technologies for peaceful purposes, nuclear fuel production, 
and, -- the most important -- security assurances for Ukraine. 
There have been positive changes with regard to the latter. 
You probably remember that some time ago, we faced an 
ultimatum: There can be no security assurances prior to signing 
the treaty. Yet, it is clear that one cannot make another state 
eliminate its nuclear arms without granting this state's 
security. As of today, we are the first country to receive 
security assurances in the form of a treaty. However, our 
diplomacy and the legislature will have to resolve a number of 
issues. The Supreme Council will have to ratify certain 
international agreements which will probably put forth new 
questions. We have to understand that compliance with our 
commitments will lead us to adopting a series of legal acts 
concerning the nonnuclear status, nuclear power engineering, and 
technologies. We need our legislature's goodwill and readiness 
to proceed in the same direction. 
  Hutsul: History is history, and international 
prestige, too, is a factor of importance. Still, what if our 
disarmament exposes us to "harsh treatment" from our northern 
neighbor? 
  Butkevych: Five or six years ago, a Swedish 
scientist conducted research and reached the conclusion that a 
nonnuclear state gains much more than it loses with regard to 
its national security. 
  Hutsul: However, there are trends in the world 
to acquire nuclear arms.... 
  Butkevych: These are different processes, 
although I must admit that the NPT is not flawless. The treaty 
does not equally distribute the commitments of nuclear and 
nonnuclear states. The imperfect wording of articles leads to a 
situation when nonnuclear states have the same commitments as 
their nuclear counterparts. The treaty deals with proliferation 
of nuclear arms from the latter to the former and does not 
mention an opposite process. Nor does it resolve the issue of 
transporting nuclear arms via territories of nonnuclear 
countries, while Ukraine's geopolitical situation does not 
permit any other solution. The resolution of this issue is 
vitally important to us. In other words, a new stage of nuclear 
disarmament has begun, not experienced by any other country, and 
Ukraine is going to play a leading role in it. 
  Hutsul: Suppose the Supreme Council does not 
ratify the treaty. What will happen then? 
  Butkevych: If the parliament does not ratify the 
NPT in the form advocated by Ukraine and finally accepted by the 
world community, this will be viewed as a challenge. This 
undiplomatic stubbornness may cost our nation a high price. I 
believe that the legislature will ratify the treaty after a 
detailed analysis of all the clauses. Only if they find the 
treaty to contain some discriminating articles, will the 
legislature have the moral right to impose a ban on it. 
However, after analyzing all the circumstances I am still 
optimistic with regard to ratification. 

