BFN 

<F P=106> [By Akram al-Khatib] </F>
  [Text] Bassam Abu-Sharif, one of Palestinian President 
Yasir 'Arafat's advisers, has said he believes the Israeli 
military will complete its withdrawal from the territories 
defined by the Gaza-Jericho First agreement long ahead of 
schedule. 
  The Palestinian and Israeli sides had agreed that Israel's 
withdrawal would take place four months after the signing at the 
latest. 
  In statements to AL-ASWAQ here in Amman, Bassam Abu-Sharif 
said President 'Arafat will likely enter the liberated areas in 
June, 1994. Speaking on the eve of the signing of the Cairo 
agreement, Abu-Sharif said preparations for the entry of the 
Palestinian police, 9000-strong, and the presidential staff and 
security personnel and bodyguards have been in the making for 
some time, and these are now ready to take over any minute. 
  The transition period amounts to more than a secondary 
stage, 
according to Abu-Sharif. The first step calls for empowerment 
of the national authority in Jericho and Gaza, the second for 
Israeli forces to redeploy in the rest of the West bank nine 
months after the start of the implementation of the first step. 
  Abu-Sharif indicated that Jerusalem was excluded from the 
agreement on the understanding that it will be addressed in the 
final stage. Procedures for entry to Gaza and Jericho will be 
different from those in force now, and the same holds for the 
rest of the West Bank nine months later. 
  Abu-Sharif said robust economic relations between the state 
of Palestine and Arab states is essential if the Palestinians 
are to tackle the problems that naturally lie ahead, including 
building an infrastructure and effecting economic development 
programs. It is impossible for Palestinians in the liberated 
areas to translate economic programs into realities on the 
ground without joining hands with Jordan. Relations between the 
Palestinians and Jordanians are of the sort that exist in one 
family. Such cooperation should enable the Palestinians to 
stand up to Israel's covetous plans. The economic agreement 
signed between Jordan and the PLO a few months ago marks the 
foundations for building economic structures. 
  Abu-Sharif said pledges have been made by donor nations to 
fund key projects. He said there are bilateral agreements 
between the PLO and the European Union, as well as Arab and 
foreign countries. The funds committed for the reconstruction 
effort over the coming three years may be in the order of $5 
billion, not counting the money to be invested in the 
Palestinian economy by private Palestinian and Arab sectors. 
  He said the widespread feeling of anxiety gripping 
Palestinians inside and in the diaspora, as well as Arabs around 
Palestine, is understandable, becuase the near future holds 
major changes, whose consequences cannot be accurately 
predicted. I think, though, that coordination and cooperation 
between the Palestinians and Arabs should be able not only to 
end the state of anxiety but also to mobilize energies to tackle 
all the challenges. 
  Abu-Sharif applauded the recent agreement between Fatah and 
Hamas [Islamic Resistance Movement], noting that a cardinal rule 
among the Palestinians is to refrain from the use of violence in 
resolving their domestic differences. Adherence to this 
principle is essential if peace and the reconstruction effort 
are to succeed. 
  I am confident that all parties will obligate themselves to 
this rule, not excluding Hamas, the Islamic Resistance Movement. 
  Palestinian democracy can accommodate divergent views no 
matter how far apart they are. But there is no place in 
Palestinian democracy for the advocates of violence as a means 
to impose their will on others. I am confident that Hamas is no 
less patriotic or enlightened than other Palestinians. Hamas 
will, therefore, play by the rule and deny whoever wants to harm 
the Palestinian people the chance to do so. 
  Abu-Sharif said President 'Arafat issued a presidential 
decree to launch a Palestinian aviation authority a while back. 
Discussion of practicalities of the project will take place 
later. 

