Language: <F P=105> Greek </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] The direction of our national issues and the 
recent NATO summit in Brussels were at the center of the 
75-minute talk President Konstandinos Karamanlis and Prime 
Minister Andreas Papandreou held today. Upon leaving the 
Presidential Palace, Prime Minister Papandreou stated the 
following: 
  [Begin recording] [Papandreou] I briefed the president on my 
trip to Brussels. We also discussed foreign policy issues and 
domestic policy. It was a good, interesting discussion. It was 
a very interesting dialogue; it wasn't ordinary, but was 
substantive. [passage omitted] I am at your disposal for any 
questions you may have. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] Prime Minister, there appears 
to 
be movement around the Skopje issue, and we note pressure on our 
country to participate in a particular form of dialogue. Is our 
country willing to attend a dialogue --either at the United 
Nations or directly -- without the government's conditions first 
being met? 
  [Papandreou] The answer is no. The dialogue will only be 
useful when Skopje abolishes the offensiveness expressed through 
the article in its Constitution that discusses liberating the 
Macedonian people, which actually means liberating a geographic 
area; when they drop the Veryina Sun from their flag; and when 
they stop their continuous offensive propaganda. These are our 
goals. The way policy on the issue is handled depends on the 
moment and the conditions. My answer is clear. We expect 
exactly what you suggested, and what I said. This dialogue will 
deal with various issues, but does not mean recognition of the 
name Macedonia or a name that includes the term Macedonia or its 
derivatives. Of course, the United Nations and the 12 members 
of the European Union have recognized Skopje as FYROM [the 
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia]. The Twelve recognized 
Skopje by that name long ago. This dialogue will deal with the 
name as well, not on the understanding that we are ready to 
change our basic and firm position, but based on our hope that 
we can convince Skopje that they will benefit in many ways by 
choosing another name and thus end the issue of recognition by 
Greece. Greece cannot recognize a state with the name 
Macedonia. The irony is that while Greece is a country with no 
territorial claim against this statelet [Skopje], the economic 
viability of which depends on Greece, the Greek economy, the 
Greek geography... [Papandreou pauses] these are our thoughts. 
They will probably be detailed at the Chamber of Deputies, and 
answers will be given. I want to stress that foreign policy, 
especially on Skopje, is handled by me personally and by Foreign 
Minister Karolos Papoulias. No one else handles policy on 
Skopje, either directly or indirectly. We should be very clear 
on this. 
  [Correspondent] Prime Minister, did you discuss the drilling 
for oil on Thasos Island, and whether Greece maintains its right 
to drill beyond the six miles [of territorial water] or within 
the Greek continental shelf? 
  [Papandreou] You said a lot in one question. We did not 
discuss this issue, but you know the Greek position. The 
continental shelf's boundaries have not been drawn up. We know 
that. We ask Turkey to come with us to the Hague to agree on 
the boundaries of the continental shelf. The Geneva 
Convention's primary article regarding the issue is that the 
islands have a continental shelf. Based on the premise that 
international law clearly states that the islands have a 
continental shelf, Greece can proceed to drill in the Aegean, 
where... [Papandreou pauses] and not only in its territorial 
water, because the islands have a continental shelf. This is a 
fact. What Greece will do and how it will handle the whole 
affair is another issue. Our policy on the affair is another 
issue. We have no reason to aggravate our relations with 
Turkey. Turkey is offensive, but I think its deceipt is mainly 
for domestic consumption. They have a need, I think, to speak 
of such things to cover other weaknesses, their economy, and 
domestic developments. [end recording] 

