Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Bronius Genzelis, legislative deputy and member </F>
of the Lithuanian Democratic Labor Party: "The Negation of the 
State"] 
  [Excerpts] The overall destruction of the state is going 
on in Lithuania. The press is waging an intensive propaganda 
war against all government structures without exception (the 
Seimas [parliament], the president, courts, and 
self-governments). It seems that no positive changes have 
occurred since the restoration of independence in Lithuania. 
This idea is being promoted on all levels -- from the "16 
February" [Independence Day] to the "leftist" "oppositions" 
[reference to right and left radical forces]. The reader is 
being persuaded that Lithuanians are immature for their 
statehood (they vote for God knows who, most of them support 
those who do not deserve support, and so on). The supreme evil 
is the Seimas (formerly, the Supreme Council) which is composed 
of foolish and avid deputies. Money assigned for its 
maintenance is wasted. It follows from these speculations that 
elections are an unnecessary waste of finances, and that 
Lithuania does not need elected bodies. Was it better when 
strangers ruled us? Might the nation need a leader like the one 
[Landsbergis] offered at the 23 May 1992 referendum? Since 
citizens did not grant him unlimited powers, should not they put 
him in this post in some other way? 
  I am convinced that some of these propagandists do not even 
consider what they are proposing to the nation. 
  Another target of criticism is the national defense system. 
Is everything so black there as well? A campaign is being 
waged against the National Defense Ministry [KAM] and the 
Volunteer National Defense Service [SKAT]. Some people have a 
great temptation to bring the first organizers of our military 
structures to the bar. 
  Papers are publishing an increasing number of articles 
exposing our Army. Everything is bad there -- the Army is 
arbitrary and corrupt. We must understand, however, why we have 
such a situation, and look for ways of improving it. 
  I would like to ask the current KAM critics: Where were you 
earlier, and what was your role in creating military structures? 
Could our Armed Forces, albeit imperfect, emerge on another 
basis? 
  When our country had no international recognition, no state 
could legally support us with arms. If some country had tried 
to do this openly, it would have been condemned for interference 
in internal affairs. 
  The illegal arms trade is a dirty business. It is often 
linked with the criminal world. History does not know any group 
fighting for its country's independence which has not tried to 
acquire arms illegally, while there is no legal way. Therefore, 
criminal charges can always be brought against them later for 
the "illegal" acquisition of arms. [passage omitted] 
  While Lithuania was not internationally recognized, it was 
dangerous to work in its military structures, particularly 
without arms. There were no possibilities then to check every 
person coming to the defense system and find out where he or she 
had bought their arms. Criminals usually take advantage of such 
situations. 
  The Supreme Council Security Department, the SKAT, and the 
National Defense Department (later the KAM) emerged during the 
events of January 1991. There is no wonder that ordinary 
hooligans and thieves also found themselves there due to the 
lack of control. I am sure that the Russian secret services 
inspired many of them to join these structures. These services 
must have infiltrated their agents into our originating military 
structures. I think that these people have not disappeared. 
Unfortunately, we know little about their network. However, 
this is only one side of the moon. What about the other? 
  KAM and SKAT politicians of that time would impart hatred 
toward their own countrymen with different views rather than 
foreign invaders. They seemed to see enemies around every 
corner. I think that the future will expose those who spread 
hatred and their goals. 
  On the other hand, our military commanders did not allow 
themselves to be involved in political intrigues: They accepted 
the results of both the 23 May 1992 referendum and the October 
Seimas elections, even though some people wanted to annul them. 
  The staff of KAM, SKAT, and the Supreme Council Security 
Department behaved properly during those elections. Political 
tolerance and responsibility was coming into being. Power was 
being smoothly transferred from one political group to another. 
Our military commanders did everything to prevent 
"Georgian-type" developments in our country. [passage omitted] 
  Certainly, we must protect our military structures from 
further corruption. However, financial violations in the past 
and the present are two different things. 
  If we continue to bluntly attack the KAM, we will either set 
the Army against us or impart an inferiority complex to our 
soldiers, which would be ruinous to the state in either case. 
  Summarizing these observations, one can draw the conclusion 
that there are two groups of people interested in discrediting 
KAM and SKAT: 1) Those who failed to use military structures 
for their egoistic interests; 2) The enemies of our 
independence who would like Lithuania not to have even a 
symbolic force that could resist attempts to suppress our state. 
  Let us consider the following synchronous events: As soon as 
the external pressure increases, the "internal opposition" (from 
the Poles' Union to the Nationalist Party) becomes active. Both 
these organizations are extremely nationalistic. It would be 
understandable if they engaged in cultural issues. I do not 
think that these small organizations could raise a big commotion 
all by themselves. For example, the Vilnius Regional Council, 
guided by the Poles' Union, is stepping up pressure on 
Lithuanian schools. Such steps are nothing but provocations 
(there are many former enemies of Lithuania's independence in 
this union). Therefore, it is clear why Lithuanian citizens 
look upon this organization with suspicion. At the same time, 
the nationalists are shouting about new elections, the overthrow 
of the government, and so on. 
  This forces one to consider which groups are interested in 
Lithuania's unstable situation, and brings one to the conclusion 
that there are three such forces operating in our country. 
  The first force is the supporters of the restoration of the 
Russian empire. They want to discredit the very idea of 
Lithuania's statehood and persuade the world community (as well 
as the Lithuanians themselves) that Lithuania is immature for 
its independence. Therefore, they are disseminating the 
following idea abroad -- former communists have returned to 
power; chaos, poverty, and theft reign the country; it is 
dangerous for foreigners to stay here longer; there is no order 
in the country; or that Lithuania is capable of exporting only 
cheap prostitutes to the West. Thus, there remains nothing else 
but to return to the embrace of the Russian empire. 
  The second force is the "constructive opposition." Its 
single goal is to return to power by any means, without knowing 
what to do after that. Although this group is trying to 
discredit Lithuania's current government alone, actually it 
contributes to ruining not only government institutions but also 
the state itself. 
  The third force is the Mafia, which is completing its 
integration with the international criminal world. Mafia 
structures do not care about the color of the government. They 
seek to create corrupt authorities incapable of controlling the 
country's economy (the syndrome of a banana republic). 
  In reality (even though they do not seek this subjectively), 
the latter two groups serve the first one. I am sure that the 
first force has a network of its agents in the second two, and 
it can control the latter's actions through such measures -- 
destabilize the situation in the country as necessary. [passage 
omitted] 

