Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Maria Wagrowska: "A Signal for the West"] </F>
  [Text] Poland will soon submit a motion requesting 
admission to the European Union [EU]. This very act itself will 
not really draw us closer to membership in this organization; 
however, it will confirm to all of Europe and to the Polish 
people that Poland links its future to the West. When European 
Commission Deputy Chairman Hennig Christophersen heard the news 
about the intention of the Polish authorities, he did not really 
encourage taking this step; he implied, however, that the motion 
would be a clear declaration of Poland's intention. 
  Poland will be able to think about equal participation in 
the 
West European integration only when the present "Twelve," and 
then "Sixteen" (after the European Free Trade Zone states join 
the union) decide that it has proved itself. Right now, there 
are no reasons to claim that the EU will want to admit Poland, 
Hungary, or other postcommunist states of Central Europe. The 
only such signal--which, however, is by no means a 
commitment--was the Declaration by the Copenhagen summit of the 
"Twelve" in June 1993. 
  Despite that, it is good that the Government of the Polish 
Republic decided to submit the motion, which was backed by the 
president. The resolution by the Council of Ministers, which 
consists of representatives of postcommunist parties (in the 
past, the Polish Peasant Party used to express considerable 
reservations concerning the association treaty, whose fragments 
dealt with trade in agricultural products), finally dispels any 
doubts concerning the pro-Western direction in the foreign, and 
partially commercial, policy of our state. The government's 
decision puts an end to the speculations of some Western 
observers, who claimed that Poles have difficulties resulting 
from an insufficiently liberalized exchange of goods and 
services with the "Twelve"; they also pointed out that Poles are 
disappointed with the stands of both the EU and NATO on Central 
Europe and thus may be discouraged from the West. The 
announcement of submitting a motion requesting admission in the 
EU may also help work out some intermediate form between 
association (which has been in force since 1 February 1994) and 
full membership in the EU. Even though so far no intermediate 
form has been discussed, various ideas keep coming up, in the 
West, as well, about how Central and West Europe could be linked 
more closely: politically, militarily, or economically. It is 
impossible to rule out the possibility that, depending on 
further developments, some kind of a transitory form of Poland's 
participation in the Western structures will be accepted. This 
would definitely draw Poland closer to the West. 

