Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
fileworthy reports on economic developments in Cuba carried on 
Havana radio and television in Spanish between 12 and 15 
February. 
  Radio Rebelde at 1000 GMT on 12 February reports that the 
Cienfuegos spring sugarcane plan calls for planting 66 
caballerias in February. The radio also says that the weeding of 
cane lands needs to be increased at Cienfuegos' 12 
agroindustrial complexes, because "at the end of January, only 
48 percent of the planned weeding had been accomplished." 
  Radio Rebelde at 1255 GMT on 12 February reports that the 
order placed with the 20th Anniversary of the Triumph of the 
Revolution factory for 75,000 batteries for use during the 
current sugar harvest has been met. "This factory, the only one 
of its kind in the nation, is located in Manzanillo." 
  Radio Rebelde at 1800 GMT on 12 February reports that Cubana 
de Aviacion serves Cuba's nine tourist hubs. "The Cuban Civil 
Aeronautics Institute, IACC, is cooperating in the nation's 
effort to receive 1 million foreign vacationers in the short 
term, and have its aircraft and installations offer these 
visitors quality service," announced Division General Rogelio 
Acevedo, president of the IACC, upon inaugurating the remodeled 
Maximo Gomez terminal in Ciego de Avila Province, which was 
expanded at a cost of 10 million pesos and services several 
international routes by which tourists arrive at hotels and 
villas on the cays along Cuba's north coast. 
  Radio Reloj at 2057 GMT on 13 February notes that Cuba and 
Jamaica have established a maritime link "for trade and tourist 
purposes. The cities of Port Antonio and Santiago de Cuba, 
separated by 77 km, are linked by a trip of just seven hours. 
This will allow a greater number of vacationers to travel 
between the two islands. This link is also aimed at developing 
multidestination programs aimed at meeting the needs of the 
European, Canadian, and Latin American markets, and making a 
reality the Cuban and Jamaican desire to consolidate economic 
and tourism relations." This link was begun with the ferry 
Caribbean Queen [Reina del Caribe], operated by the 
Inter-Caribbean [Inter-Caribe] company, "whose basic activity is 
related to cruises, in conjunction with hotel enterprises. The 
ship carries 128 passengers, and the fact that it is 
first-class, economically advantageous, and has reasonable 
prices and onboard services satisfies the traveler's 
requirements. The tourist package is broader, however. Santiago 
de Cuba offers the enchantment of its history, hospitality, sun, 
culture, and autocthonous folklore, that mix of ethnicities and 
races that have merged into a particular idiosyncrasy. Options 
range from hotels, beaches, and nightclubs under the stars to 
trips to other Cuban cities. There are also prospects cropping 
up for achieving a greater presence of Cuban products in Jamaica 
and vice versa, which creates a favorable atmosphere for 
developing cooperative investments based on the potential the 
industry of the biggest island of the Antilles offers the 
market. Geographical proximity, cultural affinity, and good will 
nourish the interest in consolidating the tourist industry by 
connecting these Caribbean islands." 
  Tele Rebelde and Cuba Vision Networks at 0100 GMT on 14 
February report that the latex factory in Las Tunas is 
manufacturing gloves for use in the sugar harvest. During the 
first stage that will end in April, the factory will produce 
225,000 pairs of acid-proof gloves. This factory, which belongs 
to the Las Tunas Ceramics Enterprise, also produces vaginas for 
artificial insemination, and will soon begin manufacturing 
protective gloves for work with laboratory animals. 
  Tele Rebelde and Cuba Vision Networks at 0100 GMT on 14 
February add that three new generators were installed at the 
Camaguey sugar mill to increase the supply of power to the 
country and the production centers. 
  Radio Reloj at 2045 GMT on 15 February reports that the 26 
de 
Julio cane cooperative in Havana is stressing cane recovery and 
that "only 20 of the 90 caballerias of cane available will be 
cut this year." Leonardo Gonzalez, the cooperative's president, 
said the disease that stunts growth has been reduced to a 
minimum in the group's fields through intense fertilization with 
ammonia and thorough weeding. 

