Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Army Commander in Chief Gen. Wimon Wongwanit 
yesterday vowed to take tough action against Khmer guerrillas if 
they trespassed on Thai soil if the government gives the 
go-ahead. Wimon said people should not believe that the Army was 
still supporting the Khmer Rouge. "Thai people should believe 
that the Thai Army is not involved in the fighting between 
Cambodia's rival factions. They should understand that the Army 
would never support the Khmer Rouge," he said. 
  Wimon said many Thai soldiers had lost their lives helping 
to 
clear land mines planted by Cambodian factions along the border. 
"It's not worth it losing (our soldiers). If the government 
agrees with the Army to push back Cambodian intruders, we will 
be ready to use tough measures against them." The Thai military 
has complained that spillover of battles in Cambodian into 
Thailand has become common. But the Thai soldiers have refrained 
from drastic action. 
  Asked if he would talk with the Cambodian government about 
the issue, Wimon said he had nothing to talk about anymore. 
"I'll adopt a tougher stance against (Cambodian soldiers who 
intrude into Thai territory)," he said. 
  American Ambassador to Thailand David Lambertson said 
recently he wanted to see the Khmer Rouge cut off. He said the 
government's policy on this was very clear but implementation of 
that policy at times was not. "Whether and to what degree the 
old relationship between the Thai military and the Khmer Rouge 
is still being maintained has been a continuing concern of the 
United States," Lambertson said. 
  Cambodian General Khin Yean said in Kon Kreal on Sunday that 
the Thai military had "helped fresh Khmer Rouge troops come 
through Thai soil from Pailin". 
  Foreign Minister Prasong Sunsiri yesterday reaffirmed that 
Thailand's policy toward the Khmer Rouge closely followed the 
1993 UN Security Council resolution. Responding to Lambertson's 
comments on Thailand's continued cross-border contacts with the 
Khmer Rouge, he said the country had sealed off border crossing 
points and stopped border trade with the Marxist group. 

