BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by John Phillips: "New Boy Swears Allegiance to </F>
European Club"--quotation marks as published] 
  [Text] Italy will consider changing strategy on policy 
areas such as the "potentially dangerous Social Chapter but will 
remain faithful to the ultimate goal of European integration, 
Antonio Martino, the Foreign Minister, said yesterday. 
  "There will be changes in foreign policy but I don't expect 
them to be as dramatic as the political change that has taken 
place in the last election,' the minister said. Signor Martino, 
52, master-mind of Silvio Berlusconi's election-winning economic 
programme, is a witty, approachable man who disarms visitors 
with a charm recalling his roots in one of Messina's oldest 
aristocratic families. He is dean of political science at Rome's 
Luiss University, a disciple of Milton Friedman who speaks 
fluent English and reads P.G. Wodehouse to relax when the strain 
of settling into his new office at the Farnesina over-looking 
the Tiber becomes unbearable. "The curious part is that I am 
considered a Euro-sceptic in this country while some of my 
friends in England consider me a Euro-enthusiast. 
  "When I stress continuity in European policy I mean that the 
ultimate goals will not change,' he says. "When I say there 
might be change I refer to the strategy that may be used to 
achieve those goals. 
  For years followers of Friedrich Hayek and Friedman were 
thin 
on the ground in Italy to the extent, he half jests, that they 
almost felt themselves an endangred species. "Once two 
colleagues of mine and myself were flying from Rome to 
Stockholm. One said `we should never take the same flight 
because if the plane falls all the free marketeers will 
disappear." 
  Forza Italia's success has turned Signor Martino into a 
national guru. But as the son of Gaetano Martino, the 
anglophile Foreign Minister who signed the Treaty of Rome for 
Italy in 1957, he takes a pragmatic approach to his new 
diplomatic responsibilities. "I will study the Social Chapter 
closely because I think I will have to know well what it is all 
about before deciding, he says. "I have expressed the view that 
it is potentially dangerous to try to impose the same standards 
on labour markets all over Europe. We have had something 
similar in this country where we have imposed the same standards 
prevailing in the rich north on the south, the result is we have 
a tremendous difference in unemployment. 
  In the same cautious spirit, he is pondering his position on 
the Delors White Paper to be discussed at the European Foreign 
Ministers' meeting at Corfu. M Delors has mooted the prospect 
of creating 20 million jobs in Europe by 2000, a grandiose plan 
that may also win the outgoing Commission president support in 
his campaign to succeed President Mitterrand at the Elysee 
Palace. 
  "The issue that I consider most important is the financing 
of 
the infrastructure that the Delors plan envisages," Signor 
Martino said. "If the infrastructures are properly financed 
through market mechanisms I would not object to them but if they 
were financed in a non-market way would have strong 
reservations. 
  Italy cannot afford to invest blindly in European fantasies 
any more, he hints, because "unless this country changes its 
course in economic and financial policy it will go bankrupt. 
  He shares British anxieties over excessive Euro-dirgisme 
while recognising that to some extent, some of these directives 
are justified to prevent national governments from interfering 
with free circulation of goods. "In general it seems to me that 
when governments intervene in markets at the national level and 
also at the supernational level they create problems." 
Reflecting on a recent opinion poll that shows Italians more 
pessimistic about Maastricht, Signor Martino adds that the 
diminished enthusiasm is not limited to Italy. 
  Signor Martino has been quick to reassure European 
neighbours 
that Italy is not in the throes of a neo-Fascist revival, 
although five ministers in the new government are from the 
National Alliance, whose main component is the Italian Social 
Movement (MSI), the political heirs of Benito Mussolini. 

