BFN 

  [Text] La Paz, 14 May (LOS TIEMPOS) -- Within the next 30 
days, the Special Antinarcotics Force (FELCN) will broaden its 
area of operations into the Bolivian Amazon region to prevent 
illegal drug trafficking by cutting off the traffickers "supply 
line." Social Defense Secretary Mario Soliz Valenzuela 
confirmed this information today in La Paz. 
  Soliz reported the preparation of a "long-term project" for 
immediate implementation. He indicated that the new FELCN 
regional headquarters will probably be located in Cobija (Pando 
Department) and that the plan includes the participation of 
customs control mechanisms, police border posts, and the 
military units in the region. 
  FELCN Deputy Commander General Rogelio Vargas Ortuno 
reported 
that as a result of increased trafficking activities in some 
sectors of Beni and Pando Departments, a detailed study has been 
made on the creation of a so-called "permanent operational 
command" in this tropical region. 
  Gen. Vargas said the many FELCN intelligence reports on the 
dangerous growth of trafficking in the zone have received the 
appropriate attention of Bolivian officials. He added: "The 
creation of a regional FELCN headquarters is the result of that 
concern." 
  Vargas said many factors prompted national officials to 
create a permanent control post on the Brazilian border. He 
cited actions by FELCN agents a few weeks ago after settlers of 
the region opposed the arrest of a dozen traffickers. He said 
the regional command to be established in Pando will be 
permanent and similar to the ones in Santa Cruz, Trinidad, and 
Cochabamba. 
  The FELCN reported that the busiest drug routes in the 
Amazon 
region are the Guayaramerin-Riberalta-Serena (Rio Madre de 
Dios), and the Puerto Rico-Cobija (Pando) roads. The report 
indicates that the roads "frequently help" traffickers in the 
region to consolidate their illegal activity. 
  The report says these roads serve an area of about 600 
square 
km. Public transportation vehicles run on them and these are 
widely used by traffickers. The report adds that the drugs 
produced in the zone come mainly from San Joaquin and San Ramon 
(Beni Department). 

