Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Japan Technology Transfer Association (JTTAS) 
will establish a research committee for industry/academic 
exchange on ultrafine particles. The committee will focus on the 
special properties of nanometer-sized fine particles and seek 
potential uses for them in industry. The committee is expected 
to begin in October after enrolling participating companies, and 
it will hold regular research conferences. 
  JTTAS will house the business office of the ``Nanostructure 
Materials Function and Use Research Committee,'' which will have 
professor Yuichiro Nishina, Metal Materials Research Laboratory, 
Tohoku University, as its chair and have a coordinating 
committee comprised of researchers from academia, government, 
and industry including Tokyo University, Kyushu University, 
Tsukuba University, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Keio 
University, AIST and private corporations. 
  In ultrafine particles, whose dimensions are measured in 
nanometers, a higher ratio of atoms and molecules comprise the 
surface than with conventional particles, so even a slight 
change in the number of atoms or molecules causes a major change 
in the physical and chemical properties of the particles. 
Research in this field has attracted growing attention in recent 
years. For example, it has been selected by the Ministry of 
Education as a basic research program, and AIST has also 
launched a project for establishing techniques to manipulate 
individual atoms and molecules. The new research committee will 
promote information exchange between industry and academia with 
the goal of developing new materials using ultrafine particles. 
  As a prelude, the committee will hold a public seminar (free 
of charge) in Tokyo to enroll participating companies on 7 July. 
JTTAS is a non-profit corporation under the auspices of AIST, 
and it works to promote exchange between industry and academia 
and helps find human resources for various topics in technology. 
Inquires may be directed to the business office (03-3597-8200). 

