Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by A. Hayane: "The Former FIS (Islamic Salvation </F>
Front) in Germany: Close to 200 Militants"--first paragraph is 
EL WATAN introduction] 
  [Excerpts] Germany certainly represents a special case in 
the geostrategic map of the international fundamentalist 
movement, especially where its getting established in the 
western world is concerned. 
  All Islamist organizations in the world have a pied-a-terre 
in the Federal Republic of Germany. In fact, this country has 
long been a favored meeting ground for these organizations, to 
hold their conventions, seminars, and conferences. Due to their 
very "official" nature, these activities are widely tolerated by 
German authorities. 
  Taking advantage of laws that are extremely tolerant of 
political and parapolitical activities, supported by foreigners 
on German soil, the foreign community in Germany enjoys the 
broadest possible freedom of association and action in the 
entire western hemisphere. 
<H5>  Black-Market Traffickers or Illegal Aliens </H5>
  This situation enabled a political party--in this case the 
Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), installed with its facilities and 
its leadership--to operate quite legally, something that would 
be quite unthinkable in France or in the United States. 
  Actually, these countries will admit only nonpolitical 
foreign associations. It was only when the PKK officially 
claimed responsibility for terrorist attacks perpetrated 
recently against Turkish diplomatic and commercial 
representatives (killing several German citizens in the process) 
that the Bonn government decided to suspend its activities. 
  But that is not the most important. Next to the regular 
activities of Islamist movements, this peculiarity of German law 
has given rise to far more dangerous activities on the part of 
some small groups that identify with the fundamentalist movement. 
  [passage omitted] extremist and radical [trends] of Islam 
are 
represented in Germany. Some maintain veritable rear bases 
there, others sometimes mere bridgeheads. 
  Turkish and Iranian extra-Islamist ties in Germany--which 
remains one of the main destinations of the ayatollahs' agents 
in Europe--are also very strong within the Turkish community, by 
far the most imposing and one of the oldest in the country; 
numerous and very-well-organized fundamentalist networks were 
created already a long time ago. 
  As a rule, they are the ones who provide financial and 
material support to their Algerian "brothers," members of the 
former FIS [Islamic Salvation Front], who reach Germany through 
France or Italy. 
  Since the state of emergency was declared in Algeria in 
February 1992, close to 9,000 Algerians are said to have applied 
for "political asylum" with German authorities. Some are genuine 
militants of Abassi's party; most of the others are just young 
black-market traffickers or illegal aliens taking advantage of 
the Bonn government's generosity toward militants of the 
Islamist party to try and settle in the country. Many succeed 
with various degrees of luck, with the complicity of some very 
lenient officials. 
  Actually, Germany is said to number now close to 200 
Algerian 
Islamist fundamentalists who are genuine activists, and 
therefore dangerous. As these militants of the banned FIS settle 
and travel, they seem to favor the area extending from 
Alsace-Lorraine (France) to Belgium and Germany. They settle, 
among other places, in the towns of Neunled, Kaiserlautern, 
Stuttgart, and Mannheim. 
  Rabah Kebir, who was just forbidden by German authorities to 
engage in any subversive political activities or statements 
against Algeria, lives in Soest, near Dortmund. There, he was 
allowed full latitude to engage in subversive activities until 
he was called to order. 

