Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Amid the controversy stirred up by the news about 
Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff meeting with three alleged 
drug traffickers from the so-called Cali Cartel, another 
confusing episode involving that organization was revealed last 
week by the news program "Noticiero QAP" and the newspaper EL 
ESPECTADOR. 
  According to those news sources, the Prosecutor General's 
Office served as a middleman to facilitate peace talks between 
the Cali Cartel and what is left of the Medellin Cartel, whose 
members are reportedly seeking to put an end to the war they 
have been waging for several years. 
  According to "QAP" and EL ESPECTADOR, on Wednesday, 16 
February, a meeting that was initially scheduled as a 
continuation of questioning turned into a friendly encounter 
between Carlos Mario Alzate Urquijo, "El Arete" [earring], 
Carlos Aguilar Gallego, "El Mugre" [grime], their attorneys, and 
Luis Guillermo Angel Restrepo, apparently a liaison with the 
Cali Cartel. The meeting was reportedly held at the office of 
Cruz Helena Aguilar Echeverry, chief of the Drug Trafficking 
Unit of the Regional Prosecutors Office. 
  Although there has been speculation recently about a 
rapprochement between the members of the two cartels, especially 
since the death of Pablo Escobar, this is the first time anyone 
has heard of a formal meeting between arrested members of the 
Medellin Cartel and an emissary from the Cali Cartel in the 
presence of a judicial authority. 
  On orders from Prosecutor Aguilar, the two arrested men were 
transferred from La Picota to the Regional Prosecutors Office to 
participate in the continuation of questioning. "El Arete" and 
"El Mugre" and their attorneys arrived at Aguilar's office after 
0915. Aguilar took them right in, declining to use the special 
cubicles that are used to ensure that the declarants do not 
recognize their interrogators. Instead, she took them into the 
conference room next door to her office. 
  While the prosecutor, the arrestees, and their attorneys 
were 
speaking informally, Luis Guillermo Angel Restrepo appeared. "El 
Arete" and "El Mugre" recognized him and told him of their 
concern about the war they have been waging against members of 
the Cali Cartel, and their desire to reach peace between the two 
sides. "This war has screwed us all," one of the arrestees said. 
  What was originally scheduled as an official appearance for 
questioning ended up being "a veritable orgy," in the words of 
EL ESPECTADOR. Indeed, at about 1445, "El Arete" sent out for 40 
boxes of chicken and 40 soft drinks for those who were present 
at the questioning as well as the security personnel. By the end 
of the afternoon, Angel Restrepo left the office having pledged 
to travel to Cali and seek a real rapprochement between the two 
sides. 
  The arrestees reportedly told Prosecutor Aguilar that they 
were worried about the charges against them and reiterated their 
willingness to cooperate with the authorities. 
  This news also surprised the prosecutor general. Although at 
first he denied that members of the two cartels had met in the 
presence of one of his subordinates, he ended up admitting that 
the prosecutor knew "El Mugre" from before, because they had 
gone to grade school together. He stated, however, that this 
would not prevent her from carrying out her judicial duties. 
  De Greiff termed the first reports by the media "monstrous," 
but he warned that the Prosecutor General's Office cannot allow 
itself to be used for this kind of activity, which seriously 
tarnishes the institution's image. He also explained that an 
entity with primarily judicial functions cannot be used as an 
intermediary between criminal organizations. 
  Aside from the anecdotes emerging from the meeting, the 
greatest concern is that some of what little evidence has been 
gathered against the two cartels is based on information 
provided by the Cali people against the Medellin people and vice 
versa. Therefore, an agreement between these two groups could 
turn into a mutual pact of silence, to the obvious detriment of 
the investigations. 

