CSO 

  [Text] The Khmer Rouge in Zone 505 clearly prosper from the 
timber trade with Thailand. They live in solid wooden houses, 
have electricity, watch television, and some of their children 
play with hand-held electronic games. 
  "The Khmers here are somewhat better off than elsewhere," 
said a Thai timber trader. "Safety is 100 pre cent secure" in 
terms of traveling and communications. 
  A week ago, it took three hours from Bo Rai district in the 
southeastern Thai province of Trat to reach this timber-rich 
community in Samlaut. The best route there is maintained by the 
Khmer Rouge throughout the year because it is the only one that 
is usable during the wet season. 
  A four-wheel-drive truck is the only vehicle that can make 
the journey. Thai timber traders stocked up with rice, dried 
and fresh food. Most of it was for improving relations with 
guards along the way and ranking Khmers important to the smooth 
operation of their business. 
  Three Thai military checkpoints were passed before Khmer 
Rouge outposts were reached. These border guards seemed to 
appreciate salted mackerel in particular. War veterans, they 
had been taken off the battlefield and posted to these 
checkpoints to deal with Thai traders because they had been 
maimed by landmines. 
  Zone 505 is in rich, variegated forest. Several Thai traders 
said they were more confident doing business with the Khmer 
Rouge than with people they refer to as Khmer Khao (White 
Khmers), meaning those loyal to the government in Phnom Penh. 
  "They [the Khmer Rouge] do not collect fees along the way 
like the Khmer Khao," one trader pointed out. "Safety in terms 
of logging and access to sites is more or less reliable 
  "If anything, it is fellow Thais who cause problems. The 
Khmer Rouge officials keep to their word." 
  Zone 505 is home to 20,000 people, the majority of them 
women 
and children, many very young - the result of a Khmer Rouge 
population drive that has seen girls from age of 18 married off 
and encouraged to produce, residents said. 
  But the leadership remains stringent about family life, no 
adultery or polygamy is allowed. 
  According to Lok Nong, who is on the central committee of 
Zone 505, with special duties to co-ordinate with Thais and look 
after the timber trade, Khmer Rouge administration allows for 
some autonomy. 
  If the zone's forces seize any territory belonging to 
government they are entitled to take charge and administer the 
benefits of that territory. 
  "Zone 505 is reputed to be very experienced in fighting," he 
said. 
  The Khmer Rouge retake of Pailin, located north of here, 
last 
month was largely the work of soldiers from Zone 505. 
  Khmer Rouge units were closing in on Battambang and would 
eventually take the country's second largest provincial capital 
if the government obtained no foreign support, he claimed. 
  "Thailand does not send arms to Democratic Kampuchea. We 
have to be self-sufficient in every respect now," Lok said. 
  At community level, Khmer Rouge self-sufficiency is ensured 
by the central committee through a cooperative system. The 
committee administers the use of a central pool of tractors, 
rollers and other farming equipment, and the distribution of 
seeds to each household. 
  "Democratic Kampuchea's main sources of income are timber 
and 
gems," Lok said. "The income is used to improve the welfare of 
each zone. We do not let any one individual or even the top 
administrator enrich himself alone." 
  Logging is carried out through cooperatives composed of no 
less than 10 parties. The main rule is to fell trees that are 
sufficiently large. 
  While Zone 505's main income is timber, zone 405 located 
further north is engaged in gems. The men of this even more 
comfortable Khmer Rouge community are said to be reluctant to go 
to the battlefield. 
  The destination of Thai timber traders is a medium-size saw 
mill in the middle of a forest in Samlaut. Khmer Rouge soldiers 
off duty from the frontlines guard the stacks of sawn timber on 
site. 
  Some 50 kilometers beyond, in a mountainous and forested 
area, a large pile of felled logs -- as many as 10,000 according 
to Khmer Rouge reckoning -- is waiting to be hauled across the 
border into Thailand. 
  "Democratic Kampuchea will look after the timber until 
Thailand permits this," said a Khmer Rouge soldier. 
  Zone 505 enjoys relative peace and fairly good means of 
communication with surrounding areas. But the area is heavily 
mined. 
  "We lean on Thais when we are in trouble," Lok said. 
  "Now we are at peace, we want to encourage Thais to come and 
do business with us more than other nationals, who want only to 
drain us of our natural resources," he said. 

