BFN 

  [Text] President Glavkos Kliridhis has said that the UN 
Security Council does not have the political will to promote 
alternative ways to solve the Cyprus problem, although in its 
resolutions it has stressed the need to use such ways if no 
progress is made. President Kliridhis said that there is a lack 
of will from the Turkish side as well. The president added that 
the presentation of the Cyprus issue to the plenary session of 
the Council of Europe's parliamentary assembly and during his 
private contacts has shown that greater emphasis should be given 
to the demilitarization of Cyprus and the promotion of its 
membership in the European Union. 
  President Kliridhis was speaking this afternoon on his 
return 
from London, where he went after visiting Strasbourg. 
  President Kliridhis also said that Robert Lamb, the U.S. 
State Department's special coordinator on Cyprus, informed him 
in London that [Turkish Cypriot Leader Rauf] Denktas' positions 
have not changed to bring him closer to the UN document 
submitted in the proximity talks. He added that Lamb will not 
play any role in the future because he will retire and move on 
to the private sector. Responding to a question on what he 
expects from the United States, the president said that he 
expects it to point out to the Turkish prime minister that the 
time for a solution to the Cyprus problem has come, that keeping 
things the way they are is not a solution, and that the Turkish 
Government must pressure Denktas to negotiate logically. 
Responding to another question, President Kliridhis noted that 
the new map on Famagusta, to which Denktas referred, is not new 
but has been submitted with the document tabled by the UN 
secretary general's representatives. Denktas then questioned 
its contents, Kliridhis said, and claimed that it included areas 
beyond the fenced part of the town. 
  Regarding the next steps, President Kliridhis said that the 
government will intensify its efforts for the demilitarization 
of Cyprus and its membership in the European Union. When Turkey 
realizes that Cyprus will become a part of Europe, he said, its 
expansionist dreams will evaporate and it will realize that it 
is no longer beneficial to be an occupation force on Cypriot 
territory. There should also be an enlightenment campaign based 
on the UN secretary general's reports, which have all said that 
the Turkish side is far away from both the secretary general's 
positions and the confidence-building measures. President 
Kliridhis added that we should stress that the continuation of a 
fruitless dialogue is not productive. Asked about his 
revelations made in London regarding the unified defense 
doctrine between Cyprus and Greece, President Kliridhis stressed 
that the purpose is for all to know that we are no longer 
willing to allow Turkey to have the military advantage. 

