Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By XIZANG RIBAO correspondent Zhuo Ga (0587 0867): </F>
"Executive Deputy Secretary Raidi of Regional Party Committee 
Executive Points Out at the Fifth Plenary (Enlarged) Session of 
the Fourth Regional Party Committee: Diligently Study and 
Comprehensively Implement the Guidelines of the Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, and Strive To 
Establish a Socialist Market Economic System in Tibet"] 
  [Excerpts] The Fifth Plenary (Enlarged) Session of the 
Fourth Tibet Autonomous Regional CPC Committee held a general 
session on the morning of 14 December. Raidi, executive deputy 
secretary of the regional party committee, delivered an 
important report entitled "Diligently Study the Comprehensively 
Implement the Guidelines of the Third Plenary Session of the 
14th CPC Central Committee, and Strive To Establish a Socialist 
Market Economic System in Tibet." 
  Guo Jinlong, deputy secretary of the regional party 
committee, presided over the meeting. 
  Present at the meeting were Danzim, deputy secretary of the 
regional party committee; Yang Chuantang, Lie Que, Bu Qiong, and 
Li Guangwen, Standing Committee members of the regional party 
committee; and Hu Yongzhu, political commissar of the Tibet 
Military District. 
  In his report, Comrade Raidi stated: The Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee is an important 
historic meeting convened at a time when China's economic 
structural reform has entered a crucial stage. To diligently 
study, thoroughly comprehend, and resolutely implement the 
"Decision of the CPC Central Committee on Issues Concerning the 
Establishment of a Socialist Market Economic System" adopted by 
the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee is 
an important task of paramount importance in the political and 
economic life of all party and government organizations as well 
as people of all nationalities in the region at the present and 
for some time to come. The report is divided into five parts: 
  1. Diligently study the "decision," enhance understanding, 
and achieve unity in thinking. [passage omitted] 
  2. Seize opportunities to accelerate the pace of reform and 
opening up in the light of realities. [passage omitted] 
  3. Fully recognize the fundamental position of agriculture 
and animal husbandry and actively guide peasants and herdsmen 
onto the track of market economy. [passage omitted] 
  4. Adhere to the principle that both material and spiritual 
civilization should be promoted. [passage omitted] 
  5. Strengthen party construction and improve party 
leadership. [passage omitted] 
  In conclusion, Raidi said in his report: The task of reform 
and development facing the cadres and people in Tibet is great 
and glorious, yet difficult. We must persist in taking Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics as our guide; further emancipate our minds; 
heighten our spirits; seize opportunities; work hard and 
concertedly; and dare to practice and to make innovations, 
thereby contributing more to the establishment of a socialist 
market economic system and accelerating the pace of reform, 
opening up, and modernization construction in the region. 

