BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed commentary] </F>
  [Text] King Husayn of Jordan, who was in Washington, has 
met and conferred with the U.S. President, Bill Clinton, today, 
Wednesday June 22. The two sides discussed the trend of the 
Middle East peace talks during their half-hour meeting at the 
White House, which took place on the invitation of the U.S. 
President. 
  King Husayn's private visit to the U.S. is taking place at a 
time when the Jordanian government delegation, during its June 7 
meeting with the Zionist regime delegation in Washington, 
reached agreements on defining the border lines, sharing water 
and economic issues. The agreements were reached during the 
presence of the U.S. representatives. Meanwhile King Husayn has 
also recently announced his willingness to meet the Israeli 
prime minister, Yitzhaq Rabin, and bilateral talks are expected 
to be held in Amman and Tel Aviv next month. 
  According to political experts, the fresh Amman-Tel Aviv 
agreement has come along with the U.S. and the Zionist regime's 
designs to create division among the ranks of the Arab 
countries. The Israeli regime in the wake of the Gaza-Ariha 
[Jericho] accord, which was signed last September, and in view 
of the opposition expressed by certain regional countries, has 
been trying to create division among the Arabs through different 
means and with backing of the U.S. In this connection one of 
the ways that the main ally of the U.S. -- that is, Israel -- is 
pursuing is to strike separate deals with each of the Arab 
countries secretly. 
  From the outset of the Madrid peace talks, the Zionist 
regime 
has tried to break the framework of the negotiations and have 
separate accords with each one of the Arab sides. The 
Gaza-Ariha accord was the first step taken in this regard and 
the recent accord between Jordan and Israel can be cited as 
being part of the same continuing trend. Political analysts 
believe that the continuation of such a trend is considered to 
be an all-sided pressure that Israel and the United States are 
putting on the other parties in the peace talks that do not 
agree with the trend. Therefore, although King Husayn is 
visiting the United States with the aim of activating the trend 
of peace talks with Israel, the trend of developments, 
especially during the recent months, speaks of conditions that 
favor Tel Aviv. 
  As a matter of fact what is being shaped is the continuation 
of the trend of compromise in which Israel will be taking more 
and more concessions from the Arabs. 

