Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Authorities from the Cochabamba Health Unit said 
that as of the end of the year they had covered more than 80 
percent of children under five years old, protecting them 
against poliomyelitis, diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, and 
measles, as well as women of 14 to 44 years of age with tetanic 
toxoid. 
  The Health Unit's head of Epidemiology, Dr. Jorge Flores 
Ramirez, said that next Friday will conclude the third and final 
infant vaccination campaign in the district, which is part of 
the national health plan coordinated by the under secretary of 
that branch. 
  The campaign currently under way, which uses the method of 
home visits, that is, house to house vaccinations, began last 25 
October and will end on Friday, the 12th of this month, with 
results that so far have been acceptable, he said. 
  ``We are prioritizing the outlying urban areas where 
coverage 
still needs to be improved within the age group comprised of 
children under five, with some exceptions in neighborhoods where 
the presence of disease is feared, where we seek even children 
of up to 10,'' he said. 
  According to Flores Ramirez, this last campaign of the year 
is intended to achieve at least the same level of coverage as 
the previous year, which was good, with the intention of 
exceeding 80 percent coverage for children under one, for a 
third dose of the three vaccines. 
  He said that next week they would hold a national evaluation 
of the Extended Immunization Program in La Paz, for which he is 
preparing an extensive report on the successes achieved so far. 
  ``This year we achieved coverage of 57.34 percent for 
poliomyelitis; 51.05 percent for diphtheria, tetanus, and 
whooping cough; 56.6 percent for measles, and 66.6 percent for 
tuberculosis, even though the latter was not part of this 
campaign,'' he said, in advance of his report. 
  He reiterated that these figures demonstrate that good 
progress was made in the district, since by the end of the year 
it will be possible to conclude the work with coverage of 
greater than 80 percent of the overall total. 
  The house-by-house campaign will conclude next Friday and an 
evaluation by area and by sector will immediately be performed, 
and in accordance with the data collected in that evaluation, a 
new sweep will be made in the areas with low coverage rates, to 
increase the level of protection among children. 
  In the current campaign, which so far has had a positive 
response from parents, approximately 2,000 people participated, 
including employees of the Under Secretariat of Health and other 
institutions that customarily cooperate in these areas. 
  According to data from the Health Unit, it was calculated 
that during the campaign 68,000 children under five were 
vaccinated with all the vaccines. No evaluation has yet been 
carried out, because according to those measures, a sweep will 
still have to be performed in areas where the anticipated 
coverage has not been achieved. 
<H5>  Cholera </H5>
  In addition, Flores Ramirez mentioned the problem of cholera 
in the district, reporting that by week 43 of the epidemic, a 
total of 1,849 cases had been reported over the course of the 
year, which means less than 50 percent of the 1992 level. 
  ``Despite this low rate, we believe that it must be presumed 
that with the coming of the rains we will be due for an 
outbreak, for which reason we have to continue following the 
instructions issued by the Anti-Cholera Commission, and the 
population bears the greatest responsibility for preventing high 
risk situations from emerging again,'' he said. 

