Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Analysis" by Chen Jinjun: "NZ, U.S. Still Differ on </F>
Nuclear Issue"] 
  [Text] Wellington, February 22 (XINHUA) -- New Zealand's 
anti-nuclear legislation still remains as a hinderer to closer 
relations with the United States despite the U.S. decision to 
lift the restraints on senior-level contacts between the two 
countries. 
  The U.S. decision, announced last Friday [18 February], was 
welcomed by NZ Prime Minister Jim Bolger as a "positive step" 
taken by President Bill Clinton. 
  Bolger said the resumption of senior-level contacts will 
"enable us to have the kind of dialogue commensurate with our 
shared interest and values, on both bilateral and broader 
strategic issues." 
  He even suggested that the move could open the way to joint 
military exercises run by a third country. 
  However, the U.S. thinks otherwise. Announcing the decision, 
the State Department said the decision does not signify a 
restoration of the United States' defense obligations to New 
Zealand. 
  It said the U.S. Administration, while recognizing that the 
two countries have important business to conduct outside the 
area of defense relations, agreed to continue to press for a 
change in New Zealand's anti-nuclear legislation. 
  The NZ [New Zealand]-U.S. relations soured in 1985 after New 
Zealand refused entry to its ports by the U.S. Navy ship 
"Buchanan" for fear that the ship might be equipped with nuclear 
weapons. In 1987, it passed the anti-nuclear legislation 
banning visits by warships and military planes suspected of 
carrying nuclear arms. 
  Washington retaliated by imposing the restraints on 
high-level contacts with New Zealand, and later suspended its 
obligations under the ANZUS (Australia, New Zealand, the United 
States) treaty. 
  Although tactical nuclear weapons are said to have been 
removed from U.S. vessels, the U.S. military still insists on 
neither confirming nor denying the presence of nuclear weapons 
on U.S. warships. 
  Observers here believed that despite the resumption of 
senior-level contacts, the nuclear issue is still essential to 
closer ties between the two countries [as received], 
particularly in the area of defense. 
  The New Zealand Government is unlikely to take any move 
toward modifying its anti-nuclear stance in view of its one-vote 
majority in the parliament. Bolger has made it clear that there 
will be no change to New Zealand's anti-nuclear legislation to 
accommodate the U.S. position. 

