BFN 

<F P=106> [John Gittings article: "BBC Prison Film Angers China"] </F>
  [Text] China has denounced BBC Television for 
"fabricating" a report about Chinese prison labour, only six 
months after another BBC programme led to fierce diplomatic 
protests from Beijing. 
  The row coincides with separate information suggesting that 
hundreds of previously unknown prisoners were arrested after the 
1989 Tiananmen Square massacre and remain in jail. 
  The Foreign Ministry in Beijing said yesterday that reports 
on labour camps, broadcast on BBC Breakfast News this week, were 
"sheer fabrication." 
  "A handful of hostile people in the world have gone out of 
their way to smear China with fabricated stories," it said. 
"Their motive is very sinister." 
  The films were made secretly by the journalist Sue 
Lloyd-Roberts, helped by Henry Wu, a former prison camp inmate 
who has returned several times to China to expose the system. 
  Using a secret camera, Ms Lloyd-Roberts filmed prisoners at 
work under police guard in three provinces. Prisoners and local 
residents confirmed the existence of the camps in interviews. 
  The scenes included an asbestos mine where alleged prisoners 
were shifting the mineral without protective clothing, and a 
shop selling clothes made by prison labour. 
  Farmers in the north-west region of Xinjiang were filmed 
complaining that the prison camps' output undercut their own 
produce. 
  Many inmates are young people sentenced for petty crime in 
the cities. The programme alleges that prisoners are often not 
allowed to leave after completion of their sentence. 
  The claims come at an awkward time for China as President 
Clinton considers whether to renew the country's Most Favoured 
Nation status. Negative news about Chinese human rights 
increases the pressure to withhold it. 
  China has previously denied that goods made in prison are 
sold abroad. The Justice Ministry said yesterday that the shops 
shown in the film had nothing to do with prisons. 
  The row may also create further problems for BBC and other 
British journalists seeking to cover China. 
  After a BBC Timewatch film in December made lurid 
allegations 
about Mao Zedong's sex life, journalists were refused visas and 
Beijing staff have had dificulties in working normally. 
  The BBC's reporters in Beijing and Hong Kong were not 
involved in making either programme. But China claims to see a 
British plot behind the negative publicity. 
  Meanwhile new evidence on almost 500 previously unknown 
prisoners arrested after the Beijing massacre in June 1989 has 
been released by the Human Rights in China and Asia Watch 
organisations based in the United States. 
  The list was compiled by local Chinese human rights 
activists 
who gathered information from the families of the alleged 
prisoners. Most had been charged with criminal offences after 
attempting -- sometimes violently -- to prevent the entry of 
Chinese troops and tanks into Tiananmen Square. But the list 
also includes several prisoners convicted of "counterrevolution" 
for crimes such as publishing an unofficial magazine. 
  Some prisoners in Beijing No. 2 prison, the report says, are 
forced to work ten- to 16-hour days. The work includes checking 
latex gloves which, it is claimed, are being shipped to the 
United States. 
  The Chinese Foreign Ministry has also denied reports that 
Beijing is preparing to prosecute its most famous dissident Wei 
Jingsheng. Wei was near the end of a 15-year sentence after 
criticising Deng Xiaoping in the 1979 Democracy Wall movement. 
He was detained again last month. 

