BFN 

  [Summary] "Dear friends: The Ninth National Assembly's 
fifth session entered its seventh day today. The National 
Assembly devoted a large part of its time to debating the 
revised draft law on the organization of People's Councils and 
People's Committees. National Assembly Chairman Nong Duc Manh 
directed the morning and afternoon sessions. 
  "All the views expressed at the conference hall were focused 
on improving the effectiveness of the People's Councils, 
people's councillors, and People's Committees, and other local 
organs of power, especially those at the village and ward levels. 
  "Some deputies proposed that this law be called The Law on 
Amendment of and Supplement to a Number of Articles of the Law 
on the Organization of People's Councils and People's Committees 
rather than the Revised Law on the Organization of People's 
Councils and People's Committees." 
  Others suggested that the name of this law not be changed 
because it has been released for public view. 
  "The majority of those who spoke agreed to retain the name 
of 
the revised law." 
  Many deputies who spoke "favored the idea that we should not 
have a top-to-bottom chain of administrative command for 
People's Councils. However, the National Assembly Standing 
Committee and the government should devise specific procedures 
on cooperation between People's Councils at various levels." 
  Some deputies believed that the draft law is still confusing 
when it comes to defining the roles between the People's 
Councils and People's Committees in directing local 
socioeconomic development activities. 
  "The majority of the deputies who spoke agreed with a 
proposal that the term of office of a People's Council be five 
years. As for the provincial, city, district, and precinct 
People's Councils, they should meet twice a year while the 
village and ward People's Councils should meet on a quarterly 
basis." 
  Some deputies raised the question whether the removal of a 
people's councillor should be considered at a People's Council 
meeting or be done based on views of voters, especially when 
such a removal is decided by more than half -- but less than 
two-thirds -- of the number of people's councillors present. 
  There were also differing views on the question of whether a 
People's Committee chairman will necessarily be a people's 
councillor. "The majority of those deputies who spoke favored 
the idea that a People's Committee chairman must be a people's 
councillor." However, some deputies asked that the law must 
further specify that in special cases, a People's Committee 
chairman need not necessarily be a people's councillor. This 
will facilitate the transfer or appointment of a People's 
Committee chairman. 
  "Dear friends: During their afternoon debate at the 
conference hall, some deputies started voicing their views on 
the draft law on the People's Council election. This draft law 
will continue to be debated by the National Assembly at 
tomorrow's morning session at the conference hall." 

