Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Remarks by Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk during </F>
question and answer session at news conference in Kiev -- live] 
  [Excerpts] [Passage omitted] [Unidentified correspondent] 
Japanese TV and Radio Corporation [word indistinct]. Could you 
tell us, Mr. President, whether Ukraine plans to dismantle all 
of its nuclear weapons, and what the prospects are for getting 
real security guarantees after their elimination. 
  Kravchuk: According to the trilateral agreement, 
Ukraine will dismantle all its nuclear arms. Incidentally, 
START I, which the Supreme Council has ratified, and Paragraph 5 
of the Lisbon Protocol, reservations on which have been lifted, 
imply precisely that -- the elimination of all nuclear arms. 
According to the bilateral agreements, in particular those with 
Russia, Ukraine will abide by its commitments provided other 
states do the same and abide by their commitments, without 
creating complications during the period of eliminating nuclear 
arms. We must find ways to solve the most complex issues 
without putting the brakes on this extremely important process 
for the entire world and all its people. 
  As for security guarantees, the United States, Russia, and 
other states, have given their consent for such guarantees, and 
this is no longer a problem. Our ministry [not further 
specified] is currently working on a relevant mechanism to 
determine whether it will be a statement or an agreement, who 
will sign it, and what its content will be. But we also realize 
that both Russia and the United States tie the provision of 
security guarantees in a documented form with the ratification 
of the Non-Proliferation Treaty [NPT], although by lifting the 
reservations with regard to the Lisbon Protocol, Ukraine has 
committed itself to joining the NPT as a non-nuclear state. It 
is a commitment and not mere words, but the NPT has to be 
ratified. Relevant documents have been submitted to the Supreme 
Council, and we will work persistently together with the 
ministry and the Cabinet of Ministers in order to gradually push 
it through and work this problem out. 
  I am convinced that Ukraine will, in accordance with its 
obligations and the conceptual principles it has declared, act 
consistently in this sensitive global area. This is a long-term 
and fundamental policy for our state. [Passage omitted] 
  Correspondent Makarychenko: Leonid Makarychenko, 
Intelnews agency. Esteemed Leonid Makarovych, I would still 
like to get a more precise reply to the question of whether the 
movement of fuel for Ukraine's nuclear power stations in the 
reverse direction -- from Russia -- has begun. Second, will 
your accord with Russia and the United States, your dialogue, 
allow a market to open to Ukrainian enterprises for conventional 
armaments? And third, Ukraine's space program. The carriers 
which launch space ships can easily launch other loads, too. 
Will these limitations not concern space programs? 
  Kravchuk: Well, we have just taken out 60 
warheads. So this is not yet such a, say, large amount that one 
can talk about a reverse movement. We are to take out 200 
warheads by the end of May. An appropriate scheme is being 
elaborated. I stress that the agreement, which has been 
concluded and initialled by Ukraine and Russia, envisages this; 
that is, whenever this may be, for example, in one week or in 
two, but it is envisaged. This does not mean that containers 
with nuclear warheads meet, greet each other, and go their 
separate ways. There should be a certain timeframe. But this 
is envisaged in the agreement. That is, this is envisaged both 
in (?the) trilateral statement and in the documents affixed to 
it. And no one, neither Russia nor Ukraine, have refused. That 
is, this will be carried out. [passage omitted] 

