Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ani Parmaksizyan] </F>
  [Excerpts] Sofia, February 1 (BTA) -- "The political 
forces opposing the no confidence vote will have to take on the 
responsibility of Lyuben Berov's cabinet for the war raging 
among gangsters and the government's incompetence to enforce law 
and order and protect guarantee [as received] people's safety," 
Mr. Asen Agov, deputy chairman of the National Coordinating 
Council of the Union of Democratic Forces (SDS) told a news 
conference held after the councils' regular meeting today. 
[passage omitted] 
  The SDS National Coordinating Council and the parliamentary 
SDS will discuss whether the SDS MP's should boycott parliament 
if the no confidence motion is voted down or whether they should 
do it if parliament passes the 1994 draft budget, Mr. Agov said. 
The BSP's [Bulgarian Socialist Party] non-participation in the 
no confidence vote would be tantamount to evading 
responsibility, he went on to say. DEMOKRATSIYA, the SDS daily, 
wrote today that the BSP parliamentary group might decide 
against taking part in the no confidence vote the SDS had moved 
for. 
  The BSP also expressed its attitude to the no confidence 
motion today. "The Socialists are going to insist on the 
government urgently initiating changes in the legal framework 
concerning gambling and measures to tighten control over the 
illicit export of goods, capital and important information. The 
minister of the interior must undertake immediately structural, 
functional and personnel changes and take specific measures 
against the shadow structures that create a real risk and fuel 
mistrust among the separate Interior Ministry services," BSP 
spokesperson Klara Marinova told today's news briefing of the 
BSP. Reporters learned that BSP leader Zhan Videnov would meet 
Prime Minister Berov and Interior Minister Victor Mikhaylov and 
ask them for guarantees those demands would be satisfied. The 
BSP stand on no confidence vote will largely depend on the 
outcome of the meeting. 
  "If the measures we demand are not taken, when the no 
confidence motion prompted by growing crime it put to the vote 
we will have no ground to shut our eyes to the serious danger 
the country is faced by," Mr. Videnov said. He pointed out that 
the BSP parliamentary group would decide whether to abstain from 
voting immediately before the voting procedure. 
  In the stand taken by the NSD [New Alliance for Democracy] 
parliamentary group today the no confidence motion of the SDS is 
described as "yet another act aimed to draw political 
dividends," the NSD insists on tangible changes in the structure 
of the Interior Ministry and on professional selection of its 
personnel. NSD MP Gospodin Atanasov told journalists that his 
parliamentary group would vote one way on the SDS no confidence 
motion and none of its members would support it. 
  "I will support the no confidence motion because if a 
government cannot cope with the situation and if it cannot curb 
crime, it must go, an interior minister who just shrugs his 
shoulders instead of saying what he intends to do must also go," 
DPS [Rights and Freedoms Movement] MP Mehmed Hodja, chairman of 
the Parliamentary Human Rights Committee, told reporters today. 
Today he submitted a statement on his leaving the DPS 
parliamentary group to the parliamentary secretarial department. 
Motivating his decision, Mr. Hodja said that the leadership of 
the parliamentary DPS and of the DPS Central Operational Bureau 
forced upon their members close collaboration with the 
parliamentary group of the BSP, thus betraying the interests of 
the DPS electorate. He accused the leaders of the DPS 
parliamentary group of employing authoritarian methods adding he 
had serious evidence of a high degree of corruption among its 
members. The differences between Mr. Hodja and the leaders of 
both the DPS and its parliamentary group became especially 
prominent at the second conference of the DPS held at the end of 
November 1993. 
  MP Redjeb Chinar, deputy chairman of the Parliamentary 
Budget 
and Finance Committee, filed a statement on his leaving the 
parliamentary DPS today too. Motivating his decision, he 
accuses the parliamentary DPS leadership of "acting in a 
dictatorial manner and hindering dialogue, thus making it 
impossible to give any issue a proper consideration within the 
DPS parliamentary group." Mr. Hodja and Mr. Chinar declare they 
will carry out the duties assigned to them by the constitution 
as independent MP's. Some time ago another two MP's left the 
DPS parliamentary group. 
  Mr. Yunal Lyutfi, deputy floor leader of the parliamentary 
DPS, told journalists today that the DPS delegation headed by 
DPS leader Ahmed Dogan had put off its visit to Morocco and 
Libya for an indefinite time because of the complicated domestic 
situation. The delegation was to leave tomorrow. Mr. Lyutfi 
declined any further comment or details. 

