Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ben Maclennan] </F>
  [Text] East London March 19 SAPA -- African National 
Congress [ANC] leader Nelson Mandela is to be inaugurated as 
South Africa's new state president on May 10 in Pretoria, 
according to ANC National Chairman Thabo Mbeki. He made the 
announcement at an ANC fundraising dinner in East London on 
Saturday [19 March]. "It is planned that the new president, 
Nelson Mandela I think, will be installed, inaugurated on the 
10th May, a big occasion in Pretoria." It had to be in Pretoria 
because Pretoria was the seat of power and government in the 
country. "For years we fought against the Pretoria regime. On 
the 10th May we ought to be (talking of) the Pretoria 
government." 
  He said the ANC had been receiving numerous queries from 
heads of state and of government in other countries asking 
whether there would be victory celebrations after the April 
election, or an inauguration of the new president. "Everybody 
wants to come," he said. The mayor of Pretoria and "all sorts 
of people" were concerned about the prospect of having the 
inauguration in the city. "They are very worried not because 
they don't want change," he said, to laughter from his audience, 
"but because they say Pretoria won't be able to handle the 
volume of visitors that are going to come". 
  Mr Mbeki said if South Africa failed to make the transition 
to a peaceful and successful democracy, it would disappoint 
millions of people across the globe. "And that we can't do. 
Too much has been invested by the rest of the world in ending 
apartheid." 
  There was a picture in many peoples' minds that Africans 
were 
incompetent, always holding out a begging bowl, had no respect 
for democracy, were always at each others' throats and that 
Africa was "generally a disaster". "The rest of the continent 
is expecting this new South Africa will change all that so the 
rest of the world will see an African country that is a success 
in terms of a political system, human rights, an absence of 
conflict and prosperity...so the rest of the world can begin to 
say our understanding of Africa was wrong." 
  These expectations meant that in the end, South Africa had 
to 
make a success of the process of change. Other countries where 
racism had raised its head, such as Sweden, France, Germany and 
England, were hoping South Africa would provide the lessons that 
would enable them to deal with their own problems. "I'm saying 
we've got to solve, we've got to succeed here in the interest of 
making a better world for millions of people." 
  He also said South Africa needed a strong ANC government to 
ensure that the country's millions were all brought into the 
settlement. If the ANC was too weak to do so, other people 
would move into the vacuum. Some of them might preach revenge 
against the whites who had oppressed them for three-and-a-half 
centuries. 
  He said the country would also need a strong National Party 
to bring white civil servants, the police and white business 
into the settlement. 

