Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Installment No 131 of the serialized memoirs of Xu Jiatun: </F>
Xu Jiatun's Hong Kong Memoirs] 
  [Text] 2. Another Controversy Over the Stationing of 
Troops -- Ch'u Heng's Statement on Picking Up the Pieces' Sets 
Off a Chinese Counterattack Over the Stationing of a Special 
British Military Reconnaissance Unit at the T'ien-Ma Naval Base 
  The deterioration in Sino-British relations was also 
glaringly evident in the hard-line and offensive approach taken 
by Britain in the drafting of the Basic Law, causing further 
tension in bilateral relations. 
  On 14 August 1989, Ch'u Heng [1448 3801], a standing officer 
of the British Hong Kong Government, made a statement entitled, 
"Picking Up the Pieces," saying that as the 4 June incident had 
been a blow to Hongkongers' confidence, he would like 
Hongkongers to study the matter of the stationing of Chinese 
troops after 1997, as well as the clause in the Basic Law draft 
on any declaration that the SAR had entered a state of 
emergency, going on to propose that he hoped that the Chinese 
authorities would delay publication of the Basic Law. 
  Some Hongkongers had already been concerned about the 
stationing of Chinese troops in Hong Kong. During the 
negotiations over the Sino-British Joint Declaration, Deng 
Xiaoping had criticized Geng Biao's [5105 7374] [former NPC 
Standing Committee vice chairman and NPC Foreign Affairs 
Committee chairman] statement that troops would not be stationed 
in Hong Kong as nonsense, touching off repercussions. As 
Beijing's use of troops on 4 June to crush a patriotic student 
movement was an even greater shock to Hongkongers, Ch'u Heng's 
drawing attention to this matter again was an obvious political 
attempt. 
  Ch'u Heng's statement on "picking up the pieces" in an 
attack 
on China was obviously not his personal doing. After we had 
studied it and, in line with the spirit set by Beijing, we 
decided to respond, as well as reporting to Beijing for the 
record. 
  So on 18 August 1989, we reviewed Ch'u Heng's statement in 
our capacity as an NCNA branch as "brazen interference in the 
drafting of the Basic Law," as well as issuing a special 
statement in the Hong Kong WEN WEI PO, pointing out that Ch'u 
Heng's action violated elementary diplomatic common sense. 
Beijing also responded the next day, with a Foreign Ministry 
spokesman stating that the drafting and formulation of the Basic 
Law was Chinese business that would brook no interference, as 
well as emphasizing that "the recent brazen and flagrant 
criticism and gross interference in the drafting of the Basic 
Law by certain British officials, such as standing officers of 
the British Hong Kong Government, was a violation of the 
Sino-British Joint Declaration provisions, and that the absurd 
position that China must not station troops in Hong Kong" had 
raised the matter to a British violation of the Sino-British 
Joint Declaration. 
  The stationing of troops was a hotly-debated issue in the 
drafting of the Basic Law. The unresolved controversy also 
involved matters of Hong Kong's T'ien-Ma Naval Base, and the 
three British military headquarters in Hong Kong which, at the 
time, Britain seemed to still find it inconvenient to mention 
openly. 
  The British military was stationed in Hong Kong at the time 
at over 20 sites, spread throughout the New Territories, 
Kowloon, and Hong Kong island. According to the plan submitted 
by Britain to China, when the British military withdrew in 1997, 
it would turn over one part of these 20-plus military camps to 
China, mainly the military bases in the border zones, such as 
the New Territories, and another part to the SAR Government for 
use by departments, such as disciplinary troops (police), with 
an additional part in the Central District being converted to 
commercial use, with this part including sites, such as the 
T'ien-Ma Naval Base and the Wotalaotao Barracks. 
  The T'ien-Ma Naval Base was the general headquarters of the 
British Navy, army, and air forces stationed in Hong Kong. We 
understood that the T'ien-Ma Naval Base not only was the British 
military's general headquarters, but also had a special 
department, with many modern reconnaissance tools and equipment 
possibly concentrated there. It was rumored that the British 
Government had thought about converting it after 1997 to a 
general consulate, and was droppping hints as feelers, about 
which China also dropped some hints that it would not endorse. 
It was also rumored that Britain was planning to demolish the 
T'ien-Ma Naval Station. But it was later rumored that the 
naval base would be moved to a small island, with its original 
site filled in for commercial use. (Britain has now unilaterally 
moved the naval base to Ang-ch'uan Chou, as well as unilaterally 
publicizing that it will turn over the three military 
headquarters at the T'ien-Ma Naval Base to China in 1997.) 
  The Chinese military affairs sector had set up a special 
small group composed mostly of its Headquarters General Staff 
which, based on British-provided data and with the approval and 
cooperation of the British Hong Kong Government, had gone to 
Hong Kong for an on-site inspection. While the Hong Kong and 
Macao Working Committee had also discussed this, basically 
agreeing with Britain's plans, some parties had also dissented, 
holding mainly that the change to other [commercial] use should 
be decided by China after 1997. As to whether the Central 
District's military site should be converted to a commercial 
zone, there was also a difference of opinion within China, with 
the military affairs sector being completely receptive, while 
the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office and the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs were unwilling to completely accept the decision 
being made entirely by the military affairs sector... As their 
exchange of views came to no conclusion, it was hard to take up 
the matter in detail with Britain. 
  While Li Hou had asked me in Ji Pengfei's presence to help 
them respond to Yang Shangkun, asking Yang Shangkun to support 
their view, I retired before I had a chance to take this up with 
Yang Shangkun. 

