Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [David Lascelles article: "Splitting the Atom Fuels a </F>
Privatisation"] 
  [Text] The government is expected to announce the 200 
million pound sale of the UK Atomic Energy Authority (AEA), 
later this week, heralding one of the more unusual 
privatisations yet attempted. 
  For one thing, the authority wiIl have to be split into two 
parts to separate the sellable bits from those which will have 
to stay in government hands. The radioactive sites left over 
from 40 years of experimentation and development of the UK 
nuclear industry will remain the responsibility of the state. 
  For another, the assets being sold will consist largely of 
the employees' brainpower rather than plant and equipment. 
Valuing the business will therefore provide a special challenge 
to City advisers. 
  Privatisation could take many forms. The company could be 
floated on the stock exchange where its value would be in the 
order of 200 million pounds. Alternatively it could be sold 
whole or in bits. However, any purchaser would have to 
safeguard the independence on which AEA's reputation would 
depend. There could even be a management buy-out. 
  Sir Anthony Cleaver, the former chief of IBM's UK 
subsidiary, 
who is now the AEA's chairman, is keen to see the AEA move into 
the private sector. He describes it as unique and capable of 
generating healthy profits. 
  The split will take place in April. One half will retain the 
various nuclear installations such as the Dido and Pluto 
experimental reactors at Harwell, the company's headquarters, 
which are being shut down and will have to be decommissioned. 
The costs of this work will be borne by the taxpayer. 
  The second, to be named AEA Technology, will be privatised 
as 
a consultancy offering a wide range of expertise not only in the 
nuclear field, but also in other high-tech areas of industry. 
  Sir Anthony sees three broad areas of operation. One is what 
he calls plant optimisation: offering services to enable 
companies to make the best use of production plant, and 
extending its life. AEA possesses technologies which could be 
applied to areas such as chemicals, food and drinks processing 
and pharmaceuticals. 
  The second area is safety assessment. Again, this could be 
applied not only to nuclear plant and industry, but other areas 
such as transport where demand will grow with rail privatisation. 
  The third is the environment. With the acquisition last year 
of the government's Warren Springs environmental research 
laboratory, AEA plans to create a national environmental 
technology centre. 
  At the moment, 70 per cent of AEA's turnover is related to 
the nuclear industry. Sir Anthony expects to see that fall to 
30 per cent over the coming years as the nonnuclear side 
strengthens. About 40 per cent of its work is government or 
public sector. But the private side is the fastest growing, and 
its proportion will increase. 
  Similarly, Sir Anthony sees the AEA's foreign business 
growing from the present level of 20-25 per cent. Business in 
Japan, for example, has doubled in the last two years. 
  AEA Technology will account for about 200-250 million pounds 
of the authority's current total turnover of about 400 million 
pounds a year. It will also employ 3,500 of the present 7,500 
employees, though the restructuring is likely to produce about 
2,000 redundancies. Employment has already halved since 1989, 
when the AEA began to be reshaped for privatisation. 
  A chief executive for the privatised division should be 
appointed in the next couple of months. Sir Anthony says he is 
looking for someone with a commercial background who can handle 
the technological aspects and the international dimension to the 
business, and understand the needs of both the public and 
private sectors. The big difficulty, though, is valuing this 
business. If most of AEA's assets are its people, it could 
easily lose them. But Sir Anthony believes that the challenge 
of creating a new business plus the AEA's range of technological 
expertise will be a powerful incentive for people to stay. 
  He is evasive on the issue of profitability. The AEA as a 
whole lost 48 million pounds last year, mainly because of 62 
million pounds of exceptional costs linked to the restructuring. 
The year before it made a profit 14 million pounds. Sir 
Anthony will only say that AEA Technology could make profits in 
double figures. 
  The package offered to investors or potential buyers would 
have to include clear indications of the company's contracts and 
its growth prospects. One way of making it attractive would be 
for the government to sign large long-term contracts to service 
the parts retained in the public sector. Sir Anthony. though, 
is keen to keep the company in one piece. "Our challenge is to 
demonstrate the value of one entity." 

