Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Volodymyr Knysh: "`Not a Sensation...'"] </F>
  [Text] IZVESTIYA of February 22 of this year published an 
article by the newspaper's military correspondent, Viktor 
Lytovkin, under the title "RVSN [Strategic Missile Forces] 
Command Disavows Responsibility for the Security of 
Nuclear-Missile Armaments in Ukraine." Referring to confidential 
sources in the Ministry of Defense of Russia, the author cites 
the content of an official letter of the commander-in-chief of 
the strategic missile forces, Colonel-General Igor Sergeyev, to 
Minister of Defense of Russia General of the Army Pavel Grachev. 
  The article, with reference to this letter, discussed the 
fact that "under the prevailing circumstances Russia can in no 
way have any impact on the security of the nuclear-missile 
weaponry in Ukraine and its non-sanctioned employment." This is 
connected with the decision of the commander of the 43rd Missile 
Army, Colonel-General Volodymyr Mykhtyuk, the commander of the 
46th Missile Division, Major-General N. Filatov, and their 
subordinates to take the oath of loyalty to the people of 
Ukraine. It also talked about the "gross violation of the 
Agreement on the Status of Strategic Forces" signed by the heads 
of the CIS and the like. 
  The facts set forth in the article were commented on at a 
briefing at the MZS [Ministry of Foreign Affairs] by Deputy 
Minister of Defense Ivan Bizhan and Deputy Minister of Foreign 
Affairs Borys Tarasyuk. 
  It was pointed out in particular that the Minister of 
Defense 
of Ukraine does not need to coordinate his actions with the head 
of the Russian military agency. Assertions that the command of 
the RVSN of Russia have been deprived of the possibility of 
exercising operational command and control over the troops of 
the 43rd Missile Army were categorized as a fabrication. The 
operational control remains with Russia, and Ukraine has in no 
way disrupted it and does not intend to do so, emphasized 
Colonel-General Ivan Bizhan. 
  The presidents of Ukraine, Russia and the United States 
signed a Declaration in Moscow on January 14. The appearance of 
this article has thus elicited, at the very least, surprise. 
  The fact was stated in particular that no one forced the 
commander of the 43rd Missile Army, Colonel-General V. Mykhtyuk, 
and the commander of the 46th Missile Division, Major-General N. 
Filatov, to take the oath of loyalty to the people of Ukraine. 
The generals, as well as the other officers, did this entirely 
voluntarily. Assertions of some gross violation of the agreement 
on the status of the strategic forces were categorized as 
untrue, because CIS strategic forces do not exist. As 
Colonel-General I. Bizhan reported, Russia unilaterally 
subordinated all of the units of the Strategic Missile Forces to 
itself in the summer of 1992. It is thus impossible to violate 
an agreement on something that does not exist. 
  The manpower levels of the units of the 43rd Army are at 85 
percent for officers and almost 100 percent for conscript 
servicemen. The high-quality officer corps thus permits the 
complete fulfillment of the tasks of combat duty and the 
maintenance of nuclear security. 
  The press service of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine 
made a statement with regard to this feature that emphasized, in 
particular, the steadfast upholding by our country of all 
international agreements signed by it. 

