Language: <F P=105> Swedish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Foreign Minister Margaretha af Ugglas under the </F>
"Focus" rubric: "Russia Needs More Support And Cooperation"] 
  [Text] The successes for the extreme nationalist forces in 
the Russian elections have given rise to great and justified 
concern in the rest of the world, even if the distribution of 
seats has gradually shifted in a more positive direction for the 
reformist parties. 
  At the same time it is also too early to draw any firm 
conclusions from what has happened. We would be wise to wait 
and see what future developments bring, and above all give 
consideration to how we can best maintain and strengthen our 
support for democratic developments. 
  The conclusion which in my view should be drawn from the 
election result is that Russia needs more, not less contacts and 
cooperation with the West. 
  The transformation of Russia is a protracted process. We 
surely have every reason to expect several years of uncertainty. 
The election result COULD be a step in the direction of a 
destructive policy for Russia itself and also, in a worst-case 
scenario, for the rest of the world. But it can also be 
interpreted as one of a series of sudden lurches, inevitable in 
the phase of transformation in which Russia finds itself. 
  Russia's development toward democracy is uncertain and can 
hardly be expected to be a linear process. In the future too 
the situation is bound to be unstable and contain contradictory 
tendencies. 
  The Russian scene is neither black nor white, but 
increasingly gray. The distance between what is economically 
necessary and what is politically possible will remain great -- 
something that prepares the ground for tensions. Developments 
would not have been smoother even if the reform-oriented parties 
had had a better election. 
  However, we should remember that there is a possibility for 
President Yeltsin to continue the policies of reform by building 
coalitions in parliament on important issues. It is the duty of 
the democratic parties in the Duma to make special efforts so 
that this first free parliament since 1917 can be made to play a 
constructive role. The rest of the world also has a 
responsibility to develop contacts with the new parliament to 
the greatest possible extent. 
  Among the glimmers of light -- for these do nevertheless 
exist -- is the fact that Russia has by and large succeeded in 
holding completely democratic elections. Despite the election 
result, for the time being at least there are no persuasive 
signs that support for fascism is widespread, either in public 
opinion or in the Russian establishment. 
  It should also be noted that the reformist parties have 
achieved good result in many places, not least in Moscow and St. 
Petersburg. 
  It is also important to note that economic factors and 
limitations will be of will be of great significance for the 
direction Russian politics will take in the coming years. Here 
every government faces the same limitations, even in the event 
of a line of developments in which antidemocratic forces have a 
decisive influence on politics. 
  Thus the next Russian government -- just like the government 
which began the work of reform in 1992 -- will have limited room 
for maneuver. The reason is the same now as it was then: The 
Russian economy is seriously out of balance and at the same time 
undergoing a far-reaching transformation. The rate of inflation 
is still high but under control, after previously being close to 
the level of hyperinflation. A relapse is by no means out of 
the question. 
  Thus even in the short term there is not much room for 
maneuver. This is a result of the way in which the economy, the 
state edifice, and the relationship between the center and the 
periphery are linked in today's Russia. There is no easy way 
out in the shape of a return to the old system of the command 
economy. 
  For political and social reasons compromises vis-a-vis what 
is economically necessary have been inevitable and will remain 
so, but this balancing act is a precarious one. 
  A significant budget deficit and high inflation are probably 
unavoidable in any event. However, there is a limit beyond 
which the continued subsidization of old-fashioned industry and 
other major items of expenditure run the risk of leading 
developments along a Ukrainian path. 
  Both in Russian and in the rest of the world there exists 
the 
idea that it is the economic reforms which are responsible for 
the difficulties which have hit Russia. But this is to ignore 
the fact that these difficulties date chiefly from 70 years of 
ruthless exploitation and deformed modernity, and the absence in 
the historic legacy of a thoroughgoing tradition of development. 
  Added to this are the collapse of Comecon and the Union with 
the accompanying disruption to trade and the division of labor 
and, not least, the financing of major deficits and credits 
through the printing of money The reforms are an attempt to 
find a way out of the sum of these difficulties. 
  Many observers inside and outside Russia seem to think that 
the central bank's printing of money has been part of the 
so-called shock therapy, when macroeconomic stabilization should 
in fact be one of its cornerstones. The problem with the 
reforms so far is not that they have been too far-reaching, but 
that it has been impossible to pursue them consistently enough. 
  The concern that has followed in the wake of the election 
result is justified. We in Sweden must follow developments with 
a watchful eye. The alarmed reaction in Sweden and 
internationally must not, however, be allowed to obscure the 
fact that the main thrust of Swedish policy is the same as 
before the elections -- namely, to support as far as is possible 
the democratic and reform-oriented forces in our neighbor to the 
east. 
  The work to incorporate Russia into the broader European 
community, with all that this means in the way of reciprocal 
efforts and undertakings, must continue. On this point our 
policy will bear the mark of continuity. In particular our 
contacts with those parts of Russia in our immediate environs 
must be deepened and developed further. 
  The conclusion we should draw from the election result is, 
as 
I have already said, that Russia needs more, not less support 
and cooperation. It is now more important than ever before not 
to create an impression of wanting to exclude Russia from the 
rest of Europe. 
  At the same time we must remain firm on the demand that 
Russia must respect agreements entered into and commitments 
made, just as it must respect the generally accepted principles 
which are the foundation of ties between states. The 
surrounding world should continue to be firm but constructive in 
its dealings with the new Russia. 

