Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Roberto Orozco B.] </F>
  [Text] The powerful drug cartels are attempting to convert 
some of Nicaragua's Pacific coasts, primarily at Rivas, into 
"key sites" for drug trafficking. Their aim for the short term 
is to gain the market previously monopolized by the now 
dismantled Medellin Cartel. 
  Captain Gregorio Aburto, the Rivas police chief, claimed: 
"Nicaragua is the target, and, specifically, our unprotected 
Pacific coasts." 
  In fact, there are in Rivas some nearly uninhabited coasts 
offering drug traffickers terrain suited for the unloading of 
drugs (mainly cocaine) by air and sea, without being detected by 
the police, who are faced with a budget problem for keeping 
their agents in the area. 
  Along the Rivas coast there are at least 18 inlets that 
could 
prove ideal for the entry of drugs destined for northern Central 
America. These inlets are located on isolated beaches, such as 
El Conejo, Gavilan, Popoyo, Guasacate, and others surrounded by 
mountains and hills, offering a "good hideout" for the shipments. 
  Colombia's Cali Cartel is attempting to find an "ideal 
hiding 
place" for its drug shipments in that section of Rivas, so as to 
gain ground and a market for drugs formerly monopolized by the 
Medellin Cartel. The latter drug cartel was broken up after the 
death of its top-ranking chief, Pablo Escobar Gaviria, on 2 
December of last year. 
  Evidence of the Cali Cartel's intentions was the operation 
unsuccessfully attempted by the drug traffic in Popoyo and 
Guasacate on 12 January of this year. 
  In a joint operation, the National Police and the U.S. Drug 
Enforcement Administration (DEA) succeeded in confiscating 275 
kg of cocaine out of the 300 kg that the Cali Cartel was trying 
to ship to Guatemala through Nicaraguan territory. In Guatemala, 
a subordinate organization of that cartel, called the 
"Guatemalan Connection," was to be responsible for distributing 
and selling the drugs. 
  In that action, termed "Operation Ocean," six persons were 
captured: four Guatemalans and two Nicaraguans. 
  Yesterday, the National Police Counternarcotics Division 
captured Marcelo Sanchez Mejia, the presumed chief of the 
"Guatemalan Connection," in Nicaragua. Sanchez was arrested with 
an ex-lieutenant from the Sandinist People's Army (EPS) named 
Marvin Cuadra, while both were located in Las Piedrecitas. 
  According to Captain Aburto, it was after this operation 
that 
the inference was made of the drug traffickers' intention of 
devising "a possible assault by the drug cartels for control of 
Nicaragua's Pacific area. They want that market left by the 
Medellin Cartel." 
  As Captain Aburto explained, the drug dealers have 
discovered 
that sending drugs by way of the Pacific to Guatemala is "safer" 
for them than moving them on the Atlantic. 
  The police chief reported: "Those captured in this operation 
took off from Colombia in a white Cessna plane, crossing the 
island of San Andres. Then they entered Nicaraguan territory 
through Barra del Colorado, in Rio San Juan. They crossed the 
Cocibolca and the Rivas Isthmus and, upon reaching the 
Nicaraguan Pacific, they dropped the shipment into the sea." 
  "It is untrue that they took off from Panama," explained 
Captain Aburto, correcting with his assertion certain accounts 
published in other news media. 
  The "safety" offered by the Central American Pacific is 
based 
on some "technical factors" related to air and sea 
transportation. 
  For example, on the Atlantic the drug traffickers have to 
cross larger stretches of land; whereas, on the Pacific, they 
can reach Guatemala without having to touch land first. 
  Moreover, the Pacific has not been a traditional route in 
the 
drug traffic; hence, there is little surveillance: a situation 
offering them the "best opportunity." It should be added that, 
when a small plane flies "skimming water," it is not detected by 
military radar, and its passage through each country's waters 
goes unnoticed. 
  There are two advantages that the drug traffic has found in 
the Nicaraguan Pacific: The first lies in Rivas, where there are 
secluded beaches suitable for unloading drugs; and the other is 
the geographical advantage of certain beaches farther north, 
such as La Boquita, Casares, and Huehuete. 
  At these three bathing resorts there are connecting roads 
leading to different parts of the country, so that the "narcos" 
need not pass through police checkpoints. 
  For example, from Casares one can depart for San Rafael del 
Sur along a road that crosses the locality of San Pablo. It is 
also possible to leave Leon using the Carretera Vieja [Old 
Highway], going through Villa El Carmen. Finally, one can reach 
Diriamba and, from there, travel as far as El Crucero, Managua. 
All these roads offer great opportunities. 
  On a lesser scale, some small drug trafficking groups that 
have been reorganizing since the "downfall" of the Medellin 
Cartel deal in small amounts of drugs that they bring in through 
"blind spots" on Nicaragua's southern border. 
  They use the so-called "pack mules," who are persons hired 
to 
carry from one to three kg of cocaine concealed in special 
compartments of their knapsacks. 
  Another problem faced by the Rivas police is the marijuana 
growing in sections bordering Costa Rica. Captain Aburto claimed 
that some "Ticos" [Costa Ricans] are using our border land to 
grow that drug. 
  The Colon, Zapotillo, and Sardinas sections are the ones 
most 
involved. At the beginning of this year, 14,000 marijuana plants 
were discovered and destroyed in Colon. 

