Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Calm seems to have returned to the northern suburbs 
of Bujumbura this morning. According to AFP, there was no 
shooting last night or early this morning. The death toll for 
the recent clashes in Burundi has now been revised downwards, 
but the clashes between soldiers and civilians are nevertheless 
said to have claimed several dozen lives. Doctors Without 
Borders Belgium has expressed its concern about the fate of the 
wounded. Most of them are said to be too afraid to leave their 
shelters to seek medical help. Christian Sendegeya, vice 
president of the Burundi National Assembly, is currently 
visiting Paris. He has confirmed that the head of state remains 
quite free to move around as he wishes, and he denied that there 
was any coup attempt, as had been claimed. This latest flare-up 
nevertheless started when soldiers tried to disarm Hutu 
civilians in Bujumbura. Murielle Pomponne began by asking 
Christian Sendegeya if he felt that this process of disarmament 
should continue: 
  [Begin recording] [Sendegeya] I quite agree that this 
disarmament should continue, but we have to ask ourselves who 
should be disarming whom. Is the Army to be involved in 
disarmament? A large proportion of the Army was actively or 
passively involved in the assassination of President Ndadaye. 
Are we now to send out that same Army to disarm other people? 
This does not make any sense. 
  The solution I believe is, as we have always asked, for the 
international community to send a neutral force to Burundi. 
This force could perhaps be entrusted with this mission of 
disarmament. 
  [Pomponne] The OAU was set to send a number of men. Where 
does this plan stand now? 
  [Sendegeya] The OAU was first going to send some 180 
soldiers. The Army together with some opposition parties 
complained about this. Now we are talking about some 50 
officers who are expected to come and be scattered across the 
various military camps in the country in order to monitor the 
behavior of the Army. I feel, however, that this is not what is 
needed. We need a good team of soldiers who could prevent the 
current Army from doing any harm, who could begin the whole 
process of disarmament, and then could help us to set up a 
really national army, made up of soldiers from all regions. [end 
recording] 
  That was Christian Sendegeya, vice president of the Burundi 
National Assembly. 
  In a communique, the European Union yesterday condemned the 
violence in Burundi. According to the Twelve, I quote, this 
violence has been fanned by extremist elements in the 
authorities, the opposition, and the Army. 

