Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Ministry of International Trade and Industry 
(MITI) is working in closer cooperation with the Ministry of 
Construction (MOC), the Ministry of Transport (MOT), the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), and the Environment Agency (EA) 
to promote practical applications of new energy including 
photovoltaic power generation and clean energy vehicles. They 
are aiming at a joint strategy by proposing a low-interest loan 
system to promote commercialization of clean energy vehicles 
such as compressed natural gas (CNG) cars, while investigating 
how various laws can be applied. Usually, ministries fight over 
policies and budget proposals, but on energy issues they are 
keeping inter-ministerial conflict in hand. 
  Cooperative efforts by MITI with other ministries include 
the 
joint development project on housing models and residential 
subdivisions which incorporates natural energy such as 
photovoltaic power generation in order to cope with 
environmental problems. Measures for energy-efficient facilities 
and demonstration of photovoltaic power generation systems which 
had been promoted under the leadership of MITI, and housing 
construction incorporating energy conservation measures 
heretofore promoted by the MOC will be worked out jointly. 
  A committee of housing manufacturers within the Solar System 
Promotion Association has been investigating use of integrated 
roofing systems. In this area also a special committee under the 
guidance of MOC has given special attention to the applicability 
of laws related to construction. Furthermore, they will 
cooperate with MOC on architectural standardization regulations 
in order to use integrated modules for building materials. 
  This cooperation extends to clean energy vehicle 
development. 
The results of the CNG car fleet tests conducted by MITI will be 
checked by MOT's Safety Standard Investigation Committee. Both 
MITI and MOT have held five conferences on low pollution 
vehicles since last fiscal year. At these meetings they have 
prepared basic information on the development of CNG, electric, 
and methanol vehicles and related infrastructure, and the 
outlook for commercialization. 
  MITI and MOT are making special efforts to cooperate in 
development of systems to aid the commercialization of CNG 
vehicles. They are also cooperating on a joint proposal for a 
low interest loan system for CNG, electric, and methanol 
vehicles. Furthermore, they are making proposals jointly with EA 
to have CNG, electric, methanol and hybrid vehicles included in 
the new tax system. 
  In addition, MHA is currently holding an ``Investigative 
Research Forum for the Promotion of Local Energy Operation'' to 
discuss power generation using waste materials, refuse 
solidification for fuel/power generation, and wind power 
generation. MITI is also showing great interest in this area by 
exchanging information frequently through their divisions 
involved. 

