BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Su Huizhi (5685 2585 1807)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 19 May (XINHUA) -- During a recent study 
and investigative tour of Beijing's suburbs, Wen Jiabao, 
alternate member of the Political Bureau and member of the 
Secretariat of the CPC Central Committee, emphasized: Suburban 
areas, which play an important role in guaranteeing the supply 
of farm products to the city, should serve city residents and 
help rural farmers prosper by continuing to reinforce 
agriculture to ensure the success of the "vegetable basket" 
project; they should strive to explore a new way for developing 
the suburban economy, bring into play the suburbs' advantages, 
develop the economy in an all-round way, and raise farmers' 
incomes. 
  From 16 to 19 May, Wen Jiabao conducted the investigative 
tour in Pinggu, Shunyi, and Tongxian counties. He visited farm 
households, fields, and pig and cattle farms, earnestly 
familiarizing himself with grain production and the vegetable 
basket project, asking questions about rural economic 
development and farmers' everyday life, and discussing with them 
a number of problems in agricultural production. 
  Fully affirming Beijing municipality's achievements in 
agriculture and rural work, Wen Jiabao said: Suburban areas are 
the primary bases which supply nonstaple foods to the city. To 
do a good job in agricultural production in the suburbs to 
ensure plentiful and stable supply of nonstaple foods is of 
crucial importance to guaranteeing the city's economic 
development and social stability. Leaders at all levels must 
attach strategic importance to agricultural development in 
suburban areas. We should increase the input into agriculture 
and raise its comprehensive production capacity by supplementing 
and building up agriculture with industrial production. We 
should rely on science and technology to enable agriculture to 
develop toward a pattern of high yields, high quality, and high 
efficiency and to raise the comparative efficiency of 
agricultural production. In line with the demand for scientific 
farming and socialized production, we should develop, where 
conditions permit, operations adaptable to scaled economy so as 
to raise the agricultural labor productivity and land output 
rate. He pointed out: The suburbs -- with their convenient 
transportation, accessibility to information, and large markets 
-- should support the city and raise farmers' incomes by 
developing the rural economy in an all-round way and raising the 
comprehensive efficiency of rural economy. They should pay 
close attention to the comprehensive development of agriculture, 
energetically exploit non-farmland resources such as barren 
hilly areas and uncultivated beaches, and develop agriculture, 
forestry, animal husbandry, fishery, and sideline production in 
an all-round way. They should readjust the structure of rural 
economy to keep abreast of market demands; and should never 
relax efforts at grain production while actively developing 
diversified operations, expanding village and township 
enterprises and tertiary industries, and developing products 
with high added value. They should expedite the flow of surplus 
rural laborers by guiding village and township enterprises to 
concentrate at appropriate places and combine them with the 
construction of small rural towns. Wen Jiabao said: Beijing, 
China's capital, is a major city. The development of 
agriculture and rural economy in Beijing's suburbs can set the 
pace for suburban areas throughout the country. Cadres and 
people at large in the suburbs must persist in emancipating the 
minds, seeking truth from facts, and striving to explore a new 
way for developing agriculture and rural economy in the suburbs 
of China's large and medium cities. 
  Since mid-April, timely rains have fallen in Beijing, 
alleviating the drought situation and helping the growth of 
summer crops. While inspecting wheat fields, Wen Jiabao 
emphasized that as the summer crops have entered the production 
stage, it is necessary to pay close attention to pest prevention 
and control, to guard against drought and waterlogging, and 
ensure a good job in other tasks of field management. 
Governments at all levels should step up guidance, provide 
adequate services, and strive to reap an even better harvest. 
  Vice agriculture minister Wang Baorui, and Yang Chaoshi, 
Standing Committee member and director of the Organization 
Department of the Beijing municipal party committee, also 
participated in the investigative tour. 

