CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by M.G. Chukhriy, L.F. Voloshchuk, Biological Plant </F>
Protection Institute at the Moldova Republic Academy of 
Sciences, `Invitation to Cooperation'] 
  [Text] The long established links among the scientists, 
including our field of biological plant protection, have 
weakened, and a number of cases became broken with the formation 
of many sovereign states on the territory of the former union. 
The All-Union Institute of Biological Plant Protection Methods 
which once was a head institute in the USSR did not escape this 
fate. After becoming subordinated to the Moldova Republic 
Academy of Sciences, it is naturally restructuring its 
activities and in no way does it pretend to play the former role 
of the biological method curator in the CIS countries. Yet it 
would be incorrect to regard this large scientific establishment 
to have been ``sliced off.'' The staff, a lot of scientific work 
in progress, and modern equipment still remain, and the plans 
outlined in the past are still being implemented. 
  We should reiterate everything the institute has done in 
recent years. 
  Basic research into the faunistics and taxonomy of a number 
of predators and agricultural crop parasites has been carried 
out, individual methods of using natural entomophagan 
populations have been substantiated, and a range of methods of 
reconstructing the agrobiocenosis of the fruit orchard which 
facilitate the preservation of natural populations of the 
natural pest enemies and increase their efficiency has been 
developed. 
  A comprehensive pesticide-free system of vegetable crop 
protection in enclosed soil using entomophagans and 
microbiological facilities has been developed and is being 
implemented. 
  The institute proposed methods of large-scale phytophagan 
breeding and production of effective entomophagan and viral 
preparations on their basis and developed original resources for 
producing Encarsia, Phytoseiulus, Cecidomyiidae carnivora, 
Amblyseius, and Aphidius; techniques for producing, 
storing, and applying Trichogramma and the methods of 
mass breeding and introduction of perillus and 
podizius have been proposed. 
  New active strains of entomopathogenic fungi, antagonist 
fungi, and hyperparasites and carnivorous pathogenic weed fungi 
have been isolated and regulations have been developed for 
production of biological preparations and application 
technologies for some of them in a series of agricultural crops; 
new baculovirus strains have been isolated and production 
regulations have been developed for viral preparations against 
cotton and cabbage cutworm and American white butterfly. 
  Sexual pheromones of more than 70 species of harmful insects 
have been isolated and production of synthetic pheromones has 
been set up for more than 15 species of agricultural crop pests; 
technologies and their applications have been developed for the 
apple worm and grape leaf roller moth as well as a method of 
pheromone monitoring for observing and indicating the pest 
development. 
  Based on the research, 36 methodological manuals and 
recommendations and more than 300 articles have been printed, 26 
collections on various issues of biological methods have been 
published, and 41 patents have been granted. 
  The VNIIBMZR was given the new name of the Institute of 
Biological Plant Protection by the 15 Feb 92 Decree of the 
President of the Republic of Moldova and incorporated into the 
Moldovan Academy of Sciences. Its mission statement was 
formulated as ``development of the theoretical foundation of 
biological methods and ecologically safe systems of integrated 
plant protection and development of biological facilities and 
technologies for their application.'' 
  The institute will rely on work in progress and the of 
totality world experience in continuing the study of the biology 
and ecology of the principal phytophagan and entomophagan types, 
ways of maintaining, introducing, and activating natural 
populations of friendly insects, development of the mass 
breeding technologies for the effective species of predators, 
parasites, and phytophagan for the production of viral 
insecticides and microbial preparations and identification of 
new microorganism and virus strains. 
  We are also speeding up efforts relating to pheromones and 
the development of the methods of phytosanitary inspection and 
monitoring systems. Individual techniques will be formulated in 
the form of environmentally safe systems of integrated plant 
protection from pests and diseases on the basis of assessing the 
effect of the new technologies. 
  The institute possesses an adequate material and technical 
base and its work sites cover approximately 14,000 
m[.sup]2[/], 59 chambers for insect breeding, 7 climate 
chambers, and a data processing room with computers. 
  We are still interested in strengthening cooperation with 
scientists and production experts from other CIS countries and 
are awaiting original proposals. The readers of this journal 
would probably be interested in finding out who is who and who 
does what at our institute. The following is a brief reference. 
  Management: Academician I.S. Popushnoy, director; 
Doctor of Biological Sciences M.G. Chukhriy, deputy director for 
science; and L.F. Voloshchuk, scientific secretary. 
  Laboratories: 

  -  technical entomology, A.F. Rusnak, director; 
  -  virology, bacteriology, and protozoan diseases, M.G. 
Chukhriy; 
  -  experimental mycology, I.S. Popushnoy; 
  -  chemistry of natural biological active substances (BAV), G.K. 
Roshka; 
  -  chemical analysis, F.I. Petrashku; 
  -  biochemistry and physiology of insects and microorganisms, 
I.G. Yazlovetskiy; 
  -  biological active substance application 
methods, V.I. Voynyak; 
  -  faunistics of insects, V.A. Matsyuk; 
  -  mechanization and automation of production processes and 
application of biological facilities, A.S. Abashkin; 
  -  food supply storage, V.A. Tudirash; 
  -  integrated vegetable crop protection, N.A. Popov; 
  -  integrated field and cash crop protection, V.A. Bradovskiy; 
  -  immunobiotechnology, T.D. Verderevskaya; 
  -  mathematical modeling group, V.D. Katane; 
  -  pollination study group, F.D. Kostic. 


    The staff consists of a total of 250 employees, 70 of whom 
are candidates of sciences and four are doctors of sciences. 
  The institute is maintaining master phytophagan cultures and 
is carrying out large-scale breeding of the following species: 
Mamestra brassicae, Heliothis armigera, Lexostege 
sticticalis, Carpocapsa pommonella, Eiphestia cuhniella, 
Ostrinia nubilallis, Sitotroga cerealella. 
  We are involved in large-scale production and marketing of 
the following entomophagan cultures: 
  1. Trichogramma (10 species) against complex pests 
in field conditions; 
  2. Phytoseiulus persimilis against ticks; 
  3. Amblyseius barkeri for suppressing thrips; 
  4. Amblyseius cucumeris for the same purpose; 
  5. Amblyseius californicus against the tick 
complex; 
  6. Metaseiulus occidentalis for the same purpose; 
  7. Chrysopa carnea against aphids; 
  8. Aphidius matricariae for the same purpose; 
  9. Lysiphlebus testaceipes for the same purpose; 
  10. Praon volucrae for the same purpose; 
  11. Dibrachys cavus against leaf roller worm; 
  12. Encarsia formosa against white flies; 
  13. Trichogramma spp. against a range of pests in 
field conditions; 
  14. Aphidoletes aphidimyza against aphids; 
  15. Paragarmania spp. against ticks; 
  16. Elasmus albipennis against a range of pests; 
and 
  17. Bracon hebitor for the same purpose. 
  The following microbiopreparations are being produced: 
trichodermin against tuber rot in enclosed soil, verticillin 
against white flies, nematophagin against gallic nematodes, and 
koniotyrin and glyocladin against white and gray sunflower rot. 
  The following viral entomopathogenic preparations are being 
produced: virin- ABB-3 against Hyphantria cunea 
caterpillars; virin-XC-2 against Heliothis armigera; 
virin-KS against Mamestra brassicae; virin-Cp against 
Carpocapsa pommonella; virin-Ls against Leucoma 
salicis; and virin-OS against Agrotis segetum 
caterpillars. 
  The institute is manufacturing and offering for sale 
equipment for the production and application of biological plant 
protection facilities. 
  We are producing pheromones on a commercial basis for 
indicating 56 species of harmful insects. 
  We want to assure all our colleagues that the doors of the 
Biological Plant Protection Institute remain open for all 
experts and organizations interested in cooperating with us. 
  Our whereabouts: 277060, Republic of Moldova, Kishinev, 58 
Dachia Avenue. 


