Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Adrian Ursu on statements by Romanian Defense </F>
Minister Niculae Spiroiu: "Romania and NATO Processes; Closer to 
the Atlantic or Closer to Siberia?"] 
  [Text] The NATO summit held on 8 and 9 January in Brussels 
aroused interest both among the members of the alliance as well 
as among the countries in Central and Eastern Europe. Those 
countries are affected by the proposals of the Alliance made 
through the two documents (the invitation to cooperation and the 
basic document) that the aforementioned Alliance has adopted, 
through the "Partnership for Peace." 
  When the summit meeting was going through its official 
moments and cliches (starting with the group picture and ending 
with the publication of documents) we tried to examine this 
proposal and asked for the support and opinions of the Romanian 
defense minister, Lieutenant General Niculae Spiroiu. 
<H3>  What is the meaning of the partnership for peace and what 
does it offer us? </H3>
  "So far the partnership with NATO has taken place on the 
basis of the decision of the aforementioned alliance (since 
December 1991) in the form of a program with cooperation 
partners which included all the countries in Central and East 
Europe, that is, the former Warsaw Pact members, including the 
countries in the former USSR. We are talking here about a sort 
of collective partnership of the countries that participate in 
the North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC). The partnership 
for peace represents a qualitatively superior stage, because we 
are no longer talking about collective relations but about 
bilateral relations between the Alliance and the countries for 
whom the partnership has been opened. Therefore, the 
partnership for peace implies certain amplified conditions 
compared with the form of cooperation that existed so far," said 
the Romanian defense minister. For the time being, concrete 
ways for this achievable military cooperation -- which also 
depends on the offer that each approached country will make -- 
could be the following: joint participation in operations aimed 
at peacekeeping or solving situations of crisis, joint military 
maneuvers, expansion of cooperation in the area of combat 
training, assistance granted for restructuring military bodies, 
and, maybe in the future, the procurement of military 
technology. Through this form of cooperation, the opportunities 
of the Alliance to participate in peacekeeping operations for 
example, would expand considerably. 
  Thus, as far as Romania is concerned, once the political 
decision for cooperation, which ends with integration in NATO, 
has been taken by the presidency, parliament, and the Ministry 
of Foreign affairs (as General Spiroiu stresses), the only thing 
left for Bucharest will be to present to the leadership of the 
alliance an proposition for cooperation, at least as attractive 
as the ones presented by the other countries that desire this 
integration. 
<H5>  Does this partnership contribute to good neighborliness? </H5>
  The insistence with which especially the countries included 
in the Visegrad group asked to be admitted to the Alliance as 
soon as possible, as well as the term of five years advanced 
more or less officially in Brussels as a period after which one 
could achieve the access, raises questions regarding conditions 
for admission. It is clear that NATO, as a body that aims to 
ensure its own security, is not tempted to incorporate sources 
of instability by accepting new members, no matter whether they 
are of an economic or of an ethnic nature. It is not very 
likely that the alliance would be used to resolve problems in 
the interests of one country or another. 
  "As far as the option of admitting new members is concerned, 
NATO will take into account the relations with their neighbors 
of those countries that it is going to admit. The alliance is 
certainly not willing to burden itself with problems of this 
nature, by accepting members that have problems. It is very 
likely that access will be granted to those countries that have 
no such problems" stressed the minister of defense. 
  Therefore, the Brussels documents require -- and analysts 
consider it absolutely necessary -- that a country that wishes 
to be admitted to NATO should offer a number of guarantees: to 
have a solid and viable economic basis, to present a convincing 
democratic process, to solve all their problems regarding ethnic 
minorities, to be ready to grant information regarding the 
budget and defense system, and last but not least, to 
subordinate the army to civilian society. 
<H5>  Is Romania Prepared for Such a Step? </H5>
  The reform of the Romanian Army and of the Ministry of 
Defense is a process desired by the country and to a great 
extent it has taken concrete shape. The process takes into 
account the need for the country's defense, the concluded 
military accords, and aims at achieving a structural 
compatibility with the Western military bodies, whose 
organization formula has already proven its viability. The 
access of civilians to the structures of the ministry up to the 
leadership body has already been implemented. 
  "The legislative framework has been worked out and, on the 
one hand it is in line with the standards of the legal bodies in 
the countries with a democratic tradition, and on the other 
hand, it is in accordance with the agreements concluded by 
Romania after the [1989] revolution. We have already elaborated 
the concept regarding the strategy of national security and the 
national military doctrine, following the same criteria." 
  "The reform process that we have started at the Ministry of 
National Defense is aimed at achieving a military organization 
similar to the structures in the West, especially in the 
countries that are members of the NATO and the Western European 
Union, because the structures that we want to achieve are 
acceptable both to NATO and Western European Union. We have 
taken action in the field of training programs, we have officers 
who are being trained in France, Britain, the United States, and 
Germany and we also made positive steps in the area of training 
methods. We carried out joint drills, especially in the Navy 
with the U.S. Navy, and the naval forces of Britain, France, 
Turkey, Bulgaria, and Greece. Although in the beginning the 
drills were of a smaller scale, they proved the compatibility of 
our soldiers' training with the training of soldiers in Western 
countries. The fact that we have credibility also proves the 
access to training programs such as IMET [expansion unknown] 
approved also by the U.S. Congress. The most difficult part is 
the army's equipment because of the economic recession. One 
might say that if we had money, this goal would be the easiest 
to achieve. In this respect we acted according to priorities, 
mainly because, in comparison with other armies of the former 
Warsaw Pact, our army's technological equipment was of Western 
origin. In our army, in case of every type of military vehicle 
(armored carriers and tanks) we have Western equipment. In the 
field of aviation we have Aero-Spatiale Turbomeca and Rolls 
Royce licenses. We are a little bit ahead of other countries. 
  In addition to this, we have already participated in 
peacekeeping operations in Somalia even on our own account. 
Currently, we are preparing the first Romanian battalion of 
"blue berets." I am optimistic in our possibility to align with 
criteria of the system proposed by the Brussels summit." 
  These are the preparations carried out by the Romanian Army 
to respond to the requirements of partnership, the way they have 
been presented by the minister of national defense. 
<H3>  What Would the Selective Access to the Structures of the 
Alliance Mean? "One or two years ago, the countries in the 
Visegrad group generated a competition as far as access to NATO 
is concerned. In this respect, there are two things we consider 
important: the first is that access of the countries in the 
region to the security structures, including NATO, should be 
carried out in such a way as to ensure equal security for all, 
without discrimination and without new frontiers. Thus, 
different levels of acceptance and discriminatory treatment 
would avoid new feelings of isolation, marginalization, 
distrust, and suspicion in this region. Second: any 
discrimination would belittle the standard required by this 
partnership for peace, even if this does not pleases the 
countries included in the Visegrad group. The partnership for 
peace is above any discrimination. In addition, it is important 
that access to security structures should not appear as an 
action aimed against Russia. It is important that Russia should 
not be pushed aside from these structures and that it should be 
assisted in this process of democratization of political life as 
well as in the military area. The NATO in which we wish to be 
integrated is not the same NATO that existed at the time of the 
cold war but an organization that has proved its ability to 
develop a new aspect of its activities, namely to support 
democratic processes and the democratic transition of military 
bodies" said General Spiroiu. </H3>
  If the Alliance offered guarantees of security to the four 
countries that belong to the Visegrad group, it would put 
Romania in a position not to be able to plead its cause directly 
within this structure. For the time being, however, it appears 
that no decision has been taken regarding access -- selective or 
not -- to NATO structures. Romania's geostrategic position, its 
demographic and economic potential, its control over the mouth 
of the Danube, and thus over a waterway that will become 
extremely important in the future, that is, the 
Rhine-Main-Danube canal, the connection that it can ensure 
Romania with the Southeast "region" of NATO [Greece and Turkey) 
and with the Middle East, all these elements make our country 
interesting and important. But not only for NATO. 

