BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Huang Fengzhen (7806 7685 3791)] </F>
  [Text] Tokyo, 8 Jun (XINHUA) -- A delegation from the 
Chinese Ministry of Forestry headed by Forestry Minister Xu 
Youfang held talks on 7 June with a group of officials from the 
Japanese Environment Agency headed by the Agency's director 
general, Toshiko Hamayotsu. The two sides reached a consensus 
on cooperation in the protection of ibises, and signed a summary 
of talks on cooperation in the protection of ibises. 
  The summary of talks says: "The Chinese Ministry of Forestry 
and the Japanese Environmental Agency realize that the ibis is 
one of the bird species which is most near extinction, and to 
protect ibises and rescue them from the crisis of extinction is 
a problem for the Chinese people and the Japanese people to 
solve together." The summary says: To further strengthen 
cooperation between the two countries in the protection of 
ibises, the two sides have reached a consensus on the measures 
which could be adopted within the limits of the laws and 
regulations of their respective countries and their financial 
resources. The summary says: To support the Japanese side in 
the artificial breeding of ibises during the period of 
cooperation, the Chinese side will lend to the Japanese side a 
pair of healthy, reproductive ibises which are currently in the 
hands of the China Wild Life Protection Association. The birds 
will be loaned for a period of less than three years and be used 
in breeding and joint research. The Chinese side shall send the 
pair of ibises to Japan before 30 September 1994, and the 
Japanese side shall return the pair to China before October 1997. 
  The pair of birds are loaned for exclusive use by Japanese 
experts in breeding research. If the Japanese side extends an 
invitation, the Chinese side will consider sending experts to 
Japan to participate in the research. 
  Xu Youfang and his party arrived in Japan on 5 June on an 
eight- day good-will visit at the invitation of the Japanese 
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. During their 
visit in Japan, Xu Youfang and his party have held talks with 
Japanese Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries Minister Mutsuki 
Sato and Environment Agency Director General Toshiko Hamayotsu. 
They have also paid courtesy calls on Japanese upper house 
speaker Bunbe Hara and former Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro 
Hosokawa. 

