BFN 

  [Text] Washington June 1 SAPA -- Declaring South Africa is 
back not only as a world market but also as a prospective 
exporter, Trade and Industry Minister Trevor Manuel on Wednesday 
[1 June] announced plans for South Africa's largest ever trade 
initiative with the United States. The multi-million dollar 
programme focusses on a South African industrial trade expo in 
New York City from September 20 to 23 where about 150 South 
African firms are expected to show their goods and services. 
"South Africa and the USA: Strengthening the Link", the expo is 
being staged by the Department of Trade and Industry and the 
South African Foreign Trade Organization (SAFTO). 
  Addressing a news conference in Washington, Mr Manuel said 
the idea was to reintroduce South Africa--not as an emerging 
market but as a emerging market with a highly sophisticated 
physical and financial infrastructure. He said President 
Mandela had set out a vision of South Africa's future based on 
compromise, peace and stability. Now the "battle royal" was on 
to give hard-won democracy some content. "Now we have to ensure 
that markets in South Africa are sharpened so that we can create 
jobs and improve on our manufacturing, that we can move up the 
value chain from our rich mineral endowment and re-position 
South Africa in the global economy." 
  Mr Manuel said South Africa's return to the Commonwealth, 
while unlikely to make a significant difference in the narrow 
sense of trade and economic terms, was part of the approach that 
South Africa was back in the family. 
  Referring to government's Reconstruction and Development 
Programme, he said South Africa had an enormous capacity to 
build a consensus society in the context of partnership and 
cooperation. This was the case between not only government and 
business but also South Africa and its major trading partners. 
  A series of initiatives being worked about between the 
United 
States and South Africa would be announced in a few weeks, he 
disclosed. 
  Mr Manuel said the development of southern Africa regional 
trade and stability was an important element in South Africa's 
drive into world markets. It was important for South Africa to 
stimulate economic development across the region with its 
100-million inhabitants. "Any notion that you build an island 
of prosperity in a sea ravaged by war is clearly a non-starter," 
he said. 
  South African Ambassador Harry Schwarz told the news 
conference that trade was like a tango -- and it took two to 
tango. With respect to the US and South Africa, one tango 
dancer was a powerful economy and the other was a fast-improving 
existing market. South Africans of all races were a proud 
people, Schwarz said. "We are not standing with a begging 
bowl....We stand as a proud people wanting to build an economy 
and saying that we have tremendous resources and the capacity to 
become a major world power." 

