Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prof Yuriy Mikhaylovich Komarov, </F>
corresponding member of the Academy of Technological Sciences 
and doctor of medical sciences, by Albert Kozlov; place and date 
of interview not given: ``What Are We Eating, What Are We 
Breathing? The Health of Russians: The Situation is Extremely 
Alarming''] 
  [Text] Until the late 1980s Russia's population 
growth exhibited a stable trend--3.5-7 percent every 5 years. In 
1991 we reached the mark at which the coefficient of natural 
growth was only 0.7 per thousand residents, and beginning in 
1992 the population actually began to decrease. The number of 
deaths exceeded the number of births by 204,000 people. This 
year this process has accelerated. 
  A TRUD correspondent asked Professor Yu. Komarov, doctor of 
medical sciences, corresponding member of the Academy of 
Technological Sciences and general director of the 
Medsotsekonominform Scientific-Production Association, to 
comment on so lamentable a fact. 
  [Komarov] In and of itself, zero population growth or even a 
decrease in population is a widespread phenomenon in the world. 
However, Russia's situation is unique in that the transition to 
a natural decrease is caused chiefly by a decrease in the birth 
rate. In the last 5 years 900,000 persons were born in our 
country, or 36 percent less than in the preceding 5 years, and 
if we include 1992, the number is 195,000 less. The birth rate 
in Russia has become the lowest among developed countries. 
  The second factor influencing the population decrease is a 
sharp worsening of the health of people and growth of mortality. 
This raises the problem of the health and life span of the 
population to the rank of national problems determining the 
survival and prospects of the nation. 
  The decline in birth rate and health is a consequence of the 
socioeconomic and ecological crisis, the low level of financing 
of public health, insufficient flexibility of its structures, 
and the absence of any strategy in this direction. 
  [Kozlov] It has usually been believed that assets invested 
directly into the development of public health produce the 
greatest impact in improving the people's health. But today the 
principal causes of morbidity and mortality are associated with 
living conditions and way of life. 
  [Komarov] That would be the most correct approach to take to 
this problem. The quality of life of Russians may be portrayed 
in general form as follows. In 1985 we were 68th in the world in 
gross production per capita, and 77th in level of personal 
consumption. This was respectively 39.9 and 25.8 percent of the 
levels in the USA. In the past year the standard of living of 
Russians dropped further by a factor of two. Consumer prices 
increased by 26 times (in 1992), while average wages increased 
by only 13 times, and the rate of growth of pensions and 
assistance was a third behind the growth of wages. This year 
these indicators are even more deplorable. 
  A drop in real income has resulted in a worsening of the 
consumption structure. The proportion of food expenses in the 
family budget grew by an average of 60 percent (85 among the 
poorest and pensioners); in this case consumption of meat, oils, 
vegetables and fruits decreased by a time and a half. On the 
other hand consumption of potatoes and grain products of lesser 
value in dietary respects increased. Hence the protein shortage 
in the Russian diet was 25 percent, the vitamin C shortage was 
50 percent and the group B and A vitamin shortage was 20-30 
percent. 
  Paradoxical as it may seem, people in countries in which the 
quality of protects against avitaminosis gulp down vitamin 
supplements. In our country, where the diet lacks in nutritional 
respects, the situation is reversed. The vitamins we produce of 
such low volume (not to mention their quality) that if we were 
to give them to all Russians, each person would receive only one 
multiple-vitamin pill a year. In the meantime in order to 
satisfy the country's demand at the Western level, we would need 
to spend just $1.50 per Russian on the development of domestic 
industry. 
  [Kozlov] Yuriy Mikhaylovich, what influence is the 
ecological 
situation in the country having on our health? 
  [Komarov] Over 60 million Russians live under conditions in 
which the maximum permissible concentrations of toxins in the 
air are continually exceeded. Approximately half of our 
population drinks water that fails to satisfy hygienic 
requirements. The work places of around 5 million persons in 
industry and a million in construction and transportation fail 
the safety standards, while 4.3 million work in conditions under 
which the concentration of toxins in the air of the work zone 
exceeds the standard. 
  In order for the scale of ecological contamination to become 
more understandable, let me say that each year over 50 million 
tons of exhausts from enterprises and motor transportation enter 
the air: This is 400 kilograms for every Russian. And in cities 
like Berezniki, Bratsk, Krasnoyarsk, Magnitogorsk, Novokuznetsk, 
Norilsk and Perm--a total of 84 cities--morbidity is 1.5-2 times 
higher than the country average. 
  [Kozlov] Your scientific-production association analyzed the 
causes of worker mortality. What diseases kill Russians most 
often? 
  [Komarov] It will seem strange, but what took first place in 
1991 was suicide. Let me say right away that it is provoked by 
social problems and stress. A high percentage of losses also 
comes from work-related injury. And among diseases, circulatory 
ailments, neoplasms, and diseases of the respiratory and 
digestive tract have the lead. 
  The structure of health impairments is now determined 
chiefly 
by long-lasting chronic diseases. Once again there is a direct 
relationship to the state's strategy in health protection: We 
need a two- or three-time increase in outlays on public health, 
and an increase of several times on improvement of the 
environment and development of the social infrastructure. But 
the new powers are as hesitant to provide money for the health 
of people as were the former ones. This is why infectious 
diseases have begun spreading in our country once again. There 
are increasingly larger numbers of cases of acute intestinal 
infections, salmonellosis and viral hepatitis--many hundreds of 
thousands of cases per year. Cholera, which has been forgotten 
by most developed countries, is revealing itself more and more 
frequently. Tuberculosis is returning. 
  Women are a special problem. In the last 3 years their 
morbidity increased abruptly in connection with absence of 
proper diet, because of the shortage of proteins, vitamins and 
microelements. Maternal mortality is very high--four to five 
times higher than in developed countries. By the way, not a 
single developed country in the world has so many women dying 
from abortions as we do (Russia can be compared only to 
Tanzania). Moreover death could be prevented in 60 out of 100 
cases. 
  [Kozlov] Are things any better with the health of men? 
  [Komarov] Unfortunately Russia is one of those countries in 
which ``supermortality'' among men is especially pronounced. In 
comparison with women, the mortality indicators for men of young 
and middle working age are four to five times higher. Only 
around 70 percent of urban and around 60 percent of rural men 
live to 60. In comparison with the USA, the FRG, Japan, France 
and Great Britain, men of what we might call ``working age'' die 
2.5 times more frequently in our country. 
  [Kozlov] The figures are saddening, if not tragic. Is there 
a 
solution? 
  [Komarov] Our country's leadership must finally realize the 
simple truths. First, without health, there cannot be a healthy 
economy. And second, if the necessary emergency measures are not 
implemented very soon, in 7-15 years Russia will transform into 
a degraded society. While in developed countries up to 10-12 
percent of the gross national product is allocated to public 
health, in our country no more than 3-4 percent is allocated. 
Each year more than $2,500 are spent per capita in the USA, 
while in our country 6,500 rubles were planned in 1993. 
  Each time, statistical bodies publish increasingly more 
alarming data indicating a decrease in life span and birth rate, 
growth in the number of suicides and murders, of venereal 
diseases, of alcoholics and drug addicts, congenital 
deformities, and disengagement of the people's ``moral 
restraints.'' These are manifestations of a chronic disease in 
society, a menacing warning that unless the dangerous trends are 
curtailed, the country and the people may find themselves 
without a future. This danger is more terrifying than the 
economic and political crisis. 
  Today, there are practically no illusions left regarding the 
possibility for reforming our economic system swiftly, in a few 
years. Therefore despite the slogans, the social sphere, 
including public health, will once again be financed on the 
basis of the residual principle, and it will experience even 
further degradation. 
  Sad as it may be, the conclusion we are forced to reach is 
this: The people's health is in serious jeopardy. 


