BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 13 (XINHUA) -- The Chinese 
Government has decided to build a national economic information 
network in a move to accelerate the establishment of a socialist 
market economy, according to a senior government official. 
  Wu Jichuan, minister of posts and telecommunications, 
explains in a article in today's PEOPLE'S DAILY [RENMIN RIBAO] 
that the decision was also designed to make use of the 
widespread information on China's economy and narrow the gap 
between China and developed countries. 
  China's economic information network will consist of an 
information resources network and an information 
telecommunications network, Wu said. 
  The first network will cover data banks with various types 
of 
information and data application systems for end-users, he 
explained. 
  The second network will be an on-line operation of 
information resources and application systems via state-owned 
public telecommunications networks. 
  Wu said, "we shall develop new types of information 
application systems in the future, in line with the requirements 
of various economic sectors." 
  The rapid development of China's public telecommunications 
network over the past decade has paved the way for the 
construction of a national economic information network, he said. 
  Since 1985 the capacity of the telecommunications sector has 
been rising faster than China's economy as a whole, he said. 
  During the 1991-1992 period, China added telephone 
switchboards with a total of 6.83 million lines and built 
121,800 long-distance circuits. 
  China will have built a large-capacity, digital transmission 
network linking all provincial capitals and other major cities 
by the end of 1994, the minister said. 
  The network is projected to extend its coverage during the 
1996-2000 period to form an optical fiber-based new transmission 
network nationwide, he added. 
  The first stage of a high-speed data network linking 21 
provinces is expected to go into operation in July to provide 
special digital circuits to customers, he said. 
  Much progress has also been made in mobile 
telecommunications, he said. 
  For example, cellular telephone networks now cover all 
cities 
and counties in coastal areas in eastern and southern China. 
China currently has 700,000 cellular telephones and seven 
million pagers. 
  Minister Wu described the construction of a national 
economic 
information network as a task for all sectors of society. "Only 
through close co-operation between the telecommunications 
sector, the electronics industry and the information application 
sector can we make the construction of that network a complete 
success." 
  He said that the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications 
will draw up plans for telecommunications development and speed 
up construction of large-capacity digital-transmission networks 
based on optical fiber cables, he said. 

