Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Washington, February 14 (XINHUA) -- President Bill 
Clinton sent a 400-page economic report to the U.S. Congress 
today, saying that the U.S. economic expansion looks far 
brighter now than they did a year ago. 
  The economic report of the President, prepared by the 
council 
of economic advisers, forecast the economy will grow 3 percent 
in 1994 and will remain on track to create 8 million jobs in 
four years. 
  In 1993, the economy generated 162,000 new jobs per month, 
twice the 1992 pace. During the bush presidency, fewer than 1 
million new private nonfarm jobs were created, the report said. 
  It also said that consumer spending should remain healthy 
because of continued gains in employment and output, and 
investment spending should remain strong because of low 
long-term interest rates and increasing demand. 
  The annual message from the president to the congress 
represented the first comprehensive exposition of the 
administration's short-term and long-term strategy. 
  The economic report argued that the administration's deficit 
reduction plan has been a major factor in the dramatic decline 
in long-term interest rates. 
  The report also laid out the administration's economic 
rationale for investing in people, technology, defense 
conversion and the environment. 
  Among the other solid signs of economic renewal cited in the 
report are: 
  -- Business investment is surging over 1993. Spending for 
producers' durable equipment has expanded at the fastest pace 
since 1972. 
  -- Housing construction has now clearly begun to accelerate. 
By December, housing starts had reached a 1.54 million annual 
rate, up 25 percent from their July rate. 
  -- Real spending on household durable goods was more than 11 
percent higher than the level of the year earlier in the fourth 
quarter of 1993. 
  -- Inflation rate was just 2.7 percent during 1993, the 
smallest increase since 1986, while the core consumer price 
index, excluding food and energy, increased 3.2 percent, the 
smallest since 1972. 
  -- The factory workweek reached its highest level in the 
post 
war period and overtime was the highest since the 1950s, 
indicating future increases in manufacturing output will be 
coupled with gains in employment. 

