BFN 

<F P=106> ["Part" of interview with Foreign Minister Sergio Abreu by </F>
Heraclio Labandera; place and date not given] 
  [Text] [Labandera] There are documents revealing that the 
United States is investing millions of dollars in birth control 
campaigns in developing countries through private and 
nongovernmental organizations. In the 1987-1992 period, $27 
million was allocated for nine Latin American countries, among 
them Uruguay. This fund grew to $75 million for the 1993-1998 
period. What are Uruguay's criteria for its population policies? 
  [Abreu] First, the Uruguayan definitions of its population 
structure, growth rate, and age structure make us aware that a 
country of approximately 186,000 sq km has a population of 3.5 
million, which is inappropriate for our territory. Consequently, 
the executive branch has a policy to foment immigration with 
concrete measures that seek to facilitate the settlement of 
foreigners in our country. 
  This means that Uruguay needs more people, more manpower, 
and 
more population, not only to increase the market but also to 
balance the population/territory ratio. 
  On the other hand, there is a migratory trend in Uruguay 
linked to a series of factors with repercussions in a particular 
population sector. The most worrisome migratory trend is that 
affecting young people, who go to seek new opportunities beyond 
our borders or better horizons thanks to labor qualifications 
with which they can obtain a comparative advantage. 
  This obviously influences a population policy that is also 
conditioned by "family planning," which has its own parameters 
and which the country has not set at the controversial levels 
existing in other countries, particularly on issues that are so 
sensitive like abortion. 
  Abortion in Uruguay is clearly addressed in the Penal Code. 
  But "family planning" is not linked to official or state 
definitions. It is oriented by advice obtained privately by 
citizens. 
  [Labandera] An International Conference on Population and 
Development, which might cause considerable controversy, is 
scheduled for September in Cairo. On the one hand, there is a 
group of countries that want to control population growth at the 
world level applying "neo-Malthusian" criteria, while on the 
other, there are countries that do not agree with birth control 
conditions. We can mention Brazil and Argentina, for example, 
countries for which credit has been conditioned on 
implementation of restrictive population policies, something the 
two countries have systematically opposed. Has this type of 
pressure been exerted on Uruguay? In such a case, is the country 
willing to pay the political cost of such pressure? 
  [Abreu] Look, Uruguay is studying the subject. Uruguay has a 
delegate to the International Conference on Population and 
Development, and a commission that is preparing for the Cairo 
meeting. 
  What I can tell you in advance is that Uruguay will not 
yield 
to any type of pressure on population policies seeking the 
reduction of the population by methods that are basically 
applied in societies that have a very high population growth 
rate. 
  If this has happened with Argentina and Brazil, just imagine 
what will happen with Uruguay, where we need more instead of 
fewer people. We obviously will not permit meddling in this 
area, if nothing else because of other reasons that should not 
be mentioned here. 
  We have defined a very clear policy for orienting the 
"family 
planning" system, but without the controls or restrictions that 
supposedly might be applied in other countries. 
  Especially because Uruguay is not accustomed to this type of 
pressure, because--among other things--of the principle of the 
sovereign equality of nations. 
  Consequently, unless self-control measures are adopted for 
political or legal reasons of an international nature, Uruguay 
will not accept impositions from abroad. 
  [Labandera] Will Uruguay and its Mercosur [Common Market of 
the South] partners seek a common position in this area, with a 
view toward the International Conference on Population and 
Development? 
  [Abreu] We are considering the issue. We have not yet 
established a clear definition, but it is part of our common 
strategy. The matter has not been directly raised within 
Mercosur, but we will debate it as positions on the subject 
become clearer. 

