Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The greatest fear of business owners and merchants 
concerning new obligations imposed by the Social Security Law 
has to do with added labor costs, the difference between the two 
pension systems, and the concentration of power in the hands of 
the Ministry of Health. 
  Spokesmen for the private sector say the new system will 
once 
again force businesses to raise prices on their products or 
accept lower profits. 
  This is how businessmen and merchants will cover the 
increase 
in payroll costs resulting from the adjustment in pension 
contributions and the change in the proportion of contributions. 
  The new Social Security Law provides that employers will pay 
75 percent of the pension contribution and workers the remaining 
25 percent. Employers currently pay only two-thirds of the 
contribution. 
  The National Association of Industrialists (ANDI) has from 
the very beginning opposed the disproportionate share of the 
dues, arguing the high labor costs it generates for businesses. 
  It holds that, when combined with the increase in 
contributions, not only will this factor generate inflationary 
pressures, but higher labor costs could result in a loss of 
ability to compete internationally for Colombian goods and 
services. 
  According to Andres de la Espriella, president of the 
Colombian Association of Garmentmakers (ASCONFECCION), the 
greatest impact will be felt by small and medium-size 
enterprises which, while paying the lowest wages, are among the 
biggest contributors because the industry is labor-intensive. 
  In his opinion, the goods produced by such industries will 
reflect a substantial price increase in the early months of next 
year. 
  Luis Gustavo Florez, president of the Federation of 
Metallurgical and Metal-Machine Industries (FEDEMETAL), warns 
that passing on the added cost to prices will not be possible in 
all sectors. 
  He thinks the economic liberalization program [apertura 
economica] reduces the room that businessmen once had to pass on 
added costs to consumers. 
  He says the added costs will be reflected in the profits of 
companies in his sector because they intend to adjust prices by 
only 14 or 15 percent in 1994. 
  Businessmen are also concerned about differences in the 
number of weeks of contributions required by private funds and 
the Social Security Institute (ISS) because they do not allow 
for real competition between the two systems. 
<H5>  Health Care </H5>
  Sabas Pretelt de la Vega, president of the National 
Federation of Businessmen (FENALCO), challenged a number of 
articles in the health reform. 
  His major criticisms are directed at the concentration of 
power in the hands of the Ministry of Health, which will be 
responsible for outlining services provided by health care plans 
for Colombians. 
  Pretelt also questions the possibility that the ministry 
could channel resources from the system to finance health 
programs. 
  He argues that in so doing, the Health Promotion Agencies 
would be turned into mere "delegates." 
  "Never before have we had such interventionism on the part 
of 
the government," the FENALCO official said, going on to claim 
that such a policy runs counter to the process of modernizing 
government. 

