BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 24 (XINHUA) -- A Japanese Government 
commission today approved a long-term program on plutonium use 
which prevents its manufacturing and possession in a greater 
amount than needed for its nuclear power generation. 
  The Atomic Energy Commission, headed by State Minister for 
Science and Technology Mikio Omi, said Japan will cut back the 
schedule of its fast-breeder reactor program by as much as 10 
years. 
  Fast-breeder reactors, which other countries have abandoned 
as unfeasible and impractical, run on plutonium and generate 
more plutonium in the process. Conventional nuclear reactors 
are fueled by U-235 or U-238 rods. 
  In the seventh revision to Japan's long-term nuclear 
development plan since 1956, the commission said the 
rescheduling was to prevent over-accumulation of plutonium. 
  The revised plan, outlining Japan's nuclear development 
targets up to 2010, also put a halt to the country's efforts at 
reprocessing spent nuclear fuel. 
  The report said uranium, once assumed to be in short supply, 
is readily available internationally. It also noted growing 
concern over nuclear proliferation. 
  The report called for the need to build two demonstration 
fast- breeder reactors -- the first of which would be built in 
the early 21st century, rather than the late 1990s with 
demonstration reactors operational by around 2030, instead of 
the original goal of 2020 to 2030. 
  The government report said that apart from its compliance in 
observing safeguards obligations which involves accepting 
regular, unimpeded, checks by the International Atomic Energy 
Agency monitors, Japan will never exchange nuclear technologies 
with countries other than Britain, France, Germany and the 
United States to prevent nuclear arms proliferation. 
  It also called for steps to prevent diverting refined 
plutonium for military use. 
  However, Japan will not scrap its basic nuclear policy of 
relying on a nuclear fuel cycle for its future-electricity 
needs, the report said. 
  The nuclear fuel cycle refers to the use of plutonium for 
electricity-generation extracted from spent fuel rods downloaded 
from a nuclear reactor that is energized by enriched uranium. 

