BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Marica Lalovic from Pale] </F>
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] Vitaliy Churkin, special 
Russian envoy, is expected to arrive in Pale at 1630. He will 
have talks with the state leadership of the Srpska republic 
about the latest events concerning Gorazde and a possible 
resumption of the peace negotiations, for which the UN forces 
bear further responsibility, it is said in the announcement of 
the supreme command of the Srpska republic. The announcement 
further says that a harsh protest is being issued for raiding 
Serbian territory around Gorazde, stressing that with this 
gesture, the UN has openly taken the side against Serbs in this 
civil war in the former Bosnia-Herzegovina. The supreme command 
of the Srpska republic warns that politically motivated elements 
in NATO and the United Nations are encouraging Muslim attacks, 
so that they can take advantage of a Serbian response as an 
excuse for a military intervention. However, Serbs will not be 
frightened and they will retain the right to self-defense with 
all available weapons, it is said in the announcement by the 
supreme command. 
  There are still no precise reports on what is really 
happening around Tarcin. However, the situation is still 
extremely tense because Muslim radio [Sarajevo Radio] is no 
longer concealing the fact that several hundred Muslim refugees 
from eastern Bosnia have occupied the prison in Tarcin and 
kidnapped three Serbian inmates from it. The Tarcin prison has 
been blocked since Friday and it is threatened that all Serbs in 
it will be killed if the alleged shelling of Gorazde does not 
stop. The Serbian side has been demanding the closing down of 
Tarcin prison for some time now, but Muslim representatives have 
persistently refused, although at the Geneva conference they 
signed an agreement to release all prisoners under their control. 
  By the way, all humanitarian convoys and humanitarian 
flights 
on the territory of the former Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Srpska 
republic have been suspended and the Serbian civil authorities 
have closed down all the blue roads in Sarajevo. 

