BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Iran Arrests Two Iraqis on Charges </F>
of Planning To Carry Out Terrorist Operations"] 
  [Text] Tehran, London, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT -- Iranian 
authorities have arrested two senior officers from the Iraqi 
intelligence service on charges of "planning to carry out 
large-scale terrorist operations." Intelligence [and Security] 
Minister 'Ali Fallahian named the two officers as Ra'd Mustafa 
Fattah and Arkan 'Abd-al-Amir 'Ali, who both, according to 
Fallahian, "confessed." Tehran described the two officers as 
members of the special branch -- an intelligence organ run by 
Iraqi President Saddam Husayn. 
  Four Iranians have also been arrested. It has been said that 
they worked with the two Iraqis in a special operations squad. 
  Fallahian's announcement yesterday came as a surprise to 
analysts, who had predicted an improvement in relations between 
the two neighboring countries. Especially as Iranian Foreign 
Minister 'Ali Akbar Velayati is scheduled to visit Baghdad on 11 
June. He will be the first Iranian minister to visit Baghdad 
since the mullahs seized power in 1979. More importantly, 
Velayati, who is in Cairo to attend the Nonaligned Movement 
conference, met yesterday with Iraqi Foreign Minister Muhammad 
Sa'id al-Sahhaf. 
  Fallahian said that the two Iraqis "signed a full 
confession" 
after a protracted investigation with them. He did not say 
where the two alleged agents had been arrested exactly or who 
interrogated them. 
  Iranian authorities seized from the two Iraqi officers a 
number of "sophisticated equipment," an undisclosed sum of money 
in counterfeit foreign and Iranian currency, and a certain 
quantity of arms and explosives. 
  The security minister, who is close to "Supreme Guide" 'Ali 
Khamene'i, said that the two Iraqis are responsible for 22 bomb 
explosions in several parts of the country over the past four 
months. And that 14 other bombs had been discovered and defused 
by Iranian security services. 
  Sources said later that the two Iraqis had planned to carry 
out a series of bombings in Tehran to obstruct the celebrations 
marking the fifth anniversary of the death of Khomeyni -- the 
mullah who set up the clerics' rule in Iran. 
  A group of Iranian exiles based in Baghdad threatened to 
obstruct the celebrations when Revolutionary Guard units began 
to bring thousands of people from the countryside to organize a 
huge gathering on 15 June around Khomeyni's tomb in south Tehran. 
  It is clear that Velayati's visit to Baghdad still stands. 
The two sides need one another in their joint endeavor to 
destroy the Kurdish "safe haven" in north Iraq. The two 
countries are also hoping to set up an axis opposed to U.S. 
influence in the region. 
  As is known, Iraq is hosting and sponsoring the largest 
Iranian group in exile, that is Mojahedin-e Khalq. 

