BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 16 KYODO -- A government panel 
advocated a new national development plan Thursday [16 June] 
designed to enhance exchanges among regions and make local 
communities more open to the world. 
  The National Land Development Council's study group also 
called for concrete steps to transfer functions as the nation's 
capital from Tokyo, which it says should become a real 
cosmopolis. 
  The recommendations are included in the group's review on 
the 
Fourth Comprehensive National Development Plan, the nation's 
basic development blueprint compiled in 1987. 
  The council endorsed the group's final report Thursday, 
which 
will serve as the policy outline for the next comprehensive 
plan. The National Land Agency plans to start working on the new 
plan this autumn. 
  The report points to drastic socioeconomic changes since the 
1987 blueprint, such as a declining birth rate and the prolonged 
recession following the burst of speculation bubbles in the late 
1980s. 
  To adjust the national development policy to the changing 
circumstances, the government should fashion a completely new 
plan aimed more at activating exchanges and alliances among 
local communities, it argues. 
  Among recommendations, it advocates formulating "regional 
cooperation axes" under which regions build up multi-layer 
exchanges in cultural, industrial and social fields. 
  The report also urges fostering "small cosmopolis" or local 
communities that maintain direct overseas exchanges in specific 
fields. 
  It notes the importance of creating a high-technology 
service 
industry based on high-power telecommunications networks and of 
more active involvement in environmental issues. 
  All these steps should focus on transforming the national 
development policy from a hardware-oriented to software-oriented 
one, it says. 
  The agency plans to hold dialogues with people nationwide 
from July to September in an effort to seek their understanding 
on the policy shift. 

