Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the ``People's Earth'' program: Video report by </F>
Dilbar Klado, identified by caption; figures in brackets denote 
broadcast time in GMT in hours, minutes, and seconds] 
  [Excerpts] [080329] [Klado over video of submarine 
disappearing under water, shoals of fish, latest pictures of 
sunken Komsomolets submarine] The Soviet nuclear submarine 
Komsomolets caught fire and sank in the Norwegian Sea 7 April 
1989. This is not the only submarine which has sunk, but the 
attention which it attracts worldwide has serious reasons. The 
Komsomolets was fitted with everything that was the last word in 
submarine building. A fire was practically impossible. 
Nonetheless, it happened. The entire crew should have been 
able to save themselves in a special rescue chamber. However, 
only three people were able to get to it, and only one managed 
to get out alive. Furthermore, it appears that a few meters 
from the seabed an explosion occurred on the submarine. 
Furthermore, the highest grade alloys from which the hull and 
the interior of the submarine were made, including the king of 
metals -- titanium -- which was used unsparingly to build the 
advanced submarine are corroding at dangerous speeds. The 
submarine is lying on the slope of an underwater hill, as it 
were. This means that it is not silting up and it is futile to 
hope that it will eventually be buried together with its lethal 
cargo. What is more, the current, which is relatively strong, 
changes direction several times a day. This is creating the 
worse possible scenario for corrosion. [080437] 
  [080438 thru 08044 -- passage omitted -- interview with 
Tengiz Borisov chairman of KOPRON (committee for special purpose 
underwater operations)] 
  [080450] [Klado over video of underwater footage of 
sub] During this year's expedition it emerged that not only 
the thin outer wall but also the strong inner wall of the hull 
has been breached here and there. So was there an explosion 
after all? The white waterline on the nose of the submarine 
marks the division between two compartments. One holds 
conventional, the other nuclear torpedoes. A warhead is clearly 
visible through the hatch. It is a beautiful pale blue color. 
It is surrounded by a beard, so to speak -- a result of 
corrosion. Water has already seeped inside, turning the 
contents into a plutonium soup. The beryllium shell is all that 
separates the most toxic substance on Earth from the Norwegian 
Sea. So watch out! This hole was discovered only this year. 
  Tengiz Borisov: Any attempt to lift the submarine 
could lead to its disintegration and pollute the environment. 
So we cannot lift the submarine. Nor are we able to remove the 
warheads at this depth. It is not just that we cannot do it: 
No one in the world can carry out this operation. 
  Klado: It is dangerous, very dangerous. You can 
see how one bathyscaphe is trying to help another to repair the 
damaged screw at a depth of 1,700 meters. This is a device for 
measuring the speed of the current, and hence also the spread of 
radionuclides from the ship's reactor. It appears that this 
leak does not present a serious danger for the time being. 
  Various sorbents for measuring the presence of all possible 
radionuclides in the aura of the submarine are carried in a 
special compartment in the belly of the bathyscaphe. The 
sorbents are placed in special grapnels which are attached to 
the hull of the submarine or buried in the seabed for a time. 
Subsequently meausurements are carried out on the research ship 
Akademik Keldysh. Only plutonium requires a special procedure, 
which will be carried out at research institutes on the mainland. 
  Having completed their tasks on the Komsomolets, the 
researchers made their way to the Kara Sea where, using the same 
instruments, they took ecological measurements in areas where 
nuclear waste and nuclear reactors from submarines had been 
dumped. KAPRON, the Committee for Special Purpose Underwater 
Operations, will carry out such monitoring regularly from now 
on. [080733] [video shows extensive hitherto unseen 
underwater footage of Komsomolets submarine] 

