BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Aleksandr Sychev: "Russia Lets Syria Off $8 </F>
Billion. Moscow Casts Doubts on This Report from Damascus"] 
  [Text] Russia is prepared to write off for Syria over 80 
percent of its debt. This was reported by the ITAR-TASS agency, 
according to Yuriy Mikhaylov, adviser to First Vice Premier Oleg 
Soskovets, who is head of the Russian government delegation to 
Syria. 
  Talks are under way in Damascus on a wide range of issues 
that have built up over the past few years, which have been 
marked by a sharp downturn in relations between Syria and 
Russia. Annual trade between the two countries now stands at 
only $50 million. Once a major consumer of Soviet weapons, 
Syria buys practically nothing from Russia. The Syrian debt 
stands at approximately $10 billion, and a large part of the 
payments on it is already overdue. 
  The government delegation is empowered to tackle the whole 
range of Russian-Syrian relations. According to Soskovets' 
adviser, Russia is suggesting that the remaining 20 percent be 
paid off as follows: Damascus would pay 60 percent in hard 
currency and the rest in consumer goods over a period of 10 
years. In other words, despite being in financial straits 
itself, Russia is giving away $8 billion and offering very easy 
terms for the repayment of the remaining part of the debt. 
  Does the Russian package of proposals the delegation took 
with it to Damascus really contain these offers? Igor Gryzanov, 
chief of the Syria department at the Foreign Economic Relations 
Ministry suggested that IZVESTIYA wait for the delegation to 
return. 
  The Foreign Ministry doubted the possibility of such a large 
part of the debt being written off. It would require a decision 
by the government or president. "I doubt whether we would make 
such concessions," a Foreign Ministry aide said, "although I 
cannot speak for the first vice premier. We want to achieve a 
solution, but not to Russia's detriment." 
  How useful it would be for Russia to waive part of the debt 
in order to revitalize economic relations with Syria it is hard 
to say. If Damascus is finding it difficult to pay the debt, 
then the likelihood is that trade with Syria will not be very 
worthwhile for Russia in the future. 

