Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondents Ivan Ivanov and Vladimir </F>
Mostovets] 
  [Excerpts] Helsinki, 11 Mar -- As a result of 
intergovernmental talks held today in the Finnish capital and 
attended by Prime Ministers Viktor Chernomyrdin and Esko Aho, a 
hefty package of documents was signed, mainly concerning 
economic interaction between the two countries. [passage omitted] 
  According to the intergovernmental agreement on checkpoints 
on the Russo-Finnish border, besides the five checkpoints open 
for international road and rail transport, it has been decided 
to create a system of open temporary checkpoints on the border 
between the two countries for exclusively Finnish and Russian 
means of transport. This measure is aimed at developing border 
cooperation and simplifying the transportation of timber and the 
conducting of other economic activity. 
  The agreement on cooperation and mutual aid in customs 
matters replaces the 1975 Soviet-Finnish agreement in effect 
until now. It contains a mechanism for implementing customs 
cooperation, and clauses on the prevention of violations and 
mutual assistance in investigating them. The document specially 
stipulates measures to facilitate customs procedures, and also 
to prevent illegal transportation across the border of weapons, 
strategically important goods and cargoes endangering human 
health or the environment. 
  The agreement in the fishing sphere also replaces an earlier 
and similar agreement between Finland and the USSR signed in 
1981. This is a conventional outline treaty for regulating 
fishing, on the basis of which plenipotentiary authorities from 
both sides can agree annually on quotas for species of fish, 
fishing zones and boats having the right to fish. 
  The agreement signed today on cooperation in the sphere of 
postal and electronic communications is intended to aid the 
development of postal communications between Russia and Finland. 
It is an outline agreement, replacing a similar document which 
the USSR concluded with Finland nine years ago. 
  The agreement on paying off the Russian Federation's debts 
to 
the Republic of Finland with supplies of special property 
determines the procedure for paying off Russian debts to the 
Bank of Finland with supplies of weapons and equipment. At 
present Russia's total debt to Finland amounts to $1.3 billion. 

