BFN 

<F P=106> [Special correspondent Nikolay Litkovets report under the </F>
"Events and Commentary" column: "Sea and Land Exercise for 
Peaceful Purposes"] 
  [Text] Vladivostok -- Your special correspondent has 
participated in an exercise aboard an American amphibious 
warfare ship. 
  The sides had agreed a year ago that such a Russian-American 
exercise would take place in two stages. The next meeting of 
sailors and assault forces of the Russian and U.S. Navies will 
take place in 1995 on American soil. But this year this most 
peaceful of military exercises ended on the Pacific Fleet 
marines' training ground. It began with an exchange of 
amphibious craft. 
  ...On the morning of 20 June the amphibious transport dock 
Dubuque, stationed in the roads of Ussuri Gulf, disgorged 
several amphibious craft, which headed for a large Pacific Fleet 
amphibious warfare ship. While, from the shore, a column of 12 
armored personnel carriers belonging to the Pacific Fleet 
Marines battled their way to the Dubuque against force three to 
four winds. Your correspondent also boarded the American ship 
from a light amphibious vehicle, so he understood full well the 
feelings experienced by the assault troops. But that was only 
the first part of what was essentially a rescue operation 
mounted by the Russians and Americans. 
  The next day two echelons of amphibious vehicles set out to 
cross the two kilometers to the shore of the Klerk peninsula. 
There, on the training ground, the aftermath of an earthquake 
had been simulated, with fires, real damage, and "casualties," 
who were played by a couple of dozen Russian sailors. Although 
they had set their subordinates a tough task, the leaders of the 
exercise, Rear Admiral Nikolay Kochergin, commander of a 
combined unit of Pacific Fleet marine landing forces, and Rear 
Admiral John Sigler, commander of the U.S. 7th Fleet amphibious 
forces, were forced to note their high level of naval combat 
proficiency and professional qualities. In the admirals' 
opinion, the exercise demonstrated that providing assistance in 
a disaster zone either on its maritime flanks or on islands was 
a task within the marine assault forces' ability. 

