Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Ivan Ivanov] </F>
  [Text] Moscow, 4 Mar -- "The development of the economic 
situation in Russia is being determined to an ever greater 
extent by the progress of the implementation of economic reform 
and the degree of consistency and coordination of the changes 
taking place", stresses the Russian Federation Ministry of the 
Economy report "On the state of the Russian economy in 1993 and 
the prospects for its development in 1994." It has been 
circulated in the Kremlin among the participants in an extended 
session of the Russian government. 
  The Ministry of Economy report, which runs to nearly 200 
pages, notes that at the first stage of reform, by the summer of 
1992, it was possible to slow inflation, to reduce the budget 
deficit and to normalize the consumer market. However, the 
subsequent wholesale advancement of credits to the economy, 
which merely temporarily "suppressed" the problem of 
non-payments, put a brake on structural changes. Acknowledging 
that part of the credits was enforced -- for the agro-industrial 
complex and supplying goods to the Far North -- the authors of 
the report, nevertheless, point out that at the end of 1992 the 
credits of the Central Bank of Russia "were excessive." As a 
result the country began 1993 with a considerable slump in 
production and a sharp reduction in investment activity, 
threatened with a high rate of inflation. 
  "In 1993, in the difficult conditions of the domestic 
political situation and confrontation with the government by the 
various branches of power, it did, nevertheless, prove possible 
to take substantial steps towards further advancing the 
reforms," the report stresses. "Efforts were concentrated on 
conducting a moderately tight financial and monetary-credit 
policy with the aim of reducing inflation, further liberalizing 
external economic activities through restricting the sphere of 
licensing and quota imposition, cutting import subsidies, and 
switching to a unified foreign-currency exchange rate for the 
ruble, and were concentrated on other areas." 
  The adoption from the first months of the year of tough 
measures aimed at improving the situation as regards the budget 
and, primarily, at cutting budget expenditure was, in the view 
of the report's compilers, one of the most vital components of 
the anti-inflation policy. 
  According to the results for the year, the budget deficit 
amounted to 6 percent of the Gross Domestic Product [GDP], or to 
about 10 per cent of GDP if one takes account of expenditure 
arising from providing credit to the CIS countries, granting 
preferential credit to enterprises and subsidizing centralized 
imports. There is still budget indebtedness to state-financed 
organizations as regards paying for the output of agriculture, 
the defense sectors and the coal industry. "It is, therefore, 
too early to speak of a solution to the problems in the finance 
field. A carefully-considered restriction policy is needed 
here." 
  The document adds that monetary and credit policy was 
pursued 
much more consistently in 1993. Its restrictive nature made it 
possible "to reduce somewhat the inflationary pressure in the 
economy" and to avert hyperinflation. "At the same time, 
inflation is still rather high, and it is premature to speak of 
a definitive breakthrough in its dynamics. In 1993 as a whole, 
consumer prices rose by a factor of 9.4 and producer prices by a 
factor of 10." 
  Speaking of the increase in nonpayments among enterprises, 
the authors of the report point out that although the relative 
scale of nonpayments in 1993 was much smaller than in 1992, 
"their impact on enterprises rose considerably". By the end of 
1993, 3,262 enterprises were standing idle, mainly because of 
nonpayments. "The main cause of falling output now is not the 
breakdown of economic links, but limits on demand and the lack 
of money and customers." 
  The Ministry of Economics officials point out that "the 
process of removal of state control and privatization developed 
dynamically and on a large scale in 1993. The position of the 
nonstate sector of the economy, which is already directly 
employing over 30 million people, or more than 40 per cent of 
the workforce, is growing stronger." About 70 percent of trade, 
catering and service enterprises have been privatized. Over 
one-third of large and medium-sized enterprises, accounting for 
some 40 per cent of industrial output, are in private or mixed 
ownership. 
  It is also noted that the process of implementation of a 
transition to the development of a single Russian agricultural 
market regulated by new market methods has begun. Partnerships 
in various forms, which now number 11,500, have become the main 
organizational and legal form of management in the countryside. 
  At the same time, the report stresses that "the quantitive 
parameters of the privatization process (the increase in its 
speed and scale) are running ahead of the qualitative aspects. 
Privatization is not yet realizing its full potential, and its 
influence on the nature and efficiency of production is weak... 
The overall proportion of production in private ownership is 
still small (below 5 percent), and it is not yet having a major 
impact on the establishment of a competitive environment." 
  The authors of the report point out that the measures taken 
by the government to support production in priority areas helped 
to prevent a disastrous slump in production and to slow down the 
rate of the slump. "At the same time we could not overcome the 
inertia of the economic slump. The GDP for the year as a whole 
was 12 percent below that of 1992, and industrial production 16 
percent below." 
  The document states that "certain positive changes were 
outlined in the social sphere," and the consumer market, which 
was almost completely destroyed by the end of 1991, has been 
restored and is actively functioning. Supply of goods has 
expanded, disposable monetary incomes of the population have 
increased by 11 percent and the average monthly salaries of 
workers, calculated in dollars, increased from $32 in January to 
$114 in January 1993. In the structure of consumer expenditure 
of the population the proportion of expenditure on food has 
begun to fall and actual consumption of meat and meat products, 
confectionery and a number of other products has increased. 
  At the same time the acute problems in the social sphere 
have 
not been overcome. Approximately one-third of the country's 
population has incomes below the subsistence wage and this 
proportion is higher than in previous years. The rapidly 
increasing differentiation of the population in terms of incomes 
and supply of material requirements is becoming a source of 
tension in society. 
  This creates a climate for an exacerbation of social 
conflict. The report notes that both the foreign economic and 
currency position of the country remains tense. Despite the 
considerable positive balance in current foreign currency 
operations in 1993 (as a result first of all of a considerable 
reduction in import), Russia is experiencing a lack of foreign 
currency funds for maintaining the necessary investment activity 
and ensuring the restructuring and clearing the foreign debt. 
Out of the total amount of increase in foreign currency funds 
on the accounts of enterprises and commercial banks, assessed at 
$21-22,000 million, a considerable part is being held in 
deposits in foreign banks. 
  At the present stage of economic reforms, for which the year 
1993 is noted, "there have been both considerable progress in a 
number of areas of creation of the market economy mechanism and 
high costs brought about by the inevitable expenditures of the 
transition period, the legacy of a top-heavy economy and 
serious errors in the implementation of the reform itself, 
aggravated by the confrontation of political forces in 1993," 
the report stresses. 
  At the same time it quotes data in accordance to which 
"crime 
is bringing a considerable negative influence to bear on the 
country's socio-economic situation." The greatest danger is 
represented by organized crime, which "not only is laying claim 
to leadership in the economy, but is also trying to invade 
politics and is lobbying power structures at all levels". As 
the reports notes, criminal groups control over 35,000 persons 
in management positions, including some 1,500 in the state 
sector of the economy. According to experts' estimates, from 30 
to 50 percent of the revenue of organized crime is used for 
bribing civil servants. 
  In 1994, the Russian Government intends to lower the 
inflation rate to 400 percent for the year as a whole and to 
slow down the pace of economic decline with a fall in the GDP to 
5-7 percent as opposed to 12 per cent in 1993, the Economy 
Ministry report says. 
  The government intends to abide consistently by a policy of 
economic reform in accordance with the government action program 
for 1993-95, adopted on 6th August 1993, and also to promptly 
adopt suitable measures to resolve problems arising during the 
carrying out of economic transformations. 
  Vital components of the implementation in 1994 of the policy 
adopted will, in the opinion of Economy Ministry experts, be the 
conducting of a moderately tight financial and monetary policy 
aimed at noticeably reducing the pace of inflation and improving 
the financial position of enterprises; the continuation of 
institutional transformations, reforming state enterprises and a 
change in the practice of privatization; ensuring a selective 
state policy of structural investment; and an invigoration of 
social policy. 
  The report points out that measures will be taken in 1994 to 
reform the fiscal system, strengthen the revenue part of the 
budget and boost the effectiveness of the use of state means. 
"The main task is to make financial policy effective, 
controllable and more predictable, and to gear it to the 
accomplishment of long-term, as well as current, tasks." 
  As far as privatization is concerned, here the government 
intends to speed up the process and to help to bring it into 
closer contact with restructuring, regional policy, the 
stabilization of the work of branches of the economy and with 
improving stability in society. "Voucher" privatization will 
come to an end in the country by 1 July 1994. The privatization 
of medium-sized and large enterprises will continue. The 
document notes that privatization "should be carried out taking 
account of preserving viable technological structures, 
strengthening stable economic links and interproduction 
cooperation and should prevent the formation of several nonstate 
monopolists in the place of one state monopolist, thus 
restricting the emergence of a number of pockets of price rises. 
Questions of appraising property liable to privatization, 
benefits whhich may be granted and the procedure of and 
conditions for the sale of enterprises or share packages 
belonging to the state should be decided in a new way." 
  The report notes that selective, "targeted" state support 
for 
those enterprises which determine the structural improvement of 
the economy and which manufacture a competitive end product and 
are of key importance for the reorganization of the economy as a 
whole, has been planned for 1994. 
  The report lists the following as highly important social 
policy priorities: achievement of stabilization of the 
population's standard of living, active influence on the labour 
market, expansion of motivation for the economically active 
population to engage in work and business, prevention of mass 
and static unemployment, intensification of targeted support for 
the least well-protected sections of the population, state 
support for industries providing social services, and the 
provision of a guaranteed minimum of free health and social 
services, education and housing. The government regards "the 
more equal and just distribution of the burden of the economic 
crisis among the various sections of the population" as a new 
important task. 
  Only the sufficiently full and consistent implementation of 
the measures outlined by the government to improve the 
efficiency of the use of state resources and to increase the 
functioning of market mechanisms will make it possible to take 
the necessary step in 1994 towards creating the conditions in 
which the Russian economy can be revived and the economic crisis 
overcome in 1995, the report stresses. 

