CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Strong Demands Both Domestically and </F>
From Abroad; Concern Lingers That Endorsing Promotional Gifts 
Will Affect the Price of Goods] 
  [Text] The Fair Trade Commission [FTC] is struggling to 
review the regulations for promotional gifts. With the strong 
demand from the United States that the upper limit on 
promotional gifts be sharply increased, the government has 
incorporated a regulatory review in the outline prospectus for 
economic reform of foreign trade that was completed at the end 
of March. There are also those domestically who are seeking to 
have the upper limit raised in response to the increased price 
of goods. Although the FTC is warning of its fear that a 
movement will emerge blaming the cost of promotional gifts for 
higher prices, review of the regulations is on track. If by June 
the government is to adopt a substantive policy in the 
prospectus for economic reform, it will be necessary for the FTC 
to show certainty of judgment. 
<H5>  Deferral for the Long Term </H5>
  "You should review both individual and overall ceilings on 
promotional gifts." Thus did the Keidanren petition for relaxing 
the regulations on promotional gifts in a letter issued on the 
19 April on deregulation in such areas as transportation and 
currency. For example, although credit card companies offer 
promotional gifts to card users based on a point system, because 
regulations governing the upper limit on promotional gifts have 
not been revised for many years, such a service cannot be used 
effectively to promote sales. 
  The FTC is determining the upper limit on promotional gifts 
based on the Promotional Gift Indicator Act. The subjects are 
prizes offered as promotional gifts, such as lottery tickets, 
drawings, and attached promotional gifts that are offered to 
everyone who buys the product. The upper limit for attached 
promotional gifts is 50,000 yen; 50,000 yen for general prizes 
when promotional gifts are awarded in drawings to purchasers of 
products; and 100,000 yen for open prizes offering promotional 
gifts when the entrant does not have to buy the product. 
  The United States has criticized Japan's promotional gift 
regulations as "a way to limit consumer choices" (assistant 
attorney general for antitrust matters in the U.S. Department of 
Justice). It hopes to sell U.S. products by developing sales 
promotion campaigns using promotional gifts when brand names are 
not as well known as those of Japanese goods. 
  The United States is not alone in making the criticism. 
Japanese firms have pointed out that, because many provisions of 
the promotional gift regulations have not been reviewed for over 
30 years, "They are not in step with economic conditions." 
<H5>  Given Current Concerns, Tacit Approval </H5>
  Last year Japan Airlines and All Nippon Airways began 
offering free airline tickets for miles traveled on 
international routes as a trump card to halt the drop in 
passenger demand. U.S. and European airlines began this practice 
about 10 years ago, finding it necessary to pursue it in order 
to maintain competitiveness. Although it is feared that this 
service exceeds the 50,000 yen limit for promotional gifts, the 
FTC has adopted a wait-and-see attitude. This results from 
current concern about the fierce competition for passengers on 
international routes as an area of international competition, 
but there is potential in the future for qualitative differences 
in the competitive conditions for awarding promotional gifts. 
  Furthermore, a relatively large segment of the merchant 
community has transmitted to MITI the hope that, "We will see 
the upper limit raised on the offering of promotional gifts such 
as through drawings." The thinking is that because the 
atmosphere in the market place has soured due to the extended 
slump and the Large-Scale Retail Store Law (Large Store Law) 
they want the means to energize consumer interest through 
campaigns such as drawings. 
  Meanwhile, Shiseido has suspended the campaign of 
promotional 
gifts it has had for more than 60 years since the early days of 
the Showa period. The company said, "Consumers are not happy 
with sundry merchandise such as tissues and pouches and, 
therefore, their effectiveness in promoting sales has declined." 
It is difficult to produce promotional gifts that consumers find 
attractive because the upper limit for promotional gifts is 10 
percent of the price of a product in the case of low-priced 
items. 
<H5>  A Difficult Balance </H5>
  Regarding these foreign and domestic demands, the FTC 
counters by saying that, "If promotional gift competition 
becomes intense, the costs will be reflected in prices and the 
consumer will not benefit" (Trade Practices Department). In 
particular, the FTC shakes its head in response to U.S. 
criticism, saying, "U.S. firms will not be the sole 
beneficiaries of deregulation." 
  While Japan's promotional gift regulations do control 
excessive competition in promotional gifts, they leave room to 
be used to some degree as a method of marketing promotion. The 
balance is somewhere between the United States, which recognizes 
promotional gifts in principal, and Germany and France, which do 
not recognize them at all. Therefore, the question usually 
follows of what standard should be used to set the upper limit. 
With the variety of demands the FTC is burying its head in its 
hands, lamenting that "finding a middle ground is extremely 
difficult." 

