BFN 

  [Text] Yesterday morning, the sound of firecrackers, 
gongs, and drums reverberated in Taihang Shan and red flags and 
floral hoops were flapping in the breeze along the banks of the 
Zhang He. The unveiling ceremony for "the Monument to the Army 
and the People Working Together in the Technological 
Transformation Project of the Hongqu Canal" and its opening to 
navigation ceremony was solemnly held at the top of the canal in 
Pingshun County, Shanxi. Persons in charge of the joint 
committee of the State Planning Commission and the Leading 
Groups for the Economic Development of Impoverished Areas of the 
State Council and the Jinan Military Region, representatives of 
the troops assisting with the project and relevant departments 
directly under the provincial government, leading cadres of 
Anyang and Linzhou Cities, and cadres representing Changzhi City 
and Pingshun County, Shanxi attended the ceremonies. 
  On 15 March of this year, construction on the 11 km 
technological transformation project of the main canal started. 
Some 1,600 officers and men of the 54776 and 54639 troops under 
the command of the Jinan Military Region and more than 10,000 
militia men and workers from Lizhou took part in the project. 
They worked together in unity, raced against time to accelerate 
the tempo of construction with a indomitable spirit, and 
completed the construction task 15 days ahead of schedule with 
good quality. Thus a magnificent chapter of the Army cherishing 
the people, the people supporting the Army, and the Army and the 
people working together in river harnessing was added to the 
annals of the Hongqu Canal. While assisting in the 
construction, Army officers and soldiers, the people of Pingshun 
County, Shanxi, militiamen and workers of Linzhou [words 
indistinct] and forged a profound friendship. After completing 
their mission, being reluctant to part, the people of Pingshun 
County and Linzhou said farewell to the officers and soldiers 
returning to their posts. 
  At the ceremonies, leaders of Lizhou city and Pingshun 
County 
delivered ebullient speeches. Entrusted by the Jinan Military 
Region and on behalf of the officers and men of the provincial 
military command and troops stationed in Henan, Major General 
Wang Yingzhou spoke, thanking Premier Li Peng and other leading 
comrades for showing concern for army building and the people of 
Linzhou for showing profound love for the Army made of the sons 
of the people. Wang Yingzhou said: The inscriptions written by 
Premier Li Peng and other leading cadres are the remarkable 
generalization of the wishes of the broad ranks of officers and 
men, the highest awards to the project assisting troops, and the 
encouragement of the work of supporting the government and 
cherishing the people. We must strive to do more with better 
results in serving the overall interests of the states and 
actively participating in and assisting local economic 
construction. 
  On behalf of the provincial party committee and government, 
Ma Xianzhang, Standing Committee member and director of the 
organization department of the provincial party committee, made 
a speech, expressing his thanks to the officers and men of the 
troops assisting the project and the people of Pingshun County, 
Shanxi. He hoped that with the pioneering and indomitable 
spirit and the spirit of the Army and the people working 
together, which were currently displayed in the technological 
transformation project of the Hongqu Canal, Linzhou would speed 
up the pace of economic construction and play a vanguard role on 
provincial wide scale, and at the same time, unfold a vigorous 
mass campaign to learn from the People's Liberation Army, and 
create a new situation in the double-support work. 
  Ma Xianzhang, Wang Yingzhou, Yang Gui, and other comrades 
unveiled the monument. On the marble of the monument was 
engraved State Council Premier Li Peng's inscription reading 
"the Army and the people share deep love, the Hongqu Canal flows 
endlessly" and State Councillor Chen Junsheng's inscription 
reading "the monument to the Army and the people working 
together in the technological transformation project of the 
Hongqu Canal" and the inscription of Li Changchun, secretary of 
the Henan Provincial CPC Committee, which reads "the Hongqu 
Canal is full of the tender sentiments of the Army and the 
people." After unveiling the monument, provincial and city 
leaders and leaders of Pingshun County, Shanxi together opened 
the sluice gate of the canal. [words indistinct] 

