Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Randa Habib] </F>
  [Text] Amman, March 20 (AFP) -- King Husayn of Jordan said 
Sunday [20 March] it was a "mistake" to include references to 
Jerusalem in the UN Security Council resolution condemning the 
Hebron massacre. 
  In an interview with AFP, the king attributed the "mistake" 
to "a total lack of coordination" between Arab countries. 
  "It would have been better not to have mentioned Jerusalem, 
in order to avoid the United States abstaining and the need 
henceforth to ask Washington for guarantees on its position 
regarding the holy city." 
  The Security Council finally adopted Friday a resolution 
condemning the massacre and allowing for international 
protection for the Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied 
territories. 
  In an unusual paragraph-by-paragraph vote, the United States 
abstained on two clauses -- one with a reference to occupied 
Palestinian territory and a second describing Jerusalem as part 
of the occupied territories. 
  King Husayn asked: "Was it really necessary to include 
Jerusalem in this resolution when there was a strong chance that 
the United States would use their vote to veto it, or abstain 
from voting?" 
  He said it would have been better to have evoked the Geneva 
convention on protection for Palestinians in all the territories 
occupied since the 1967 Middle East war. 
  "That would have put the Arabs in a better position," King 
Husayn said. 
  He was also "surprised" that a draft resolution had been 
drawn up between the Palestinians, Americans and other parties 
"following a dialogue in which Jordan did not participate." 
  The king said that only hours before the vote was taken he 
tried to coordinate the Arab position, making telephone calls to 
PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arafat, Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad, 
Egyptian President Husni Mubarak and King Hassan of Morocco. 
  King Husayn said he had contacted Washington for 
confirmation 
that its policy on Jerusalem remained unchanged and "will not 
suffer the same fate as that (policy) on settlements, which the 
United States initially regarded as illegal but later described 
as simply an obstacle on the path to peace." 
  East Jerusalem was occupied by Israel in 1967, while it was 
under Jordanian sovereignty, and later annexed. 
  The city is considered holy to Jews, Christians and Moslems, 
and the Moslem holy sites are looked after by the Waqf 
organisation, which is run by the Jordanian religious affairs 
ministry. 

