Language: <F P=105> Indonesian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Excerpts" of interview with Foreign Minister Ali Alatas by </F>
TEMPO correspondent Yuli Ismartono in Jakarta on 6 March] 
  [Text] [Ismartono] Is it true that the Nonaligned Movement 
[NAM] has taken a rather delayed initiative on the Bosnian issue? 
  [Alatas] I do not think so; on the contrary, the NAM is now 
more united in supporting Bosnia's cause at the United Nations. 
In the past, there were fundamental differences among its 
members regarding the status of the former Yugoslavia. Things 
are different with the Islamic Conference Organization [ICO], 
because this group is smaller and the views of its members are 
less contradictory. 
  During Bosnian Prime Minister Haris Silajdzic's visit to 
Indonesia, President Suharto promised that we would support him 
both at the United Nations and in Indonesia's contacts with big 
countries. This has actually been implemented by our roving 
ambassadors through diplomatic channels. 
  [Ismartono] Therefore, the delay was caused by differences 
in 
perception? 
  [Alatas] Yes. The differences are not limited to the Bosnian 
issue. All NAM members think the ethnic cleansing [preceding 
three words in English] in Bosnia is too much, but there is a 
school of thought within the NAM that believes the old 
Yugoslavia was an artificial merger of several states. The 
country was only united because of the strong political 
influence of Joseph Tito. As soon as he died, the unity was 
shattered. Those who hold this view can accept the present 
reality, albeit reluctantly. They are willing to allow those 
states to become independent. When the war broke out, those who 
held this view within the NAM considered Serbia to be the 
aggressor. We must support the victim of aggression. This view 
is held by the members of the ICO, including Indonesia. 
  [Ismartono] What about the other school of thought? 
  [Alatas] The other one -- consisting of 15 countries, mostly 
from Africa -- considers what is happening in the former 
Yugoslavia an issue of separatism. They do not want to take 
tough action against Yugoslavia. The NAM must at least give 
that country a chance to solve its problems. 
  This is the situation Indonesia faces in its capacity as 
chairman of the 110-member movement, where all decisions must be 
made by consensus. We have urged the second school of thought 
to follow the majority's view, but of course we cannot impose 
our will. 
  [Ismartono] What about the Bosnian task force? 
  [Alatas] Well, we managed to complete our work on this 
issue. 
Due to the changing situation -- both in Bosnia and within the 
NAM -- Bosnia has now agreed to the convening of a new 
international conference. We began to make efforts on this 
issue as soon as the Cambodian problem was solved. We believe 
it would be good to solve the Bosnian issue the same way as the 
Cambodian conflict; namely, the warring sides and neighboring 
states should get involved with seeking a solution. The 
European Community rejected this idea, however, because Portugal 
objected to Indonesia's leadership of the NAM. This made me 
furious, because this issue has nothing to do with East Timor. 
Well, our foreign policy has been criticized because of this. 
  [Ismartono] There has been criticism that your foreign 
policy 
is defensive, passive, and tends to respond to events instead of 
the other way around. 
  [Alatas] You must first know the facts. What about the 
statement: "Indonesia's initiative to convene an international 
conference on Bosnia"? This is in fact not a new initiative, 
but an old idea from when Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic 
earlier visited Indonesia. He was the one who called for the 
convening of this international conference, and he needed the 
NAM's support. As soon as he gave the green light, we began to 
move. So we are not late. As for those who say the Somali task 
force formed by the NAM two years ago has not materialized, I 
say this is not true. This task force has started its work and 
our roving ambassador, Sayidiman, has taken part in the Addis 
Ababa conference and other meetings. 
  [Ismartono] What about criticism that the Foreign Affairs 
Department did not play a major role in the normalization of 
diplomatic relations with the PRC? 
  [Alatas] Once again, people must see the facts. The move to 
normalize diplomatic relations was initiated by the late Foreign 
Minister Adam Malik, and by subsequent Foreign Minister Mokhtar 
Kusumaatmaja about 10 years later. Both attempts failed because 
the political climate was not yet ready. When I became foreign 
minister, I saw an opportunity. In April 1988 Indonesia hosted 
an ESCAP [Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the 
Pacific] conference. A PRC deputy foreign minister came to 
Indonesia as a participant in the meeting after 22 years of 
frozen diplomatic relations. 
  After obtaining President Suharto's approval, I met the PRC 
deputy foreign minister to begin the normalization process. Of 
course, we had to hold secret talks at first. Finally, in July 
1990, I went to Beijing with President Suharto's message and 
tried to negotiate and sign a memorandum of understanding [MOU] 
with them. In August 1990, I signed the MOU with PRC officials. 
Therefore, I am amazed to hear some people's views that the 
Foreign Affairs Department only played a minor role in 
normalizing diplomatic ties with the PRC. 
  [Ismartono] But the Foreign Affairs Department was kept in 
the dark on Israeli Prime Minister Rabin's visit to Indonesia. 
  [Alatas] It is like this: there are decisions, like Rabin's 
visit, in which the department deliberately prefers not to get 
involved. Another example is the Taiwan issue. Otherwise, the 
government would be seen as giving implicit recognition to the 
two countries. 
  [Ismartono] There is also criticism that the Foreign Affairs 
Department is too accommodating. For example, it only pays 
attention to the groups that benefit the United States and 
Japan, such as APEC [Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation] and ARF 
[ASEAN Regional Forum], which are expected to produce economic 
benefits. 
  [Alatas] Who initiated the establishment of APEC? Who else 
if not our ministry? The idea originated in Australia, but they 
consulted us first because I was chairman of the ASEAN Standing 
Committee at the time. Therefore, APEC can be established in 
accordance with ASEAN's needs. The same is true of the ARF. 
Indonesia is ASEAN's largest member country, but we are not 
eager to boast of our achievements. 
  [Ismartono] There is a proposal to establish an agency 
comparable to the National Security Council [NSC] in the United 
States. 
  [Alatas] That proposal is worth studying, but it must be 
remembered that even in the United States the NSC does not work 
smoothly. It often clashes with the State Department. There 
were tugs-of-war between Kissinger and Rogers and between 
Kissinger and Vance to the point that Vance had to quit. In 
fact, Indonesia already has an agency like the NSC -- namely the 
Office of Coordinating Minister of Political Affairs and 
Security -- where the foreign minister, minister-state 
secretary, home minister, defense and security minister, armed 
forces commander, chief of the State Intelligence Coordinating 
Agency, and information minister sit down to discuss issues, 
including foreign policy. The truth is that the Foreign Affairs 
Department cannot stand and operate alone; we need feedback from 
other agencies. During our meetings at the Office of 
Coordinating Minister for Political Affairs and Security, we 
usually discuss all variables. Then, when we report to the 
president, I can tell him that other agencies have been 
consulted. Do not forget that our foreign policy is determined 
by the president. 
  There are times when we must move fast, and I have to meet 
the president without consulting the Office of Coordinating 
Minister for Political Affairs and Security. But I can always 
meet with them for discussions later. If they want to upgrade 
the procedure, I will certainly lend my support. 
  As for allegations that our foreign policy is defensive, 
unresponsive, and inefficient, let me explain first. We have 
been pursuing initiatives to solve the Cambodian problem since 
1988, and finally managed to find a respectable solution. We 
normalized diplomatic relations with the PRC after they had been 
frozen for 23 years. The Indonesian president visited the 
Soviet Union for the first time in 25 years. Besides, President 
Suharto managed to meet Gorbachev before the collapse of the 
USSR. Our foreign policy was also responsible for the birth of 
APEC. Above all else, our foreign policy was also responsible 
for us becoming chairman of the NAM despite the East Timor 
issue. We are still active on several international issues; for 
example, as chairman of the Nuclear Test Ban Convention at the 
United Nations. Can you call our foreign policy passive and 
defensive? 
  [Ismartono] As for the East Timor issue, are we really 
making 
any progress? 
  [Alatas] We are making slow progress in our efforts to seek 
a 
comprehensive solution to the problem. We feel that Portugal 
does not want to solve the issue or is unable to solve it 
because of internal conflicts. They themselves have not yet 
reached agreement, so they make Indonesia a scapegoat. This 
makes things difficult, and UN assistance is needed. East Timor 
remains one of the major issues facing our foreign policy. This 
is especially true because many countries pay a lot of attention 
to it. 

