BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Olga Semenova] </F>
  [Text] Moscow, 26 May (ITAR-TASS) -- In his speech to the 
conference of leaders of the Federal Counterintelligence Service 
(FSK) from all over Russia, the Russian President Boris Yeltsin 
paid special attention to the FSK's role in countering illegal 
attempts to overthrow the constitutional system. 
  In Russia, the president said, there are certain parties, 
movements, public figures, and citizens who resort to unlawful 
methods of struggle but they do not always receive the rebuff 
they deserve. In this respect, Boris Yeltsin believes, there 
are still many deficiencies in the work of the FSK itself, since 
existing laws are quite adequate to neutralize extremism of this 
kind. 
  The president regards every organized attempt to overthrow 
the existing constitutional system as a blow against Russian 
statehood, as a major failure on the part of federal special 
services. Here the key task of counterintelligence is always to 
obtain "preemptive information". However, Boris Yeltsin made it 
clear that he was not referring to control over the political 
behavior of citizens or their views. All he had in mind is the 
need to expose, forestall, and put a stop to unconstitutional 
activities by extremist elements. If these guidelines are 
strictly adhered to, the Russian president believes, this area 
of the special services' activities will not degenerate into 
political surveillance. 
  A large part of the head of state's report was devoted to 
the 
activities of military counterintelligence, whose task is to 
protect the army against anybody who seeks to gain access to 
military secrets or installations. But the results of military 
counterintelligence need to be much more productive. Preemptive 
information is not being obtained about violation of conditions 
in which weapons and ammunition are supposed to be kept. The 
president expects military counterintelligence to keep him 
regularly informed about the country's nuclear security and 
attempts to procure any weapon of mass destruction, both in 
Russia and elsewhere. There must not be any instances of 
"nuclear terrorism" in Russia, he said. 
  The president also dwelt on the FSK's role in resolving 
ethnic contradictions within the country. Counterintelligence's 
entire arsenal of manpower and resources must be harnessed to 
this, he believes. 

