Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Japanese-U.S. Economic Consultations </F>
Winding Up; Rift Remains on `Objective Criteria' Question; Focus 
Now Centered on Whether Accord Should Apply To NTT"] 
  [Text] The Japanese-U.S. economic consultations are 
entering their finale -- with the hope of arriving at a 
conclusion by the time of the Japanese-U.S. summit meeting in 
February. Starting with the working group session on government 
procurement in the telecommunications sector, sector-by-sector 
talks will be held in Washington and Tokyo to deal with priority 
areas of government procurement of medical equipment, insurance, 
and automobiles and auto parts. In the focal issue of 
"objective criteria," the United States is showing a flexible 
position of not caring so much about numerical targets as it did 
before, but Japan thinks that "the U.S. stand has not changed 
much." Apparently, the rift between the two countries has not 
been patched. With only a month left before the time for 
concluding the talks, a tough verbal war is expected in them. 
<H5>  U.S. Softens Position </H5>
  The economic consultations on the priority areas are 
supposed 
to arrive at a conclusion before 11 February, when the 
Japanese-U.S. summit is set to be held. The working group talks 
will be succeeded by vice-ministerial-level talks of the 
ministries and departments concerned. Thus, the consultations 
will be entering a final phase of negotiations in early February. 
  The major hurdle in the sector-by-sector talks will be the 
vice-ministerial-level talks on automobiles and auto parts to be 
held in Tokyo in mid-January and in Washington later in the 
month. In the negotiations so far, both Japan and the United 
States have presented their own drafts of agreement, and the 
final negotiations will center on the "objective criteria" aimed 
at measuring the degree of market access. As for the question 
of objective criteria, there has been a clash between the United 
States, which wants to fix the future sales targets as the 
numerical targets, and Japan, which is opposed to doing that. 
  But more recently, when an official of the Office of the 
U.S. 
Trade Representative visited Japan in December, he indicated 
that the United States has softened its position on the matter. 
The official said, "We are not asking that numerical targets be 
set." On the other hand, Jeffrey Garten, under secretary of 
commerce for international trade, insisted that there is a need 
to find a way which replaces numerical targets as a yardstick 
for measuring matters. He declared, "There is no change in our 
position in wanting Japan to increase its purchases of U.S.-made 
automobiles and auto parts." 
<H5>  Japan Not Relaxing Its Guard </H5>
  Regarding this U.S. position, a top official of the Ministry 
of International Trade and Industry [MITI] noted: "The United 
States is now using expressions like standards and indicators, 
and the difference of their meanings from that of targets is not 
clear. If they are something similar [to the meaning of 
targets], we will reject them." A senior official of the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs [MOFA] insisted: "The United States 
is asking Japan to increase (the share of foreign products on 
the Japanese market) to the level practiced by the seven 
industrial (G-7) nations. But that is equivalent to accepting 
numerical targets." Japan thinks that the United States' basic 
position has not changed, and Japan is not about to relax its 
guard now. 
  Rough sailing is expected in negotiations on other priority 
sectors as well. In the area of government procurement of 
telecommunications equipment, it has become clear that the 
United States wants to apply the draft agreement to the Nippon 
Telegraph and Telephone Corporation [NTT] to increase 
opportunities for the sale of U.S. products [in Japan]. But 
Japan persists in saying that a private-sector business cannot 
be governed by a government-to-government treaty. It is likely 
that the NTT issue will become a moot point in the working group 
meeting which is to start on 4 January. 
<H5>  Possibility of Being Pressured Into Making Concessions </H5>
  What is casting a dark cloud on the future of the 
Japanese-U.S. economic consultations is the offensive of the 
United States, which is hinting at the possibility of taking 
retaliatory actions. Late last month, the United States set 15 
February as the date by which it would decide whether to enforce 
retaliation on Japan with respect to market access on such 
sectors as automobiles and telephones -- under the U.S. trade 
act. The country had earlier set 20 January as the date by 
which it would decide whether to enforce retaliation on the 
construction sector. Apparently, the United States is poised to 
make all-out attacks on Japan before the Japanese-U.S. summit. 
  Last year, the U.S. Congress approved NAFTA, the GATT's 
Uruguay Round of talks came to a successful conclusion, and 
several major trade issues were resolved. Now the eyes of 
Europe and Asia are turned on the progress that the 
Japanese-U.S. economic consultations are making. 
  A senior MITI official said emphatically: "With the Uruguay 
Round of talks having been successfully concluded, the trend 
toward maintaining the free trade system has been set. There is 
no way we can agree to a settlement which would lead to managed 
trade." But as long as Japan maintains its large trade surplus, 
it is true, as a top MOFA official admitted, "that Japan will be 
required to make more concessions [than the United States]." 
The possibility is predictable that eventually Japan will be 
pressured by the United States into making concessions. 

