CSO 

  [Text] The president of the La Paz District Forest Chamber, 
Mauricio Hauser, reported that the clearing or burning of 
forests by campesinos is causing an annual loss of 80,000 
hectares in the country's tropical and subtropical regions. 
  He noted that 90 percent of the destruction is due to the 
process resorted to by poor farmers attempting to expand their 
land for cultivation. In other words, there is an annual loss of 
72,000 hectares that are permanently ruined. 
  According to Hauser, one of the main problems for the 
chamber 
that he heads is the progressive destruction of woods. It is 
difficult to curb this devastation, because consecutive 
governments have implemented policies aimed at establishing land 
with a capacity for agriculture and livestock raising (apart 
from the wooded areas), to provide for the consumption and 
export of food products. 
  Another cause leading to the constant destruction of forests 
is the economic and social crisis afflicting the populations in 
valleys. It has prompted waves of migration to the low-lying 
areas, with a resultant clearing of woods. 
<H5>  Lumbering Development </H5>
  Fewer than 4,000 hectares of woods are actually allocated 
for 
timber forest development, according to the La Paz Forest 
Chamber. 
  In fact, the incidence in that area is less: that is, only 
2,400 hectares under new management are converted into forests 
annually. It may be assumed that another five percent is 
destroyed by road construction. These are very low percentages 
compared with the increasingly extensive clearing. 
  The entrepreneurial organization's president claims that, 
for 
this reason, it has become essential "to take direct action to 
minimize the effects of poverty on the Bolivian population." He 
indicated that this could be achieved "through the country's 
productive-industrial reactivation, generating sources of 
permanent employment, and hence, better economic conditions." 
  Moreover, he called for the classification and demarcation 
of 
land suitable for forests, agriculture, livestock raising, and 
protection, through the passage of the Land Law. 
  According to the Forest Chamber, a more drastic change in 
the 
problem of forest and environmental destruction could occur 
through appropriation occupancy of woods and forest land, "as 
well as legislation that would convert Bolivia into a forest 
country, with large production, based on sustained management of 
the woods." 
  However, Hauser did not cite another cause of the clearing 
of 
forests in southern Bolivia: the consumption of charcoal by the 
Vinto smelting plant. Large wooded areas of Chuquisaca, and in 
Zudanez, Tomina, and Hernando Siles Provinces, have been left 
converted into uncultivated land by the burning of woods to 
supply the Vinto company with charcoal. 
  That devastation, repeatedly scored by the authorities and 
inhabitants of the south, has been condoned by the Forest 
Development Center, without allowing for the so-called 
"ecological respite" proclaimed by the previous government 
administration. 

