CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yevgeniy Shlemovich Gontmakher, deputy minister </F>
for social protection of the Russian Federation and candidate of 
economic sciences, and Tatyana Yugay, chief analyst of the 
Analytical Center for Socioeconomic Policy of the Office of the 
President of the Russian Federation and doctor of economic 
sciences: "Social Policy: In Which Direction To Navigate?"] 
  [Text] "The need for the creation of truly targeted 
social protection has long been urgent and overdue even. Its 
nucleus should be composed of personal work with everyone who 
appeals for assistance." 
  The social sphere in the best socialist times was the 
unloved 
stepdaughter of the military-industrial complex, and now her 
wicked sister--financial stabilization, which is aiming to cut 
the already scant expenditure on social needs--has shown up. And 
as always when it comes time to tighten the screws, it is the 
people who are left carrying the can. Yet the social sphere is 
the space of people's direct vital activity, of our sole and 
unique life, which we want to live not just any old how, roughly 
and in haste, but with dignity, and if not as in civilized 
countries, then with minimal conveniences, at least. 
  Meanwhile our country is increasingly becoming an extremely 
unpropitious and even dangerous sphere of habitation. A threat 
to the health and normal reproduction of the population has been 
created. In the last three years alone the birthrate has fallen 
from 13.4 to 9.2 per mill, and mortality has risen from 11.2 to 
14.6 per mill. As a result, society is becoming depopulated: In 
the past year alone it declined by 300,000. The natural 
population decrease has become particularly threatening in 
Central Russia. Mortality at the able-bodied age is increasing 
at a preferential rate, and, what is particularly alarming, the 
already high child and infant mortality is growing also. 
  The sanitary-epidemiological situation has deteriorated. In 
the past three years alone morbidity from diphtheria has 
increased by a factor of 12.3, from measles, by a factor of 4.1, 
typhoid, 1.5, and tuberculosis of the respiratory organs, by a 
factor of 1.3. The growth of infectious diseases is a direct 
consequence of the deterioration in the quality of food and the 
sanitary state of the cities and villages. 
  The situation in the sphere of nature conservation [as 
published; possible misprint for "occupational safety"] is 
particularly inauspicious. Injuries are sustained in industry 
and agriculture annually by 400,000 workers, of whom 15,000 
become invalids, and 8,000 die. One out of every five working 
persons works under conditions that do not conform to 
sanitary-hygiene standards, which has led to a doubling of 
occupational illness in the past five years almost. 
  Thus the disregard for the social constituent of the process 
of reform of the economy has brought the nation to the brink of 
physical survival. We could present a long list of factors that 
have reduced the people to such a life. But ultimately they have 
all been brought about by the absence of a unified comprehensive 
social policy, which has made the latter a gratis and optional 
supplement to macroeconomics. 
  The social ministries work in an emergency first-aid mode 
and, lacking a concerted action program, distribute monetary 
resources to those who have become adept at lobbying in the 
corridors of power or who are able to loudly make their presence 
known. The miners began it, it was continued by the air-traffic 
controllers, teachers, and doctors. But there are also 
categories of working people which could hardly attract 
attention to themselves by shouting or strikes. Science, 
culture, and so forth are quietly becoming extinct. 
  Now, when the original shock following the proclamation of 
the election results has passed, there is no shortage of 
miraculous prescriptions of a painless reform of the economy, up 
to and including the resuscitation of state regulation (read: 
control). One of the best examples of this genre is, for 
example, the infamous report prepared by the Russian Academy of 
Sciences Economics Department. 
  The authors of the report proclaim a transition to a 
socially 
oriented market economy; we will leave the marketeers to judge 
the "marketness" of their proposals, but as regards the 
"socialness," things are not, to be blunt, that dazzling. In so 
bulky a report merely one paragraph each is devoted to such 
components of social policy as assurance of a subsistence 
minimum; housing reform; pensions and a "reinforcement" of the 
system of social allowances; food assistance for the 
particularly vulnerable categories; credit for young people; 
reorganization of the system of health care; preservation of the 
gratis nature of basic types of education; the fight against 
unemployment. The main defect of the report is the absence of 
specific mechanisms of a solution of these burning social 
problems; there are not even the most elementary calculations as 
to how much this would cost the treasury and the taxpayers, and 
the specific sources of funding are not indicated. Without such 
economic computation the above-mentioned measures will remain 
merely good intentions, and the road to hell is, as we all know, 
paved with these. 
  The proposal for the completion of the elevation of the 
minimum wage and social payments to the subsistence minimum no 
later than the first half of next year, 1995, sounds very 
beguiling, for example. Is this feasible, if it is considered 
that the minimum wage now constitutes 25 percent of the 
subsistence minimum. 
  The report points to the need for the government's 
establishment of some "socially permissible level of 
unemployment," but how is it to be measured? For Russia as a 
whole this is a "mean hospital temperature." Each city and each 
community have their own employment situation. Instead of 
armchair discussions of figures, would it not be better to 
concentrate on the elaboration of a program of a restructuring 
of employment, the creation of new jobs, and the development of 
a system of the training and retraining of personnel? The report 
makes absolutely no mention of such most important areas of 
social policy as incomes policy (the interlinkage of the various 
types thereof, the principles of fixed-income indexation, the 
formation of wages as the price of manpower, and so forth); 
formation of a labor market; the organization of targeted social 
protection; social partnership; the principles of the 
delineation of responsibility in the pursuit of social policy 
between the federal and local levels; stable financial support 
for social programs. 
  What, in our view, should the program minimum of social 
policy for the coming years represent? 
  It is necessary first and foremost to proceed from the fact 
that any state should guarantee such things as minimum wages and 
pensions and free generally accessible health-care services, 
education, and culture. An increase therein in line with the 
increase in economic possibilities would be guaranteed here 
also. But not directively but merely given objective signs of a 
real improvement in the situation. In 1994, for example, the 
minimum remuneration under all conditions will be maintained at 
the level of 50 percent of the subsistence minimum. This figure 
could be increased if against the background of a steady 
reduction in inflation to 5-7 percent a month an increase in 
real personal income were to begin. The next step could be taken 
when real income is restored to the level of the end of the 
1980's. 
  It has long been time to introduce into Russian practice 
such 
a concept as the "social budget." This means that the person in 
the government to whom responsibility for social policy is 
entrusted would have at his disposal a sizable part of the 
budget pie. As for how to divide it among the various 
areas--this would be the internal concern of the social bloc of 
the government. Supplementary to this it would be necessary to 
strictly defend the "social budget" itself against the 
military-industrial, agrarian, and other lobbies. 
  Closely linked with this is the question of how to 
distribute 
the "social budget" between the center and the regions. There 
would have to be precise mechanisms and agreements here, 
evidently. 
  The responsibility of the localities in the pursuit of 
social 
policy should be bolstered also by the communication of a 
uniform wage scale of an exclusively recommendatory nature. This 
would afford the regions an opportunity with regard to local 
specifics to allocate resources independently and with 
sufficient flexibility for unblocking bottlenecks from both a 
sectoral and intraregional angle. This selective influence on 
the sore points of the publicly funded sphere would make it 
possible to sharply enhance the efficiency of the use of funds 
for remuneration. 
  If we are speaking of an incomes policy as a whole, however, 
the regulatory role of the state should under present conditions 
shift primarily to the sphere of the taxation of personal 
income, being manifested in the rigorous, even repressive, 
withholding of the taxes specified by legislation and also in a 
temporary increase in the rate of taxation of high and 
super-high personal income. This would make it possible to 
replenish the revenue side of the budget and slow somewhat the 
property stratification processes. 
  The need for the creation of truly targeted social 
protection 
has long been urgent and overdue even. Its nucleus should be 
composed of personal work with everyone who appeals for 
assistance. If the applicant is able-bodied, work would be found 
for him, or he would be sent on courses to acquire a trade. For 
people with limited employment opportunities (women with small 
children, the handicapped) special jobs would be created. The 
beamed allocation of credit to families, young ones 
particularly, and the utmost encouragement of small-scale 
enterprise should be part of the arsenal of active means of 
social protection. 
  Those, on the other hand, who are incapable of catering for 
their well-being by their own labor must be paid--in a strict 
linkage with their material situation--allowances, 
compensation--and accorded privileges, free food, and so forth. 
A system of the ascertainment of and assistance to those who for 
objective reasons are not in a position to independently make 
their calamitous position known would be developed together with 
this. 
  The principles of the specificity of social protection are 
being introduced quite successfully in a number of Russian 
regions. A striking example are Voronezh and Nizhegorod Oblasts, 
where practically each needy family obtains entirely specific 
assistance from the local authorities. 
  In conclusion we would like to share our apprehensions about 
the fact that the real result of the castling which has occurred 
in the power structures since the elections could be not an 
improvement in Russians' material position but satisfaction of 
the political ambitions of numerous party leaders. Yet on 12 
December the electorate sent them an unambiguous message, which 
says that if the social sphere continues to be ignored by 
politicians, VVZh will be the second president of Russia. The 
results of the Federal Assembly elections should be seen as a 
first call, and the second call--general strikes and acts of 
civil disobedience--could be heard very soon and very menacingly. 

