BFN 

  [Text] Washington, May 5 (XINHUA) -- Independent 
prosecutor Robert Fiske, who is investigating the Whitewater 
affair, today subpoenaed all White House documents relating to 
Vincent Foster, the White House deputy counsel who police say 
committed suicide last July 20. 
  "The White House will cooperate fully and promptly," White 
House special counsel Lloyd Cutler said. 
  The sweeping subpoena seemed aimed at determining if any 
documents were taken from Foster's White House office or 
concealed from investigators after his body was found last July 
20 in a park outside Washington. 
  U.S. President Clinton told reporters today that he did not 
know anything about the subpoena when asked if he would claim 
executive privilege to withhold any of the documents. 
  As part of his probe of financial and land dealings 
involving 
Clinton and his wife Hillary when the President was Arkansas 
governor, Fiske is looking into whether the White House 
interfered with authorities investigating the Foster tragedy. 
  Sources familiar with the case said Wednesday [4 May] that 
the independent prosecutor has concluded Foster did, in fact, 
commit suicide, and that Fiske would soon issue a report 
wrapping up that part of his probe. 
  U.S. Park police had previously determined that Foster, a 
long-time friend of the Clintons, shot himself last July 20 in 
the suburban park. Files were removed from his office in the 
White House shortly after his body was found, and Bernard 
Nussbaum, then White House counsel, reviewed other documents 
before they were given to police investigators. 
  It was disclosed last year that some of the documents taken 
from Foster's office concerned the Whitewater Development 
Corporation, a failed Arkansas real estate venture in which the 
Clintons held half interest. 
  White House deputy counsel Joel Klein said today that the 
Whitewater documents were initially turned over to Donald 
Kendall, the Clintons' personal lawyer, and that others had been 
given to foster's family lawyer. 
  Questions have also been raised about whether White House 
aides tried to conceal some of Foster's documents. 
  The White House sought to portray Fiske's latest demand as 
routine, but it appears to signal a widening of the 
investigation. 
  In the U.S. Senate, 40 republicans urged their leader Bob 
Dole to confront Democratic leader George Mitchell with the 
proposal that Whitewater hearings begin within 30 days. 
  Both the Senate and the House have passed resolutions 
calling 
for Whitewater hearings, leaving it up to the leaders of the two 
parties to decide when they can be held without interfering with 
Fiske's investigation. 

