Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 3 (XINHUA) -- The 10th Asian 
Parliamentarians' Meeting on Population and Development (APPD), 
whose purpose is to strengthen and promote cooperation among 
parliamentarians of some Asian countries, opened here today. 
  A message of congratulation from Chinese Premier Li Peng was 
read out at the opening ceremony. 
  Noting that Asia is the most populous region and also widely 
held to be the region with the most dynamic economic growth, Li 
said "To study and address the population problem of Asia will 
contribute significantly not only to Asia's prosperity and 
stability, but also to global peace and development." 
  The question of population is, in essence, a question of 
development, Li said. Only when the interaction between socio- 
economic development and population control is given thorough 
and balanced consideration can the problem of population be 
tackled at its root. 
  Li said that given the fact that countries vary considerably 
in their national conditions such as the level of economic 
development, natural resources, traditions, culture and 
religious practice, it is necessary for each country to 
formulate effective population and development policies in the 
light of its economic and social development and its other 
specific conditions and to strengthen international cooperation 
on this basis. 
  He said that women are an important force for promoting 
human 
progress and social development. An enhanced role and improved 
status of women will surely facilitate a rational resolution to 
the population problem. 
  Li noted that the Chinese Government has always attached 
great importance to the question of population and development 
and made family planning a basic state policy. 
  While vigorously promoting socio-economic development, he 
said, China has implemented family planning to bring congruity 
between population growth and socio-economic development so as 
to ensure prosperity for the country and a better life for its 
people. 
  Li said that China is ready to continuously strengthen its 
exchanges and cooperation with other countries and international 
organizations and work unremittingly for the stabilization of 
population and for prosperity and peace in Asia and the world. 
  Among those present were Zhao Dongwan, leader of the 
delegation of China's National People's Congress (NPC) and 
chairman of the NPC Education, Science, Culture and Public 
Health Committee; Fukusaburo Maeda, chairman of the Asian 
Population and Development Association; Shin Sakurai and Prasop 
Ratanakorn, chairman and secretary general of the AFPPD 
respectively; Hirofumi Ando, deputy executive director of the 
U.N. Population Fund (UNFPA) [acronym as received]; and 
parliamentarians, scholars and experts from 15 countries 
including China, representatives of international organizations, 
and some Beijing-based diplomatic envoys. 
  In his speech, Zhao Dongwan spoke highly of the many Asian 
countries which have made progress in birth control and 
population quality over the past decade. 
  Reviewing the remarkable achievements made by China in 
economic growth and population control, he said that although 
the fertility rate in China has dropped noticeably, the annual 
net population increase is still estimated at around 16 million. 
  Therefore, he said, China must strictly enforce family 
planning to control population growth, while developing its 
economy. 
  Zhao said that realizing sustainable and harmonious 
development is considered a long and arduous task but the only 
alternative for China over a long period of time. 
  He said that China, like many other developing countries in 
Asia, is facing an incompatibility between population growth and 
socio- economic development. China attaches great importance to 
friendly cooperation with Asian countries. 
  Zhao said he hoped the meeting would deliberate on 
population 
and development issues, particularly the status of women. 
  The Chinese delegates are willing to make the meeting a 
success along with other participants and to contribute to the 
International Conference on Population and Development to be 
held in Cairo in September this year, he said. 
  Fukusaburo Maeda said the significance of the meeting is 
underlined by the fact that it is being held in China, "which 
has the greatest population of all countries in the world and 
which, moreover, has achieved an unmatched success in population 
policy while proceeding with rapid economic growth." 
  He described China's extraordinary growth of the economy and 
the population growth control as "clear proof that population 
and development are closely related." 
  Shin Sakurai and Hirofumi Ando also delivered speeches at 
the 
meeting. 

