Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Colin James] </F>
  [Text] St. John's, Antigua, 5 Jan, CANA -- Political issues 
were dominant in Antigua and Barbuda in 1993 and a new leader 
was chosen for the ruling Antigua Labour Party (ALP). The 
opposition party consolidated its unity, a government minister 
was pardoned from a one-month prison sentence, a new governor 
general was sworn in, and a fight between government and a group 
of environmentalists over a controversial tourism and marine 
development project were other issues making the headlines. 
  Planning Minister Lester Bird was elected at an ALP 
convention to succeed his 84-year-old father Vere Bird, Sr. as 
the new leader. Bird, a former deputy prime minister before he 
resigned from his father's cabinet in 1991 in the aftermath of a 
commission of inquiry, defeated his main rival, Information 
Minister John St. Luce, 169 votes to 131 on September 5. After 
months of campaigning following the tied vote, Bird was able to 
emerge a comfortable victor with his brother Vere Bird, Jr., 
defeating Health Minister Adolphous Freeland to become the ALP's 
new chairman. Bird will be leading the ALP into forthcoming 
general election early next year and has committed himself to 
winning all 16 seats. 
  "I will be taking 16 warriors in battle and I intend to 
emerge with everyone alive," Bird said during his victory speech. 
  Prime Minister Bird will be leaving the political scene next 
year and in a farewell address at the convention, he said: "I 
have served my course, I am a satisfied man." 
  However, the ALP convention was subject to several 
postponements as wranglings emerged concerning the procedure to 
be adpoted in selecting the delegates for the convention. Former 
trade minister and outspoken government backbencher Hugh 
Marshall had declared his candidacy for the leadership, but 
withdrew from the ballot a week before the convention because he 
did not receive a seconder. Marshall had threatened to take 
legal action against the party. 
  As the ALP struggled to put its house in order, the 
opposition United Progressive Party (UPP) held its first 
national convention in April, where trade unionist Baldwin 
Spencer was re-elected unopposed as its leader. Spencer 
nominated newspaper editor and political activist Tim Hector as 
his deputy, and the party set about selecting candidates for the 
next general elections. The UPP also staged several 
demonstrations outside the Ministry of Information in a campaign 
for air time on state-owned radio and television which led to 
Spencer being granted 15 minutes. 
  Just days after its convention, the governing ALP 
administration was stunned by the news that Agriculture Minister 
Hilroy Humphreys was sentenced to a one-month imprisonment for 
contempt of court in a case brought before the courts by the 
Barbuda council, which had a long-standing dispute with 
government over the ownership of lands on the sister island. A 
high court judge had cited Humphreys and two associates of two 
sandmining companies for contempt when they carried out 
sandmining in a specified area of Barbuda on behalf of the 
central government in contravention of an interin court order. 
An appeal was made to the Eastern Caribbean Court of Appeal but 
was thrown out because the proper procedure in filing the motion 
was not followed. However, the country's new governor, General 
Sir James Carlisle, granted the minister and the two associates 
a pardon. That decision upset the local legal community, and the 
opposition announced it was taking steps to bring legal action 
against the governor general. Spencer said the UPP intended, "to 
take the issue to the highest level". Sir James became the 
country's second head of state since independence in 1981, 
succeeding Sir Wilfred Jacobs who retired because of ill health. 
He was sworn at a special sitting of parliament in June which 
was boycotted by the leader of the opposition because he was not 
consulted on the choice. 
  1993 could not have started on a more controversial note for 
the government when it become involved in a potentially 
explosive exchange with a group calling itself the Environmental 
Coalition. It was protesting the constructing of a hotel 
complex, golf course, and marina close to a mangrove swamp. 
Members of the group had attempted to lie in front of bulldozers 
in an effort to stop work. The government's Development Control 
Authority (DCA) had put the project on hold pending an 
environmental impact assessment study, but Prime Minister Bird 
gave the developers the go-ahead to continue work. In a terse 
statement, Bird said: "Bulldozers do sometimes run over people." 
The enviromentalists were unsuccessful in forcing a permanent 
work stoppage, but operations soon ceased on the instructions of 
the developers. 
  Almost simultaneously, the Bird administration came under 
fire for the appointment of former works minister Vere Bird, Jr. 
and ex-Army chief, Colonel Clyde Walker, who were deemed unfit 
by a commission of inquiry to hold public office in important 
government posts. Bird, Jr. was named an adviser to the prime 
minister while Walker was appointed as a consultant in the 
Ministry of Aviation. Pressure from inside the government and 
the opposition forced the cabinet to rescind the decision. A 
displeased prime minister said both men had suffered because of 
the 1990 commission of inquiry into the illegal shipment of 
Israeli-made arms and ammunition to Colombia. 
  Again parliament was the scene of drama as ALP backbencher 
Hugh Marshall publicly opposed bills brought before the House by 
Public Utilities Minister Robin Yearwood and Finance Minister 
Molwyn Joseph. Marshall said Yearwood kept a computer in his 
office for the purpose of victimising consumers he did not find 
favour with. His outburst sparked an angry reaction and a strain 
in his relationship with long-time friend Lester Bird. 
Marshall's attack on Joseph's Business Licence Act prompted the 
finance minister to deliver a salvo at his colleague. The 
legislation was also opposed by the business community as well 
as other ALP parliamentarians and was subsequently withdrawn. 
  Another bill to suffer similar fate was the Free Zone Act 
which was rejected by the Senate on the grounds that certain 
sections were ambiguous, anti-labour, and could interfere with 
established business practices here. Trade Minister Lester Bird 
did not accept the rejection in good spirits. Lester Bird's role 
concerning the financing and construction of Italian-funded 
development projects, including the nine-story Royal Antiguan 
Resort and the ultramodern Heritage Quay Shopping and Harbour 
Complex. [as received] The weekly opposition-linked OUTLET 
newspaper carried a series of articles on the issue and Bird 
reacted by filing a libel suit against its editor, Tim Hector. 
  The publication of a book, "Caribbean Time Bomb," weeks 
before the ALP convention, again raised questions about 
government, and in particular, the prime minister, his son 
Lester, and the U.S Government's relationship with the 
administration. 
  The Antigua and Barbuda economy continues to experience 
moderate growth and predictions are that it will perform a 
little better than the two percent of 1992. The finance minister 
said the country's per capita income was more than U.S. 5, 000 
dollars. 
  "Although it is an indicator of good development in our 
economy, it also works to our disadvantage because the World 
Bank has established U.S. 1,800 as the level to determine 
whether a country... That is accessible to concessionary funds," 
Joseph said. He said the International Monetary Fund (IMF) had 
expressed satisfaction with the country's self-style structural 
adjusment programme introduced two years ago. Tourism, the main 
engine of growth in the economy, recorded growth of 6.2 percent 
up to last July. 
  As 1993 closes, the country's two political parties were 
busily campaigning for forthcoming general elections which are 
constitutionally due by March 1994. Latest predictions suggest 
the parliamentary opposition is expected to make a strong 
showing at the polls with the ALP retaining the balance of power. 

