Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] NATO will have to show great caution over using air 
strikes against Bosnian Serbs, Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind 
said today. 
  Britain was "not enthusiastic" about a policy of extending 
the threat of air strikes, he said. 
  The decision was taken at the NATO summit in Brussels 
yesterday, when alliance leaders also called for United Nations 
commanders to draw up urgent plans to reopen the airport at 
Tuzla for humanitarian relief flights and to get Dutch troops 
into the Muslim enclave of Srebrenica to replace beleaguered 
Canadian peacekeepers. 
  John Major won NATO backing for his plan to bomb the two 
hotspots -- described by his officials as "tactical air support" 
-- after U.S. President Bill Clinton called for readiness to go 
beyond rhetoric in dealing with the Serbs. 
  Mr. Rifkind said today: "One has to be very cautious indeed 
about the use of air power, precisely because of the fact that 
we have forces on the ground. 
  "The primary objective of our forces on the ground -- 
British, French and Canadian -- is to get humanitarian aid 
through. 
  "If their own self-defence or the carrying out of their 
mandate involve some extra means of imposing our will, that has 
to be considered," he told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme. 
  The Canadians had expressed great caution about this, he 
said, adding: "We are not enthusiastic about it because there 
have to be very special circumstances." 
  The UN's role was to try to get help through to people who 
needed it. "Whenever there has been action by the Serbs in 
particular, but I am afraid it also applies to the other 
parties, to prevent aid getting through, we have to consider new 
measures, and that includes air power." 
  But he warned: "The purpose of the UN is not to stop this 
war. That cannot be done by some military means from the 
outside. The purpose of the UN is to get aid through." The 
objective was to preserve the lives of tens of thousands of 
innocent lives "caught up in this ghastly conflict," he added. 

