Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Igor Galkin] </F>
  [Text] Moscow January 11 TASS -- The last American credits 
for purchasing grain have been used up. On behalf of the 
Russian Government the Exportkhleb Foreign-Trade Association has 
purchased in the United States and delivered to Russia about 2.7 
million tonnes of grain and 650,000 of soya grist. This means 
that the programme, dubbed in the United States as "food for 
progress," has been fulfilled. 
  Exportkhleb President Aleksandr Belik told ITAR-TASS that 
this credit was quite advantageous for Russia. It was granted 
for a period of 15 years. Repayment by instalments is to begin 
within 7 years from now. 
  All in all, Russia has purchased abroad, according to Belik, 
about 10.5 million tonnes of grain. Although purchases were 
made also in other Western countries, the United States has 
remained Russia's main supplier, as in many previous years. 
  Does Russia's intention to cut grain imports signify its 
desire to curtail cooperation with American agro-industrial 
firms? Belik believes that the possible area of such 
cooperation is sufficiently broad. He noted that Russia, no 
matter what efforts it exerts, will not be able to satisfy all 
its requirements in soya, maize, seeds, and fodder additives. 
The purchases will not be as impressive as they had been, but 
they are unavoidable. Therefore, Exportkhleb does not plan to 
interrupt its contacts. 
  "American grain farms are now experiencing some 
difficulties," Belik said. "The situation is better at farms 
that have gone over in proper time to the processing of grain 
into fodder, that have obtained a foothold in the food and 
processing industry. Why shouldn't we cooperate with them in 
the building of soya-processing complexes, combined fodder 
factories, and port elevators in Russia? The summer sales of 
ready goods is ending and we are trying to convince our American 
partners that investment ventures will lay the foundation for 
futue broad cooperation. As to Exportkhleb, it knows our 
market, its requirements and possibilities, and is ready to 
discuss various versions of cooperation, crediting, settlements 
and other terms meeting the interests of all the partners 
involved." 

