BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "A Web With Many Spiders"] </F>
  [Text] The color photograph, 15 centimeters by 18 
centimeters, only shows the scorched fragment of a green 
synthetic resin board. It looks like nothing at all, the 
fragment is no larger than a fingernail. Only an enlargement 
reveals the soldering typical of a circuit board. 
  The photograph of plastic casing consisting of two parts 
also 
does not reveal much at first sight. The upper and lower parts 
are connected by a cable. Two dials, which have been affixed to 
the piece of plastic, are not visible on the outside. 
  Electronics experts immediately know what this means. The 
synthetic material is bottom plate [Platine] and the two dials 
allow for programming of a timer. This kind of timer is 
essential for the precise detonation of a bomb. 
  Men who display Victorian discretion have been presenting 
the photographs during secret investigations in Berlin for 
months. Scouts from secret services all over the world have been 
flocking together: It is almost like the coldest days of the 
Cold War when Berlin was the spy capital. 
  It is a home game for German investigators. Officials from 
the Cologne-based Federal Office for the Protection of the 
Constitution, colleagues from the State Protection Office, 
investigators from the Wiesbaden Federal Office of Criminal 
Investigations Office (BKA), and prosecutors from Frankfurt and 
Berlin are trying to solve the most mysterious crime story of 
recent years: the story of the timer. 
  The timer, which is not even worth 400 German marks [DM], is 
what the Americans term a "smoking gun" -- an irrefutable piece 
of evidence. The only question is: In whose hands was it? The 
timer was used by terrorists to detonate the bomb that ripped to 
pieces the Pan Am jumbo jet "Maid of the Seas" over the Scottish 
village of Lockerbie on 21 December 1988. All 259 passengers, 
primarily U.S. citizens, died; 11 inhabitants of Lockerbie were 
killed by falling wreckage. There were 270 victims altogether. 
  Lockerbie -- the placename has become a synonym for lunatic 
international terrorism. For many, the case was considered 
officially solved, at least until now. 
  In 1991, American and British investigative authorities 
revealed that Libyan secret service agents Amin Chalifa Fuheima, 
who was 35 at the time, and Abd-el-Bassit Ali el-Mikrahi, who 
was 39, were behind the Boeing 747 crash. The sinister villain 
of the international community, the self-proclaimed protector of 
Arab terrorists, Libya's head of state Mu'ammar Qadhdhafi, was 
once again exposed as a murderer. 
  The U.S. Justice Ministry demanded in vain that both 
suspects 
be extradited. The United Nations then imposed an embargo, which 
was intensified in November of last year, against Libya. 
  Now, new facts have shaken the carefully formulated 
construction of the investigators, the indictments that are 
ready in Washington and Edinburgh. Secret service men and 
investigators are talking about a hot "German lead." 
  German Lockerbie prosecutor Volker Rath says: "It threatens 
to jeopardize the charges leveled by the Americans and the 
Scots." The Frankfurter investigator says: "Everyone who is 
familiar with the matter can put one and one together." 
  Rath is even more direct in internal reports prepared for 
his 
top boss, Hesse Justice Minister Christine Hohmann-Dennhardt. 
In short: No German judge would be able to issue an arrest 
warrant for the suspects on the basis of the evidence that has 
been collected to date. 
  Rath, 40, is one of a handful of Lockerbie experts who has 
been working on the case internationally. The Meckenheim BKA, 
which cooperates closely with the American FBI and Scotland 
Yard, has an office in which 450 files are piled high. All of 
them bear a Frankfurt Prosecution Service code number: 50 Js 
42.401/88. 
  Lockerbie was, as Scotland Yard boasts, the "most demanding 
piece of detective work in criminal history." Statements have 
been collected from 15,000 witnesses, 20,000 names have been 
checked, 35,000 photographs assessed, and 180,000 items of 
evidence examined. 
  A German lead in the west came up early on: It is highly 
probable that the deadly cargo came from Frankfurt. According 
to the investigators reconstruction, the suitcase containing the 
bomb -- it was unaccompanied luggage transported by Air Malta 
from that Mediterranean island -- found its way into the German 
air traffic network on the morning of 21 December 1988. 
  At 1307 hours [local time], a computer issued the code 
number 
B 8849 for the bronze colored Samsonite suitcase. The suitcase 
containing the bomb was then checked onto flight PA 103, 
Frankfurt- London -- where it was to land before the 
trans-Atlantic crossing - between 1512 and 1650 hours. The lead 
that has now electrified everyone did not appear at this point. 
It is completely new and leads to the former Ministry of State 
Security (MfS). 
  Former MfS employees are being questioned. Over the past few 
days, prominent names have appeared on the list of witnesses who 
still have to be questioned. 
  Thus, the prosecution service not only wants to question 
former Politburo members, but also Honecker successor Egon 
Krenz. The point at issue is: Who handed over the timer to 
whom and for what purpose? 
  It is true that no one has expressed the bold suspicion that 
the horrific Lockerbie bloodbath was the work of the Stasi, 
which wanted to perform a service for allied Arab organizations, 
but there already is talk of possible complicity in the murder 
of several hundred people. 
  One thing is certain: Detonation devices of the Lockerbie 
type were found in the possession of the state security 
department -- that is very compelling evidence. The results of 
the investigation to date must be reappraised. 
  From the very beginning, the key to the Lockerbie mystery 
was 
that piece of bottom plate that investigators found on 13 
January 1989 after a laborious search of the wreckage of the 
aircraft, which had been ripped apart. It turned up in the 
wrecked suitcase of terror victim Karen Noonan, having burned a 
hole in the collar of a shirt and embedded itself in it. 
  Technicians removed the fragment with tweezers. After weeks 
of detailed work, Scottish specialist Thomas Hayes identified 
the piece of plastic with production code number PT 30 as part 
of a detonator. 
While those leveling the charges place him firmly on the 
Libyan side, he was secretly involved in procurement for the GDR 
above all: He was a Stasi Unofficial Agent (IM) codenamed 
"Rubin" and procured highly sensitive goods over decades. At 
the MfS, he was registered under filename 2550/70 and there are 
six thick files chronicling his successes. 
  The papers on this gem among embargo busters, who procure 
forbidden goods worldwide and use cunning means to have those 
goods smuggled to recipient countries, were -- what a surprise 
-- destroyed during the confusion of the 1989 and 1990 
changeover. Bollier was to have begun the new era without being 
incriminated in any way. 
  The Swiss businessman has been behaving as if he knew 
nothing 
at all. He claims that he first learned from SPIEGEL "that I 
had been assigned a codename. All the business I conducted was 
concluded under my official name or official company names." 
  He had sworn dedication to the Libyans, but was not 
selective 
in seeking other employers if they had the money to throw 
around. Bollier, the servant of many masters, was not committed 
to any country or political conviction, but only to himself: 
Business with the east promised piles of loot, especially at 
the high point of the Cold War. 
  It is in keeping with Bollier's character that he did not 
have to be recruited like a common spy, but offered his services 
to the Stasi. At that time, at the end of the 1960's, there was 
great demand for electronic equipment on the part of the GDR. 
In Erich Mielke's Ministry of State Security, a special unit -- 
Department III -- had just been created to listen in on western 
German telephone communications. 
  Bollier had dinner at the "Stadt Berlin" Interhotel with 
department chief Horst Maennchen. The two, each of whom was a 
specialist in his own field, soon agreed on business. 
  The Swiss supplied special aerials, coders, police 
communications systems, and computer terminals. Maennchen's 
department took everything. More and more employees had to be 
supplied with technology, and in the end, the Stasi employed 
over 3,000 people in the interception of telephone 
communications. 
  IM Rubin travelled to the GDR almost every month. To report 
his arrival, Bollier just had to dial the East Berlin telephone 
number 5 59 49 48: This special line that had been set up for 
him ended on the desk of his officer in the "Foreign Operatives" 
department. 
  There were no passport or customs controls for Bollier. 
During conversations at a Stasi villa in the Berlin embassy 
quarter of Pankow, order lists were checked off and new orders 
placed. The MfS paid cash, Western marks. A former Stasis 
officer says that "Bollier earned over 1 million marks from us." 
He would also come up with equipment, the procurement of which 
almost seemed impossible. When the KGB was pressurizing the 
fraternal East German secret service to acquire encrypting 
machines produced by the Swiss Crypto AG company, IM Rubin 
promptly carried out the job for a fee of DM120,000. 
  The Swiss firm also had excellent contacts with western 
services: Bollier was able to obtain highly secret equipment 
using various complex ways and means. Thus, he supplied the 
Main Intelligence Administration, Stasi General Markus Wolf's 
team of spies, with a well-guarded American secret: the "Mark" 
voice analysis machine. 
  The appliance is similar to a lie detector and registers the 
slightest changes in a voice. Wolf wanted to use it to test his 
agents' honesty. 
  GDR secret service officers became suspicious that the Swiss 
only needed weeks to acquire such sought after espionage 
equipment from the United States. Thus, Wolf's spies were to 
find out for whom Bollier really worked. 
  The attempt failed. Bollier travelled constantly and could 
not be shadowed well enough. A former Stasi officer told German 
investigators that "it was not possible to obtain tangible 
results in view of the enormous amount of travel that Bollier 
conducted." 
  The MfS was not sure: Bollier might also be working for a 
western secret service, "probably the CIA," is what an internal 
report stated. After they had had dinner together, the 
assessment of IM Rubin arrived at by Colonel Gerhard Hoeferer, 
Maennchen's deputy, was: "He is a double agent." 
The Lockerbie bomb corresponded almost exactly to the infernal 
device that a group of militant Palestinians had build two 
months previously in the Rhineland town of Neus. In both cases, 
the explosive was Semtex H, which had been affixed inside a 
Toshiba radio recorder with fiendish cunning. 
  The difference between the two devices was: The Palestinian 
group in Neus had used a barometric detonator which would have 
resulted in an explosion if there had been a change in air 
pressure, if, for example, an aircraft reached a certain height. 
For a long time, the North Rhine-Westphalian terrorist group, 
which came under the Syrian protective umbrella, was considered 
the main suspect. 
  However, when it became clear beyond any doubt that the 
explosive on flight PA 103 was detonated by a simple timer, the 
investigations proceeded in a different direction. 
  Analyses conducted by the CIA led investigators to the 
actual manufacturer: the Zurich-based Mebo AG company. It 
trades in electronic appliances of all kinds. The timer was one 
of the company's own production lines, type MST-13, which was 
developed for the Libyans for use in desert warfare in 1985 and 
was resistant to dust and water. 
  According to what the CIA has established, a mechanism of 
this kind was used in the attack on the American Embassy in Togo 
in 1986. Two Libyans were arrested in connection with that in 
Senegal in February 1988: They had about 10 kilograms of 
plastic explosives and two MST-13 timers in their possession. 
The name of the manufacturing company had been removed, but 
using a special process, it was possible to make the name on the 
parts visible again: Mebo. 
  Almost 2 dozen units of this kind were produced, supposedly 
for Qadhdhafi's assistants. The fact that Mebo does substantial 
business with the Libyans was considered a very significant 
piece of evidence by the accusing parties. Mebo managers told 
the CIA as well as American and British Lockerbie investigators 
that the timers were sold solely to Tripoli and the Libyan 
People's Bureau in East Berlin. The charges against the two 
suspects depend very heavily on this statement. 
  However, the Mebo version turned out to be a smokescreen, 
perhaps even a false trail that had been deliberately laid. 
Edwin Bollier, 56, one of Mebo's two executive directors, 
apparently remembered just 6 months ago that he had had two 
other customers, from "the Institute for Technical Research or 
something similar in East Berlin," confided Bollier to 
investigators. 
  People of Bollier's kind might well have been familiar with 
the GDR's Institute of Technical Research: It was a security 
service workshop for the production of all kinds of items of 
equipment used by agents: listening and detection devices. 
  The investigators then believed that the Bollier had allowed 
himself to be bought by the Libyans -- anything is possible in 
the Orient -- and had made the statement to exonerate state 
terrorist Qadhdhafi. The Arabs had generously reimbursed his 
expenses. 
  The investigators also took careful note of the fact that in 
January, during the Geneva meeting between U.S. President 
Clinton and the Syrian head of state Hafiz el-Assad at the 
"President" Hotel, a colorful group turned up for a meeting: 
the four-man international Libyan defense team, including 
London lawyer Stephen M. Mitchell and American attorney Frank 
Rubino. 
  The spokesman for the group was the Libyan lawyer Ibrahim 
Legwell. Bollier also logically made his way to Geneva and 
revealed further details about the sale of Mebo timers to East 
Berlin. Mitchell said: "He always has something new to say." 
  The statements made by the Swiss electronics dealer, 
although 
they might continually vary, are essentially correct. 
  It has been clearly established that the Stasi acquired 
timers of the MST-13 type in 1985. The prosecution service 
assumes that Bollier had supplied the GDR with as many as seven 
units. At any rate, that is the quantity that appears in a Mebo 
bill that Bollier says that he suddenly found and has handed 
over to investigators as evidence. 
  In the meantime, former Stasi procurement employees are 
revealing that they had acquired "projector control devices of 
the MST-13 type." The following is an extract from the 
questioning of a former state security officer in Meckenheim: 
  Question: Did you buy the timer? 
  Answer: Yes, I did buy the timer; it was part of 
a package that also included two or three timers with digital 
displays and casings as well as about 10 units without casings. 
In addition, there was also an Italian reddish-brown attache 
case with a built-it transmitter that allowed two frequencies to 
be used for the detonation of explosives, using two receivers 
that were also supplied. We paid between DM30,000 and DM40,000." 
  Other Stasi employees have lent more credence to the German 
lead. On Thursday [14 April] of last week, a former MfS colonel 
who was being questioned by the BKA in Munich discussed the 
question. He ruled out direct and deliberate participation by 
his ministry in the Lockerbie bombing, but the witness went on 
to say that "that would by no means apply to passing on such a 
timer." 
  It has ultimately been proven that the MfS was involved in 
other murders. The latest example was provided last week: 
Stasi anti-terrorism expert Helmut Voigt was sentenced to four 
years imprisonment for participation in the 1983 bombing of the 
Berlin Maison de France (one dead, 22 injured) by virtue of 
having passed on explosives used in the attack. 
  The current theory of sole Libyan involvement, although it 
might fit in very well with the Americans jumbled scheme of 
world politics, has been shattered. It is just as if the 
indictment had been written in invisible ink and the letters 
have now just suddenly disappeared. 
  Lockerbie and the German lead lead directly to the bizarre 
world of secret services, for which deception and subterfuge are 
the elixir of life. The Zurich Mebo boss Edwin Bollier, a 
sinister figure possessed of many talents, fits precisely into 
this picture. He has been playing a game on at least two sides. 
Should a smart multiple agent, who, grotesquely enough, was 
also on the CIA payroll, be finally responsible for the cruel 
death of the mainly American Pan Am passengers? As a 
precaution, the Frankfurt state prosecutor investigated 
"relevant connections" at the Federal Intelligence Service [BND] 
in March -- the answer is still pending. A Stasi defector, 
which the BND released to the Lockerbie investigators, affirmed 
to the BKA officers: "A man like Bollier had hidden protectors 
in the West." Asked aobut CIA contacts, Bollier told DER 
SPIEGEL: "No comment." 
  In the bizarre artificial world of agents and misinformers, 
such entanglements are part of the risks that every principal 
incurs. Nobody trusts anybody, everybody spies on everybody 
else, and traitors buy traitors who give away traitors. 
  So it may happen quite easily that a major affair goes wrong 
and that those who should actually have been protected are 
damaged. 
  Should Bollier have reported to other -- maybe even western 
-- masters about his dealings with the bad guy number one, Al- 
Qadhdhafi? Or should he have assisted the Stasi in what was its 
declared policy at the time, namely to protect the GDR against 
international terrorist attacks -- through cooperation with 
internationally acting terrorist groups? 
  A former Stasi man, who in 1983 became IM Rubin's 
controller, 
might be able to provide information on Bollier's dealings with 
Mielke's men. To the Swiss informer, he introduced himself as 
Joachim Wenzel. 
  A brilliant technician, radio mechanic, and an information 
technology engineer by profession, he was entrusted with unusual 
tasks by the MfS at an early stage: Wenzel built the electronic 
timing device for a bomb, which was to be placed underneath a 
car of a Hamburg refugee smuggler. 
  The former officer has meanwhile been interrogated half a 
dozen times by the BKA. The question and answer game has almost 
become a ritual. Here is the excerpt from one interrogation on 
the timer in the Lockerbie bomb: 
  BKA: Mr. Wenzel, I am showing you here a gray 
plastic case consisting of two pieces, what can you tell us 
about it? 
  Wenzel: This case is of exactly the same design 
as those used by Mr. Bollier for the clocks he sold us. 
  BKA: BKA: When was this version with the control 
wheels provided by Bollier? 
  Wenzel: I am pretty sure that this control clock 
is the last of a series of versions and was presented to us by 
him between March and June 1985. 
  BKA: BKA: Has Bollier made any comment toward you 
in connection with the attack against Pan Am flight 103 over 
Lockerbie? 
  Wenzel: No, not once. 
In a statement dictated to the investigators, Wenzel said 
that, at the MfS, the higher ranks were greatly worried at the 
time that Bollier might have "sold" the timers to "other groups, 
too." The Stasi man: "I was mainly thinking of terrorist 
circles such as the ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty], the IRA 
[Irish Republican Army], the RAF [Red Army Faction], and maybe 
even the Libyans." What is certain is that in 1987, Wenzel 
took the timers, which Bollier had provided, along with him to 
his new department on Ferdinand-Schultze street. There, he 
worked in the Main Department XXII: It was responsible for 
anti-terrorist activities and had closest contacts with militant 
Arab groups, but also the West German RAF. 
  The timers have disappeared since then. It is unclear 
whether they were destroyed in the chaos before and after 1989, 
when the Stasi destroyed technological equipment from bugging 
devices to shredders, or whether, still under the responsibility 
of Mielke and Erich Honecker, the timers found their fateful 
destination in the world of international terrorism. 
  There was no shortage of potential buyers. Explosive 
solidarity presents were regarded by Stasi as helpful for 
initiating good relations with all kinds of Arabic terrorist 
groups. A network with many spiders. 
  The Stasi, for example, provided ship loads of lethal 
material to the security department of the PLO, 5,000 hand 
grenades, explosives, 1,000 detonators, and bridging timers 
[Brueckenzuender] in 1980 alone. 
  Yet, even the many splinter groups of the Palestinian 
movement, who plagued the world with murderous terrorist attacks 
for 20 years, found a new base in the GDR. 
  Leading representatives of international gangs frequently 
came to East Berlin. The internationally wanted terrorist 
Carlos, who, according to recent intelligence reports continues 
to live in Damascus under Syrian protection, used to stay in the 
fine Palace Hotel Unter den Linden. The fighters of infamous 
Abu Nidal underwent a three-month training course at the MfS in 
1985, including the launching of missiles and shells. Only a 
few months after the training, the group slaughtered 16 people 
at Rome airport and four at Vienna airport. 
  Abu Dawud, who is believed to be one of the men responsible 
for the massacre at the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich, was also 
attracted by East Berlin. In the 80's, the former terrorist 
resided in the very center of Berlin, at 178 Prenzlauer Allee. 
  The East German intelligence service got more and more 
deeply 
involved in its insidious cooperation with the Arab guerrillas 
-- after all, they were fighting the same enemy. 
  Over whom did the Stasi hold out protective hands, who is 
behind Lockerbie? Was it the Iranians, after all, who wanted to 
take revenge for the unintentional downing of an Airbus by the 
American destroyer "Vincennes" in 1988 above the Strait of 
Hormuz? And were they assisted by the Syrians, who are 
meanwhile high in the favor of the Americans after they stood up 
against Iraq's Saddam Husayn in the Gulf War? 
  The intelligence experts now must go through a new mass of 
theories of conspiracy. The Russian intelligence service, for 
example, is by no means convinced about the American 
investigations according to which Libya alone was responsible. 
  The CIA's most important source was "tapped rumblings of the 
Arabs," as one Russian intelligence service officer said. The 
Americans did not even use the "confidential communications 
channel," which was set up in 1990, to ask Moscow for 
information. 
  And such information would be abundant in a place where the 
archivists of international intelligence service connections on 
Stasi and Arabs, on terrorists and agents, have accumulated 
unique information. Leonid Shebarshin, former head of the 
Soviet foreign intelligence service, was surprised at 
Washington's silence: "They have not asked a single question." 

