BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Owe Wiktorin, incoming commander </F>
in chief of the Armed Forces, by Margaretha Bergman in Ronneby; 
date not given: "New Commander in Chief Is Proud of JAS"] 
  [Text] Sweden's inability to put an end to the submarine 
violations is a defeat of its security policy. It is in the 
interest of all the people in Sweden that the violations stop. 
  That is the opinion of Owe Wiktorin, who succeeds Bengt 
Gustafsson as commander in chief of the Armed Forces on 1 July. 
Wiktorin finds it hard to explain why the foreign submarine 
activities continue. 
  "In the new world vision, it is difficult for me to see any 
reason for the violations," he said. 
  Owe Wiktorin thinks it is inappropriate to say, the way the 
intelligence service does, that there is no threatening picture. 
The former Soviet Union's military capability is in a sorry 
state, but the equipment is there, ready to be used: "Russia is 
a factor for insecurity." 
  This uncertain vision of the future is exactly why Sweden, 
according to the new commander in chief, needs a strong defense: 
"The Armed Forces are an insurance premium we pay for the 
future. In 1989 everybody counted on 1,000 years of peace, but 
we in the military were realistic." 
  He thinks the decision to buy 120 new tanks was quite 
correct. He is not equally sure that the Armed Forces can afford 
to buy the attack helicopters intended as complementary to the 
tanks. The solution may be to use SK-60 light attack planes to 
complement the tanks. 
  Sweden's new commander in chief is a warm supporter of the 
JAS [39 Gripen -- multirole combat aircraft] project. He 
regrets the crashes, but adds that these are not unusual in the 
testing of new planes: "We focus on masochism instead of being 
proud of our ability to produce our own airplane. We can be 
proud of getting a plane that is fully adapted to Swedish 
conditions. The JAS is a good plane at a low cost," Wiktorin 
added. 
  He refuses to make predictions about the Armed Forces' 
future 
makeup. The 16 brigades and 16 airborne divisions are not 
definite figures for eternity: Owe Wiktorin is not deaf to the 
idea of further cuts in the number of brigades and divisions. 

