BFN 

<F P=106> [By John Kohut in Beijing] </F>
  [Text] The caller is fed up. She has been working seven 
days a week at a Beijing printing plant for several weeks. Her 
boss won't give her a day off. She's exhausted, but doesn't 
complain for fear of being fired. A worker at a foreign-funded 
factory in the northeastern port city of Dalian has a different 
problem: He wants to know how to stage a strike to demand a 
wage rise so his pay package keeps up with sky-rocketing 
inflation. Another young caller is so depressed with his 
"meaningless" job that he wants to commit suicide. 
  Such are the problems that workers across China pour out on 
perhaps the most sensitive of Beijing's help lines, the worker 
hotline. Operating five nights a week since March 1, the 
hotline is run by 22 young scholars in a spartan office at the 
Chinese Workers' Movement Institute. The Labourers' Emotional 
Consulting Hotline is hardly a solution to the difficulties 
workers face in the wrenching transformation from a Marxist to 
market economy, but it gives them an outlet to voice concerns 
and get some advice. 
  "The system for Chinese workers is changing now," said Deng 
Weiyun, 31, a university lecturer and hotline chairman. "In the 
past the problems weren't so serious, and the traditional way of 
dealing with them was to go to the leader. Once you had a job, 
you rarely lost it. Now... all at once, for no reason, a worker 
may be out of a job. So we hope to give them some help to get 
accustomed to the changes." 
  The hotline has had more than 200 calls since it opened, 
more 
than 80 percent of them from people at state-run enterprises. 
That percentage is not surprising, given that nearly half of 
the state enterprises are operating in the red and that they 
face the prospect of cost-cutting and streamlining reforms which 
would inevitably hurt some workers. 
  Callers complain their wages are too low, their jobs are 
boring, or they are unemployed. Others worry about the 
financial health of their enterprise, and are distraught because 
they feel their jobs offer no future. 
  The advice they get does not challenge any of the precepts 
of 
the Government. Staff might suggest the caller approach his or 
her labour union, seek the help of a worker arbitration 
committee, find a new job, learn a new skill. Sometimes they 
suggest how to find a new job. Such advice may seem obvious, 
but not necessarily in China, where workers have been accustomed 
to the cradle-to-grave employment system. 
  But the hotline would never encourage strike action, or 
anything else which might rankle the authorities. Mr Deng said 
his staff encouraged workers to act within the laws of the state. 

