BFN 

<F P=106> [XINHUA commentator's article: "It Is Necessary To </F>
Continuously Attach Importance to Family Planning Work"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 1 Jun (XINHUA) -- In recent years, China's 
birth rate has been steadily decreasing. Even in years when 
women of child-bearing age account for a high proportion of the 
total population, our country has held back the trend of a rapid 
increase in population. China has been recognized by the 
international community as one of the best countries in 
restraining the rapid growth of population. 
  However, we must soberly understand that we must not be too 
optimistic about the population situation in our country. 
First, the absolute growth of population in our country is 
still very high. The number of newborn babies each year is 
equivalent to the combined total of the population of Australia 
and New Zealand. Second, at present we are primarily relying on 
forceful administrative means to promote family planning work. 
The birth rate will rise again if we slacken our efforts 
slightly. Third, the situation of imbalance in family planning 
is still quite serious in various locales. In the next few 
years, China will continue to have some provinces and autonomous 
regions with women in their peak child-bearing years accounting 
for a large proportion of the total population. Owing to the 
fact that those provinces and autonomous regions are all located 
in northwest and southwest regions, the tasks of population 
control are ever more difficult. 
  Family planning concerns the vital interests of hundreds of 
millions of people, and so we must actively, prudently, and 
steadily grasp the work. While accelerating economic 
development, we must keep the population growth rate at a 
relatively low level. 
  Leading cadres at various levels must further heighten their 
understanding of the important, arduous, and prolonged nature of 
family planning work. The top leaders of party and government 
organizations at various levels must act according to the 
requirements set by the party central committee and the State 
Council, personally take charge of the work, and have all 
leading bodies understand the importance of the task and work 
with concerted efforts. We should further improve the 
responsibility system with merits linked to the goals of 
population control and family planning. We should pay attention 
to and strengthen the training of cadres for family planning 
work. We should organize various concerned departments to 
improve family planning work, and create a favorable social 
environment to promote late marriages and later childbirths, to 
advocate fewer childbirths and sound practice in bringing up 
children, and to treat boys and girls in the same way. 
  In implementing the policy of family planning in a constant 
manner, we must effectively strengthen family planning work at 
the grass-roots level. The rural areas are the main and 
difficult places in promoting family planning work. We must 
strengthen family planning work at the village level, mobilize 
the cadres of village party branches and villagers' committees, 
and truly implement family planning work down to all households 
and people. The cadres at the grass-roots level should learn 
from the family planning work in Shanxi's Wenshui County and the 
working spirit of Zhou Lanu. We should effectively grasp family 
planning work in all villages, towns, and households. Various 
locales should adopt different methods according to local 
conditions, and closely integrate the work of family planning 
with the work of developing the rural economy, of helping 
peasants get rich and become well-to-do, and of building 
civilized and happy families. 
  In implementing the policy of family planning in a constant 
manner, we must actively explore and establish a system which 
can suit the need of a socialist market economy and constantly 
solve new problems in the new situation of family planning work. 
In addition, we should strengthen the administration of family 
planning work for the migrating population. We should integrate 
the work of patient education and propaganda on family planning 
with enthusiastic and fine services, and integrate the work of 
family planning with the work of developing a socialist market 
economy and of building socialist spiritual civilization. We 
should strive to raise the quality of the population, improve 
the population structure, and promote a coordinated development 
of population, the economy, and society. 

