Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "ABB Robotics Launches Two New Robots] </F>
  [Text] ABB Robotics has launched two new robots: its IRB 
1400 (5 kg) and IRB 2400 (10 kg). These are the first two 
products of the new line of robots developed by the ABB group 
under its customized approach to robotization. They feature 6 
axes, operate very rapidly, and follow a trajectory with 
precision. "We know that the primary demands on the part of our 
clients boil down to reduced cycle time, the manufacture of a 
wider variety of products on a small-scale production basis, at 
a reduced price per unit. They also want customized integration 
of products, systems, and services. This is the feedback that 
has prompted us to develop this new line," says Guy Micoulet, 
president of ABB Robotics France. At the heart of the new line 
is the all-new S4 command console, which enables the user to 
rapidly put the robots into operation within his current 
manufacturing process, without delay, without any specific 
development of software, and without costly adjustments and 
fine-tuning. This new line also provides in advance for the 
needs of the manufacturing industries, through various 
innovations. The line includes a Windows-type operating system 
interface that facilitates communication regardless of whether 
the user is an operator, programmer, computer engineer, or 
systems engineer. It utilizes its own technology, and its 
language in the form of interactive dialogue is simple. The 
command console enables very precise adherence to trajectory at 
a high speed. Rapidity of movements is obtained through 
automatic optimization of control. The console utilizes a 
complete real-time dynamic model of the robot arm, enabling 
incremental accelerations and higher speeds of the arm. The 
command system always provides the optimum acceleration 
regardless of conditions of use; as a function, for example, of 
the position of the arm within the robot's work envelope, or 
according to the weight and inertia of the load taken on. The 
system also uses the robot's mechanical potential to optimum 
advantage. The duration of cycles is therefore shorter and 
productivity is improved. ABB Robotics will launch other new 
products and services as part of the new product line it is 
developing together with its clients. Its current gamut of 
products and services provides a platform that can be modified 
and adapted to keep ahead of the needs of industries beyond the 
next 10 years. The group posted a 1992 revenue of $350 million 
worldwide with personnel totaling 1900 employees. R&amp;D 
accounted 
for $35 million of this revenue. Its activity in France 
generated a revenue of 162 million francs with 150 employees. 
  ABB Robotique - 22 rue du 8 Mai 1945, BP 118, 95340 
Persan. Tel. (1)30.28.60.00. 

