BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Ayatollah 'Ali Hoseyni Khamene'i, leader of the </F>
Islamic revolution, to a gathering at the Imam Khomeyni 
Mausoleum in Tehran -- live] 
  [Excerpts] In the name of God, the compassionate, the 
merciful. Praise be to God, lord of the universe. God's 
prayers and peace be upon our Prophet Muhammad, his scion and 
his companions. [passage omitted] 
  I express my condolences on the fifth anniversary of the 
demise of our great imam to all the truth-seeking Muslims of the 
world, especially to the dear and great Iranian nation. I 
sincerely express my regards to those who in the course of these 
five years have chosen the path of the imam as the luminous path 
of their lives and have exulted proudly in this fact, as well as 
those sincere and true disciples of that noble personage, who 
are numerous in our nation and in other nations. 
  Similarly, I consider it necessary to convey my sympathies 
to 
the respected and esteemed family of the late imam for the 
selfless service they rendered to that noble personality in the 
last years of his life. This was a heavy and major 
responsibility, which they took on themselves and carried out in 
the best possible manner, especially his illustrious and dear 
son Haj Seyyed Ahmad. 
  Today, I wish to mention a few points in memory of that 
noble 
personality as the basic points for future reference, study, and 
perception during this grand and tumultuous gathering. 
  First, I will begin with the personality of the imam, even 
though much has been said and written and sung about it by 
orators, authors, and singers. [passage omitted] 
  The imam's most noble action was to lay the foundation of an 
Islamic government and system. It would be worthwhile for our 
respected brothers and sisters to note the importance and 
greatness of this noble action of the imam so that it will be 
correctly etched in their minds. 
  Our revered imam established an Islamic system on which our 
Government is based. Then we have Islamic political 
institutions and a program which is also Islamic. All these 
three are worth pondering and mulling over. The Islamic system 
that the imam created and established in this country 
constitutes the format for the life of this nation in an Islamic 
mold with an Islamic meaning and bias. This Islamic system has 
faith as its main essence; faith in God, in the unknown. This 
system has a form, an image--the Islamic shari'ah. 
  Such a system has not existed in the course of history and 
does not exist elsewhere in the world today, except at the 
beginning [of Islam]. This system is based on the ingredient of 
faith, and an image, a corpus of the laws of the Islamic 
shari'ah. This system is exclusive, exceptional, and not well 
identified by the materialists, even though it is 
well-comprehended by Muslims who are familiar with the Koran and 
Islam. Of course, no one expected that such a system could be 
implemented in this day and age. It could not even be imagined 
that with so much hostility and opposition, any one could even 
dare to go in this direction or have the power to carry out this 
task. 
  However, the imam achieved the impossible through the 
strength of his faith, determination, and hard work, and with 
his reliance on the fervent and loving hearts of the millions. 
A prominent part of this system is the political apparatus, 
that is, the administration. This is the basic department in all 
systems, that is, the political element from which the system 
takes its form. It is on this basis that systems, ideologies, 
and objectives can be correctly identified. Our great imam 
forged a government unparalleled in the contemporary world, even 
in the course of history--except for some exceptional cases, 
right from the advent of Islam until today. [passage omitted] 
  The second characteristic of this political system is its 
independence, because it does not give in to extraneous 
pressure. Our system is not intimidated by any power and has 
ignored the decrees of the powerful ones of the world, who are 
equipped and armed with the weapons of wealth and might. This 
in itself is an unprecedented phenomenon in the world. However, 
in the system of the Islamic Republic of Iran, its nature is 
such that with the grace of our Creator, all the officials are 
endowed with these qualities. This noble figure [Khomeyni] was 
the most sublime example of these characteristics. The others 
are also blessed with these qualities. This is the kind of 
political apparatus of the Islamic system created by the imam. 
  The third point is the program. The program is also unique 
among the programs propounded by the reformers of the world, 
governments, and harbingers of new messages. Reconstruction of 
the world and of the hereafter goes hand in hand. The Islamic 
system wishes for people to flourish in this world but hopes 
they will not content themselves with that. The world and the 
hereafter are interrelated in the Islamic system and in the 
program of this system. Human beings should live in an 
honorable and comfortable manner, but comfort and welfare and 
all that ensures such comfort are mere preliminaries, subject to 
God's pleasure. They are only a precursor. This is an 
exceptional phenomenon on the plane of today's world and has 
been so throughout history, except for the governments of the 
prophets, their successors, and their implementors. 
  Everyone wishes to reform the material world for the people, 
but apparently they are not able to. However, the Islamic 
system reforms the world and the hereafter; it is capable of 
doing so. This is the strength which has been revealed by Islam. 
If the present situation of the country is viewed through the 
eyes of justice, this will be confirmed. Ours is a country on 
which a war was imposed for eight years. Its factories and 
roads were destroyed. An economic embargo was clamped on it. 
Its resources were wrested from it; and no assistance was 
extended by any government. 
  Internally, various kinds of pressure were exerted on the 
nation and government by political and propagandistic means. 
This country, this nation, this government is implementing the 
program to reconstruct the country, especially infrastructural 
projects, in a manner which has elicited the praise of 
observers. Those who come and perceive this process, commend 
the programs and their executors. 
  Without the pressure from the enemy, if the traitorous and 
trouble-making hands of the enemy had not existed, if the 
enemy's propagandistic and politico-economic presence had not 
lurked beyond our borders, the situation would have been far 
better and most of the economic problems that we have today 
would not exist. The Islamic system is concerned with the 
administration and prosperity of the world and the hereafter. 
No other program is concerned with the religion of the nation, 
the hereafter of human beings. The Islamic system imparts 
training and civilization. 
  Today in our country, a general movement can be observed, 
especially among our youths, toward learning the Koran, studying 
religion, abiding by Islamic tenets and injunctions. This is a 
distinguishing feature of the programs formulated by brains and 
hearts that have been guided by the Koran and Islam. These are 
not confined to the materialistic world. The materialists claim 
that they are ameliorating the world for the people, but they 
cannot do so. However, Islam focuses on the world and the 
hereafter; and by the grace of God, it is able to do so as well. 
Our people--as a result of Islam--have been endowed with 
exceptional faith, fortitude, and awareness, which is unique 
among the nations of the world. This range of characteristics 
together is the product of the work of this noble personage, the 
true servant of the Almighty. [crowd chants God is Great! 
Khomeyni is the Leader!] 
  I should make three points: There is a trend toward 
political centralization in the world and the wielder of world 
power is demanding that nations and governments should be 
reduced to captivity and follow the dictates of the central 
power, which today is the United States, its satellites and 
cohorts. Many have failed and fallen in the path of this trend. 
The Islamic Republic of Iran, however, has stood steadfast. 
  Blessed by this steadfastness, the Islamic Republic of Iran 
declares its categorical stance on the Palestinian issue while 
others do not have the courage even to listen to it at times. 
This categorical declaration, on which the Iranian nation and 
Government are unanimous, is that Palestine is a country that 
belongs to the Palestinian people. The Zionist government is a 
despotic government; the principles of this government and 
system are absolutely illegitimate. [crowd chants] 
  Many do not even have the courage to listen to those who 
utter such remarks. Thus, the talks that are being held on 
Palestine are nothing but empty words. They do not have any 
worth or credibility, because they are in contradiction of the 
truth and the accepted norms. Contrary to this, the views of 
the Government and people of the Islamic Republic of Iran on all 
international issues are independent and truthful. 
  As for the Muslims in the Balkans, we believe that the 
pressure on the Balkan Muslims is to insure that a Muslim nation 
and a Muslim government do not take shape in Europe. The fear 
is of Islam. Thus, it was on the basis of a calculated plan that 
the domineering powers in the world today have not supported the 
Muslims of Bosnia-Herzegovina. They know what they are doing. 
They have supported and assisted the Serbs in a calculated 
manner. They prevented arms and military equipment from 
reaching the Muslims in a calculated manner. This is the view 
of our Government and nation; it constitutes a condemnation of 
the present domineering powers with regard to the issues of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Balkans. 
  With regard to the newly independent Muslims of Central 
Asia, 
the Kashmiri Muslims, the Azerbaijani Muslims, the Muslims in 
every part of Asia, the Middle East, and Africa, the opinion of 
our Government and nation is that it is the right of these 
Muslims to live in an Islamic manner and to implement the 
injunctions of the Islamic shari'ah in their daily lives. No 
one has the right to prevent them from doing so. Western powers 
that describe this as fundamentalism prevent some of these 
countries from even holding free elections. We believe that this 
interference and encroachment with regard to the affairs of 
Muslim nations is tyrannical and unwarranted. They have the 
right to have an Islamic way of life and should be given an 
opportunity to do so. 
  On the issue of Lebanon, the Iranian nation and government 
condemn the Zionist aggression; we deem the struggle against the 
Zionists imperative and accords with them as invalid. These are 
the independent stances of the Islamic system and the Islamic 
government and these are the reasons why the pyramid of 
international power levels accusations against the system of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran. This is where the accusations stem 
from. 
  The second point is that these so-called accusations 
probably 
stem from a distortion of realities. In many cases, they refer 
to what is actually a point of strength in the system of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran. For example, they accuse the Islamic 
Republic of Iran of fundamentalism. By this term they mean 
prejudice and Stone Age beliefs. This means, in fact, the 
refusal on the part of the Iranian people and government to 
surrender to the unjust desires of the international powers, so 
we are labeled as primeval. No. This is the rightful stance of 
a Muslim nation; it is not a primeval belief. If fundamentalism 
is the term used for respect for accepted principles, it is 
commendable and all should be proud of it. It is a lie to term 
it primeval and prejudicial, and it is a false accusation 
against the Iranian Government and nation. 
  Then they slander the Islamic Republic of Iran by saying 
that 
it does not adhere to human rights. They mean the 
implementation of Islamic penal laws [hodud]. We implement the 
Islamic ordinances. The Koran says: "Those are limits set by 
God: and anyone who transgresses the limits of God does verily 
wrong his (own) soul." Anyone who violates God's laws is 
subjected to the Almighty's chastisement. These are divine 
laws. We consider the understanding of the Koran and its text 
to have priority over the products of the impaired minds of the 
Western legislators who have laid out knowledge and inventions 
for themselves and give them precedence over the gnosis of 
Divine religions. We believe that the divine laws are to be 
given preference. 
  The path to the reform of a society is through the 
implementation of divine ordinances. It is possible that we may 
have shortcomings in this regard, but we are definitely moving 
in the direction of the complete implementation of the divine 
penal laws, of Koranic laws. This was the second point. 
  The last point is that our path is that of perseverance, 
following the attainment of the objectives of the Islamic system 
as this great person [Khomeyni] has delineated for us in the 
lessons by our great imam and as embodied in his will. This is 
the path of this nation. My dear brothers and sisters all over 
the country should heed the fact that the path to the happiness 
of the Iranian nation is to have recourse to Islamic and divine 
injunctions. 
  The path to the happiness of the Iranian nation is through 
reliance on the nation itself, its capabilities, and aptitudes. 
The road to the prosperity of this nation lies in severing all 
hopes from the domineering powers of the world and in not 
fearing these powers. Do not be afraid of them in the slightest 
and do not expect anything at all from them, even anything as 
tiny as the point of a needle. 
  My dear ones, the greatest gift given by the Islamic 
Revolution to this nation is that it has removed the evil of the 
corrupt and servile governments who for many years had imposed 
themselves on this country, this nation and these bounties of 
God. Today, with the blessings of the Almighty, the 
administrators of this country are the people themselves. 
Today, with the vigilance and endeavors of these people, the 
best form of popular government in accordance with the will of 
the people exists in this country. 
  Of course, the enemy denies this in his propaganda and this 
is how it should be. What else can we expect from the enemy! 
Here, the people elect an individual in accordance with their 
beliefs, their own criteria, Islamic criteria, for administering 
the country's executive matters, for legislation and guidance of 
the executive officials, with the ultimate freedom, reliance on 
faith and this is what is exceptional. If, in the well-known 
democratic countries in today's world, differences between 
factions, disputes among parties, and political tussles are the 
motivation behind elections, in this Islamic country, in the 
proud and honorable country of Iran, voting is carried out 
solely for the sake of faith and the recognition of divine 
values. This is what is worthwhile and important and this is 
what there is today. 
  In the whole world, I do not know of any place where there 
is 
a bond of affection, a rapport from the heart between the nation 
and the officials as is the case in Iran. The nation loves the 
officials and the officials love the nation with all their being 
and consider themselves to be at their service. This nation has 
such sentiments regardless of what the enemy's propaganda says. 
[passage omitted] 
  As the last sentence of my remarks, I wish to say that the 
Iranian nation and the officials should preserve these traits 
with all their power and being. [chants of God is great! other 
indiscernible chants]. The government and the people should 
safeguard the path of God, the path of Islam. The officials 
should not forget the people even for a second. In the great 
movement toward our reconstruction program, the underprivileged 
should be given intensive attention. The Islamic Majles should 
pass the laws, the government will implement them and the 
Judiciary will oversee the implementation of these laws with all 
its being. The nation will tread this path with all its 
strength and valor. This is the path of Islam, the Koran, of 
the religion of God, and the path that the great imam blazed for 
us. [passage omitted] 

