Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] President Suleyman Demirel, who has concluded his 
official visit to Romania as the guest of Romanian President Ion 
Iliescu, has returned to Turkey. At Ankara Esenboga Airport, 
Demirel was received by Assembly Speaker Husamettin Cindoruk 
with ceremony. Chief of Staff General Dogan Gures, State 
Minister Aykon Dogan, and other officials were present at the 
ceremony. 
  In a statement at Esenboga Airport, Demirel said that his 
contacts in Romania had been very beneficial. Assessing 
bilateral relations in his airport statement, Demirel said the 
following: 
  The absence of any conflicts between our countries and the 
feelings of sincerity between the two peoples have constituted 
the sound foundation of our developing relations in all fields. 
With such an understanding we have discussed, in the political 
field, regional problems and international issues concerning 
both countries. We have dwelled on what Turkey and Romania, as 
two great and important countries of the region, might 
contribute to achieve peace and stability in the Balkans and the 
Black Sea region. Demirel continued: In the economic field we 
share the view that the two countries can increase their trade 
volume to $2 billion in a short period. We have also decided to 
encourage mutual investments. To achieve that end we agreed that 
work will be speeded up to conclude a free trade agreement. 
Turkey and Romania will jointly benefit from the free trade 
zone existing and to be expanded in the two countries. The $75 
million Eximbank loan Turkey has extended to Romania will be 
activated. We also envisage establishing cultural centers in 
Istanbul and Constantsa. 
  Demirel said that they were deeply touched by the great 
affection and hospitality shown to the Turkish delegation in 
Romania and added: No doubt, this great honor paid to us is 
directed toward our country and our people. He noted that 
relations with Romania have attained a considerable impetus as a 
result of the contacts made with Iliescu in the last few years. 
Demirel stated that his visit once more confirmed the strength 
of the political will necessary to develop bilateral relations 
in all fields. He concluded by saying: I would like to stress 
that my visit was most beneficial and timely within the 
framework of the continuing crises in our region and the rapidly 
changing conditions. 
  Foreign Minister Hikmet Cetin returned to Turkey together 
with Demirel. 

