CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Huynh Cong Hoa, vice minister of marine products] </F>
  [Text] Our country's seas have a rich and varied nature. 
For generations, the ocean has supplied our people with valuable 
items. "Golden forests and silver oceans" is an old saying of 
our people and a generalization about the rich nature of our 
country. Ocean resources in general and marine products in 
particular have always played an important role in the national 
economy and been viewed as one of Vietnam's leading economic 
sectors. Thus, exploiting, protecting, and developing our marine 
resources in conjunction with defending our national sovereignty 
at sea is extremely important both economically and politically 
and with respect to national defense and security. This is a 
large and complex problem. It is the task of the entire country, 
which includes the marine products sector. In this article, we 
will mention only a number of problems so that readers can study 
them. 
  1. A number of natural characteristics and the marine 
products potential of Vietnam. 
  Vietnam's coastline runs for 3,260 km, passing though 13 
latitudes from north to south. The ratio of the mainland 
coastline to the mainland area is rather high: 1 km:100 square 
km. The world average is only 1:600. Our country's various 
coastal areas differ greatly in terms of climate, weather, and 
hydrologic and crop systems. Our string of islands consists of 
approximately 4,000 large and small islands, which includes two 
large archipelagoes, the Hoang Sa and Truong Sa [Spratly] 
islands. There are many coral reef areas and many bays and 
inlets that provide good conditions for many types of marine 
products to live, grow, and reproduce. 
  The monsoons and the geography of the East Sea have formed a 
special ocean current system that reverses direction in accord 
with the two monsoon winds, that is, the northeasterly monsoon 
in the cold season and the southwesterly monsoon in the hot 
season. The coastal tides are very complex, because they are 
controlled by both the terrain and the ocean bottom. The area 
near the shore of the Gulf of Tonkin has a typical solar tidal 
system. The Thuan An (Hue) seaport area has an irregular 
semi-solar tidal system. Other areas have mixed tidal systems. 
The amplitude of the tides differs from one area to the next. 
The depths of the coastal areas vary greatly. Every year, there 
is an average of 9-12 typhoons in the East Sea and approximately 
30-35 northeasterly monsoon winds that influence mainly the 
northern and central provinces. 
  The above characteristics exert an important influence on 
the 
distribution of the marine products and on the harvesting and 
protection seasons. 
  On marine products: Based on many survey and research 
projects, Vietnam's marine products reserves have been estimated 
at approximately 3-3.5 million tons. Approximately 1.2-1.4 
millions tons a year can be harvested. Our country's marine 
products are rich and varied, and to date we have identified 
only about 2,000 species of fish belonging to many different 
families and orders. There are 1,600 species of crustacea, which 
includes about 70 species of shrimp. There are about 2,500 
species of molluscs and more than 600 species of seaweed. 
Besides this, Vietnam's seas also have many types of marine 
products of high economic value such as sea slugs, hydrophiidae, 
abalone, clams, rays, sea turtles, sea animals, and oysters. 
  Based on the different geological, climatic, and hydrologic 
conditions and different biological systems, our seas can be 
divided into four main zones: the Gulf of Tonkin, the central 
sea, the eastern Nam Bo sea, and the western Nam Bo sea. 
  2. The situation in exploiting marine products and security 
in Vietnamese waters. 
  As for the situation in exploiting marine products in 
Vietnamese sea areas, our country's fishing industry is a 
people's industry that is presently carried on mainly near the 
shore. We have approximately 68,000 ships and boats, about 80 
percent of which have been equipped with motors with a total 
capacity of almost 1 million horsepower. Of these, about 80-90 
percent are of small size of 40 CV or less. The harvesting 
industry is composed of 6 groups with more than 40 types, with 
the most widespread being dragnet fishing, encirclement, draw 
fishing, hook fishing, and seabed basket fishing. There are more 
than 300,000 fishermen and more than 500,000 people engaged in 
processing and rear service activities to support the fishing 
industry. 
  During the 10-year period 1982-1992, the country's gross 
production of marine products increased every year. In 1992 
production reached 721,681 tons, and in 1993 production is 
expected to reach 793,324 tons. In general, production has 
increased every year, but the new requirement is that quantities 
must increase constantly and, at the same time, the sources must 
be protected so that we can exploit these sources long into the 
future. Fishing activities today are concentrated mainly in 
coastal areas from a depth of 35 meters or less and to the 
maximum depth permitted (with bottom and surface fish). 
Approximately 80-90 percent of the fishing activities are 
carried on in this area. Thus, activities aimed at increasing 
fishing yields are being carried on mainly in depths of 50 
meters or more, particularly in deep-sea areas. Catches of 
surface fish can increase to 160,000 tons a year. 
  Today, the fishing industry is confronted by the reality 
that 
a high percentage of the marine products caught are not yet 
fully mature when caught. This is particularly true for shrimp, 
a number of species of fish, and mollusca having export value. 
This is a danger that must be dealt with promptly; otherwise, a 
number of valuable species such as groupers, lobsters, and 
"diep" face the threat of extinction. Along with this, there is 
the use of inefficient fishing techniques and tools. In 
particular, explosives are used to extract and kill many species 
of marine products, which destroys the ecological conditions and 
changes the growth and reproduction environments of the various 
species of marine products. In just 1992 and 1993, more than 600 
cases were tried involving more than 700 boats that used 
explosives to catch marine products, and [officials] seized 
7,685 kg of explosives, 544 mines, 14,884 detonators, and 1,046 
meters of slow-burning fuses. Environmental pollution is 
increasing because of industrial waste, waste matter emitted by 
ships at sea, and waste matter released by the oil and gas 
drilling platforms. Together with the destruction of the 
headwater forests, mangrove swamps, underground reefs, coral 
zones, and so on, this has had a great effect on the sources of 
marine products. Thus, the important and pressing problem today 
is to tie exploiting the marine products with protecting the 
marine product sources and protecting the environment. This is 
the only way to ensure an increase in productivity and yields 
and keep from exhausting our country's valuable marine products 
and ocean environment. 
  Concerning security at sea, to date, it can be said that few 
of our country's sea areas, particularly areas in our 
territorial waters and special economic zones, have been fully 
exploited. In recent years, disputes over sea areas and islands 
have been very complex, and this will continue to be the cause 
in the future. This is the case in two main areas, the 
northeastern sea and the southwestern sea. 
  In the Gulf of Tonkin, the Truong Sa [Spratly] Islands, and 
the Bai Tu Chinh area, many boats and ships of various types 
(fishing boats, warships, seismology ships, ocean survey ships, 
and so on) from various countries have regularly operated 
illegally, with the average being 20-80 ships a day. The 
situation in the southwestern coastal area is also very complex. 
  Foreign ships entering our territorial waters, illegally 
extracting marine products, and engaging in various activities 
for a variety of reasons is a very serious situation. Each year, 
foreign fishing boats illegally catch more than 1 million tons 
of fish in our waters, which is more than we catch. Also, many 
foreign ships illegally survey our sea areas, cause 
provocations, and threaten the safety of our oil and gas 
exploration and extraction activities. They also seize 
Vietnamese ships operating and fishing in Vietnamese waters. In 
1993 alone, foreign ships seized 152 Vietnamese boats and 249 
fishermen and 29 ships belonging to the Ministry of 
Communications and transportation and the Ministry of Marine 
Products. 
  The above situation is posing a serious threat to the 
peaceful working life of our people, threatening our security, 
and encroaching on our national sovereignty at sea. 
  3. Exploiting the marine products in conjunction with 
maintaining the security and sovereignty of the state in the 
East Sea. 
  From the actual activities of the marine products sector, we 
can see that the presence of Vietnamese fishing boats at sea, 
particularly on the open seas and at remote islands, has 
contributed to discovering, expelling, and seizing foreign 
ships, blocking their illegal activities in our territorial 
waters, and protecting the sovereignty and manifesting our 
ownership in the fatherland's sea areas. In past years, many 
local and central fishing units that have worked together in 
catching marine products have participated in discovering and 
expelling foreign fishing boats and a number of foreign boats 
conducting seismological surveys in the East Sea by "throwing 
nets" fore and aft or surrounding the foreign ship, which has 
had the effect of blocking or slowing the speed of the enemy and 
enabling border defense forces and naval forces to deal with the 
situation promptly and force them to withdraw. Naval groups and 
fishing fleets of the Kien Giang and Minh Hai provincial marine 
products sectors have carried on fishing activities and dealt 
directly with threats by enemy ships. They have also expelled 
and seized foreign boats that have encroached on our territorial 
waters. They have closely coordinated carrying on production 
activities with protecting production and maintaining security 
and national sovereignty at sea. 
  The policy of having people go to live and work on the 
islands having the necessary conditions is a good way to tie the 
work of catching and processing marine products to the task of 
protecting our sovereignty and security at sea. On the Chau 
island in Kien Giang Province, the policy is to provide help so 
that every fishing household can borrow money and to allocate 20 
million dong to build houses on the islands and buy boats. The 
fishermen there have responded positively to this policy. On the 
other hand, the infantry forces on the islands have implemented 
many positive measures to help the people build schools and 
medical aid stations and enable them to carry on production with 
peace of mind and become masters on the islands and at sea. 
Haiphong has a policy of encouraging fishermen to establish 
enterprises on a number of islands in the Gulf of Tonkin in 
order to carry on fishing activities. The Ministry of Marine 
Products has plans to invest in the material and technical base 
in conjunction with taking credit loans and borrowing money from 
abroad at a low or favorable rate of interest in order to build 
marine products processing installations and repair 
installations and to buy boats, ships, and other means 
(approximately 100-120 boats a year of 100CV or more). In 1993, 
on a number of islands, there were programs concerning 
investment capital. Based on the plans to expand the fishing 
industry in conjunction with the program to move people to key 
areas and islands, along with building marine products 
production installations, attention must be given to developing 
the cultural, social, communications, and information bases in 
order to stabilize the lives of the people, enable them to 
produce with their minds at ease, and protect our national 
sovereignty at sea and on the islands. 
  In conjunction with naval and other forces, the Ministry of 
Marine Products must organize things to bring fishing fleets to 
a number of important sea areas (such as the Truong Sa Islands) 
in order to protect the fishing grounds and ocean resources. 
What is even more important is that we must constantly have 
fishing forces in those places that are ready to coordinate with 
the Ministry of Marine Products in order to manifest our 
sovereignty and protect our national sovereignty at sea. 
  In order to maintain large fishing forces on the open seas 
and in remote ocean areas, the Ministry of Marine Products and 
the coastal localities must regularly organize things to enable 
the fishermen to take long-term loans (10 years), medium-term 
loans (5 years), and short-term loans (1-2 years) at a low rate 
of interest to build large boats and purchase fishing gear and 
have high productivity. At the same time, rear services and 
other services and product storage must be organized well so 
that the fishermen can carry on production in remote sea areas 
for longer periods. In 1993, fishermen on Phu Quy Island in Binh 
Thuan assembled a 55-boat fishing fleet, caught marine products 
in the Truong Sa area, and earned revenues of more than 3 
billion dong. This is a good example from which other localities 
can gain experience. To ensure that the people stick close to 
the remote fishing grounds, particularly those in important sea 
areas, besides the investments by the state and marine products 
sector in materials and techniques, naval and border defense 
forces must guide things closely, organize things efficiently, 
provide support, and provide protection so that fishermen can 
produce with their minds at ease. 
  The naval forces must also organize flotillas to make 
patrols 
and provide protection and also to catch marine products and 
provide services far out at sea. They must coordinate things 
with the fishing forces of the localities and marine products 
sector and create a broad fishing line on the open seas. Only in 
this way will results be achieved in protecting and exploiting 
our sea resources and defending our national sovereignty at sea. 
  The ocean fishing forces require centralized and unified 
guidance. There must be plans to organize and protect 
production. Every fishing group must carry out the fishing tasks 
and also help defend and manifest Vietnam's sovereignty in 
remote sea areas. Attention must be given to applying the 
experiences of the fishermen in order to formulate production 
plans and protect production. Plans must be formulated to 
coordinate things closely between the armed forces and the 
production forces at sea. The ocean lines of defense and the 
all-people's national defense and people's security front at sea 
must be solidified. Stability and safety must be maintained for 
economic activities at sea. International laws of the sea must 
be obeyed strictly, our national sovereignty at sea must be 
defended resolutely, and peace and stability in the East Sea 
must be maintained. 
  In order to carry out the tasks of exploiting, protecting, 
and developing the marine product resources along with defending 
the sovereignty of our state in the East Sea firmly, we would 
like to make a number of proposals: 
  1. Intensive propaganda and education activities must be 
strengthened for all strata of people, particularly for leading 
and managerial cadres, so that they clearly understand both 
international and domestic laws on the sea and have a deep 
understanding concerning national sovereignty at sea, on the 
islands, and on the continental shelf. Within this is the 
problem of exploiting and protecting our sources of marine 
products along with defending Vietnam's sovereignty in the East 
Sea. 
  2. The state should soon formulate a policy giving priority 
to investing in ocean marine products research programs in order 
to have a basis for making forecasts, guiding fishing 
activities, and effectively protecting the sources. 
  Investments in technical means and equipment and information 
must be increased for the forces engaged in protecting our 
sources of marine products in order to coordinate things with 
the naval and border defense forces in controlling the 
activities of the ships at sea. 
  4. Procedures and policies must be implemented to encourage 
fishermen to exploit the open seas and settle and work on the 
islands (give priority to them in making loans, give initial tax 
exemptions, build bridges and ports, and formulate cultural and 
social policies and procedures). 
  5. We should expand international cooperation, particularly 
with other countries in the region, concerning fishing on the 
open seas and cooperate in surveying ocean marine product 
sources and in obtaining and storing products. 

