Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Zhou Guangzhou (0719 0342 0664), </F>
president of the Chinese Academy of Science, by staff reporter 
Tang Hua (3282 5478): "The Development of Science in China in 
the Next Century"] 
  [Text] The development model set down for the Chinese 
Academy of Science (CAS) as it prepares to move into the next 
century is as follows: "A council made up of fellows elected 
from the ranks of China's most outstanding scientists; a group 
of scientific research centers, institutes, and engineering 
(technology) research centers which are up to international 
standards and have close ties with society at large; and 
surrounded by modern high-tech enterprises (groups) where CAS 
has partial or controlling shares and which have close ties with 
the academy in such areas as manpower, information, research 
achievements, and funds." 
  At the end of January, CAS held its annual work conference 
in 
Beijing to plan further reform and development for the year 
1994. CAS President Zhou Guangzhao, who had just returned from 
his Taiwan trip to chair the meeting, gave LIAOWANG an exclusive 
interview. During the interview, he spoke of what model the CAS 
should adopt in order to abolish the operational practices of 
the planned economy era, how the CAS should actively and 
steadily make the transition to a modern scientific research and 
development structure, and how it will make use of its new 
overall superiorities to fulfill the important work which the 
state and the nation have assigned to it. 
  Zhou Guangzhao emphasized that the development objective of 
CAS is "to become a base of international advanced standards 
which struggles along the frontiers of science; to become a base 
for training top-level scientific and technological personnel; 
and to become a base for promoting the formation and development 
of new- and high-tech industries." 
<H6>  I. </H6>
  Zhou Guangzhao has always stressed the importance of making 
observations from the plane of the latest ideas ideas science. 
This time, he also paid particular attention to the latest 
scientific, technological, social, and economic trends when 
deliberating on the reform and development of CAS. 
  Zhou Guangzhao said retrospectively: The invention of 
semiconductors and microelectrons opened a new electronic era 
after World War Two. A variety of high-quality and 
multi-function electronic products, which met the needs of 
consumers at different levels, have made their way into homes 
and offices, changing people's life-styles and work styles. 
During this period, that which created the highest labor 
productivity was no longer workers who controlled machines, or 
American-style centralized command systems, but the Japanese 
system of worker participation in innovation which stressed 
coordination. 
  Today, with the introduction of computerized automation and 
production systems, and the popularization of satellite and 
optical fiber communication facilities, production of diverse 
varieties in small quantities at a low cost has become a 
widespread practice. This calls for rapid acquisition and 
handling of large quantities of information as well as a 
flexible and swift response. Big companies with tight-knit but 
unwieldy organizational setups are no longer suited to this 
change, which has been caused by scientific and technological 
development, and a process of reorganization has begun. 
  Zhou Guangzhao mentioned two opposite yet complementary 
trends: On the one hand, there has been a strengthening of the 
overall order. Modern scientific and technological development 
has created more effective means for better planned management 
and supervision. For example, the introduction of electronic 
equipment and facilities in banking, financial, and taxation 
organs makes it possible to control, in a timely fashion, the 
circulation of money in the whole society, halt speculation and 
tax evasion, and check inflation and price raises. The remote 
monitoring of energy, material, and manpower supplies as well as 
natural disasters to prevent possible trouble, has also become a 
possibility. These have turned the society into a more ordered 
and coordinated system. 
  On the other hand, there has been a development of local 
autonomy. The rapid conversion of scientific and technological 
achievements and the diversification of market demands, have 
brought about intensified competition and uneven development. 
The more technology is made use of in our work and everyday 
life, the greater will be the demand on people's knowledge and 
ability. The vitality of a unit is reflected through the 
initiative and creativity of its members. The decentralization 
of power, the streamlining of management hierarchies, and the 
promotion of continuing education aimed at improving the quality 
of laborers and arousing the enthusiasm of individuals, have 
become a world trend. 
  Regarding the influence of, and example set by, CAS in these 
respects, Zhou Guangzhao said: In an open market economy, 
scientific research units must engage in competition on a world 
scale. A research unit without vitality will be eliminated. 
Units that have vitality but work on their own will also meet 
the same fate because their forces will be dispersed or will be 
offset by others and cannot be strengthened. Only by correctly 
formulating development strategies in accordance with the actual 
conditions of our institutes, academy, and country; properly 
organizing our ranks; concentrating our strength on the most 
important and fastest developing frontiers of science, as well 
as on projects that have a vital bearing on the national 
economy; and by creating an overall strength and superiority and 
launching several major assaults which will have a major impact 
on scientific and technological development, will we have the 
opportunity to develop further. Thus, we can understand that 
the structural readjustment now underway in the CAS is 
definitely not a short-term contingency measure aimed at tiding 
over current difficulties. 
<H5>  II. </H5>
  Zhou Guangzhao disclosed that the CAS has a three-step 
strategy: The first step, which covers the last two years of the 
"Eighth Five-Year Plan," is to accelerate the structural 
readjustment of disciplines, manpower, organization, and 
operational mechanisms, concentrating a superior force on 
several major assaults. The second step, which covers the 
period of the "Ninth Five-Year Plan," is to further improve the 
structure, bring about a generational transfer in the ranks of 
key scientific researchers, achieve major successes in 
scientific research, develop a benign mechanism for the 
application of scientific and technological achievements, and 
support the entry of China's high-tech industry into the 
international market. The third step, which covers the first 
decade or two of the next century, is to ensure omnidirectional 
and rapid scientific research and development and join the world 
front ranks. 
  Zhou Guangzhao gave the following cool-headed analysis: The 
shortage of financial resources and outstanding young academic 
leaders is the biggest headache confronting CAS. However, there 
are also many opportunities and the deepening of reform is a 
favorable opportunity greeting the historic new development of 
CAS. 
  First, the demands of the state and society for science and 
technology will exceed any period in China's history. It is 
predicted that the need to sustain the development of the 
Chinese society during the "Ninth Five-Year Plan" and thereafter 
will compel the state to attach greater importance to long-term 
basic research. CAS is organizing people to analyze major 
problems which are likely to confront China's economic and 
social development over the next five to 10 years. By fully 
taking into account the possibilities and opportunities offered 
by the latest scientific and technological developments, it will 
be possible to secure better task and development opportunities 
during the "Ninth Five-Year Plan." 
  Second, a standardized market economy essentially refers to 
a 
fine environment where the productive forces of science and 
technology have been fully emancipated. Following 
implementation of the "Decision on Several Problems Concerning 
the Establishment of the Socialist Market Economic Structure," 
the work of integrating science and technology with the economy 
will receive more support and see a better external environment. 
  Third, CAS scientific and technological personnel have the 
fine tradition of dedicating themselves to the cause of China's 
science and technology and have years of experience in reform 
and opening up. Among the more than 50,000 CAS scientific and 
technological personnel, nearly two-thirds are under 45 years of 
age. While continuing to bring into play the role of 
middle-aged backbone cadres, it is necessary to give outstanding 
young cadres the heavy responsibility of taking charge of 
first-line research and development tasks. In this way, it will 
be possible to speed up the gradual takeover of key scientific 
research posts by outstanding young scientists in the next few 
years. 
<H6>  III. </H6>
  The implementation of structural readjustment is a 
pioneering 
move taken by CAS in China's scientific and technological 
circles. When asked how it came about, Zhou Guangzhao said that 
it was a decision made by CAS in the summer of 1993. Reforms 
undertaken by CAS over the past 10 years and more were basically 
functional reforms carried out on the basis of the old 
structure. In other words, they were no more than readjustments 
of the functions of various research institutes within the old 
framework. In mid-1992, CAS began a comprehensive reform 
program embracing scientific research, development, and various 
support systems. The fact that these reforms increasingly 
touched on deep structural problems made structural readjustment 
imperative. 
  Zhou Guangzhao said: The structural readjustment in CAS 
mainly involves the orientation of various disciplines and the 
establishment of research institutions, the contingent of 
scientific and technological personnel, and various support 
systems. 
  The "Ninth Five-Year Plan" scientific and technological 
development program for CAS as it prepares for the 21st century, 
will be the guideline for the readjustment of the disciplinary 
structure and the establishment of research institutions. 
According to Zhou Guangzhao, since this is the first program to 
prepare CAS for the transition to the new economic structure, it 
is necessary to scientifically predict the economic and social 
development conditions and the scientific and technological 
demands which are likely to prevail in the early part of the 
next century; fully understand the role and impact of the market 
economy; analyze the trends and advances of scientific and 
technological development in the international arena in the next 
10 to 20 years; and attach importance to personnel training and 
development. 
  Zhou Guangzhao then went on to talk about new 
deployments by CAS for basic research 
  1. Priorities for basic research in the academy have been 
set down and the orientation and arrangement of disciplines have 
been readjusted to muster the limited manpower and material 
resources behind those areas which are fast developing in 
international scientific circles and in which we have already 
established basic capacities, as well as exploratory spheres 
which have major strategic significance for economic 
construction and social development. Arrangements have also 
been made for those areas of frontier science which are 
developing rapidly internationally and are of great significance 
but which do not yet have the basic capacity. 
  2. Modern comprehensive scientific research centers will be 
organized for some of the fast-developing and important 
interdisciplinary subjects to make up for the shortage of 
research facilities and open laboratories which were basically 
established for the use of individual disciplines in the past. 
These centers will be headed by accomplished scientists and 
will have post- doctoral scholars and doctoral candidates as 
their main researchers. These positions will be advertised both 
locally and internationally and appointments will be offered for 
fixed terms. The centers will work closely with related 
research institutes, offices, and sections. 
  CAS has decided to open two such centers this year. One is 
the Shanghai Life Scienec Research Center which will operate on 
the basis of various biological institutes in Shanghai and will 
bring research forces from chemical, physical, and technological 
science under one roof. The other will be the Modern Earth 
Science Research Center to be set up by revamping the Institute 
of Geophysics, which will work closely with international bodies. 
  3. While undertaking projects under the state's 
Scaling-the-Peak Program and other major foundations, 
appropriate steps will be taken to organize and give all-out 
support to major projects on life science and other areas in 
which CAS has an advantageous edge and which are developing 
rapidly. A given proportion of elective topics will be 
preserved. 
  4. A number of large-scale scientific installation projects 
within our national capabilities will be selected and 
recommended to the state so that appropriate deployments can be 
made during the "Ninth Five-Year Plan." These projects should 
be ones which can stimulate significant technological progress, 
are likely to reach international advanced standards, and 
produce an impact. 
  5. Cooperation with other institutions of higher learning 
will be strengthened through such means as the mutual offering 
of part- time positions, joint training of postgraduate 
students, and cooperation in the establishment of research 
centers. More substantial cooperation with institutions engaged 
in similar research abroad will be encouraged and efforts will 
be made to cooperate in the establishment of laboratories and 
research centers. 
<H6>  IV. </H6>
  Of the main battle-front of economic and social services, 
Zhou Guangzhao said: On the basis of research carried out in 
past years, and bearing in mind the long-term needs of national 
construction, CAS has decided to organize several major 
"assaults" using the new mechanism. With the support of 
relevant research institutes, CAS will practice systems 
integration by establishing several engineering (technology) 
headquarters. These bodies will have the ability for 
organizational coordination, can assume overall responsibility 
for major tasks, and will be run on the basis of the market 
mechanism. 
  Zhou Guangzhao also briefed this reporter on major projects 
involving a number of institutes which CAS will start preparing 
this year and will submit to the state for inclusion in the 
"Ninth Five-Year Plan": 
  Coal purification, combustion and conversion. Since the 
early 1980's, five or six institutes under CAS have been engaged 
in research on technologies aimed at raising combustion 
efficiency, reducing pollution, and developing coal processing, 
combustion, and conversion, achieving some successes. In these 
areas, the necessary conditions exist for putting the research 
achievements into industrial application. 
  The harnessing and coordinated economic development of the 
red earth undulating hills of South China. The undulating hills 
of South China make up one-fifth of China's total land area and 
most of these are poverty-stricken areas which urgently need 
opening up. Having previously done research and developed new 
technologies in such areas as comprehensive planning, soil, 
species, fertilizers, resource processing, environmental 
protection, and ecological restoration, and with its experience 
in the comprehensive harnessing of the Huanghe-Huaihai region, 
it is high time that CAS began this "assault." 
  The comprehensive exploitation and utilization of rare earth 
resources. China has not yet developed the technologies for the 
purification and ultrafine powdering of rare earth, and has not 
yet made much of a breakthrough in the application of high 
technologies and new materials. With its multidisciplinary 
strength, CAS should be in a position to organize a superior 
force and develop China's own technologies and industries using 
rare-earth luminescent materials, battery materials, and 
magnetic materials. 
  Information technology. CAS and related organs have already 
built up an excellent research force and capability in such 
areas of information technology as computers, automated systems, 
and optical-mechanical-electrical devices. For example, it has 
two microelectronic bases, one in the north and the other in the 
south, and has successfully developed the "Shuguang-I" parallel 
processor which is up to international standards of the early 
1990's. CAS must organize its strength to study its own 
development strategies and speed up development. 
  Zhou Guangzhao said that high-tech enterprises under CAS 
must 
practice standardized management under the modern enterprise 
system. On the basis of sorting out property relations, steps 
must be taken to define the relations between the institutes and 
enterprises in accordance with law. The joint-stock system 
should be instituted in all types of enterprises, with the 
majority of them being turned into limited liability companies. 
  Zhou Guangzhao disclosed that CAS will start a project this 
spring to train and select leaders who will lead various 
disciplines into the next century. At the same time, more 
post-doctoral scholars, postgraduate students, and postgraduate 
students who are doing both their masters and doctoral programs 
will be recruited. Subsidies for postgraduate students will 
gradually be replaced by scholarships and more grants will be 
issued. These postgraduate scholars and postgraduate students 
will be assigned to research programs and regarded as part of 
the mobile workforce of various institutes. Those students on 
masters degree and doctoral programs who demonstrate academic 
excellence and are engaged in part-time research should be 
rewarded as research trainees and assistant researchers 
respectively. He emphasized that CAS must truly become a place 
which trains and provides top grade scientific and technological 
personnel for the state. 

