BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chan Wai-Fong in Shenzhen] </F>
  [Text] Ousted Communist Party chief Zhao Ziyang has been 
given unexpected prominence in a photographic exhibition on tour 
in Guangdong. The former party general-secretary, 74, appeared 
in at least five photos among the 520 shown in the Deng Xiaoping 
Photograph Exhibition which opened in Shenzhen yesterday. 
  One well-displayed picture showed him working side-by-side 
with patriarch Deng Xiaoping and the late party chief Hu Yaobang 
in the 1980's when Mr Deng's theory of "socialism with Chinese 
characteristics" was put forward. 
  There were also pictures of Mr Zhao on historical occasions, 
like the signing of the Sino-British and Sino-Portuguese Joint 
Declarations, in which Mr Deng also participated. 
  Photos of Mr Zhao, Mr Hu and other controversial figures in 
the Communist Party's political movements, like Gao Gan amazed 
the thousands who flocked to the Shenzhen Exhibition Hall at the 
start of the week-long show. Zou Qiyu, director of the 
Information Office of the Guangdong Provincial Government, said 
that to respect history and to be loyal to facts was one of the 
guiding principles of the exhibition. "Many of the historical 
personalities appear in the way history has taken place," Mr Zou 
said. 
  Analysts in Guangdong said Mr Zhao, a former party boss of 
the province, still had a large following there. Perhaps 
mindful of this the leadership has repeatedly denied requests by 
Mr Zhao, now re-located to Chengdu, Sichuan Province, to visit 
the province, 
  Many of the old comrades-in-arms who fought alongside Mr 
Deng 
during the liberation warfare and during the 1950's were given 
pride of place, dwarfing the current powers-that-be. 
  While a number of relatively liberal politicians, such as 
former president Yang Shangkun, were shown in central positions 
in a number of pictures, Premier Li Peng appeared only once, 
among party leaders in a group photo taken about two years ago. 
  Mr Zou said about 40 per cent of the pictures had not been 
published before. Most of these were taken on Mr Deng's visits 
to Guangdong in the past decade and particularly in early 1992. 
  Co-organised by Shenzhen and the Guangdong Provincial 
Government and party committees, the exhibition is understood to 
be the largest of its kind about the patriarch. 
  Apart from Mr Deng's life-long involvement with China and 
the 
Chinese Communist Party, a large section is devoted to Mr Deng 
in Guangdong. There is a special section on him as a humorous 
and active private citizen who enjoys life, particularly family 
life. 
  Mr Zou dismissed claims that the show would help boost Mr 
Deng's personality cult, which the elderly leader has repeatedly 
denounced. "We only want to help people understand and 
comprehend better comrade Deng's theory of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics and to promote the learning of 
Deng's Selected Works," he said. He added that "responsible 
departments" in Beijing had given their approval. 
  Tang Yongbin, a Shenzhen worker, said the exhibition was 
significant now that economic reform "had reached a rather 
critical stage." He did not think the show would promote Mr 
Deng's personality cult. 
  Another visitor said the exhibition was only to commemorate 
Mr Deng's visit to Shenzhen and Guangdong. "Many of the 
pictures taken during his visit then had not been shown before. 
But now there is little disagreement over the introduction of 
market economy the showing of these pictures carries no 
particular significance," he said. 
  After touring the province, the exhibition will travel to 
Hong Kong and other cities in the West. 

