Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by S. Fedorova: "A Number of Questions After the </F>
Poll"] 
  [Text] The sociological survey, on which the agrarians 
insisted so much, has taken place and, as expected, it has 
confirmed the policy being conducted by the leadership of the 
Republic, which aimed at strengthening its independence. 
  In spite of the fact that only one question was asked, given 
its sphere of influence, it embraced the most important problems 
facing the state. The first thing to be clarified was how the 
population viewed the status of the Republic remaining what it 
was before. Those favoring the idea of unification with Romania 
had no choice but to give a negative response. The Republic's 
inhabitants also had to confirm its unity and territorial 
integrity within the framework recognized by the United Nations. 
This part established in general the permissible limit beyond 
which there should be no more talk about the status of the two 
regions -- the Gaugaz south and the Dneister region. The answer 
"yes" in this connection signifies the following: The forms of 
autonomies or other types of formations for the eastern and 
southern regions can be of any kind provided the principle of 
the unity and territorial integrity of Moldova is observed. 
  One other detail: In asking citizens whether they agree that 
Moldova should develop ties with any states, the authors of the 
poll were, to all intents and purposes, preparing the ground for 
the ratification by parliament of the CIS agreement. As is 
known, a year ago, in spite of the support of the majority, this 
question was blocked by the small Popular Front faction. This 
was an awkward moment and it was soon followed by the decision 
of the legislative assembly to dissolve itself. 
  Judging from the results of the elections, two-thirds of the 
new corps of deputies is united. At least regarding important 
decisions, one can count on the unity of views of the healthy 
rational majority. The poll that was carried out represents 
that reference point from which this majority can proceed, 
adopting laws that will subsequently form the basis of the new 
constitution. 
  The Gagauz again demonstrated the greatest activity. This is 
not surprising given that the poll focused on the future status 
of Moldova. Moreover, the results of the elections and the 
discarded slogans about unity radically changed the attitude of 
the native inhabitants of Moldova to the possibility of the 
Republic moving beyond the Prut River. There was also a change 
in attitude toward such a concept as the unity of one Romanian 
nation. With the arrival in power of the Agrarian Democratic 
Party, the basic principles of its program have essentially been 
established in the republic. Moldova is an independent state, 
the people living there are called Moldovans, and the state 
language is Moldovan. In principle, this was first sounded at 
the official level at the general civil congress "Our Home: The 
Republic of Moldova." 
  Disassociating itself from the idea of unification with 
Romania, the Republic's leadership came under sharp and negative 
criticism from the Bucharest press and Romania's political 
parties. True, according to M. Snegur, official Bucharest 
silently ignored the change in Moldova's political course. The 
Moldovan intelligentsia reacted to the criticism by lodging an 
official protest with the United Nations. In the letter signed 
by a group of scientists and cultural figures, it was pointed 
out: "Resolute condemnation of the insulting, even aggressive 
attitude of one UN member -- Romania -- toward another UN member 
-- the Republic of Moldova -- forms the essence of the protest." 
It is pointed out in the document that "the idea is alive in 
Moldova -- and is growing every day -- of the restoration of the 
unity of the Moldovan ethnic group and the status quo of the 
Moldovan principality" within its old historical borders. 
  Therefore, the poll as well as the results of the 
parliamentary elections are a platform for radical changes in 
Moldova. Having brought to an end discussions on possible 
unification with Romania, the Republic's leadership and its 
leading political parties will try to resolve one of the main 
problems -- the consolidation of the state and the achievement 
of civic accord in society. Therefore, as the president 
promised, one of the first bills to appear on the agenda of the 
first session [of parliament] will be that regulating relations 
between Chisinau and Comrat. Work will begin on elaborating the 
status of the eastern regions. Following the implementation of 
these documents, it will be possible to tackle the issues of the 
reestablishment of a single budget and a single monetary unit. 
  It is difficult to forecast in what way and in what form the 
status promised to the Dneister region will be conferred. 
However, if one takes into account that the recommendations of 
the CSCE will form the basis of the agreement pertaining to this 
question, one can suppose that, at a specific stage in the 
negotiations, the sides will tackle the federative formula for 
the construction of the state. Although, today, the Republic's 
leadership, while offering the eastern region wide powers, 
including even the existence of its own legislative assembly, is 
trying to avoid any forms of an autonomous political formation 
that, in time, would lay claim to its joining Moldova as part of 
a federation. 
  The authorities in Tiraspol, while welcoming the appearance 
of the agrarians at the political summit, are nevertheless in no 
hurry to announce any possible concessions on their part. In a 
statement issued by the Tiraspol press service, it is pointed 
out that, as the overwhelming majority of the inhabitants of the 
left bank did not participate in the parliamentary elections and 
also distanced themselves from the nation-wide poll, this can be 
assessed as support on the part of the population for the idea 
of independent statehood in the region. 
  The Republic's leadership is hoping to find a common 
language 
with Tiraspol with the help of Russia, which recognizes the 
independence of Moldova and favors a reduction in its present 
borders. Moreover, the Dneister region is also counting on 
Russia, viewing it as a guarantor of the observance of the 
region's interests. 
  Apart from these already "chronic" problems, the new 
parliament, being guided by the results of the poll, will also 
have to examine the document on the inclusion of the Republic 
into the economic union. 
  There is one other plus: Having clearly indicated its course 
toward independence, the Republic can expect to receive 
attention from Western investors who, until now, have manifested 
caution that has been dictated by uncertainty regarding the 
preservation of Moldova's statehood and also by the unstable 
internal situation. 
  It is not only the isolated regions but also the 
Russian-speaking population on the right bank who link their 
hopes to the new parliament. Having voted for the agrarians and 
the socialists, they have a right to count on the resolution of 
the problems of the national minorities. There is, as yet, no 
corresponding law in the republic whereas the state language 
tests announced for March threaten to lead to mass dismissals of 
nonnative specialists. The Russian-speaking population 
supported the new parliament by taking part in the poll. It is 
now up to the deputies to take effective steps. 
  At a press conference held to discuss the results of the 
poll, the following statistics were made public: Of those who 
took part in the plebiscite on the given question, 95 percent 
gave a positive answer. The most active participation was noted 
in the south and in the northern regions of the Republic. This 
amounted to 98 percent in Oknitsa rayon. In 12 of the 43 
regions, more than 90 percent of eligible voters participated in 
the poll, while the turnout was more than 80 percent in 15 
regions. The most passive were the inhabitants of Ungheni, 
[name indistinct], Cahul, and Chisinau. 
  On 6 March, there were several attempts to blockade 
precincts 
where the poll was been conducted. In Cahul, law enforcement 
bodies were brought into action to restore order. 
  In the opinion of the republican commission, the MOLDOVA 
PRESS Agency did not show any interest in the event while the 
most objective information was disseminated by ROMPRESS. 
Incidentally, Romanian television used disinformation in its 
reports. 
  According to members of the commission, the results of the 
poll will form the basis of Moldova's new constitution. 

