CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Pinhas 'Inbari] </F>
  [Text] Reports from Cairo, that Israel and the PLO are 
close to signing an agreement on introduction of a Palestinian 
police force in Hebron along with an international force, for 
the most part have been welcomed in Israel, accompanied by the 
sense that a breakthrough has been made. Only in Hebron, the 
object of this joy, was the news greeted with skepticism. So far 
as can be determined, it seems that the Palestinian police will 
not be met with the celebrations that were held for returning 
prisoners. The rivers of blood shed by residents of the city 
during confrontations with settlers and clashes with the IDF 
[Israel Defense Forces], the continuing curfew and the dire 
economic situation are just one side of the terrible anguish 
that, in the wake of the slaughter in the Cave of Makhpela, is 
the legacy of these times. Yet it appears that the worst is 
still to come. Not only have they yet to pay the full price of 
the burden of life under the occupation with settlers 
malevolently close by, but they are also now threatened by the 
ugly specter of civil war. 
  Mustafa 'Abd A-nabi Natshe, Hebron's deposed mayor and one 
of 
PLO leader Yasir 'Arafat's prominent supporters, was very 
careful this week. Natshe, a candidate to return and take back 
leadership of the city, hinted without saying so outright that 
he prefers to operate by other means, without a police force. "I 
still do not know what the extent of my authority will be or how 
authority will be split between the city, Israel and the 
international force," he said cautiously. In any event, he hopes 
to work through political and civic means. The issue of 
settlement in Hebron must be the first item for discussion on 
the agenda. "Whenever a settler attacks a city resident, I will 
demand that Israel take action against him," he stressed. 
  Like the great majority of Hebron's inhabitants, Natshe 
blames Israel for creating an atmosphere inappropriate to the 
peace talks. For instance, the steps taken in the city center, 
closing it down to prevent friction between Hebronites and 
settlers, is choking the entire city. It is impossible, he says, 
that the settlers should commit a massacre and the residents 
have to pay the price. Contrary to reports about removal of the 
settlers, he adds, another four settler families entered the 
"Abraham our Father" zone immediately after the curfew was 
lifted. 
  Attorney Husayn a-Shyukhi is one of Hebron's leading 
political activists and known to be close to 'Arafat. Precisely 
for that reason, the positions openly expressed by someone of 
his standing have to set off red lights in Tunis. Says 
a-Shyukhi: "The massacre in the Cave of Makhpela and the horrors 
that followed in Hebron have been like an earthquake that has 
fundamentally changed the terms that prevailed before that. No 
one today can foresee the future without making mistakes or 
errors in judgment. The Palestinian street in general, and in 
Hebron in particular, no longer accepts the rules made in Oslo, 
and even those who supported the Oslo agreements, and after that 
the Cairo agreements, now demand that they be changed, 
especially the principle of dividing the negotiations into two 
stages. The questions of settlement, Jerusalem and the Cave of 
Makhpela have forced themselves onto the terms of discussion and 
cannot be put off any longer. In other words, not Gaza and 
Jericho first but all the territories now have to be on the 
negotiating table." 
  To grasp how someone in the central stream of 'Arafat 
supporters can speak that way, one has to understand political 
developments in Hebron immediately after the massacre, in 
particular the rising tension in most parts of Hebron and, 
within them, between people known over the years as 'Arafat 
supporters and the Tunis leadership. Right after the massacre, 
the people of Hebron tried to establish a central institution 
without a leader, the "Emergency Committee," to unite the city's 
organizations and represent all the political streams on an 
equal footing. The Emergency Committee, however, did not catch 
on and, by all appearances, the two major political forces, 
Hamas [islamic Resistance Movement] and Fatah, tried to take the 
city's reins of leadership during its black hour of trial. Hamas 
gained the upper hand. The families of the murdered preferred to 
establish a committee led by someone from Hamas that would deal 
with their concerns. Hamas and Fatah set up separate commissions 
of inquiry. Apparently, the Hamas commission won greater 
cooperation from the people of Hebron than did the Fatah 
commission. 
  Hamas was aided not just by Hebron's extraordinary piety, 
and 
not just by the widespread opinion that the massacre was 
perpetrated due to the peace talks with the PLO, in which 
attention was given solely to the security needs of the settlers 
while the PLO ignored the security needs of the Palestinians, 
but also by Hamas' success in concealing its differences in 
opinion and working in harmony while the PLO spoke in two voices 
in a way that projected confusion and internal divisions. One 
group in Fatah was composed of well-known political people such 
as Natshe, the deposed mayor, and Fa'iz Qawasme, the brother of 
the expelled mayor, Fahd Qawasme, who was murdered in exile in 
Rabat Amon. They tried to join up with members of the 
Palestinian delegation headquartered in Orient House and forged 
ties to the head of the Palestinian negotiating team in 
Washington, Sa'ib 'Eraqat, who was then in east Jerusalem 
because Husayni had gone to Tunis. 
  A second group, led by 'Abas Zaki, who openly opposes 
'Arafat's policies, is linked to the western sector of Rabat 
Amon. This group has shown itself stronger and would like to 
collaborate with Hamas and representatives of the refusal 
organizations. The internal struggle sharpened when, on March 
21, 'Arafat appointed the "Hebron District Council," a large 
body of 73 (some say 85) members that is supposed to take 
control of the area, similar to the center in Orient House. At 
the head of this body, 'Arafat put 'Ali Qawasme, a Fatah 
activist close to Husayni. Hamas, the refusal organizations and 
the 'Abas Zaki wing in Fatah instantly realized the significance 
of the appointments to the district council and announced their 
opposition the same day. 
  The surprise came from those people who were expected to 
stand with 'Arafat on the day of reckoning. Nabil J'abari, a 
central Fatah activist who had represented 'Arafat in Hebron for 
years and been a member of the Palestinian delegation to both 
Madrid and Washington, was included on the district council list 
as a matter of course. The next day, however, he published a 
paid-for announcement on the front page of AL-QUDS, declaring 
that he rejected the appointment because: "Our people are now 
capable of discussion and elections. The people of the Hebron 
district can devise a lawful and popularly based body to look 
after their interests and rights. The idea behind the 
appointments...is one we reject." 
  Muhmad Horanif, one of the leading activists in the Fatah 
wing that supports 'Arafat, announced the day after the 
appointments that "the council has been frozen." 'Arafat's 
inability to appoint a council raised grave questions about his 
ability to rule in Hebron. A-Shyukhi: "I can state without a 
doubt that the Palestinian leadership does not exercise any 
control in the Hebron region because it has lost all its 
credibility. Its assets amount to less than 1 percent. Chairman 
'Arafat decided to set up the council but used methods that are 
not acceptable to us, dictates from above that gave priority to 
a certain sector and overlooked others. The result was that he 
was forced to rescind his decision one day after he made it. If 
he changed his decision hours after making it, he has to change 
all his calculations. The council he set up ignored all the 
fighters, all the Palestinian organizations, all the political 
parties and entire neighborhoods in Hebron even though they are 
the parts of town that have struggled the most. Similarly, there 
was no representation for whole villages, such as Tarqumiya, 
Shyukh, Samo'a, Beit-'Awa and Nuba." 
  J'abari's words brings to the fore one of the most important 
disputes between Tunis and PLO supporters in the territories, 
the nature of the future Palestinian entity. While 'Arafat seeks 
to appoint his loyalists to key posts, the political leadership 
demands elections. 'Arafat has already attempted to name Mansur 
Shawa mayor of Gaza but a coalition made up of a majority of the 
political forces in the city foiled his plans. The failure in 
Gaza is threatening to recur in Hebron. There is growing 
opposition in the territories to the parameters laid down in 
Oslo heedless of the leadership of the territories. 
  On 25 March, the day marked for the Cairo agreements 
permitting resumption of the talks, representatives of a 
majority of the organizations and groups, some 100 persons, 
convened in Hebron. What they decided is unknown. A-Shyukhi 
describes the general atmosphere. "Community activists in Hebron 
are against continuing with 'Arafat's methods. They feel that he 
has to distinguish between the stage of rule and the stage of 
revolution. The stage of creating a government requires certain 
tactics, the stage of administration and revolution requires 
others. 'Arafat does not separate the stage of revolution from 
the stage of rule and administration. You can see this as well 
in the way he has conducted the negotiations with Israel. The 
Palestinians were on a lower level, and the Palestinian 
delegation could not stand up to the terms and issues set by 
Israel and the United States, which were on a higher level. 
Every round of the negotiations was without experts and 
everything depended on one person ('Arafat). Resumption of the 
talks in the same manner definitely will lead to failure and a 
dead end. Likewise, UN Resolution 904 cannot serve as a basis 
for renewal of the talks because it does not include the minimum 
Palestinians demands. 
  "I am amazed that the talks with Israel are resuming on the 
basis of sending police to Hebron. What Hebron needs today is 
not police. It has been under curfew for a month, its economy is 
collapsing, unemployment is growing, and with that there is 
hunger. Hebron needs industry and revival of its social and 
economic institutions, not police--even if it were to mean 
100,000 police officers. IDF operations in Hebron against Hamas, 
in which the IDF has mobilized the best of its men and its most 
advanced technology, prove that a Palestinian police force is 
not the answer to our needs and will solve nothing. It will not 
prevent the next massacre. Can a Palestinian policeman impose a 
curfew on Qiryat Arb'a? Will the Palestinian police be able to 
stop a single one of the settlers' children? The police are not 
and never have been the solution. The solution is not to 
continue the talks on the basis of establishing a police force 
but to discard the principle of two stages and to bring 
Palestinian experts into the talks. I am puzzled by Rabin. His 
peace with 'Arafat will be the peace of men but not of nations, 
and will have no value. True peace is one of trust and 
convincing the Palestinian people that they have, indeed, 
realized their dreams. Any other peace will lead to two nations 
beset by tragedy and further bloodshed." 
  A-Shyukhi emphasizes that he cannot be considered an 
opponent 
of 'Arafat or of the peace process. On the contrary, "I am for 
peace and striving for peace, but on the basis of Palestinian 
national unity and within a framework that will be acceptable to 
most of the people without coercion from above. But events have 
laid bare the fact that the frameworks in which the talks are 
being conducted have been exhausted. Even leaders of the 
delegation such as Husayni, 'Arafat and Abd A-Shafi demand new 
frameworks and formulas that will place Hebron, Jerusalem and 
the settlements at the top of the agenda. 
  "I admire and greatly respect Chairman 'Arafat. He is the 
symbol of Palestine. He has dedicated his life to his people and 
independence. I am convinced that he is trying to get the 
maximum for the Palestinian people. But the route he is taking 
and his way of working will not bring him to realization of his 
goals. So I am calling for him to take a break of 24 hours, to 
get away from the pressures, the slogans and the faxes, and 
think in quiet about the way to get out of this dead end. I know 
that many leaders do this. During World War II, Churchill did 
not forsake his weekly holiday. I saw 'Arafat some months ago in 
Tunis. I felt sorry for him. He was utterly exhausted. The 
tremendous effort he is making is wearing him out. Whatever I 
have said is for his benefit so he can look after himself. 
'Arafat also has to change the fax numbers of people in the 
territories and listen to what the strong are saying--not the 
weak. I want 'Arafat to consider what I am saying as a kind of 
open letter to him, to pay attention to what people are saying." 
  For all that, A-Shyukhi's observations on the Palestinian 
police are unequivocal. "In Hebron, Abu 'Amar ('Arafat) sees the 
police as a branch of the Border Patrol. I think that will lead 
all the officers to resign. Even Antoine Lahad's position in 
South Lebanon is better, since he at least has an army under his 
command. The Palestinian police will be under Israeli control. 
'Arafat has to know not only how to talk with Rabin and [Gen. 
Amnon] Shahaq but with the young men of Fatah and the national 
streams such as the National Front, the Democratic [Front] and 
Hamas. 'Arafat's arrival in Jericho before he comes to an 
understanding with the Palestinians and arranges a framework of 
national unity will convert the Palestinian police into an 
instrument of repression, and I am sure that it will refuse to 
act as a repressive force." 
  One complication involving the police is the need to make 
changes in the city. Natshe was deposed in 1973 and, since 1976, 
the city has been administered by an Israeli official--a friend 
of the settlers, of course. This year, according to a secret 
agreement between Israel and Jordan, city leaders acceptable to 
both countries were appointed, among them the current mayor, 
'Abd al-Majid a-Zir. The Democratic Front's Hebron branch 
immediately declared its opposition to the isolated actions of 
appointing Zir and holding elections in Hebron. The Democratic 
Front announced in a poster on 28 March that without restoring 
all deposed mayors, it would be impossible to return Natshe to 
his post. The Democratic Front's reason--the dean of mayors 
elected in 1976, Basam Shakh'a of Shehem, belongs to the refusal 
front and the Democratic Front does not accept a situation in 
which only those mayors who support 'Arafat, and none of his 
opponents, are reinstated. Thus, the complications in Hebron are 
also spreading at least to Shehem. 
  A-Shyukhi concludes, "The Tunis leadership's treatment of 
the 
events in Hebron, the massacre and its ramifications have raised 
a high wall between it and the entire Hebron district. The 
public in Hebron hoped that the leadership would pay close 
attention to the city's mood. We were amazed by remarks made by 
Nabil Sha'at that the Palestinian police will protect certain 
people in Hebron and certain institutions that were not in 
danger in the past and will not be in the future. Would even 
1,000 Palestinian policemen have prevented Goldstein and his 
confederates from [perpetrating] the massacre in Hebron?" 
  [Box, p 3] 
<H5>  Waiting for 'Arafat in Gaza </H5>
  People in Israel are attuned to the tense atmosphere in 
Hebron and the steep decline in support for 'Arafat. A senior 
Israeli defense official says that Israel hopes that the PLO 
leader's arrival in the territories will be accompanied by 
displays of rejoicing and euphoria that will change the national 
mood. 'Arafat also will bring money with him, hand out sinecures 
and have a police force, which will enable him to tilt the 
balance in his favor. The arrival of the international force 
also will impart a feeling of a change for the better. 
  While buds of opposition to 'Arafat are sprouting on the 
West 
Bank and in Hebron, the picture is different in Gaza. There, in 
Hamas' stronghold, ironically, movement towards 'Arafat has been 
noted. Gazans are waiting for a change and the arrangements with 
Israeli are giving them a new chance, the defense official said. 
But he made these comments before the unfortunate incident in 
which IDF soldiers killed six Fatah Hawks in Gaza. It still is 
not clear how the agreements on the Palestinian police will be 
greeted in Gaza. [end box] 


