BFN 

<F P=106> [By ZHEJIANG RIBAO reporter Chen Songqing (7115 7313 3237) </F>
and XINHUA reporter Shen Haixiong (1957 3189 7169)] 
  [Text] Hangzhou, 15 Jun (XINHUA) -- While inspecting the 
Hangzhou Fangxiang Group, State Councillor Chen Junsheng pointed 
out: Coastal town and township enterprises' participating in 
developing the central and western regions is not only of great 
significance to poor areas but also to national economic 
development. It is a move of strategic significance, and I hope 
that the plan will be a success. 
  Not long ago, the Hangzhou Fangxiang Group decided to invest 
funds worth 100 million yuan in merging, buying, or 
incorporating a bunch of major town and township enterprises in 
the western region. It also decided to cooperate with 
enterprises in the western region in developing new industries 
to quicken the pace of economic development in the west. 
  After hearing the report by Lu Guanqiu, general manager of 
the Hangzhou Fangxiang Group, Chen Junsheng said: "I have 
already heard of your `westward plan' in Beijing, and I am very 
glad to know about it. I made this special trip to your company 
today to express my support for your `westward plan.' I also 
wish your `westward plan' success. I hope that it will 
encourage more coastal town and township enterprises to 
participate in developing the central and western regions and in 
supporting economically underdeveloped regions." 
  Chen Junsheng pointed out: Cooperation between the east and 
the west in joint development is of strategic significance. It 
serves the purpose of supporting poverty-stricken areas as well 
as the need for coastal town and township enterprises to further 
develop themselves. At present, being affected by the labor 
force, land resources, and other various factors, coastal town 
and township enterprises are seizing the opportunity to invest 
in the western region. This move will enable coastal town and 
township enterprises to reinvigorate themselves and to help town 
and township enterprises in the central and western regions to 
improve their economic efficiency and to develop healthily. 
Combining professionals, technology, and capital from the east 
with natural resources and the labor force in the west will 
definitely enhance both the eastern and western regions' 
strength and stamina of economic development. Moreover, the 
fundamental way to accomplish the state's goal of supporting 
poverty-stricken areas and helping 80 million people in poor 
areas lead a fairly comfortable life is to strengthen the inner 
vitality of economically undeveloped regions in terms of their 
economic development. At present, the economically 
underdeveloped central and western regions have abundant surplus 
laborers. If town and township enterprises in the eastern 
region can concentrate funds, technology, and professionals to 
develop the economy in the western region, the surplus laborers 
will be able to work in their hometowns. This will help reduce 
the number of migrant workers and maintain social stability. 
  Chen Junsheng said emphatically: The relevant departments in 
both the eastern and western regions must give support to their 
town and township enterprises and vigorously encourage them to 
jointly develop natural resources in the central and western 
regions on a mutual beneficial and reciprocal basis; quicken the 
pace of helping the central and western regions shake off 
poverty and become prosperous; gradually diminish the central 
and western regions' disparity compared to the eastern region; 
and promote sustained, rapid, and healthy national economic 
development. 

