BFN 

<F P=106> [Report from Bucharest by political correspondent Udi Segal </F>
-- live] 
  [Text] Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin and PLO leader Yasir 
'Arafat will sign the Gaza and Jericho agreement in two weeks. 
This is the Israeli and PLO working assumption at the close of 
a series of Peres-'Arafat meetings, here in Bucharest. At the 
same time, a precise date was not set in order to avoid creating 
yet another sacred date which might eventually be desecrated. 
  Foreign Ministry officials regard the meetings here as an 
important juncture in the political process and the negotiations 
with the PLO. The local press exaggerated in its banner 
headlines describing the meetings as a major landmark in the 
process between Israel and the Palestinians. Foreign Minister 
Shim'on Peres told us what the target dates are at this point: 
  [Begin recording] [Peres] There are three dates we have 
agreed on: One, is that our delegation, headed by Major General 
Amnon Shahaq, will go to Cairo on 24 April to work with the 
Palestinian delegation all next week. On 25 April we will man 
the three delegations which will deal with coordinating the 
hand-over: the security liaison committee, the committee on 
joint patrols, and the committee on transferring administrative 
powers. The third date we agreed on is 2 May. On that date two 
major committees of the donor countries will meet in Cairo -- 
the committee on police affairs and the committee on current 
expenditure affairs -- without which the Palestinians cannot 
practically begin establishing their own administration. Should 
this be called for by the situation and the need arise, 'Arafat 
and myself will travel to Cairo over the weekend [not further 
specified] to prepare all that is needed for the conclusion of 
the process, the ending of which will be attended by Israel's 
prime minister and the PLO chairman in Cairo. 
  [Segal] In view of your discussions with 'Arafat here, can 
you at this stage estimate whether you will be able to conclude 
all the issues during the coming week and reach the signing 
stage? 
  [Peres] I believe it is possible, though absolutely not 
certain. This is the reason why we avoided fixing dates. We 
did not want to set a date only to later postpone it by a day or 
even an hour. Therefore, some of the dates are rigid while 
others are flexible. 
  [Segal] What is there still left to be concluded in the 
negotiations? 
  [Peres] Our delegation will carry with it a written paper on 
the issue of jurisdiction which will determine who will be tried 
where and for what. We have to conclude the issue of the 
composition of the Palestinian council and its powers. We need 
to conclude the issues of airspace and territorial waters. We 
still need to wrap up the economic issues, as well as the manner 
of the population registration in the form of identity cards or 
some other form of identification. The number of issues still 
pending is not negligible. 
  [Segal] Judging from your meetings with 'Arafat and his men, 
do you believe they are ready to enter the territory of Gaza and 
Jericho despite the problems they know they will encounter when 
they do? 
  [Peres] Bottom line, I would say they are. At the same 
time, they are worried and, to be honest, they also doubt our 
intentions. The doubts are unjustified, but I am only making a 
point. 
  [Segal] What is you view of Yasir 'Arafat after the 
meetings? Can he really control the territory? Can you today 
calm the Israeli public which is afraid and worried -- perhaps 
for good reason since the man has not yet proven himself on the 
ground -- regarding future developments? 
  [Peres] There is no doubt that of all the Palestinian 
leaders, 'Arafat is the most prominent and authoritative. It 
must be said that over the past several years, three or four, 
'Arafat has stepped down from the heights of declarations and 
out of the murderous stake outs onto the realistic grounds of 
negotiations. He will not receive all that he had stated in his 
declarations, although he may go on making them. It does not 
matter. In the end, he will compromise. A man should be judged 
by his deeds, not his words. [end recording] 
  Foreign Minister Peres will return to Israel tonight. Early 
tomorrow morning, he will hold a private meeting with Prime 
Minister Yitzhaq Rabin before the latter leaves on an official 
visit to Moscow. As acting prime minister, Peres will return 
straight into the hectic political scene surrounding the 
Histadrut Labor Union elections and, on 28 April, U.S. Secretary 
of State Warren Christopher will come to our region, and the 
focus of attention will shift to the Syrian track. 
  We asked Peres: Is there anything new in Rabin's remark that 
Israel will be willing to remove settlements from the Golan 
Heights in return for peace? 
  [Begin recording] [Peres] To some extent I believe there 
is. Still, I prefer a leader who does what he says to a leader 
who does the opposite of what he says. 
  [Segal] Are you referring to the late Menahem Begin? 
  [Peres] I do not feel comfortable with mentioning names, but 
the late Mr. Begin was not the only one. He had partners who 
still live among us. They made sky-high declarations while in 
practice they were left without a grain of Sinai sand under 
their shoes. 
  [Segal] Do you sincerely believe this is the price of peace 
with Syria? 
  [Peres] I would not like to comment on this. Look, we are 
at the very beginning of negotiations. I do not believe we need 
to say today everything that we intend to do. I do not believe 
we should come naked to the negotiations. [end recording] 

