BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Dominique Seux: "Sarkozy: Tax Surpluses Will Be </F>
Limited"] 
  [Text] Tax receipts do not indicate that progress in 
business activities is coming faster than predicted, especially 
in terms of consumption. Tax surpluses will be limited to 10 
billion French francs [Fr]. However, yesterday [Budget 
Minister] Nicolas Sarkozy pointed out that predictions for 
French growth may be increased at the end of the month to 1.6 or 
1.7 percent. 
  The government is making every effort to convince the public 
to take its budgetary policy seriously. In the face of mounting 
tension in recent weeks on the bond market, not to mention the 
criticisms of certain high-ranking officials at the Bank of 
France, it has tirelessly reiterated that it will respect its 
commitments regarding the budget deficit. Yesterday, Nicolas 
Sarkozy hammered out this message once again, presenting the 
main figures for the semiannual budget to the finance committees 
of the National Assembly and the Senate. He pointed out: "The 
objective for 1994, Fr301.4 billion, will be stringently 
respected. Nobody should doubt this." He also emphasized that 
"any drift in the deficit would affect the development of 
interest rates," and "would jeopardize the recovery and the 
return to stronger growth." 
  The budget minister reaffirmed this principle all the more 
strongly because he believes he can only count on minimal extra 
receipts to finance the new expenditure announced during the 
first quarter. Since growth is driven mainly by exports and the 
resumption of company investment, he explained: "It is 
difficult to hope for more than Fr10 billion in extra tax 
receipts," compared with this year's forecasts (Fr1,236.6 
billion for tax receipts). He added: "Only a much stronger 
recovery in household consumption, which has yet to come about, 
would result in surplus tax receipts, notably in terms of VAT 
[value-added tax]." Detailing the figures submitted to 
parliament last week, the budget minister pointed out that, at 
the end of April, "effectively recovered" tax receipts exceeded 
forecasts by Fr3 billion. A welcome surprise came in the form 
of Fr4.7 billion on corporate tax, but this was offset by 
capital losses of Fr1 billion on VAT and of Fr600 million on the 
domestic tax on oil by-products. 
<H5>  Supporting Consumption </H5>
  Although tax receipts on income match the forecast figure, 
VAT returns clearly show that there has been no real 
acceleration in consumption. Hence a degree of caution when it 
comes to predicting growth. Mr. Sarkozy said: "A decision on 
the possibility of revising the predicted growth of the French 
economy at 1.6 to 1.7 percent will not be made before the 
meeting of the National Audit Committee in late June or early 
July." In reality, the government is counting on the impact of 
two measures already adopted in order to stimulate consumption 
during the next parliamentary session: the already announced 
tripling of the back-to-school benefit, and the effect on income 
tax of the 1994 budget reform. In all, he believes that Fr20 
billion will be available for households. This is a slightly 
optimistic calculation insofar as these two measures are 
incomparable, one being a case of aid in the form of liquid 
assets, the other being a case of levying less. 
  There is also a pedagogical aim in exercising caution 
regarding tax receipts, namely avoiding getting into a future 
spiral of new forms of expenditure. According to Nicolas 
Sarkozy, such expenditure already amounts to Fr18 billion, and 
doubtless more than Fr20 billion if we add the Fr10 billion 
pledged by Air France (only one portion of which has been paid), 
funding provided by the "transfer of the AGF [Assurances 
Generales de France] at the end of the year." In particular, 
there is the carryover of unspent credits from 1993, including 
those earmarked for defense (worth Fr5.5 billion), the bonus for 
employing of young people (Fr2.5 billion), measures accompanying 
the devaluation of the CFA [African Financial Community] franc, 
and the allocation of the back-to-school benefit (Fr6 billion). 
  The cost of the "wrecking bonus" for used cars, part of 
which 
has already been funded, is estimated at around Fr800 million 
which corresponds to the sale of 160,000 new vehicles. Since 
the extra receipts will be insufficient, Nicolas Sarkozy 
justifies blocking Fr7 billion in credits, stressing that this 
decision applies to all administrations, including the military. 

