BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by State President F.W. de Klerk, IFP </F>
President Mangosuthu Buthelezi, and ANC President Nelson Mandela 
at the Union Buildings in Pretoria--live] 
  [Text] [De Klerk] Ladies and gentlemen, before I make the 
statement as political leader, let me just, as host, say that 
logistically you will be provided with a short press statement 
before you leave. It is being duplicated at the moment, to 
which there will be an addendum which sets out in detail the 
agreement reached which will after these statements be formally 
signed here by the three principals and Professor Okuru, who is 
a professor from Kenya and to whom recognition is given in the 
statement which will be issued with regard to the constructive 
and positive role, a very helpful role he has played in bringing 
us to this moment of this agreement. Part of the agreement will 
refer also to an addendum B, which will not be ready now. It 
will be distributed later in the day because certain details 
still have to be decided. That's just on the logistical side. 
  Now may I say, as state president and as leader of the 
National Party [NP], that I am extremely pleased that after 
months of negotiation, after the intensive talks of the past 
week and more, but specifically after the intensive interaction 
and negotiation of the past days, we have reached agreement this 
morning between the government of the National Party, the 
KwaZulu Government and Inkatha, and the African National 
Congress which will result in the participation in the election 
on the scheduled dates from 26 to 28 April of the Inkatha 
Freedom Party [IFP] throughout the country. 
  The agreement also encompasses the amendment of the 
constitution in two respects with regard to the Kingdom of 
kwaZulu, and Parliament will be called together in all 
probability on Monday [25 April] to consider those amendments. 
The agreement farther entails that there will be a mediation 
process after the election. 
  This agreement, I believe, removes one of the last main 
causes for tension and violence in the Republic of South Africa, 
and it is my deepest hope that this agreement will bring to an 
end the violence in our country, and that all South Africans, 
whatever party they support, will now take hands, exercise their 
free and democratic right to vote for the party of their choice, 
so that we can bring our country to the great moment for which 
all of us have been working for so long -- that of having a 
government of national unity. The great moment of launching our 
nation on the road of reconciliation, the great moment of all 
the significant leaders in this country starting to cooperate to 
work for a better life for all our people. I thank God that we 
have even, at this late stage, reached this agreement, and I say 
to my opponents, to both sides of them, that it is my sincere 
hope that our supporters will follow the lead of their leaders 
and will ensure that this election will be free and fair, will 
be a triumph for the South African nation. I would like to 
express my thanks to all those who have contributed over the 
weeks and months to also help us cross this last and important 
bridge. 
  [Buthelezi] Ladies and gentlemen, the Inkatha Freedom 
Party's Central Committee decided at a meeting on Sunday 17 
April to contest the elections at the national... [brief break 
in transmission] to the constitution to be made to secure the 
kingdom of KwaZulu and the future of His Majesty the King of the 
Zulus, as a constitutional monarch. The decision of the Central 
Committee was further made conditional upon the final 
formulations for provisions for the existence of the Zulu 
kingdom and the role of His Majesty being agreed to through 
mediation. 
  In a series of meetings which took place on Sunday, Monday, 
and today, final agreement was reached securing the kingdom of 
KwaZulu and the role of His Majesty. I spoke to His Majesty, 
and the president, President de Klerk, spoke to His Majesty, and 
also the president of the ANC. I, therefore, am pleased to 
announce that the Inkatha Freedom Party will contest elections 
in the national and provincial levels, even though it's so late 
in the day. The entry of the IFP [Inkatha Freedom Party] into 
the national and regional levels will be made possible by 
suitable amendments to ballot papers, and there will be certain 
relations in the procedures laid down for the registration of 
parties and the publication of electoral lists. I'm pleased to 
announce that the TEC [Transitional Executive Council] and the 
IEC [Independent Electoral Commission] have promised their full 
cooperation to make the IFP's entry into elections possible. 
The Inkatha Freedom Party has decided to make the kind of 
compromise which make...would make its entry into elections 
possible in order to avoid a great deal more bloodshed and 
carnage which we have been witness to in the last nine years and 
even more intensely in the last...in the recent months. 
  Only the IFP held the firm two principles right until the 
very last moment and we did everything in our power to eliminate 
the very worst elements of the 1993 constitution. The best in 
the constitution can be attributed to the IFP's interventions 
and the long struggle it waged to ensure that the country as a 
whole benefited from a constitution which would lay the 
foundations for a democratic future. 
  Central to the IFP's concerns were the need to ensure viable 
regional government with the minimum interference by the state. 
It is to this end that the IFP finally managed to negotiate a 
secure role for his majesty the king of the Zulu nation and the 
guarantee of the future existence of the Zulu kingdom. In 
securing these things, the IFP has guaranteed that provincialism 
in the kwaZulu-Natal province will set standards which other 
provinces will be encouraged to adopt in their own search for 
provincial constitutional futures. 
  The IFP previously succeeded in securing amendments in the 
1993 constitution which will enable provinces to adopt 
constitutions of their own choice. The IFP also secured the 
right of provinces to adopt constitutions which will not be 
confined to the structures laid down for the provinces in the 
1993 constitution. The IFP's negotiation victory in securing 
the role of his majesty the king of the Zulu nation and the 
continued existence of the kingdom of KwaZulu is, therefore, a 
victory for the principle of self-determination from which the 
whole country will benefit. 
  I wish to convey my deep gratitude to Professor Washington 
Okumu for the role he played in making it possible to reach the 
agreement which will result in the IFP entering elections. He 
was an additional appointment as adviser to the international 
mediating team and remained on in South Africa when other 
mediators left for their various international destinations. It 
was his personal intervention which made the final negotiation 
breakthrough possible. When my spirits were down, ladies and 
gentlemen, after the international mediation had been aborted, 
and I was leaving Johannesburg for Ulundi on Friday 15 April, I 
received a message at the airport from Professor Washington 
Okumu, that he wanted to meet me at the airport and would be 
there in 20 minutes' time. I just want to say, to give you a 
background that I've known Professor Okumu for more than 20 
years. I even met him at a prayer breakfast in Washington, and 
we have kept...been kept in touch purely on the basis of 
Christian fellowship. I waited at the air...Lanseria Airport 
for as long as I could in the morning of 15 April for Prof. 
Okumu but as two of my colleagues had appointments with his 
majesty the king that day I had to leave before he arrived. 
However, the aircraft had hardly been airborne when I was told 
that there was a problem and that we had to turn back. 
Fortunately, Professor Okumu was still there, and I said that 
it was as though God had prevented me from leaving and I was 
there like Jonah was brought back through the whale. I told 
Professor Okumu that my forced return was a godsend. He 
insisted that everything should be done to try and see if lost 
mediation could be retrieved and that I should do everything I 
could to negotiate, even at this late hour, the IFP's 
participation in the election. I shared with Professor Okumu 
the IFP's problems, the fact that the IFP took a decision not to 
participate, because of its serious concerns regarding his 
majesty the king -- which had not been met and that I could not 
disregard that. If I did so, I would be committing treason. 
  Professor Okumu said that everything, notwithstanding, he 
was 
going to see Mr. Mandela, whom he has known, I must say, for a 
long time and that he was also going to see President de Klerk. 
I had hardly arrived back in Ulundi on Friday when Professor 
Okumu telephoned and said that he had been in touch with the 
govern...[pauses] with government who said they were quite 
prepared to look at the concerns that I expressed. 
  Professor Okumu was very firm and said I should telephone 
the state president at 3 o'clock that afternoon. Before I did 
so, the state president telephoned me and asked me what it was I 
wanted to say to him. I said that I gathered from Professor 
Okumu that he wanted to talk to me, and I gave him the 
background. 
  The state president told me that the issue of the IFP's 
participation was sympathetically looked at by the government, 
that they were prepared to look at participation on a regional 
level, but I told the state president that there was no way the 
IFP would participate at regional level only, because the IFP 
has support all over South Africa. The state president said he 
was quite prepared to look at the possibilities. I said the 
only way this could be done was if the issue of his majesty the 
king was addressed. The state president said a special session 
of parliament could be called to effect amendments to the 1993 
constitution, and I reminded the state president that His 
Majesty said he wanted matters dealt with before elections. 
  On Saturday, Professor Okumu telephoned again, and on Sunday 
we met in Durban where we both were attending a Jesus rally 
organized by Africa Enterprise, but Professor Okumu had to leave 
immediately without attending the Jesus rally, and he gave me a 
draft on a proposed agreement which could be entered into 
between myself, the president of the ANC and the South African 
Government. The draft incorporated many of the answers to our 
needs and I gave my provisional approval to it. Professor Okumu 
said he was flying to Cape Town to talk to Mr. Mandela, and I 
showed the draft to Mr. Jacob Zuma and Mr. Jan Schutte who were 
with me at the Jesus rally, before I put it before the Central 
Committee that afternoon, because that is the way I exercise my 
leadership, referring all crucial matters to Central Committee 
which is the final decision-making body between (?direct) 
conferences. 
  By arrangement with the president, I met him in Pretoria 
yesterday, 18 April. I was presently surprised to find that the 
draft agreement had been shown to Mr. Mandela, the president of 
the ANC, who said he wanted to study it for clarification but by 
and large he had no problem with it. After further negotiations 
the draft agreement with the necessary amendments were accepted 
by myself, Mr. Mandela, and Mr. de Klerk, and I must add that 
there was a meeting also with the secretary general of the ANC, 
Mr. Ramaphosa, and Mr. Joe Slovo. 
  I wish to pay tribute to Professor Okumu. He is really a 
remarkable man who had studied under Dr. Kissinger at Harvard. 
I paid tribute to the shuttle diplomacy initiated and what has 
been achieved through it. I'll never forget the picture of him 
as I returned after our plane had problems, waiting for me at 
the airport, larger than life. [laughter] I will also pay 
tribute to both President F.W. de Klerk and Mr. Mandela, for the 
fact that they were receptive to the suggestions that were made 
to the three of us by Professor Okumu. I believe that as a 
result of the signing of this memorandum of agreement that South 
Africa may well have been saved from disastrous consequences of 
unimaginable proportions and has been put on a course which I 
hope will lead to long-lasting peace, democracy, and meaningful 
federalism. As I said, we phoned his majesty the king, and 
Prince Gideon will read just a short statement which his majesty 
the king has issued today. 
  [Prince Gideon] A statement by His Majesty Zwelithini 
Goodwill kaBhekuZulu, king of the Zulu nation, on 19 April 1994: 
I have been informed of the progress made in the deputations 
between the Inkatha Freedom Party, the KwaZulu government, the 
African National Congress, and the National Party, South African 
Government, with respect to the definition of outstanding 
constitutional issues in matters related to the claims and 
demands of the Zulu nation for the restoration of the Kingdom of 
KwaZulu. 
  Arrangements have been made for the calling of a special 
session of the South African Parliament to pass an agreed set of 
constitutional amendments related to the status and position of 
the Zulu monarch. Furthermore, it has been agreed that all 
other outstanding issues related to the claims and demands of 
the Zulu nation with respect of the restoration of the sovereign 
Kingdom of KwaZulu will be addressed by way of international 
mediation which will commence as soon as possible. For this 
reason, I think that a process has begun which addresses the 
serious concerns of the Zulu nation and of the Zulu monarchy, 
and that the Zulu nation should now freely support this process, 
including participation in the elections, in the hope that our 
claims and demands will be finally fulfilled. 
  [Mandela] I am sorry to displace you. [laughter] 
  [Unidentified speaker] It's a bad omen. [laughter] 
  [Mandela] Firstly, I would like to express my deepest 
sympathy to the family of Ken Oosterbroek, the photographer who 
was killed yesterday under very tragic circumstances. I 
sincerely hope that he will be the last journalist to die in our 
country as a result of this senseless violence. 
  Turning to the agreement, I want to say, this agreement is a 
leap forward for peace, reconciliation, nation building, and an 
inclusive election process. Nothing is more precious than 
saving lives of human beings. Nothing is more urgent than the 
possibility that by making this process all inclusive, to get 
all political parties to take part in this election, that is 
something which deserves the support of all leaders and of all 
those who love South Africa at heart. The 26th, 27th and 28th 
April are dates which are sacrosanct, and the election must take 
place on that day [as heard]. The whole country, including the 
overwhelming majority of Zulus, of our Zulu communities, want to 
participate in this election, because this election is what we 
have been fighting for throughout the years. 
  All of us have been in this fight in various ways. Some 
became more prominent than others in the cause of the fight, but 
what we must accept is that this was a collective effort, 
because for the one man in the frontline, you need 10 to help 
him. All of us, as we sit here, are responsible for the fight 
to make democracy a reality in our country. The people, 
therefore, look to us to give the leadership, worthy of their 
hard work and their sacrifices. Once again the African National 
Conference has bent backward to make sure that there is a 
peaceful solution, that we accommodate those who have been 
outside this process, for whatever reason. A solemn 
responsibility rests upon us, and that responsibility is not 
going to be discharged through finger pointing. It is for all 
of us, each, to take responsibility, to roll up his sleeves, and 
to honor the human spirit by ensuring that there is 
reconciliation, that is nation building. 
  A bright future awaits our country, and the reports that we 
see in the press about people stockpiling, fearing that after 27 
April there are going to be riots, the minorities in this 
country are going to be attacked -- these are mischievous 
statements which have no foundation whatsoever. One understands 
that in the course of a transition the minotiries in particular 
immediately become concerned. I have said before, and I want to 
repeat it on this important occasion, that the African National 
Congress is aware that when there is a transformation, everyone 
becomes concerned, wants to know -- what is going to happen to 
my family, to myself, to the national values in which I believe, 
have I got a future in this country? The fact that there are 
organizations outside the process who are not participating, and 
the escalating violence has been a source of great concern to 
many innocent people in this country, and through this 
agreement, we hope we will allay the fears which have made some 
of our talented people to leave the country with their skills, 
with their knowledge, with their expertise, and we hope that 
through this settlement they will regard it as an invitation to 
them to come back to their country and serve it, and that those 
who are on the verge of leaving will now realize that they have 
nothing to fear in the future. 
  The entire people of South Africa, or our country, have 
gained through this initiative, and we would like to reassure 
everybody that we are concerned about our state of economy. From 
the moment we came out of prison, returned from exile, one of 
the strategies we have adopted is to involve business in 
discussions as to how to address the problems of our country, 
both political and economic. We have done that because we 
realize the critical role of business, if we are going to get 
our economy to grow, to generate wealth, to offer employment. 
Not only did we make this move, but we made sure that we have 
it in an organized manner, in the form of the National Economic 
Forum which brings together workers, employers and the 
government, so that the problems between workers, between labor 
and capital, can be resolved without disrupting the economy of 
the country. These are steps which we have taken because we 
want to reassure everybody that we have the interest of the 
country at heart. And I sincerely hope that through this 
arrangement, this agreement, we will be able to bring about 
stability, confidence -- both from the point of view of our 
business and from the point of view of foreign investors. 
  I must indicate that I have traveled widely throughout the 
various continents, and I have spoken to heads of states, heads 
of government, to organizations like the International Monetary 
Fund, the World Bank, appealing to them to come to our 
assistance as far as resources are concerned. Doing so because 
I know that everybody wants to lead a better life. I stand firm 
once again in my belief that we are one country, we are one 
people, Africans, coloreds, Indians, and whites, and it is in 
that spirit that I have taken part in this initiative. I thank 
you. 

