Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nursultan Nazarbayev, president of the Republic </F>
of Kazakhstan: "The Ideological Consolidation of Society as a 
Condition of Kazakhstan's Progress"] 
  [Text] "...The achievement of real independence 
requires political, intellectual, and spiritual support. It is 
essential that we secure not only an economic, organizational, 
and personnel breakthrough in these directions but also create 
an atmosphere consolidating society. And we have to have here an 
ideological conceptualization of our activity geared both to the 
immediate and the more distant future." 
  The work "Strategy of the Formation and Development of 
Kazakhstan as a Sovereign State" appeared in May of last year. 
It set forth my vision of the fundamental directions and content 
of the reform and pursued the goal of providing society with a 
sense of the future. Time has shown that the main priorities and 
their forecast characteristics as a whole were determined 
correctly. Many provisions of the strategy have been embodied in 
the new constitution, the National Program of Stabilization of 
the Economy and Extension of the Socioeconomic Reforms, and in a 
number of government programs. 
  An understanding that global transformations connected with 
a 
change, virtually, in a state's social and economic formation 
are always accompanied by complex processes of changes in 
people's consciousness forced me to commence in parallel the 
conceptualization and elaboration of these problems pertinent 
for the activity of any social organism. We have to negotiate a 
transitional period which is quite substantial both in terms of 
scale of work and in terms of time. It is extraordinarily 
important in this connection to create in society a spiritual 
atmosphere which is adequate to the changes and which may be 
sustained only by a balanced policy of the state in all spheres, 
so specific a sphere as ideology included. 
  Arguments over whether ideology is needed or not are largely 
unproductive. To put it no more strongly: After this term had 
been introduced in practice, last century, it became an object 
of such manipulation that in time it partially lost its original 
meaning. The same thing is also happening in our society, which 
lived for decades under the harsh conditions of a totalitarian 
system. It is not surprising that since its collapse the 
"ideology" concept has acquired a negative connotation and has 
recently been employed in political vocabulary with a large 
degree of skepticism. But does ideology as such, that is, the 
set of views and ideas which are formulated in any state, a 
developing state particularly, for the purpose of the exercise 
of foreign and domestic policy, the development of science, 
culture, and education, and the assertion of new moral values, 
merit such an attitude? 
  Evidently not, inasmuch as without such a system, which may 
be defined as ideological, a society of the modern type simply 
cannot exist. The leading states of the world have always 
aspired to the creation not only of a political and economic but 
also an ideological image attractive both to its own citizens 
and to other countries also. If the state allows a vacuum to 
occur in this sphere, it is frequently filled by philosophical 
precepts of a different kind. 
  Ideology is essentially a method, which has stood the test 
of 
time, of the consolidation and mobilization of a community of 
people for the accomplishment of political and economic tasks, a 
mechanism of the shaping of social behavior. But this is not a 
compulsory method but civilized influence on people's minds 
exerted by the state and the parties and public movements 
sharing its platform. The existence of other views and outlooks 
is by no means precluded here. As long as there is life, as long 
as there are society and the state, there will always be 
different ideological currents. 
<H5>  The Current Social and Political Situation in Kazakhstan </H5>
  Kazakhstan has finally and irreversibly renounced an unequal 
life in the shadow of a former empire and has embarked on the 
building of a strong sovereign state with a socially oriented 
market economy and fundamentally new social relationships. The 
political system and state arrangement are changing 
fundamentally, and the republic has emphasized its commitment to 
a democratic course and international rules and principles. 
The highest value of the society we are building is man, 
in whose name and for whose good the transformations have been 
initiated. Guarantees of people's rights and liberties have been 
secured in legislation, and the ideas of consolidation, 
humanism, internation accord, and the equality of all nations 
and nationalities have been laid down. 
  All this, strictly speaking, is a firm foundation for the 
consistent implementation of the reforms. But it would be an 
illusion to believe that changes in the social consciousness 
occur automatically with a change in political and economic 
systems. This is a far more serious and complex phenomenon 
inasmuch as it is connected with deep-lying processes of social 
life and changes in world-outlook principles and psychological 
stereotypes and the very tenor of the life of society and each 
person individually. We have all today come in for a dual load, 
as it were: It is as though both the economy and society find 
themselves between past and present. Even while having fully 
recognized that there is no road back, we must acknowledge that 
the system of management, science, culture, education, and 
spiritual life invisibly bear the imprint of the past. 
  The same is happening in the social consciousness also. Such 
a concept as "anomie"--the state of man's confusion under 
sharply changed conditions, when the established value system is 
reinterpreted and there is a radical change in life's 
values--became firmly established in scholarship back last 
century. This is a difficult test not only for the individual 
citizen but for the whole of society also. And despite the fact 
that an absolute majority of Kazakhstanis support the reform 
policy, we must recognize that many people, while having 
apprehended the need for changes with their heart, so to speak, 
have yet to grasp their essence intellectually and are 
experiencing uncertainty, lacking an entirely clear idea of 
their future. 
  The state of a certain spiritual discomfort is being 
intensified by the economic crisis, which for the ordinary 
individual has been expressed primarily in the unchecked growth 
of prices, a fall in the living standard, and the unresolved 
nature of many social problems. Extremes of the political 
struggle frequently disorient people also. The most unexpected 
political speculation sometimes finds for itself a niche in the 
social consciousness. 
  In order to understand the situation shaping up in the 
political sphere of Kazakhstan today it is necessary to closely 
analyze the substance of the ideas that are being actively 
discussed in the press, in the party polemics, in economic 
circles, and, yes, in broad strata of society, perhaps. 
  Granted the entire complex picture of political views, and 
there is a great collection of them, it would seem necessary to 
examine the socialist and liberal views, as two poles of the 
current social and political diversity. Of course, this is 
somewhat of a simplification, but one that makes it possible to 
see the picture as a whole. 
  The socialist platform has certain supporters in 
society, although it is unlikely that it could be taken as a 
basis in reform. The period of wholesale criticism of the 
socialist idea has passed. The time has come for a serious 
analysis of what was done for the people by socialism in its 
Soviet version and of what simply cannot be accepted. 
  The creation in Kazakhstan in the years of Soviet power of a 
powerful industry and agriculture and unique production 
engineering complexes, universal literacy, urbanization, and 
much else would have been impossible without Kazakhstan's 
industrialization. Our present potential is to some extent the 
result of the former system. Only in polemical over-excitement 
could this be denied. 
  Orthodox supporters of the socialist idea are speaking with 
nostalgia about the past and insisting on its return and the 
institution of proceedings against politicians for their 
"crime," virtually. The illogicality of framing the issue this 
way is astonishing: While always urging a consideration of the 
objective regularities in history, the opposition is today 
putting the emphasis on personalities and incidental or 
temporary factors. Of course, individual leaders of that time 
did perform some role in accelerating the disintegration of the 
state. But if we keep to an objective, not emotional, viewpoint, 
it is obvious that socialism was in the most profound crisis as 
a system of socioeconomic and political relations. It may today 
be said affirmatively that it is a question of a crisis of 
extensive proportions. 
  Economic crisis. A key criterion of the efficiency 
of social systems is economic efficiency. By this criterion the 
centralized planned economy had ultimately conclusively lost out 
to the market economy. 
  Political crisis. The contradiction between the 
stated power of the people and the concentration of power in the 
hands of a very narrow elite of the intraparty bureaucracy had 
reached its logical conclusion. Formally political structures 
created the semblance of democracy, but in reality all decisions 
at the local and central levels were made only by the party 
leaders. 
  National crisis. Despite the proclaimed 
internationalism, the socialist system most brutally suppressed 
the free development of the nations for decades. Specifically, 
in Kazakhstan more than half the Kazakh people perished or 
emigrated, according to experts' estimates, in the years of 
forcible collectivization. All peoples of the country sustained 
colossal losses. National crisis is largely the creation of 
economic crisis. The relations of the center and the regions 
were of a semicolonial nature. The raw material focus of the 
republic's economy and its noncomprehensive nature were 
deliberately predetermined. To the same extent Kazakhstan was 
tightly tied to the center and other regions in a transport 
system whose purpose was to make an independent outlet onto the 
foreign market impossible. Only the threat of violence held back 
the hidden internation tension. When the system fell apart, the 
territory of the former USSR flared up in internation conflicts 
and wars. This is not the fault of people but the fault of past 
and present politicians. Violence--from the direct physical 
extermination of whole peoples through the constriction of the 
sphere of application of national languages--had driven the 
contradictions deep down. There were no other methods for their 
resolution. Despite all the statements about internationalism, 
behind the facade of official ideology steady negative 
stereotypes took shape in some peoples in respect to others, 
which at the everyday level are alive today also. The attempt to 
standardize all nations in a single super-ethnic community--the 
Soviet people--had manifestly failed. 
  Further, ecological crisis. The particular 
features of the socialist economic system with its 
abstract-nationwide, but in practice, departmental, ownership 
led to colossal ecological malfeasance on the part of the 
ministries and departments. The essence of the problem is that 
while disposing unchecked of the land and natural resources, the 
departments at the same time were not interested in 
environmentally clean industries and bore no real responsibility 
for the inevitable tragedies. This "no one's property" 
phenomenon brought about global catastrophes without precedent 
in previous history. The lack of ecological standards resulted 
in the confrontation of society and nature. Kazakhstan found 
itself in an extremely serious situation in this respect. 
  One of the biggest disasters was brought the Kazakh people 
by 
the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site. Conducting nuclear weapons 
testing, underground included, in Kazakhstan, the system 
perpetrated one of the most monstrous crimes in the history of 
mankind against the citizens of its own state. Over half a 
million persons have suffered from radiation in our republic 
alone. Many of them have already departed this life at the 
height of their powers, hundreds of thousands have been deprived 
of their health forever. Several generations of children have 
been condemned from birth to live as invalids. And the tragedy 
continues in many families, which are giving birth to cripples. 
  Another catastrophe which came to Kazakhstan is the Aral 
Sea, 
which is disappearing from the face of the earth. This calamity 
has subjected the peoples of the vast Central Asia region to 
untold suffering. And not only them: Scientists have drawn a 
substantiated conclusion concerning the global destructive 
influence of the Aral cataclysm on vast territories of the 
planet. 
  But those who have suffered most from these experiments 
presented by the former regime as struggle for the "bright 
future" are primarily the people of Kazakhstan. 
  We have still to tally the entire damage inflicted on 
people, 
the land, and nature as a whole. If only to estimate the true 
dimensions of the catastrophes and to determine measures to 
eliminate their consequences. And the world also should have a 
clear idea of the actual ecological situation in Kazakhstan. 
  Moral crisis. There was a discrepancy between the 
ideological symbols and people's real values. The dual morals of 
the governing elite could not have failed to have brought about 
the similar morals of millions of people formally participating 
in various political activities--meetings, demonstrations, 
marches, and so forth--yet absolutely disbelieving of the 
proclaimed slogans. When, today, there is bewilderment as to why 
the system fell apart so easily, it is simply forgotten that it 
had long since lost the confidence of the people, who saw and 
understood our growing lag behind the West and the Soviet 
economy's accelerating slide into crisis. Socialist ideals in 
recent years evoked nothing more than irony. All this was known, 
but ideology obdurately continued to serve the ambitions of the 
ruling elite and to pass off its interests as all-state 
interests. Let us recall the myths of Soviet homespun ideology 
divorced from reality--the theory of the merger of the nations, 
the practice of the relationship of state and individual, when 
the latter was assigned the role of "cog," and the implanted 
party-mindedness of science, literature, and art. Even such 
natural feelings as love for the motherland, concern for the 
future, fidelity to the traditions of one's ancestors--all this 
was fitted into the Procrustean bed of the "moral codes of the 
builders of communism." This was not an ideology but a kind of 
speculation on people's moral principles. 
  But it should be considered that for many people, 
forswearing 
old illusions is a very painful process. Mocking their 
convictions is impossible. Engaging in a competent and honest 
polemic is another matter. It is essential to explain as lucidly 
as possible that under modern conditions equality via state 
redistribution, state paternalism, ideological uniformity, and 
the suppression of private property and the market would repel 
Kazakhstan from the world community. A return to the past is 
futile and could merely detonate society and lead to civil war. 
It is no less important to recognize that the ubiquitously 
asserted myths of socialism--of the kind we experienced--have 
collapsed not only in the CIS but throughout the world. 
  Despite a number of achievements of this system, useful and 
realized in practice, we cannot finish up at a historical dead 
end yet again. 
  Another direction of social thought puts the emphasis on 
traditions and national character. The ideology of 
traditionalism is logically connected with the crisis of 
socialist ideology. Truly, to what can we turn if the previous 
tenets have proven bankrupt? To, most likely, that which is most 
simple, comprehensible and at the same time profoundly moral and 
spiritual in the life of each people--traditions. Their role in 
the life of the people is indisputable. Cultural traditions have 
always been a source of social revival. A return to one's 
historical cultural roots is, of course, a positive process. In 
addition, it is necessary to abandon the simplistic 
interpretation of the relationship of traditions and social 
progress. The experience of the modern world shows convincingly 
that certain traditional structures are very organically 
interwoven in the fabric of the present civilization. Without 
experience, innovation is impossible also. It is traditions that 
enable a person to "keep his bearings" and adapt his way of life 
to the impetuous changes of the modern world. 
  Development of the national language, art, culture, everyday 
culture included, and the family is entirely supported in 
Kazakhstan. But the political ideology of the traditional type, 
which is based on a resuscitation of archaic forms of social 
arrangement, tribal mentality, and a system of legal views 
characteristic of the territorial organization of Kazakh society 
of the 18th-19th centuries, is categorically rejected here. 
  The immense space occupied by Kazakhs on territory from the 
Caspian to China required some structural formalization and 
particular centers of attraction. This coincided with the 
particular features of historical development of different 
regions and was accompanied subsequently by a system of 
administrative division consciously introduced by tsarism. On 
the other hand, the singularities of management of the economy 
also required a precise regulation of territorial issues. 
Regional affiliation, therefore, has primordially played an 
appreciable role in the political arrangement. But do we need to 
bring all this into the 21st century? After all, under modern 
conditions the rate of development of the social and cultural 
systems of the Kazakh people are absolutely incommensurable with 
that period. 
  Thus despite the aspiration, understandable to some extent, 
to find in our own history effective political mechanisms, we 
need to be realists and to recognize that the political ideas 
and political symbols of past ages are not suitable for the end 
of the present century. Even in the past, incidentally, our 
great educators called for the prevention of a stratification of 
Kazakh society. 
  Also popular in social circles are liberal ideas. 
At the end of the 1980's and at the start of the present decade 
the general euphoria at their triumph and the affirmation of 
ideals common to all mankind and the rights and liberties of man 
as the highest value led to the optimistic conclusion as to the 
conclusive victory of democracy and democratic principles. 
  But there has come to be a gradual understanding throughout 
the world that complex processes also are occurring against the 
background of liberal ideology. Not to touch on other regions of 
the world but to speak about our former common space, mention 
has to be made of the growing social tension in society, which 
is expressed at times in the most extreme forms--armed 
conflicts, political confrontations, economic anarchy, and 
people's unbelief in the possibility of changing anything. 
Instead of the growth of a civilized market, speculative capital 
in all spheres--finances, trade, foreign economic 
relations--walks side by side with two companions--criminal 
elements and the corrupt nomenklatura. These processes have 
nothing in common with the modern world market, but they exist 
in reality, manifestly contradicting the very essence of liberal 
ideology. Internation conflicts, on the other hand, graphically 
demonstrate that arguments about democracy and values common to 
all mankind are not as yet capable of protecting human life and 
dignity. 
  Of course, the contradiction between liberal ideology and 
harsh reality may be explained by reference to the legacy of 
totalitarianism. This would be correct, but only partly so. 
There are more profound reasons. 
  Liberal ideals and liberal ideology are the result of the 
extensive, centuries-long evolution of Western civilization. The 
basis of these is composed of objective prerequisites--private 
property, the mentality of individualism, and democratic 
political institutions. Its rudiments with us were either absent 
or were interrupted almost a century ago. In addition, a strong 
legal system facilitating the realization of liberal ideas was 
created in civilized states. Outside of these objective 
prerequisites this process is extraordinarily more difficult. 
  The fact that the main and most populous support of the 
ideology of liberalism--the middle class--as it is customarily 
called in social science, does not exist in the republic as yet 
has to be seen also. Account should be taken of the actual 
cultural and historical situation as well. The point being that 
with a mechanical transfer of Western liberal ideology to 
Kazakhstan its proponents would come up against such a 
phenomenon as culture--in the broad, including political, sense. 
Its nature and ideals cannot be changed in an instant. The type 
of political culture needs to be transformed gradually, in 
civilized fashion and on the basis of real reforms. 
  Thus an analysis of the political and ideological directions 
in present-day Kazakhstan testifies to the need for the search 
for particular paths in the formation of the ideological 
platform. We do not reject that which is valuable that has 
accumulated within it socialist and traditional and liberal 
views. But the tasks confronting Kazakhstan require, in our 
view, the conceptualization of somewhat different national 
ideological priorities. 
<H5>  Toward Real Independence </H5>
  We speak about the transitional period. What is 
its substance? To what do we aspire? There are a whole number of 
specific economic and political directions which are set forth 
in the constitution, documents of the executive and the 
legislature, and the programs of certain parties of Kazakhstan. 
But aside from the specific tasks, there is also a global 
purpose, without having achieved which we cannot successfully 
move forward along the path of the reform of society. It is a 
question of the achievement of the real independence of 
the republic. Despite its numerous attributes and the 
recognition and assertion of sovereignty, to say that Kazakhstan 
has acquired full independence would be premature. 
  We must in the next few years concentrate all efforts on 
this 
process. We have for this to resolve, generally speaking, the 
following key problems--to strengthen state principles, 
build a state based on the rule of law, and ensure the formation 
of a full-fledged national market on a new production 
engineering, structural, and institutional basis. Such a 
formulation of the issue will, most likely, meet with the 
understanding of parties and public movements, the work force, 
entrepreneurial circles, research and artistic organizations, 
and representatives of all strata of the population of the 
republic inasmuch as the said priorities are of an all-state 
nature and their realization could effect the profound 
modernization of Kazakhstani society. If we seek so necessary a 
consensus, we should also agree with such an inevitable 
condition: The achievement of real independence requires strong 
political, intellectual, and spiritual support. It is essential 
that we secure not only an economic, organizational, and 
personnel breakthrough in these directions but also create an 
atmosphere consolidating society. And we have to have here an 
ideological comprehension of our reality geared both to the 
immediate and the more distant future. 
  One of the main political aspects for us in the impending 
work is the strengthening of statehood. On the whole, 
this is a natural inference from the experience of world 
civilization: An objective need for an increase in the 
regulatory influence of the state, which is essential primarily 
to secure the emergence from the crisis and stabilization of the 
socioeconomic and social and political situation, is necessarily 
manifested in an era of profound crises and upheavals. We should 
concentrate the main efforts here on enhancing the role and 
responsibility of the executive, strengthening the vertical line 
of management, and forming strong presidential rule. Both 
parliament and society as a whole agree on the need for an 
intensification of this process, to which the quite precise 
allocation of functions of the three branches of power in the 
country's basic law testifies. 
  But the formation of the state of Kazakhstan is not confined 
merely to adoption of the constitution. Especially since it was 
stipulated from the very outset that it is a constitution of a 
transitional period which has been created. It reflects the 
realities of our present day and the complexities and 
contradictions of our society. Its provisions and requirements 
are binding on all. But it is necessary to ponder the prospects, 
looking into the future, even now. 
  The present Supreme Council is fulfilling its historical 
mission and performing a great deal of work, laying the 
foundations of the country's legislative base. The next stage of 
societal development will inevitably require us to create a 
professional parliament with clearly defined duties and powers. 
It is important also that we reach a common opinion on which of 
the world's prevalent and approved electoral systems is the 
optimum and which of them is applicable for our republic. The 
next task is the legislative separation of the powers of the 
central state and local authorities, in terms of which the 
executive and representatives authorities locally are 
sufficiently plenipotentiary in the solution of their problems. 
The central structures would then be relieved of diverse current 
business and could concentrate on the strategic directions of 
political, economic, and social development. 
  It is essential to reform the judicial system also. 
Unfortunately, people still have no faith in the authority and 
competence of the judicial authorities locally. It is as yet too 
early to speak of the objectivity of the courts and the 
constructive nature of their activity; they are divorced from 
the problems of society, as it were. It is necessary to make the 
judicial system as efficient as possible and to rid it of the 
possibility, which still exists, of pressure being exerted on 
the part of the power structures, in the localities 
particularly. A most practicable path of this reform is the 
legislative enshrinement of the appointability of judges by the 
head of state following a recommendation of a special supreme 
judicial council, say. We could this way ensure the genuine 
independence of the judges and cut short any encroachment on 
justice. 
  As we can see, the process of the formation of Kazakhstani 
statehood is a complex, laborious, and diverse task. And there 
should be no ill-considered haste or unwarranted slowness here. 
It is important to secure the mutual understanding and 
interaction of all branches of power. We would be doing future 
generations a bad turn were we to loosen the foundations of the 
state for the sake of momentary political benefits. 
  The accomplishment of radical socioeconomic 
reforms undoubtedly belongs among the main national 
priorities. This is a key question of modern Kazakhstan and its 
acquisition of independence. The fate of the reforms is directly 
linked with the mechanisms of state control of the political 
sphere inasmuch as Kazakhstan's development of recent decades 
has been characterized by very complex and large-scale 
processes. It is in this period that a number of global programs 
have been realized on the territory of the republic. These 
include the development of the virgin and fallow land, the 
creation of industry's colossal raw material base, and nuclear 
and space research. 
  But the national, social, and cultural problems introduced 
into Kazakhstan by the realization of these programs went 
unstudied and uncomprehended behind the economic and military 
aspect of these processes. A qualitative change occurred--for 
the first time the proportion of the urban population exceeded 
that of the rural population. The unevenness of the development 
of the regions increased sharply. There was a change in the 
national composition of the population on account of the huge 
immigration from the European part of the country. A sizable 
group of an urban Kazakh population, with the concentration of 
the bulk of the nation in the countryside, appeared. 
  All of this could not have failed to have led to the 
appearance of very strong differences in political and cultural 
orientations. At the same time, on the other hand, the 
ostensible ideological unity was deliberately emphasized and 
exaggerated, and the differences and problems were ignored. As a 
result the ideological and political contradictions of different 
strata of the population grew. Today they are coming to be 
manifested actively. 
  It is for this reason that the molding of a new economic 
philosophy now occupies a special place. This is connected 
primarily with its direct influence on an acceleration of the 
progress of the reforms. The ideology of a democratic, 
rule-of-law society based on a pluralism of ideas is nothing 
other than a reflection of views on the forms of ownership and 
management. We have set as the strategic goal the formation of 
genuinely market mechanisms and a socially oriented 
multistructural market economy. That is, we have opted for the 
path of the creation of a society in which economic liberty and 
the economic interests of the individual are indisputable and 
where the free expression of beliefs and spiritual values is 
guaranteed by the state and the law. 
  But owing to the tenacity of past ideological stereotypes, 
the affirmation of these norms can hardly be painless. It is no 
secret that instances of the open rejection of the reforms at 
both the power and the everyday level are far from isolated with 
us. What is to be done in this situation: opt for a hard-line 
policy, establish the direct diktat of the state, organize the 
persecution of the opposition for criticism of the government? 
There have been many examples of this in the contemporary 
history of the implementation of economic reforms, incidentally. 
  The actual social and political situation in Kazakhstan 
enables us to avoid such power actions lowering the republic's 
international prestige. It needs merely to be emphasized that 
both on the issues of a strengthening of statehood and in the 
economy there has to be a mutual aspiration of the government 
and the main political movements and parties to a convergence of 
positions on questions of the reform. It is not, of course, a 
question of some class appeasement and a ban on constructive 
criticism of the actions of the government and the formulation 
of alternative programs. The danger lies elsewhere. As the 
experience of certain CIS countries testifies, it consists of 
internation and political destabilization, which, certainly, is 
in the interests of no political party and no single inhabitant 
of multinational Kazakhstan. 
  A cultured, civilized dialogue with all who are sincerely 
interested in Kazakhstan's breakthrough in economic space and 
time is essential. It is necessary to take account of all this 
and to formulate the basic principles of ideology in the 
economic sphere. They are geared to: 
  the creation of a socially oriented mixed market 
economy based on a combination of the competitive 
self-regulation of production and regulation of the basic 
parameters of economic development on the part of the state; 
  support for national enterprise in all its forms 
with the priority of private enterprise in the sectors directly 
producing material assets in the sphere of services, 
construction, transport, and trade; 
  the structural reorganization of production and 
the surmounting of its raw material one-sidedness with 
priorities in the fuel and energy and iron and steel complexes 
and the food and consumer goods market and in the development of 
the system of service lines; 
  the social protection of the population, 
particularly the needy and handicapped strata, assurance of 
employment, and the surmounting of unemployment and the 
unmanageability in migration processes; 
  use of the economic advantages from the middle "Eurasian" 
geopolitical location and pragmatism in the choice of 
economic and political partners in interstate relations. 
  The market cannot be built without the masses' recognition 
and acceptance of such categories as economic efficiency, the 
personal economic liberty of the individual, and private 
property. It is obvious that these categories cannot be firmly 
established in the consciousness without the corresponding 
social base, the formation of which is only just beginning. 
Under these conditions it is the state that assumes the function 
of defense of the new economic ideology. Without the active 
ideological support of the state a market mentality simply 
cannot take shape. It is essential to understand here that the 
real market presupposes not only propaganda of its values but 
also a mastery of the essential mechanisms and skills. It is 
obvious that in Kazakhstan only the state can undertake the 
large-scale training of personnel equipped with this set of 
instruments. 
  A strengthening of state principles should be accompanied by 
the building of a society based on the rule of law. This is a 
task of national significance. We are talking primarily about 
questions of legal culture and legal reform in the 
republic, for without them there will be no social progress and 
independence will not be complete. 
  In a civilized society legal culture is an essential 
component of the general culture of each individual and a 
qualifications requirement of each official. There needs to be a 
most serious discussion about this inasmuch as without the 
establishment of the proper rule of law we can hardly reform the 
economy and affirm democratic standards in the life of society. 
  The market implies primarily the self-regulation of the 
relations of the commodity producers and consumers based on 
qualitative laws. Without precisely operating legislation, 
therefore, there is no market, nor can there be. 
  Democracy requires state power clearly protected both 
against 
autocracy and against mob rule. It can only be protected via 
observance of binding legal procedures, for both the violence of 
the minority and the violence of the majority are equally 
dangerous. Without law, therefore, democracy is impossible. 
  Freedom of the individual as the target idea of a state of 
civilization presupposes the sovereignty of the individual and 
protection of his inviolability and dignity, regardless of 
whether he is a child or adult, employer or employed, state 
official or rank and file employee. Such legal equality is 
possible only if there is general observance of the 
democratically adopted laws. Only the court can transform any 
social conflict into a civilized dialogue. That is, without the 
law there is no liberty. 
  It may observed that in terms of its importance and 
complexity legal reform is the equivalent of economic reform. 
The building of a state based on the rule of law needs to begin 
with the state itself. This is a stringent demand of the market 
economy and the democratic society. If high-quality laws are 
lacking, the laws have to be constantly amended and revised. If 
the laws do not operate, "telephone law," as before, will. If 
legal thinking does not become firmly established in the 
consciousness, there will be those wishing to encroach on the 
functions of administration, investigation, and justice. 
  If we truly intend building a civilized society in which the 
ideas of right and ethics triumph, each citizen must from his 
school years assimilate their elementary principles, just as 
each of us knows the elementary principles of mathematics. 
  Like any sovereign state, Kazakhstan will maintain a 
defense capability and strengthen national security. We 
have adopted a military doctrine and a package of military laws, 
which specify both measures to prevent war and methods of 
defense of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the 
republic. Our doctrine has an exclusively defensive focus. We 
take account here of the doctrines of the states of the CIS and 
offer cooperation with them in the accomplishment of joint 
defense assignments. But however the situation in military 
questions shapes up, only political methods taking account of 
the balance of states' interests are a civilized method of the 
solution of international problems and conflict settlement. 
Kazakhstan has confirmed its commitment to this position 
repeatedly. We should also carefully consider the geopolitical 
factor as well. An exceptional balance of decisions in the 
military sphere which do not disturb in the least the continuing 
stability in the region is essential. 
  Maintaining defense capability is a most important state 
function. The political aspect is significant here also. Our 
armed forces are currently in the formation phase. The state has 
rendered and will continue to render them daily support. From 
its first steps the army of the republic is called upon to 
enhance combat readiness, be for the youth a true school of 
devotion to the motherland, and to multiply our people's truly 
illustrious combat and labor traditions. At the same time, on 
the other hand, it is essential to establish in society a 
respectful attitude toward the defenders of the fatherland. 
Military service should possess tremendous prestige, and the 
army's authority among the people must be made unshakable. Much 
will depend here both on the men themselves and on the 
government and public organizations, primarily those that work 
with the youth. We must not allow an unhealthy atmosphere to be 
created around the army or servicemen to feel themselves to be 
second-class citizens. 
  Strengthening the independence of the state, we should 
continue the development of the course in foreign 
policy. We are aware of the close attention to and 
increased interest in the international orientation of 
Kazakhstan. Attempts to predetermine the vector of the 
republic's outlet to the outside world are made openly or 
covertly from time to time. 
  It would seem extraordinarily important in this connection 
to 
adhere to a multipolar orientation on the basis of our 
geographical location and ethnodemographic and other factors. 
The basis of our international relations is an aspiration to 
establish mutually profitable political, socioeconomic, and 
cultural relations with all countries, near and far. 
  Taking account of the salient features of historical 
development, we are undoubtedly paying and will continue to pay 
paramount attention to an expansion of cooperation with Russia, 
the republics of Central Asia, and other states of the CIS, with 
many of which we are bound by close integration and allied, 
including defense, agreements. 
  The creation of the Economic Union will afford favorable 
opportunities for the consolidation of interstate contacts, 
economic interaction, the restoration under the new conditions 
of rational relations, the organization of efficient sectoral 
cooperation, and the expansion of information and cultural 
exchange. 
  We attach enormous significance to the dynamics of 
continental development. It is this that justifies the 
well-known initiatives we have put forward at the United Nations 
and also the steps connected with the convening of the 
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in 
Asia and the activity of the Asian Economic Cooperation 
Organization. 
  In foreign policy activity we will adhere consistently to 
the 
commonly accepted international standards and comply strictly 
with the commitments we have assumed. 
  And concerning one other most important factor of the 
formation of the sovereignty of Kazakhstan--information 
independence, without which the creation of an efficient 
ideological platform is impossible. 
  We are becoming more and more extensively a part of 
international information exchange, which is undoubtedly a 
positive phenomenon. But this process cannot be interpreted 
simplistically. An expansion of the international system of 
information does not mean an automatic extension of democracy in 
the region. Information channels in the world are distributed 
and loaded unevenly, which is connected with the limited range 
of languages of exposition of the information and the differing 
level of states' financial and technical possibilities. 
  The young independent states frequently find themselves 
under 
the strong pressure of opinions imposed from outside. As a 
result most complex internal processes with their particular 
logic are evaluated by an outside view and frequently explained 
superficially and, at times, tendentiously also. This results in 
a kind of barrier in the way of the establishment of the genuine 
independence of many states. But closing off outside sources of 
information would mean for us self-isolation. 
  The solution is to see behind the information announcements 
the essence of the political principles. The state is required 
to regulate the information balance. This is in no way contrary 
to the principles of an open society and makes it possible at 
the same time to seriously approach the achievement of genuine 
information independence. It is essential here that our mass 
media learn to uphold the interests of the republic and create 
their own information space in the world's political arena. We 
need to win an audience outside of the republic, especially 
since we have impressive arguments in support of our foreign and 
domestic policy steps. 
  Such are the basic national priorities, fidelity to which 
will bring us onto the path leading to the achievement of real 
independence. This is possible only on condition of the creation 
in society of an atmosphere of consolidation, stability, and 
spiritual harmony. 
<H5>  Toward Ideological Consolidation </H5>
  It is hardly necessary today to convince anyone that 
national 
movements, particularly in the young independent states, are 
performing a colossal role. It is they that are to a 
considerable extent upholding national interests expressed in a 
revival of the self-awareness, culture, spirituality, 
traditions, and language of any people. These processes are 
occurring currently in Kazakhstan also. Realization of the 
national idea has produced for society many positive results. 
And it would be a big mistake not to see this and to discern in 
nations' natural aspiration to self-revival merely a limitation 
of the rights of others or a sham appeal, as a tribute to 
fashion, to the past, frequently of a decorative nature. 
  No, this is a return to a normal human condition. And the 
peoples of the republic should on the one hand adopt an 
understanding attitude toward the changes taking place in the 
consciousness of the Kazakh people and render them spiritual and 
intellectual support. On the other, it should be seen that under 
the new conditions other peoples also are undergoing complex 
formation processes, which requires the same understanding and 
attitude on the part of the Kazakh nation. Everyone should 
understand that it is impossible to compel respect for oneself 
and one's national dignity while denying it to others. 
  It is perfectly obvious that under the conditions of 
multinational Kazakhstan there is only one way of realizing 
national interests, which consists of a guarantee of the 
equality of all peoples with the integrating role of the Kazakh 
nation. Any other is fraught with disastrous conflicts and a 
halt to the democratic reforms. The key ideological task for us 
in this connection is the assurance of internation 
harmony. 
  The elaboration of a special integral concept of 
Kazakhstan's 
nationality policy for the transitional period incorporating a 
study of the specific requirements of the nations and 
nationalities living in the republic and realization of the 
provisions of the constitution concerning their free development 
would seem extremely necessary today. It is important here that 
the activity of the state authorities and public organizations 
primordially be geared to the development of the interaction of 
the peoples and their spiritual unity in the name of the 
achievement of the set goals. It is our duty to convert the 
polyethnic nature of society into a stable consolidating factor. 
  An important part in the accomplishment of this task could 
be 
played together with traditional institutions such as the 
educational system, the family, and the work force by 
national-cultural centers. They should be not only focal points 
of the preservation of national self-awareness and the 
development of the distinctive spirituality but also be schools 
of genuine internationalism. Taking advantage of their 
possibilities of work directly with people, the centers could do 
much to overcome national narrowness and exclusiveness and 
manifestations of chauvinism, nationalism, and separatism. There 
is a sphere in which their influence could be particularly 
effective. I refer to our social life, people's everyday mutual 
relations. After all, it is here that conflicts, seemingly 
negligible, but dangerous in their consequences, in internation 
soil at times arise. 
  Together with the state institutions they could do much for 
the development of cultural ties between the peoples and ensure 
a pluralism and the compatibility of the cultures with the free 
development of each. 
  Some nongovernment structure which could assume the 
functions 
of practical realization of the ideas of internation harmony and 
unity and be a directive body of the Forum of Peoples of 
Kazakhstan will be necessary in the future, most likely. Its 
composition should make provision for the representation of all 
ethnic groups, well-known public figures, the most authoritative 
personalities in the republic, and the administration chiefs. 
The national-cultural centers could in conjunction with the 
public organizations channel the energy of all strata of society 
into a creative channel, study the deep-lying processes in the 
relationships of different social and national groups, and 
pursue a consistent policy aimed at excluding internation or 
social tension in any region of the country. 
  An active part in this noble work could be taken by the 
public movements and parties. Primarily those whose program 
principles are aimed at the consolidation of Kazakh society in 
the name of the progress of the reforms. 
  Together with the affirmation of internation harmony the 
strengthening of intranation unity would seem 
important in realization of the idea of the consolidation of 
Kazakhstani society. This problem exists today, and the task is 
to ensure that the national idea perform a unifying, 
constructive role in this case. 
  In the research aspect the history and nature of the 
intra-Kazakh division into zhuzy, clans and territorial 
groupings and the nature of its influence on the development of 
society past and present have still to be conceptualized. But 
the essence is that new and by no means innocuous trends of 
intranation division have emerged. The democratization of social 
life and a certain independence of the regions have come to be 
used as levers of monopoly control over resources by local 
elites. Various forms of clannish protectionism and clannish and 
territorial lobbies are at times manifested in the power 
structures and in the financial and commercial spheres. 
  As a whole, contemporary clan and tribal ideology is a 
highly 
dangerous form of intranation disintegration and disorientation. 
A leitmotiv of state ideology, therefore, should be the 
surmounting of clan stereotypes. The potential for this exists. 
This includes primarily the historically evolved national 
statehood. The unitary state arrangement. The territorial 
integrity of Kazakhstan. The unity of the centuries-old culture. 
The entire population of the republic is united beneath these 
slogans today, and all the more should they call for the 
national unity of the Kazakh people. 
  Another most important ideological mission of ours is the 
fostering of Kazakhstani patriotism and the formation 
of the clear self-determination of each citizen. Specialists use 
for this term "self-identification." And it is by no means a 
question of citizenship as such, which pertains to legal acts 
with a precise juridical meaning. There is an appreciable 
difference between taking out citizenship and recognizing 
oneself to be a citizen. 
  Unfortunately, the understanding that henceforward we shall 
all be citizens of the independent, sovereign state of 
Kazakhstan, not the former USSR or the CIS, is of a very 
superficial nature. Moreover, certain strata of the population, 
having lost their former ideals and not having acquired new 
ones, are today experiencing a certain confusion, which is 
converting them into a sum total of the notorious "social 
atoms." The formation, on the other hand, of genuine patriotism 
and real civicism presupposes the precise political 
self-determination of the personality and a conscious choice of 
one's motherland. 
  It is essential to formulate a system of actions which helps 
each person feel proud of his involvement in our state, its rich 
and illustrious history, and its future. Both the problems and 
prospects of the country should be close and comprehensible to 
all people. 
  This task also concerns the entire system of education, the 
cultural authorities, public organizations, the mass media, and 
each family. And we need to start with the inculcation of a 
reverential attitude toward the country's flag, coat of arms, 
and anthem, obedience to the law, and respect for the 
authorities. We need to ensure that each person assimilate from 
his childhood years the essentially simple idea: Kazakhstan is 
my fatherland, and I am responsible for it, as it is for me. 
  Questions of the establishment in society of high 
linguistic culture should also be in the channel of 
constructive work on ideological consolidation. This problem has 
become heavily politicized as of late, although it should be 
viewed not from the standpoint of the exclusiveness of the 
official language and its counterpoise to others, as people have 
attempted to do, but, on the contrary, from its unifying role. 
The Kazakh language, as a part of the culture, should be an 
additional factor of the consolidation of all Kazakhstanis. It 
is the basis of cognition for all nations and nationalities of 
the culture, traditions, customs, and everyday life of the 
Kazakh people. Study thereof, not compulsory but deliberate, 
should commence for everyone from his childhood years and be 
supported organizationally and methodically. And everyone living 
here should clearly recognize the need for this approach. At the 
same time, on the other hand, all people should know that our 
legislation as a whole and the Language Act in particular 
protect them against all restrictions and persecution based on 
knowledge or ignorance of the official and any other language. 
  The question of an enhancement of the consolidating role of 
the Kazakh language is pertinent for the added reason that in 
recent decades part of the Kazakh youth has come to be divorced 
from its native language environment, which has occurred on 
account of the artificial narrowing of the sphere of use of the 
native language. 
  This problem can be tackled in entirely civilized fashion. 
There is among this part of the Kazakh population a relatively 
great desire and readiness to familiarize itself with its 
national roots. Consequently, we should not be exacerbating the 
situation but creating the conditions for filling in the gaps. 
Moral sensitivity on the part of those for whom national culture 
and language are natural and organic is needed also. 
  Speaking of the language problem, it is essential to link it 
with our general goals. Kazakhstan aspires to join the world 
community on a par with others. Linguistic self-isolation is 
incompatible with this, however. A channel of introduction to 
the immense flow of information in the modern world is Russian. 
For this reason knowledge of Russian is a positive factor for 
the peoples of the republic. 
  On the whole, it is essential to inculcate in young people 
of 
all nationalities an aspiration to the constant enrichment of 
linguistic potential. The study of European and oriental 
languages today together with knowledge of one's own and the 
official language are a command of the times. The state is 
required to create the necessary conditions for study in this 
case also. 
  Any constructive, not destructive, ideology in Kazakhstan 
should also take account of the fact that our state is not only 
multinational but also multicredal. A religious perception of 
the world is characteristic of hundreds of thousands of 
citizens, and the number of followers of various creeds 
continues to grow. There has also been a change in the 
place of religion in society. Even recently it was, 
to put it mildly, on the periphery, now it is a real component 
of social and spiritual life. The sphere of charitable activity 
of religion, specifically in the field of health care, 
education, and culture (the creation of kindergarten and 
retirement homes, hospitals, and educational institutions) is 
expanding. It is common knowledge that values common to all 
mankind are the basis of the moral principles of various 
religions. The religious communities are doing a great deal to 
maintain in society a healthy atmosphere, peace, and harmony and 
to establish spirituality. It is important that the followers of 
various creeds can recognize their involvement in the creation 
of the new statehood and have a vital interest in its 
strengthening and development. The renunciation of the 
ideological confrontation with religion and the adoption of the 
constitution and the Law "On Freedom of Religious Belief and 
Religious Associations" afford extensive opportunities in this 
respect. 
  At the same time it is essential to convey to the 
consciousness of all that the secular nature of the state 
permits the most democratic solution of the questions of free 
choice of any religion or atheism and assures the equality of 
the creeds. Also important is an understanding that the 
separation of religious associations from the state not only 
creates favorable opportunities for the satisfaction of 
religious requirements but also presupposes their 
noninterference in the activity of all state institutions and 
organizations. 
  It is necessary to strive for fulfillment of the provisions 
of the constitution concerning the impermissibility of the 
creation of political parties on a religious basis and the 
political activity of religious associations. We need to 
counteract attempts to use religious feelings for instigating 
conflicts in society and to promote the positive directions in 
the activity of the religions. The effectiveness of the new 
ideological propositions, on the other hand, will also depend on 
how extensively and successfully the dialogue of the main social 
forces, including the clergy of various creeds, is conducted and 
to what extent its participants display a will to joint search 
for paths of mutual understanding and cooperation in the name of 
the well-being of the multinational people of Kazakhstan. 
  An appreciable influence on a strengthening of the 
consolidation of society is exerted by the creation of an 
atmosphere of stability and civic harmony. Much will 
depend here on the skillfully organized dialogue of the state 
and the new political institutions--political parties and public 
movements. As a whole, it is still too early to speak of 
qualitatively and quantitatively evolved multiparty conditions. 
But we must foster in society a tolerance of the views of 
political opponents. On the whole, the opposition is a normal 
and even useful phenomenon. But the main thing is that parties 
and movements operate in a constructive spirit and engage in 
criticism in the true meaning of this word, not carping. We need 
ideas and versions of this program or the other capable of 
serving the common good, not general arguments and altercations. 
The state authorities are adhering in relation to the parties 
and movements at the present time to a centrism contributing to 
observance of statewide interest, not the interest of a part of 
society. We will continue to actively support structures 
establishing political stability and at the same time to cut 
short anticonstitutional, unlawful actions based on extremist 
ideas. 
  Parties and movements, to whatever orientations they adhere 
and however contradictory their platforms, can do much for the 
consolidation of society. The trend of their unification in the 
form of a roundtable is a fact of positive value. 
  Also extremely important is the role of the parties and 
public movements in the shaping of political culture and the 
creation of political traditions which are new for us. Without 
this, stability and civic accord, as the basis of consolidation, 
become barely attainable. 
  It is essential to understand that we need stability for the 
sake of continuation of the reforms and determination of their 
correct pace corresponding to their particular stage. 
Specifically, a certain cultural adaptation is needed for the 
continuation of privatization. That is, we need to identify the 
"reference points" at which we need to stop and closely analyze 
the path that has been covered. Not only for the purpose of 
adjustment but also with the aim of preparing and acclimatizing 
the public consciousness to them. Such an approach is very 
important in political reform also. We have consciously moved to 
gradually transform the political system, although even this is 
evoking rebukes from the radicals. There should be no haste in 
personnel matters either, incidentally. Stability is 
immeasurably more important to us. 
  The revolutionary leap forward syndrome is a very dangerous 
ailment for society. Sociopolitical revolutions are not the best 
way to develop the state. A task of the present generation of 
Kazakhstanis is the creation of a society in which mechanisms of 
the evolutionary type operate and in which its renewal is 
consistent. 
  The ideology of modernization, which is a complex 
multilevel phenomenon, contains a consolidating principle also. 
This is both the ideological platform of the economic reforms 
and the transformation of political institutions and a new type 
of social behavior. 
  When people speak today about the danger of the 
modernization 
of Kazakhstan and recall the deplorable experience of the 
1930's, they forget two facts. First, we are talking about an 
entirely different modernization, second, it is not of a 
forcible nature. 
  Truly, the forced collectivization and compulsory transition 
to other methods of management struck a colossal blow at the 
people, undermining primarily the entire tenor of life for 
years. Politically, the modernization amounted at that time to 
affirmation of the totalitarian idea in all spheres of society. 
It is this uniformity that we have to overcome. Unless society 
is modernized, we will simply lose the future. There would, at 
worst, be a restoration of totalitarianism in this form or the 
other. 
  Modernization presupposes the formation of a developed civil 
society. And this incorporates primarily the sum total of 
voluntary associations of people: the family, public 
organizations, religious, cultural, and economic associations, 
trade unions, and so forth. Their common characteristic is that 
they are truly voluntary, nonstate, and nonpolitical 
organizations. It means people's entire private property and 
particular customs, habits, and rights. It means the sphere of 
life that is protected against outside interference. 
  The formation of such a civil society requires gradual 
evolution. Economically, the basis thereof are 
nonstate enterprises, that is, all economic associations of the 
citizens on a voluntary basis and in accordance with independent 
initiative. When this sector of the economy becomes just as 
significant as the public sector, the degree of the citizens' 
economic freedom will enable them to determine their future 
themselves. 
  Socially, this means primarily the family and all 
nonstate public associations of the citizens, but formed for 
other than political purposes. They may vary from a fellowship 
of scientists or unofficial mass media through a sports club or 
economic organization. 
  Finally, ideologically, this means ideological 
pluralism and real freedom of speech and freedom of worship. 
  The modernization of Kazakhstan presupposes the formation of 
a civil society which is a condition of the freedom of each 
citizen and the stability of society as a whole. 
  A certain modernization of political institutions and the 
formation of a mass democratic consciousness are essential in 
addition to this. 
  Utopian notions of democracy as some anarchic freedom 
manifestly do not correspond to the political arrangement of 
truly democratic societies. In actual fact, the organization of 
political life in them is somewhat different. Politics there 
becomes a sphere of professional activity, and the population 
participates in it via local government, elections, and the mass 
media. It is such an arrangement, not demonstration anarchy, 
which is the indicator of the stability of democracy. This 
system includes a multiparty arrangement and numerous civic 
movements, national-cultural centers, and economic and cultural 
foundations. But the main thing is that in the civil society the 
state sharply restricts its interference in the economic and 
private life of the individual. 
  It should be considered that the formation of a civil 
society 
is impossible also without a modernization of values. It is 
essential to renounce state paternalism. We have become 
accustomed to the state being responsible for each and 
everything, the subject notwithstanding--the retiree who has 
given the best years of his life to social labor or a perfectly 
able-bodied individual. Henceforward, however, support will be 
rendered only the groups of the population that actually need 
it. The accentuated social policy is aimed primarily at the 
needy, large families, the handicapped, retirees, and students. 
But this is one aspect of the problem. Any economically 
independent person, in the private sector particularly, should 
understand that economic freedom demands responsibility also. A 
person must himself be responsible for his well-being, as long, 
by virtue of different circumstances, as he is not among the 
socially vulnerable strata. This high individual responsibility 
for his material and social position should be a principal 
ethical norm. 
  It is essential also to effect a transition from group to 
individual choice. In the new economic, political, and cultural 
sphere the highest value is individual liberty, individual 
choice. Kazakhstan has subscribed to international legal 
instruments giving individual freedom and choice priority not 
from tactical considerations. It is the ideological axiom of the 
modern world. The former system of group control has already 
been demolished. It is essential to create mechanisms of inner 
self-control, which will require a change in the entire system 
of education. 
  Finally, it is essential to determine the institutions 
of realization of the new ideological platform. 
  In speaking of the ideology that has departed our political 
arena we mean that its institutions and the immense machinery 
that worked on it have disappeared together with it also. Of 
course, there can be no question of its reconstitution inasmuch 
as we have proclaimed entirely different principles and 
approaches not only to the content but also the organization of 
ideological activity. 
  But, as in any democratic society, a system of the 
dissemination of modern knowledge, essential political and 
socioeconomic information, and the propaganda of moral values 
and behavioral standards in keeping with the transformations 
which are being effected must be created here. Professional 
machinery is undoubtedly required for this, and its functions 
consist also of helping people figure out the far from simple 
questions of our life and analyze social and political phenomena 
and economic and international problems. 
  The reform of society should necessarily be based on a 
broadly erudite stratum of propaganda workers and ideologists, 
primarily in the person of public servants. They should be 
active conduits of political and economic strategy and tactics 
to broad strata of the populace, particularly in the localities. 
Incompetent, conservative officials should be replaced by 
progressive specialists, people of the market generation, who 
know the fundamentals of political science, sociology, and 
psychology and who are convinced and energetic and capable of 
in-depth generalizations and independent evaluations. 
  The educational system, science, culture, artistic 
organizations, and the mass media should participate in molding 
the political culture of society and in realizing humanitarian 
ideas contributing to its progressive development. 
  The platform of ideological consolidation requires 
all-around 
discussion. The shaping of a new world outlook of Kazakhstani 
society is only at the initial stage. But we must be able to 
discern the actual outlines of our future concerns. Future 
generations will be able to look even further. 
  We are not today building an epoch-making ideological 
structure. But it is important to understand that the 
transitional period is not a period of stagnation, it has its 
own logic of development, its own long-range goals, its own 
ideological substantiation. It is today that the foundations of 
the civilized development of the country, of the society toward 
which we have begun to move, are being laid. We need to cast off 
the shackles of the former thinking and the fear of the unknown. 
We need to understand that we are treading, generally, the paths 
trodden by world civilization. But our salient feature and 
difficulty is that no one before us has accomplished a 
transition to the market simultaneously with the building of 
statehood and the democratization of society. 
  Kazakhstan has opted conclusively for the path of progress. 
We can negotiate it only by having adopted as allies efficiency 
and purposiveness and by having mobilized the enormous material 
and moral potential. 

