Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Qin Shaoxiang (4440 1421 4161): "Li </F>
Yining, Vice Chairman of the National People's Congress Standing 
Committee Law Committee, Talks About China's First `Securities 
Law' Which Is To Be Promulgated Soon"] 
  [Text] Securities issuing and transacting has become an 
important component part of the socioeconomic life of our 
country. Correspondingly, the legislative work related to 
securities is also going on in an intensive manner. Recently, 
Professor Li Yining, vice chairman of the National People's 
Congress [NPC] Standing Committee Law Committee and responsible 
person in the Securities Law Drafting Group, told this reporter 
about the progress of the work in this respect, expressing his 
own opinions on some questions related to the drafting of the 
"Securities Law" in which many people had shown interest. 
  The Securities Law will be the first economic law which 
has not been drafted by a government institution. According to 
the equity principle for all stocks, all joint-stock investors 
will enjoy the same protection and are also subject to the same 
constraints. In the "Securities Law," there will be no such 
terms as shares owned by the state, shares held by legal 
persons, and shares held by individuals. 
  According To Li Yining, the "Securities Law" is being 
drafted 
by experts organized by the NPC Standing Committee Financial and 
Economic Committee. They began drafting in August 1992 and 
submitted the seventh version, which they drafted on the basis 
of intensive investigations and studies, to the NPC Standing 
Committee for deliberation in August 1993. The revised version 
will soon be submitted once again to the NPC Standing Committee 
for further deliberation. 
  China is a socialist country, so people are concerned about 
whether special protection should be given to state-owned stocks 
and whether it is necessary to specify which stocks are 
negotiable and which are not negotiable. Li Yining said: What 
matters in a market economy is fair competition. In the 
securities market, no stockholder should enjoy special powers 
and all investors should stand on an equal footing. Therefore, 
the equity principle is applicable. Since all people proceed 
from the same starting line, the legitimate rights and interests 
of the state-owned stocks, legal-person-owned stocks, 
individual-held stocks, and foreign- investor-held stocks should 
be protected alike in the securities market and should also be 
subject to the same constraints. No stockholder can enjoy any 
special treatments or prerogatives because of their nature. If 
any special stipulations must be made for state-owned stocks, 
they can be included in the "State-Owned Assets Management Law," 
and the provisions concerned may include the methods of turning 
the existing state assets into stocks, the transfer and 
management of state-owned stocks, and the proportion of 
state-owned stocks in certain trades. In the "Securities Law 
(Draft)," there are only such terms as stocks, the distribution 
of stocks, and stock transactions and there are no such terms as 
state-owned stocks, legal-person-owned stocks, or 
individual-owned stocks. The equity principle also indicates 
that all stocks are equal and the same stocks bear the same 
rights and responsibilities. That is to say, any stock-holding 
investor can transfer the stocks through the stock exchanges 
according to his own wishes; at the same time, he can also 
receive dividends according to the stocks they hold. Thus, there 
will never exist such a situation in which some investors can 
transfer the stocks they hold but the stocks held by other 
investors are not negotiable. 
  In China, it is necessary to establish certain trading 
places outside the stock exchanges. Not allowing transactions 
outside the stock exchanges will hinder the development of the 
joint-stock system and may also lead to an increase in 
underground transactions. 
  Li Yining said: In the process of drafting the "Securities 
Law," the second major controversial issue was the approach to 
transactions outside the stock exchanges. He said: A distinct 
characteristic of the joint-stock system is the impossibility of 
returning stocks to the enterprises issuing the stocks. If an 
investor does not want to continue to hold the stocks the only 
thing he or she can do is to transfer the stocks to other 
people. This then gives rise to the issue of stock transfers. 
The stock exchanges are places where securities transactions 
are conducted. However, as there are only a very small number of 
stock exchanges, only a limited number of companies can have 
their stock listed on the exchanges. If people holding stocks 
in some companies cannot return the stocks to those companies 
and cannot transfer the stocks on the exchanges, then 
underground transactions will become unavoidable. Thus, the 
legitimate rights and interests of stockholding investors will 
not be protected. Moreover, underground stock transactions can 
cause sharp falls in stock prices and can thus put great 
pressure on the companies and even cause panic among workers in 
the companies concerned. Therefore, in China, it is necessary 
to establish some trading places outside the stock exchanges. 
In the discussions, some people held different opinions on 
establishing trading places outside the stock exchanges. Li 
Yining held that applications for transactions outside the 
exchanges should first be lodged by securities dealing 
institutions and trading places can be established only with the 
approval of the authorities in charge. Some people may be 
worried that stocks in a large number of irregular joint-stock 
companies may appear in such trading places outside the stock 
exchanges. Li Yining said that such a situation would not 
appear because the securities dealing institutions are 
responsible for examining all stocks to be traded through their 
hands. In the future, the control should be strictly exercised 
only when a joint-stock company is being set up. If a company 
has been set up, then it must be regarded as a regular one. If 
the stocks in the same liability-limited company are traded both 
in the stock exchanges and in the trading places outside the 
exchanges, will there be two different prices? Li Yining said 
that such a situation would not arise either. He said: The 
"Securities Law (Draft)" specifies that the stocks in a company 
which issues a limited number of stocks can only be traded in 
one trading place. If the company is listed on a stock exchange, 
then before the listing, all transactions outside the exchange 
will have to be stopped within the specified time limit. In 
China, transactions outside the stock exchanges are necessary. 
Without such transactions, the development of the joint-stock 
system will be hindered and this can also give rise to 
increasing underground transactions and other consequent 
problems. 
  The association of securities companies is a 
self-disciplining organization of the institutions engaged in 
securities transactions and disputes between different 
securities companies, or between a securities company and its 
customers, can be arbitrated by the association. 
  At present, the issuing of and trading in securities has 
become an important part of the socioeconomic life in our 
country. Who should play an arbitration role if disputes arise 
in such activities? Li Yining said: The association of 
securities companies is a self-disciplining organization of the 
institutions engaged in securities transactions. A company 
engaged in buying and selling securities must join the 
association. In the process of drafting the "Securities Law" 
there were different opinions on whether the association should 
play an arbitration role. Some people held that the arbitration 
function should be performed by the stock exchanges; others held 
that this should be the function of the government institution 
in charge of securities business; and still others held that 
arbitration should be effected by the association of securities 
companies. What relationship is there with the law courts? Li 
Yining said: If disputes arise between different securities 
companies or between a securities company and its customers, 
they can be handled by the arbitration committee of the 
association of the securities industry and the arbitrations made 
by the association will not be contradictory to the handling in 
the law courts. This is because if the parties involved in a 
dispute have ever concluded any arbitration agreements in the 
process of securities distribution and transaction, the 
arbitration made by the arbitration committee will be the final 
ruling. If no such arbitration agreement is signed in advance, 
they can still conclude a belated arbitration agreement and 
apply for arbitration by the arbitration committee or they can 
file suit in court rather than applying for arbitration. 
  As all citizens have the right to make investments, the 
"Securities Law" should not specify which people are prohibited 
from buying and selling stocks. As for whether or not civil 
servants in state organs can buy and sell stocks, the 
stipulation can be made in other laws, regulations, or 
policies. 
  As to whether or not it is necessary for the "Securities 
Law" 
to include a provision about the involvement of civil servants 
in state organs in trading stocks, Li Yining said that there 
were five opinions on this issue. The first opinion held that 
the law should specify that all civil servants are prohibited 
from buying and selling stocks. The second opinion held that as 
civil servants are also citizens, they should have the right to 
buy stocks and whether or not they actually do is a question of 
their self-discipline rather than whether or not this violates 
the law. The third opinion held that it is necessary to prevent 
civil servants from gaining stocks by abusing their powers and 
such activities should mainly be prevented in the primary 
market; as for activities in the secondary market, transactions 
are all fair so there is no need to exercise restraints. The 
fourth opinion held that only high-ranking civil servants 
bearing responsibilities in leading positions and civil servants 
working in securities management institutions should be 
prohibited from buying and selling stocks and that there is no 
need to prohibit ordinary civil servants from such activities by 
means of a law. The fifth opinion held that three systems 
should be adopted to restrain civil servants' involvement in 
buying and selling stocks, namely: The system of reporting 
individual property, the system of making public the individual 
actions of buying and selling stocks, and the system of 
securities custody during office terms. Li Yining held that as 
all citizens have the right to make investments, it is improper 
that a law includes provisions prohibiting some people from 
buying stocks because this sounds like depriving these people of 
their civil rights. What should be prohibited in the securities 
market are illegal securities transactions and the behavior of 
abusing powers and harming the public interests. In China, it 
is not necessary to write the question related to stock 
transactions involving civil servants into the "Securities Law." 
Relevant provisions can be written into other laws, 
regulations, and policies. 
  After the "Securities Law" is adopted, what will happen to 
the stocks that have been issued before and the 
securities-dealing institutions of all types? Li Yining said: 
The stocks issued by enterprises before the adoption of the 
"Securities Law" will continue to be valid but will be subject 
to the constraints of this law. We can assure stockholders that 
they can set their minds at rest because the adoption of the law 
does not mean that the stocks issued in the past will all become 
invalid. However, the institutions engaged in securities 
transactions, including securities companies, securities service 
companies, and securities assessment companies, will have to be 
reregistered after the "Securities Law" comes into force before 
they can continue their business. In addition, the previous 
laws and regulations formulated by the State Council and some 
local governments will have to be adjusted in line with the 
"Securities Law" if there are any contradictions. 

