Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Boris Johnson: "Europe Faces Split Over </F>
Immigrant Workers"] 
  [Text] Brussels -- The EC Commission is heading for a 
clash with Britain over plans to allow the nine million legally 
established immigrants within Europe the right to move and work 
freely across the continent. 
  Padraig Flynn, social affairs commissioner, will today 
unveil 
an audacious plan designed both to crack down on illegal 
immigrants and to give those already in Europe "a stake in 
society," EC officials said last night. 
  The commissioner, a former Fianna Fail justice minister in 
Ireland, will propose that legally established immigrants in 
other EC countries should have the right to seek employment in 
Britain, even if they do not have an EC passport. 
  The 34-point plan is likely to appall Tory backbenchers. At 
last year's Tory Party conference, Peter Lilley, Social Security 
Secretary, drew cheers with an attack on "benefit tourists" from 
other EC countries, and the notion of throwing open the doors to 
non-EC citizens is already being dismissed in London. 
  Britain's immigration laws still tightly restrict entry to 
those doing necessary jobs, or those having spouses or dependent 
children already resident in Britain. Any legally established 
immigrant can apply for citizenship after four years. 
  Germany, too, is likely to object to Mr Flynn's plan for a 
gradual naturalisation of "gastarbeiters," such as the Turks who 
can remain in Germany for generations without being entitled 
either to nationality or to the vote. Last night, details of 
the plan, which involves extensive use of dual nationality, were 
still being negotiated with the German commissioners, Peter 
Schmidhuber and Martin Bangemann. 
  Mr Flynn's far-reaching programme involves spending EC cash 
on fighting discrimination, and improving housing, education and 
training for immigrants. 
  It appears to make a nonsense of the Government's constant 
claim that Maastricht's "pillar" structure has served to 
decentralise decision-taking in Brussels. 
  One EC source pointed out that before the Treaty came into 
force on Nov 1, the 12 interior and justice ministers held 
informal deliberations in remote locations across the Community, 
without facing a stream of proposals and directives from the 
Commission, let alone the scrutiny of the Euro-parliament. 
  "Now you can have the Commission at the table," said a 
source. 
  When the Flynn proposals come before Mr Howard and other 
interior ministers this spring, governments are likely to be 
much more enthusiastic about the parallel measures to keep 
illegal immigrants out. 
  These include fines for those who employ them, as in the 
American system, and special clauses to be written into trade 
and aid agreements with the countries of emigration, stipulating 
that they should play their part in restraining the exodus. 

