BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article] </F>
  [Text] Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata is increasingly 
becoming irritated. It is possible that some government 
officials may assume a hardline stand over North Korea's 
suspected nuclear weapons development and that policy gap 
between the government and the Social Democratic Party of Japan 
[SDPJ] will deepen, and that it may become even more difficult 
for the SDPJ to return to the government if people begin to talk 
about economic sanctions against the DPRK before the United 
Nations actually arrives at a decision on the issue. The fact 
that the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] is trying to force Chief 
Cabinet Secretary Hiroshi Kumagai, who is the prime minister's 
right-hand man, to resign on the issue of "manipulated Diet 
questioning" is also irritating the prime minister. Since the 
minority government's touch-and-go business in steering the 
political situation is continuing, we cannot wipe out the 
apprehension that "even one mistake will become fatal to the 
cabinet." 
  "The mass media is too exited. I am coolly dealing with the 
situation." He made this complaint in an interview with 
journalist Tetsuya Chikushi on the evening of 3 June at his 
official residence. After the interview, Hata emphatically 
explained to a group of reporters that, "We will keep our doors 
open all the time to have discussions. We are still not in the 
stage of imposing economic sanctions against the DPRK. We 
should not drive the DPRK into a tight corner." In response to 
a question asked by a reporter whether Japan should deal with 
the North Korean issue by adopting the strategy of the North 
Wind or the Sun in Aesop's Fables, Hata positively 
said "the Sun." 
  Those close to the prime minister say that what irritate him 
on the issue of North Korea's suspected nuclear weapons 
development is that "there are growing voices within the cabinet 
and the Foreign Ministry calling for adopting a hardline 
position" against the government's will. For example, Foreign 
Minister Kakizawa said at a session of Committee on Foreign 
Affairs of the House of Representatives on 3 June that 
controlling remittances to North Korea by Korean residents in 
Japan and suspending trade with North Korea can be considered as 
a possible sanction measure by Japan. It is said that since the 
prime minister, in hopes of having the SDPJ return to the 
coalition, has so far stressed the "importance of settling the 
issue of North Korea through dialogue," he is concerned about 
the SDPJ's possible objection to Foreign Minister Kakizawa's 
remarks. 
  The prime minister is also nervous about the suspicion that 
Chief Cabinet Secretary Kumagai asked Issei Inoue of the SDPJ to 
bring up in the Diet a document criticizing Masahisa Naito, 
former chief of Industrial Policy Bureau of the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry [MITI], in an apparent attempt 
to force Naito to quit. Because of the introduction of this 
issue, the budget committee session of the House of 
Representatives was suspended on the afternoon of 2 June, and 
the time of the prime minister's scheduled meeting with a 
visiting high-ranking Chinese official was changed and 
shortened. The prime minister, dissatisfied with the 
opposition's pursuit of the issue that changed and shortened the 
schedule of his meeting, said "there is something wrong with 
this country." But this remark has invited the LDP's harsh 
criticism, thus eventually helping the LDP step up the offensive 
against the Hata cabinet. For this reason, the prime minister 
seems to be puzzled over how to manage the Diet. 
  Since the Hata cabinet will suffer a serious blow if Chief 
Cabinet Secretary Kumagai should be forced to resign following 
former Justice Minister Nagano, the prime minister's irritation 
will likely grow in the face of the Diet summoning former MITI 
Industrial Policy Bureau Chief Naito as unsworn witness on 6 
June. 

