BFN 

  [Text] Today the talks between the Russian and Ukrainian 
governmental delegations on division of the Black Sea Fleet and 
the basing of Russian military ships in Crimea were continued in 
Moscow at the level of experts. 
  Russian experts are led by Russian Foreign Ministry Envoy, 
Chief Russian Negotiator at the talks with Ukraine Yuriy 
Dubinin. Ukrainian experts are headed by Vice Premier Valeriy 
Shmarov. 
  Interfax learned that behind the closed doors the experts 
were working on the second version of the draft 
inter-governmental agreement on the first stage of settlement of 
the Black Sea Fleet issues put forward by the Russian party. 
The first version has been rejected due to disagreement on some 
of its provisions. 
  Sources in the Russian delegation told Interfax that Moscow 
wanted to reveal the issues on which there existed principal 
discord which demanded a political decision by the two 
countries' supreme leaders. The main problem concerns the 
basing of Russian and Ukrainian military ships. Moscow wants 
Sevastopol to be the main base of the Russian Navy in Crimea. 
Russia proposed that the Ukrainian navy be based in Balaklava 
and Donuzlava. Kiev wants a part of the Ukrainian Navy's ships 
and headquarters to be based in Sevastopol as well. 
  Ukrainian Deputy Foreign Minister Boris Tarasyuk told 
Interfax that last night the Ukrainian experts had worked on the 
draft document. He hoped that the parties would reach a final 
agreement on Wednesday. 
  Interfax learned that on Wednesday morning Russian Premier 
Viktor Chernomyrdin and acting Ukrainian Premier Yukhym 
Zvyahilskyy were working independently. 
  Zvyahilskyy had a telephone conversation with Ukrainian 
President Leonid Kravchuk in the morning in which he requested 
additional instructions on the talks with Moscow from the 
Ukrainian leader. 
  On Wednesday morning Chernomyrdin held a meeting with 
several 
members of the Russian government. He also received a group of 
Chinese journalists and commented on the purpose of his official 
visit to Beijing. Chernomyrdin will leave for China today in 
the evening. 

