BFN 

<F P=106> ["Investigations Intensifying With Three Suspects in Qiandao </F>
Lake Incident"--XINHUA headline] 
  [Text] Hangzhou, April 22 (XINHUA) -- The Zhejiang 
provincial procuratorate Tuesday [19 April] approved the arrest 
of three suspects involved in the March 31 robbery and murder of 
32 Taiwan and mainland tourists and the subsequent torching of 
their tour boat on Qiandao Lake in Zhejiang Province, and 
further investigations are intensifying, according to the 
provincial public security bureau here today. 
  The three suspects are Wu Lihong, Hu Zhihan and Yu Aijun. 
  According to sources at the bureau, Wu Lihong is from 
Kanjiao 
village of Tongziwu Township, Chunan County in Zhejiang; Yu 
Aijun is a resident of Xinanjiang Town, Jiande City; and Hu 
Zhihan is from Qiandaohu Town of Chunan County. 
  The three were friends and they shared the same idea of 
seeking fortune but not wishing to put in honest labor. 
  Wu Lihong first conceived of robbing tourists on Qiandao 
Lake. When he talked with Hu and Yu about his scheme, he 
immediately got approval from them. And the three men jointly 
hatched a plot on the time, place and means for the robbery, 
according to the three men's confessions. 
  In the early evening of March 31, the three took their motor 
boat and sailed into waters at Huangniling, where there would be 
few boats and ships at nightfall. 
  At that time, two tourist boats, Qiandaohu No.6 and 
Huangshan 
No.3, passed through the waters. The three did not dare to 
launch their scheme right then, for it was still dusk and there 
were a few other boats passing by. 
  When the tourist boat named "Hairui" approached the area, it 
was dark and raining, and there was no other boat in the 
vicinity. The three intercepted it. 
  As soon as they boarded the "Hairui", they threatened the 
crew with hunting guns and an ax, forcing them to enter the 
lower cabin of the boat. They then asked all passengers to hand 
over their cameras, jewelry, watches and money, and forced them 
to move into the cabin, saying that they would not harm their 
life. 
  After the robbery, the three attempted unsuccessfully to 
sink 
the boat by opening the anti-fire valve. They then set fire to 
the boat to kill the tourists and the crew and fled. 
  Two hours later when the "Hairui" did not show up, the local 
department concerned immediately sent out speed boats to look 
for it. Because of a heavy fog, they were able to find the boat 
only at eight the next morning. 
  They immediately reported to the local government which 
organized people and boats to explore the area as no man was 
found on the burning boat. 
  Firemen extinguished the flames and towed the boat to shore, 
where they found that all tourists, guides and the crew had died 
in the lower cabin. 
  After the incident, the Central Committee of the Chinese 
Communist Party and the State Council ordered the Zhejiang 
provincial authorities to deal promptly with the case and 
uncover the facts of the incident. 
  The Zhejiang provincial government and Hangzhou City 
government formed a leading group to take charge of the matter 
under the guidance of the department concerned under the State 
Council. They took measures to help relatives of the Taiwan 
victims in the incident identify the remains and personal 
articles and arrange mourning according to Taiwan customs. 
Proper arrangements were also made with regard to the crew and 
tourist guides who died in the incident. 
  Meanwhile, the Public Security Bureau of Zhejiang Province 
assigned more than 300 policemen to investigate the case. 
  After a 17-day investigation, they apprehended the three 
suspects. In their search of the three men's houses, the police 
retrieved 5,250 U.S. dollars, 154,620 yuan (Taiwan currency), 
seven cameras, eight rings, one jade bracelet and two watches. 
  They also tracked down instruments used to commit the crime, 
such as the motor boat, hunting guns and an oil pail. 
  Sources said that the property and money will be returned to 
the relatives of the deceased. 

