BFN 

<F P=106> [By Reporter Yan Liqiang (0917 0500 1730) "Yanshan </F>
Petro-Chemical Corporation Expands Economic-Technical 
Cooperation With Fangshan District"] 
  [Text] On 29 March the Yanshan Petro-Chemical Corporation 
of Beijing Municipality and the Fangshan district people's 
government jointly sponsored the second work conference on 
economic and technical cooperation. The personnel from both 
sides happily got together and signed an agreement amid an 
enthusiastic atmosphere on the continuous expansion of economic 
and technical cooperation. Chen Xitong, secretary of the 
municipal party committee, attended the conference and extended 
congratulations on the successful Yan-Fang cooperation and 
encouraged the corporation and district to be an example of 
linking between industry and agriculture in the municipality and 
to achieve new development under the new situation in the 
worker-peasant alliance. 
  Yanshan Petro-Chemical Corporation is located in Fangshan 
district and possesses the strong points of the raw materials, 
technologies, and talented personnel of chemical industry. 
Fangshan district has the strong points of vast territory, 
natural resources, labor forces, and farm and sideline products. 
In September 1992, the corporation and district signed an 
agreement on Yan-Fang economic and technical cooperation; 
according to the guideline of supplementing each other in strong 
points and paying attention to mutual benefit and interest; 
under the support of the municipal party committee, the 
municipal people's government, and China National Petro-Chemical 
Corporation; and under the concern and guidance offered by the 
leading personnel, including Chen Xitong. Since then, they 
enacted their cooperation in an overall and conscious way. Over 
the past one-odd year, the number of enterprises jointly run by 
the corporation and district has reached more than 100 and shown 
a more than 200 percent increase over the figure scored before 
the signing of agreement. Of these enterprises, almost 50 
projects are with the total investment of more than 1 million 
yuan. More than two thirds of township enterprises in Fangshan 
district have set up cooperation with the plants, institutes, 
and companies under Yanshan Petro-Chemical Corporation in the 
fields of chemical industry, building materials, architecture, 
tourism, non-staple foodstuffs production, and of building small 
industrial zones. Their business operation has initially 
created a situation with the cooperation in all directions and 
among multiple industries and trades. Their business has not 
only turned out good economic results but also promoted the 
consolidation and enhancement of the worker-peasant alliance as 
well as the integration between urban and rural areas. 
  At the conference Gao Guozhang, vice president of the 
installation company under Yanshan Petro-Chemical Corporation, 
and Liu Shui, secretary of the Shilou town party committee of 
Fangshan district, delivered speeches on describing their 
typical cooperative business and speaking glowingly of the 
cooperative achievements scored under the friendship of workers 
and peasants. Their speeches are earnest and their sentiments 
put in their speeches are sincere. After hearing the speech 
given by Liu Shui at the conference with regard to that the 
people of Shilou town will never break faith in conducting 
cooperation with the corporation because they can increase 
knowledge and experience in following the corporation to do 
business and talented personnel can come out through the 
cooperation, Chen Xitong immediately praised his words as 
excellent. 
  Amid the joyful and excited music Liu Haiyan, president of 
Yanshan Petro-Chemical Corporation, and Jiao Zhizhong, head of 
Fangshan district, signed their names on the agreement of 
continuously economic and technical cooperation. An agreement 
on eight specific cooperative projects was also signed by the 
personnel from the units concerned. 
  Yang Anjiang, secretary of the party committee under Yanshan 
Petro-Chemical Corporation, and Li Qingyu, secretary of the 
Fangshan district party committee, also delivered speeches at 
the conference, in which they put forward demands for both sides 
to further conduct cooperation. The personnel from both sides 
put forward that efforts should be made to enhance the work of 
making overall arrangements in line with the "Longteng" plan and 
"Huyao" project newly set forth by Fangshan district as well as 
the development strategy set forth by the corporation with 
regard to "perfecting the main projects, having two flanks 
achieve development, opening more channels, and injecting 
vigor". They also put forward that by regarding science and 
technology as a guide, efforts should be made to continuously 
upgrade the cooperative scope and grade; to expand and deepen 
the cooperative fields; to actively expand the cooperation to 
the aspects of tourism, culture, tertiary industry, and market 
construction; and to foster a pattern of cooperation in all 
directions. 
  At the work conference Li Yi, executive vice president of 
China National Petro-Chemical Corporation and deputy secretary 
of the leading party group under the corporation, also delivered 
a speech on extending warm congratulations on the successful 
Yan-Fang cooperation and heartfelt thanks for the support given 
by the Beijing Municipal Party Committee and the municipal 
people's government to the cooperation. He said: The Yan-Fang 
cooperation has revealed the vitality of cooperation between 
enterprises and localities and has a universal significance on 
the petro-chemical industrial front in China. The people of 
Fangshan district have made important contributions to the 
development of Yanshan Petro- Chemical Corporation. It is hoped 
that both sides should get along well from generation to 
generation, closely rely on each other, go through thick and 
thin together, and commonly achieve development. The state-owned 
large and medium-sized enterprises should play a leading role in 
local economic development, supplement one another in strong 
points, and commonly become wealthy. Enhancing the cooperation 
between enterprises and localities represents a demand for 
establishing modern enterprise systems and cannot be done 
without the support of localities. The cooperation conducted by 
the corporation and district represents a demand for building 
socialist spiritual civilization and maintaining the social 
stability. He urged the Yan-Fang cooperation to further achieve 
development with a high starting point and high technologies. 
  In his speech Chen Xitong said: He was so happy to attend 
the work conference and the enthusiastic atmosphere revealed 
from the worker-peasant alliance made him excited and touched. 
The Yan-Fang cooperation that has achieved new development 
under the support of China National Petro-Chemical Corporation 
has a bright future. The enterprises and the district 
encountered contradictions in the past, which adversely affected 
the worker-peasant relationship and social stability. What we 
are now witnessing is the friendly feeling prevailing among 
workers and peasants, the words from the bottom of people's 
hearts on mutual dependence, the increasing consolidation of 
worker-peasant alliance, and the increasing enhancement of 
Yan-Fang cooperation. Hereafter, the corporation and district 
should say or do what is favorable for unity and don't say or do 
what is unfavorable for unity. They should strive to become the 
best model district and enterprise in establishing ties between 
workers and peasants. 
  In his speech Chen Xitong fully acknowledged the spirit of 
Yan-Fang cooperation with regard to supplementing each other in 
strong points and paying attention to mutual benefit and 
interest. He pointed out that in enforcing the socialist market 
economy, the cooperative field conducted by both sides should 
become much wider, and that they may develop in an overall way 
their cooperation into the aspects of tertiary industry and 
culture. The wider and deeper cooperation is more favorable for 
narrowing the gap between urban and rural areas and between 
workers and peasants. The Yan-Fang cooperation has achieved new 
development under the new situation. It is hoped that after the 
first and second developments, it will achieve third and better 
development! 
  Attending the work conference were Lu Yucheng, vice mayor of 
the municipality; and responsible persons from the municipal 
level commissions and offices concerned, China National 
Petro-Chemical Corporation, Yanshan Petro-Chemical Corporation, 
and Fangshan district. 

