BFN 

<F P=106> [Press release issued by the UK Department of Transport: </F>
"Major Step Forward in Aviation Security"] 
  [Text] Directions requiring airlines to account for and 
authorise for carriage (known as triple A) of every item of hold 
baggage placed on board an aircraft on international flights 
originating in the United Kingdom have been issued today. 
  Making the announcement during a visit to Manchester 
Airport, 
Lord MacKay of Ardbrecknish, Minister for Aviation said: 
  "Triple A is a major step forward in our aviation security 
programme. The directions will come into force on 1 July this 
year and will give legal effect to a security initiative 
introduced into the National Aviation Security Programme as a 
Recommended Practice in January this year. 
  ``For some time, the Government has been seeking an 
available 
and effective means of identifying and dealing with the `rogue 
bag' that is a bag introduced into the air transport system 
which has no connection with any passenger on a particular 
flight. Triple A is the solution to this problem. 
  ``No-one should have any doubts about this government's 
commitment to aviation security. The Department of Transport's 
nine-fold increase in expenditure on and ten-fold increase in 
staff involved in aviation security over the last five years are 
figures that speak for themselves. It is this commitment which 
has propelled the advances in technology which make it possible 
for me to issue today a Direction which will result in airline 
passengers travelling from the UK enjoying one of the highest 
level of security in the world. 
  ``The work like that done here at Manchester on baggage 
management has helped create the advances in technology which 
enable me to make this announcement today. 
  ``Last year, Manchester Airport took the initiative and 
hosted successful trials which proved the effectiveness of an 
automated baggage management system developed by Ferranti 
Electronics. I would like to commend the airport for its 
foresight in seeking the introduction of a system that will not 
only improve the service airlines and airports are able to offer 
air travellers, but will also have significant benefits for the 
security of civil aviation in this country. 
  ``It is clear that a number of airlines are already meeting 
the requirements of the direction. For others, where large 
investment in equipment may be necessary, there will be an 
agreed and binding phasing-in period. The standard will apply 
to all international flights originating at all airports in the 
United Kingdom and will cover both accompanied and unaccompanied 
hold baggage. The requirements can be met in a number of ways, 
but airlines operating both here and at other UK airports might 
do well to take advantage of Manchester's experience in 
operating an effective automated baggage management system. 
  ``In doing so, they will be certain of complying with our 
new 
security requirements. In addition, they may find that such a 
system will more than pay for itself in commercial terms by 
drastically reducing the amount of misrouted baggage.'' 

