BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by station observer Mulatov; from the special </F>
column "Comments on China" in the "Half an Hour With Wang Xiao" 
program] 
  [Text] Listeners and friends! Now we air the special 
column "Comments on China." Today we will first talk about 
China's interrelationships with the Central Asian nations of the 
Commonwealth of Independent States [CIS]. Our station observer 
Mulatov wrote a commentary on this issue: 
  After a one-and-a-half-year break, Chinese Prime Minister Li 
Peng is back on an overseas trip again. Foreign observers have 
pointed out that this time he is first visiting four CIS nations 
-- Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Kazakhstan -- and 
then Mongolia. It can be said that China's relations with the 
Central Asian countries are going through their second spring, 
because these countries are located along the route of China's 
ancient Silk Road. 
  President of Uzbekistan Karimov said at a state banquet 
honoring the distinguished guest from China: China and 
Uzbekistan already were linked up by the Silk Road in ancient 
times; and, today we have all the necessary conditions for 
restoring this ancient channel. The Uzbek president saw a good 
opportunity for developing bilateral economic cooperation and 
trade, as there were many entrepreneurs accompaning Prime 
Minister Li Peng on his trip. We will continue to talk about 
China's relations with the CIS Central Asian nations in our 
station programs. 
  Russia understands and appreciates China's wish to develop 
equal, stable, and friendly relations with these countries on 
the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. Some 
Western media are now talking about so-called Sino-Russian 
competition in carving out spheres of influence in the Central 
Asian region. I think this is wishful thinking. During a press 
interview, Prime Minister Li Peng unequivocally pointed out: 
China supports Central Asian countries' good relations with 
Russia. Diplomats noted that the development of China's 
relations with the CIS Central Asian nations, and the 
strengthening of Sino-Russian relations and cooperation in the 
economic and other fields have progressed at the same pace. 
Chernomyrdin, head of the Russian federal government, will visit 
China next month. Therefore, Russo-Chinese relations also are 
developing continually. 

