Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by 'Abd-al-Rahim 'Ali] </F>
  [Text] A dispute has flared up between Asyut Governor Samih 
al-Sa'id and the People's Assembly members; each side is 
accusing the other of supporting terrorism. Escalating disputes 
have led Prime Minister Dr. 'Atif Sidqi to call an emergency 
meeting next week to be attended by members of the Consultative 
Council and municipal councils in the governorate. 
  The governor held an emergency meeting in the governorate 
last week. It was attended by popular leaders. During the 
meeting, the governor criticized some People's Assembly and 
Consultative Council members sharply and accused them of 
assisting terrorists and protecting them instead of doing their 
duty to support the popular resistance of terrorism, at a time 
when the security agencies are doing their utmost to catch 
terrorists and contain their activity. 
  Muhammad 'Abd-al-Muhsin Salih, secretary of the National 
Democratic Party [NDP] in Asyut, expressed his belief that the 
Interior Ministry is engineering a conspiracy to embarrass 
Asyut's popular leaders. Muhammad Ahmad Husayn, Asyut deputy, 
and Jamil Abu-'Aqrab, Abu Tij deputy, blamed the NDP and corrupt 
officials for what is happening, particularly since everybody is 
competing for privileges and to obtain arms licenses for their 
family members. He claims that everybody is ignoring the 
expansion of terrorist activities in their villages and centers 
and in their families. 
  People's Assembly member 'Abd-al-Hafiz Abu-Hashish said that 
the seven terrorists who were killed recently in al-Zawiyah 
al-Hamra' in Cairo were located with the help of information 
provided by popular leaders in Asyut. But the security agencies 
overlooked this fact and gave all the credit to their men, he 
said. 
  When 'Abd-al-Muhsin Salih called for setting up popular 
committees in every village to stand up to terrorists, the 
governor replied angrily that the committee was formed two years 
ago on the orders of former Governor Major General Hasan 
al-Alfi, before he was appointed interior minister. It is known 
that al-Alfi encountered the same problems when he was governor 
of Asyut. President Mubarak intervened at the time to settle 
the dispute between the governor and popular leaders. 
  In another development, the security agencies in Asyut 
declared a maximum state of alert as a precaution against 
possible terrorist suicide operations in retaliation for the 
death of six members in the village of al-Balayzah and two 
others in al-Duwaynah, Abu-Tij, last Sunday, a senior security 
official in Asyut told AL-AHALI. A terrorist group attacked a 
police car on the way to the officers' guest house in Sadafa on 
the same day. 
  AL-AHALI has learned that the terrorists have set up four 
separate groups within the military wing so that the fall of one 
group will not lead the security apparatus to the remaining 
groups. The first group is in charge of attacking civilian 
targets, the second attacks trains and tourist cruises, the 
third banks, and the fourth attacks Coptic targets. 

