Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report signed "M.-L.C and D.S.": "Foreign Trade: France </F>
Improves Its Trade Balance With the Asian Dragons"] 
  [Text] France occupies a halfway position in Europe in 
terms of trade with Asia. But last year saw a significant 
improvement. According to the INSEE [National Statistics 
Office], France is taking better advantage than other European 
countries of trade opportunities with this region. 
  In Asia -- China, the newly industrialized countries (Korea, 
Hong Kong, Singapore, and Taiwan), and the ASEAN countries 
(Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and Brunei) -- European 
countries all have a limited market share and trade deficit. 
This situation is radically different from that of Japan, for 
which Southeast Asia is a natural expansion zone and which earns 
substantial surpluses in this region; or that of the United 
States, which is very much present, though with heavy deficits. 
  Among European countries, France occupies a halfway position 
with regard to trade with Asia. More present in China than in 
other zones, it ranks behind Germany and the United Kingdom but 
ahead of its other neighbors. In any case, according to foreign 
trade statistics, its position improved in 1993. The 
export-import ratio in our trade with Asian and Pacific rim 
developing countries was 88 percent, compared with 80 percent in 
1992 and 68 percent in 1980. By comparison France's 
export-import ratio for the world as a whole has risen from 97 
percent in 1992 to 102 percent in 1993. In numerical terms, the 
deficit amounted to 8.6 billion francs [Fr], compared with Fr17 
billion two years earlier, on a growing trade volume. 
  With the "rapidly developing" Asian countries (excluding 
China) the upward swing has been even more visible, with a 
export-import ratio of 108 percent (95 percent in 1992). 
Exports have risen by 14.6 percent (to Fr47.8 billion), while 
imports have slowed down (Fr44.3 billion). With China, however, 
the French trade deficit has increased: minus Fr12.2 billion 
last year, compared with minus Fr11.2 billion in 1992 and minus 
Fr9.3 billion in 1991. In total, our trade with Asia is growing 
regularly from year to year, in terms of both imports and 
exports (excluding military equipment), the Industry Ministry 
pointed out. Imports from Asia accounted for 11.1 percent of 
total French imports (10 percent in 1991) and 8.2 percent of 
exports (7.1 percent in 1991). 
<H5>  China: Mainly Semiprocessed Products </H5>
  According to the INSEE (footnote 1) ("INSEE Premiere" No. 
303, March 1994) French exports, which are relatively 
unspecialized, present a certain number of specific features. 
Toward newly industrialized countries, France exports more 
consumer goods and mixed products (intermediate or final use) 
and less equipment and semiprocessed goods than its competitors. 
In consumer goods, France remains in a deficit position despite 
large exports of toiletries, clothes, and cars, which give it 
higher export-import ratios than its partners, with the 
exception of Japan (in surplus) and Italy. 
  In the case of China, France stands out with exports of 
semiprocessed products, whereas other industrialized countries 
tend to sell more equipment. With the ASEAN countries, French 
exports consist primarily of equipment (46 percent compared with 
an average of 41 percent for France's main trading partners). 
France's export-import ratio is poor in terms of consumer 
goods, but more favorable in terms of equipment thanks to 
Airbus. Which, for INSEE, proves that France "appears to be 
making good use of its comparative advantages in its trading 
relationships with ASEAN countries." 

