BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" report by Ramon Meneses from Puerto Ayacucho] </F>
  [Text] DEA [Drug Enforcement Administration] reports on the 
increasing use of Venezuela as a bridge for drugs have revealed 
that the "doors" also open to the south, specifically in the 
Amazon and Apure regions, a high-level police official has 
reported. 
  "This situation has been getting more serious every day. In 
past years, the drug barons, who were operating in neighboring 
Colombia, have transferred all their laboratories to areas in 
the Vichada and Guainia regions. It has been easy for them to 
work in those secluded areas because the presence of security 
forces is sparse there," Venezuelan intelligence officials have 
pointed out. 
  People know about the groups in Puerto Ayacucho but they 
move 
very cautiously due to the [words indistinct] with the movement 
of money and weapons. Many people have reported encountering 
drug traffickers when they are working in the Amazon region. 
Drug traffickers reportedly have opened roads in the Montana 
Fria, Rueda, and Garcitas areas, to the south of Puerto 
Ayacucho. They also reportedly opened another road in the 
northern area, very near Puerto Paez, to take advantage of 
Puerto Carreno and other Vichada towns. 
  A prominent National Guard official, who has been working 
against drug traffickers for several years, has reported: 
"People don't talk about them because they fear retributions, 
but seeing how the drug traffickers are increasing their ties in 
the region and apprehensive that their quiet existence in the 
Amazons may turn into violence like in Colombia, they are now 
cooperating and we have been informed of the drug traffickers' 
paths in the south." 
<H5>  The Road is Free on the Colombian Side </H5>
  Due to the freedom they have on the other side of the 
Orinoco 
[Colombia], Venezuelan authorities can do little about the 
presence of the drug traffickers on the Venezuelan side. The 
drug traffickers control entire towns in the neighboring country 
and authorities do not get close, sometimes due to fear and at 
other times due to compliance with the illegal activity. "Things 
are so serious that on one occasion we arrested a Colombian 
citizen who had a large amount of drugs on him in Puerto 
Ayacucho and we were surprised to find out that he was the top 
police official in a town close to the Amazon capital city. How 
can you fight this?" the official asked. 
  The Orinoco is a long fluvial highway, through which 
Venezuelan authorities, by an agreement signed with Colombian 
authorities, are able to transit freely. They did not consider 
that international right today would cause a serious problem on 
that bordering and depressed region where drug traffickers have 
set up their headquarters and where they secure allies in all 
the sectors of the, up until now respectable, community. 
  Enrique Betancourt, one of only two native governors that 
region has had in all its history, and one of the few strugglers 
against that scourge said: "When I was governor I ordered 
measures against all the drug traffickers' fronts, because I 
knew that it [drugs] was filtering through the weak and scarcely 
guarded border. Unfortunately my administration was short-lived, 
however, during those months not one act of violence took place 
in the state and not one case of kidnaping was reported, as is 
happening today, he noted. This scourge has been spreading its 
evil on several fronts of our community, from which officials of 
the security corps and officials of the governorship do not 
escape." 
  Betancourt said: "It is of no avail to report personal 
incidents linked to drug trafficking if a stiff and courageous 
response does not exist by those in charge of enforcing the law. 
These individuals, most of them from Caracas, become powerful 
lords based on false promises, a position from which they 
manipulate and operate under their superiors' complaisant gaze; 
this is also a crime," the former governor of that Amazon region 
stressed. 

