CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gerd Trommer: "A Second Life for Old </F>
Plastics: VDI-North Baden Palatine Learns About Plastics 
Recycling"] 
  [Text][First para is editor's summary] VDI-N, 
Mannheim--Members of the district association for North 
Baden-Palatinate viewed the new plastics reprocessing center of 
the BASF in Ludwigshafen. Here methods for reprocessing plastic 
wastes are tested. 
  That plastic is neither a totally artifical nor a completely 
new material was discovered by the visitors from North Baden and 
the Palatinate at BASF. For example, the resin with which 
Pharoah Rameses, 1301-1234 B.C., was mummified corresponds 
chemically to a modern plastic. By now plastics have become the 
number one material in the world. Every year about 100 million 
tons are used. 
  This amount also accounts for the necessity for 
environmentally friendly reuse or disposal. The plan of the 
German plastics industry anticipates putting emphasis on waste 
avoidance, material recycling (for the working materials) and 
chemical reuse (for the raw material). Thus dumping and burning 
are "out" as direct methods of disposal. Working material 
recycling means the direct refashioning of used plastics into 
new products; in the opinion of plastics producers, it 
represents the correct solution, if raw materials, energy and 
costs can be saved in that way. 
  In contrast, raw material recycling means the reseparation 
of 
plastic materials into chemical or petrochemical raw materials. 
The chemical industry regards it as the proper procedure, 
especially for the reuse of used plastic packaging. Processes in 
use at the moment include pyrolysis, hydrogenation and chemical 
separation. 
  Investments in the plant technology alone for the new 
plastics reprocessing center of the BASF add up to DM3 million. 
The process technologists want to develop "recipes" for working 
material recycling of plastics. About 15 to 20 percent of used 
plastics would be able to gain a second life in Germany by this 
means alone, as long as the materials in question are remeltable 
thermoplasts. Indeed, these represent about 80 percent of the 
world's plastics. 
  In contrast to the melting down of metals, impurities or 
admixtures represent a significant hurdle for plastics. For 
instance, if all organic impurities are incinerated during metal 
melting processes, that is not to be expected at temperatures 
between 100 and 300C for plastics. Thus a prerequisite for 
the reprocessing of working materials is clean, perfectly 
sorted, extrudable plastic wastes with no noxious materials. The 
engineers of VDI saw on the spot how they are produced at the 
technical school. Three plant blocks with a total of 20 stations 
are available. Saws, chopping blades, mills or special grinders 
of various kinds transform the plastic parts into granules. 
Separation of metal parts, filtering of waste air and sound 
protection take place in parallel. Either dry separation or wet 
reprocessing follows. Next come sifting arrangements, magnetic 
separators, gravity and air separation procedures or alternative 
or additional washing processes, sorting in a water bath using 
flotation or sinking, and finally drying processes. 
  A particular value is placed on environmentally friendly 
disposal of all the remnants and toxins which come along with 
the plastic parts, e.g. oils, brake fluids and other impurities. 
At the moment the plant accepts throughput of 50 to 500 kg per 
hour in single-shift operation. The individual stations can be 
linked by process control and material transport arrangements. 
  Work and experience in the technical school are also 
intended 
to give information about which cycles and combinations can 
assure disposal on a scale suitable for major industries using 
economic and ecological criteria. "Chemistry is doing its 
homework now; and the cycles will soon be closed," says Prof. 
Anton Weber of the BASF, viewing the future with optimism. After 
viewing the new technical school, the chairman of the VDI, Dr. 
Heinz Mueller, noted with pleasure that the prevailing opinion 
within the chemical industry had changed: "If a year ago thermal 
reprocessing was as it were the only possibility, we welcome the 
fact that the chemical industry now values recycling with its 
alternatives for working materials and raw materials!" 

