BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, June 9 (BTA) -- "The people in the Balkans 
have no alternative but living together in some sort of 
community, at first an economic community, and later on, 
possibly in a Balkan state," Prof. Dr. Mira Markovic, wife of 
Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic, told a news conference 
today. Dr. Markovic arrived in Sofia yesterday on the 
invitation of the Bulgarian Slavyani Fund. Today she took part 
in the presentation of her book "Odgovor," [Reply] published 
last year in Belgrade, which was organized at the independent 
Balkan news agency. The event was attended by Yugoslavia's 
Charge d'Affaires in Sofia Rados Smilkovic, Russia's Ambassador 
in Sofia Aleksandr Avdeyev, the leader of the Bulgarian Business 
Bloc George Ganchev, the leader of the Women's Democratic Union 
Emiliya Maslarova, Bulgarian scientists, actors and journalists. 
  Dr. Markovic said that the integration of the Balkan nations 
is a prerequisite for the integration of Europe. Asked which 
Balkan countries she believed would join a future Balkan state 
and which city would be its capital, Mrs. Markovic said that all 
Balkan countries are equally capable of living in one community. 
In connection with a recent publication in THE WASHINGTON POST 
about the Balkans, Mrs. Markovic said the fate of the Balkan 
nations should be determined by themselves and not by the United 
States. 
  Asked why Yugoslavia has not yet recognized the Republic of 
Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia] yet, Mrs. 
Markovic said that she is in Sofia in her capacity as a cultural 
and public figure and not as wife of President Slobodan 
Milosevic, leaving it to Mr. Smilkovic to give an official 
answer to this question. Mr. Smilkovic explained that the 
former Yugoslav republics agreed to meet certain conditions 
before leaving the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia but 
not all commitments have been honoured. That was the reason why 
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has not made a statement on 
the recognition of Macedonia. "Former Yugoslavia was the first 
to recognize the Macedonian nation," Mr. Smilkovic recalled. 
  Asked if she expects support from the Bulgarian left-wing 
parties for lifting the Yugoembargo, Mrs. Markovic said: "Yes, 
we expect support from the Bulgarian left wing, but also from 
the Bulgarian right wing, as they are the ones who have more say 
here." 
  Dr. Markovic met with her colleagues from the Bulgarian 
Association of Sociologists last night. Tomorrow she is 
expected to have meetings in the Bulgarian Parliament and with 
Culture Minister Ivaylo Znepolski, said Slavyani Fund Chief 
Zakhari Zakhariev. Mrs. Markovic gave a long interview on 
Bulgarian National Radio in the early afternoon today. 

