BFN 

<F P=106> [By correspondent Yoshiyuki Sugiyama] </F>
  [Text] More than 800,000 ethnic Koreans reside in the 
Korean Yanbian Autonomous Prefecture, in China's Jilin Province, 
which borders the DPRK (North Korea). These ethnic Koreans 
account for about 40 percent of prefecture's total population. 
For this reason, there has been a constant exchange of visits 
between the ethnic Koreans in the prefecture and North Koreans. 
YOMIURI SHIMBUN has covered the food situation and the issue of 
opening up in North Korea--which is further deepening its 
international isolation by raising the nuclear issue--from the 
Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture, which is a "point of 
contact" linking the DPRK to the international community. 
  Cool weather this spring caused most rice paddies to wither 
before maturing, and the withered rice paddies cover fields in a 
village facing North Korea across the Tumen River. Last year, 
the Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture suffered an 
unprecedentedly poor rice crop, with the rice harvest being 30 
to 40 percent below average. 
  Some ethnic Koreans, who have gotten the first look at the 
actual situation in North Korea, said in unison, "North Korea 
also is in the same situation." Kim Kum-chul, deputy chief of 
the Export and Import Office under the prefectural Foreign 
Economic and Trade Committee, agreed with their comments, 
saying, "The food situation in North Korea is very serious." 
Last year, the Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture shipped 
200,000 tons of food to North Korea, which his almost the same 
level as in the past. 
  Ethnic Koreans in the Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture 
and North Koreans have visited each other's relatives. They 
have engaged in their own trade besides the trade undertaken 
between North Korea and China. Their exchange of visits has 
been a valuable channel for North Koreans to secure food. 
<H5>  Travel Restrictions </H5>
  From last summer to the fall, when the rice harvest was 
extremely poor, North Korea restricted individual travel to 
China. According to an ethnic Korean residing in the 
prefecture, China has restricted individual visits to North 
Korea to one a year since 1993. Both the DPRK and China are 
said to have restricted individual travel by Koreans in order to 
bring the border trade under state control. 
  The 82d birthday of North Korean President Kim Il-song was 
marked on 15 April. That day, one border checkpoint in Tumen 
city out of the five border checkpoints along the Tumen River 
remained idle. According to the municipal government, in the 
past, 500-600 Korean visitors passed through the border 
checkpoint each day, but now only a few Koreans pass through the 
checkpoint. Both North Korea and China have tightly controlled 
the border trade, and trade statistics show that as a result of 
the state control of this activity, trade between the two 
countries jumped from $100 million in 1992 to $300 million last 
year. China ships food, industrial raw materials, and 
commercial electric appliances to North Korea, which in return 
sends steel products, lumber, Soviet-built automobiles, and 
marine products to China. 
  A small number of North Koreans have illegally crossed the 
frozen Tumen River into China. Upon discovering them, both 
North Korea and China deport immediately those persons, in 
accordance with a bilateral treaty. There have been no disputes 
between the two countries over their illegal immigrants. 
<H5>  North Korea Eager To Open Up </H5>
  The Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture said that what 
North 
Korea really wants is to develop its economy by opening itself 
to outside world, and it added that the DPRK has sent clear 
signals to this effect. 
  According to an official with the Yanbian Korean Autonomous 
Prefecture, the DPRK has expanded the extent of the 
Najin-Sonbong Free Economic and Trade Zone from the southern 
side of the mouth of the Tumen River to areas near Fuchun city 
after North Korea, at a December 1993 plenary session of the 
Workers Party of Korea Central Committee, adopted a "policy of 
promoting trade." This move shows that North Korea, which has 
refused to participate in the development of the Tumen River to 
protect the interests of its ports, including the Chongjin port 
(according to a Chinese source), is now eager to develop its 
economy through economic cooperation with China and Russia. 
  A delegation of the Najin-Sonbong Free Economic and Trade 
Zone which recently visited the prefecture said, "Our nation can 
only open up partially because of the North-South issue," but 
the delegation's members expressed great eagerness to open up 
their country. 
  National Sentiments 
  The prevailing view in the Yanbian Korean Autonomous 
Prefecture is that even if the United Nations imposes economic 
sanctions on North Korea, it would be impossible to cut off 
trade between the prefecture and the DPRK, which are closely 
tied by the same national blood. 
  An ethnic Korean youth in Yanjin said: "As ethnic Koreans 
residing in China, our opinion is that the nation is more 
important than the state. We cannot go along with any economic 
sanctions against our parents and relatives living in North 
Korea. We would be unable to trade openly with the North Koreans 
if economic sanctions are imposed, but there are a lot of ways 
to trade secretly with them." 
  The ethnic Korean Chong Yong-cha, age 50, who once fled from 
China into the DPRK during the Great Cultural Revolution but who 
now sells dried fish in Tumen city, said, "My brothers and 
sisters want me to send them medicine." 
<H5>  South Korea's Moves </H5>
  For South Koreans, the ethnic Koreans in the Yanbian Korean 
Autonomous Prefecture are their compatriots. South Korea's 
direct capital investment in China has sharply grown since 1992, 
when China and the ROK established diplomatic relations. Of 542 
foreign-affiliated enterprises in the prefecture, 251 of them 
are South Korean-affiliated enterprises. About 500 ROK 
businessmen were working in the prefecture at the end of 1993. 
  Mr. Che Su-chol, a South Korean president of a joint-venture 
textile company in Huchun city, said: "I want to make Yanbian a 
front-line base for advancing into the East Asian market. I am 
looking to North Korea as my potential future market." 
  According to a South Korean trader, many South Koreans are 
engaged in manufacturing goods, arranging marriages for South 
Korean youths, and reuniting displaced Korean relatives. Some 
South Koreans appear to be collecting a variety of information 
on the DPRK. 

