BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "New Coalition Government Led by Shinseito, </F>
Komeito Will Leave the Seeds of Future Problems"] 
  [Text] Ruling parties, at a meeting of their heads on 22 
April, decided to choose Tsutomu Hata, deputy prime minister and 
foreign minister, as a successor to Prime Minister Hosokawa and 
agreed on the basic policies of a new coalition government. The 
Diet is expected to elect Mr. Hata the next prime minister on 25 
April. With these arrangements, two weeks of political turmoil 
will subside, and infighting between the ruling parties will 
come to an end. Nevertheless, the possibility of realigning the 
established political parties is likely to keep the political 
situation unstable in the future. 
  A long delay in picking a successor to Prime Minister 
Hosokawa plunged both ruling and opposition parties into a state 
of confusion. Such a situation occurred because the ruling 
parties lost their cohesive force which had held them together 
after the Political Reform Law was enacted in the Diet, and they 
continued to vie with each other for the leadership of running 
the coalition government while being pressed to choose between 
the maintenance of their coalition and its breakup. 
  Sakigake [Harbinger], which played a pivotal role in the 
coalition government, has broken away from the coalition 
government, and the Japan New Party has split. Those 
developments have precipitated a bipolarization in the ruling 
coalition parties in which Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] and 
Komeito have forged an alliance against the Social Democratic 
Party of Japan [SDPJ]. What kept the ruling parties involved in 
a dispute to the last, when they sought an agreement on the 
basic policies of a new coalition government, were the issues of 
reforming the current tax system and that of security, which was 
triggered by North Korea's suspected development of nuclear 
weapons. Raising the two issues at discussions by the ruling 
parties was a matter of course. 
  To settle the disagreement between the ruling parties on the 
issues of reforming the current tax system and security and to 
formulate common policies on them for a new coalition 
government, it is logical to deal with those issues by changing 
the current coalition framework. But, the Shinseito-Komeito 
alliance and the SDPJ chose the way of seeking a compromise 
while leaving their deepening mutual distrust unaddressed. 
  We have asked that "the post-Hosokawa government" be formed 
by the political forces that emerge after the established 
political parties realign themselves on the basis of a policy 
consensus. Nonetheless, the opposition Liberal Democratic Party 
and the SDPJ, which have a numerical edge over other parties, 
abandoned their political leadership by giving their top 
priority to defending their own organizations and avoiding 
making their own policy proposals. As a result, the political 
leadership passed to Mr. Ozawa of Shinseito, who took the lead 
in formulating the basic policies for a new coalition government. 
  A set of agreements reached among the ruling parties clearly 
states that the key element in reforming the current tax system 
is to "study the validity of amending or abolishing the 
consumption tax and to raise indirect taxes." We have long 
advocated that it is an urgent task to upgrade the current 
social infrastructure to prepare for a society of senior 
citizens, and we proposed that the consumption tax be raised to 
6 percent. 
  Shinseito and Komeito, which will play a key role in 
reforming the current tax system, have only stressed the need to 
increase taxes. We have stressed the premise of raising the 
consumption tax while 1) the income tax should continue to be 
cut; 2) the progressive rate of the income tax should be 
reviewed; 3) defects in the consumption tax and other taxes 
should be corrected; and 4) the expenditure structure and the 
unfair tax system should be reviewed. 
  With regard to the issue of North Korea's suspected 
development of nuclear weapons, if the DPRK succeeds in 
developing nuclear weapons, this will have a serious impact on 
the peace and safety of the Far East, including Japan. We have 
repeatedly asked North Korea to accept international nuclear 
inspections. In principle, diplomatic efforts should be made 
for a peaceful solution to the issue, and pushing North Korean 
into isolation would instead cause a dangerous situation. 
  We are doubtful about why the ruling parties agreed on a 
basic policy that says, "Japan will act in line with a policy to 
be adopted by the United Nations." The United Nations is still 
in a transitional period while undergoing a process of trial and 
error. Leaving Japan's option to the United Nations beforehand 
in dealing with issue of North Korea's suspected development of 
nuclear weapons will limit the flexibility of Japan's diplomacy. 

