Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pretoria Mar 22 SAPA -- Law and Order Minister 
Hernus Kriel and the commissioner of police are expected to 
decide soon on the fate of three senior police officers under 
investigation by the Goldstone Commission in connection with 
alleged third force activities. A government spokesman said on 
Tuesday [22 March] Police Commissioner Gen Johan van der Merwe 
had the authority to withdraw the officers from service, but the 
commissioner had decided to consult the officers before taking a 
decision. 
  "Depending on the outcome of this procedure, the minister of 
law and order might have to consider the possibility of 
suspending the officers concerned," the spokesman said in a 
statement. 
  President F W de Klerk put the three officers, Deputy 
Commissioner Lt-Gen Basie Smit, Police Intelligence Chief 
Maj-Gen Krappies Engelbrecht and Lt-Gen Johan le Roux on paid 
leave last week after the Goldstone Commission released an 
interim report on the matter. 
  The government meanwhile spelt out on Tuesday the grounds on 
which Mr de Klerk decided to put the three officers on paid 
leave, and two of the police generals said they had written to 
Mr de Klerk seeking clarification on the matter. 
  The government spokesman said, apart from the contents of 
the 
Goldstone report, Mr de Klerk had also considered the national 
interest, including the interests of the police and the 
legitimacy of the further investigation into the allegations. Mr 
de Klerk had also found it desirable that police officers should 
be withdrawn from service if serious allegations were made 
against them in the findings of a judicial inquiry. 
  But "the (police) commissioner has the authority to withdraw 
officers from service with full pay, which would give practical 
effect to the state president's decision," the statement said. 
  "He (Police Commissioner Gen van der Merwe) has, 
subsequently, advised the state president that this step must be 
carried out in interaction with the officers concerned and that 
he will soon complete his consultations with them in this regard. 
  As the government made the announcement, Gen Smit and Gen le 
Roux said they had not been placed on mandatory leave by Mr de 
Klerk, adding they considered themselves still in the service of 
the SA Police. They said in a joint statemenththat after seeking 
legal advice they had written to the state president requesting 
clarification on: 

  -  who took the decision to suspend the three generals; 
  -  the exact content of the decision and what it entailed; and, 
  -  on whose authority the decision had been taken, and what 
grounds it was based on. 

    The two generals claimed Mr de Klerk had informed them that 
he had not placed then on immediate mandatory leave, but that he 
had decided they should be temporarily "withdrawn from service". 
  According to the generals' statement, Mr de Klerk informed 
them that he did not have the power to permanently withdraw them 
and that the power to do so lay with the commissioner of police. 
  Mr de Klerk informed the men that in the past the decision 
to 
withdraw officers from duty had been taken after negotiation 
"between the parties involved". The generals said such 
negotiation had not taken place by Tuesday. 
  Gen Smit and Gen le Roux said they were therefore still 
"fully" in the service of the South African Police, and in light 
of Mr de Klerk's reply to them, legal action in this regard 
would not taken. 
  Both generals denied any allegations they had acted 
improperly and demanded a public investigation be held to 
address the "rumours" and vague allegations contained in Judge 
Goldstone's preliminary report. 
  The generals said they would bmth co-operate with any 
inquiry 
which may follow, adding their only demand was that the normal 
principles of justice be applied and that no person be found 
guilty and convicted based on untested and vague allegations "as 
contained in the Goldstone report". Both men expressed their 
"disappointment" at the way the issue was dealt with considering 
the implication it could have on their careers and on the morale 
of the SA Police. 
  In its preliminary report the Goldstone Commission said on 
Friday it had heard evidence implicating three police generals 
in third force activity aimed at fomenting violence and 
destabilising the country. The report said an investigation was 
underway into alleged gun running to kwaZulu. 

