BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Qusayy Salih al-Darwish: "Algerian Security </F>
Forces Foil Attempt To Assassinate Kafi"] 
  [Text] Paris -- According to informed sources, former 
Algerian Higher State Council Chairman Ali Kafi was the target 
of an assassination attempt last week, and the security forces 
have arrested two of his guards for complicity in the operation. 
  The sources say that the security forces uncovered the 
operation in time and in doing so prevented any harm to Kafi, 
but observers do not rule out the possibility that the aim was 
to put pressure on the former chairman to force him to leave the 
presidential residence in Zeralda which he refused to leave when 
his term of office ended. 
  The responsible authorities had prepared a villa for Kafi in 
a military residential area in "Palm Beach" because he had 
leased his personal residence to a Spanish company. 
  Meanwhile, President Liamine Zeroual has canceled his 
meeting 
with Dr. Saeed Saadi, leader of the Grouping for Culture and 
Democracy. The cancellation of the meeting, which was scheduled 
to take place yesterday, came in the wake of Saadi's statements 
to the French press criticizing the regime and President Zeroual 
and disclosing the questions he intended to ask President 
Zeroual. After the cancellation, Saeed Saadi intensified his 
attack on the presidency in a statement to the newspaper EL 
WATAN yesterday. 
  President Zeroual's decision to cancel his meeting with 
Saadi 
represented a new step in the regime's way of dealing with the 
forces opposed to dialogue which had enjoyed the regime's 
privileges and criticized it at the same time. 
  Many observers believe that Saadi and his party had for many 
years acted in accordance with the instructions of the Algerian 
authorities. 
  The cancellation of the meeting can be seen as the beginning 
of the crystallization of Zeroual's personal style of running 
the presidency. 
  Some forces are still calling for the formation of militias 
and abandonment of the dialogue idea. The [Islamic] Salvation 
Front [FIS] has claimed that the regime was behind the 
assassination of the two female students who, it said, had veils 
on and were killed to instill fear. In a statement issued 
yesterday, the FIS also said that over the past few days the 
security forces killed 82 civilians in Blida and 120 civilians 
between Mouftah and Sidi Moussa in addition to others in various 
parts of Algeria. 
  Some of the regime's circles are already talking about 
tangible results of the general violent security offensive 
launched by the military forces two weeks ago. They maintain 
that the number of assassinations and victims has dropped 
significantly since the offensive began. 
  That general offensive, however, has failed to put an end to 
violence, not even in the capital where an Army captain was 
killed the day before yesterday by unknown gunmen. 

