Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Defense Minister Fabio Fabbri by Ruggero </F>
Stanglini; place and date not given: "Toward the New Model"] 
  [Text] [Stanglini] To what extent has the new defense model 
been implemented? How can it be put into effect in view of the 
country's economic situation? 
  [Fabbri] The Defense Ministry is going ahead with the 
implementation of the new model, but is constrained by how much 
is permitted under the current legislation and the resources 
that are available. Up to now it has gone ahead by optimizing 
the use of financial resources, and by only including programs 
that are totally coherent with the final objectives of the new 
defense model in the modernization and renewal budgets. 
  Furthermore, a provision was incorporated in the law 
introducing "corrective interventions for public funding" 
designed to encourage voluntary service, its goal being the 
formation of the first brigade to be made up entirely of 
volunteers. Finally, provision is being made for a revision of 
the central and peripheral structure of the three Armed Forces, 
with the goal of streamlining and optimizing the organization. 
  Unfortunately this action has well-defined limits, the first 
being the end of the legislature that has prevented these 
provisions, which form the indispensable legislative framework 
of the new defense model, from obtaining the approval of 
parliament. I am referring in particular to the decree relating 
to the reform of the military summits, and the decrees 
describing the new regulations governing voluntary military 
service and the institution of voluntary service for women. 
  Furthermore, the economic difficulties that the country is 
facing and that are preventing the necessary resources from 
being devolved for defense are not to be ignored. It would be 
impossible to make the necessary improvement on a qualitative 
level correspond with the decisive reduction in size of the 
military instrument without these resources. 
  [Stanglini] Could you briefly explain the reasons leading to 
the choice of the Tornado ADV for the integration of national 
air defense? When and how will this decision be implemented? 
  [Fabbri] It is a well-known fact that our air defense 
capacity needs to be improved. While confirming our intention 
to continue with the EF-2000 (new name of the EFA [European 
Fighter Aircraft]) program, we could not underestimate the 
operational limitations that are connected with the F-104/ASAM 
aircraft (although they have been modernized). We therefore 
found it necessary to resort to a "bridging" solution. 
  The study of various options highlighted the expediency, 
from 
the point of view of military requirements, of the 
cost/efficiency ratio, and the advantage to industry that would 
derive from the choice of the "mixed" option comprising 60 
F-104/ASAM aircraft (12 of which are training aircraft) and 24 
Tornado ADV's. In mid-January I spoke at length on these 
subjects in parliament, and also pointed out that the other 
hypotheses, centered on the total or partial purchase of F-15 or 
F-16 aircraft, did not appear to be expedient for a number of 
economic, logistic, technical, and industrial reasons. 
  As far as implementation times are concerned, I can then say 
that the ADV's are planned to go into service in 1995. This is 
long before the other solutions proposed would have gone into 
service. 
  [Stanglini] What is your evaluation of the possible creation 
of an Italian-French-Spanish naval force in the Mediterranean? 
Could this initiative be in contraposition to that of the 
Eurocorps? 
  [Fabbri] Certainly not. The presence of one of these 
countries itself, France, both in the Eurocorps and in the 
air-sea cooperation excludes possible divergencies and 
contrapositions between the two initiatives which, on the 
contrary, have a common goal; the reinforcement of European 
military collaboration within the WEU [Western European Union], 
something that Italy cares about in particular. 
  [Stanglini] Important subjects regarding the future of the 
alliance and stability and peace in Europe were dealt with at 
the recent NATO summit held in Brussels on 10 January. What do 
you think of the results? 
  [Fabbri] The problems under discussion were certainly many, 
and some of them were definitely thorny. However, I think that 
some progress was made. 
  The Partnership for Peace formula is a valid compromise 
between the various requirements and does not prejudice, but 
rather stimulates, further moves forward in the union, also of a 
military nature, with the countries of Central and East Europe. 
  Then the confirmed willingness of the alliance to work for 
peace in Europe reconfirms the obligation in the former 
Yugoslavia, that is already seeing important NATO air and naval 
initiatives. 
  Furthermore, we must not forget the agreement, made 
immediately after the summit between Presidents Clinton, Yeltsin 
and Kravchuk, on the nuclear disarmament of the Ukraine, that 
aims at eliminating one of the major worries in Europe. The 
resolution of the alliance also played an important role here in 
discouraging the perils and intransitable paths of exasperated 
nationalism. 
  [Stanglini] Why has the defense exhibition, which was 
initially planned for May 1994, been postponed? 
  [Fabbri] The organization of this exhibition has come up 
against a series of repeated postponements over recent years for 
technical-organizational reasons, also shared by the industrial 
world, and these have led to its postponement until the fall of 
1994. 
  The defense ministry agrees that it is opportune to hold 
this 
display in 1994. It should recapture the tradition of the naval 
display, which was the only display of its type to be organized 
in Italy in the past, and extend its range of interest to all 
the forces. So there are no preclusions or vetoes regarding 
this initiative, that is thought to be valid and advantageous. 
Precisely for this reason, it must receive the highest priority 
and this also applies to choosing the right time to hold it. 

