BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 27 (AFP)--China has no wish to spark 
an incident in the disputed Spratly islands but will honour its 
contract with a US company to explore for oil there despite 
Vietnamese protests, the foreign ministry said Wednesday [27 
April]. "The Chinese government has all along stood for a 
peaceful settlement of the Nansha (Chinese name for Spratlys) 
issue and we do not wish to see the occurrence of any incident 
that might complicate the matter," a ministry spokesman said. 
  The Spratlys are claimed wholly or in part by China, 
Vietnam, 
Brunei, Malaysia, the Philippines and Taiwan. The crux of the 
dispute centres on what are believed to be large oil and natural 
gas deposits in the area. Hanoi has reacted strongly to what it 
described as the "illegal" contract signed by China and 
Colorado-based Crestone Energy, warning that the deal marked a 
"serious escalation of the situation in the South China Sea." 
Crestone had announced that it would sink exploratory wells 
under the protection of the Chinese navy, which has recently 
stepped up operations around the Spratlys. 
  The spokesman, reaffirming China's claim to the island 
chain, 
said the contract was perfectly legal. "China has undisputed 
sovereignty over the Nansha islands and adjacent waters," he 
said. "The signing of the contract with the American company 
entirely falls within China's sovereignty," he added. 
  The war of words between Beijing and Hanoi continued Monday 
when the Vietnamese communist party daily, Nhan Dan, evoked the 
spirit of Dien Bien Phu -- the site of Vietnam's decisive 
victory over France in 1954 -- in a front page article on the 
Spratlys. "During these days of April, the people and troops of 
the district of Truong Sa (Vietnamese name for Spratlys) are 
lighting the historic flame of Dien Bien Phu in this sacred part 
of the country," the newspaper said. Taiwan, meanwhile, 
announced at the weekend that it had stepped up naval patrols in 
the Spratlys to emphasise its sovereignty over the archipelago. 
  Historical enemies China and Vietnam normalised relations in 
November 1991 after a 12-year diplomatic freeze, agreeing at the 
time to settle peacefully border disputes through negotiations. 
But mutual suspicions and allegations of violating bilateral 
understandings have continued to strain relations, with rival 
claims to the Spratly and Paracel islands the main point of 
contention. The South China Sea was the sight of bloody 
confrontations between the two countries in 1988, when hundreds 
of Vietnamese troops lost their lives. 

