Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Rangoon, 14 Mar (PL) -- Cuban Foreign Minister 
Roberto Robaina described as positive the talks held in this 
capital with Myanmar (former Burma) Prime Minister Than Shwe and 
several government officials 
  Approached by the local media, Robaina, who has already 
spent 
a week visiting Asian countries, said that they discussed many 
issues concerning the development of political and economic 
bilateral relations. 
  Although no agreements were signed during his visit, Robaina 
pointed out that broad prospects to develop ties between the two 
nations were created. This is the first trip a ranking Cuban 
official has made to Myanmar. 
  Meanwhile, President Than Shwe conveyed to Robaina his 
government's wish to exchange delegations of specialists and 
businessmen to explore trade prospects between the two nations. 
  He also indicated that both Myanmar and Cuba are the target 
of similar manipulation campaigns by the West and because of 
that, he added, they need to know each other better. 
  Myanmar, a nation bordering China and India, produces mostly 
rice (15 million tons a year), although it has large mineral 
deposits and timber reserves. 
  Its economy today is beginning to flourish in the area, 
especially with regard to foreign investment. Its leading trade 
partner is China, although other countries in the area have a 
steady relationship with this country. 
  In addition to being greeted by President Than Shwe, Robaina 
met with counterpart Ohn Gyaw, Chamber of Commerce President U 
Koko Gyi, Development and Planning Minister Brigadier General 
Abel, among other government officials. 
  Yesterday, Robaina visited several new communities on the 
outskirts of Yangon, the Shwedagon Pagoda, which is the largest 
Buddhist shrine in the world. He also visited a university and 
the Yangon sports complex, where a Cuban boxing trainer has been 
working since 1993. 
  During all the meetings, the hosts expressed their interest 
in the current Cuban situation and in seeking new forms of 
cooperation that yield mutual benefits. 
  Robaina and his delegation will leave today for Cambodia, 
and 
will later visit India, Malaysia, and Vietnam in the last phase 
of his Asian tour, which has also included Indonesia, Thailand, 
and Laos. 

