BFN 

<F P=106> [Victor Smart article: "Will Maverick Right Hold the </F>
Balance of Power"] 
  [Text] The complexion of the next European Parliament [EP] 
is likely to be determined by the unpredictable new parties of 
the Right, such as Silvio Berlusconi's Forza Italia. 
  This is the picture that emerges from THE EUROPEAN/MORI 
survey on voting intentions across Europe. 
  Campaigning for next month's European elections has begun in 
earnest with the traditional parties struggling to win over 
voters. According to the poll's projections, the most 
spectacular loser from the political mainstream could be the 
junior partner in the German government, the centrist FDP [Free 
Democratic Party]. With just 2 percent of the vote it would 
fail for the first time, under German law, to break through the 
threshold required to gain seats. On the survey's figures, 
Felipe Gonzalez's Spanish Socialists could also be severely 
mauled, with the Right winning its first national plebiscite 
since the death of Franco. Such an outcome may well prove the 
beginning of the end for the administration in Madrid. 
  More generally, however, the MORI poll reveals the extent to 
which none of the main parties has managed to establish any sort 
of lead. In fact, the Socialists and Christian 
Democrat-inclined European People's Party find themselves 
neck-and-neck on 34 percent, while the proportion of people 
saying that they are committed to vote is down eight points on 
the turnout on the last European elections in 1989. Meanwhile, 
the Greens are stuck on 9 percent and the Liberals on 7 percent. 
  This analysis highlights how pivotal the position of 
right-wing forces in Italy has become. None of the three 
coalition partners has yet committed itself to joining one of 
the nine specific European Parliament groups, but overtures to 
them will now become intense. 
  According to the poll, Forza Italia would emerge with 26 
seats, the neofascist National Alliance with 13 and the Northern 
League with eight. If that 47-seat bloc joined the Christian 
Democrats en masse, as we are projecting in our analysis, the 
centre-right grouping should find itself with only 40 or so 
fewer seats than the more ideologically cohesive Socialists. 
But there is an equal likelihood that the three Italian 
groupings will peel off, with Forza Italia joining the 
Democratic Alliance, the National Alliance the Technical Right, 
and the Northern League the regionalist Rainbow group. 
  Though it would still not help the Socialists to an overall 
majority, that internal fragmentation of the Right would give 
the Left a commanding lead of nearly 90 seats. Even the 
prospect of such a blow will force the European People's Party 
to consider postelection concessions to the Italian Right. 
  Forza Italia is likely to prove far less passionately 
pro-European than previous governments in Rome, some observers 
doubting whether it will support the Maastricht Treaty. Yet the 
survey reveals that Italian rank highest on almost all indices 
measuring commitment to the union. 
  Their projected turnout is the highest of the states: the 
number who would vote in a referendum to stay in the Union has 
risen to 76 percent in the past two years. 

