BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Stephanie Bothma] </F>
  [Text] Pretoria -- The Transvaal Supreme Court has placed a 
gagging order on former Armscor [Armaments Corporation of South 
Africa] nuclear and rocket scientists, preventing them 
disclosing details about the supply, export, import, manufacture 
or research of any armaments. 
  Armscor brought an urgent application against 16 former 
employees -- who were among 60 people retrenched last February 
when Armscor subsidiary Denel rationalised its Advena division. 
  The arms manufacturer argued in court that publication of 
arms secrets could seriouly damage SA's newly acquired standing 
in the international defence industry. 
  The move followed a report that the scientists had 
threatened 
to disclosed nuclear secrets unless they were paid R4.5m 
[million rands] in compensation by their former employer. The 
scientists admitted that their demands amounted to blackmail. 
  Judge TT Spoelstra prohibited the scientists from disclosing 
information to the media or unauthorised people about the 
obtaining, supplying, marketing, importing, exporting, 
development, manufacture, maintenance or repair of armaments by 
Armscor or its subsidiaries. 
  In an affidavit supporting the application, Armscor guided 
missile systems chief Gideon Smith said all the scientists had 
signed on oath of secrecy. 
  Armscor's mission to secure SA's armament needs as 
effectively and economicallly as possible meant that technology, 
knowledge, material and equipment had to be obtained from 
abroad. All dealings with overseas countries or companies were 
extremely sensitive and secrecy received absolute priority, 
Smith said. 
  Last November SA had entered into an agreement with the U.S. 
on the restriction of missile-related export and import, 
including guarantees that secret information would not be 
disclosed. Adherence to this agreement would result in the U.S. 
recommending SA's admittance as a member of the Missile 
Technology Control Regime [MTCR]. 
  "To be accepted as a member of the MTCR would be beneficial 
to Armscor and SA. Armscor would have access to technology and 
foreign markets currently not available to it. Should sensitive 
information be made available, SA's chances of being admitted 
would be very poor." 
  Smith said that on November 11, four scientists, Christiaan 
du Plooy, Eldrid Fick, Klaus Muller and Jan Frederik Combrink, 
had informed Denel about a potential labour dispute. They had 
demanded re-employment or further compensation, a demand 
rejected by Denel a month later. 
  Since then, nothing had been heard from the scientists until 
last Sunday, when a newspaper article appeared headlined 
"Nuclear Scientists Threaten To Tell All." 
  Smith said the report had sparked immediate inquiries from 
Switzerland and several other countries, which had been upset 
and worried by the media reports. 
  It had been reported that the scientists were prepared to 
accept employment from anyone who could guarantee their 
salaries. If they received employment as a result of the 
publicity, sensitive information could be passed on their new 
employers and Armscor would lose control over such information, 
Smith said. 
  Armscor's attorney said only six of the 16 scientists cited 
in the court action had been aware of the newspaper report, 
while the others had indicated that they were prepared to honour 
their oath of secrecy. 
  The six who had been aware of the report were Du Plooy, 
Combrinck, Ester Maria Swart, Cornelius Appelgryn, Maarten 
Pretorius and Jurie Heydenrich. 
  The scientists had 14 days to oppose the application and 
have 
the order amended or set aside, the judge ordered. 

