BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on news conference by Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel </F>
in Bonn on 18 May -- recorded] 
  [Text] Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel, who has now been in 
office for about two years, viewed topical foreign policy issues 
at a news conference in Bonn this morning. He mentioned nearly 
the whole spectrum of German foreign policy, including Germany's 
policy vis-a-vis Africa, the war in the former Yugoslavia, the 
European Union [EU], and the United Nations. He also made it 
clear what a disastrous effect the right-wing extremist violence 
in Germany has abroad. He said he was seriously alarmed when he 
read reports that he received from German embassies abroad. One 
can only be ashamed of Germany's image in the United States, 
Kinkel pointed out. The fact that the blacks were chased 
through the streets made the headlines in New York and 
Washington. 
  The foreign minister also devoted great attention to the 
upcoming German presidency in the EU, which will start on 1 July 
and last six months. Europe continues to be our fate, he 
stated. In fact, quite a few things have been achieved in the 
past few years, he pointed out. The Federal Government has set 
a few priorities for the next six months: Establishing closer 
ties with the Central and East European states and the 
completion of the EU enlargement by the three Nordic states and 
Austria, which will improve the balance in the EU. Thus, he 
mentioned an issue that has caused irritation and annoyance 
among the southern partners and in France. The third priority 
will be the fight against unemployment. 
  In the preparation of the 1996 government conference, it 
will 
be important not to concentrate only on the enlargement but also 
on the deepening of the EU, the foreign minister pointed out. 
The larger the EU becomes, the more difficult it will be. Thus, 
the question should be raised as to whether the troika can 
remain unchanged. The troika consists of the acting, previous, 
and future presidency. Kinkel asked what will happen if the 
troika that represents the EU at the international level 
consists only of small countries, if a smaller and 
internationally not so important country assumes the presidency 
three times in a row. This might have a negative impact on the 
efficiency of the EU. It should be considered whether the large 
countries -- France, Britain, Italy, Spain, and Germany -- 
should assume this office more often. Concerning the filling of 
the commissioner's offices, new ideas are also required. 
  Russia was another topic of Kinkel's news conference. He is 
concerned about a Russia that feels isolated. Russia has become 
much more sensitive in the past few months. Thus, the 
relationship with its leadership, which has to take into 
consideration domestic problems and opponents for the first 
time, has also become more difficult. One must be fully aware 
of this sensitiveness, the minister stressed. However, this 
does not mean granting Russia the right of veto concerning 
relations of the Baltic and Central and East European states 
with the EU, the Western European Union, and NATO. 
  Referring to the United Nations, Kinkel reiterated his view 
that the obstacles in the Basic Law to German participation in 
UN missions must be removed. It is about time for the 
Constitutional Court to give a green light. The current 
situation is unbearable. However, once this step is made, 
Britain and France would no longer object to Germany becoming a 
permanent member of the UN Security Council. 

