Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Y.C. Tsai] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, March 1 (CNA) -- A seven-member delegation 
of US wildlife conservation officials will arrive in Taiwan 
Tuesday [2 March] evening to inspect conservation efforts here. 
  The delegation, led by Kenneth Stansell, director of the 
Office of Management Authority of the Fish and Wildlife Service 
under the Department of the Interior will visit the Council of 
Agriculture (COA), the Department of Health, the Ministry of 
Justice, the Directorate General of Customs, and the National 
Police Administration during their five-day stay in Taiwan. 
  The inspection tour will help determine whether the US 
Government will impose trade sanctions against Taiwan for 
alleged trade in endangered species parts. 
  COA Chairman Sun Ming-hsien pledged that the council will do 
its best to act on advice and guidance from the US delegation or 
other conservation groups at home and abroad in order to improve 
Taiwan's protection of endangered wildlife. 
  He added that he will also seek a rhino horn identifying 
agreement with the US when meeting with the delegation. 
  "We will take this opportunity to communicate with the 
delegation members in the hopes that a rhino horn identifying 
technique agreement with the United States will be signed as 
soon as possible," Sun added. 
  The US Government's willingness to enter into such a pact 
demonstrates its goodwill toward Taiwan's wildlife conservation 
efforts, he noted. 
  The US Department of the Interior, under pressure from 
international conservation groups, last September identified 
Taiwan as an area trading in rhino horn and tiger bone and asked 
President Bill Clinton to call for trade retaliation against the 
island. 
  Meanwhile, the Geneva-based Convention on International 
Trade 
in Endangered Species (CITES) Standing Committee will meet March 
21-25 to decide whether to call for an international economic 
boycott against Taiwan. 
  Two CITES delegations visited Taiwan in November and January 
respectively to evaluate Taiwan's wildlife protection measures. 
  Results of the CITES meeting are expected to be influential 
in the US Government's decision in late April, Sun said. 

