BFN 

<F P=106> [By Staff Reporter Kim Song-pok] </F>
  [Text] The tension between the rival parties over the 
suspicion that huge amounts of "political funding" were provided 
to the ruling party is developing into a queer conflict between 
the current and former governments and the opposition camp as 
the ruling Democratic Liberal Party [DLP] yesterday accepted the 
opposition Democratic Party [DP]'s demand for a National 
Assembly investigation of the allegation. 
  The problem starts with the donation by the Chongwoo 
Construction Co., the contractor in a lucrative project to 
relocate the "Sangmudae" military base in Kwangju, of eight 
billion won out of a total 22.7 billion won in its "secret 
chest" to Tonghwa Temple in Taegu, the native place of former 
president No Tae-u, to build a Buddhist statue in 1992. 
  The allegation is that 5.6 billion of the eight billion won 
found its way into the ruling camp as a kickback for the 
lucrative project after laundering by Buddhist circles. 
  The DLP's agreement to accept the DP demand is construed as 
a 
gesture showing the clean hands of the party and the Kim 
Yong-sam government. Conversely speaking, the incumbent 
government is pointing an accusing finger at its predecessor, 
the No administration. 
  With the ball smashed into its court, the No's camp appears 
to be on the alert and, at the same time, giving vent to hard 
feelings against the Kim administration, saying that Kim is 
attempting to pass the buck to No. 
  Under the bashing of skepticism among the people, Chongwadae 
has reportedly carried out secret in-house probes into Home 
Minister Choe Hyong-u and exchange-Rep. So Sok-chae, a confidant 
of President Kim, both suspected of being privy to the political 
funding. 
  The reported outcome is that their hands are clean. Instead, 
the finger is pointing to the No administration. 
  A DLP key post-holder who is a President Kim protege said on 
condition of anonymity, "Now that close aides to President Kim 
have proved to have nothing to do with the scandal, there is no 
reason for a cover-up." 
  He added, "Now the opposition camp will playing another 
boring game with those who were at the core of power during the 
No government over a past irregularity." 
  The DLP's agreement to the Assembly action may be aimed at 
escaping from the political quandary into which it has fallen 
and, instead, at pitting the opposition party against the No 
administration. 
  President Kim Tuesday instructed the ruling party to "face 
the matter squarely." 
  Meantime, the No camp, better known as "Yonhui-tong," the 
name of the area where No lives, is fuming against the Kim 
government, thinking the current administration is treating it 
too harshly. 
  An aide to No who wanted to remain anonymous said 
sarcastically, "We do not hope to be protected by the current 
government but this is going too far." 
  He added he worried that this may become a precedent to find 
fault with any matter in the past. 
  The aide also said confidently, "The Assembly's probe will 
find little." 
  A senior DLP lawmaker who held a ranking party post during 
the No government criticized the Kim administration, saying, 
"Did the Kim government only find out now that the Sangmudae 
relocation project was carried out during the previous 
government?" 
  He added that the attempt to divert public attention, acting 
as if there had been a deal on political funding during No's 
days does not befit with the image of the reform-oriented 
current government. 
  He also said, "The current government is ignoring the 
prosecutors' conclusions that the eight billion won was all used 
for the Buddhist project." 
  Another former ranking official who served in the No 
government maintained that Chongwadae and the opposition party 
are scheming to make the No administration a common target 
finding an odor in their own houses in connection with the 
"political funds." 
  He pointed out the fact that all the presidential candidates 
attended the dedication ceremony of the giant granite Buddha 
image built at the Tonghwa Temple. 
  He added, "If they look into the scandal, they will find 
that 
flames will fly in directions they do not expect." 
  The opposition party throws a skeptical eye at Yi Hyon-u, 
former chief of presidential security service, and former 
Sports-Youth Affairs Minister Yi Chin-sam. 

