Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Deborah Berlinck] </F>
  [Text] Geneva -- Shrimp fishermen in northeastern Brazil 
will have to change their fishing nets. The problem is not 
quality, but the fact that U.S. scientists believe these nets 
kill turtles. The United States has a solution: a law banning 
the importation of shrimp from countries that use this type of 
nets. If this law is implemented against Brazil, fishermen in 
the northeast will loose $30 million per year. 
  This situation makes one wonder who establishes the trade 
rules and international environmental patterns. This question 
prompted environment ministers from 25 countries to meet on 17 
February at the United Nations to discuss a basic issue: How to 
harmonize the freeing of world trade with the preservation of 
the environment. The meeting, which was headed by Brazilian 
Environment and Legal Amazon Region Minister Rubens Ricupero, 
failed to provide an answer. 
  The developing countries reached at least two clear 
decisions: They will not accept the preservation of the 
environment as a pretext for new barriers on exports of poor 
countries. Any decision in this direction must be taken at 
multilateral forum to avoid, for example, a country like the 
United States unilaterally deciding what sort of net is best for 
fishing shrimps in Brazil. 
  In this specific case, Ricupero maintains that the 
fishermen, 
afraid of being unable sell their catch to the U.S. market, are 
prepared to pay up to $10,000 for the TED [expansion unknown] 
type of net (which has a device to free turtles) and thus 
increase the cost of their catch. Fishermen in southern Brazil, 
who do not export to the United States, see no reason for 
change. The minister disclosed that a recent survey in the 
northeastern region revealed that during 4,000 hours of fishing, 
only two turtles were caught by the nets currently used in 
Brazil. 
  Widespread complaints that rich countries are using trade as 
a tool to impose their environmental patterns prompted the 
ministers to discuss another issue: In the event of a conflict 
like that of the northeastern shrimps, who will decide if the 
U.S. argument is right or wrong? Currently nobody has that 
authority, not even the UN environment agencies, not even the 
GATT. 
  Brazil and several other countries agree that the UN 
Environment Protection Program should arbitrate: Faced with a 
commercial conflict within the GATT involving an environmental 
aspect, the organization would give a decisive scientific 
opinion. 

