Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Legislative and Parliamentary Affairs 
Division. The Majles held an open session yesterday with 
Mr. Nateq-Nuri presiding. First Mr. Majdara made a speech. Then 
the speaker of the Majles spoke about the crimes of the Serbs 
against the innocent Muslims of Bosnia and the false claims of 
the human rights assemblies and Europeans concerning human 
rights, which was published in yesterday's issue. Then the 
question of Mr. Hazrati, the deputy from Rasht, to the minister 
of interior was discussed. We call to your attention the details 
of the Majles discussion. 
<H5>  Selection From the Majles </H5>
<H5>  Speech </H5>
  The only speaker was Mr. Majdara, the deputy from Babolsar, 
who spoke about the visit of the president to Mazandaran 
Province and the unprecedented welcome of the people of that 
province to the president. He then referred to the potential 
resources of the rich province of Mazandaran in agriculture, 
fisheries, forests, lumber, and industry and pointed out the 
importance of attention to the transit road of this province 
with the Central Asian countries. The reason for Mr. Majdara 
being the only speaker yesterday was that the open session began 
at 0900 and the reason for the delay was mentioned as being the 
open discussion concerning the economic issues of the country 
and the procedure for the examination of the 1373 [21 March 
1994-20 March 1995] budget. 
<H5>  Question of Hazrati to the Minister of Interior </H5>
  Mr. Hazrati, the deputy from Rasht, asked the minister of 
interior about the reason for the Ministry of Interior not 
agreeing to the march on 11 Aban [2 November] by the Islamic 
Society of the Universities in Tehran. The minister of interior 
responded: Based on the law, we are obliged to give a marching 
permit on 13 Aban [4 November] to only one institution. The 
Cultural Council was the institution that had obtained a permit 
to march and had organized all groups, including the student 
groups, for 13 Aban. He said: The main reason for the refusal 
was that we must say one thing and have one slogan, whereas they 
had separated themselves from the people and shouted slogans 
against the government and the values of the revolution. 
  The minister of interior's response was not considered 
satisfactory to Hazrati, and the issue was referred to the 
Articles 88 and 90 Committee. 
<H5>  Mohammad Majdara, Deputy From Babolsar </H5>
  Investment in fundamental affairs in the Province of 
Mazandaran brings a return three times that of other areas. 
  The only pre-agenda speaker of the open session of the 
Majles 
yesterday was Majdara, the deputy from Babolsar, who offered his 
congratulations on the birthday of his holiness 'Ali and said: 
The noble people of the tulip-growing province of Mazandaran in 
the past five days engaged in an enthusiastic and unprecedented 
welcome, the likes of which had not been seen very often in the 
history of the province. This welcome once again revived in the 
minds of the people the exciting memory of the arrival of the 
grand leader of the revolution during his presidency. Once 
again, the ever-green domain of 'Ali had come to welcome the 
pious slave of God, the old friend of the Imam, the brother of 
the leader and the concerned lover of the people, Ayatollah 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani. [sentence as published] 
  Describing the unprecedented welcome of the president on the 
part of the people of the province of Mazandaran, he said: 
Undoubtedly, this great maneuver of the people in their presence 
once again on the scenes of strengthening their covenant with 
the regime will never go unnoticed by the aware expert eyes of 
domestic and foreign political circles and they will bow to the 
divine strength of the nation and the just rulers. In addition 
to this important matter, what was observed in this fruitful 
visit everywhere was the unity and solidarity among the 
religious scholars, the clerics, the Friday and congregational 
imams, and the officials of the province and the coordination 
and unity between the valued Shi'ite and Sunni people, which 
according to the president is glory rarely seen in history for 
the religion of Islam. 
  He then referred to the gains of this visit, including 
emphasis on and issuance of permits to build and complete the 
parts of the province, the dam-building projects to harness 
water, and emphatic emphasis on carrying out and examining the 
essential 11 important demands of all the deputies and added: 
Mazandaran has a great share in the gross national product and 
provides an important part of the essential goods of the 
country, including rice, meat, wheat, soybeans, cotton, marine 
products, and lumber. 
  Hence, with this God-given gift, as the president said, 
investment in this rich province in fundamental affairs will 
have three times the results and profit of other areas, and in 
this connection, it is necessary for the economic planners and 
thinkers of the country to prefer in the essential investments 
of the country the province that has more of these added value 
characteristics in order to overcome the present economic 
problems of the country. 
  The speaker also said in conclusion: We consider it 
obligatory, before God and the beloved responsible people, on 
behalf of all the revered people in the province, the revered 
clerics, and all the officials and people of the province of 
Mazandaran, to thank the president and his companions. May his 
blessed and fruitful visit be a new chapter in the economic 
development of the province and release Mazandaran from the 
70-year-old deadlock following the political and administrative 
changes of the northern neighbors in the Second and Tenth Plan 
of the future of Islamic Iran. 
<H5>  Ratifications </H5>
  Educational and cultural establishments and units that 
are not licensed will be closed. 
  The first item on the agenda of the open session of the 
Majles yesterday was the "proposal to exempt the ratification 
concerning the internal bylaws of the Majles from the content of 
Article 2 of the civil law." First, its general points were 
ratified and then its details were discussed and ratified by the 
deputies. 
  Single article. All the ratifications concerning the 
internal 
bylaws of the Majles shall be implemented immediately after 
final ratification. This ruling also applies to this single 
article. 
  The third item on the agenda was a report on the second 
round 
of discussions of the Judicial and Legal Affairs Committee 
concerning the bill on the closure of educational, research, and 
cultural establishments and units that have been or will be 
established without a license, the details of which were 
ratified. 
  Single article. Persons who, without acquiring a permit from 
legal authorities, engage in the creation of educational, 
research, and cultural establishments and units, such as 
universities, higher educational or research establishments, and 
schools that are among the duties of the Ministries of Culture 
and Higher Education; Education; Labor and Social Affairs; 
Health, Treatment and Medical Education; and Islamic Culture and 
Guidance; and after the issuance of instructions to dissolve on 
the basis of regulations keep the establishment or unit open 
shall be considered fraudulent, and upon the complaint of the 
related ministry, shall be prosecuted. 
  Note 1. Concerning legal persons, establishments, directors, 
and the board of directors or the highest executive official 
shall be prosecuted and punished. 
  Note 2. Educational, research, and cultural establishments 
and units, and those with similar names that have been 
established prior to the ratification of this law without 
acquiring a permit, if they do not take steps to acquire the 
permit within six months after this law is put into effect, 
shall be subject to this law. 
  Note 3. The implemental bylaws of this law shall be prepared 
by the related ministries within three months and ratified by 
the Cabinet. 
<H5>  Question of Hazrati to the Minister of Interior </H5>
  My question is clear, and a copy of it is available to the 
deputies: What is the reason for the Ministry of Interior 
preventing the march of the students of the Islamic societies of 
the Tehran universities on 11 Azar 1372 [2 December 1993], which 
was supposed to take place from the University of Tehran to the 
spy nest? We had a meeting in the committee with the minister. 
He gave some explanation in regards to having been informed too 
late, and for this reason the issue was denied, which was not 
satisfactory from our point of view. 
<H5>  Response of the Minister of Interior </H5>
  Then the minister of interior responsed: Every phenomenon 
has 
a crystallization and manifestation and has a series of 
standards and measures. As our revolution is an Islamic 
revolution and Islam is a part of the essence of our revolution 
and inseparable from the revolution itself, fighting injustice, 
oppression, and heathenism is a part of the essence of the 
Islamic revolution. 
  He added: Because the crystallization of so much oppression, 
injustice, aggression, and interference in the internal affairs 
of countries is an attribute of American imperialism, fighting 
the United States is in the nature of our Islamic revolution. 
Fighting the United States has been, is, and will be a part of 
the Islamic revolution from the beginning. 
  Today, at the head of all the affairs, the grand leader, 
Ayatollah Khamene'i, who as the manifestation, spokesman, 
symbol, and leader, clarified the policy of the Islamic 
revolution, which is a continuation of the policy determined by 
the founder of the Islamic Republic, the late Imam, and the 
government continues this course without question and has based 
the direction of its social and foreign policies on it. The 
minister of interior continued: Hence, such statements and 
discussions must be made elsewhere, not here. Those factors that 
caused us not to agree to the parallel march that the Students 
for the Strengthening of Unity had suggested were mostly these. 
If our nation is united, as the most powerful phenomenon, this 
can stop any aggression and neutralize open and secret 
opposition to this unity. And we find this to be desirable. If 
it were not agreed to on that day, the main reason was that we 
must, like others, submerge ourselves in the endless sea of the 
nation and say the same thing and have the same slogan. 
  He also said: I am not in a position to want to give advice 
to anyone. I must defend what I did. Based on the same report, 
then, Mr. Hazrati said: Mr. Besharati said in the committee that 
we agree to any march against America, but I received the 
request of the students a bit too late. There is sufficient 
reason and evidence that the students submitted the request one 
week before, and on the basis of the request of the students of 
Tehran universities, which took place on 05/08/1372 [27 October 
1993] and was presented in writing to the Ministry of Interior 
on the 10th, upon the instructions of the minister, it was 
pointed out that with regard to the Islamic Student Societies of 
the universities throughout the country, based on Letter No. 
5467, dated 05/08/1372, requesting coordination with law 
enforcement forces, etc., the minister did not agree with the 
above-mentioned ceremonies. Following this issue, unfortunately, 
the governor-general's office of Tehran also issued a 
pseudomarshal law communique stating that if such a march takes 
place, they will do thus and so to deal with it. And since it 
was not agreed to, the students did not march. 
<H5>  The Question of Mr. Hazrati in Response </H5>
  Hazrati again added: My question is, first, where in the law 
is the statement that 10 days or a week earlier it must be 
announced and the request made? Second, based on the 
Constitution, all assemblies and marches are permitted, provided 
they are not contrary to the fundamentals of Islam. Yes, it 
would have been better to carry out the ceremonies altogether 
and in a unified way. This is a bit of advice from all of us. 
The same advice was also made in previous years. The differences 
in methods and tastes in our country are a reality that has 
existed, exists, and will exist. In previous years also, we have 
had problems among the Muslim groups who support the Islamic 
revolution. No matter what label and accusation we make, they 
are interested forces and are endorsed by the grand leader. They 
also had marches in the previous years. Sometimes in the morning 
one group marched and in the afternoon another. What happened 
this year, when that infamous letter was published and such 
accusations made against the Islamic Republic? We must encourage 
the students and the Muslim forces and our various strata to 
come and show themselves and declare their positions. At such a 
time, upon the anniversary of the capture of the spy nest, 
should we oppose the students? Then, in one place we say that we 
received it too late and in another place, on the basis of the 
directive of RESALAT newspaper and the revered brother who 
expressed his kindness to us here, we speak of unity and 
solidarity, and for this reason decide our opposition to one 
group carrying out its duty. We cannot stop the action of one 
group unless we have strong evidence that the march is contrary 
to security issues and contrary to Islamic goals. We cannot 
deprive the person who has not listened to my advice as a deputy. 
<H5>  Counter Response of the Minister of Interior </H5>
  Mr. Besharati counter responded: We thank Mr. Hazrati for 
announcing what happened in the committee, partially. I have 
come here on the basis of my legal duty. I consider myself 
responsible and consider it my duty to respond to Mr. Hazrati, 
but I do not consider myself responsible to convince him, as 
this cannot be done, because we presented the best evidence in 
the committee, but when he is not going to be convinced, it is 
not. Now, no matter how many reasons, 70, 80, 100, or 200, you 
provide, it will have no effect, and it is not our purpose to 
give reasons in this regard that will convince him. We consider 
the Majles responsible when we must come and respond. 
  He continued: First, I should say that I read a letter from 
the Islamic Propaganda Coordinating Council that requested a 
march on 13 Aban [4 November]. The date the late Imam was sent 
into exile, the day of fighting global oppression, the day of 
the occupation of the American spy nest, which the Imam called 
the Second Revolution, is a very great day. That day must 
certainly be revived along with the positions that we have 
against the imperialists. They wrote: "While wishing you 
increasing success, in reference to the circular letter of the 
honorable president, which is attached, the organization, 
management, and responsibility of holding all the public and 
official ceremonies and marches is conferred on the Islamic 
Propaganda Coordinating Council." Hence, as the official in 
charge of the Ministry of Interior, I give permission to one 
organization to march, and that is the Islamic Propaganda 
Coordinating Council, and no one else, under no title, name, 
flag, central council, or anything else. 
  He then read the continuation of the letter of the Islamic 
Propaganda Council Organization: "Hence, considering the 
approaching ceremonies of 13 Aban, the anniversary of the exile 
of the great leader of the revolution, Precollegiate Students' 
Day, the day of the capture of the spy nest, and the day of 
national struggle against global oppressors, for which every 
year special ceremonies are held in Tehran and throughout the 
country, this year, too, in order to hold the ceremonies in a 
more coordinated and magnificent manner, a headquarters composed 
of students and precollegiate students, institutions, and 
people's assemblies has been established in this council, and 
so-and-so is in charge of the Central Headquarters of the 13 
Aban [4 November] ceremonies in regards to the coordination and 
follow-up of the tasks. Hence, it is requested that you issue 
the necessary instructions and introduce the person on that 
council and the permit to hold the above-mentioned ceremonies 
from 1300 to 1800 on 13/08/1372 [4 November 1993] in front of 
the spy nest. Thank you, Ahmad Jannati, representative of the 
Religious Guardian and secretary of the Islamic Propaganda 
Coordinating Council. Hence, our basis is this circular letter, 
and this is what is legal to us. We can give one institution a 
permit to march. Second, based on this circular letter, you were 
a member of this headquarters and changed your path midway. It 
is not our duty to protect everyone in every case and give 
permission to march or provide facilities. Mr. Besharati 
continued: The day that I presented the proposal here, we made 
the center of the policies three things: power, law, and good 
treatment of the people. We must advance on the basis of the 
law. The law has made us responsible for being present here. The 
law has told us what is our duty with regard to issuing march 
permits. Now, some people come and instead of 13 Aban [4 
November] declare 11 Aban [2 November] as the day of struggle 
against global oppressors. It is like the man who performed his 
Friday prayers on Wednesday. It is like announcing 21 Bahman [10 
February] as the day of the crumbling of the palaces of 
injustice and oppressors. We shall not allow it. We have another 
duty. Most humbly, Ayatollah Jannati requested a permit from me, 
and we gave permission for the march. The totality of 
institutions and organizations that have a share in this issue 
are members of this headquarters. You are responsible for your 
own work. You should have gone and coordinated it. We did not 
permit it to protect you. Our forces came. That day, you had a 
gathering without a permit. This gathering also needs a permit. 
And you changed the day of struggle against global oppressors 
and U.S. imperialism in the whole world to a conference or a 
seminar or a gathering against the government and questioned the 
values of the revolution. You made statements that were not in 
support of the government, this society, these people, and the 
revolution. You break the people's hearts so soon. You separate 
your way so soon. It is unfortunate. Where do we want to go? If 
the people are the basis, then why did you not join the people? 
Do we not all say that we are obedient to and emulate the 
founder of the Islamic Republic and do we not all follow the 
statements and directives of the Imam, the straight path of the 
revolution, forever? Did the Imam not say that the basis for 
opinion is the people? Our children were there. They said there 
were a total of about 1,000 people. Is this good? Does this 
strengthen our society or is the prestige of the revolution 
protected? These dear students who broke the awesome image of 
the United States, exposed its documents, and showed to the 
whole world what the United States has done in independent 
countries under the pretext of its embassy. That was a very 
great day. But that action will never be a justification for 
those who want to put the values of the revolution on trial. The 
revolution will not allow anyone to evaluate its work. Who was 
made happy with what you did that day, U.S. imperialism or the 
families of the martyrs, or the owners of the revolution? You 
ask me one question. I ask you 50 questions. So many complaints 
from the families of the martyrs have come to the Ministry of 
Interior asking why we allow such statements against the most 
sacred individuals of the country. In this country, the 
government is obedient to the leader. When you question an 
institution or organization, you are questioning all the values 
of the revolution. And my last word is that not only do I defend 
not granting a permit, but also by the help of God, if I am 
alive and remain a minister, I will not give a permit next year 
or the following year, either. 
  It is interesting that after Mr. Besharati, the minister of 
interior, statements were finished, Mr. Hazrati, the deputy from 
Rasht, announced that the response of the minister of interior 
was not satisfactory, and the issue was referred to the 
Investigation of Questions Committee. 
<H5>  On the Margins of the Majles </H5>
  Elyas Hazrati, the deputy from Rasht, regarding the reciting 
of the sacred verse by the minister of interior, in a Majles 
internal bylaws reminder said: In regards to the verse that Mr. 
Besharati recited in connection with my question, it is about 
the heathens and hypocrites. I need 10 minutes to respond, in 
accordance with the law. 
  Dr. Ruhani said in response: Mr. Besharati certainly did not 
mean to insult Mr. Hazrati. He wanted to use that verse as an 
example without intending to make a comparison. He wanted to 
say, in some cases no matter how much effort is made, no results 
are gained. And he wanted to say, I feel no matter how much I 
reason, the other side is not concerned. (In examples, 
similarities are not necessary. One similarity is sufficient.) 
This question of yours will go to the committee and be discussed 
again and will ultimately come to the Majles. The fact that you 
made an objection, you should have confessed immediately. I 
think later some people came and talked to you and gradually you 
reached this conclusion. Otherwise, you could have responded 
then. After all, this issue too place during the administration 
of Mr. Nateq-Nuri, and he must make a decision. 
  The deputy speaker then addressed Mr. Qomi, the deputy from 
Varamin, and said: Mr. Qomi, Mr. Hazrati is articulate and does 
not need your help. 
  The open session of the Majles yesterday started at 0900, 
later than the regular time. The report of our correspondent 
indicates that during this period, the deputies, considering the 
changes made in the internal Majles bylaws and the change to two 
rounds of discussions, discussed the procedures for examining 
the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget bill. 

