Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing January 28 TASS -- The Russian and the 
Chinese sides engage in the work to delimit the border. The 
sides will disscuss the posibility of jointly using some islets 
so as not to cause damage by economic activity and not to create 
tension on the border. "An understanding on this matter has 
been reached in Beijing", Russian Foreign Minister Andrey 
Kozyrev, on a visit in China told a news conference on Friday. 
  Answering questions from Western correspondents, Kozyrev 
said 
that the military-technical cooperation with China is developing 
in the framework of goodneighbourliness and partnership. 
  "I have never denied the importance of military-techical 
cooperation. Quite the contrary, I have declared openly in 
China and in many other countries for the widening of this 
cooperation", the minister said. 
  Talk in the West about "Russian neoimperialism" distracts 
the 
attention from real problems connected with Russia's special 
role in the CIS and in the maintenance of stability in Eurasia, 
Kozyrev noted. There will be no changes in the course. The 
December elections and, what is the main thing, the adoption by 
nationwide voting of a new constitution have created an even 
more durable basis for the presidential foreign policy, he said. 
  Kozyrev said nuclear safety in the Korean peninsula was 
discussed at the negotiations in Beijing. The minister said the 
sides had very close positions, both being aware of the need to 
preserve the nuclear nonproliferation regime and treaty. Action 
in this area must be firm, balanced and cautious, he said. 
  "On my part, I noted that for Russia and China and for other 
countries of the region the problem of nonproliferation of 
nuclear weapons, delivery vehicles and related missile 
technologies is a matter of safety. We are vitally interested 
that such armaments should not be brought into zones of 
conflict", Kozyrev said. 
  Regarding his forthcoming trip to the Shenzhen economic 
zone, 
Kozyrev said there is no need for blindly copying the experience 
of economic development of other countries. 

