BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 18 KYODO -- Veteran politician Michio 
Watanabe of the opposition Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) said 
Sunday he will leave the party, as early as Monday, in a bid for 
the premiership, hoping to gain the backing of the ruling 
coalition. Watanabe's statement came as the ruling coalition 
was moving toward backing Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata, head of 
Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party], as its candidate for premier. 
  There is some support within Shinseito, however, for the 
nomination of Watanabe for the premiership and his latest move 
will complicate the selection process, political sources said. 
  The 70-year-old former foreign minister said he will seek 
ties with the coalition parties to achieve his goal of 
succeeding outgoing Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, 
commenting, "I have a conviction that a cabinet of national 
salvation should be formed to overcome the present difficult 
situation." 
  "I could not become (prime minister) only with LDP support. 
As I have to ask for the support of many people, I will 
naturally renounce my party membership," he said. 
  If the leader of the LDP's third-largest faction quits the 
party, some 30 other LDP members will follow suit, LDP sources 
said. 
  Regarding the possibility of his forming a new party, 
Watanabe concurred, saying, "Naturally I will not forget about 
(the matter)." He also suggested he will run in the premiership 
race as an independent. 
  Meanwhile, representatives of the coalition parties will 
resume consultations Monday afternoon on policy coordination for 
a new government and are expected to reach agreement on a policy 
platform. 
  After reaching agreement on basic policies, coalition party 
chiefs will hold talks on the selection of a successor to 
Hosokawa. 
  Watanabe will make a final decision Monday, concerning his 
possible departure from the LDP, after consulting with his 
fellow faction members to determine how many would support such 
a move, faction sources said. 
  After Watanabe leaves the party, he will propose a 
"coalition 
government for national salvation" and call for policy 
consultations with the coalition, the sources said. 
  Shinseito Secretary General Ichiro Ozawa, the coalition's 
chief strategist, who has close ties with Watanabe, said Sunday, 
"Aside from the issue of whether he can be the candidate for 
prime minister (from the coalition), I respect him as a man of 
great experience and wisdom." 
  Komeito [Clean Government Party] Secretary General Yuichi 
Ichikawa said in a statement, "Watanabe's departure (from the 
LDP) would have a great impact." 
  Executives of the Social Democratic Party (SDP) [of 
Japan--SDPJ], the largest party in the coalition, confirmed 
Sunday night that if Shinseito decides to nominate Watanabe as 
the coalition candidate for premier, the party will leave the 
coalition, party officials said. They also agreed that if the 
SDP quits the coalition, the party will not form a "grand 
coalition" with the LDP, the officials said. 
  New party Sakigake [Harbinger] plans not to support a 
cabinet 
which includes Watanabe, party sources said. Sakigake, a 
15-member coalition group led by Chief Cabinet Secretary 
Masayoshi Takemura, declared Friday it will not seek a post in a 
new cabinet but will support a candidate agreed upon by its 
coalition partners. 
  Watanabe and LDP President Yohei Kono, who has himself vowed 
to run in the Diet election as his party's official candidate, 
had been scheduled to have a second round of talks on Monday. 
But it is unclear whether the talks will actually take place, 
sources said. 
  Kono urged Watanabe Friday to drop his ambitions for the 
premiership, in order to maintain party unity, but met with no 
success. 

