BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with President Geydar Aliyev by Pavel Alekseyev, </F>
datelined Baku and Moscow; date, place of interview not given: 
"Geydar Aliyev: We Only Want One Thing -- for the Truth To Be 
Known"] 
  [Text] [Alekseyev] It will soon be a year since you 
became president of Azerbaijan. Yet not many years ago most 
people were sure that G. Aliyev's political career was over.... 
  [Aliyev] You could say I did not come here at my own 
volition. After leaving the Politburo in 1987 because of 
serious disagreements with the USSR leadership, including 
Gorbachev personally, I did not engage in political activity. 
When, in late 1990, I was not allowed to live in Baku and found 
refuge in Nakhichevan, again I did not want to get involved in 
political life. But in 1991 a very difficult situation arose. 
That autonomous republic within Azerbaijan is detached from the 
state's main territory and borders on Iran, Turkey, and Armenia, 
and therefore, as a result of the war, it found itself 
blockaded. For some days the people held rallies in the 
squares, demanding that I become head of the republic's Supreme 
Council, and I was obliged to do so. I started work. It is a 
very complex region, our life was not without its difficulties, 
but it is at least peaceful, unless you count minor border 
clashes. 
  There is no war there now either, and there is not the same 
crime situation as before. Turkey has granted Nakhichevan $100 
million of credit. We immediately released $20 million of that 
to buy food, and that also alleviated the situation. And I 
thought that this autonomous republic would be my last abode. 
  But in June last year the power struggle in Azerbaijan was 
stepped up and the republic found itself on the brink of civil 
war. Then the Azerbaijani leadership, in the person of 
President Abulfaz Elchibey, appealed to me to come and help lead 
the republic out of the crisis. I did not want to return, but 
then I decided that it is wrong to stay on the sidelines if your 
people are in trouble. Unfortunately, two days after I entered 
on duty as chairman of the Azerbaijan National Assembly, 
President Elchibey left Baku in secret and has been in a 
Nakhichevan mountain village ever since. I was left alone. And 
for 11 months now I have been trying to sort out the situation 
in the republic. 
  [Alekseyev] What are the basic problems facing Azerbaijan at 
present? 
  [Aliyev] We are going through a very difficult period. The 
transition from a situation in which we were all part of a 
single Soviet state to the formation of independence and the 
consolidation of sovereignty is very difficult in itself. The 
situation is exacerbated by the fact that all the former USSR 
republics were very closely interlinked, especially in the 
economy, and the severance of ties had a very severe effect on 
Azerbaijan's economy. Then again, the republic is making the 
transition from one economic system to another, from the 
socialist economic system, with its laws and principles, to a 
free market economy. Finally, the third factor complicating the 
socioeconomic situation in Azerbaijan is the war. It has now 
been going on for six years, some 20 percent of the republic's 
territory is occupied, and there are more than 1 million 
refugees. 
  [Alekseyev] What can you say about the causes of the 
conflict, and what must be done to stop it? 
  [Aliyev] It was not the Azerbaijani side that started this 
war. There is no point now in analyzing what happened, but I 
will say one thing. When it all began, Azerbaijan was part of a 
single centralized state -- the USSR, and therefore the Union 
leadership could have prevented the outbreak of conflict. Or 
else, if conflict had begun, prevented it from developing. 
Unfortunately, this did not happen. The Karabakh conflict was 
the first on the USSR's territory, and look how many hot spots 
have developed now. 
  Azerbaijan is now waging a war to preserve its territorial 
integrity. But all this time I have been trying to put an end 
to the war through talks. There has been a cease-fire since 10 
May. Talks are now under way with the participation of the CSCE 
Minsk Group and Russia. Maybe it will be possible at last to 
reach an accord to eliminate the conflict. But on one 
condition: that the Armenian armed formations free all the 
occupied Azerbaijani territory, except, of course, 
Nagorno-Karabakh. Then we can conduct talks on the status of 
Nagorno-Karabakh. 
  [Alekseyev] During the Bishkek talks there was talk of 
disengagement forces.... 
  [Aliyev] Look. Whatever happens, in order to stop the war, 
monitor compliance with the cease-fire accord, and ensure the 
withdrawal of Armenian armed formations, forces of some kind are 
certainly needed. The CSCE Minsk Group sees these forces as 
observers. Russia considers it possible to send in so-called 
CIS peacekeeping disengagement forces, but this question is 
still at the stage of talks. 
  [Alekseyev] How would you assess the situation in the 
Caucasus? There has been much talk recently of how Russia still 
has no clear political concept with regard to that region. 
  [Aliyev] It is hard for me to say whether Russia has a clear 
stance or not. But it is a fact that the Caucasus is a very 
complex region and requires a more thoughtful, considered, very 
wise approach. Russia is a great country. And the Caucasus has 
been part of it for more than 200 years -- be it czarist Russia 
or the USSR, in which the Russian Federation was dominant. And 
Russia should have the same attitude to all the republics of the 
Caucasus. If there is a slant in one direction or another, it 
will lead to complications, and, naturally, the loss of its 
prestige in the region. There should, I repeat, be a very 
carefully considered approach, irrespective of whether Russia 
had closer historical links with one people, irrespective of 
religion. It seems to me that Russia will then have more 
prestige in the Caucasus, and the Caucasus will be assured of 
greater tranquillity. And greater tranquillity in the Caucasus 
means greater tranquillity in Russia. 
  [Alekseyev] For two years now the former republics have been 
trying to resolve the problem of the severance of ties in the 
post-Soviet area within the framework of the CIS. How do you 
assess that organization's activity and future? 
  [Aliyev] The organization has a future, I believe. It is 
needed so that each republic can develop more successfully. 
That was why, when I became leader of Azerbaijan, I made great 
efforts to create an atmosphere of trust in the CIS and the 
right conditions for joining the Commonwealth. 
  To tell the truth, it was not easy. By virtue of various 
circumstances, a very negative attitude to the CIS had developed 
in Azerbaijan. I am not saying everyone felt that way, but the 
vast majority did. First and foremost, the events of 20 January 
1990 had very serious moral effects on the people. On the other 
hand, the People's Front, while in power, vigorously cultivated 
anti-Russian sentiments. So it took some months to overcome 
those sentiments in the public consciousness. And on 24 
September last year we joined the CIS. I think it was a 
necessary and important step, and Azerbaijan should remain in 
the CIS in future. But as for the Commonwealth's practical 
activity, I would not say the organization has really become 
established or is functioning properly as yet. It seems somehow 
that during the meetings of heads of state, which last a day and 
a half or two days, the CIS exists, but in the intervals between 
meetings it does not. Therefore, in my view, very energetic 
measures are needed to enable the CIS to function more 
successfully. 
  [Alekseyev] And what does that require? Some kind of 
supranational structures, perhaps? 
  [Aliyev] I do not consider that expedient. That implies the 
resurrection of a unified state, the possibility of impinging on 
national interests. The former republics are now independent 
states, and they cannot agree to that. But it is essential to 
have closer integration. 
  [Alekseyev] Previously, in the USSR, much was said about 
the friendship of peoples. In the CIS, they discuss every 
question under the sun expcept for this one. Does it not seem 
to you that now, of all times, this is what is needed? 
  [Aliyev] The question is indeed very important. At the 
meeting in Ashkhabad [Ashgabat], I stated officially that I 
consider it abnormal to have a situation whereby two states 
belonging to one alliance fight among themselves. But I got no 
response. A second time, in Moscow on 15 April, I again raised 
the question of how the CIS was created for the purposes of 
uniting to defend the interests of our alliance, which is why it 
is unacceptable for two members of the alliance to fight among 
themselves, and that such a thing had never been seen in world 
practice. And again this question was not discussed. But you 
know, alongside military and economic aspects, the CIS needs a 
moral climate: What is needed is the strengthening of the 
friendship of peoples as a means of avoiding future conflicts 
and hostility toward one another. The CIS should extend its 
functions to the humanitarian sphere too, to the strengthening 
of mutual relations between nations and peoples, but in order to 
do this it is necessary for mutual relations inside the CIS 
itself to be warm and friendly. 
  [Alekseyev] In your short time as president, you have shown 
exceptional diplomatic energy. How would you describe 
Azerbaijan's political orientation in the international arena? 
  [Aliyev] I deem it a success that I managed to turn around 
criticism of mutual relations between the Russian Federation and 
Azerbaijan toward a positive direction. I met with B. Yeltsin 
and V. Chernomyrdin and other officials, we signed a number of 
very important documents, and we joined the CIS. That is, my 
first steps were aimed at restoring good relations with Russia. 
And this policy will continue: For Azerbaijan, Russia is both 
a close neighbor, and a large country with which the lives of 
many of the republic's citizens, living both in Azerbaijan and 
Russia, are linked. 
  Naturally, we favor the establishment of friendly relations 
with all neighboring countries -- with Turkey, for instance. 
These relations were good before, but my visit to Turkey, and 
the treaty we signed, strengthened our relations still further. 
Another neighbor is Iran -- we have a very long common border, 
and traditional links. Admittedly, the previous leadership did 
not accord the necessary significance to relations with Iran, 
and a certain tension arose in our relations. But during a 
visit to Baku by President Rafsanjani in October, we signed a 
number of documents. 
  Georgia is also our neighbor -- 600,000 Azerbaijanis live 
there -- and President Shevardnadze also visited us. 
  As for other countries, as we move along the road toward 
building a democratic, rule-of-law state, so we have a great 
need to develop relations with Western countries with traditions 
and experience in the sphere of democracy and a market economy. 
Therefore, I accepted an invitation from the leaders of Great 
Britain and France, John Major and Francois Mitterrand, to visit 
those states, and we had fairly fruitful talks. 
  [Alekseyev] You spend a great deal of time on foreign 
policy, problems within the republic, the Karabakh conflict.... 
Who helps you in doing so? From the sidelines, just one figure 
is visible above Azerbaijan's entire political horizon -- 
President Geydar Aliyev.... 
  [Aliyev] I have already said that I did not return to Baku 
at my own volition and I did not plan to get involved in 
politics. This probably sounds rather high-flown, but the people 
called me. Therefore, I did not bring any team of my own with 
me, nor did I prepare one. Admittedly, I know Azerbaijan well, 
but I left in 1982 -- in this time, an entire generation of 
leaders has been replaced. I have no party of my own, I work 
with the people who are there now. 
  [Alekseyev] What would you like to say to ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA 
readers? 
  [Aliyev] I want them to know one thing: I, as president, 
will put all my effort into this job, and I will strive for 
friendly relations with Russia. 

