BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "No All-Clear Sounding"] </F>
  [Text] The good news first: In 1993, the number of arson 
and bomb attacks fell by 41 percent compared to the previous 
year. Nevertheless, the figures that have been now released by 
the Federal Office of Criminal Investigations [BKA] are anything 
but comforting. In a confidential study, the Wiesbaden-based 
BKA talks of a reduction "on a high level." 
  With 540 politically motivated attacks, 1993 was once again 
closer to the figures for 1991 (537 attacks) following the 
horrific year 1992 (901 attacks). A return to the reasonable 
levels of 1990, which saw "only" 128 violent attacks of this 
kind cannot be expected for the time being, say the 
criminologists. 
  The most serious crimes were committed by right-wing and 
left-wing extremists: On 29 May 1993, four young neo-Nazis set 
fire to the home of a large Turkish family in Solingen, causing 
two deaths and serious injuries to eight of the occupants. Two 
months before that, early in the morning of 27 March, the new 
Hesse prison in Wieterstadt, which cost 130 million German marks 
to build, was blown up by members of the RAF [Red Army Faction]. 
  According to BKA findings, extremist right-wing motives 
(both 
acts aimed directly at left-wing groupings and various acts 
involving hostility toward foreigners) were behind 300 of the 
540 attacks. This means that attacks carried out by right-wing 
extremists reman the main problem. 
  The extremist left carried out 150 arson and bomb attacks. 
Their targets were political opponents, the police, the state, 
and the bourgeoisie. 
  The left-wing arsonists stronghold is Berlin. In the capital 
city alone, "anti-fascists" and "anti-capitalists" carried out 
69 attacks as part of campaigns, such as that directed against 
"Olympia 2000." The BKA has identified a further large group of 
arsonists and bombers among radical foreigners. 
  Of the 90 attacks carried out in 1993 by radical foreigners, 
the majority can be attributed to Kurds linked to the PKK 
[Workers Party of Kurdistan]. The potential for "politically 
motivated crimes committed by foreigners" remained the same as 
in 1992. 
  There was a significant decline in the number of criminal 
acts motivated by animosity toward foreigners. In new laender 
above all, the number of attacks fell by 75 percent. 
  The greatest praise was earned by the Thuringians, who were 
the most peaceful, followed by Saarland and Bavaria. 

