BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 1 (CNS) -- Improvement was made by 
state-owned enterprises during the first quarter of this year, 
according to Mr. Wang Zhongyu, Minister of the State Economic 
and Trade Commission. 
  With implementation of reform measures for finance, 
taxation, 
monetary system and foreign exchange, the new system proceeded 
normally, said Mr. Wang. He added that work on the state-owned 
enterprises would have to be strengthened. Emphasis had to be 
put on improvement of the enterprise mechanism while practice 
concerning bankruptcy on a trial basis, clearance of debt, 
supplement of capital at one's own disposal, restrictions on 
production of particular items for prevention of stockpiling, 
turning loss into profit and improvement of administration of 
enterprises had to be carried out. 
  At a conference sponsored recently by the Commission on 
comprehensive coordination of economic operation, participants 
expressed great concern for the state-owned enterprises. 
  Mr. Wang said that enterprises which came to a halt in 
production or saw inadequate working hours generally made up 10 
percent of the total across the country. Of the enterprises, 
those which stopped production accounted for four percent. As 
state-owned enterprises followed the international accounting 
system, some expenses in the past considered part of spending 
related to profit made by enterprises is now regarded as 
production cost, leading to a drop of profit in the account 
book. Actual profit made by state-owned enterprises, according 
to Mr. Wang, however, registered a gain and the loss reduced to 
some extent. 
  When regarding to appraisal of state-owned enterprises, Mr. 
Wang said that this should be seen with the following three 
points in minds. First, state-owned enterprises took a turn for 
the better in the wake of preferential measures for them and 
efforts made by the Party committees and governments at various 
levels as well as by enterprises themselves. 
  Second, great attention had to be paid to some enterprises 
suffering from poor quality products and difficulties in selling 
them. Solution to these problems had to be seriously looked 
into, but time and necessary conditions were needed for 
solutions. 
  Third, as state-owned enterprises had great vitality, 
therefore prospect for those enterprises was very promising. 

