Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Vicenzo Buondonno, a 37-year-old Italian and member 
of the Mafia, was arrested on 15 March by agents from the 
Maritime, Air, and Border Police Precinct (DP-MAF) of the 
Federal Police. The warrant for his arrest was issued by the 
Federal Supreme Court at the request of the Italian Government, 
which has filed for his extradition. Buondonno, who is linked 
to the Camorra of Naples, was in charge of receiving drugs from 
other South American countries and shipping them to Europe as 
part of the so-called "Spaghetti Connection." 
  Buondonno, known as Enzo, is the son of Rosario Buondonno, 
one of the leading members of the Camorra. Edson Antonio de 
Oliveira, Federal Police director for Rio de Janeiro, reported 
that Buondonno had been spotted in Rio de Janeiro four months 
ago. He was subsequently kept under surveillance by the police 
until the warrant for his arrest was issued. 
  The mafioso was arrested when he was going to his apartment 
on 26 Barata Ribeiro Street, in the Copacabana district. The 
three Italians who accompanied him were released after being 
questioned by the Federal Police. Buondonno is one of the 
owners of the Baroni-Fasoli Restaurant located on Jangadeiros 
Street, in the Ipanema district. De Oliveira stated that 
Italian Mafia members "launder" drug money through their chains 
of restaurants--hence the name "Spaghetti Connection." 
  The Federal Police also discovered that Buondonno has links 
with at least two other Italian Mafia members--Humberto Amaturo, 
who escaped from the Brasilia Federal Police but was recaptured 
in Bolivia, and Marco Pugliese from the Sacra Corona Unita, who 
was taken into custody in Rio de Janeiro. 
  Because of the friendship between Buondonno and Pugliese the 
police are investigating the possibility of Italian Mafia groups 
having joined forces to facilitate drug trafficking. Buondonno 
may have something to do with the murder of Roberto Farina, one 
of the owners of the jewelry shop at the Copacabana Palace 
Hotel, who was killed in 1991. 

