Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Correspondent Cristian Nita report from Chisinau] </F>
  [Text] The latest information received from the republican 
commission in charge of preparations for the sociological poll 
"What People Advise" shows that the action is currently 
unfolding normally and the republican commission has not 
received information about any violation of the rules concerning 
the unfolding of the poll. 
  In the eastern rayons of the republic, where citizens had 
the 
opportunity to start voting in the poll a week ago, local 
correspondents report that some of the citizens have the 
possibility to vote on the right side of the [Dniester] river 
and in the Dubossary area, the authorities of the 
self-proclaimed Dniester republic have doubled and even tripled 
the number of border guards. 
  In Chisinau, by 1030 local [0830 GMT] only 10-12 percent of 
citizens that have been registered on lists participated in the 
voting. 
  Mr. Mihail Coscodan, chairman of the commission in charge of 
the organization and unfolding of the poll said this morning on 
the television that the poll has no such legal value as a 
referendum would have had, but its positive results might 
influence the orientation of the future parliament's activity. 
  In turn, President Mircea Snegur, after expressing his 
opinion in the poll, stated this morning to representatives of 
the press that this action lays the foundation for the future 
constitution and the citizens will vote for the existence of a 
democratic state. Today, the fate of our state is being 
decided, said President Snegur. 
  In conclusion, we remind our listeners that the question 
that 
citizens have to answer in a positive or a negative way is the 
following: 
  Are you in favor of the Republic of Moldova's development as 
an independent, unitary, and indivisible state, with borders 
valid since the proclamation of its sovereignty, that is, 23 
June 1990, and in favor of Moldova promoting a policy of 
neutrality that has relations of mutually advantageous 
cooperation with all countries of the world and guaranteeing 
equal rights to all its citizens, in accordance with the norms 
of the international law? 
  In the right hand corner of the voting ticket, two answers, 
namely, "yes" and "no" are marked in capital letters. A ticket 
on which both answers are marked, or on which none of them are 
marked out, is not considered valid. 

