Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial report] The following is a compilation of 
fileworthy reports on antinarcotics operations in countries 
monitored by FBIS London Bureau from 19-24 February. Sources 
are given in parentheses at the end of each report. 
<H5>  Iran </H5>
  Some 883 kilos of morphine have been seized from an 
international drug gang in the border village of Gonbad-Kahriz, 
according to the prosecutor of the provincial Islamic 
revolution's tribunal. He said four active members of the gang 
were also arrested during the operation. Provincial law 
enforcement forces have seized about 4.3 tons of morphine from 
17 international drug gangs and arrested 110 traffickers over 
the past 11 months. (Tehran IRNA in English 1903 GMT 23 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Italy </H5>
  Men from the Special Operations Section working with 
carabinieri from Massa Carrara, have seized nine sacks 
containing 450 kilos of pure cocaine hidden in a consignment of 
coffee. The sacks were found inside a container unloaded from a 
cargo ship called "Saint-Pierre," which was flying a Cypriot 
flag and which came from Colombia. The cocaine, which has a 
street value of 200 billion lire, was destined, according to the 
carabinieri, for a group of Sicilian mafia members active in 
northern Italy and came from the Medellin cartel. (Rome RAI 
Televideo Teletext in Italian 1402 GMT 23 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Spain </H5>
  The Malaga Civil Guard has intercepted a consignment of 2.5 
tons of hashish in an operation carried out in the last few 
days. The drugs seized would have been worth over 7.5 billion 
pesetas on the black market. The police have broken up the main 
network of drug traffickers operating in Cantabria, arresting 
its 13 members. Various amounts of heroin, cocaine, and hashish 
were seized, as well as money, firearms, cars, a boat, and 
numerous jewels. The alleged leader of the drug-trafficking 
network, Juan Marin Cardenas, was arrested and handed over to 
the judiciary three years ago, when 2 kilos of cocaine that had 
come from Galicia were found in his possession. (Madrid RNE-1 
Radio Network in Spanish 1900 GMT 19 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Turkey </H5>
  A British woman is in jail in Turkey, accused of trying to 
smuggle 60,000 English pounds worth of heroin out of Istanbul's 
Ataturk Airport. Angela Corkmaz, understood to be 36 and 
married to a Turk, is alleged to have been carrying a kilo of 
the drug as she tried to board a charter flight back to England. 
(London PRESS ASSOCIATION 1805 GMT 24 Feb 94) 

