CSO 

  [Text] Events Service -- After identifying narcotics 
distribution gangs, agents of the antinarcotics campaign office 
were able to identify and destroy three large gangs of narcotics 
smuggling gangs that were operating extensively in the city of 
Tehran. In this regard the members of the aforementioned gangs 
were arrested and 91 kg of opium and morphine were seized. 
  The Greater Tehran Police Precinct Public Relations Office 
reports: Following the efforts of the personnel of the 
antinarcotics campaign office of the Greater Tehran Police 
Precinct in identifying narcotics procurement and distribution 
gangs and the struggles against smugglers, which they carried 
out in the city of Tehran, the agents clashed with a gang whose 
members had brought large quantities of narcotics directly into 
Tehran from a province in the eastern part of the country using 
heavy vehicles and advanced and clever stashing techniques. 
  After investigations were done, all the members of this gang 
were identified and it was also determined that its leaders were 
not local but were from Zahedan. After continuous surveillance, 
police agents placed one of their safe houses under observation 
and then they succeeded in arresting an individual named Halim 
in the Nezamabad area of Tehran. After being taken to the police 
station and interrogated the defendant admitted that he had been 
engaged in narcotics procurement and distribution working with 
three other people named Reza, Nasir, and Shokrollah, also from 
Zahedan, who were staying in safe houses in Tehran at that time. 
  The agents therefore immediately went into action and 
arrested the aforementioned individuals at the aforementioned 
house, located in [?Punak]. They also seized 61 kg of opium and 
1 kg of morphine. 
  In this regard a file was prepared and turned over to the 
proper authorities along with the arrested defendants. This 
report also adds that after seizing 27 kg of opium from a gang 
importing narcotics into Tehran from the cities of Kerman and 
Esfahan, agents set out to completely destroy this gang. After 
obtaining a court order they were sent to the municipalities of 
Kerman and Esfahan and succeeded in identifying and arresting 
the people associated with this gang. They confiscated a side 
arm from the defendants, named 'Abbas and Qasem. 
  These individuals admitted that the weapon belonged to the 
Esfahan police, that they were being sought for buying 70 kg of 
opium, and that they stole the side arm from this municipality's 
police agents during a false transaction. 
  In this regard a file was prepared and all the arrested 
individuals were turned over to the judicial authorities. 
  According to this report, following reports received from 
the 
Hezbollah nation that an individual named Jabbar had formed a 
gang and was engaged in extensive narcotics procurement and 
distribution, using heavy vehicles and trailers to bring opium 
into Tehran from the nation's eastern provinces, agents of the 
Greater Tehran Antinarcotics Campaign Office began an extensive 
investigation in this regard and were able to identify and 
arrest one of the gang members, named Ahmad. In a search of his 
house they obtained 2 kg of opium. Following his confessions, 
agents were able to arrest three more members of this gang. 

