Language: <F P=105> Macedonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dr. Aleksandar Stojmilov, professor at the Pure </F>
Mathematics Department: "Relatively Few Disputable Points"] 
  [Text] With the exception of the northern border, which is 
also "the newest one," and about which there are disputes over 
some places, the demarcation of the borders of the Republic of 
Macedonia has rarely been a subject for dispute. 
  The total length of the four state borders of the Republic 
of 
Macedonia adds up to 849 kilometers; the longest segment--262 
kilometers--is next to Greece, and the shortest one--165 
kilometers--is next to Buglaria. 
  The western border, that with Albania, extends in a 
north-south direction for 191 kilometers. The border was marked 
and delineated mainly in 1913, and since then it has not changed 
much. Since the time of the initial demarcation of the 
boundaries, there have been disputes over some places. First and 
foremost, the disputes concern the surroundings of Mala Prespa, 
specifically the region of Golo Brdo, the village of Lin on the 
western shore of Lake Ohrid, and most importantly, the monastery 
of St. Naum. In 1913, at the time of the demarcation of the 
border, the conclusion of the commission was that the western 
and southern shores of Lake Ohrid, from Lin to the St. Naum 
monastery, should be a part of Albania, but, at the same time, 
it was not explicitly determined under whose jurisdiction the 
monastery should be. 
  Later, the government of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and 
Slovenes interpreted the conclusion of the commission to 
demarcate the border in such a way that the St. Naum monastery 
would be considered part of its own territory, but Albania 
expressed its disagreement with that position and considered 
that the monastery had been awarded to Albania. The dispute over 
the monastery reached the League of Nations and remained there 
until 1921 when a special conference was established. The 
ambassadors of Italy, France, Great Britain, and Japan 
participated in this conference. Their decision was that the 
road connecting Debar and Struga should be in Yugoslavia, the 
region of Golo Brdo should go to Albania in its entirety, and 
the village of Lin, together with the St. Naum monastery, should 
belong to Albania. The Yugoslav Government objected to that 
solution, and the entire problem was referred to the 
International Court at The Hague, but that institution did not 
reach a definite decision. The border dispute was finally 
resolved in Florence in 1926 with the signing of a protocol 
according to which the St. Naum monastery would belong to 
Yugoslavia and the region of Golo Brdo, which included 27 
villages with Macedonian inhabitants, would belong to Albania. 
  Otherwise, for the greater part of its length, the 
Macedonian-Albanian border is a natural boundary since it is 
covered by a chain of mountains and is difficult to cross. The 
border, by the way, is not drawn on an ethnic basis, in view of 
the fact that, within our territory, a large number of Albanians 
who had previously been in Albania settled in the 18th century 
in the disputed area of Golo Brdo, southwest of Debar; in Mala 
Prespa, west of Lake Prespa; and in the region of Zapadna 
[western] Gora of Sar Planina where Macedonians were living. 
From a natural geographic aspect, this border and the 
immediatedly surrounding area should be divided into three 
natural units: the mountainous border and the portions below the 
Korab, Desat, Krcin, Jablonica, and Galicica mountains; then the 
lake regions and the parts which lie between the Prespa and 
Ohrid lakes; and the 12-kilometer stretch along the valley of 
the Cri Drim river and the lower border area with sections 
through the Debar basin. Today on this border, there are four 
open and functioning border crossing points: Blato near Debar, 
Tjafasan near Struga, St. Naum on the southern shore of Lake 
Ohrid, and Stenje on the western shore of Lake Prespa. 
Considering the length of the border and the number of border 
crossings, it appears that for each crossing point, there is an 
average distance of 48 kilometers; this is unsatisfactory in 
comparison with world standards. 
  The southern border, that with Greece, follows a laborious 
course and extends for a length of 262 kilometers. The border 
consists mostly of straight lines, and, in the literature, 
borders of this type are known as "geometric borders." Like the 
western border, this one runs through mountains, plains, and 
water regions. The length of the border is 238 kilometers over 
land, 20 kilometers through lakes, and 4 kilometers along 
rivers. This border is not a natural one throughout its length, 
since it cuts through the Prespa and Dorjan lakes, as well as 
the Pelagonia and Gevgelija basins. Moreover, it is not an 
ethnic boundary since it divides half of the ethnic territory of 
Macedonia through the center. 
  This border was demarcated and confirmed in 1913 by Serbia 
and Greece. About the demarcation of this border, one of the 
best-known Polish historians, Henrik Batovski, would later say 
that the day the agreement was signed in Belgrade--16 August 
1913--was one of the darkest days in the history of the 
Macedonian people. Since then, even until today, the border has 
not changed; the only correction was made in 1919 and that 
involved a section of Belasica mountain. At the time of the 
Peace Treaty of Nej [probably Neuilly], the Strumica district 
was detached from Bulgaria and joined to Yugoslavia, and that 
section, along the Belacica ridge was, in effect, added to the 
historical border. 
  Like the border between Macedonia and Albania, the southern 
border of Macedonia is divided into three parts: the 
mountainous--the areas which pass through the Baba, Nidze, 
Kozub, and Belacica mountains; the water regions, passing 
through the Prespa and Dorjan lakes, as well as the section 
through the Vardar river; and the lowland border with the 
stretches through the Pelagonia and Gevgelija basins. 
  When the Macedonian-Greek border is discussed, it should be 
remembered that, both in the past and today, this topic presents 
many vital "windows" for the development of the economy. Among 
other things, along with that same demarcation, an agreement 
between Greece and Yugoslavia was concluded (and renewed in 
1923) to obtain a free trade zone in Thessalonika (34,000 square 
meters) for a period of 50 years. (The free trade zone was shut 
down in 1973.) 
  Now that Macedonia is a sovereign state, that zone would be 
of decisive importance for the formal functioning of the 
economy. Furthermore, the fact that Greece is a member of the 
European Union clearly indicates that our southern border is 
also the border of Macedonia with the European Community. 
Besides that, it is also a fact that Macedonia does not border 
the sea; this means that it belongs to the so-called 
"geographically handicapped countries." The southern border is 
of great significance for Macedonia's economic development since 
through it lies the shortest path to the sea. 
  The border with Bulgaria follows a meridional direction 
through its entire course with a slight angle bending eastward. 
From Belasica in the north to the Kopriva summit (1,315 meters), 
the border encompasses 165 kilometers. It follows a natural line 
almost entirely. However, it is not an ethnic boundary since 
Pirin Macedonia is separated from the rest of Macedonia. This 
border is, for the most part, the same as the one between Serbia 
and Bulgaria, which was determined by the Bucharest Peace 
[treaty] of 1913. As I have already said, the only change was 
the correction in the sector of the Strumica basin, which was 
originally awarded to Bulgaria, but awarded to the Kingdom of 
Yugoslavia in 1919. 
  The northern border, the one with the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia extends in an east-west direction and encompasses 231 
kilometers. In the east, it begins at the Kopriva summit, at the 
point where the three borders (of Macedonia, Bulgaria, and the 
FRY) meet, and ends in the west north of the Kopan entry to the 
Korab mountain where it forms a triangular intersection with 
Macedonia, Yugoslavia, and Albania. 
  The border is primarily a natural one and is drawn along the 
ridges of the bordering mountains. The border was demarcated 
immediately after World War II. It does not correspond with the 
earlier border with Serbia, but for the most part it is an 
ethnic boundary. Neither the initial line nor this border was 
clearly defined. From the meeting of the Antifascist Assembly of 
the People's Liberation of Macedonia in 1944 until the enactment 
of the first constitution of the Federal People's Republic of 
Yugoslavia in 1946, the cities of Kacanik, Presevo, Bujanovac, 
and Trgoviste were under the administrative jurisdiction of the 
presidium of the federal body. They are now in the territory of 
Serbia. Later, all these districts, along with the Prohor 
Pcinski monastery, were joined to Serbia. Here, we should also 
keep in mind the question about the Gora district in Sar Planina 
in which an Islamicized population which speaks Macedonian is 
living, but generally speaking, this question has not been 
examined up to now. 
  Along these four borders many curves and other linear 
irregularities exist; thus the variation in the state border is 
quite large. Each of the four borders has its own peculiarities 
and specific traits, and this factor contributes to the fact 
that there are significant differences. At the same time, our 
state borders are also very complicated, primarily from the 
defensive and strategic points of view. Because of this, it is 
necessary to have a detailed acquaintance with the borders. 

