BFN 

<F P=106> [Ivan Zhagel report: "Increased Revenue From Customs Duties </F>
Proposed While Reducing Their Scale"] 
  [Text] The government has made significant adjustments to 
the revenue items in the amplified draft budget which has been 
submitted to the Duma. In particular, it is planned to increase 
the receipts from export and import duties to 8.6 trillion 
rubles [R], whereas they were R6.2 trillion in the previous 
draft. 
  Everyone still remembers the struggle waged over customs 
duties this year. At first the government intended to introduce 
new customs duties in January, then a special decree was adopted 
10 March on this question, which proposed to increase import 
duties no later than 15 March. In the end, under pressure from 
the public and from businessmen, the government admitted that 
the issue had not been dealt with very well, and there followed 
a further postponement of the deadline for introducing the new 
duties -- 1 July. 
  Naturally, the size of duties on a number of groups of 
commodities must also be reexamined or amplified, and, on the 
basis of the logic of the entire previous discussion of this 
question, revised downward. However, as follows from the latest 
draft budget, a reduction in the rates of import duties is 
lead...to an increase in payments into the budget to the tune of 
R2.4 trillion. 
  Incidentally, when sending the government the draft budget 
for further work, the Duma also insisted on increasing revenue 
from import duties. But, as Mikhail Zadornov, chairman of the 
Duma Committee for the Budget, Taxes, Banks, and Finances, said, 
this will be done not by increasing the rates, but as a result 
of abolishing a huge number of duty exemptions on imports which 
were previously handed out indiscriminately. 
  Incidentally, M. Zadornov cited some very interesting 
figures. Thus, in accordance with the memorandum on economic 
policy recently signed by the government and the Central Bank, 
it is planned to restrict the average rate of duties to a level 
of 15 percent. Naturally the Ministry of Finance, as part of the 
government, is also guided by this figure. However, 
realistically speaking, in the latest draft budget, when 
calculating revenue from import customs duties, the Ministry of 
Finance was proceeding on the basis of an average rate of 3.6 
percent. That is, an enormous number of exemptions for imports 
are being cut, as well as the allowance being made for the 
situation whereby people are simply going to avoid making the 
required payments. Therefore a reduction in customs rates plus 
the abolition of various exemptions may have a significant 
positive effect. 
  The abolition of exemptions on imports may degenerate into 
protectionism for our sectoral monopolies, for instance, 
automobile manufacturers and producers of agricultural output. 
Therefore, while repealing the exemptions, it is important on 
the other hand to restrict the maximum rates of import customs 
duties by legislation. And here the fact that the Committee for 
the Budget, Taxes, Banks, and Finances is preparing a change in 
the Law on Customs tariffs which, according to M. Zadornov, will 
establish the upper limit for rates at 20-30 percent, cannot 
fail to be encouraging. And if the government wants to exceed 
this level, then a special decision will be required from the 
legislators. 

