Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Toshiba Corp has begun work on the development of 
the landing-guidance system for the H-II Orbiting Plane (HOPE), 
a pilotless winged craft that could be called the 
Japanese-version space shuttle. In 1999 the Japanese-version 
space shuttle project will launch an experimental craft with the 
help of the H-II, a large domestically produced rocket, and will 
thereby firmly establish Japan's space shuttle technology, such 
as that involving leaving the atmosphere, reentry, and automatic 
landing. Toshiba believes that Japan's National Space 
Development Agency (NASDA), which is the primary entity 
conducting the project, will select as early as fiscal year 1993 
the firms to be in charge of the craft's guidance system and 
Toshiba intends to position itself to profit from orders placed 
for the guidance system by moving quickly to develop it. 
  What Toshiba has begun to develop is (1) a system to guide 
the shuttle by utilizing the global positioning system (GPS) 
prior to the shuttle's assuming the landing position, and (2) a 
microwave landing system to control the craft's landing orbit by 
microwaves sent out from the ground after the shuttle has been 
placed in position for landing. GPS is a system for determining 
three-dimensional positions by microwave sent out from U.S. 
military satellites; it is already being employed as a 
navigation system for aircraft and automobiles, and Toshiba will 
apply it for the Japanese-version space shuttle. Meanwhile, 
Toshiba is said to be planning to enhance the precision of the 
pilotless shuttle's radio reception, analysis, and other 
capabilities based upon the same guidance technology as the 
microwave landing system employed by aircraft. 
  Toshiba has organized a research and development team in its 
Komukai (Kawasaki City) Plant, which is Toshiba's development 
base for space-related equipment. Toshiba, aiming to be 
appointed to handle the experimental craft slated to be launched 
in 1999, will work on the quarters concerned for employment on 
the project. 
  The Japanese-version space shuttle has gained prominence as 
a 
key element in Japan's efforts to upgrade its space 
infrastructure, not only to regularly transport people and 
material between the ground and space, but also to be able to 
utilize space for such purposes as recovering and repairing 
satellites. It is hoped that it will prove helpful for the 
operation of the Japan Experimental Module (JEM) of the "Space 
Station," which is being planned as an international joint 
venture mainly under the direction of the United States. 
  Firmly establishing technology for reentry into the earth's 
atmosphere and guidance is a task for Japan to address; total 
costs for the 1999 shuttle launch is forecast to run about 
&yen;150 billion, a figure that includes the cost of developing 
the experimental craft and the cost of the launch. 

