Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yasir 'Abd-Rabbuh, member of the PLO </F>
Executive Committee, by Kassab Samawi in the studio; date not 
given--recorded] 
  [Text] [Samawi] Ladies and gentlemen, good evening. For 
about five months, the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations have 
been attracting regional and world attention. After the famous 
Oslo agreement, which many described as a surprise, and after 
the historic signing ceremony in Washington, difficult 
negotiations were held in regional and world capitals, then in 
Davos and back to Cairo, where three-day around-the-clock 
negotiations were held, ending with the signing of the Cairo 
agreement on 9 February. These events were accompanied by many 
developments and questions, which need some clarification. Our 
guest on this show is Yasir 'Abd-Rabbuh, PLO Executive Committee 
member. Welcome Mr. 'Abd-Rabbuh. 
  ['Abd-Rabbuh] Thank you. 
  [Samawi] Mr. 'Abd-Rabbuh, what is the Cairo agreement? How 
important is it toward the implementation of the self-rule 
agreement and the establishment of the national Palestinian 
authority in the autonomy regions? 
  ['Abd-Rabbuh] In fact, the Cairo agreement has been an 
extremely important step. This is because it is the key to the 
implementation of the interim agreement on the establishment of 
the national Palestinian authority. In this agreement, we 
addressed and resolved a number of major issues, without which 
we cannot proceed to resolve other issues and, consequently, 
begin implementation of the interim agreement. Of course, at 
the forefront of these issues is the question of withdrawal 
arrangements from the Gaza Strip and the Jericho region. 
Evidently, agreement has been reached on all withdrawal 
arrangements from these two areas. What remains to be done is 
to define the final size of the Jericho area. This issue will 
be addressed during the meeting between President 'Arafat and 
Yitzhaq Rabin. The second point is the question of crossings 
and entry. On this point, many criticisms and various 
observations can be made. In fact, there is no perfect 
solution. No solution can be termed an ideal solution. 
Certainly, there has been a settlement and halfway solutions to 
a number of issues pertaining to the crossings and some 
withdrawal arrangements. For our part, we want to indicate that 
through any possible steps or arrangements, the objective of the 
Palestinian negotiator is to address two basic points. First, 
to start the removal of the occupation from parts of the 
Palestinian territory and to ensure the continuation of these 
steps toward the achievement of the final objective, which is 
the removal of the occupation from the entire Palestinian 
territory. The second objective is to put an end to all forms of 
coercion and suffering that our people have been enduring 
throughout the years of the occupation. With respect to the 
crossings, I believe what has been reached concerning this issue 
has been made public, but I want emphasize some important 
points. First, there is a Palestinian participation in the 
administration and security of the crossings. This is something 
that did not exist in the past. There is also a special 
Palestinian wing for the citizens of Gaza and Jericho as a first 
phase and as a first step, given that Gaza and Jericho will 
witness an end to the occupation. There are also some detailed 
arrangements concerning the verification of identification cards 
and interrogation, which will involve Palestinian participation. 
This is because the unilateral occupation control in the past 
has caused a great deal of pain and suffering for our people 
throughout the years of the occupation. 
  Additionally, there are arrangements concerning, for 
example, the arrival of Palestinian and other visitors from 
abroad. The duration of the visit may be for three months, for 
example, and then extended for a minimum of three extra months. 
This is still an unresolved issue. We demand a minimum of 
eight months, after which it can be extended with the approval 
of the two parties. 
  There are Israeli security demands that were raised. We 
dealt with these demands in a balanced way without allowing any 
exaggeration of Israeli security demands to encroach on the 
substance of the Oslo agreement, that is ending occupation. We 
linked the ending of occupation with the steps that will lead to 
alleviating the suffering of the Palestinian people, as I have 
said. 
  [Samawi] Mr. 'Abd-Rabbuh, when the famous Oslo agreement was 
announced, it was first received with surprise, the surprise 
then turned into acceptance and then wonderful manifestations. 
People in the occupied territories prepared to receive 
President 'Arafat. After that, you entered into very difficult 
negotiations with the Israelis. This state of imbalance has in 
fact created confusion and despair among the Palestinian people. 
You then reached the Cairo Agreement two days ago. What can 
one tell the kinsfolk in the occupied territories? Are the 
difficulties and problems now over? Can they expect to see soon 
the national Palestinian authority on the Palestinian soil, or 
see an Israeli withdrawal from the occupied territories, from 
Gaza and Jericho? 
  ['Abd-Rabbuh] I wish to say one important thing here. 
Withdrawal will take place and the dawn of the Palestinian 
independence will soon arrive. This process has started and 
will not end without completing all of its chapters; that is, 
the arrival of the dawn of freedom and the Palestinian people's 
wresting of their sacred national rights over their territory. 
But the start of this process is extremely difficult and 
complicated. There are so many years of occupation and there is 
an interconnection in relations -- economic, administrative, and 
other relations between us and the occupation apparatus and 
occupation as a whole. Therefore, severing these links requires 
first very difficult and tiring negotiations, and, second, a 
detailed, specific treatment of each issue. The most dangerous 
thing in this process is to lose patience. Losing patience will 
lead to solutions which we, the Palestinian people, will have to 
suffer for many years to come. What is important is to continue, 
persistently. 
  There are some issues which some people think are marginal 
issues. What happened in Cairo, negotiations over details and 
secondary issues, such as entry and exit gates? Yes, they may 
seem secondary, but when you take into account the suffering of 
the Palestinian citizen throughout the years of occupation, 
these are principal issues. And, as far as the Palestinian 
future is concerned, they are also principal issues. 
  The Israeli side says that dates are not sacred. In fact, 
this is not true. The dates are part of an integrated 
mechanism. The proof that dates must be respected, must be 
sacred, is that in the Cairo agreement, we considered that these 
arrangements realized were for one year and are liable to 
amendment and change in the future. 
  Therefore, we are aware that there is a feeling of 
frustration, a feeling that since the date fixed for December 
was not respected, then perhaps the entire agreement is 
unimplementable. We say that this question is not linked only 
with the Palestinian negotiator. This is the responsibility of 
the entire Palestinian people, their forces, groups, figures, 
and establishments. The battle of the Palestinian negotiator is 
the battle of the entire Palestinian people, the battle of all 
the Palestinian people's brothers and allies. There are many 
complicated problems between us and the occupation. 
  For instance, in Cairo we solved a number of difficult 
problems but certain issues have remained which will need a 
solution and treatment during the next two or three weeks. For 
instance, the issue of the economic relations. We certainly aim 
not to make the Palestinian entity economically subservient to 
occupation. We do not want to have an economic occupation that 
is camouflaged in one form of another. We want the Palestinian 
entity's relations open and closely connected with its Arab 
surroundings, especially with the Jordanian and Egyptian 
brothers for well-known pan-Arab and geographic reasons. 
  There is going to be a sharp struggle over the issue of 
economic relations. Negotiations will also be held on a number 
of administrative issues. For instance the identity cards to be 
issued by the Palestinian authority, how they will be approved 
and how they will be treated. We wish to have something similar 
to a Palestinian passport so that the Palestinian citizen will 
be able to get rid of many years of suffering. For instance, in 
the Gaza Strip, there is no Palestinian passport or identity 
card recognizable in the world. There are restrictions. 
  All these issues will be subject to negotiations. We believe 
that it is possible to reach agreement on these issues within a 
short time now that the more difficult questions have been dealt 
with in Cairo. Other problems remain such as defining the size 
of withdrawal from the Jericho area. Of course, we consider 
this issue to be very important because the entire process we 
are undertaking aims to ensure taking at least first steps 
during the first stage of the interim solution to end the 
occupation. 
  I'd like to make the point here that there is no such thing 
as a prefect solution. We would gladly help the opposers of the 
recent Cairo agreement determine its negative points. We will 
tell them how much bargaining it took to get that agreement. 
  [Samawi] Some observers contend that the Palestinian 
negotiators talking to the Israelis were facing tough choices, 
and therefore had to accept certain Israeli conditions with 
respect to the crossings, withdrawal, security for the Jewish 
settlements, and other important themes. Is that a fair 
assessment? 
  ['Abd-Rabbuh] I'd like to point something out here. Let's 
draw a comparison between the Cairo agreement and the parent 
Oslo accord. There were certain constraints in the Oslo accord, 
and these may have been relaxed rather than toughened by the 
recent Cairo agreement. I do not want to talk about details 
that will serve no useful purpose for us the Palestinian 
negotiators. However, the themes on which agreement was reached 
in Cairo -- like the question of an Israeli pullout from the 
Gaza Strip, the area of the settlements and their locality -- 
had been the subject of haggling for two months. These were the 
sticking points that held up the signing on 13 December. 
Regarding the settlements in Gaza, the Israelis insisted on a 
security presence for themselves in the adjoining territories. 
But we insisted that, in other respects, these territories be 
under Palestinian control and readily accessible to 
Palestinians. We also insisted that there be joint, rather than 
exclusively Israeli, patrols on the roads leading to the 
settlements -- short as they are, and, in our opinion, 
artificial, and, therefore, disposable, as they are. It takes 
patience and stamina to address such issues. We also insisted 
that the main road that passes through the Gaza Strip from end 
to end be under Palestinian control. The Israelis can build 
bridges to span that road but not roads. As I have said every 
single detail of these issues took tough bargaining to sort out. 
This is because we had set out to achieve the twin objective of 
ending occupation and easing our people's suffering. Neither 
the Palestinian negotiator nor the process in general stand to 
gain anything from frustrations. What we really need is patience 
and resolve, even if the negotiating process has to drag on for 
longer. 
  Quick solutions will not be sufficient and will be 
dangerous to our future. Solutions achieved through 
determination, patience, and perseverance provide us with better 
guarantees even if they take longer, better guarantees for our 
future, and for the future of this entire political process. 
  [Samawi] Watching the signing ceremony in Cairo, we noticed 
that President 'Arafat was less cheerful than he had been during 
the Washington ceremony to sign the Oslo agreement. You were 
close to 'Arafat for three days and during the signing ceremony. 
Was he satisfied with the agreement? 
  ['Abd-Rabbuh] I believe that brother Yasir 'Arafat gave his 
views frankly during the news conference because he believes 
that this agreement is an important, big step toward finalizing 
the interim period agreement. We are happy whenever we proceed 
toward a solution. However, the suffering to reach this 
solution had been great. At the same time, we feel the immense 
responsibility of the Palestinian negotiator when he decides and 
agrees on any point. Perhaps it was the sense of this 
responsibility that appeared [on 'Arafat] and not that he did 
not want to sign as the news agency dispatches alleged. I do 
not believe these reports are worth responding to. 
  [Samawi] Last question, what is the next step after the 
Cairo 
agreement? 
  ['Abd-Rabbuh] This is the important thing, I imagine. As I 
said, the Cairo agreement allowed us to move one step forward to 
finalizing the interim phase agreement. There are so many 
issues that require extensive negotiations. The primary issue 
is the national authority and its role during the interim phase. 
I believe that in general, this issue is already solved as 
enunciated in the Oslo agreement. There are certain details 
related to it. 
  There is also the problem of the Palestinian police force 
entry, with its numbers and weapons, etc. There are a number of 
administrative problems such as documents, ID's and passports 
and how they will be dealt with. There is the issue of economic 
relations. All these issues require treatment and solutions 
over the next two weeks in order to complete the agreement. 
With this agreement, there is a primary issue for us; namely, 
releasing all the Palestinian detainees. There will be no 
agreement without releasing all the detainees and the detained 
Palestinian freedom fighters. If we want to turn a new leaf, 
none of these strugglers, who are the elite of our people, 
should be in jail. 
  We began negotiating on this subject in Taba. Of course, we 
negotiated on details and not on the principle itself because 
the issue of releasing the detainees is not negotiable. There 
was a fixed timetable extending to 13 April. If the agreement 
is completed on various issues and is applied before 13 
April--and I believe this is possible because withdrawing from 
Gaza and Jericho and certain issues related to the transfer of 
authorities require only one month, between 13 March and 13 
April--then the timetable on releasing all detainees will be 
implemented along with completing the withdrawal. 
  I repeat that this is an essential issue for us and we 
emphasized it in the Cairo meeting. We are aware that the 
Palestinian people, their brothers, allies, and friends, and all 
those who want the peace process to succeed will be happy to see 
tangible, real implementation of all these papers, agreements, 
and signatures. Failure to begin implementation will cause a 
loss of trust in the entire process. 
  That is we have the link between the steps of withdrawal 
and the measures concerning reducing and ending the suffering on 
the crossing points, and so forth, and the release of 
Palestinian detainees. All these issues are linked so that we 
can arrive at the starting point in the implementation of the 
transitional phase. Here, I wish to say that this is only a 
starting point in the transitional phase. It will be followed 
by negotiations covering issues such as ending the military 
occupation, ending the Israeli civilian administration, and the 
Palestinian authority's assumption of control over all 
Palestinian territory in the West bank and Gaza Strip. These 
issues are expected to be completed after several months, three 
or four months after completing the Gaza-Jericho agreement. 
  Even as regards the Cairo agreement, it is clear that on the 
Gaza and Jericho wings there will be a principal Palestinian 
presence and an invisible Israeli presence. On the other wing, 
that of other Palestinians in the West Bank, there will be a 
joint presence. These are all transitional arrangements because 
when the full role of the Palestinian authority over all 
Palestinian territory is complete, and when withdrawal from Gaza 
and Jericho takes place, when the remainder of Israeli troops 
are deployed in certain areas in the other parts of the West 
Bank, and when the military occupation ends, the role of the 
Palestinian authority will in this case be comprehensive. 
  Here I wish to say, once again, that the main thing is to 
view this issue as a very serious one that needs patience and 
perseverance. We have no ready-made solutions. We are dealing 
with a unique, extraordinary, and unprecedented situation. 
Therefore, it is natural to see incomplete solutions because 
these are transitional, and not final solutions. 
  [Samawi] But we hope to arrive at permanent and complete 
solutions that will return the territory and establish the 
comprehensive peace. 
  ['Abd-Rabbuh] Exactly. Here I wish to point out that within 
the framework of this process, Palestinian-Jordanian 
coordination is a basic and central element. I am not saying 
this as a slogan, often repeated when talking about this 
subject. For example, in our economic talks with the Israelis, 
which may start in a week and last for several weeks, we cannot 
reach agreements before having a joint Jordanian-Palestinian 
agreement over so many issues, such as customs, taxes, the entry 
and exit of commodities, transportation, and other issues. The 
two parties must be speaking from the same grounds in order to 
be able to guarantee the Jordanian and Palestinian common 
interests. Palestinian interests cannot be separated from 
Jordanian interests, or vice versa. Therefore, I believe 
cooperation between the two parties must be strengthened over 
the economic and administrative issues -- and there are many 
details that have to be worked out by the Palestinians and 
Jordanians, there are issues concerning water and others issues. 
The cohesion should not remain limited to slogans only. We have 
to detail it and find practical solutions and move within the 
context of this practical solution to deal with it in the 
negotiations with the other party. 
  [Samawi] Thank you for this interview, Mr. Yasir 
'Abd-Rabbuh. Ladies and gentlemen: On your behalf, we thank PLO 
Executive Committee member Yasir 'Abd-Rabbuh. 
  ['Abd-Rabbuh] Thank you very much. 

