Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Philip Webster: "I Shall Fight on as Leader, </F>
Says Major"] 
  [Text] John Major tried yesterday to head off the threat 
of a summer leadership crisis by making plain that he will stay 
on as Prime Minister even if the Conservatives are badly beaten 
in the European elections in June. 
  Dismissing renewed speculation about a leadership challenge, 
Mr Major declared: "I was elected at the last election with the 
largest vote any party or party leader has ever had. I was 
elected to remain Prime Minister of this country at least until 
the next election, and beyond it if I win the next election." 
  He moved to strengthen his personal position as he and 
Douglas Hurd launched an attempt to unite Conservatives on 
Europe in the run-up to the June 9 elections. The Foreign 
Secretary is chairing a committee drawing up the manifesto and 
his delicate task will be to bind together the Eurosceptic and 
enthusiast wings of the party. 
  The two ministers indicated yesterday that they intended to 
do that by concentrating on trying to curb the growing power of 
Brussels and improving the running of the European Union [EU], 
while steering clear of such divisive issues as the single 
currency and the Union's long-term future. Mr Hurd took the 
first step last night when he told European politicians and 
bureaucrats to cut red tape and unnecessary lawmaking, crack 
down on fraud, and concentrate on making the EU work. 
  "The Union must be careful not to over-legislate," he told 
the Belgian Institute for International Affairs. "What we do, 
we should do well; what we would do badly, we should not 
attempt. The temptation for every legislator is to spend his 
time legislating. It is after all the power which our electors 
give us. It requires self-restraint and confidence to know when 
not to rush into print." 
  The EU was now doing less and doing it better, but in some 
areas it was still doing too much and not well enough. "There 
is a danger that we legislate to feel good, not to do good," Mr 
Hurd said. "Nowhere is this truer than in social legislation. 
The warm glow comes quickly after passing a piece of law which 
is designed to raise standards for those in jobs; the chill of 
lost jobs because of lost competitiveness is felt more slowly." 
  Mr Hurd also urged the Community to crack down on fraud, 
which he said was a drug that weakened Europe. Nobody knew how 
much money was disappearing, but the catalogue of crime was 
depressing: double payments of subsidies, cattle smuggling to 
avoid customs levies, social fund cash being used to build 
private villas. 
  Both Mr Hurd and the Prime Minister, in a [BBC] Radio 2 
interview earlier, pledged to fight any attempts to weaken the 
right of individual governments to veto European legislation 
against their national interest when the EU expands. 
  Mr Major told Jimmy Young that he intended to fight the 
elections on a "distinctly British Conservative manifesto for 
the future of Europe," and he tried to scotch suggestions that 
he could be threatened if the Tories did badly. His approach 
pleased close colleagues, who believe that pressure on the Prime 
Minister will ease if the Tories can hang on to 20 of their 
existing 32 seats. But the difficulty of the task of uniting the 
party on Europe was underlined by Sir Edward Heath, who 
criticised Mr Hurd's speech and said ministers had to be more 
positive about the Union. 
  Asked about a potential challenge and support for Michael 
Heseltine, Mr Major said that similar rumours had circulated 
last year but a challenge had failed to materialise. "It is an 
extremely good story for a small number of journalists to 
pursue, but it is not real." 
  He also rejected much of the criticism against him and 
denied 
being weak and indecisive. "If that were really true, I doubt 
that I would have survived the last three-and-a-half years. 
Some people think you should shout and scream and bang the 
table to show you are a strong leader. That is not in my 
nature." 
  Mr Young said strong leaders could survive hatred and 
vitriol, but said: "Once people begin to laugh at you and make 
fun of you, and draw silly cartoons of you, with your shirt 
tucked in your underpants, is it almost impossible to regain 
your credibility?" The Prime Minister replied: "That has been 
going on for quite a long time. It hasn't in any way changed 
the way in which I seek to run the Government. The thing that 
matters is what emerges at the end of the struggles, not what 
vitriol may be hurled during that time." 
  Mr Major also denied that the Government was "riddled with 
sleaze," saying: "Rumours and innuendo do not make fact. There 
has been a frenzy, but I know the Conservative Party, and it 
isn't the case." 

