Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development 
Corporation (PNC) plans to begin full-scale research with the 
goal of building a new recycling system concept (new 
reprocessing and recycling) that will "strengthen resistance to 
nuclear proliferation" by extraction without separating 
plutonium and uranium from transuranic element (TRU) nuclides. 
  In the current reprocessing method, extraction is carried 
out 
by separating plutonium and TRU. If fissile plutonium is mixed 
with TRU, however, it cannot be used in nuclear bombs. 
  For this reason, PNC wants to begin research to modify the 
existing method of light water reactor (LWR) reprocessing so 
that (1) TRU nuclides are not separated, (2) complete separation 
of uranium is not carried out, and (3) complete elimination of 
fission products is not carried out; and to use the unrefined 
plutonium (i.e., mixed with TRU) in a new fast reactor that can 
burn it. This process would be a new fuel cycle with greater 
nuclear proliferation resistance and, moreover, would make it 
possible to burn TRU, so the resulting reduction in TRU 
accumulation could be expected to contribute to reducing the 
burden on the environment. 
  Along with research on the recycling process as a whole, 
including the above modification, new reprocessing methods using 
technology to simultaneously burn and recycle plutonium and TRU, 
fuel fabrication, waste disposal and basic reactor concepts, PNC 
also plans to evaluate the features of the the cycle, such as 
plutonium/TRU balance in the recycle flow, degree of nuclear 
proliferation and environmental protection and economy. 
  In FY94, PNC wants to build the basic cycle concept and 
carry 
out the feature evaluations. Then, from FY95, it wants to move 
to cycle concept design research and development of element 
technologies. With regard to plutonium-TRU combustion 
technology, from FY94, PNC will carry out research on an 
advanced purex method that will not extract plutonium 
separately, and research on separation and recovery of TRU 
nuclides from nuclear waste. PNC also plans to carry out the 
following research projects: (1) analysis of characteristics of 
combustion of TRU in fast reactors and continuation of R&amp;D on 
TRU fuel manufacturing technology; (2) provision of equipment to 
recover materials needed for TRU fuel irradiation testing 
(americium, neptunium, etc.) and modification of existing cells 
to use in making TRU samples; and (3) study of concept of TRU 
research facility that can play a role in basic, fundamental TRU 
research (a long-lived nuclides research facility). 

