BFN 

<F P=106> [By Peter de Ionno] </F>
  [Text] The SA Navy -- long neglected "Cinderella" of the 
defence force -- has fired the first shots in a fight for 
survival. It is proposing a R1.2-billion [rand] contract to 
build four deep- water patrol ships. 
  But this presents a dilemma for the ANC-led 
government--whose 
leaders have said funds from the R9.2-billion defence budget 
will be used to fund the ANC's R39-billion reconstruction plan. 
  President-elect Nelson Mandela and his deputy Thabo Mbeki 
have voiced their approval of this. 
  Defence experts say an efficient navy is essential to 
protect 
South Africa's marine interests. Also, they say the SA Navy 
needs development to end the country's "psychosis of isolation" 
-- and define its role as a regional power. 
  New Defence Minister Joe Modise will be pressured to make 
cuts to keep his budget within 2.6 percent of the GDP--which the 
International Monetary Fund says is a prerequisite for the 
granting of loans for social improvements. 
  Last week invitations for proposals to build the vessels -- 
corvettes equipped with anti-submarine helicopters -- were 
issued through Armscor [Armaments Corporation of South Africa] 
to shipyards in Britain, Denmark, France and Spain. This week, 
Armscor refused to comment on the invitations, which followed a 
two-year study of 42 designs offered by 17 countries. 
  Mr Modise, former Umkhonto we Sizwe [Spear of the Nation; 
ANC 
military wing--MK] commander, will be torn between loyalty to 
this programme and a lobby pushing for a status quo in defence 
spending. He leads a small but influential band of "hawks" in 
the military section of the ANC sympathetic to the defence lobby. 
  The arms industry's attempts to woo Mr Modise included a 
visit in December by him and Armscor chief executive Tielman de 
Waal to British arms manufacturers at the invitation of the 
British Ministry of Defence's sales division. 
  Mr Modise's problems will be compounded by an upward trend 
in 
defence costs -- even without capital investment. The 
integration of 35,000 MK guerrillas and former TBVC [Transkei, 
Bophuthatswana, Venda, Ciskei] soldiers into the National 
Defence Force threatens to add a R3.5-billion burden to the 
budget over the next three years. Senior officers want this to 
be paid for from funds additional to the defence budget. 
  Against this background, the Navy's bid to stay afloat by 
modernising its ageing fleet seems hopeless. In addition to the 
corvettes, it says it needs at least four 2,000-ton 
multi-purpose "blue water" ships to do its job properly. The SA 
Navy has had its share of the defence budget slashed from 17 to 
eight percent since 1990 -- and faces being downgraded from a 
maritime force to a mere coast guard. 

