BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article; from NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 3 June </F>
Morning Edition] 
  [Text] The Ministry of Foreign Affairs [MOFA] considers the 
situation over the suspected DPRK (North Korea) nuclear arms 
program as being at "a major crossroads" (to cite Foreign 
Minister Koji Kakizawa), and thinks the next few days, up to 
early next week, will be a critical period. Vice Foreign 
Minister Kunihiko Saito, who was on an official trip overseas, 
shortened the trip and hurried home on 2 June. On 3 June, 
senior officials of the ministry will be sent to the United 
States for emergency meetings with officials of the United 
States and South Korea. 
  If North Korea continues the work of changing fuel rods at 
its experimental reactors as it is now doing, many observers 
predict it will develop into a situation of the UN Security 
Council deciding on economic sanctions. The government will 
watch what North Korea chooses to do, but in the meantime it 
will start reviewing its actions with respect to possible 
economic sanctions by the United Nations and possible 
independent actions by Japan, the United States, and South Korea. 
  Vice Minister Saito was supposed to be in the United Kingdom 
and France from 20 May to 5 June for routine policy 
consultations. But with the North Korean situation becoming 
tense, he canceled his visit to the United Kingdom and returned 
home on the afternoon of 2 June. He went directly to the 
ministry for talks with staff officials on what Japan should do. 
  The government is still unable to interpret North Korea's 
moves, and wants to decide on its course of actions after 
reading the International Atomic Energy Agency's report to the 
United Nations on the issue of the fuel rods being changed. 
Regarding the forthcoming Japan-U.S.-ROK talks, a MOFA officer 
said: "The talks are not meant for holding discussions on the 
premise of meting out sanctions." Thus he emphasized there is no 
change in the basic policy of searching for ways to solve the 
issue through dialogue with North Korea. He also added: "There 
is no new move by North Korea yet," thus also admitting that the 
possibility of finding a solution by dialogue is dimming. 
  In a meeting with Chinese diplomatic authorities on 1 June, 
the MOFA once again called on China to work on and persuade 
North Korea, but a ministry source said, "China said it would 
make efforts, but did not give a clear-cut view on such question 
as sanctions." Even when Foreign Minister Kakizawa met with 
Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan on 2 June, all Tang 
did was to note the importance of solving the problem through 
dialogue. And it remains unclear how China will act in the 
United Nations. 
  Japan, the United States, and South Korea, in their talks, 
will also discuss the possibility of enforcing sanctions, on the 
assumption that North Korea will continue its rigid position. 
Since China takes a cautious stand on the question of 
sanctions, the Japanese Government is also wary, lest the 
situation develop in one big sweep into meting out sanctions. 
On the evening of 2 June, a top ministry official said: "What 
is desirable is a measure China could accept and does not need 
to exercise its veto rights on." He said that a warning should 
be issued to North Korea first, and if North Korea still does 
not soften its stance, then the nations should think about 
passing a resolution on sanctions. 
  Meanwhile, the government has also started to study what it 
should do in case the United Nations fails to pass a resolution 
on sanctions. 

