SUMMARY 

                                Russian officials have tried to minimize the impact on U.S.- 
Russian relations of the arrest of Aldrich Ames and his wife on 
charges of spying for the USSR and Russia against the United 
States.  Joined by Russian media commentators, they have 
criticized the involvement of high-level U.S. officials in 
publicizing the case, saying that the case involves normal 
espionage activity that all countries pursue.  In addition, 
Russian media across the political spectrum have viewed U.S. 
handling of the incident as evidence of a U.S. desire to 
marginalize Russia's international role. 

                            END SUMMARY 

   In their initial public statements on the Ames case, Russian 
officials have consistently tried to minimize the incident's 
impact on U.S.-Russian relations.  They have decried the 
publicity given to the case by high-level U.S. officials, saying 
that incidents such as the Ames case should be handled by 
intelligence agencies without involving officials at higher 
levels: 

   -- According to ITAR-TASS on 24 February, Foreign Minister Andrey 
Kozyrev said that it would be better to let the intelligence 
services handle the case and "not to politicize or ideologize the 
situation."  He emphasized that it is important for the United 
States and Russia to continue to "cooperate and not to attach 
undue, hypertrophied significance to this case."  After the 
Russians expelled a U.S. Embassy officer in retaliation for the 
U.S. expulsion of a Russian Embassy official in Washington, 
Kozyrev reiterated these views and claimed Moscow "had to resort" 
to a reciprocal expulsion but this process of "reciprocity" 
should be eliminated, "the sooner the better" (ITAR-TASS, 28 
February). 

   -- A 25 February Foreign Ministry press statement sniped at U.S. 
handling of the case, criticizing "attempts by the special 
services to drag the political leadership into their mutual 
relations," and noted that there are "appropriate channels" that 
can be "brought fully" into use to deal with such cases.  The 
statement said that if, as reported, the investigation of Ames 
had begun ten months ago, "this was sufficient time for us to be 
contacted directly" and for U.S. officials to "share their 
anxieties with us before making them public" (ITAR-TASS, 25 
February). 

   -- Russian Foreign Intelligence Service (FIS) officials refused 
to comment directly on Ames, but expressed surprise that the 
United States made such an outcry over actions FIS officials 
described as common practice for all intelligence services.  FIS 
director Yevgeniy Primakov had "no comment" on the case (ITAR- 
TASS, 23 February).  FIS press spokesman Yuriy Kobaladze noted 
that declining to comment on such allegations is the general 
practice among intelligence services and stressed "there is 
nothing new or sensational here in the fact that countries engage 
in intelligence activities" (Moscow radio, Russian TV, 23 
February).  He went on to claim that neither the United States 
nor Russia had "ever pledged to curtail intelligence activity" 
and that Washington has "been very active" in intelligence 
activity in Russia and the other newly independent states. 

   Breaking ranks, at least temporarily, with other officials, 
Mikhail Kolesnikov, chief of the Russian General Staff, 
acknowledged Ames' links to Russia but later retracted this 
admission.  A 26 February ITAR-TASS report quoted Kolesnikov as 
saying "Ames worked in the UnitedStates for Russia" but 
nonetheless claiming that he had "inflicted no direct damage" on 
the United States.  On 28 February, however, Kolesnikov stated 
that the General Staff and its intelligence service "have no 
information on any links" between Ames and Soviet or Russian 
intelligence agencies.  According to ITAR-TASS, Kolesnikov went 
on to claim that "U.S. media misinterpreted" his 26 February 
statement (ITAR-TASS, 28 February). 

   Russian Media 

   Russian media across the political spectrum indignantly 
criticized U.S. handling of the case and speculated, sometimes on 
the basis of comments by unnamed officials, that the United 
States had ulterior motives in timing the public exposure of 
Ames.  Some commentators said that U.S. officials had exposed the 
case now because they wanted to create a pretext to reevaluate 
U.S.-Russian relations in the wake of the recent slowdown of 
reform in Russia, while others alleged that the United States 
wanted to take the gloss off Russia's diplomatic success in 
brokering a compromise over Sarajevo.  Media commentary, even in 
publications like Izvestiya, a strong supporter of Russian 
efforts to integrate with the West, supported the Russian 
government position and criticized the United States: 

   -- A 24 February article in Izvestiya remarked on what it saw as 
the "hypocrisy" of U.S. reaction to the Ames case, since, it 
claimed, Russia "has no less right to secret operations in the 
United States than America has to espionage in Russia."  A 25 
February article on the case headlined the question "Why Is 
Washington Making a Fuss?" and cited "competent sources" as 
speculating that the Ames' arrest was an attempt to put Moscow in 
its "place" after Russian diplomacy in Bosnia for the first time 
in recent years "cast the United States in a secondary role." 

   -- A 25 February article in the government newspaper Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta worried that the Ames case is being given "political 
overtones" reminiscent of the 1960 U-2 incident, which triggered 
a sharp downturn in U.S.-Soviet relations.  The article claimed 
that "certain forces" in the United States were trying to 
"exaggerate this affair" because they are unhappy with the new 
Chernomyrdin government and with Yeltsin's Bosnia initiative, 
which had "thwarted the hawks' attempt to resolve the Serbian 
question through air strikes" and had "suddenly and very sharply" 
increased Russia's "political weight in the international arena." 
The article concluded, however, that both the U.S. and Russian 
presidents were demonstrating a "well-balanced approach" and 
expressed hope that political relations between the two countries 
would not be aggravated. 

   -- A 25 February article in the Defense Ministry's newspaper 
Krasnaya Zvezda cited several theories advanced by unnamed 
"experts" to explain the U.S. "ballyhoo" over the case.  The 
article claimed U.S. intelligence agencies wished to get even 
after the exposure of more than 2O foreign intelligence agents, 
including U.S. spies, in the last year.  An article on 26 
February charged that the "fuss" over the "routine event" of a 
double agent's exposure is taking on an "increasingly hysterical 
character" in the United States, claiming with obvious sarcasm 
that "Langley believes that only [its agents] have the right to 
carry out intelligence activity."  Prominent Krasnaya Zvezda 
observer Aleksandr Golts, in a commentary published on 1 March, 
implicitly took issue with this analysis, however, claiming 
instead that it is Russia's newly demonstrated foreign policy 
independence that has "driven Washington berserk."  Golts 
contended that the United States is publicizing the Ames case 
because Russia's efforts to "implement an active foreign policy 
course" with its "successful initiative in the Balkans" had put 
the United States "on the sidelines" after it had become 
accustomed to "feeling that it is the only world leader, the only 
superpower."  He concluded by advocating the "vital necessity" of 
a "partnership" with the "rules of conduct. .. the same for 
everyone. 

   -- The independent pro-reform newspaper Segodnya, in a 24 
February article, warned that the Ames case would revive the "old 
outcry" that the "Russians cannot be trusted."  The article 
linked the case to Yeltsin's Bosnia initiative, particularly his 
proposal for a summit on the issue.  Claiming that Yeltsin's 
summit proposal would be "inconvenient" for Western leaders, the 
article implied that the Ames "scandal" had been whipped up to 
"remove the Russian initiative from the agenda."  A 1 March 
article cited unnamed sources as saying that Russian security 
services "are not interested in arousing passions," but that 
"influential U.S. forces" are hoping to "impose a time-out" for 
the United States to reexamine its policy toward Russia. 

   -- In an interview published in the 26 February edition of the 
labor-oriented newspaper Trud, retired KGB Major General Boris 
Solomatin, citing examples of other spy cases where there was no 
official outcry, bitterly ascribed what he called Washington's 
"inappropriate reaction" to the Ames affair to U.S. "imperial 
thinking" about Russia.  Lamenting that Russia had been 
"transformed" from an equal power whose intelligence services 
could work against those of the United States to one which now 
"has to ask permission to do so," Solomatin complained that the 
U.S. attitude is "we can, you cannot" because "we have the money" 
and "you have an outstretched hand."  Contending that the United 
States had not given much thought to the possible consequences 
when it "embarked on this scandal," Solomatin claimed that now, 
when Russians see that the "big bucks" spent on intelligence are 
"working," they will recognize the importance of intelligence and 
begin to "organize it properly." 

   Implications 

   The pains taken by Russian officials to play down the Ames affair 
and to minimize its effect on U.S.-Russian relations clearly 
indicate Moscow's desire to keep the relationship on a firm 
footing.  However, the indignant reaction on the part of both 
officials and the media to the U.S. handling of the case, as well 
as the sensitivity displayed toward perceived attempts to 
relegate Russia to a marginal role in diplomacy or intelligence 
activities, indicates that Moscow will continue to assert itself 
when it feels that the United States is trying to take unfair 
advantage. 

(AUTHOR:  BELLINGER.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, ANALYSIS BRANCH, RUSSIA DIVISION, (703) 733-6070.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/ta 02/1835z mar 

