BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Golts article: "Korean Crisis Continues -- That </F>
Someone Wants It To"] 
  [Text] The crisis now threatening the security of the 
whole Asian-Pacific region as well as the Korean Peninsula can 
be called anything but unexpected. Suspicions have been 
circulating for a few years to the effect that North Korea is 
secretly developing nuclear weapons. Complex diplomatic 
maneuvers were needed to get Pyongyang to accede to the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty. And even then it did not prove 
possible to carry out the kind of inspections that would have 
completely dispelled International Atomic Energy Agency 
specialists' doubts. Direct talks between Pyongyang and 
Washington regarding the terms for such inspections and 
guarantees of the peninsula's becoming a nuclear-free zone have 
been under way for over a year. The United States was even 
willing to give up the "Team Spirit" maneuvers, which have 
always caused DPRK leaders particular irritation. But even then 
the inspectors say that obstacles were put in their way. 
  The upshot being that all the talks have been frustrated. 
The sides exchange the kind of statements that, if they are 
taken seriously, it may seem that North and South Korea have 
really reached the point of another war. The most striking 
thing is that the interests of the main parties to the conflict 
can be glimpsed increasingly clearly behind the seemingly 
determined actions to settle the crisis situation. Interests 
which only have an indirect bearing on an actual settlement, 
moreover. 
  Take the question of economic sanctions against the DPRK 
which have been discussed at such length. It turns out that 
people in Seoul and Tokyo are more afraid of these sanctions 
being introduced than people in Pyongyang. The DPRK's neighbors 
are afraid that these sanctions may destroy the already shaky 
North Korean economy. Which in turn might impel this country's 
leaders to take desperate adventurist action. 
  It also incidentally turns out that Japan is North Korea's 
second [biggest] trading partner after China. Every year 
billions of yen come from Koreans living in Japan to their 
relatives in the DPRK. Which then go back to Japan to buy the 
goods that the DPRK needs. 
  Washington may even reap certain dividends from this crisis. 
The United States has of late had problems with its allies in 
Asia. For instance, it has become increasingly difficult to 
extract concessions from Tokyo in the field of trade and the 
economy. The situation on the Korean Peninsula reminds both 
Tokyo and Seoul that their security depends on the U.S. military 
presence. 
  In principle what is happening is extremely useful for 
Chinese diplomacy. Beijing's relations with a number of states, 
primarily the United States, have deteriorated now owing to 
differences of approach to the problem of human rights. 
Washington is threatening to cancel its most-favored-nation 
status in trade. The Korean crisis clearly shows Beijing to be 
the key participant in a settlement, capable of influencing 
Pyongyang's position. 
  Finally, for all the risks involved in the game that 
Pyongyang is playing it may also bring dividends to it too. If 
DPRK leaders succeed in finding the requisite balance between 
promises to allow inspectors in on the one hand and threats on 
the other hand, they may obtain more than the cancellation of 
the maneuvers. 
  I will not say that this crisis was provoked specially. But 
the strange inertia in the attempts to settle it shows that 
almost every one of the active participants intends to use the 
situation in their own interests. Was that not why Russia's 
proposal to hold an international conference regarding the 
problems of the Korean peninsula's nuclear-free status viewed so 
coolly? After all, multilateral efforts do nonetheless limit 
certain states' freedom of maneuver. 

