Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lagos, 28 Feb (PANA) -- Nigeria said on Monday [28 
February] that the arrival of French troops in Cameroon does not 
change its commitment to peace on the border dispute between the 
two countries. "We (Nigeria's military) will continue to do 
our normal duties of maintaining peace in the border area until 
the federal government gives us other responsibility," Nigeria's 
defence spokesman Fred Chijuka told PANA. He said that Nigeria 
received advance notice from France about the mission to 
Cameroon. Chijuka said the French, by sending troops to 
Cameroon in fulfilment of a defence pact, were also for peace. 
Diplomatic sources said that a French delegation is also due to 
visit Nigeria over the border dispute, but a date is yet to be 
fixed. 
  The long-running dispute over the ownership of Bakassi 
peninsula in the oil-rich Gulf of Guinea, took a new dimension 
with a reported clash by their troops on 18 and 19 February. 
Cameroon said that its troops were attacked, but Nigeria 
denied it saying that its own soldiers on a routine patrol duty 
were fired on. Nigeria said that its troops, acting on strict 
orders, never returned fire. 
  Nigeria has said that 30 of its villages in the disputed 
border area were set alight by Cameroonian gendarmes in the last 
two months. The arrival of French troops in Cameroon, comes in 
the wake of last week's visit to Nigeria by a Cameroonian 
delegation, which gave an assurance that President Paul Biya has 
accepted an invitation to visit Nigeria to resolve the border 
dispute. 
  Cameroon bases its claim to Bakassi on a 1913 pact between 
Germany and Britain, two former colonial powers. Cameroon 
claims that the pact was reinforced by another agreement between 
former Nigerian head of state, Yakubu Gowon and then President 
Ahmadu Ahidjo of Cameroon. But Nigeria argues that the 
agreement was never ratified by the country's then ruling 
supreme militaty council. Gowon has also denied ceding the 
peninsula to Cameroon. 

