BFN 

    [Editorial Report] 
<H8>  BUSINESS DAY </H8>
  Food and Health Care -- Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY in English 
on 3 June carries an editorial on page 10 arguing that a school 
feeding program, primary health care, and free hospital 
treatment for pregnant women and children under six should be 
considered as "an investment in the people of this country." It 
goes on to assert that the cost of the investment cannot be 
shirked but that the program must be carefully monitored to 
ensure "that every cent is wisely spent and that programmes 
benefit those who need them." Proposals in the Reconstruction 
and Development Program will, the editorial continues, "help to 
reduce the racial disparities in health, educational level, life 
expectancy and other factors highlighted in regularly by studies 
of our population. We now have a government which no longer 
shrugs off these statistics as a Third World inevitability. 
Given fiscal discipline and sensible priorities, a programme 
aimed at uplifting the needy can buoy the whole nation by 
turning this country into one of which all of us can, at last, 
be proud." 
<H8>  WEEKLY MAIL &amp; GUARDIAN </H8>
  Government Urged To End Violence -- "Government's 100-day 
timetable for the delivery of tangible benefits through 
reconstruction and development last month was encouraging in the 
extreme," begins the Johannesburg NEW NATION in English on 3 
June in a page-14 editorial. "But in focusing on the new 
imperatives, we must not forget the priorities we inherited from 
the apartheid administration. We must not underplay the 
importance of eradicating the violence that has over the past 10 
years cost this nation tens of thousands of lives." If the 
violence is not eradicated reconstruction will be "meaningless." 
"While we have a new government, the obligation to end the 
violence has not changed. What is different, though, is that the 
new government is not weighed down by the moral culpability that 
held back its predecessor." "Given the culpability of the past 
government in the killings and complete absence of a moral will 
to disarm the perpetrators of this violence, we understood the 
NP's [National Party] failures to halt the violence. We also 
understood the inability of the democratic forces to respond 
decisively to the violence, given their lack of access to the 
instruments of state security. But this has all changed." 
<H8>  CITIZEN </H8>
  Disbanding of Peacekeeping Forces -- "With the disbandment 
today of the National Peacekeeping Force [NPKF], the costly and 
sorry effort to train a peacekeeping force to supplement the 
role of the army and police in the election period has come to 
an end," begins the Johannesburg CITIZEN in English on 2 June in 
a page-6 editorial. "The NPKF was a blunder of great magnitude," 
laments the editorial. "We blame the ANC alliance for this 
terrible waste of money (the NPKF's budget was R390 million 
[rand])." "Why it thought that a peackeeping force was 
necessary .... is beyond us. In the event, the police and army 
kept the peace so well during the election that President 
Mandela has given them his warm commendation." "President 
Mandela has set the tone for the open-hearted acceptance of the 
security forces, and we expect the campaign of denigration, 
particularly of the police, will now be a thing of the past." 
<H8>  BEELD </H8>
  Accommodation of Right Wing Viewed -- "The willingness which 
President Mandela displays toward the right wing can help a lot 
to take the sting of aggression out of that quarter," but in the 
long run it could be dangerous if right-wingers read too much 
into it, notes a page-12 editorial in the Johannesburg BEELD in 
Afrikaans on 1 June. "The danger is that right-wingers could 
deduce from President Mandela's efforts to involve them in the 
political process that an Afrikaner homeland is going to be 
presented to them on a silver tray." Election results meanwhile 
have shown that support for a homeland is "minimal." What the 
right wing gained from the election was a political party -- 
Gen. Constand Viljoen's Freedom Front -- a seat in Parliament, 
provincial legislators, and a homeland council. "It is unlikely 
that the right wing will be further accommodated." "An 
interesting question, however, is whether further concessions 
for the right wing are still necessary. Like other South 
Africans, the right-wingers have already seen that the election 
and developments thereafter went off well, and life is 
continuing normally," so why still clamor for a limited piece of 
homeland "when he has the whole country to live and work in?" 
  Amnesty for Political Prisoners -- A second editorial on the 
same page of the 1 June BEELD states that "every South African 
who has ever rejected violence as a political means must feel 
uncomfortable when the question of amnesty for political 
criminals is mentioned. Amnesty is a necessary evil, however." 
Since two extensions in amnesty deadlines have already been 
made, "politicians and other experts must consider whether a 
third extension is really necessary," and if it has to happen, 
"it should be the very last." "The election has been a miracle, 
but it has not yet freed South Africa from people who think they 
can attain political goals through violence." 
<H8>  ILANGA </H8>
  Government Health, Feeding Schemes Welcomed -- Durban ILANGA 
in Zulu in its 31 May-1 June edition writes in a page 6 
editorial that "President Nelson Mandela's statement in 
Parliament that he would compel his government to urgently 
attend to the implementation of programs like giving free 
medical treatment for black children under six years and 
expectant women is very commendable." Another welcome 
announcement by the president is that primary school children 
will now get supplementary feeding where necessary." "The new 
government should move swiftly to fulfill these promises, even 
though it might not be easy to find the finance to back them up." 

