BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Estonian Foreign Minister Juri </F>
Luik by Francoise Delstanche in Brussels; date not given: 
"Estonia Expects Firmer Support From The Twelve"] 
  [Text] An ambiguous European attitude is prompting the 
countries of Eastern Europe to come banging on its door. Still 
wary of Russia, Estonia is seeking support from the European 
Union (EU) and wants to set up a free trade zone as from January 
1995. 
  In the wake of the accelerated process of rapprochement 
between the West and the countries that used to be on the other 
side of the Iron Curtain, the Baltic states do not intend to let 
themselves be held to one side. Like other countries in Eastern 
Europe, they are implementing their policy of rapprochement with 
the EU, and the defense and security organizations -- NATO and 
the WEU [Western European Union] -- in parallel. 
  For instance, Estonia, whose foreign minister, Mr. Juri 
Luik, 
was in Brussels this week, has signed up to the Partnership for 
Peace with NATO, and does not intend to let itself be 
outstripped if the WEU actually goes ahead with the creation of 
an associate status for the countries of Central and Eastern 
Europe. What is more, Juri Luik proved optimistic in this 
respect, remarking during an interview with L'ECHO that the WEU 
Secretary General Willem Van Eekelen said he was clearly in 
favor of the Baltic states participating in such a project. 
<H5>  Free Trade </H5>
  Furthermore, the three Baltic states launched negotiations 
with the Twelve last February with a view to creating a 
free-trade zone. This has become essential in the light of the 
possible entry of the Scandinavian countries to the Union -- for 
these countries already have such an agreement with the Baltic 
states. Hence the need to conclude an agreement this summer, so 
that it can be implemented as from 1 January 1995. 
  Have any problems arisen in the context of these 
discussions? 
Not really, affirmed Juri Luik. Things are making quite good 
progress, he believes, even if his country would like more 
extensive free trade -- at least, more extensive free trade than 
the EU is offering at the moment. Estonia, he reiterated, is 
one of the champions of free trade. "That," he explained, "is 
why we do not want to see the others erecting any more barriers 
between us." Compared with the European agreements already in 
force, Priit Kolbre, deputy secretary general for foreign 
affairs in Estonia and his country's main negotiator with the 
EU, emphasized that the EU's current preference for countries 
with EU associate status will be reversed to Estonia's benefit 
because its economy is completely open. However, certain 
sectors that are sensitive from the EU's point of view -- e.g. 
the agriculture and textile sectors -- are still posing problems. 
  Nonetheless, in the eyes of Minister Luik, it is not only an 
economic gesture, but also a political decision aimed at showing 
that free trade is still worth something, even today. "We have 
come a long way," he said, "and we are expecting stronger 
political support from the EU than we are being given at the 
moment." 
  However, the three Baltic states have already set their 
sights even higher and soon want to launch talks on becoming EU 
associates, just like the other countries of Central Europe. 
These negotiations could be finished by the end of the year, 
believes Juri Luik, for the economic part will already have been 
completed within the context of setting up the free trade zone. 
So all that would remain would be the political and 
philosophical part, which he does not believe should create any 
major problems. 

<H5>    Artificial Barriers </H5>
  As for full EU membership, it is still too early to say for 
Estonia. "For the moment we are concentrating on association," 
affirmed Priit Kolbre, who believes that the EU has erected 
artificial barriers by subdividing the countries of Eastern 
Europe into small subgroups, with the Visegrad countries on one 
side, the Baltic states on the other, etc. "Consequently, our 
main objective is to eliminate these barriers and ensure that we 
are given equal treatment," he said, by becoming associates, 
just like everyone else. Only then will the time come to 
discuss membership, a prospect for which Estonia will be ready 
in five years' time, according to Kolbre. 
  Moreover, it is the behavior of the EU member states which 
is 
provoking the current climate of competition between the new 
candidate member states in the East, continued the Estonian 
minister. For it would appear that the Union has not managed 
its policy on enlargement with sufficient clarity, Kolbre 
believes. In this context, he went on, the potential candidates 
are wondering about the risk they are running of seeing the EU 
end its enlargement process for the time being. It is precisely 
this uncertainty that is prompting them to rush so that they can 
be included in the next wave of negotiations. 

<H5>    Unpredictable Russia </H5>
  Juri Luik believes that beyond the pure process of bilateral 
rapprochement, the EU also has a very important role to play 
regarding the relations between the Baltic states and Russia. 
This particularly applies in the context of Russia's commitment 
to withdraw its troops from Estonia by the end of August 1994. 
A promise which could effectively be respected if European 
pressure is kept up, for it should not be forgotten that the 
actual means of withdrawal have not yet been settled. 
  In Tallinn, the Estonian Government is wary of Moscow's 
changes of mood. The Foreign Ministry is underlining the 
ambivalence of the Russian position, which is constantly 
imposing new conditions on the withdrawal of its troops. 
However, that is not the only example. The Russians would still 
like to be given special treatment, laments Priit Kolbre, 
whether in relations with the IMF, NATO, or the Council of 
Europe. It is precisely for that reason that the West should 
set clear limits that are not to be crossed, insists the 
Estonian politician. For, in his view, Moscow is currently 
performing a neat U-turn toward centralism, chauvinism, and 
withdrawal into itself. The last instance of this to date 
comprised the modifications imposed on the Russian customs 
system, which penalize the Baltic states in particular. 

