Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentator's article: "Valuable Sense of Participation"] </F>
  [Text] Over the past few months, a large number of letters 
have been sent to Beijing from the masses in support of China's 
sponsorship of the United Nations' Fourth World Women 
Conference. This has reflected the sense of participation of the 
Chinese people in the years of reform and opening up. 
  This world conference will be the largest one ever held in 
Beijing since the founding of the PRC. By that time, about 
30,000 friends from over 100 countries will gather in Beijing, 
which will be a contribution made by China to the international 
community for the women's cause. 
  The Chinese Government takes the convocation of the 
conference very seriously. When Premier Li Peng met UN 
Secretary-General Butrus Butrus-Ghali last December, he made a 
solemn commitment to the international community on behalf of 
the Chinese Government by saying: "We welcome the convocation 
of the conference in Beijing, as this will provide an 
opportunity for the world to understand China and for China to 
understand the world. We will do what we can to make 
appropriate preparations for the conference." 
  At present, the preparatory work undertaken by the China 
Organizational Committee for the Fourth World Women Conference 
is in full swing. The entire Chinese people, the vast number of 
women in particular, have gone into action, and are expressing 
their support to the conference in various ways. 
  Thanks to the support and concern of the party and 
government 
since the founding of New China, particularly over the past 
dozen years of reform and opening up, great advances have been 
made in the cause of women liberation, the position of women has 
been remarkably enhanced, and a lot of excellent females having 
emerged in large multitudes have won universal praise throughout 
the world. 
  Although considerable headway has been made in the cause of 
women's liberation in China, there are still many aspects that 
are not satisfactory owing to traditional concepts. For 
example, compared with men, the proportion of women 
participating in the deliberation and administration of state 
affairs has yet to be raised; a certain number of women are 
illiterate; and women's right and interests have not been fully 
protected in some areas. The current conference will urge the 
entire society to show concern for and resolve these problems. 
  Since reform and opening up, China's achievements in all 
fields of endeavor have attracted worldwide attention. We 
should fully avail ourselves of the conference to propagate 
these achievements, make as many friends as possible with people 
from various countries, and strive to acquire a better 
understanding and greater support from friends all over the 
world. 
  We believe that with September 1995 approaching, the 
people's 
sense of participation will be enhanced with each passing day, 
and the extensive participation by the entire people will be the 
most powerful guarantee for the successful convocation of this 
conference. 

