Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, March 22 (KCNA) -- The spokesman of the 
Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of the Fatherland 
[CPRF] published a statement today denouncing the South Korean 
authorities for racing toward confrontation and war, totally 
blocking the exchange of presidential envoys and dialogue 
between the North and the South. 
  The statement says the developments today clearly show that 
from the very beginning the South Korean ruling quarters did not 
want peace and peaceful reunification of the country, not to 
speak of the exchange of special envoys, but used the 
North-South dialogue for their insidious aim of putting the 
brakes on the DPRK-USA talks. 
  As already reported, the statement continues, on the 
threshold of the 8th working contact for the exchange of special 
envoys held Saturday, the South Korean authorities held "a 
high-level strategic meeting," at which they threatened "a tough 
reaction" and cried for the resumption of the Team Spirit 
nuclear war exercises, introduction of Patriot missiles and 
participation of South Korea in the international "sanctions." 
  These provocative acts of the South Korean authorities 
predicted the destiny of the exchange of special envoys and the 
harassment of peace. 
  The situation has taken that course today. 
  At the March 19 contact, the South side took a position of 
virtually declaring break with us, thus bringing the working 
contact itself to a rupture, and it is now driving the situation 
on the Korean peninsula to an acute phase of war. 
  The provocative steps taken at the so-called "meeting of 
security-related ministers" on March 21 were a sort of 
declaration of total confrontation and a declaration of war 
against us. 
  From shortly after this reckless provocative declaration of 
the puppet rulers, the puppet Army forces entered into an 
"emergency alert" in South Korea and there are signs of moves 
for bringing new military equipment including Patriot missiles 
from the United States. 
  The Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of the 
Fatherland resolutely denounces in the name of the entire Korean 
people the Kim Yong-sam puppet clique for unilaterally breaking 
up the dialogue with fellow countrymen and pushing the situation 
of the country to a very dangerous brink of war by following 
outside forces. 
  The reality in which the situation of the country is rushing 
to a new phase of war urges the whole nation to see with high 
consciousness what a grave situation has been caused by the 
criminal acts of the Kim Yong-sam group in abandoning the 
North-South dialogue and obstructing the DPRK-USA talks. 
  Facts tell that the North and the South may fall a victim to 
outside forces, failing to achieve reconciliation and 
reunification, while such flunkeyist traitors to the nation as 
the Kim Yong-sam group are left alone in the country, the 
traitors who set greater store by the interests of outside 
forces than by the security and interests of the nation and 
think more of their personal comfort and distinction than of the 
destiny of the nation. 
  Now, the Kim Yong-sam group has become unable to conceal the 
fact that it is an anti-national group which blocks dialogue 
between the fellow countrymen and seeks to inflict the scourge 
of war upon the nation, keeping foreign forces within the 
country. 
  Traitors to the nation must be removed and liquidated within 
the nation as early as possible. 

