Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with President Luis Alberto Lacalle by Barret </F>
Puig at the presidential residence in Montevideo, 23 December: 
"President Lacalle Supports Only Economic Policy That Benefits 
Social Progress"; first three paragraphs are LA NACION editorial 
introduction] 
  [Text] On the occasion of the end of 1993, during an 
interview with LA NACION, President Lacalle presented an overall 
view of relations with Argentina and the challenge created by 
Mercosur [South American Common Market], among other matters of 
major interest to Uruguay. 
  President Luis Alberto Lacalle received a LA NACION 
representative at El Prado, his official residence on Avenida 
Suarez and spoke about relations with Argentina, Mercosur, Latin 
America in general, and the election year in Uruguay, from the 
perspective of the end of 1993. 
  Following are the most important matters raised in the 
interview. 
  [Puig] What are the principal problems with Argentina at 
this 
time? 
  [Lacalle] I think that, rather than problems, we might refer 
to them as questions. I would say that the central question, 
which is being resolved but which still presents some 
difficulties, is ensuring that work on the Martin Garcia Canal 
(an Uruguayan project) is compatible with work on the Emilio 
Mitre Canal (in Argentina). As you know, these are complementary 
projects in Uruguay's view. However, in the view of some 
Argentine groups they are almost conflicting projects. 
  President Menem has personally recognized this fact, and I 
must say a few words in recognition of the sympathy and 
affection with which he has always considered Uruguayan views. 
However, there have been some difficulties in handling these 
matters. 
  Sometimes we have a commercial question to deal with. 
However, I would say that this sort of thing has been 
overshadowed by the matters which we have in common: the bridge 
from Buenos Aires to Colonia, in particular, and the super 
highway. These are the two major public works which we have at 
hand. A contract for the construction of the bridge project will 
certainly be awarded in the course of 1994. The super highway is 
its natural consequence, because it is going to connect Buenos 
Aires with San Pablo by way of the bridge. 
  We are awaiting ratification by the Argentine Congress of 
the 
treaty on the waterway system, which has already been approved 
by Bolivia, Paraguay, and Uruguay, leaving Brazil and Argentina 
to accept it. The matter of the waterway system is very 
important, and I will take advantage of this occasion to 
underline its significance and the need for the Argentine 
Congress to approve it. 
<H5>  Mercosur </H5>
  [Puig] On 1 January 1995--barely one year from now--Mercosur 
should be in full operation. Meanwhile, in the countries which 
will be members of it there are inflations ranging from a single 
digit, at best, to 50 percent annually, to 50 percent monthly. 
How will all of that fit together? 
  [Lacalle] Making it fit together will be difficult. I know 
that Mercosur will not be easy to handle, but there is no other 
choice. If we cut off our legs to avoid losing our way on the 
road, we would not have signed the Treaty of Asuncion, because 
Argentina was in too strong a financial position. 
  Brazil has major problems, but it also has a major 
potential. 
I think that the economic plan which it has adopted for 1994 
will be an effective one. The proposal made by the Brazilians 
themselves to study some way of linking our currencies 
demonstrates the will to deal with these matters. 
  [Puig] Uruguayan and Paraguayan industrialists have just 
asked their Argentine and Brazilian opposite numbers to request 
their governments to agree to a delay in the implementation of 
Mercosur. 
  [Lacalle] I think that a delay is about the only thing that 
we could not agree to because, since we know what kind of people 
we are, an extension would be continued forever. Therefore, I 
consider that the major advantage of Mercosur is that, because 
the date for its entry into effect cannot be changed, it has 
caused a major industrial renovation program. 
<H5>  Military Concern </H5>
  [Puig] I would like to change the subject: 1993 was a year 
which was characterized by concerns about the military. Let us 
not go into them in detail, but they are clear enough. There is 
the case of the Chilean, the case of the microphone, some 
transfers, the restructuring, and even the matter of pensions. 
What is the situation now? 
  [Lacalle] I would not call them concerns. I would call them 
problems, which is a different matter. We have asserted our 
position as the supreme authority of the armed forces. We have 
not seen acts of disrespect, as unfortunately happened a few 
years ago in the history of our country. There has been 
continuing respect for duly constituted authority. 
  In our country legal authority over the military hierarchy 
is 
fully in effect. 
<H5>  Economic and Social Policies </H5>
  [Puig] A few days ago, when you dedicated construction work 
which had been completed at the Pereira Rosell Children's 
Hospital, you said that you can have good economic policies with 
good social policies as well. 
  [Lacalle] You have heard it said, until you are tired of 
hearing it, that the so-called neoliberal policy was being 
implemented to the detriment of social policy. I always remember 
a remark made by Jaime Paz Zamora: "With inflation at the 25,000 
percent rate, there are no social policies. They do not exist. 
They are only on paper. With inflation at 8 percent annually 
Bolivia has been able to deal with social policy." If I might 
transpose these remarks, which is not quite correct, I would say 
that Uruguay has been able to follow very important social 
policies at the same time that it was putting its economic house 
in order, reducing the deficit, lowering inflation, and, more 
specifically, reorganizing the external debt. I will give you 
two figures. We have practically doubled the budget for health 
and education. We have raised the health budget from $90 to $170 
million. The education budget has been raised from $180 to $300 
million, not taking into account other kinds of social 
investments. And this has been done at the same time as we have 
achieved a noticeable reduction in inflation and in the deficit. 
<H5>  Elections </H5>
  [Puig] Over a period of 12 months elections will have been 
held in 11 Latin American countries. They have already been held 
in Honduras, Venezuela, and Chile. And consider how curious this 
is: three former presidents and four sons of former presidents 
are candidates. Are the people voting out of a sense of 
nostalgia? 
  [Lacalle] I do not know about the other countries, but I 
would say that we are substantially different from that. If 
there is something in the rest of America which cannot be 
applied to Uruguay, it is in political terms. 
  We have the oldest party system in the world. From 1836 
until 
now there have been two political parties in Uruguay which are 
inextricably united. Their very existence alongside each other 
is conditioned in a way unlike any other system in the world. 
Certainly, this is without prejudice to the emergence of the 
other political groups. However, there is no doubt that the 
traditional parties are a unique phenomenon. 
  This is a country with a well-developed electoral culture. I 
do not believe that I would vote for anyone because he is the 
son of this person or a relative of that one. It has not been 
much of an advantage for me to be the grandson of one of the 
greatest leaders that Uruguay has had. I had to make my own way. 
<H5>  Election Programs </H5>
  [Lacalle continued] What is happening in Uruguay--and you 
can 
see in that the impact which Herrera has had, that is, in my 
sector of the National Party [PN]--is a recognition of the 
importance of election programs and their implementation. We are 
very proud of the great extent to which we have implemented our 
election program. And I am sure that this is going to have an 
enormous effect on the next election campaign, because people 
are going to be asking the parties to do something similar to 
what we did: that is, to advocate appropriate actions which can 
actually be accomplished. 
  [Puig] Can you comment on the issue of constitutional 
reform? 
  [Lacalle] Look, I believe that there is a critical mass, as 
we would say in terms of physics, in favor of constitutional 
reform. I do not know if there are historic moments to do that, 
because today is 23 December, and I see that there will be a 
delay. I do not want to make a judgment about this. I believe 
that there is a critical mass of people who understand. I am the 
man who can speak about this subject with the greatest freedom, 
first, because I am not a candidate in the next elections, and, 
secondly, because I have lived through the difficulties of not 
being able to form a government. We are aiming at constitutional 
reform while at the same time we would like to give the next 
president better means of governing the country in a better way. 
  [Puig] Are you disappointed about that? 
  [Lacalle] Yes, because I believe that the contrast between 
the things which many political groups have said and what they 
did afterwards has led to great disappointment among the people. 

