Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by political correspondent Aluf Ben] </F>
  [Text] Saudi Arabia is deliberately keeping oil prices low 
in order to undermine Iran's economy and regime, senior analysts 
told the political echelon in Jerusalem. The main aim of the 
Saudi oil policy, according to this evaluation, is to prevent 
Iran from becoming stronger, which the Saudis fear and are 
prepared to suffer economically as long as the harm they cause 
Iran is even greater. 
  The political echelon was informed that raising the price of 
oil by several dollars would significantly improve Iran's 
economy, which has a very heavy foreign debt of $30 billion, of 
which $8 billion are short-term debts. 
  Political sources in Jerusalem recently expressed concern 
about an agreement by Germany, Japan, and Switzerland to 
reschedule Iran's debts and to offer it new lines of credit. 
Iran is also negotiating a similar agreement with France. In 
the view of the analysts, Iran might use the money to purchase 
dual purpose technology which would permit it to advance its 
plans to develop nuclear weapons. 
  The analysts said that the scope of trade between the United 
States and Iran casts a shadow on the U.S. commitment to isolate 
Tehran. Iran's trade with the United States is smaller than 
with the Europeans and the Japanese. It was over $600 million 
last year, and in 1992 reached some $730 million, which was made 
up almost entirely of U.S. industrial equipment to Tehran. 
Iranian exports to the United States were very small, only some 
$20 million. 
  Israel warned the West about Iran's aspiration to obtain 
nuclear arms and its actions to encourage Islamic fundamentalism 
in the Arab states. Israel's policy was however not to present 
itself as an enemy of Iran, but to round up international 
support for a policy of curtailing Iran's rearmament and 
subversive tactics, and to support a U.S. policy of "dual 
containment" against Iran and its rival Iraq. 
  The evaluation recently presented to the political echelon 
in 
Jerusalem states that U.S. "dual containment" is no longer a 
single policy against Tehran and Baghdad. An analysis of a 
paper published by National Security Adviser Tony Lake in 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS shows that Washington's policy toward Iraq calls 
for the overthrow of President Saddam Husayn's regime. Its 
policy toward Iran is different. The United States is not 
trying to overthrow the Islamic regime in Iran and wants to 
influence Tehran to change its behavior and start a dialogue 
with Washington. It has, however, reservations about the 
policies of European states and Japan, which are seen as 
attempts to advance their business interests with Tehran. The 
Americans think that improving Iran's economic situation will 
decrease the regime's extremism. The analysis presented to the 
political echelon said that Israel early on expected "dual 
containment" to be expressed in an effort to isolate Iran 
politically and economically, as the United States had done with 
the USSR. 
  Elements in the U.S. intelligence community recently 
dismissed the Israeli evaluation of Iran's subversive activities 
in the Arab world. In their view, Iran is trying to keep up its 
revolutionary image and present itself as having influence in 
the Middle East way beyond what it really has, and that there is 
no real Iranian threat to undermine the existing regimes in the 
Arab states. 
  The U.S. sources believe that the fundamentalist movements 
in 
Egypt enjoy some aid from Iran, but do not want to be Tehran's 
satellites since they regard themselves as popular Egyptian 
organizations. Tehran is simultaneously maintaining ties with 
Husni Mubarak's government. In the U.S. view, Hamas [Islamic 
Resistance Movement] in the territories also does not want to 
operate as an Iranian satellite. 

