Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "China, US Team Up in Drug Control"] </F>
  [Text] China and the United States have agreed to join 
efforts to fight drug trafficking and illegal immigration, 
according to officials of the Ministry of Public Security. 
  The agreement was signed by Bai Jingfu, vice-minister of 
Public Security and vice-director of the National Narcotics 
Control Committee and Robert Gelbard, the US Assistant Secretary 
of State for international narcotics affairs. 
  Through their talks on January 25 in Beijing, Bai and 
Gelbard 
exchanged views on how to solve the international narcotics 
problems, especially the sources in Asia, such as the notorious 
"Golden Triangle." The two sides agreed on the need to 
strengthen their cooperation in fighting drug crimes. The 
Chinese side expressed its hope that the United States would 
remove barriers impeding the two nations from working together 
to stop the international drug trade. Gelbard said the United 
States needs to work out new laws for curbing the increasing 
drug crimes. 
  During his stay in Beijing, Gelbard also held talks with 
Zhang Hongxi, director of the Consular Affairs Department of the 
Foreign Ministry, on illegal immigration. While briefing 
Gelbard on various factors that cause smuggling and illegal 
immigration and the steps China has taken to combat these kinds 
of illegal activities, Zhang reiterated China's opposition to 
such activities. He also asked the United States to clamp down 
on the "snakeheads," who have been found to be involved in 
smuggling Chinese people to the United States. He added that 
while the United States grants asylum to these smugglers who 
falsely claim that they are fleeing political persecution in 
China, it is encouraging such kind of smuggling. 
  Gelbard said his talks with the Chinese officials on both 
problems were satisfactory, and he and his Chinese counterparts' 
opinions on the matter were "very much along the same line." 
  Gelbard also visited China's Fujian, Guangdong and Yunnan 
provinces after leaving Beijing. 

