Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Aleksandr Menshov, chief engineer of the </F>
"Severovostokzoloto" Association, by DELOVOY MIR correspondent 
Vladimir Androsenko: "The Hen Has Laid Golden Eggs..."] 
  [Text] Magadan--The gold mining industry of the 
Northeast survived in 1993, in spite of the tremendous 
difficulties. Extraction of the precious metal in Magadan 
Oblast, together with Chukotka, decreased by nearly 3,500 
kilograms to a total of 40 metric tons (about one-third of all 
Russian production). With the extraordinary increase in prices 
for fuel, equipment, and materials, the mining enterprises lost 
stability, but remained afloat. 
  "So some hopeful signs have appeared in the Far North's 
economy, and miners can look to the future with greater 
confidence now?" Our correspondent began an interview with 
Aleksandr Menshov, chief engineer of the "Severovostokzoloto" 
Association, with this question. 
  [Menshov] We cannot speak about normalization of the mining 
industry yet. Gold mining enterprises in the Far North can 
produce output only during the summer, during the placer season. 
The rest of the year we get ready for the season: we work the 
stripping rock, we bring gold-bearing sands up to the surface 
from the pits, and we repair the equipment. 
  But since the money for the metal is received only after it 
is sold, all this must be done on credit. This is where the 
stumbling block is. 
  The miners themselves are not in a position to finance the 
expenditures for future periods; after paying all the taxes and 
levies, they have hardly enough for minimal social needs. 
Consequently, the question concerns the sources for financing 
these outlays. If the government--the main buyer of our 
product--gives us an advance payment, the enterprises will 
function and Russia will have gold. If it does not, it will have 
nothing. 
  Last year the Komdragmet [Committee on Precious Metals and 
Precious Stones] understood this clear dependence, it financed 
us on time, and the results are apparent. The association cut 
back extraction of the metal by 8 percent when there was a 
downturn of 20 and 30 percent at the Bilibino and Polyarnyy 
Mining and Concentration Combines, which had left the 
"Severovostokzoloto" organization and did not receive the proper 
support. But now there has been no advance payment, and 
stripping has already decreased by 10 percent in January, 
compared with last year. 
  The sector's collapse has not been ruled out altogether. A 
Komdragmet representative told gold mining managers at a 
conference on 17 December 1993 that a minimum of half the funds 
needed would be provided before 15 February. We also formed our 
economic policy on the basis of this promise. But by the end of 
January it was suddenly revealed that there would be no money 
and that the Komdragmet is just beginning its search for credit. 
But is this any way to conduct business? We have been literally 
driven into a corner, after all. 
  [Androsenko] Aleksandr Aleksandrovich, according to some 
reports, a government decree is being prepared which authorizes 
the banks to purchase gold from its producers. Does this mean 
that our government wants to shift some of the expenses to the 
businessmen as well? 
  [Menshov] I am deeply convinced that such a decision will be 
very detrimental to state interests. Yes, at first glance, 
considerable savings are indicated for the budget: by 
stipulating its right to purchase 50 percent of the metal, the 
state thereby reduces the amount of its advance payment. These 
are sizable sums: for example, we now need 210 billion rubles 
[R] in last December's prices. 
  It seems profitable, especially as the commercial banks are 
ready and willing to finance the gold miners for the remainder 
of our output. But in reality, there is no benefit here. A huge 
profit is simply slipping into private hands. 
  Think about it: we are selling gold at R15,000 per gram--at 
its current world price. But the price of a gram is already more 
than R50,000 in the jewelry stores. And this difference will 
exist for quite a long period of time. At present, two-thirds of 
the market value of gold items is supplementing the Russian 
budget, but if the decree you mentioned is issued, this will 
begin filling the pockets of the businessmen. 
  I think that concern for the budget should force the 
government to reject this undertaking and return to the previous 
system of financing and settlements. But this must be done more 
quickly, for time is more valuable than money now. 
  [Androsenko] It is no secret that the "Severovostokzoloto" 
enterprises are operating mainly at placer deposits. We cannot 
speak about increasing the proportion of bedrock deposits 
because of the high capital-output ratio. The association was 
not able to offer anything even to develop the "Kubaka" with its 
100 metric tons of easily extracted gold, and this tidbit went 
to a Russian-American joint venture. So you are destined to 
"fade away" at the placers to the extent that they are depleted? 
  [Menshov] For the first time last year, we extracted more 
metal than we increased reserves during the entire gold season 
in the Kolyma. This was the result of the breakdown in 
geological work, not the exhaustion of natural resources. But 
we have enough, even of the reserves that have already been 
explored and protected, for a good 20 to 25 years. Of course, 
the quality of the placers is declining: their gold content is 
decreasing, and more stripping must be done. 
  Our only chance is to reduce the production cost of mining. 
In particular, we have now developed a new technology for 
extracting the metal without the use of cyanides. Its 
introduction will make it possible to reduce the cost of 
production by nearly one-half. There are other advanced ideas as 
well. But you are right: the tendencies to "fade away" may turn 
out to be quite strong. The causes are rooted in the unhealthy 
principles in organizing the economy. 
  As an example, we have not actually modernized our fixed 
capital for 3 years now. There is no money. The level of taxes 
now is such that simply nothing is left for reproduction and 
development. But using credits means hanging a millstone around 
our necks. 
  Take the "Kubaka." We need a minimum of $100 million--R150 
billion--to develop it. Commercial loans are now provided at a 
minimum of 213 percent interest per annum. The maximum 
extraction of gold there is 8 to 10 metric tons annually. Taken 
at today's prices, the entire cost of production will be less 
than it costs just to service the debt. Is this really 
conceivable for a producer? 
  After all, a joint venture undertook to develop the deposit 
only because the American side was able to obtain normal, 
civilized loans at 6 percent interest for the program. But by 
dealing with Russian commercial sharks, the SP [joint venture] 
would be bankrupt right away. After all, this involves deposits 
which are superprofitable by world standards. But what can we 
say about our placers then? 
  But after all, the farther we go, the worse it is. Thus far 
over 50 percent of the product's value has been collected in the 
form of taxes, a little over 37 percent has made up the 
production cost, 10 percent has gone to maintain the social 
infrastructure, and 1.5 to 2 percent has been used to assist 
those with low incomes and pensioners "on the mainmland," to pay 
for containers, and so forth. 
  In 1994, according to our calculations, the tax on property 
alone will be increased by at least 24 times as much because of 
the reassessment of fixed capital announced by the government. 
The rates of the tax on profit are also being increased. 
Production cost will rise sharply, for the new tax system will 
force our suppliers to raise the price of their products. 
  There is one more negative factor. It is no secret to 
economists that the Ministry of Finance has been supporting the 
understated exchange rate of the dollar until very recently. I 
do not know in whose interests this is, but it is clearly not in 
the interests of the domestic producer. Let us say that 
transactions with us for gold are conducted at the world price 
on the basis of such a regulated exchange rate. But at the same 
time, we are purchasing petroleum products, materials, and 
equipment at prices which are twice the world prices. Where is 
the logic? After all, this is not a struggle to normalize the 
economy at all, for inflation and the budget deficit only 
increase to the extent that production volumes decrease, and 
unbalanced prices exert a direct influence on this. 
  So I can definitely state that the main reason that gold 
mining enterprises will "fade away," if this takes place, will 
not be the exhaustion of natural resources, but economic policy. 
  [Androsenko] Aleksandr Aleksandrovich, the 
"Severovostokzoloto" Association was almost broken apart into 
numerous fragments as the result of purposeful pressure "from 
the top." Fortunately, you managed to stop the process of 
self-destruction, but voices calling for reunification are 
already being heard today in the enterprises that left from 
under your "wing." What has happened? 
  [Menshov] Yes, they are speaking more insistently about 
returning at the Polyarnyy and Bilibino GOK's [mining and 
concentration combines]. The Dukat GOK has stated unequivocally 
that it will become part of a holding company after shareholding 
is introduced in the form of a joint-stock company. Discussions 
among the prospectors about the separation have been 
discontinued. We now have 202 artels in operation, and a total 
of 21 have left us. The solution is quite simple: one cannot 
survive alone in the North. 
  "Severovostokzoloto" has maintained ties with its suppliers 
and is working with them without middlemen, which is 
significantly cheaper and faster. By combining the enterprises' 
funds, we can deliver everything needed in time and thereby 
ensure uninterrupted production. How can an individual GOK pay a 
billion rubles in advance for a steamship carrying explosives? 
But together we are finding this money. We have paid in full for 
the tankers coming to Magadan. 
  They attempt to accuse us of monopolism here, because we use 
this fuel ourselves and do not share it with anyone--but after 
all, these are normal market relationships. Why should we supply 
others to the detriment of our placers and artels? It is hard 
for them now, but after all, this is because they left us at one 
time in search of an easier life. 
  There is none in the North, and there cannot be under 
extreme 
natural and climatic conditions. Alas, it is not to no purpose 
that popular wisdom divides those who learn from others' 
mistakes and those who prefer to make their own. We are not 
gloating: what pleasure can there be here when everything that 
has been built up is being ruined, and when our economic space 
is being removed? And we are always prepared to unite on 
sensible principles to survive together. 
  [Androsenko] Over the past 3 years the territory has lost 
one-quarter of its population. People are leaving because they 
are tired of the North, the general disorganization, the poor 
supply, and most imporantly, the lack of confidence in the 
future, the lack of prospects. But how do the miners feel? 
  [Menshov] Like everyone else. They are hoping that the 
government will be sensible. And the authorities must be more 
honest, too. They should be direct in stating whether Russia 
needs the North's gold and act in accordance with this. 
  The situation here is very simple: the lack of financing in 
advance means the treasury does not have 40 metric tons of the 
precious metal. Delaying the advance until May means reducing 
the output by 40 percent. Only it is not necessary to speak 
about the unprofitability of its production for the budget. I 
have already mentioned the comparative prices for gold in 
selling to the state and by the state. 
  I will also remind you that half of the money we receive 
goes 
for taxes--and the budget--right away. A substantial part of the 
budgetary income is hidden in the production cost (through the 
tax payments of our suppliers) and in the income tax on gold 
miners' wages. 
  Our sector is truly the hen laying golden eggs for the 
country. It can be killed, of course. But then we must question 
the responsibility of its owners. 

