BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on drug seizures and arrests related to drug trafficking 
monitored through 5 May: 
<H5>  Argentina </H5>
  Federal Police personnel arrested five members of an 
international gang of drug traffickers and seized approximately 
40 kg of very pure cocaine during operations conducted in 
Palermo, Parque Chacabuco, and Almagro Districts, in Buenos 
Aires. The detainees are Maria Elena Volpi, the leader of the 
gang; Luis Cuenca Chirveches; Damian Potrollo; Jorge Omar 
Cottoneo; and Guillermo Alamo. The drug came from Santa Cruz de 
la Sierra, Bolivia, bound for several European countries. 
(Buenos Aires NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS in Spanish 1451 GMT 28 Apr 94) 
  The Federal Police seized 2.7 kg of cocaine and arrested 
three traffickers in two operations in the township of 
Ciudadela, Greater Buenos Aires and in the township of La 
Carlota, Cordoba Province. One of the criminals was identified 
as Raul Rolando Moreno. (Buenos Aires NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS in 
Spanish 0040 GMT 1 May 94) 
  Federal Police personnel on 2 May arrested three men and 
seized 5 kg of very pure cocaine in the Flores neighborhood in 
Buenos Aires. The drug was inside a wheelchair in the trunk of 
their vehicle. (Buenos Aires NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS in Spanish 2241 
GMT 2 May 94) 
  Police personnel have seized more than 6 kg of very pure 
cocaine during various operations in Buenos Aires. They 
arrested Bolivian citizens Roberto Mendez, Wilfredo Martinez, 
Laureano Hernandez, Leonel Peralta, and Waldo Dominguez, and 
Argentines Damian Ibarra and Elisa Tabarez. (Buenos Aires 
NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS in Spanish 1457 GMT 3 May 94) 
<H5>  Bolivia </H5>
  The Special Antinarcotics Forces, FELCN, on 18 April seized 
nearly 3 kg of cocaine base from under the seat of a car of the 
Expreso del Oriente railway that was about to leave for the 
township of Quijarro, on the Brazilian border. The FELCN also 
arrested three youths with 1,450 liters of sulphuric acid in Los 
Sauces neighborhood, in Santa Cruz. The detainees are Johnny 
Vargas Coca, 18, Jorge Luis Ovando, 18, and a 15-year old minor 
who was not identified. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish 20 Apr 
94 p 13) 
  On 21 April FELCN personnel arrested three people with more 
than 28 kg of cocaine at the Cochabamba bus terminal. The 
detainees are Martha Beltran Robledo, Eolina Perez Guillen, and 
Rosalia Mendoza Espinoza, who planned to take the drug to Santa 
Cruz. (Cochabamba LOS TIEMPOS in Spanish 22 Apr 94 p A4) 
  FELCN agents seized 380 liters of ether, 470 liters of 
ammonia, and 180 liters of sulfuric acid, and arrested Agustin 
Suarez Barbery, Milton Ruddy Rivero Terceros, Victor Mario 
Tellez Montalvo, Julio Cesar Vargas Molina, Anibal Justiniano 
Sanchez, Clemente Vargas Melgar, and Maria Esther Ribera Perez 
in Santa Cruz this past weekend. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish 
26 Apr 94 p 13) 
  Antidrug agents on 26 April arrested Fernando Rojas Noco and 
Nelson Cuadiay Montenegro with 3 kg of cocaine during a control 
at the Yapacani checkpoint. The drug was attached to their 
legs. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish 27 Apr 94 p 13) 
  Police arrested Jorge Rodriguez Suarez with 2 kg of cocaine 
in Puerto Suarez on the Brazilian border. They also caught 
Daniel Vargas Burgos with 1.3 kg of cocaine on a train coming 
from Santa Cruz. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish 27 Apr 94 p 13) 
  Lieutenant Colonel Luis Caballero Tirano, commander of the 
Mobile Police Unit for Rural Areas, Umopar, in Chimore, reported 
on the increasing use of 6 to 14 year-old children by 
traffickers to transport cocaine to Cochabamba and Santa Cruz. 
They attach cocaine sulphate to their bodies and make them walk 
on paths in the jungle. The forces have already caught 12 
children. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish 27 Apr 94 p 8) 
  The General Customs Directorate has delivered to the FELCN, 
4,225 liters of sulphuric acid, 124 liters of hydrochloride 
acid; 365 liters of ammonia; 1,600 kg of sodium bicarbonate, and 
1,050 liters of acetone that were confiscated between 10 October 
1993 and 26 March. (La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 29 Apr 94 p 12) 
<H5>  Brazil </H5>
  Federal Police personnel found 3.5 kg of cocaine hidden in a 
clothes dryer at the Rio de Janeiro international airport. The 
drug was bound for Lagos, Nigeria, and had been shipped in 
Asuncion, Paraguay, by Lucimar Martinez. (Rio de Janeiro JORNAL 
DO BRASIL in Portuguese 7 Apr 94 p 17) 
  Police personnel found a sophisticated arsenal that included 
weapons exclusively used by the Armed Forces. It belonged to a 
drug trafficker known as Washington, or Ostinho, who leads 
trafficking in the west part of Rio de Janeiro. The weapons 
were discovered in the house of Jorge Luis Martins, in the Deusa 
Minha slum, in Jardim Novo, Realengo District. (Rio de Janeiro 
JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 27 Apr 94 p 16) 
  On 27 April, Drug Control Precinct personnel arrested 
federal 
agent Andre Luiz de Jesus Parez and real-estate agent Jose 
Manoel da Silveira and seized 40 kg of cocaine at a house in the 
San Pedro de Aldeia beach resort in Rio de Janeiro. The drug 
was to have been delivered to trafficking gangs in the Rio de 
Janeiro hills and shantytowns. (Sao Paulo O ESTADO DE SAO PAULO 
in Portuguese 28 Apr 94 p C3) 
  On 26 April Police personnel arrested Jonas de Oliveira, 20, 
and Messias da Silva, 25, and seized 2.5 kg of cocaine in 
Fortaleza, Ceara State. Their arrest led to the discovery of a 
new trafficking route linking Bolivia with Fortaleza. (Sao Paulo 
FOLHA DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 28 Apr 94 Section 3 p 3) 
<H5>  Chile </H5>
  Carabineros personnel seized 48 kg of cocaine paste from an 
interprovincial bus linking Arica to Santiago. The drug was 
hidden in two bags. The Carabineros Prefecture has seized 195 
kg of drug so far this year. (Santiago EL MERCURIO in Spanish 26 
Apr 94 p C9) 
<H5>  Peru </H5>
  Peasants reported that poppy growing began more than a year 
ago in the Apurimac River Valley. They said that Colombian 
traffickers teach farmers how to grow and disguise this product, 
adding that "they have convinced peasants of the good prices 
paid for it in U.S. markets compared with cocaine." They added 
that growers choose inaccessible areas, like in Atamba, in the 
jungle zone of the Apurimac Valley where the Army and the 
National Police found three small plantations. (Lima EL COMERCIO 
in Spanish 15 Apr 94 p A17) 
  Leoncio Prado Province Prosecutor Jose Lopez Mendoza on 14 
April ordered the arrest of 21 policemen of the police unit in 
Aucayacu, Tingo Maria Province, on charge of trafficking and 
other irregularities. They were illegally trading 180 kg of 
cocaine paste that had been seized a year ago. (Lima LA 
REPUBLICA in Spanish 15 Apr 94 p 13) 
  Interior Ministry intelligent experts have discovered that 
traffickers are testing eight poppy varieties in areas of 
Cajamarca, Upper Huallaga, Huancavelica, Pucallpa, and Ayacucho. 
They are seeking to identify the best variety before planting 
en masse. The experts said two varieties are reportedly doing 
well in Peru and could become profitable for traffickers. (Lima 
EXPRESO in Spanish 16 Apr 94 Political Section p A3) 
  On 11 April police personnel seized 140 kg of cocaine paste 
in the township of La Punta, Padre Abad Province, Ucayali 
Department. The drug was ready to be sent to a drug storage 
center and then taken to Colombia by drug trafficking 
organizations. (Lima EL COMERCIO 16 Apr 94 Political Section p 
A12) 
  Tacna National Police and Interpol agents have dismantled an 
international gang of traffickers made up of Bolivian, Chilean, 
and Peruvian citizens. They sent cocaine to Chile from Tacna 
and forged U.S. dollars, soles and Chilean pesos in Bolivia. 
The forces seized 2.9 kg of cocaine paste and arrested Aurelio 
Choquezonga Maquera, Agustina Mamani, and Victor Condori in 
Tacna, Peru. Vidal Torres, Aurelio Chalco, and Cesar Condori 
were arrested in La Paz. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 20 Apr 04 
p A12) 

