Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on environmental issues monitored by Paraguay Bureau 
from 14 to 22 December. 
<H5>  ARGENTINA </H5>
  Congress on 15 December ratified the agreement on biological 
diversity signed in Rio de Janeiro on 5 June 1992. The 
agreement's objective is to preserve biological diversity, tap 
natural resources in a sustainable way, and fairly share in the 
benefits derived from such exploitation. (Buenos Aires NOTICIAS 
ARGENTINAS in Spanish 1644 GMT 19 Dec 93) 
<H5>  BOLIVIA </H5>
  Lumber companies oppose two aspects of the bill on forest 
exploitation being debated in Congress: the taxes, which they 
deem too high and the number of years covered by each permit for 
logging. The companies want the government to give them these 
areas. Bolivian environmental organizations are against that 
because they believe it would be like privatizing the national 
forests. The sustained development minister, however, believes 
it is logical and acceptable that businesses want to own the 
logging areas. He added that, otherwise, businesses would not be 
motivated to spend on projects for sustained management of the 
forests. The bill includes permits for 40 years of exploitation, 
but the government wants the bill to consider giving away the 
areas to be exploited. (La Paz Television Nacional Network in 
Spanish 0100 GMT 16 Dec 93) 
<H5>  BRAZIL </H5>
  The Brazilian Institute for the Environment and Renewable 
Natural Resources, IBAMA, and Salvador prefecture have signed an 
agreement for opening a new egg-laying area for sea turtles, 
which will be located at the Itapua ecological camping area. The 
area will be fitted with two tanks for the preservation of some 
species. (Brasilia Voz do Brasil Network in Portuguese 2100 GMT 
17 Dec 93) 
  The National Environment Council on 17 December authorized 
IBAMA to grant Petrobras, Brazilian Petroleum Corporation, a 
license to drill and operate an oil well in the Piacabucu 
environmental preservation area in Alagoas. (Brasilia Voz do 
Brasil Network in Portuguese 2100 GMT 17 Dec 93) 
  President Itamar Franco has signed an agreement to clean up 
the Paraiba do Sul River basin. France will cooperate in this 
project that will cost more than $3 billion. This river crosses 
through 78 towns in Minas Gerais, 41 in Rio de Janeiro, and 37 
in Sao Paulo, supplying more than 12 million people with water, 
in addition to generating electricity through the Santa Barbara, 
Jaguari, and Funil dams. This project is expected to last 17 
years. Environment Minister Rubens Ricupero said the technology 
to be used will be the same as in the Rio Doce Valley basin in 
Minas Gerais and Espirito Santo, and that it will count on the 
technical cooperation of the French Government. (Brasilia Voz do 
Brasil Network in Portuguese 2100 GMT 22 Dec 93) 
  Uruguay and Rio Grande do Sul State signed a cooperation 
agreement on sanitation in the Porto Alegre border area on 21 
December. The agreement contemplates the implementation of 
several joint projects such as maintenance work, the enhancement 
of water quality, and technological research. (Madrid EFE in 
Spanish 1628 GMT 21 Dec 93) 
<H5>  CHILE </H5>
  The Chilean Government on 13 December established an 
Environmental Fund and the Administrative Council for the 
Americas that seeks to "promote activities geared to preserving, 
protecting, or administering Chile's natural and biological 
resources in an environmentally sound and sustainable way, as 
well as promoting the enhancement of the survival and 
development of Chile's infant population." The financial 
resources for this fund, which amount to $20 million, come from 
interest on Chile's outstanding debt with the United States, 
which has been canceled by the U.S. Government. This council 
will be made up of 11 members: one U.S. Government 
representative, four Chilean Government representatives, and six 
Chilean nongovernmental organization representatives. (Santiago 
EL MERCURIO in Spanish 14 Dec 93 Economic and Business Section 
page B2) 
  The environmental organization "Defenders of the Chilean 
Forest" has reported that more than 100,000 hectares of native 
forests have been destroyed in the last few years. According to 
official data, native forests cover 11 million hectares, 11,000 
hectares of which are depleted every year for the production of 
wood chips, the raw material for computer paper. (Madrid EFE in 
Spanish 1630 GMT 20 Dec 93) 

