CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ali H. Zerdin: "`Slovenes' From Singapore"] </F>
  [Editorial Report] The 3 May issue of the Ljubljana weekly 
MLADINA publishes a report detailing attempts by the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia military to circumvent the UN-imposed 
arms embargo and economic sanctions. According to the report, 
the Federal Directorate of Supply and Procurement [FDSP], the 
only Yugoslav Government agency authorized to trade in weapons, 
set up a subsidiary, FDSP (Asia) PTE Ltd., in Singapore in June 
1991 and established "successful trade relations" with the 
Burmese Government, to which it reportedly sold several Galeb 
aircraft. 
  Lim Poh Weng, a Singapore citizen, is the largest investor 
in 
and director of the FSDP Singapore subsidiary, MLADINA states, 
with Yugoslavs Borislav Jurisic, Nikodin Jovanovic, Caslav 
Jovanovic, and Mustafa Smailovic serving as executive directors. 
With the exception of Jurisic, the Yugoslavs listed their 
permanent address as 9 Nemanjina, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, which is 
the address of the Federal Directorate of Supply and 
Procurement. Citing a report in the December 1989 issue of the 
Belgrade military journal NARODNA ARMIJA, MLADINA says that 
Nikodin Jovanovic attained the rank of lieutenant colonel 
general in the Yugoslav People's Army. 
  MLADINA states that following the imposition of the UN arms 
embargo and economic sanctions against Yugoslavia, FDSP (Asia) 
PTE Ltd. changed its name to Deuteron PTE Ltd. and increased its 
capital to 200,000 Singapore dollars. Director Lim Poh Weng's 
share of the investment was 102,000, and the Yugoslav parent 
company contributed 98,000 Singapore dollars. The firm's 
registration number remained unchanged. The Yugoslav parent 
company, however, is now listed as a Slovene enterprise 
headquartered at the old Belgrade address. The Yugoslav 
business partners have also reregistered as Slovene citizens, 
although they still use the same Yugoslav passports and 
permanent address in Belgrade. They have dropped Mustafa 
Smailovic, a Muslim, from their staff and added a new "Slovene" 
member -- Jovan Cekovic. MLADINA notes that it had checked the 
records in Ljubljana and found that none of the business 
partners has Slovene citizenship. 

