BFN 

  [Text] Mexico City, 28 May (NOTIMEX) -- Israeli Foreign 
Minister Shim'on Peres said the United States is the head of an 
overall moral operation for peace, stability, liberty, and 
security. 
  At the end of a 48-hour visit to Mexico, the diplomat stated 
there is currently no country that can replace the United States 
in its position before the world. "The United States is not the 
world's gendarme; it is the head of an overall moral operation 
for peace, stability, liberty, and security. It is not a matter 
of having a policeman; instead, it is a highly responsible 
country," he said. 
  Peres and Mexican Foreign Secretary Manuel Tello reported 
the 
acceptance of five Israeli proposals, which include negotiating 
a free trade agreement, avoiding double taxes, carrying out 
cultural exchange, and modifying Mexico's position at the United 
Nations. 
  The Mexican diplomat explained that Israel proposed 
negotiating the bilateral free trade agreement based on the 
agreement it has with the United States and said that this issue 
must be analyzed. 
  The Mexican diplomat said it will be necessary to get the 
text of the U.S.-Israel free trade agreement prior to the 
negotiations so the document can be studied by the Mexican trade 
secretariat to learn what commitments, rights, and obligations 
it entails. After adding that the next step will be to determine 
whether those issues are compatible with Mexican laws, Tello 
said there is certainly a willingness to negotiate the trade 
agreement. 
  The Mexican foreign secretary said the second point proposed 
by Peres to Mexico was to sign a treaty which prevents double 
taxes between the two countries. Work on this treaty is well 
ahead of schedule and is about to conclude; and all they will 
have to do is set the date for signing the document. 
  Tello indicated that another proposal is to sign an 
agreement 
to create a double fund that encourages research and development 
in various sectors, which shall be determined by the two nations. 
  The fourth point in Peres' proposal, he indicated, was to 
adopt specific measures to give an additional boost to cultural 
exchange, and the fifth point refers to the request that Mexico 
modify its position at the United Nations on environment issues. 

