Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jan Bazyl Lipszyc: "There Was No Affair; </F>
Unofficial Talk"] 
  [Text] There was no affair with regard to fixing the 
price of bank shares. There were just irregularities when it 
comes to getting the shares [of recently privatized Bank Slaski] 
into circulation, which should be cleared up, Sejm deputies say 
unofficially. What happened was an "accident at work"; these 
cannot be avoided in the process of privatization. The deputies 
are very much in agreement when it comes to expressing their 
views on this, regardless of their political affiliation. 
  "In my view, there has been no Bank Slaski affair," says 
former Finance Minister Jerzy Osiatynski of the Democratic Union 
[UD]. "But what did happen for sure are irregularities in the 
functioning of the bank's brokerage house, and these must be 
cleared up. What also needs to be examined is whether there has 
not been a conspiracy among the bank's employees aimed at 
artificially raising the shares' prices to a level that would 
not be justified economically. But that should be discussed now 
by representatives of the commission that was in charge of the 
issue, inasmuch as I am a bit of a judge in my own case here." 
  There was no affair, there are just a great deal of 
experiences linked to the privatization process, and I agree 
with the view that the same kind of decision (regarding fixing 
the prices of the shares) would have to be made today, as well, 
said Jacek Piechota of the Democratic Left Alliance [SLD], while 
Ryszard Ulicki, of the same Sejm deputies club, said that what 
happened in the case resulted from the "crawling on all fours" 
stage at which the financial system now operates; it is also a 
kind of "accident at work" and a lesson for the future. 
  In the view of the SLD's Adam Halber, if there was an affair 
at all, it only applied to allowing the shares into circulation. 
According to him, it is hard to say currently whether that is 
due to negligence, mindlessness, or something else, and that 
must be cleared up. Halber says that if all of the shares could 
get to the stock market at the same time, their prices would be 
set at a reasonable level. According to SLD Sejm Deputy Roman 
Nowicki, the case is a political game and a game of interests, 
not an affair. Someone is eager to be on the front pages of the 
newspapers. But that does not help the capital market. Nowicki 
also says that the issue should be examined, but it has to be 
done without emotion. 
  According to Zbigniew Bujak of the Union of Labor, there are 
two serious issues involved: First of all, the principle of 
equal access to the stock market for everyone who purchased 
shares, was not observed--and that is an affair. The other 
issue is participation by employees who had an opportunity to 
sell the shares and who bought more shares (at preferential 
prices) than they were entitled to. 
  Janusz Dobrosz, press spokesman of the Sejm Deputies Club of 
the Polish Peasant Party [PSL], expressed his support for a 
statement made by Bogdan Pek. Dobrosz said the statement 
cleared up the matter of fixing the share prices and the issue 
of the strategic investor. Their colleagues from the same Sejm 
deputies club can see no affair with regard to price fixing or 
the investor. If there was any affair at all, it pertained to 
completely different kinds of problems. 
  According to Sejm Deputy Jacek Cieciora (PSL), the fact that 
the shares were put into circulation at a time when only shares 
of the employees were on the stock market, was an affair. 
Cieciora says that was what raised the prices to such a high 
level. If there could just be 30 to 40 percent of the shares on 
the stock market, there would be no issue at all, and the 
shares' price would be 2 to 2.5 million zlotys, which "would be 
all right." Jerzy Pistelok (also of the PSL) thinks that hopes 
were stirred up among people for making very big money in a 
short amount of time, which caused the hurried efforts to 
acquire the shares. According to Pistelok, one can speak of 
irregularities that must be cleared up. 
  Only Grazyna Staniszewska of UD, who is deputy chairwoman of 
the Sejm Ownership Transformations Commission, said she does not 
really know whether there was an affair or not because a lot of 
doubts must still be cleared up and conclusions formulated after 
eight hours of debate by the commission. So, according to her, 
the Sejm debate on the issue is premature because all it can do 
is discuss suspicions. 
  There was no Bank Slaski affair. There is just the issue of 
Sejm Deputy Pek who, through his statements and ignorance of 
economics, put many stock market gamblers at risk of significant 
losses. This is how the problem was summed up by a few Sejm 
deputies for UD, who wanted to remain anonymous. 
  There was also unofficial talk in the Sejm to the effect 
that 
Bogdan Pek managed to become a widely known politician over a 
short period of time (at the expense of Bank Slaski), and that 
he is better in this than Jan Komornicki (also of the PSL), who 
failed to gain this kind of popularity while trying to track 
down, as the idea's author and a commission chief, "crimes of 
the Hanna Suchocka government." 

