CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Natalya Gorodetskaya: "Kirsan Ilyumzhinov Will </F>
Possibly Have To Remain President: The Deal Involving the Sale 
of Sovereignty Might Remain Unconsummated"] 
  [Text] As SEGODNYA has already reported, a proposal by 
President Kirsan Ilyumzhinov concerning the need to abolish the 
republic Constitution and adopt the "Great Code of the Steppe" 
in its place was considered on 19 March at an extraordinary 
session of the parliament of Kalmykia. At the time, the members 
of parliament heeded the arguments of Mr. Ilyumzhinov, albeit 
with difficulty, and resolved to convene the Constitutional 
Assembly which was supposed to abolish the Constitution of the 
republic. According to the decision made, the organs of local 
self-government, public movements, and political parties of the 
republic were to assign their representatives to the 
Constitutional Assembly by 5 April. 
  Vyacheslav Kostikov, press secretary of the Russian 
Federation president, has made a statement concerning Mr. 
Ilyumzhinov's proposal to abolish the Constitution of the 
republic, adopt the "Great Code of the Steppe" instead, and sign 
the "General Treaty with the Russian Federation." Mr. Kostikov 
welcomed "the striving of the president of Kalmykia to preserve 
the unity of the Russian Federation." However, he indicated that 
the Constitution of the Russian Federation makes it possible to 
change the status of a component of the Russian Federation 
solely by mutual agreement between the Federation and its 
component on the basis of federal constitutional law. Mr. 
Kostikov believes that in calling for the abolition of the 
Constitution of the republic, Kirsan Ilyumzhinov meant precisely 
to change the status of Kalmykia. 
  However, Kirsan Ilyumzhinov did not even conceal his 
intention to give up sovereignty and equate the status of the 
republic with that of an oblast of the Russian Federation. One 
would think that this step by Kirsan Ilyumzhinov was prompted by 
the difficult economic situation of the republic rather than by 
a concern for "the greatness and indivisibility of Russia." 
There is a reason Kalmykia was one of the few republics of 
Russia to demand an increase in import tariffs: Sheep breeding 
and primary processing of wool account for 80 percent of the 
production in the republic. In the words of Viktor Khlystun, 
minister of agriculture of the Russian Federation, "the Kalmyk 
ethnic entity is perishing because of a 60 percent drop in 
production." The expedition of Kirsan Ilyumzhinov to the 
president of Russia in search of interest-free credit following 
his public rejection of subsidies from the Russian Federation 
(which accounted for two-thirds of the budget of the republic) 
clearly indicates that it is impossible for him to keep his 
election promises to live off the republic's own money and 
foreign investment and to make the Kalmyks more affluent than 
their neighbors while paying taxes to the federal budget in full. 
  It appears that, upon assessing the opportunities for 
Kalmykia's survival, the president resolved to trade the 
sovereignty of the republic for Russian subsidies. Besides, on 
the eve of adoption of the federal budget and the beginning of 
carving up grants for the indigent regions, Mr. Ilyumzhinov 
apparently saw fit to deserve forgiveness from Boris Yeltsin for 
having "sat in the White House in October 1993," creating the 
alternative "Federation Council," and demanding that the Supreme 
Soviet of the Russian Federation and the president run 
simultaneously in elections. 
  However, a number of political parties and movements and 
public organizations of the republic which do not wish to lose 
state sovereignty and turn into an oblast of Russia have set up 
a public committee in defense of the Constitution and statehood 
of Kalmykia. Yesterday's appeal of the new committee reads: 
"Until recently, the Republic of Kalmykia was a region with a 
stable political situation and relatively favorable ethnic 
relations. We, the citizens of Kalmykia, along with all citizens 
of the Russian Federation, are sincerely interested in 
preserving and strengthening our great Motherland of Russia. 
However, we do not intend to give up our small Motherland--the 
Republic of Kalmykia--either. Yet, the official statement of the 
president of the republic about the need to abolish the 
Constitution and renounce its citizenship leads not only to 
changing the status of the republic and undermining its 
statehood, but also to encroaching on the Constitution of the 
Russian state." 
  The defenders of Kalmyk statehood maintain that society has 
now split, with the emerging "confrontation increasingly 
acquiring an ethnic coloring." They warn President Kirsan 
Ilyumzhinov of his "responsibility for possible consequences." 
Moreover, says the statement, "this so-called legislative 
initiative of our president may cause a chain reaction in 
complicating the situation in other regions of the Russian 
Federation." 
  Incidentally, representatives of some republics belonging to 
the Russian Federation have already voiced their attitude toward 
the proposal of the president of Kalmykia, calling him a 
"traitor and apostate" who is giving up sovereignty at a time 
when the rest of the republics are demanding as much freedom as 
possible, especially on issues of taxation and budget formation. 
  The issue of adopting the "Great Code of the Steppe" instead 
of the Constitution was discussed yesterday by a congress of the 
nations of Kalmykia. 

