Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Standpoint" column by Sabri Hammadi: "Deal and Evidence"] </F>
  [Text] Although the Saudi regime, the world's biggest oil 
producer and exporter, is facing the worst financial crisis in 
its history and is being compelled to cut its general 
expenditure in the 1994 budget by 20 percent, it has signed a 
contract with the United States to purchase 50 airliners for $6 
billion dollars only! Since that regime is no longer capable of 
paying for its purchases in cash due to a drop in liquidity, it 
has been agreed that an American bank will finance the deal. 
  When we know that this deal, in which Clinton is said to 
have 
intervened personally by pressuring Fahd to sign it, will save 
the United States 100,000 jobs whose occupants are threatened 
with dismissal, it becomes very clear how far this servile king 
can go in order to serve his American overlords and to help them 
overcome their pressing economic and social problems and crises. 
Conversely, it also becomes very clear how far the Americans 
can go in order to milk the Saudi regime and plunder its oil 
wealth, which actually belongs to the Arab people in Saudi 
Arabia and the entire Arab nation. 
  With this deal the Saudi regime proves once more that it is 
willing to go to any length in its non-patriotic and anti-Arab 
behavior, which has turned the oil wealth into a scourge for the 
Arab nation. He is no longer part of the Arab nation. In fact, 
he is not concerned about the nation's interests and economic, 
security, and development needs. Here he is rushing to prove 
his loyalty to the United States by offering it services which 
no other agent regime can give. It suffices to say that he has 
contributed, and is contributing, toward the drop in oil prices 
to their lowest level in five years for insisting not to cut his 
production. 
  It is obvious the Al Sa'ud regime has no need for all those 
airliners. It is also obvious that a similar deal could have 
been concluded with other companies at lower cost. But what 
could Fahd do when it was the U.S. President who ordered him to 
sign the deal and the one who intervened, pressured, and also 
announced that he will intervene whenever necessary in order to 
secure commercial deals for his country? Despite this 
intervention, it is only fair to say that Fahd was also 
concerned about securing job opportunities for 100,000 Americans 
now and at any time in the future, and that he was not less 
concerned than Clinton about the U.S. economy and society, 
despite the fact that this concern and subservience to the 
United States is at great financial and political cost to his 
regime. There are many signs and evidence of the bankruptcy and 
financial crisis facing the regime. Furthermore, there are 
indications of a growing religious and civilian opposition to 
the regime's policies and open subservience to the imperialist 
West, despite all the stop-gap political methods to limit and 
absorb this opposition. 
  It may be said that Fahd is behaving this way because he 
counts on the United States to protect his regime and its 
security and future. But such talk is meaningless, since many 
other regimes had once given their loyalty and subservience to 
the United States only to discover later that the United States 
did not guarantee anyone's security except its own security and 
interests. In fact, it helped overthrow those "allied" regimes 
when they were no longer useful and when it was convinced that 
its interests would be served better by an alliance with other 
regimes. But the problem with Al Sa'ud is that they have not 
learned and they are not willing to learn any lesson from what 
has happened. 

