Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Robert Minasov and Yevgeniy Skukin: "Lower </F>
Chamber Has Taken Time Out"] 
  [Text] The logical result of the absurd and sometimes -- 
from the viewpoint of the standing orders and parliamentary 
procedures -- illiterate actions of Georgiy Lukava (LDPR) 
[Liberal Democratic Party of Russia], who is chairing the first 
session of the State Duma was that the lower chamber from the 
first day of its work took enforced time out. (Incidentally, 
Georgiy Lukava has composed a dissertation entitled "Dialectic 
of the Solution of Conflicts in War Through the Use of Weapons 
of Mass Destruction.") 
  The outburst of emotions, which continued throughout the 11 
January evening session, was caused by the seemingly, not that 
important, question of the numerical strength of the deputies' 
groups to be registered. The minor political movements and 
parties were, naturally, interested in the lowest possible 
threshold (12-14 deputies), while the larger ones (the LDPR, the 
Russian Communist Party, the Agrarian Party) wanted to raise the 
threshold to 50. "Russia's Choice" offered a compromise -- 20 
deputies. 
  A real fight developed over these figures. The deputies 
returned repeatedly to vote. And only the figure of 35 received 
the largest number of votes. Only by having that number of 
members can a group count on registration. 
  What is the thrust of the problem? Why did deputies from 
political parties and movements defend their proposed options so 
zealously? 
  We received a reply to this question from Sergey Shakhray, 
leader of the Party of Russian Unity and Accord. 
  "There are eight political parties represented in the State 
Duma. If they had settled on the figure of 50 the largest could 
have acquired decisive votes in the State Duma Council while the 
small ones would essentially have been jettisoned or obliged to 
join some group even if they did not want to." 
  "Sergey Mikhaylovich, please share your impressions of the 
first day," we asked our interlocutor. 
  "They are very sad. From the first minutes of the session 
the Liberal Democrats, Communists, and Agrarian Party members 
made what I would call a ferocious attempt to take control of 
the chamber. After all, the Council of Elders had assigned 
Georgiy Lukava only the opening of the session and the procedure 
for the election of the State Duma working organs. The session 
was then to be led either by the secretariat or by a provisional 
presidium. You realize that this attempt to impose his will on 
the chamber split it into two parts. Exactly half of its 
members were elected to the State Duma from political movements 
and parties while the other half consists of deputies from 
single-seat territorial districts. So is it seemly to infringe 
on the interests of a minority? We suggested compromise 
versions: Let us say conditionally one deputy from the parties, 
one from the one-seat districts, and so forth. But without 
success. The methods used to conduct the session were very 
reminiscent of the worst times in our former parliament...." 
  Alas, Sergey Shakhray was far from the only person to assess 
the first day of the State Duma's work as depressing. 
  Alevtina Fedulova, leader of the "Women of Russia" faction: 
  "I should like more political culture, a more economical use 
of parliamentary time. But on the other hand I do not lose hope 
that after the necessary familiarization we will manage to make 
headway in resolving organizational questions and an atmosphere 
for lawmaking will be created. I am satisfied that we have 
settled on the 35 option. That is a controllable group or 
faction, it does not matter what you call it, with which other 
associations can deal." 
  With what did the "Women of Russia" come to the State Duma? 
  [Fedulova] First, we will take part in the work of virtually 
all committees. For us it is fundamentally important not to 
concentrate only on questions of women, the family, and 
children. Also, we shall work most seriously in various 
directions. We believe we must provide not only for equal 
rights for women and men but also, most important, for equal 
opportunities. Nonetheless, we believe the interests of man to 
be the priority for parliament. We are interested not in a 
problem in itself but in close connection with the improvement 
of people's lives. The laws must be socially oriented.... 

