Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sanaa, Feb 24 (AFP)--Jordanian and Omani military 
officials headed for Sanaa Thursday to help ensure compliance 
with a reconciliation agreement between Yemen's rival leaders, a 
military statement issued in the Yemeni capital said. 
  The officials would try to finalise a plan to reposition 
troops who have clashed repeatedly since the accord was signed 
in Amman Sunday, and ensure that the military and security 
aspects of the deal were properly implemented. 
  In Amman officials said 10 Jordanian military observers 
would 
travel to Yemen, accompanied by royal adviser Khalid al-Karaki. 
  The reconciliation accord, brokered by Jordan, called for 
constitutional reforms, an improvement of security and the 
withdrawal of military checkpoints from towns and cities. 
  It was signed by President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, a 
northerner, and his southern rival, Vice-President 'Ali Salim 
al-Bid, in the presence of King Husayn. 
  Oman, which borders on Yemen, also mediated between the two 
leaders, who have been in dispute since last August over 
al-Bid's refusal to take up his duties in Sanaa. 
  The armies of north and south have not merged since the 
country was unified in May 1990. 
  The military statement also said southern troops and militia 
belonging to al-Bid's Yemen Socialist Party (YSP) Thursday 
ambushed northern troops of the al-'Amaliqah brigade outside a 
hospital in the troubled Abyan province, 100 kilometers (60 
miles) east of Aden. 
  At least 20 people are reported to have been killed in the 
province since clashes between the rival armies erupted Monday. 
  One northern soldier was wounded in the ambush Thursday, 
which occurred when northern troops went to reclaim the bodies 
of soldiers killed in the earlier clashes, the statement said. 
  It also denied a claim that northern troops were surrounding 
units based in 'Amran, 60 kilometers (35 miles) northwest of 
Sanaa. 
  Earlier an official in Sanaa said southern units were 
surrounded in 'Amran and Dhamar, 100 kilometers (60 miles) south 
of the capital. 
  "Tension is high in these regions, and there is a serious 
risk of an explosion," the official told AFP, declining to be 
named. 
  Meanwhile, a newspaper in al-Bid's stronghold, the southern 
port city of Aden, said Thursday southern Yemeni troops had 
captured several Arab veterans of the Afghanistan war during the 
clashes in Abyan province. 
  The veterans were fighting alongside northern troops, the 
newspaper October 14 said, but did not specify how many were 
captured nor their nationality. 
  It said the veterans, who fought against the Soviet 
occupation of Afghanistan in the 1980s, were supported by the 
powerful fundamentalist movement al-Islah, and were trained in a 
"terrorist camp" on al-Marakishah mountain, in the north of the 
province. 
  They were financed by a rich Saudi businessman, Usamah 
Bin-Ladin, based in Khartoum," the paper said, and were 
"supported by officials in the Sanaa administration." 
  Al-Bid has refused to go to Sanaa, demanding major economic, 
political and military reforms. He returned directly to Aden 
late Wednesday after touring Oman and Saudi Arabia. 

