BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Parkin, PA News] </F>
  [Text] Prime Minister John Major and his Irish counterpart 
Albert Reynolds began talks in Downing Street tonight to review 
the progress of the joint push for peace in Northern Ireland 
they launched together more than five months ago. 
  They met after Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams offered what 
sounded like new hope of ending the sectarian slaughter, saying 
he was convinced a settlement would come out of the peace 
process. 
  He indicated there would be a Sinn Fein response to the 
Downing Street declaration of December 15 after the June 9 
European elections. 
  However, there were the first signs today that Sinn Fein, 
the 
IRA's political wing, is suffering internal tensions over its 
approach. 
  Members critical of the leadership were accused of trying to 
damage the peace process. 
  Mr. Adams told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: "I am quite 
convinced that what is going to come out of this peace process 
is a peace settlement -- I am quite convinced about it. It is a 
significant step. 
  "It is part of one of those steps which are required to 
advance the peace process. It addresses some of the core issues 
and it dismisses some of the other questions." 
  He said the fact that the British Government had responded 
to 
Sinn Fein's list of questions about the Downing Street 
declaration was in itself "very significant". 
  Meanwhile, Mr. Major and Mr. Reynolds were meeting against a 
background of continuing terrorist violence. 
  Prime aim of their discussions was to consider the reaction 
to a detailed British response a week ago to Sinn Fein's request 
for clarification of their peace declaration. 
  But persistent gun and bomb attacks in Northern Ireland and, 
last weekend, in the Irish Republic -- when Ulster Loyalist 
paramilitaries shot an IRA man in a Dublin bar -- ensured that 
security issues would remain high on the agenda for tonight's 
exchanges. 
  The two leaders were also due to assess progress made by 
officials from their two governments towards establishing a 
framework for resuming all-party cross-border talks on Ulster's 
future. Those discussions stalled near the end of 1992 after a 
series of disagreements. 
  Since then, Northern Ireland Office ministers have been 
involved in behind-the-scenes meetings with party officials in a 
bid to kick-start the talks process. 
  Meetings between officials are thought to have made advances 
towards a timetable for beginning the inter-party discussions 
again. But it is thought likely to be the end of the summer 
before meaningful talks get under way. 

