Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] According to preliminary reports, the elections to 
the St. Petersburg Assembly have been recognized as valid in 25 
out of 50 St. Petersburg constituencies. All of these 
constituencies will hold a second round of the elections, since 
none of the candidates canvassed the required number of votes. 
  Among 50 candidates, there are 20 representatives of the 
bloc 
St. Petersburg Democratic Unity, which support Russia's Choice. 
The bloc is headed by the former chairman of Petrosoviet, 
deputy of the Federation Council, Aleksandr Belyayev. 
  St. Petersburg Democratic Unity is followed by another bloc 
called All St. Petersburg which claims to encompass the city's 
bankers, businessmen and intellectuals and is headed by a deputy 
chairman of Goskomimuschestvo (committee for managing state 
property), Sergey Belyayev. The third place is occupied by a 
centrist bloc, The City We Love, headed by Vice Mayor Vyacheslav 
Scherbakov. 
  The bloc Business St. Petersburg formed by directors of 
state-owned enterprises nominated the former head of the Baltic 
steamship line who is now accused of forgery and embezzlement of 
state property and remains under investigation. 
  None of the candidates nominated by Communist, nationalist, 
patriotic and liberal democratic parties managed to enter the 
second round of the elections. 
  After another nomination of candidates, the other 25 
constituencies will hold the first round of the elections once 
again. On March 20-21, the proportion of those who voted in the 
city reached a mere 25.6 percent. Some experts and observers 
are skeptical about the procedure for the vote count, since St. 
Petersburg Mayor Anatoliy Sobchak lifted the restriction barring 
soldiers and students from voting on the election day in 
accordance with a court decision. Therefore, these categories 
of electors were not included in the main election lists 
beforehand. Instead, they were introduced into additional lists 
as they showed up at the ballot stations. If they had been 
included in the main lists beforehand, the percentage of voters 
could have been even lower and would never have reached the 
25-percent mark required to make the elections valid. 

