CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with N. Borodin, chief of the Department of GU </F>
GAI MVD RF, by Yuriy Ursov: "A Barrier to Vehicle Thieves: 
Innovations of Russian GAI Should Be Raised Against Them"] 
  [Text] Russian reforms have affected even the 
extremely conservative sphere of organizing and regulating 
highway traffic, including the procedure for registering and 
arranging for registration of motor vehicle transport. N. 
Borodin, chief of the Department of the GU GAI MVD RF [Russian 
Federation State Motor Vehicle Inspectorate Main Administration 
of the Ministry of Internal Affairs], tells us about some of the 
innovations developed by Gosavtoinspektsiya [State Motor Vehicle 
Inspectorate]. 
  [Ursov] Nikolay Georgiyevich, the stealing of personal and 
state motor vehicle transport has recently taken on a simply 
menacing scale. In the opinion of some specialists, in Moscow 
alone, more vehicles are stolen every day than are purchased.... 
  [Borodin] The deep-seated reasons for this form of crime 
becoming such a widescale practice in recent years should be 
sought, in my opinion, in the general criminalization of Russian 
life. In actual fact, a car worth several million rubles (if not 
tens of millions) is parked on the street. Moreover, these 
millions are mobile, they are on wheels. One doesn't have to 
force the doors or, worse still, resort to armed robbery. It is 
enough, having studied the alarm system and the routes and 
habits of the owner, just to drive the car off to a secluded 
spot -- you are a millionaire. Such an easy path to criminal 
enrichment, of course, attracts many people, especially since 
the law interprets this form of crime in a vague, ambiguous way: 
was the car stolen with further unlawful intent, or was it 
"taken to go for a drive." The punishment is therefore not 
comparable with the material damage incurred by the owner. 
Moreover, the criminals often use juveniles, to whom criminal 
responsibility, even mild responsibility, does not apply. How 
many people have repeatedly spoken of the need to make the 
punishment tougher, to eliminate ambiguity in the interpretation 
of vehicle theft, but... the situation remains the same. 
  Nevertheless, GAI is making maximum use of the existing 
legal 
possibilities in order to limit the field of action for the 
criminal elements. In the first place, of course, our associates 
are organizing searches and checks "for hot clues." We are 
making raids on garages and parking lots. Incidentally, through 
this last measure, dozens of cars figuring in the search were 
discovered in Moscow. There is another aspect of this work, 
though. Stealing the vehicle is just half of the job. It still 
has to be legalized, that is, provided with the appropriate 
documents.... 
  [Ursov] Judging by the fact that, for example, the stolen 
vehicles regularly "surface" at certain motor vehicle auctions, 
in vehicle showrooms, etc., does this make the criminals 
successful? 
  [Borodin] Let us put it this way: they used to be 
successful. 
I think that it will now be much more difficult to pull off 
schemes like this. The reason for this is the new procedure for 
legalizing and registering cars, which prevents the 
manufacturing of fake documents. Every domestic motor vehicle 
now receives a technical certificate at the manufacturing plant, 
on which data concerning a change in owner in the course of the 
operating period are entered. The owner keeps this certificate 
at home or at his establishment, and the driver must carry on 
him evidence of registration, which certifies his right to drive 
the vehicle. In this way we can trace the entire buying-selling 
chain of a certain specific car, detecting any suspicious gaps. 
Unfortunately, the State Customs Committee is not so far trying 
to introduce documents of this sort for imported cars. 
  The operations procedure at many of the commercial 
structures 
trading in motor vehicles has also changed. Now they must have a 
license, issued by the local organs of authority with all the 
ensuing consequences, in particular, responsibility for the 
authenticity of the registration documents, for the sale of cars 
figuring in the search, etc. New forms of certificate-records 
have been introduced, and have become documents for strict 
accounting. In Moscow and a few other areas, we are starting to 
counter sink the vehicle markings, so that if there is an 
attempt to register a vehicle with battered numbers, this is 
easily detected. It must be said that such measures have already 
begun to show results: the percentage of thefts exposed has 
begun to grow slowly. This work would be more effective if the 
activity of numerous private notaries were monitored more 
strictly. After all, it is much easier to make a fake document 
for a vehicle than, let us say, a fake technical certificate. 
  The ideal thing -- and this has been a question for several 
years -- GAI intends to make the transition to full 
computerization, as happened, for example, in Krasnodar Kray. 
There, the staff members of the State Motor Vehicle Inspectorate 
are equipped with portable computers, and if necessary, can get 
a direct line to a centralized data bank which instantly 
provides full information on both a vehicle and on the 
violations of its driver. 
  [Ursov] One has recently begun to come across vehicles on 
the 
streets, not only with the new type of state numbers, but also 
with a few unusual number designations in yellow and red.... 
  [Borodin] The white numbers of the new type for domestic 
vehicles, I remind you, are unified to conform with the 
requirements for international standards. There is no division 
into private and state vehicles, and one can travel to all 
foreign countries with these numbers. As for the yellow and red 
numbers, they belong to special categories of vehicle owners. At 
one time we used, for foreign citizens -- not diplomats -- 
different number series: one for journalists, another for trade 
representatives, etc. Now all these categories, including 
non-citizens, joint ventures, etc., receive yellow numbers. 
Diplomats and persons on equal footing with them use the red 
numbers. 
  [Ursov] I have often noticed: using a red and blue special 
signal light, some "Mercedes" with personal numbers "cuts 
through" the traffic, but the person behind the wheel bears 
little resemblance to a state official or operations worker. 
  [Borodin] Yes, there are such cases. In order to look 
prestigious, businessmen install special flashing lights, since 
it is easy to get them right now. This is illegal, and we are 
putting a stop to such cases. An edict of the Russian President 
determined the group of those enjoying the use of special signal 
lights. These are higher officials, and also some ministries and 
departments which, because of their type of activity, need 
special signal lights. For example, the Ministry for Emergency 
Situations, bank collection and delivery and public health 
department vehicles and, of course, fire department vehicles, 
ambulances.... 
  Moreover, special signal lights may now be only blue, and 
are 
mounted in strictly defined spots on the roof of the vehicle. A 
procedure has been determined for special colors for the 
vehicles. For the police it is blue and white, for fire vehicles 
-- red, for bank collection vehicles -- sand-colored, etc. I 
will note that the new procedure for placing special signal 
lights and special coloring has considerably narrowed the group 
of people having this right. Remember, it used to be that 
special signal lights were practically granted to a kolkhoz 
chairman. All this is now taken under strict consideration and 
monitored. 
  [Ursov] And in conclusion, a question which is worrying a 
great many potential motor vehicle owners. By this I mean the 
new Draconian duties on the import of motor vehicles. 
  [Borodin] I personally do not understand the logic of the 
people who drew up this document. I will not go into details, 
but this is the way Russia is becoming a place where they "dump" 
all sorts of, pardon the term, trash, which satisfies neither 
ecological nor technical norms. This means -- new emergencies, 
nature pollution, and so on. All civilized countries, though, 
behave in a different way: the older the vehicle that you drive, 
the more tax you pay. Or are we so rich that we pay for battered 
vehicles in currency, which was originally gained from the sale 
of top-value oil, gas, timber and other irreplaceable resources? 

