Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Leonid Mlechin: "The Russian Question in </F>
Russian Politics in 1994"] 
  [Text] The Russian question is a highly important issue of 
Moscow's diplomacy in the new year. The opposition attacks the 
president precisely in this area, where it knows it cannot fail 
to win. 
  The instinctive reaction to the 12 December elections is: 
Russian diplomats should urgently tackle the problem of the 
Russians who were left outside Russia's borders. The task is to 
wrest the aces from the hands of the nationalists, who 
successfully scored points on this issue, and to prove that the 
democratic government is capable of sorting things out for the 
Russians in the former Soviet republics. 
  However, if Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev rushes to do 
something now, this will be credited to the opposition. 
Diplomats' activity would be interpreted in one way only: They 
are moving because they were frightened by Zhirinovskiy. 
  This claim is unjust. It is improper to accuse the 
Yeltsin-Kozyrev policy of neglecting the Russian question. They 
have encountered a problem which, as history shows, has no ideal 
solution. 
  Pure diplomacy, negotiations, UN resolutions, and appeals to 
international organizations and to the two supreme commissioners 
for human rights (Europe's CSCE commissioner and the world's UN 
commissoner) do not have the power to change the situation 
radically. Only by restoring the USSR is it possible to really 
reassure Russians living outside Russia and return to them their 
lost spiritual well-being. No other solutions will bring the 
desired relief to all Russians living abroad. 
  The most able actions by Russian diplomats, even if they 
manage, for example, to win some kind of concessions from the 
governments of the Baltic republics, will be unable to change 
the atmosphere in the Baltic region, where Russians and 
Russian-speakers are regarded as an alien element, and are at 
best tolerated. 
  It is as possible to make Estonians, Latvians, and 
Lithuanians think differently as it is to erase from the pages 
of history the occupation of the Baltic region by Soviet troops 
in 1940, the deportations, and, in general, the half-century of 
lording it in the three republics. 
  Of course, it is possible to make threats, to resort to 
strong-arm blackmail, to make use of the services of the 
military department, to refuse to withdraw troops from the 
Baltic region, or even to dispatch additional units there. 
  The idea of "enlightened nationalism" and the hope of taking 
over the slogans of the nationalists are sufficiently naive: 
The original is always preferable to a copy. So if the 
liberals decide that the troops who still remain in the Baltic 
region can be used as an instrument of pressure, then the 
citizens of our country are more likely to support those who 
have long been demanding the use of force against "Baltic 
nationalists." Then there would be a new government in the 
Kremlin, and this government would manage without Yeltsin and 
without Kozyrev. 
  The present government does not have the right to make a 
favorable impression on the public by offending neighboring 
states and boldly promising who-knows-what. 
  But it is making one unforgivable mistake: Andrey Kozyrev 
and his apparatus have not taken the trouble to prove 
to the Russian public that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is 
seriously concerned over this problem. If the ministry is doing 
something, if it is trying for some kind of success, then very 
few people know about it. 
  Judging by reports from embassies and all the information 
at Moscow's disposal, the majority of Russians outside Russia 
want to remain living where they are. And it is from this 
premise that the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs is 
operating, Deputy Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov told IZVESTIYA. 
It is necessary to ensure at the state level the legal basis of 
their lives outside Russia, to help Russian communities preserve 
their language and culture and receive education in their native 
tongue. 
  In the very near future the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is 
to 
make yet another attempt to get the government to adopt a 
program to improve the life of Russians beyond Russia's borders. 
However, it is not known where the money necessary to implement 
this will come from. 
  A few days before the new year the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs administration dealing with the planning and forecasting 
of foreign policy ceased to exist. Some of its staff will be 
transferred to the CIS department. Instead of global studies 
they will be handling the problems of the former Union republics. 
  A very important issue now is to see that those seeking dual 
citizenship are granted it. This will to some degree guarantee 
Russians protection and enable them to move to Russia in 
critical situations. CIS leaders agreed on this principle, but 
are now drawing back from signing agreements on a bilateral 
basis. 
  In Sergey Lavrov's opinion, this is mainly because they do 
not fully comprehend the real significance of dual citizenship, 
supposing that it frees the holders of two passports from the 
fulfillment of all obligations to the state. In actual fact 
dual citizenship only grants "nonindigenous" inhabitants equal 
rights with "indigenous" inhabitants, but by no means frees them 
from responsibility. A holder of two passports is answerable 
for a crime he has committed in the place that he committed it, 
and serves in the army in the place of his permanent residence. 
  What else can diplomats do in real terms? 
  We can prove to Western politicians and Western public 
opinion that their former sympathetic approach to the Baltic 
republics which suffered under the Soviet yoke is outdated. 
Western pressure is the only way to force the Baltic leaders to 
make concessions. 
  We msut tirelessly seek out sensible people in Tallin and 
Riga and negotiate with them: Surely Estonian and Latvian 
politicians do not really think that some kind of NATO will save 
them if people with Zhirinovskiy's mentality come to power in 
Moscow? 

