Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] In a meeting held at the White house today, His 
Excellency U.S. President Bill Clinton said that he had received 
a letter from the custodian of the two holy mosques, King Fahd 
Bin-'Abd-al-Aziz, which included the agreement of the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia to start negotiations on the purchase of civil 
aircraft from the United States. [passage omitted] 
  President Clinton also praised the cooperation between the 
two countries in the sphere of civil aviation and said that 
economic relations consolidated and bolstered the current strong 
political and strategic relations with the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia, which he said is the object of respect. 
  His Excellency President Clinton expressed the consideration 
the Kingdom's decision to start negotiations on buying U.S. 
civil aircraft as a vote of confidence in the quality of U.S. 
industry and the strength of U.S. exports. 
  Afterward, His Royal Highness Prince Bandar Bin Sultan 
Bin-'Abd al-Aziz, the ambassador of the custodian of the two 
holy mosques to the United States, made an address on this 
occasion in which he praised the strong relations between the 
Kingdom and the United States and their steady development since 
the historical meeting between King 'Abd al-Aziz Al Sa'ud and 
President Roosevelt. 
  His royal highness said that Saudi-U.S. relations are based 
on the principles of common interests and mutual respect. 
  He said: The Kingdom has invited the U.S. companies Boeing 
and McDonnel Douglas to send representatives to the Kingdom in 
March to start negotiations on the Saudi airliner's requirements 
on aircraft. 
  The meeting was attended U.S. Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher; Secretary of Trade Ronald Brown, Secretary of 
Transport Federico Pena; the President's national security 
adviser, Anthony Lake; the White House Chief of Staff, Thomas 
McLarty; adviser on economic affairs, Robert Rubin; the 
presidents of McDonnel Douglas and Boeing; representatives of 
trade unions; and members of the U.S. Congress. 
  At the end of the meeting, the presidents of the U.S. 
aircraft manufacturing companies McDonnel Douglas and Boeing 
expressed their welcome for the step and commended the 
cooperation with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in the sphere of 
air transport and the modernization of the Saudi Arabian 
airlines' fleet. They also expressed their gratitude to the 
custodian of the two holy mosques, King Fahd Bin 'Abd al-Aziz, 
and the Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 

