CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ivan Sabic: "Rich and Untaxed"] </F>
  [Text] Two years have passed since the economy of Bosnia 
and Herzegovina, which had fallen into deep trouble even before 
the war broke out, was in a position to guarantee even the most 
necessary financial minimum for operation of the government in 
that portion of Bosnia-Herzegovina under Muslim control. Even if 
the costs of that government are reduced exclusively to 
diplomatic activity, that is, to the participation of Muslim 
delegations in peace negotiations, tours of friendly countries, 
and covering the expenses of diplomatic missions and missions to 
international organizations. 
  From what sources, then, are all those expenditures 
financed; 
in particular, what are the sources of funds to cover 
expenditures for the armed forces and to care for the large 
number of refugees, which are certainly considerably greater? 
What is more, in Bosnia-Herzegovina they are even thinking about 
introducing the most recent technologies in certain segments of 
the economy and public communications. Hajrudin Suman, general 
director of the PTT of Bosnia-Herzegovina, for example, has 
announced the introduction of a mobile telephone network in 
Sarajevo, Tuzla, and Zenica, and he announced that the Motorola 
company was one possible supplier of equipment. Where is the 
money coming from to "cover" all that? 
  At the beginning of the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Libya 
furnished aid to Bosnia-Herzegovina in the amount of $50 
million. That amount had been fixed during an earlier visit of 
Alija Izetbegovic to Tripoli. After that, other Islamic 
countries sent financial aid to Bosnia-Herzegovina, but these 
were always considerably smaller amounts intended for the care 
of people threatened by the Serbian aggression, and the donors 
decided considerably more frequently to send aid in the form of 
food, clothing, and medicine. In mid-June 1992 the Kuwaiti 
agency KUNA reported that that country's government had decided 
to make a donation of $3.1 million to Bosnia-Herzegovina, and at 
approximately the same time Saudi Prince Fahet set aside $8 
million. 
<H5>  Izetbegovic's Reproach </H5>
  However, all that is insufficient to cover regular costs, 
and 
even less would the Muslim leadership be able to acquire 
armament and equipment for its military units on the basis of 
such amounts of aid. During last year's visit to Riyadh, 
arranged so that he might accept the award of Saudi King Faisal 
for his contribution to Islam, Alija Izetbegovic reproached the 
Islamic countries for furnishing insufficient aid to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and said that "several Islamic countries had 
not fulfilled their obligations" within the Organization of the 
Islamic Conference (OIC), but he expressed confidence that "with 
the help of the Islamic countries, the war will not be lost." On 
that occasion an official figure was presented to the effect 
that aid in the amount of $53 million had been obtained since 
the beginning of the war. 
  Unofficial estimates have indicated considerably larger 
amounts spent to care for the refugees, but also to purchase 
weapons and other military equipment. At that time, of course, 
before the general Croat-Muslim conflict broke out, there was no 
great difficulty with the illegal advancement of arms into 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. But there is no doubt whatsoever that the 
purchases, and accordingly the payments for them, have occurred 
later as well. They are of course difficult to prove, and it is 
especially difficult to show that sizable quantities have been 
purchased, although it is clear that otherwise the Army of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina would not have been able to achieve certain 
military successes. 
  In late January DER SPIEGEL wrote that $15 million for arms 
purchases had come in from certain Bosnian representative 
offices abroad. The same authors said the money had in fact been 
spent for the purposes planned, that the MOS [Ministry of the 
Armed Forces] had purchased six transport helicopters in Russia 
and two light scout planes in France. According to reports that 
cannot be described as completely reliable, Muslim armed units 
have been furnished with arms and equipment purchased in Great 
Britain, Italy, Switzerland, Azerbaijan, Afghanistan, Armenia, 
Lebanon, and Serbia, and one journalist from the German 
television station ZDF said on his return to Germany that he had 
seen Iranian-made ammunition in Sarajevo. 
  The German weekly FOCUS wrote recently that in 1993 the 
Izetbegovic government received $250 million from the Islamic 
Conference; the donors were allegedly Abu Dhabi, Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, and Iran, along with Islamic humanitarian organizations 
in Europe. According to the same source, Islamic organizations 
in Great Britain collected $20 million, and certain arms 
deliveries from Serbia were "covered" with a delivery of oil 
from Iran and Libya, with Greece and Romania serving as 
intermediaries. 
<H5>  "Local Tax" Collected at the Market </H5>
  "Oil is the weapon of the Islamic countries" is a sentence 
uttered frequently. There was a time when one heard it in the 
context of announcement of pressure on the Western countries to 
remove the embargo from delivery of weapons to the Bosnian 
Muslims, and on the eve of one meeting of the member-countries 
of the Islamic Conference it was uttered even by Hikmet Cetkin, 
Turkish foreign minister, but the threat was never carried out. 
If we ask ourselves why, the most logical answer is because it 
is in the interest of the Islamic countries to sell their oil, 
but there are also other possibilities. For example, an 
agreement that would go like this: we supply you oil, you give 
us a free hand in providing aid to Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Certainly all the expenditures of the government in Sarajevo 
cannot be reduced to covering the costs of caring for the 
refugees and purchasing armament and military equipment. The 
government must also have certain amounts to meet other 
expenditures. From what informed sources say, the donors are 
once again the Islamic countries and organizations, and the 
money is being paid into private accounts abroad or literally 
carried into Bosnia-Herzegovina in cash. Volunteers from the 
Islamic countries are said to have brought in rather large 
amounts in hard currency when they arrived in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Certain officials of the HVO [Croatian Defense Council] in 
central Bosnia say that before the war groups of foreign 
citizens were crossing their territory and large amounts were 
discovered when they were searched. As for private accounts 
abroad, it is assumed that the largest are owned by Alija 
Izetbegovic, Haris Silajdzic, and Ejup Ganic. It cannot be said 
that the funds are paid into the private accounts exclusively in 
order to obtain personal benefits under circumstances favorable 
to that practice, but rather there is also an effort to leave 
the government accounts empty. This gets around the possibility 
of someone tracing the purchases of military supplies, and at 
that same time it avoids the possibility of those funds being 
included in the amount that would figure in the succession, 
assuming of course that it ever occurs. 
  Nevertheless, the Turkish newspaper SABAH recently published 
an article stating that the Turks have found fault with the 
leadership of Bosnia-Herzegovina for having used the immense 
financial aid for its own purposes. Under the present 
circumstances it is of course difficult to distinguish precisely 
between personal and general needs, and it is still more 
difficult to ascertain the amounts that pass through accounts 
and through the hands of particular officials. Especially since 
many tales have been woven in this connection. According to one 
of those tales, just one Turk from Bosnia, a member of a company 
of several hundred people who reached Turkey following the 
Austrian occupation of Bosnia-Herzegovina in 1878, made a money 
contribution sufficient to equip the entire building of the 
embassy of Bosnia-Herzegovina when it was opened in Turkey. 
  The Muslim government has taken certain steps to procure on 
its own some of the funds necessary to cover the war budget. A 
law was passed requiring citizens of Bosnia-Herzegovina working 
abroad temporarily to pay a portion of their earnings as their 
contribution to the defense of Bosnia-Herzegovina, something is 
probably also "earned" by issuing (expensive) Bosnian passports 
and other documents in diplomatic missions abroad, and certain 
amounts, it is difficult to determine how large, are obtained 
through one kind of legal smuggling. 
  That is, there is "warranted suspicion" that consumer goods 
reaching government warehouses in one way or another are going 
onto the market and being sold at black-market prices. It is 
known for sure that last year this was the method used in 
selling off a certain quantity of vegetables which the 
government of Bosnia-Herzegovina, through the mediation of 
certain international organizations, had sent to Sarajevo from 
Serbia, so that citizens of Sarajevo buying those vegetables 
with no knowledge of that were paying a kind of local tax. 
  The war budget of Bosnia-Herzegovina is obviously so 
complicated that probably no one has a complete picture of it, 
that is, of all the sources of funds and all the purposes they 
are spent for. The only thing that seems to be certain is that 
there are large holes in the budget. 

