BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Dudnik: "The Army Cannot Be Outside </F>
Politics. At Any Rate During a Time of Social Crisis"] 
  [Text] Over the last two years the Army has played a 
crucial role in Russian history on two occasions. And on both 
occasions experts made the same mistake -- they avoided public 
analysis and assessment of what happened. In August 1991, 
intoxicated by victory, as it were. And in October 1993, 
supposedly scared of it. But were they victories? It is 
impossible to understand the Army's role in society's crisis 
development without answering this question. 
<H5>  Prologue </H5>
  Over the last seven or eight years there has been a change 
in 
the nature of our society's development: From normal political 
evolution we ended up -- via a phase of virtually normal 
political struggle -- with overt confrontation and even, here 
and there, civil war. And the definite stance espoused by the 
Army has matched every phase. 
  Initially (until February-March 1989) the Army remained 
outwardly neutral and monolithic, although this was only an 
appearance. It continued, as it were, to reflect the interests 
of all society. In actual fact this was a period where conflict 
phenomena covertly developed and accumulated within it. 
  In February 1988 then premier Nikolay Ryzhkov was forced to 
accept the existence of vertical stratification within the Armed 
Forces. Thus, intra-Army problems and flaws found themselves 
the center of public attention. And that fall the civilian 
press raised the problems of military reform. In effect this 
marked the beginning of a fight for the Army between society and 
the authorities. 
  The tragedy in Tbilisi occurred 9 April 1989: The official 
authorities in confrontation with the people furtively used the 
Army. And then came Vilnius, Baku, Sumgait, and Dushanbe and 
the Airborne Troops' "potato maneuvers...." There were signs 
all around that the authorities were endeavoring to embarrass 
the Army and place society and it on different sides of the 
barricades (and barricades were already a fact in society). 
  A military "formation demonstration" took place on Moscow's 
Manege Square 23 February 1990. An "Appeal to the People" was 
adopted at the bidding of the Main Military-Political 
Directorate of the USSR Armed Forces, containing the following 
words: "A resolute 'no' to attempts to slander the Army and 
depict it as a force opposing the people." But a month later 
the authorities themselves overtly pitted the Army against the 
people: The Army was brought out with its hardware to surround 
the Kremlin 28 March in front of a 500,000-strong people's 
demonstration. 
  From that moment on controversy began in the mass media 
regarding the possibility of a military coup. In response the 
ruling top brass accused the mass media of inflammatory attempts 
to demoralize the Army. 
  This was the atmosphere in the country by August 1991. The 
Soviet authorities attempted 19-21 August to rout the radical 
civilian opposition by overtly relying on the Army. The Army, 
however, sabotaged the orders that it was given by the 
authorities, giving the outward appearance of keeping neutral. 
But even if you believe that the Army just found itself outside 
politics, as it were, that too was a bold political choice on 
its part. And tantamount to its joining the democratic camp. 
This choice brought about the Russian reformers' victory. 
<H5>  En Route to October </H5>
  The truth, however, was that the crisis in society had not 
been overcome. What is more, it escalated still further and 
increasingly took hold of the Army. Following the breakup of 
the USSR the latter too began to spontaneously break up. This 
was accompanied by a quite uncontrollable, if urgently disguised 
process that saw Army involvement in regional armed conflicts. 
And spring 1992 marked the beginning of a virtually undisguised 
tussle over the Army between the Supreme Soviet and the 
executive. 
  Certain events over the next 18-24 months were crucial for 
the moral and professional state and the subsequent position of 
the Soviet Army (and it is the Soviet Army that we are talking 
about, since virtually all its generic features are to a 
considerable extent retained). 
  First its legal recognition as Russia's Army. In effect this 
was the enactment of the choice that it had already made in 
August 1991. Then came vigorous steps on the part of the 
president to rehabilitate the Army morally and ethically and to 
boost servicemen's social status and improve their material 
position. 
  Early in March 1993 President Yeltsin had a meeting in 
camera 
with supreme command personnel. It is now clear from B. 
Yeltsin's memoirs that they discussed the Army's future position 
in a situation of growing political crisis. 
  In the April referendum the Army's choice was not 
proclaimed, 
but it nevertheless became known that 72 percent of the military 
backed the president's policy. That enabled Boris Yeltsin to 
say shortly afterward: The Army is the guarantor of state 
stability. In effect this indicated the place and role played by 
the Armed Forces in the nationwide conflict. 
  However, this was shortly countered by an idea that appeared 
out of nowhere -- "the Army is outside politics." The 
cultivation of this idea within the Army almost played a fatal 
role during the overt confrontation between the Communist-Soviet 
political system and the executive's post-totalitarian regime 
that began 21 September [1993]. 
  I think that in essence this was the antithesis of the 
recent 
past, which espoused the unqualified ideological principle that 
the Army has no internal functions even though everyone knew 
that this was a lie. The "Red-Soviet" Army was systematically 
used to ensure the internal stability of the Communist regime. 
  This hypocrisy and deception could not last long. It was 
bound to come to an end. And that happened in October. 
<H5>  A Victory? </H5>
  Everything that happened during October is horrifying, 
speaking in ordinary human terms. But in the harsh language 
found in a review of events, the scale of what happened and the 
number of casualties enable these events to be ranked as a 
low-intensity, local armed conflict. And the damage done during 
it can be regarded as acceptable. That is the case, ridiculous 
as it may sound. 
  However, all this should and could have been prevented, even 
in conditions where the idea of the Army's role in maintaining 
internal state stability had not been formalized de jure. But 
during the most critical hours the leadership of the Armed 
Forces played a waiting game. Even later on it did not make use 
of the full scale of degrees of using force in a civil conflict. 
And that scale is broad, with many subidivisions. It includes 
making an unambigous advance statement of position; threatening 
the threat [as published] of force; directly threatening the use 
of force; making a show of intent; using limited components of 
force for effect, etc -- this is what the range of measures is 
like. 
  But in order to feel confident about using this range of 
measures, the Army leadership should have had a clear 
ideological principle prior to the events of October: The Army 
cannot be outside politics, and at critical moments the Army 
should be under one-man command and obey the constitutional 
commander in chief. The Army leadership did not have this clear 
ideological principle, and therefore at the critical moment 
immediately switched to the scenario involving tanks and 
shooting. 
  Needless to say, force was certainly used to provide the 
requisite defense of the state system. But in a very clumsy 
manner, and after the Army leadership had not had dialogue with 
society for a very long time and had shown dogged reluctance to 
present any arguments other than those that were last-minute and 
extreme in their intensity. 
  Needless to say, force of argument (eschewing the latter 
argument up to a certain point) is the only thing that can and 
should keep the social situation under control in the long term. 
However, at times of political crisis either arguments are 
lacking or they fail to work. And people behind a crisis tend 
to be deliberately unwilling to hear and see them. That is what 
happened in September and October 1993. 
  But even if society wants to evolve in its chosen direction, 
the authorities should at least keep control of the situation. 
It is in these cases that the argument of force replaces the 
force of argument: In Moscow 3-4 October 1993 it was not merely 
a political victory and temporary civil stabilization that was 
achieved by military means. Civil war was averted, and that 
could have been followed by global armed conflict. 
  People claim that in October the Army could with an equal 
degree of probability have ended up on any side depending on the 
command. 
  In conditions whereby the Army is in a state of unstable 
political equilibrium and its position depends on the personal 
choice made by its sole commander, who has the right to give it 
orders (in this case, Pavel Grachev), this might have happened. 
But only in theory. In practice everything was determined by 
the alignment of forces and interests in society and the fact 
that the "White House inmates" had been utterly discredited 
morally and politically. In this context its choice was 
preordained. This was the culmination of the Army's choice in 
August 1991. 
  It did not use force against its own people then. Now it 
used force to defend the people's fundamental interests. To put 
it in extreme terms, it was a question of preventing global 
civil war. 
<H5>  A Defeat? </H5>
  Victory was not followed by civil peace. Everything that 
divided people when they were killing one another has not only 
remained in society but has worsened the situation still further. 
  Having secured victory for the politicians, the Army 
suffered 
a "defeat." It did not succeed in being the arbiter in the 
civil dispute and the guarantor of state stability. It fell 
hostage to the winning side. 
  Nor has the potential threat to the authorities posed by 
this 
Army been removed. On the one hand, it has become conscious of 
its own indisputable strength and in this connection its own 
exclusivity in this state system. On the other, the following 
question has not been removed: What will the Army do if the 
authorities it supports prove unviable in civil organizational 
development? Whereas 10 tanks settled everything in October, 
another 10 (or perhaps more) could turn up if only their 
commander is sure that there is an individual who will be able 
to make better use of the fruits of his labors than the people 
in power at the moment. There are still enough forces 
interested in these same tanks but with different commanders and 
people. 
  The 12 December elections not only confirmed this, but at 
the 
same time demonstrated the true sympathies of the post-October 
Army. 
  The Defense Ministry and the Central Electoral Commission 
kept the results of the Army's voting secret. However, the 
president admitted that a third of the Army voted for 
Zhirinovskiy. 
  The results of the 12 December 1993 voting do not merely 
reflect the profound crisis in which the current Army finds 
itself. They represent defeat for the democratic choice that it 
made in August 1991. Its current choice may quite possibly be 
the prologue to the general defeat of democracy in Russia. 
<H5>  The Last Bastion of the Soviets </H5>
  Appealing to his compatriots the day after the Soviet armed 
putsch was put down, the Russian president promised the people 
"full military reform." Instead of that, a month later he 
produced military doctrine. 
  The military doctrine, written by gung ho Afghan generals, 
not only made no reference to the term "military reform" but 
contained none of the key formulas -- civilian control of the 
defense sphere, a civilian defense ministry, an open, 
structurally-improved defense budget, and a professional army. 
  To make up for that it harbored the possibility of a fresh 
wave of economic militarization and Russia's transformation into 
a military police state. Let us recall just two episodes. 
  A month after the Security Council adopted the military 
doctrine the president made a peacemaking trip to the North 
Caucasus. During this trip Pavel Grachev issued the following 
tough statement: If it is necessary to use the Army to pacify 
the region, he, the defense minister, would do so. And a month 
later, this January, in response to the detention in Latvia of 
two generals, without authorization the commander of the 
Northwest Group of Forces put the divisions under his command on 
combat alert. And the Airborne Troops did the same. 
  Thus the ruling top brass are wilfully sending draftees to 
die outside the Fatherland in breach of Russian laws and are 
opening the way for the legal use of mercenary troops and the 
semilegal transfer of armored vehicles, heavy weapons, and 
munitions to the warring countries of the former USSR. In 
return they have gotten local civil wars. 
  Nor is military reform working out. Are some of the current 
generals contemplating further sabotaging reforms? With their 
complete power, they have all the means at their disposal on 
which the Supreme Soviet relied as it was losing power. The 
temptation is great. They have presidents available. The 
appropriate entry is there in the doctrine. 
  The ruling state elite cannot be unaware of all this. 
  It will not prove possible to keep the Army in its present 
state for long. It is also impossible to radically reform it, 
since the authorities have handed the business of transforming 
the Army over to the military elite themselves. The ruling top 
brass will not permit full-scale military reform because that 
would spell the end of their absolute power. Yet the military 
elite cannot now be replaced. That would automatically mean 
blaming it for the Army's involvement in the Moscow conflict. 
That would not really be right; what is more, it would be 
simply very dangerous. 
  Consequently we are "condemned" to a certain pause in Army 
reform. It should be followed by a scene-change, most likely a 
multiple change, which will also clear the stage for the next 
historical act. 

