CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mikhail Afanasyev: "`Stage-by-Stage </F>
Constitutional Reform' as a Way of Life"] 
  [Text] Unless we adopt immediate measures for legal 
and economic support, local self-government will soon cease to 
exist as an independent institution. 
  Is it not strange: The Constitution has been adopted, the 
president in his message to the Federal Assembly defined the 
main task as unwavering observance of the Constitution and the 
most rapid adoption of the laws envisioned in it, and throughout 
Russia more and more documents are being produced concerning the 
organization of state power and local self-government in which 
the formula from the October presidential edicts is repeated: 
"for the period of stage-by-stage constitutional reform." 
Knowing regional norm-setting, we are convinced that many local 
leaders apparently think that to mouth this formula which has 
lost its meaning will release them from the obligation to 
observe the Constitution. 
  The Russian bureaucracy is used to transition periods. 
Actually they know only two forms of existence: transition 
periods and stagnation. So we have known quite well for a long 
time: If the leadership has been defined--there will soon be 
stagnation; if they have started speaking about a transition 
period--a redistribution of power is in progress. 
<H5>  Cheap Legislation </H5>
  With one of his October edicts the president defined the 
foundations for the organization of state power in the Russian 
regions: The administration manages and gives orders; the 
representative assembly legislates and oversees the 
implementation of laws, execution of the budget, and the 
disposal of state property. The only unusual norm was the 
restriction of the number of personnel of the regional 
legislative assembly--no more than 50 deputies. In general the 
Constitution establishes that components of the Russian 
Federation shall determine the system of their state organs 
independently in keeping with the fundamentals of the 
constitutional system and general principles for the 
organization of representative and executive organs of state 
power established by federal laws. The establishment of these 
general principles by presidential edicts is not envisioned by 
the Constitution and, moreover, there is no way you can call the 
number of positions in regional representative assemblies a 
general principle. In spite of this, the next edict for organs 
of state power in the regions, which came out on 22 
December--that is, under the existing Constitution--after 
limiting the overall number of representative assemblies, also 
limited the number of deputies working on a paid staff 
basis--this number must not exceed two-fifths of the overall 
number of elected deputies. Here the edicts contradicted not 
only the Constitution but also themselves. Because here is what 
we have: First it was established that the representative organ 
(note, organ, that is, assembly and not any group of deputies) 
performs its activity on a permanent basis, but in the next 
paragraph it is written that no more than two-fifths of the 
personnel of the assembly shall work on a staff basis! 
  Behind this absurdity lies something of quite distinct and 
great interest. Thus managers of enterprises and officials of 
administrative organs have been given an opportunity to 
legislate while holding more than one position. This is why the 
prohibition on combining the deputy status with a state position 
and entrepreneurial activity in all regional normative documents 
extends only to representatives working on a staff basis. As 
though the problem is not one of monopolization of power and 
unrestricted lobbying but simply of allowing people to draw 
wages from two positions! We must also keep in mind that the 
number of representatives professionally engaged in legislative 
work is being limited precisely at a time when the new 
representative organs for the first time in Russian history will 
have to create legislation of the krays and oblasts and reform 
their system of state power and local self-government. And it is 
obvious that this work cannot be performed on a public basis 
during short visits. Though this work will actually be taken on 
by the staff, and the legislators who are combining jobs, 
instead of professional legislative and supervisory activity, 
will concentrate on solving their own production and personal 
problems and lobbying for particular interests. Who said there 
was uncivilized lobbying in Russia? On the contrary, ours is 
organized by the state. 
  As we know, the "party in power" had a shattering victory in 
the local elections. Apparently we cannot expect the new 
legislative assemblies, the majority of which are 
representatives of the director-chairman corps and subordinate 
to the head of the regional administration of bureaucrats, to 
establish civilized principles and restrictions on professional 
representative activity. Of course, such principles could be 
legislatively established by the State Duma, but our all-Russian 
legislators, it seems, are completely absorbed by the Yugoslav 
crisis. 
<H5>  A Mixture of the General-Governor System and the Presidency </H5>
  The nomenklatura is the nomenklatura, but any representative 
(and also legislative) assembly is for the staff a source of 
uneasiness, inconvenience, and irritation. Because just as soon 
as they have determined who has all the power--it begins all 
over again...in this situation how can one resist the temptation 
to prolong the transition period, to drag out the stages of 
"constitutional reform." Or, before the transition period has 
ended, manage to adopt the most permanent Law, Regulation, 
Constitution that there is. To write a correct and convenient 
Regulation and ask the people to approve it. This is what they 
have done in many krays and oblasts--they have scheduled 
simultaneously with elections to legislative assemblies 
referendums on the adoption of regulations written in the 
staffs. One thing is bad: According to the Russian Constitution 
a representative assembly must adopt the Constitution and 
regulations of a component of the Russian Federation. The 
president abolished the regional referendums at the last moment. 
How well this was thought out and prepared for! 
  For example, the draft of the regulations of Vologda Oblast 
stipulates that the authority of the owner of oblast property is 
exercised by the executive power, but there is a discrete 
silence about overseeing the disposal of oblast property by the 
representative assembly, so that the staff establishes and uses 
nonbudget funds without any oversight. The duty of being the 
collective administrative property owner is assigned to the 
governor--the highest official of the oblast. This individual is 
elected by the population for four years. The present chief of 
the oblast administration, N. Podgornov, becomes governor 
automatically, without elections--this was stipulated, but 
nothing was said about when the gubernatorial elections would 
take place. The president appointed N. Podgornov as chief of the 
administration, but the regulations say nothing about whether or 
not the president may remove Governor N. Podgornov, whom nobody 
elected as governor. In general the draft is extremely brief, 
wherein lies its genius. Of course, in the oblast Duma there 
will certainly be people willing to add something, but this too 
has been envisioned: There is a special decree prohibiting the 
Duma from revising articles of the regulation that pertain to 
the authority of the owner of oblast property and the 
organization of power. 
  The draft of the regulations of Saratov Oblast, unlike 
Vologda's, cannot be called laconic--it contains a detailed list 
of subjects, objects, and concerns of the oblast administration. 
In order to avoid seeming insufficient it lists the authority of 
the oblast power with respect to the objects of federal and 
municipal property. Is there really any need to say anything 
about the fact that all the authority of the property owner 
belongs to the staff? The only mention of a representative 
assembly amounts to saying that this assembly exists. Why it 
exists, true, is completely incomprehensible--the staff itself 
establishes the oblast taxes, it establishes its own budget and 
report on its execution, and it adopts legal normative acts 
itself. In general, it is clear who is the master of the oblast. 
But what a master! Read this with envy: "The citizens shall 
utilize natural objects free of charge (forests, rivers, lakes, 
roads, and other natural objects)..." This is not some kind of 
land owner who will not let you swim in his stream--it is 
written: "free of charge"! In addition to the fact that the 
staff protects the population from the market, it patronizes the 
arts and sciences, "establishes plan-programs for public 
education," supports a "healthy way of life" and "kinds of 
sports that are traditional in the oblast." Since only a lunatic 
would reject regulations like these, in Article 106 "the effect 
of the regulations in time and in terms of individuals" 
stipulates that its norms "are in effect without restriction in 
time" and apply to citizens residing in the oblast and 
"transiting through it." Other oblasts have things to be proud 
of, but they are a long ways away from the Saratov draft--this 
monument will probably go down in the history of Russian 
bureaucratic thought. I would suggest that they publish it as an 
appendix to Shchedrin's "History of One City." 
<H5>  Local Self-Government: Reform or Counterreform? </H5>
  A typical feature of the present "transition period" is the 
re-bureaucratization of local self-government. From the 
president's edicts "On Reform of Local Self-Government in the 
Russian Federation" of 26 October 1993 and "On Guarantees of 
Local Self-Government in the Russian Federation" of 22 December 
1993 it follows that the current administration chiefs will 
become the chiefs of local self-government--they convene and 
lead the work of the representative organ, sign its resolutions, 
and even unilaterally give consent to fire a deputy from his 
job. Moreover, it is stipulated that not only the chiefs but 
also other officials of the local administration may be members 
of the corresponding representative organ. The representative 
organ itself is given a minimum of authority: to adopt the local 
regulations (but the administration chief has the right, 
bypassing the assembly, to place the draft regulations on a 
local referendum); to approve a program for development; at the 
suggestion of the chief, to establish local taxes, and approve 
the budget and then the report on its execution. Thus the 
representative organ is completely without rights--it is 
convened by the chief of the administration to document his 
decisions and it consists of individuals who are independent of 
him but at the same time directly subordinate to him. Thus there 
can be no real supervision of the administration--the chiefs of 
the local administrations, having concentrated the local power 
in their hands, are not responsible either to the population or 
to its representatives. 
  It is not surprising that the possibility contained in the 
president's edicts of not electing but appointing heads of 
administrations, in the majority of regional normative acts, has 
been turned into an unequivocal norm concerning the appointment 
of local chiefs by the higher chief of local 
self-administration, and in the rayons and cities--by the chief 
of the state power of the component of the Russian Federation. 
The Ulyanov and Saratov governors even want to appoint the 
chiefs of the rayon administrations in the oblast centers. It is 
understandable that the restoration of the administrative 
vertical under conditions of conflicts over division of property 
and taxes will lead to a blocking of the separation of local 
self-government from regional administrative systems which has 
just begun and to the "punishment" of excessively independent 
local leaders--most frequently the mayors of cities. The crises 
of power in Vladivostok and Nizhniy Novgorod are only the most 
blatant of a number of similar conflicts. 
  In many regions it is being proposed to form representative 
assemblies in the rayon or rural soviet from the appointed rural 
and village chiefs of local self-government--this is not a 
representative organ but an administrative collegium under the 
chief of the administration. They were not satisfied with this 
in Ulyanovsk Oblast and established that, in addition, all the 
assemblies of representatives would include, without any 
elections to these positions, not only the chiefs of the 
corresponding administrations, but also their deputies. Vologda 
Oblast has been left with only two elective organs of local 
self-government--city dumas in Vologda and Cherepovets, and 
local self-government has been abolished in the ancient Russian 
cities of Totma, Belozersk, Velikiy Ustyug, Kirillov, and 
Ustyuzhna. 
  An analysis of the normative documents and their drafts in 
the components of the Russian Federation makes it possible to 
single out three groups of regions: 1) regions in which they 
limit themselves to reproducing provisions of presidential 
edicts; 2) regions where the re-bureaucratization of local 
self-government is proceeding on a broader scale (leading in 
this movement are Vologda, Volgograd, Saratov, and Ulyanovsk 
Oblasts); 3) a group of regions (Karelia, Khakassia, Krasnoyarsk 
Kray, and Belgorod, Kursk, Nizhniy Novgorod, Omsk, and Tambov 
Oblast) where attempts to create a civilized local 
self-government have not yet been abandoned. 
  It should be kept in mind that the most powerful, 
independent, and skilled forces of local self-government are 
concentrated in the cities and their alliances, but it is 
precisely the activists of city local self-government who have 
now ended up in an extremely difficult position. On the one 
hand, the provincial authorities are trying to take the cities 
back into their own complete control and overthrow their 
self-administration and, on the other, the populations of the 
cities themselves have essentially boycotted elections, as a 
result of which many Russian cities have been left, in the first 
place, without representative organs of self-government and, in 
the second place, underrepresented (and in some places not 
represented at all) in regional legislative assemblies. Unless 
immediate measures are adopted for legal and economic support, 
local self-government in Russia will soon cease to exist as an 
independent institution. Of course, we are more used to going 
without self-government. But here is the problem--we no longer 
respect or fear our leaders. If we do not want to elect our 
leaders and thus take responsibility for our choice--who can we 
blame? In turn, the lack of participation of the population in 
the exercise of local power and the placing of all 
responsibility on chiefs appointed "from above" exacerbates the 
sociopsychological and political alienation. This growing 
alienation, this fundamental lack of civic pride in our society, 
is our main social danger. 

