BFN 

<F P=106> [Report signed GGD: "Russia Joins Partnership for Peace"] </F>
  [Excerpts] Brussels (NATO), 22 Jun (BELGA) -- After months 
of hesitation, Russia joined the Partnership for Peace on 
Wednesday [22 June], thus opening the way for closer cooperation 
with NATO and more frequent consultation between Moscow and the 
Atlantic Alliance. In addition, it did not rule out the 
possible enlargement of the organization to include new members 
from East Europe. [passage omitted] 
  "Fifty-three years ago (22 June 1941), Nazi Germany attacked 
the Soviet Union, and this war cost Russia and the other states 
a heavy toll in human lifes," said [Russian Foreign Minister] 
Kozyrev at a news conference. Maintaining good relations 
between Moscow and other countries "constitutes the best 
guarantee for us that such a thing will not happen again," he 
said. 
  He also said that he was "convinced" that, by opening this 
new chapter in their relations, the Russian Federation and NATO 
would contribute to the building of a "more stable and more 
secure Europe." 
  "We want to create a Europe that is not only free of war, 
but 
also free of fear. We must not repeat Europe's past mistakes. 
The security of some cannot be ensured thanks to the insecurity 
of others," stated Sergio Balanzino, NATO deputy secretary 
general. 
  "NATO's enlargement, when it happens, will not mean 
isolating 
Russia or establishing new divisions or borders, nor will it 
move us away from a united Europe. It must be viewed as a 
contribution to stability in the new European-Atlantic order," 
Mr. Balanzino added. 
  When asked by the press, on several occasions, about NATO's 
enlargement to include East European countries, Kozyrev evaded 
the question by saying that his country had excellent relations 
with Poland, which wants to become a full member of NATO. A 
short time later, during a joint news conference with his 
American counterpart, Warren Christopher, the Russian foreign 
minister did not rule out Russia or other countries one day 
becoming full members of NATO, although he did say that the 
matter should not be rushed. 
  So far Russia has opposed the admission of some of its 
former 
satellite countries into NATO, something which NATO approved in 
January. 

