Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Guatemala City, 1 Mar (DPA) -- It was officially 
reported today that the Guatemalan Foreign Ministry will send a 
formal note to UN Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali 
expressing Guatemala's interest in solving the 100-year-old 
territorial dispute with Belize through negotiations or 
international legal procedures. 
  Guatemalan Foreign Minister Gladys Marithza Ruiz de Vielman 
said that "in order to safeguard Guatemala's rights regarding 
Belize," the Ministry decided to send the note to the UN 
secretary general, "with the appropriate reservations regarding 
the territorial sea, the exclusive economic zone, and 
continental shelf, so that it can be circulated as an official 
document of the United Nations." 
  The government of Guatemalan President Ramiro de Leon Carpio 
maintains claims over the territory of Belize (23,000 square 
km), which Great Britain unilaterally granted independence on 21 
September 1981. Jorge Serrano Elias, the previous president who 
was ousted on 1 June 1993, recognized Belize and established 
diplomatic relations. Various Guatemalan sectors, including 
Human Rights Ombudsman Jorge Mario Garcia Laguardia, have said 
this was unconstitutional. 
  Moreover, because the border between the two countries has 
not been well defined, some incidents have occurred. The 
Guatemalan Foreign Ministry reported that the Belizean 
Government has affirmed that a group of Guatemalans allegedly 
settled in Belizean territory. This is being investigated by the 
Guatemalan Government. 
  Human Rights Ombudsman Garcia Laguardia has asked for the 
immediate intervention of the Guatemalan Army to protect 
Guatemalan territory, after he personally learned of the threats 
that Belizean soldiers have issued against 35 families in the 
town of Rio Hondo in northern Peten Department, on the border 
with Belize. The ombudsman met with local peasants who provided 
details of the threats. Garcia Laguardia called for strict 
control and surveillance of the border area by the Army to 
guarantee the rights of the Guatemalans. 

