BFN 

  [Text] Tripoli, 8 Jun (JANA) -- JANA's local affairs editor 
condemned the frantic attack launched by some British newspapers 
against Mrs. Queenie Fletcher, the mother of the English 
policewoman who was killed in London in 1984, as a result of the 
statements which she made during her visit to the Great 
Jamahiriyah a few days ago. 
  Mrs. Fletcher said [words indistinct] her visit to Libya 
gave 
her the opportunity to see the effect of the sanctions and the 
unjustified harm they caused to the Great Jamahiriyah. 
  She added: "I would like to say that I do not wish the death 
of my daughter to be exploited in order to impose sanctions on 
the Libyan people." 
  She expressed her wish that political relations between the 
Great Jamahiriyah and Britain should be restored to their 
previous state and that there would be no problems between the 
two countries. 
  The editor stressed that the British press campaign [words 
indistinct] the statements of Mrs. Fletcher and her initiative 
in visiting the Great Jamahiriyah could only be interpreted as 
official British sensitivity to any sincere attempt to get at 
the truth, or even fear that the truth, which is far removed 
from the falsification of facts to serve premeditated political 
ends, will be reached. 
  Otherwise why should Mrs. Fletcher's statement that she did 
not want her daughter's death to be exploited for the purpose of 
imposing sanctions on the Libyan people be received with this 
British media commotion? The British press's rejection of this 
statement implies direct support for the exploitation of the 
death of Mrs. Fletcher's daughter to achieve political aims, 
namely support for what the British Government has done in this 
regard. 
  The editor asks how the wishes of British citizens that 
their 
country's relations with other states should be free from 
problems can be turned into a crime, in the eyes of the British 
press, for which British citizens are held accountable and as a 
result of which they have pressure put on them to modify their 
position. 
  A press which adopts the policy of falsifying the facts and 
twisting the truth in order to serve political aims and cause 
harm to people is a press which speaks in the name of the devil 
and which works for the dominance of evil and hatred in the 
world. 

