BFN 

  [Text] Vienna, May 20 (AFP) -- North Korea has begun 
extracting fuel rods from its Yongbyon reactor in a "serious 
violation" of International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA] 
inspection teams that will be reported to the UN Security 
Council, the IAEA said late Thursday [19 May]. 
  The removal of the rods, if not halted immediately, could 
wreck the IAEA's attempts to see if fuel had already been taken 
from the reactor, the IAEA said in a strong statement. 
  Washington wants the IAEA to check whether North Korea has 
been hiving off weapons-grade plutonium to make a nuclear bomb. 
  But the IAEA said: "As of today, it still seems possible to 
implement the required safety measures." 
  But it warned: "Should (North Korea) continue the discharge 
operation without these measures, it would result in irreparable 
loss of the Agency's ability to verify whether all nuclear 
material subject to safeguards in (North Korea) is in fact under 
safeguards and that no such material has been diverted." 
  The IAEA said it had sent a telex to North Korea on Thursday 
to complain that the discharge of fuel rods "constitutes a 
serious violation of the safeguards agreement" for monitoring 
nuclear facilities. 
  The statement said IAEA inspectors on site had "confirmed 
that core discharge has indeed started." 
  "The Agency has concluded that further discharge of fuel 
rods 
would jeopardise the possibility of the Agency applying 
safeguards measures necessry to verify whether any fuel has been 
diverted in the past." 
  The statement said the IAEA would report the violation to 
the 
United Nations Security Council. 
  "The Agency has asked (North Korea) to make arrangements 
promptly for the requisite safeguards measures and has urged 
that until these are in place, further discharge be deferred." 
  It said it wanted to send an IAEA team to the site 
immediately to discuss implementing the checks. 
  In Washington, President Bill Clinton said this week: "I 
think it would be an error for North Korea to continue to thwart 
these inspections after they have agreed to comply with them." 
  U.S. Defense Secretary, William Perry, said Wednesday that 
the United States faced "a very substantial near-term crisis" 
with North Korea. 
  The fuel rods in the reactor contains enough plutonium for 
four or five nuclear bombs, the Pentagon said. 
  North Korea has denied that it has a nuclear weapons program 
but has balked at international inspections. 
  The Central Intelligence Agency has estimated that North 
Korea withdrew enough plutonium in the late 1980s to make at 
least one nuclear device and that there is a more than 50 
percent chance it actually did so. 
  North Korea's continued refusal to abide by the IAEA's 
non-proliferation rules has led to international threats of UN 
sanctions, which in turn prompted war threats from Pyongyang. 
  North Korean President Kim Il-Sung, in his latest warning, 
said that North Korea would not bow to international pressure 
over its nuclear ambitions, saying that "pressure can never be a 
solution to the problem," according to the Korean Central News 
Agency (KCNA). 
  "If the United States continues to clamour to put pressure 
on 
our republic, we will be compelled to take due measures of 
self-defence to safeguard the dignity of our nation and the 
sovereignty of our country," added the leader of the Stalinist 
state. 

