Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest ROMPRES, 11/2/1994 -- The treaty of 
friendship and collaboration between Romania and Croatia will be 
signed during the Romanian visit by President Franjo Tudjman, 
scheduled on February 14-16. The visit will be "a fine 
opportunity to survey the bilateral relations that have marked 
tangible progress after President Iliescu's visit in Zagreb last 
year," said presidential spokesman Traian Chebeleu during a news 
conference on February 11. 
  Apart from the exchange of views on the Yugoslav crisis, the 
visit will also occasion the signing of an agreement on road 
transport and a protocol of collaboration in science and 
technology. 
  The schedule of the visit includes official talks between 
the 
two presidents, a dinner for the guest, a trip to Sinaia 
mountain resort, talks with Premier Nicolae Vacaroiu and the 
president and speaker of the parliament's two chambers. A last 
round of talks and the signing of the official documents are 
scheduled on February 16. 
  Ambassador Traian Chebeleu referred in his weekly news 
conference on February 11 also to various aspects of foreign 
policy including: the recent reference in Washington to a 
certain government coalition in Romania that would entail the 
withdrawal of the most favoured nation [MFN] status. "The MFN 
status," Chebeleu said, "was granted in certain conditions and I 
do not think any government, even the American one, could afford 
to condition the relations with Romania on a certain government 
coalition. Anyway, we care about the stands and give them due 
consideration, but we do not take them as belonging to the 
American Administration." 
  The presidential spokesman opined that the recent NATO 
decision on the Yugoslav crisis "has first of all the character 
of political pressure pursuing the continuation of the 
negotiations and then a humanitarian nature, being meant to help 
avoiding new attacks on the civil population." The NATO 
decision is "well-balanced and equidistant." It is not an 
ultimatum as such, Chebeleu said, but "a measure apt to favour 
the political process of settlement of the crisis." Romania 
shows "a certain reluctance as regards the use of force" and 
sustains in every way a peaceful settlement, Traian Chebeleu 
mentioned. 

