BFN 

    [Editorial report] Amman Jordan Television Network in 
Arabic at 1840 GMT on 6 June carried the 60-minute weekly 
program "Topical Issues" moderated by Jarir Maraqah. The 
program, which this week deals with the Middle East peace 
process and Jordan's stand vis-a-vis this process, hosts 
Jordanian Information Minister Dr. Jawad al-'Anani and 
journalist Salamah Ni'mat. 
  The program moderator begins by reviewing the peace process 
in light of the statements made by King Husayn after chairing 
the cabinet session on 4 June. Analyzing the new developments 
in the peace process, al-'Anani reviews the peace talks on the 
Arab-Israeli tracks saying that the peace process is continuous 
and changeable. He then says: "The Jordanian position basically 
derives its strength from a united Arab position on the external 
level and from its domestic impregnability on the internal 
front. We have our own circumstances, our own geography, and 
our own demography which are known by all. Therefore, those who 
fabricate rumors against Jordan or those who attempt to shake 
the Jordanian negotiating stand are in fact encroaching on 
Jordan's dignity in terms of demography and geography." He adds 
that Jordan intervened in light of the developments in the peace 
process "to guarantee Jordan's borders and geography." He says: 
"Therefore, border demarcation has become, for Jordan, a 
process that would avert the basic threat coming from Israel or 
from its attempts to tamper with this matter. Also, we should 
safeguard the demographic structure in Jordan. His majesty the 
king has always stressed that we are one people who have equal 
rights and duties." 
  Journalist Salamah Ni'mat speaks about weak Arab 
coordination 
and deviation of the peace process from the Madrid framework, 
saying that the PLO is interested in reaching an agreement that 
serves its strategic interests which might be different from 
Jordan's. He says that Jordan cannot wait until settlements are 
reached between Israel and the other Arab sides. 
  Turning to the agenda signed by Jordan and Israel, al-'Anani 
reviews the formation of the tripartite economic committee which 
will meet in Washington on 6 June, adding that "unofficial 
talks" will cover the issues of water and borders. He adds that 
Israel claimed that the Jordanian side delayed the talks because 
it insisted on not discussing the other issues, such as economic 
issues, before settling the issues of border and water, saying 
that these are basic Jordanian rights that must be addressed. 
He says that Jordan has always tried to convince the United 
States that Jordan does not want to obstruct the peace process, 
but wants to achieve specific things. He says: "If the Israeli 
side shows enough flexibility in Washington -- something which 
we will know soon -- and there is a need to form committees to 
discuss the border and water issues on the ground it will be 
useless to waste the opportunity by not forming technical 
committees here on the ground -- that is, in the region." 
  Asked if Jordan will resume talks on the Jordanian-Israeli 
track in Washington within the resumption of all talks or will 
agree on a new mechanism for implementation, al-'Anani says: 
"It is unfair to address this question to Jordan alone. The 
Madrid equation does not concern Jordan alone; it concerns all 
Arab tracks. If the Arab countries continue with the current 
method of negotiations, would Jordan return to Washington alone?" 
  Asked if Jordan is ready to host the meetings of 
Jordanian-Israeli committees, al-'Anani says: "If this comes 
within the framework of returning Jordanian territory and water, 
the answer is yes. A team should be present on this side and 
the other side. They should meet at the geographical site which 
should be defined, not in any other place." 
  Journalist Ni'mat then speaks about the Arab-Israeli 
normalization process and requirements of the peace process. He 
says that the majority of people does not attach great 
importance if talks with the Israelis are moved to Jordan. The 
information minister says that Jordan is prepared technically to 
hold direct talks on the issue of borders here on the ground. 
  The information minister then touches on future 
Jordanian-Palestinian relations and the importance of 
concentrating on priorities. He says that Jordan seeks to 
establish relations based on common interests. Ni'mat then 
reviews Palestinian-Israeli agreements and their impact on 
Jordanian-Palestinian relations. 
  Al-'Anani then speaks about the importance of stability and 
security to achieve and maintain peace. 

