Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Skalsky: "Slovaks on the Opposite Bank </F>
of the Morava River"] 
  [Text] According to the 1991 census, virtually 315,000 
Slovaks are living in the Czech Republic, which represents more 
than 3 percent of the total number of inhabitants. On 1 January 
1993, these people awoke to a special morning. They were 
compelled to choose one of various possibilities: to become a 
foreigner where they have lived for years and where they do not 
feel like foreigners or to apply for Czech citizenship and then 
travel to visit their parents as foreigners. Problems involving 
health and social insurance, social security insurance, very 
limited possibilities to engage in business, the loss of the 
right to participate in coupon privatization, the inability to 
exchange Czech currency within the Czech Republic for Slovak 
currency before undertaking a journey, and, mostly, the constant 
feeling of insecurity--these were the pressures under which 
local Slovaks had to make decisions and continue to make 
decisions. Moreover, many are determined to keep their Slovak 
citizenship. But not even the second of the possible decisions 
means that they would not espouse Slovakia or forget about their 
roots. 
  For many years, Prague has had the House of Slovak Culture 
(DSK) and the affiliated club. The Club of Slovak Culture (KSK) 
unites those who favor Slovak culture in Prague and its 
environs. The club has more than 2,000 members, more than half 
of whom are Czechs. No matter how meritorious the activities of 
this association were and are, in the cultural field its aims 
fell far short of satisfying all the needs of the local Slovaks. 
  And so, at the end of 1992 and the beginning of 1993, 
several 
additional Slovak activities came into being. The first to 
develop was the Community of Slovaks (OS), an apolitical 
association that was established as early as October 1992, at 
first in Prague, and, subsequently, following lively interest in 
other regions, it expanded its activities over all of the 
territory of the Czech Republic. Its first congress, which took 
place not quite two months following the division of the CSFR, 
was attended by more than 200 delegates. Today, there are 
already four regional OS organizations in Prague, Brno, Karlovy 
Vary, and Kladno. At Karvina, the organization wants to join the 
Community Association of Parents and Friends of the local Slovak 
basic school--the only one of its kind in the Czech Republic. 
Preparatory committees are also at work and in Tabor or Benesov. 
Today, the Community of Slovaks has about 400 members, and the 
number of sympathizers is approximately 2,000. Its activities 
are coordinated by a three-year presidium, headed by the 
journalist Nada Vokusova. 
  Significant popularity was also shown, primarily in the 
Czech-language press, to two other organizations: the Democratic 
Alliance of Slovaks (DAS) of director Fera Fenic and the 
Association of Slovaks (ZS) of the former delegate to the 
Federal Assembly, Jan Mlynarik. Both have several common 
features: According to their leading representatives, they plan 
to transform themselves into rightist political parties, the 
listed numbers of their members did not exceed 20, and they 
engage in no activities outside the city of Prague. However, 
publicity is provided by contacts in Czech journalist and 
political circles on the one hand, as well as being a result of 
their expressly anti-Slovak attitude. In addition, there exist 
several other Slovak activities, which are, however, already 
specifically focused--an example can be the Historical Group of 
Participants in the Slovak National Uprising or the Slovak 
Evangelical Church in the Czech Republic. The Slovak minority is 
officially represented by three Slovak members of the Council 
for Nationalities at the level of the Czech Government--one each 
from OS, the KSK, and DAS. 
  In May 1993, the Community of Slovaks began to publish the 
first Slovak periodical in the Czech Republic, with the title of 
DZAVOT. Seven issues appeared of this 12-page monthly. Its title 
was intended to symbolize that the Slovak minority in the Czech 
Republic is still learning to act from this position it holds, 
that it still must get accustomed to formulating its positions 
and needs clearly. Because the creators of this periodical 
judged that the Czech Slovaks have already overcome this period, 
the periodical will change its appearance and title in 1994: The 
colored cover, including 24 pages, will bear the title KORENE 
[ROOTS]. 
  The Government of the Czech Republic was reluctant to 
subsidize the periodical DZAVOT, as is customary with all local 
minority periodicals. The Matica Slovak cultural organization 
and other Slovak institutions helped out. The situation suddenly 
changed when DAS came up with the project for a monthly 
SLOVENSKE LISTY. SLOVENSKE LISTY received 1.2 million (to 
finance three issues!), and even DZAVOT came in for some 
crumbs--378,000. For 1994, to formally finance virtually 
identical projects, approval has been received for 2 million or 
rather 800,000 korunas. SLOVENSKE LISTY has profiled itself 
unequivocally as a political periodical that does not deal with 
problems experienced by Slovaks in the Czech Republic, and these 
people do not even contribute articles to it. From among the 
authors of the periodical, it is sufficient to identify only 
Ivan Miklos, Fedor Gal, Milan Zitny, and Miroslav Kusy. And so, 
the Czech Government, under the pretext of supporting minority 
publications, is financing an opposition Slovak political 
periodical. Such a destruction of bridges over the Morava River 
is not in the interest of those whom the DAS allegedly desires 
to represent. 
  The Community of Slovaks has been successful in initiating 
even a Slovak-language broadcast over Czech Radio--a 10-minute 
news broadcast each day plus a one-hour program once a week. 
However, Slovak activities have only a minimal opportunity to 
influence the content of this broadcast. The Community of 
Slovaks has protested this several times, but, for the present, 
without results. 
  With the end of 1993, the House of Slovak Culture, which has 
provided occasional asylum for all of the above-mentioned 
associations, as well as sponsoring their joint meetings, under 
the slogan of "Forums of Slovak Activities," was supposed to 
close down. Although the embassy is supposed to establish a 
Slovak cultural and information center in the same building, 
this will take some time. So the largest minority in the Czech 
Republic and the third-largest community of Slovaks abroad 
anywhere (following Canada and the United States) finds itself 
in an extremely unenviable situation. But I believe that the 
Slovaks on the opposite banks of the Morava River have already 
definitely decided what to do--they will not capitulate. 

