BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Berlusconi, Partners Meet on </F>
Ministerial Hurdle"] 
  [Text] (ANSA) Rome, April 29 -- Premier-designate and Forza 
Italia leader Silvio Berlusconi this afternoon began meeting 
with his two main government partners aimed at clearing the last 
major hurdle to the formation of the new right-wing government: 
ministerial appointments. 
  Going into the meeting, Berlusconi said that the names "will 
not be based on a share-out" with his partners in the League and 
the neofascist National Alliance. "The most able people will be 
chosen, otherwise what change will there be? There is no 
disagreement on the programme and that is very important," he 
said, expressing "optimism" that the League would show "good 
sense." 
  Northern League leader Umberto Bossi expressed confidence of 
claiming the Interior Ministry, for which the League has been 
long pressing. He said the meeting would also examine points in 
the programme. 
  National Alliance leader Gianfranco Fini reiterated that his 
party will allow Berlusconi to have a free hand in the naming of 
ministers, as laid down in Article 92 of the Constitution, but 
said the three forces have a lot of talking to do on the 
programme, where he will be pressing to keep social welfare 
provisions in place and for solidarity between the rich north 
and the poorer south. "When we are agreed on the programme I 
will give Berlusconi the National Alliance names I think can do 
a ministerial job," he said. 
  He said Bossi's "slapping vetos and claiming strategic 
ministries" harked back to the days when ministers were 
appointed on the basis of party strength, adding that "all the 
forces in the coalition have the same dignity." 
  He accused the opponents of the right of trying to "raise a 
political dust-storm" out of a National Alliance request to 
revise the 1975 Osimo Treaty on border relations with the former 
Yugoslavia ("which will not immediately enter the government's 
programmes"), despite the fact that they were "well aware that 
the revision of a treaty can only take place via diplomatic, 
bilateral channels." He described the alarms about National 
Alliance in government aired in France, Greece and Belgium as 
propaganda by "left-wing activists" in the run-up to the 
European elections. 
  He voiced the hope that Italy's broadcasting law will be 
changed by the incoming parliament without the need for a 
referendum -- for which signatures are now being collected -- 
and said the right was ready to take to the streets like the 
left, "in democratic and civilised" fashion, in defence of its 
positions. 
  A leader of Berlusconi's other smaller partners, the 
Christian Democratic Centre, expressed "complete faith" in 
Berlusconi and called on all the components of the coalition to 
demonstrate a break with the past and put away "vetoes and 
trials of strength." He noted with satisfaction that one of the 
premier-designate's first moves, creating a Ministry for the 
Family, "shows he will carry forward those Catholic values that 
are dear to us." 
  Separately, Northern League veteran Luigi Rossi said 
Berlusconi's remark, "I'm the one who names the ministers," 
amplified in a newspaper headline this morning, "smacked of 
(Fascist dictator Benito) Mussolini." 
  Earlier, asked if he would sign a referendum on repealing 
Italy's broadcasting law that allowed him to keep hold of 
roughly half of national TV, Berlusconi said "as a broadcaster I 
would sign it immediately...but as premier I have to reflect." 
  The large opposition Democratic Party of the Left criticised 
Berlusconi's naming of the committee of "three wise men" -- 
Antonio La Pergola, Giorgio Crisci, Agostino Gambino -- to sort 
out his conflict of interest problem. It said the move was 
"lacking in substance" and put off a solution that might have 
been expected to come from Berlusconi himself "clearly 
separating himself from his private interests" upon his 
reception of the government-formation mandate. 
  The organ of the small Republican Party took the same line, 
asking for a "clear response" on what is to be done while the 
three legal experts are drawing up their formula. 
  But Berlusconi's partner Fini expressed "great satisfaction" 
in the three experts, describing them as "men of the utmost 
morality and great quality." 
  Earlier, Berlusconi enjoyed a cordial meeting with Rome's 
Progressive mayor, Francesco Rutelli, assuring him the 
government would have "a special regard" for the capital. 
  In other political events today, the last premier, Carlo 
Azeglio Ciampi, 73, reversed speculation that he would continue 
in politics and claimed his government had marked a break with 
the past by keeping party politics out of the day-to-day running 
of the country. 
  Former electoral reform hero Mario Segni accused the four 
MP's who left his tiny Pact for Italy yesterday to form a group 
closer to Forza Italia of "betraying the voters." 

