BFN 

<F P=106> [By Andrew Laxton] </F>
  [Text] Security at Kai Tak is open to abuse by terrorists 
and below standard for one of the world's busiest airports, 
claims a former chairman of Hong Kong's Security Association. 
  This month a man was able to slip through the airport and on 
to an empty Cathay Pacific jet unchallenged. When discovered, 
he was arrested and held by police. But just hours later, after 
being released, he returned to Kai Tak for a repeat performance. 
Airport police have played down the incident, describing it as 
``minor,'' but the chief executive of Hong Kong's biggest 
security company has expressed doubts over security. 
  ``Basic and cost-effective measures like passenger profiling 
and checking that boarding passes belong to the passport holder 
are non-existent,'' said Ted Devereux of Guardforce Ltd. ``This 
man has shown how easy it is to skip security at the airport. 
How easy would it be for a terrorist? I am sure the airport is 
well-equipped to deal with a terrorist attack but I am not 
confident it is good enough to prevent one, and that is what 
counts,'' he said. ``The security monopoly at Kai Tak needs to 
be defranchised. Competition would mean levels of security 
being raised in order to stay in business. With the runup to 
1997, how many people will try to leave Hong Kong illegally? If 
the situation continues, we will never know because security at 
the airport is not made accountable.'' 
  Mr. Devereux said Kai Tak should undertake a similar method 
used at all British airports on the instructions of the 
Department of Transport. They lay down a series of basic 
security steps which apparently work. When checking in, 
passengers are asked if they packed their case and whether they 
have left it unattended. Mr. Devereux said: ``While this is 
going on, your reactions are being watched and because scanning 
machines are not 100 percent reliable, you can often get a 
better idea of what is really inside the suitcase. This is 
called passenger screening and is devised to check whether a 
person is a bona fide traveller.'' During the recent incident 
at Kai Tak, the man was able to walk unchallenged through the 
airport, immigration booths, passenger screening, on to a 
shuttle bus and then an empty plane twice in one day. 
  ``For people to say we do not need to upgrade security is 
ridiculous,'' Mr. Devereux said. He also criticised the amount 
of machinery used at Kai Tak. While it was good equipment, he 
said, it needed regular calibration to keep it in working order. 
``But even this equipment is not 100 percent reliable so a lot 
of the detecting relies heavily on the skills of the operator,'' 
Mr. Devereux said. ``But the airport has a high turnover of 
staff within this area so there is no stability and you are 
constantly retraining people which takes time. Having all that 
expensive equipment down there is all very well and good but it 
did not stop this man getting through.'' 
  He added: ``Kai Tak is open to abuse by terrorists. This man 
has proved it twice in one day. Nobody really knows what is 
going on at the airport and that is why I feel security should 
be made accountable. We are talking about people's lives.'' 
  But a spokesman for the Security Branch said existing 
security arrangements at Kai Tak were satisfactory. ``All our 
passengers go through metal detectors and their hand luggage is 
scanned as well,'' the spokesman said. ``Because of the high 
number of people coming through Kai Tak, we are 100 percent 
satisfied with our system and consider this more effective than 
passenger profiling, which is a lengthy process. All our 
security procedures adhere to Annex 17 of the Chicago Convention 
on Airport Security. As regards to the so-called monopoly at 
the airport, any company can bid for the contract but they must 
match the very stringent standards required.'' 

