BFN 

  [Text] London, 24 Jun (AFP-NA) -- Having met with U.K. 
Government officials and politicians, a high-powered delegation 
of five Argentine deputies today concluded a five-day official 
visit to London at the invitation of the U.K. Government. 
  During a news conference, Jorge Matzkin, Justicialist 
(neo-Peronist) bloc leader in the Chamber of Deputies said: 
"This is the first time that an (Argentine) delegation has been 
officially invited" to London by the Foreign Office of the U.K. 
Government since the Malvinas War in 1982. 
  "The main objective of this visit was to improve relations 
with our counterparts, especially in the House of Commons. We 
talked about everything. We openly broached controversial 
issues like the Malvinas Islands and subjects of common 
interest," he pointed out. 
  The five deputies met with David Heathcoat-Amory, the 
secretary of state for Latin American affairs, on 20 June. 
During the meeting, Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd suddenly 
appeared to greet the visitors. 
  According to Florencio Acenolaza, chairman of the Foreign 
Relations and Worship Committee of the Chamber of Deputies, Hurd 
recalled his government's stance, saying that it wants "to 
respect the will of the inhabitants" of the Malvinas Islands. 
  The Argentine deputies mentioned that Argentina believes the 
conflict is not between the islanders and Argentina but rather 
between Argentina and the U.K. 
  Acenolaza said the delegation "aired all its grievances over 
the Malvinas Islands without restraint." They even voiced 
concern about issues including "the preservation of the 
environment and oil." 
  "There were no differences or gray areas," he said, 
insisting 
that the current trend is "very positive." He added that it 
constitutes "a new landmark" within a framework of "human rather 
than political relationships." 
  When inviting Kelpers to visit Argentina to establish 
"human, 
not political relations," Matzkin told them: You will like 
Argentina! 
  The lawmakers reported that they did not discuss the thorny 
issue of war crimes committed -- according to Buenos Aires -- by 
British soldiers or the possible request for the extradition of 
former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher on war crimes charges. 
  The other members of the Argentine delegation were Francisco 
Duranona, (UCeDe [Democratic Center Union] Lower House bloc 
leader); Javier Menenghini (Radical Civic Union Lower House bloc 
deputy leader); and Marco Micheli (Conservative Party Lower 
House bloc leader). 

