Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Netherlands Brigadier General Van </F>
Baal by Wio Joustra; place and date not given: "The United 
Nations Cannot Force a Solution"--first paragraph is VOLKSKRANT 
introduction] 
  [Text] Netherlands Brigadier General Van Baal leaves for 
Bosnia next week, where he will be under the direct command of 
UN commander Rose. In Kiseljak, he will be involved in 
diplomacy, bureaucracy and the constant threat of an escalation 
of violence which could also turn against UN soldiers. 
  [Van Baal] This function will be the first where I am 
involved in operations under war conditions. It is probably a 
situation which has always been the backdrop for my actions, my 
training, and my career as a soldier. 
  In this type of situation, however, I am now really in the 
right place. 
  Ad van Baal is a brigadier general. He is a gunner, 47 years 
old, who will become the new chief of staff of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Command in Kiseljak. In other words, he is 
second in command to the British Lieutenant General Sir Michael 
Rose, currently causing a furore in the international media. 
  This veteran of the Falklands, one of several highly admired 
by Margaret Thatcher, with his typical British stiff upper lip, 
seems slowly but surely to be taking control of ravaged Sarajevo 
on behalf of the international community. He is stationing blue 
helmets at strategic points in the capital to show that the 
United Nations is serious about monitoring and controlling 
observance of the ultimatum which runs out early on Monday [21 
February] morning. 
  [Joustra] Is Rose a whiz kid? 
  [Van Baal] During my reconnaissance visit I was extremely 
impressed by him, particularly the clear vision he has of the 
function of UNPROFOR [United Nations Protection Force] in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and by the determination which he radiates. 
In addition, he is also a warm and captivating man. 
  [Joustra] He seems quite domineering. 
  [Van Baal] First, he is the commander. Second, I am the 
chief of staff and, generally speaking, sensible commanders use 
their staff. Period. You cannot simply go by what you see on 
the news. That is often the result of many hours of work. 
  Van Baal, who succeeds the British General Ramsey, leaves 
on Thursday of next week for 6 months in Kiseljak. He already 
has his reward. As from September, he will get a star going 
from one star to two. This week, Defense Minister Ter Beek 
appointed him deputy commanding officer of the land forces, as 
successor to major general Reitsma, who will head the 
German/Netherlands army for the first 3 years. 
  However, Van Baal is not yet thinking about this office job. 
A difficult task awaits him -- this weekend could well be 
crucial for the chances of a peaceful solution to the bloody 
conflict in Bosnia. In the days leading up to the expiration of 
the ultimatum, political pressure on the Serbs is being stepped 
up. 
  There is a real danger that bombings will take place and 
that 
there will then be retaliation against the blue helmets. 
Nevertheless, Van Baal is assuming that he will be going on 
Thursday. 
  [Van Baal] The ultimatum is very clear: Intervention could 
take place, and everyone is bearing that in mind too. 
  [Joustra] This does not however solve the Bosnian question. 
  [Van Baal] One of the characteristics of UNPROFOR's task is 
to ensure that the conditions are created whereby the warring 
parties reach solutions together. UNPROFOR cannot force those 
solutions. It is not therefore simply a question of exercising 
military power and showing the flag, but of working hard to 
bring them around the negotiating table. 
  As chief of staff, Van Baal will be in charge of 200 
professional officers simply picked up from the NATO base in 
Rheindalen, Germany, and dumped in Kiseljak. Kiseljak is seen 
by the men in the field as an unwieldy, bureaucratic body. This 
is because, in addition to the 200, there are also twice that 
many support staff. In the Netherlands transport unit in 
Vusovaca, a poster hangs on the wall bearing the text: "Never 
have so few been led by so many." 
  Van Baal seems even now to be getting involved in a 
controversy about the size of his staff. He is measured and 
diplomatic. 
  [Van Baal] All these people have obviously been needed to 
allow the staff to operate. I do not let myself be influenced 
by numbers. I will judge soon whether there are too few or too 
many staff. 
  In addition to being in charge of the staff, Van Baal is 
expected to give balanced advice to General Rose about current 
matters and matters affecting the longer term. 
  [Van Baal] We are in charge of ten battalions of various 
nationalities, with all their individual dimensions and 
characteristics. This makes about 30,000 men who are in charge 
of protecting "safe havens" and protecting humanitarian aid 
convoys. 
  He still has to work with Rose on an exact distribution of 
tasks, but Van Baal is assuming that he will also have a 
diplomatic role. This will involve negotiating with the chiefs 
of staff of the Serbian, Muslim and Croatian troops to make sure 
that food can be transported to its destination without 
obstruction. 
  [Van Baal] The conflict between the warring parties is 
concentrated on the roads. They are of crucial importance to 
them, and for food convoys. The two go together.. That is why 
the problems we are now facing have arisen. 
  From Havelte, where Van Baal was commander of the then still 
poorly mobilizable 43d mechanized brigade, to Kiseljak is a step 
not devoid of risk. 
  [Van Baal] The military is a violent organization. If 
necessary, violence can be used, which leads to the risk that 
the violence can rebound. 
  That is unavoidable. You can protect yourself adequately 
from it, however, through the professionalism of your men and 
through your resources. 
  [Joustra] Do you think, though, since your appointment to 
this post, about the danger to which you personally can be 
exposed? 
  [Van Baal] You have to start by having faith in yourself. I 
have no experience in this field, but I put myself into it. My 
job can be compared to that of a police officer who has to track 
a hardened criminal, or a fire-fighter attacking a blazing 
inferno. Obviously, you think about the dangers. You know that 
when you look into the eyes of your wife. She supports you, but 
there is a huge gap between supporting something and being 
wildly enthusiastic about it. 

