BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Nadav Shragay] </F>
  [Text] The demonstration by several hundred settlers 
outside the Prime Minister's Office is due to turn into a series 
of sit-down strikes, in which thousands of settler families will 
take part for several months. It will involve the voluntary 
evacuation of dozens of settlements for many weeks. The plan's 
guidelines are detailed in a document issued by the operational 
headquarters of the United Command of the Zionist Camp, which 
set up the protest encampment opposite the Prime Minister's 
Office. This document has reached HA'ARETZ. 
  The encampment is currently being operated in a restricted 
form following consultations with the Council of Jewish 
Settlements in Judaea, Samaria, and the Gaza Strip. Prior to 
PLO head Yasir 'Arafat's arrival in Jericho, the camp will be 
expanded sharply for three days and then reduced again. The 
settlements which have so far participated in the restricted 
format are Ma'ale Levona, Yitzhar, Bet Hagay, Qiryat Arba', and 
Bet El. 
  The document, disseminated to the settlements, says among 
other things that "we are not discussing an ordinary Rose Garden 
model demonstration [outside the Knesset], not a representation 
from each settlement, but participation by most inhabitants of 
the settlements, by entire famililies. Those who support 
families will continue going to work, their base being a strike, 
while essential work in the settlement will be left to a 
minority which may not come. 
  "This is an act that requires devotion and endurance. It is 
built not on breaking the law, closing roads, going to jail, 
etc., but on a massive legal demonstration by a very large 
public, prepared to do what is needed to save the nation and the 
state from those who collaborate with the enemy against their 
blood brothers." 
  "Success," the document says, "depends on creating the right 
atmosphere in the settlements, which will reflect the gravity of 
the situation and our national responsibility during these 
difficult times, and which will inspire the entire public to 
stand like a pillar in the face of the government's astonishing 
abandonment of all Jewish, Zionist, security, and existential 
values. We must initiate a sit-down strike, which will last 
several months, outside the Prime Minister's Office until there 
is a shift in the political reality towards the settlements in 
Judaea, Samaria, and the Gaza Strip. 
  "The message is simple. The minority government's scheming 
-- underpinned by Israel's enemies -- against citizens whom 
successive Israeli Governments sent to inhabit settlements, is 
unbearable. The government broke all the rules. We must 
respond by also breaking the rules," the document says. 
  The paper contains a series of questions and answers which 
present the anticipated vacillation over the plan. Question: 
"Will the government not be pleased by the fact that we will 
abandon settlements?" Answer: "We are not discussing 
abandoning settlements, but a sharp demonstrative act against 
the government's scheming against the settlements, its forsaking 
the security of the settlements, and endangering all the 
citizens of the country...." 
  Question: "Will not basing the strike mainly on settlers 
make the struggle sectarian and will it not play into the hands 
of the left and the government?" 
  Answer: "A sharp demonstrative act by a sector hurt by the 
government is legitimate and acceptable. Beyond that, it 
involves thousands of families taking to the streets and backing 
by thousands of families living in Judaea, Samaria, and the Gaza 
Strip, who constitute a very large sector of society. All this 
shows that the sectarian issue is secondary in this case. 
Thousands of striking families will be an unbearable phenomenon 
for the government. 
  "Any departure from routine life constitutes a problem for 
the government. When a plant is closed by the government and 
its workers hole up in the closed plant, the government 
negotiates to make sure the workers get what they want. Dozens 
of closed settlements, thousands of citizens permanently in the 
streets, is an unbearable situation for any regime...." 
  Question: "Does such an act not weaken the settlements?" 
  Answer: "The government's plan is demonic, to slowly weaken 
the settlements until the settlers leave freely. The process 
will go on not matter what. Routine life continuing in the 
settlements is in the government's interest. The settlements' 
steadfastness is meant to erode the Palestinian police's 
assistance to attacks by Hamas [Islamic Resistance Movement], 
with the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] constituting part of the 
international observer force." 
  The joint command of the right-wing movements plans to hold 
demonstrations today at five main Jerusalem junctions as a sort 
of dress rehearsal to test the public's response prior to 
implementing its plan to take to the streets on the day of 
'Arafat's arrival in Jericho. At the same time, dozens of other 
settler families plan to reinforce the encampment opposite the 
Prime Minister's Office. 
  On the day of 'Arafat's arrival in Jericho, the planners say 
that activity is planned for Jerusalem, when they hope hundreds 
of thousands will participate. If 'Arafat plans to reach 
Jerusalem, these people will be diverted to the Old City. 
  A gathering organized by three bodies was held in Jerusalem 
yesterday: the Rabbis Union for Israel and Eretz Yisra'el, 
headed by Rabbis Avraham Shapira, Sha'ul Yisre'eli, and Moshe 
Tzvi Neriya; the right-wing professors circle; and the "Follow 
Me" forum of senior army officers in the IDF reserves. 
  The officers even announced yesterday that "we will stop 
'Arafat with our bodies" and published "call-up orders" to their 
friends "to be prepared for action so as not to permit mass 
murderer 'Arafat to enter the gates of the country." 
  Rabbi Hayim Druckman, who moderated the gathering, said that 
Israeli nationalists are not prepared to accept the current 
situation. "We will not permit such a situation to take place. 
We will do everything we can to foil it. We are sure that the 
people do not want it to happen," Druckman said. When the 
gathering ended, the participants held a protest march to the 
prime minister's residence. 

