BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 19 KYODO -- Additional macroeconomic 
measures will not help Japan curb its huge trade surplus and may 
even lead to inflation and overheating of an economy already 
poised to recover, Bank of Japan Governor Yasushi Mieno said 
Tuesday. 
  "The supportive efforts of the monetary and fiscal policies 
taken so far are gradually putting in place a foundation for 
economic recovery," Mieno said during a speech at a luncheon 
sponsored by the Foreign Correspondents' Club of Japan. 
  With the economic decline coming to a halt, he said the most 
important thing now is to "carefully monitor" those measures and 
flatly reject any further cuts in the official discount rate. 
"I'm not thinking of reducing the discount rate." 
  Noting that the current-account surplus "also reflects the 
underlying trend of excess savings," Mieno said, "if we neglect 
this and adopt an over-ambitious macroeconomic policy to rectify 
the external imbalances, this may well result in inflation and 
overheated economic activity." 
  In this respect, the central bank head emphasized the 
measures included in Japan's March market-opening package, 
saying "appropriate macroeconomic policy measures, improvement 
of market access, deregulation and consolidation of sound 
infrastructure would contribute to diminishing the imbalances." 
  Meanwhile, Mieno said he is not trying to justify Japan's 
trade gap, apparently referring to mounting U.S. pressure on 
Japan to take fresh and bolder actions ahead of Sunday's meeting 
in Washington of finance ministers and central bankers from the 
Group of Seven (G-7) nations. 
  Mieno said Japan is doing its best on macroeconomic measures 
although they have not yet fully materialized to put the economy 
on a "well-balanced" recovery path. 
  "However, it is expected to come about in the near future, 
and in the process, the current-account surplus should 
decrease," he added. 
  Analyzing the historical trend of trade surpluses moving 
from 
developed to developing nations, Mieno said it is natural in 
economics and noted that the issue has become too politically 
sensitive. 
  Expressing regrets over the still deep-rooted view that 
trade 
surpluses are a virtue and trade deficits a vice, Mieno said, 
"an international transaction is not a zero-sum game...rather it 
should be recognized as a plus-sum game." 
  Under the current global trend, he cited the "East Asian 
miracle," the shifting of high development to East Asian nations 
from Japan. 
  In fact, Japan's merchandise trade surplus for fiscal 1993 
released Monday showed that its gap with other Asian nations 
topped that with the U.S. for the first time on record. 
  Mieno reiterated that the "decline in economic activity has 
come to a halt" with some improvements seen led by consumption 
and business sentiment which was nothing but pessimistic in the 
latter half of last year regaining some equanimity. 
  He painted a brighter picture than his recent comments by 
saying that conditions for inventory adjustments to improve are 
"gradually falling into place" and that write-offs of banks' 
nonperforming loans are set to peak and are manageable. 
  Mieno gave high credits to a recent positive stance by 
financial institutions to clear bad loans, noting that 
completion is already in sight at "money center banks" and 
increases in fresh bad loans are slowing. 
  Banks are taking positive steps to make sound lending, he 
said, and noted the U.S. experience suggests that banks' 
attitudes change when a clear outlook for write-offs is obtained. 
  Mieno remained cautious, however, and said, "we still need 
to 
analyze some forthcoming economic indicators before reaching a 
definite conclusion." 
  He also repeated "we must still bear in mind the various 
future possibilities" of downward pressures, citing ongoing 
corporate restructuring, particularly in face of competition 
from Asian nations, triggered by the yen's appreciation. 
  He also cited persistent inventory adjustments and "still 
midway" overall write-offs of nonperforming loans by financial 
institutions. 
  Regarding questions by reporters on currency rates, he 
declined to comment, only mentioning the G-7 accord "to 
cooperate to keep stable exchange rates reflecting economic 
fundamentals." 
  On Japan's political turmoil, Mieno said political certainty 
is necessary for economic stability, and called for a settlement 
as early as possible. 
  But he said the current "political vacuum" is unlikely to 
drag down the economy with sufficient public works being carried 
over from February's 15.25 trillion yen stimulus package. 

