Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Argentine military kept their eyes peeled for 
every gesture that former UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher 
made during her five-day visit to Chile. What is more, they 
tried to send "all the signals possible" in order that their 
Chilean colleagues might understand that, from this side of the 
Andes mountain chain, "nobody approves of the shows of 
affection" that the Chilean military -- and especially General 
Augusto Pinochet, the Army commander in chief -- have lavished 
on the former Iron Lady. 
  Even what the Argentine military labeled an "accident" made 
the sparks fly. It took place on Saturday, 19 March, on the 
very same day that Thatcher arrived on Chilean soil, when it 
came to the knowledge of several members of the military that 
the plane aboard which the former prime minister was flying to 
Chile -- it was coming from Brazil -- had violated Argentine 
airspace. 
  Thatcher was traveling aboard a Lear jet aircraft belonging 
to the Chilean Aeronautical Directorate. 
  The Argentine military simplified the equation, and 
concluded 
that for them it was a military airplane transporting the 
victorious party in the Malvinas war. And to make matters 
worse, they were sure that the Chileans had not requested 
permission to overfly Argentine territory. 
  Soon afterwards a new piece of information called this 
statement into question. According to another military report, 
the Air Regions Command had given the plane the "okay" to 
overfly our territory. 
  It was already too late. The "day Thatcher passed by 
Argentina" triggered off a sort of symbolic revenge. The 
Chilean Embassy observed the day of the Air Force on Monday 21 
March. By tradition, the chiefs of staff of each of the three 
branches of the Armed Forces attend this ceremony. 
  As a result of a "talked out decision" -- as a military 
source consulted by CLARIN termed it -- Lieutenant General 
Martin Balza, the Army chief of staff, Admiral Enrique Molina 
Pico, the Navy chief of staff, and Brigadier General Juan 
Paulik, the Air Force chief of staff, agreed to "boycott" the 
banquet. 
  The chiefs of staff sent representatives having the rank of 
colonel (or equivalent), a position that is three ranks below 
the topmost rank of each branch. 
<H5>  Difficult Relations </H5>
  President Carlos Menem yesterday underscored "the excellent 
relations" existing between Argentina and the United Kingdom. 
  The military seemingly share the president's view. Despite 
this, Thatcher's trip to Chile showed them that what they call 
the "Chilean military buildup" is the most bitter pill for them 
to swallow. With very little trouble the Argentine military are 
able to quickly enumerate all the military equipment purchased 
by the Chileans over the last two months: 
  -- 40 Storm vehicles with anti-tank armament capability, 
from Israel. 
  -- two ships for transporting troops, with a capacity for 
300 men each, from the United States. 
  -- six CASA freighter planes, with a capacity of 24 men 
each, from Spain. 
  And it is said that they are contemplating the purchase of: 
  -- two frigates from Great Britain. 
  -- 20 Mirage aircraft from Belgium. 
  -- New uniforms for the entire Armed Forces personnel that 
cannot be detected by infrared equipment. 
  According to the Argentine military, the above list proves 
that the "regional balance" is a concept of the past. From this 
utterance, there is only a short step to demanding of the 
government a speedy reequipping of the Armed Forces. 

