BFN 

  [Text] President Denktas received Gustave Feissel, the UN 
secretary general's assistant special envoy to Cyprus, at 1700 
today. Ozker Ozgur, minister of state and deputy prime 
minister, Atay Ahmet Rasit, minister of foreign affairs and 
defense, Foreign Ministry Under Secretary Ozer Koray, and John 
Paul Kavanagh, adviser to the UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, 
attended the meeting. Speaking after the meeting, which 
continued for nearly one hour and 45 minutes, Denktas said: 
  [Begin Denktas recording] The issue of whether or not the 
situation has changed was discussed. Our position is common 
knowledge. Our question on whether things are still the same on 
the Greek Cypriot side remains unanswered. We reiterated our 
complaints relating to developments on the Greek Cypriot side, 
which have created a difficult atmosphere for the talks on the 
confidence- building measures. An impression has been created 
that preparations for war are being made around us. The Greek 
Cypriots have indicated that they are determined to further the 
agreement they have reached with Greece and that they are taking 
steps in that direction. They have even moved to place joint 
orders with Greece for arms. 
  All these things are dispelling the hope that something can 
be achieved through the confidence-building measures. This is a 
deliberate approach by the Greek Cypriots. And it is due to 
their conviction that concluding an agreement with the Turkish 
Cypriots will degrade and reduce their status. They are 
convinced that they have misled the world into believing that 
Cyprus belongs to them. 
  We have observed that the UN secretary general is trying to 
submit the nondocument placed before us as the UN secretary 
general's document containing his proposals. That too has made 
us uneasy. We cannot agree to that. The nondocument's status 
cannot be changed. Its contents cannot be described as the UN 
secretary general's proposals to the sides. This is because the 
UN secretary general cannot submit binding proposals within the 
framework of his goodwill mission. That has not been 
considered. He does not have that mandate. 
  Yes, we discussed all that. Feissel will come back to 
contact us if he wants to. [end recording] 
  Denktas replied to a correspondent's question after the 
meeting: 
  [Begin recording] [unidentified correspondent] The letter to 
be submitted to Butrus Butrus-Ghali refers to the current basis. 
Was the nondocument, which was submitted to the sides on 21 
March, included in that? 
  [Denktas] Yes, that is right. It was suddenly described as 
the final document, one that must not be touched. Glavkos 
Kliridhis said he would agree to that document if it was not 
changed and if Denktas accepted it. The UN secretary general 
has converted the document into a list of proposals that will 
form the basis of the agreement. That is wrong. [end recording] 

