BFN 

<F P=106> [By Barry Parker] </F>
  [Text] Gaza City, Occupied Gaza Strip, May 4 (AFP) -- 
Autonomy came at last to the Gaza Strip and Jericho on Wednesday 
[4 May] with the start of a mass prisoner release and the 
arrival of police top brass to take over from Israel. 
  "We are starting to take charge from today," PLO 
brigadier-general Ziyad 'Arif told AFP. "We are starting our 
real duties as Palestinian police." 
  "The autonomy agreement is working now," he said after a 
19-strong PLO delegation including four generals entered Gaza 
from Egypt, forming a liaison committee for the security 
transfer. 
  Israel and the Palestinians would draw up a takeover 
timetable on Thursday, following the signing of the self-rule 
accord in Cairo on Wednesday. 
  Three of the delegation went by Israeli jeep to the West 
Bank 
town of Jericho and the remainder on a tour of Gaza security 
installations. 
  An advance party of 1,000 policemen will arrive in Gaza over 
the weekend, 'Arif said, forming the vanguard of a 9,000-strong 
force. 
  In Jericho, hundreds of children threw flowers instead of 
stones at Israeli troops. They climbed the police station fence 
and put up Palestinian flags as well as palm leaves. 
  Youngsters marched through the West Bank oasis of 15,000 
people singing patriotic songs, but it all turned sour when 
police fired tear-gas and rubber bullets after stones were 
thrown. Four people were treated in hospital. 
  At Khan Yunus, three masked Palestinians killed an 
11-year-old, wounded his father and another relative in a 
bungled kidnapping attempt. 
  In Gaza City, dozens of teenagers lobbed rocks at soldiers 
outside the central jail, as they waited for prisoners to be 
freed. 
  The release of 1,000 prisoners on Wednesday began right 
after 
Israel and the PLO signed the accord to launch Palestinian 
self-rule. Four are Islamic fundamentalists, the rest from 
Yasir 'Arafat's Fatah movement. 
  "Peace is wonderful," shouted Umm-Majid Sharif, 55, as the 
first men stepped off buses to a flag-waving, tabla-beating 
reception at Nahal Oz crossing into Gaza. 
  "The war is over between us and Israel," she said. "We want 
all the prisoners to be freed now the agreement has been signed." 
  Sharif's son Rami was not freed, but she refused to be 
discouraged amid the kissing, sobbing and singing as hundreds 
turned out to give their loved ones a hero's welcome home. 
  'Adnan Susi, 35, ran into his brother 'Adil's arms and they 
just hugged for several minutes as the tears flowed. 
  "I'm crying because I'm so happy. I had two years of a 
five-year sentence left to do," he said. 
  PLO official Sufyan Abu-Zaydah said: "More will be released 
on Thursday and that should make a total of about 2,500 from all 
the occupied territories." 
  Under the Cairo deal, another 2,500 are to be freed when the 
Israelis have completed withdrawal within three weeks. The PLO 
has demanded that the remaining 5,000 be released, but 
timetables still have to be negotiated. 
  All those up for release have to sign a paper pledging 
support for autonomy. 
  Israel had let 1,678 prisoners out in several batches since 
last October in a bid to spur the autonomy talks. However 
hundreds have also been arrested since then. 
  It took two attempts for Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and 
'Arafat to sign their agreement and not surprisingly there was 
no repeat of the mass celebrations which greeted the September 
13 Declaration of Principles. 
  Tens of thousands poured on to Gaza's streets more than 
seven 
months ago. This time they were more cautious. 
  Shopkeepers hung up flags and a few dozen supporters paraded 
around on trucks, horns honking, shouting pro-'Arafat slogans. 
  "I won't believe anything has changed until I see the last 
Israeli soldiers leave," said 25-year-old Muhammad Balah, a 
shopkeeper in Shatti refugee camp. 
  "Officially Fatah is not organizing any celebrations. We 
leave that to our people on the street to do what they feel," 
PLO official Rashid Abu-Shibak said. 
  "May 4 is a unique day in Palestinian history ... our 
authority will be manifest in our homeland," Fatah said in a 
statement. 
  "The Palestinians will be able to live in a freedom that has 
been denied over so many years by the occupation. 
  "The historical agreement is the product of a process of 
struggle by the Palestinians and for which many gave their lives. 
  "We still have a long and a hard way to go but the 
achievement so far is a first step for us which requires 
everybody to be united ... so we can all reach the final stages 
and establish an independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as 
its eternal capital." 
  The Islamic Resistance Movement (HAMAS), vowing to fight on 
against Israel, declared two days of mourning and urged people 
to hoist black flags against autonomy. 
  Few black flags were on view. 

