BFN 

  [Text] The Trinidad and Tobago Government will soon adopt 
legislation to regulate competition and to minimize unfair 
trading practices. Minister of State and Industry Ken Valley 
says decades of protectionism have led to a lack of 
international competitiveness. He gives the assurance, however, 
that in opening up the market to private enterprise, the 
government would protect the economy from monopolies through an 
effective competition policy. The minister was speaking at the 
Seminar on Competitive Policy and Restrictive Business 
Practices. The highlight of this event was a panel discussion 
on the subject. Representatives of the manufacturing sector 
debated the issue with (Philip Busic), of the UN Conference on 
Trade and Development [UNCTAD]. Debbie Deganz reports: 
  [Begin recording] [Deganz] The question arose whether the 
size of a country's economy affects its ability to compete 
internationally. Chief Executive Officer of the TTMA [Trinidad 
and Tobago Manufacturers' Association] (Clive Teluxing) thinks 
so. And while he supports the theory of free trade, he would 
also like to see a policy framework in place before the doors 
are opened to foreign competitors. 
  [(Teluxing)] We have, in Trinidad and Tobago, a situation 
and 
laws that are geared to assist manufacturers to achieve that 
kind of level playing field in Trinidad and Tobago, and we are 
saying look, let's strengthen these laws, put teeth into the 
laws, and let's strengthen the administration of those areas. 
  [Deganz] But the UN representative maintains that since 
liberalization is worldwide, all countries, especially small 
ones, must protect themselves by ensuring a strong policy 
governing competition. The aim, says Mr. (Busic), is not to 
discriminate against foreign firms but to treat everyone equally. 
  [(Busic)] The aim of competition policy is not to stop 
monopolies, per se, but, in fact, it is to ensure that 
monopolies act as if they were under the pressure of 
competition; to avoid that enterprises sleep on their 
comfortable, single supplier position; that to avoid that 
enterprises provide bad service, ineffective, inefficent, 
noninnovative, and do not respond to the needs of the consumer. 
  [Deganz] The speed with which government should pursue the 
liberalization process came up for debate. While both the TTMA 
and UNCTAD agree that it should be a gradual process until the 
legislation is in place. Gene Hutchinson, of the Bureau of 
Standards, says we have run out of time. He says local 
companies need foreign competition to bring their products up to 
international standards. 
  [Hutchinson] And once you can compete successfully with the 
imports, in fact, you can then export to those markets. That's 
the name of the game. That's [words indistinct] you do not have 
the time. The game has gone past. 
  [Deganz] It was agreed that once the proper legislation is 
in 
place, the competition process will naturally weed out the weak 
companies, leaving those efficient enough to survive an 
international climate. [end recording] 

