Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nick Nuttall, Environment Correspondent: </F>
"Britain Steers Clear of Ban on Dumping Nuclear Waste at Sea"; 
first paragraph is THE TIMES introduction] 
  [Text] President Clinton has refused to ask Britain to halt 
nuclear-processing at Sellafield, while making known his 
displeasure. He rejected a request from 33 members of Congress 
that he try to block the Thorp plant in Cumbria but told them 
the continued production of plutonium was not justified. 
  Britain defied international public opinion yesterday by 
refusing to support a worldwide ban on dumping nuclear waste in 
the sea. 
  The decision to abstain, also taken by France, Belgium, 
China 
and Russia, came at a meeting of the International Maritime 
Organisation, a UN body based in London. 
  Britain could now resume dumping radioactive material at any 
time. 
  Officials at the agriculture department, which spearheaded 
the government's stance, insisted there were no immediate plans 
to resume dumping defunct nuclear submarine reactors or waste 
from power stations, hospitals and research laboratories. 
However, they said they wanted to keep open such options. 
  Ministers at the defence, environment and agriculture 
departments now have 100 days in which formally to reject the 
ban, otherwise they will be automatically bound by the majority 
decision, despite abstaining. 
  More countries could join the boycott. About 30 signatory 
nations ignored the meeting and, like Britain, can register 
their opposition within 100 days. 
  Last night there was every sign that Britain is prepared to 
defy the agreement. While a spokesperson for the agriculture 
department said: "We will now carefully consider our response," 
official sources said the government's position remained the 
same: Britain argues there are good scientific reasons for 
having the option to resume nuclear dumping at sea rather than 
keeping it on land, particularly for bulky items such as pieces 
of submarines. 
  Critics claim radioactive substances in the sea respect no 
territorial boundaries and that monitoring and retrieving leaky 
containers is significantly more difficult from oceans than from 
land-based stores. 
  Yesterday's vote, supported by 37 members of the 
International Maritime Organisation, including America and 
Japan, replaces a ten-year voluntary ban that was broken by 
Russia recently when it dumped radioactive wastes off Japan. 
  Before the voluntary ban, Britain had dumped about 74,000 
tonnes of low and intermediate level waste at 15 locations. 
Currently, Britain has six radiation contaminated submarines 
awaiting disposal at naval dockyards. 
  Russia said earlier in the week that it could not support a 
ban at the moment as it had no other option for dealing with its 
radioactive wastes from its fleet of nuclear submarines. 
  Dick Trump, a Dutch official who chaired the meeting, said 
yesterday: "I would have been much happier if we would have 
adopted the resolution unanimously." 
  "We will have to look to the future," he said, referring to 
the 100-day response time. 
  Greenpeace, the environmental pressure group whose lobbying 
in the early 1980s led to the preliminary ten-year voluntary 
ban, initially reacted with delight to the vote. 
  As it became clear that several key nuclear powers might 
ignore the ban, Remi Parmentier, an adviser in the political 
division, said: "It would be a public outrage if France, the UK, 
Russia and Belgium filed a declaration of non-acceptance. It is 
about time these governments realised that no one wants to see 
the oceans become a radioactive waste garbage site. It is about 
time they joined the ranks. The oceans belong to everyone, not 
Her Majesty's government or the French Republic." 
  COPYRIGHT: TIMES NEWSPAPERS LIMITED, 1993 

