CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V. Lendov, GUDOK correspondent: "A Survey of the </F>
Anniversary Celebrant: Novosibirsk Is Mastering the Repair of 
Czech Locomotives"] 
  [Text] The plant came into being, that is, began to repair 
steam locomotives, in 1943. Evidence of this fact is an order by 
the Narkomat [People's Commissariat] of Railroads on starting up 
its operation somewhat later -- in April 1944. They worked, as 
everybody did at that time, for the front. The Novosibirsk 
workers had over 2,000 steam locomotives put in good order to 
their account when, in 1945, the plant changed its specialty and 
began to repair electric locomotives. 
  By its 50th anniversary, the plant had put back into 
operation over 6,000 electric locomotives of various series, and 
ten-fold more electric motors, and had manufactured 40,000 
locomotive wheelpairs. It made, of course, a great many other 
things: spare parts for locomotives, over a million tonnes of 
iron casting and 26,000 tonnes of non-ferrous casting, bridge 
supports and overhead wire-contact system suspension elements 
for electrification of the Transsiberian Railroad. NERZ 
[Novosibirsk Electric Locomotive Repair Plant] had done a great 
deal for the city, in particular, supplying the metal structures 
for bridges across the Ob and Berd and for the construction of 
subway and other facilities. 
  Today the electric locomotive repair plant is a modern 
enterprise, equipped with the newest high-productivity 
equipment. There is a robotized complex here, various 
semi-automatic machines, unique machine tools and flow lines and 
over 200 units of hoisting-transport machines. 
  One can add to the "survey" of the anniversary celebrants, 
the fact that NERZ has always had a reputation in Novosibirsk 
for paying close attention to the social sphere. Along with the 
plant wings, a whole small town has been built up (50 apartment 
houses with an area of 66,000 square meters), schools and 
child-care combines, a sports complex and stores, medical 
institutions and a hotel, a movie theater and a swimming pool. 
There is a subsidiary farm which has over 3,400 hectares of 
agricultural products. 
  I found all this out from the information prepared for the 
jubilee. V. Klimov, director of the plant, did not tell me a 
single word about the former achievements of the foremost 
collective in the sector. He is right now mainly occupied with 
the present state and the tomorrow of the enterprise, where 
about 2,500 people are working. 
  "We were the base enterprise for repair of the VL60 electric 
locomotive, practically the only one in the country," says 
Valeriy Mikhaylovich. "This series has been going on for 20 
years now. The Ministry and the Locomotive Main Administration 
asked us to help prolong the life of these machines by 10-15 
years. We did it, we modernized the locomotives, the bogie 
frames and the body." 
  But now the powerful enterprise, increasing its flowline 
production from year to year, has begun to slow down its chosen 
course: in 1993 it put 260 machines in good working order, in 
1994 it is looking at an order for 180 locomotives, and indeed 
may not even achieve these figures: there are fewer roads, and 
the fleet has decreased. A major buyer such as the Odessa 
Railroad (to this day, it owes the Siberians 340 million rubles 
[R]), for example, has found that it is now foreign -- so have 
the Central Asian and Tselina railroads. Besides, the VL60 is 
already highly obsolete, and all of these machines are going 
into the reserve. The electrification of the railroads, which 
provided quite a large additional amount of work, has also "gone 
off." Railcar brake shoes have begun to be cast at released 
"defense plant" sites, creating competition for the powerful 
NERZ casting shop. 
  These unpleasant surprises were not, to tell the truth, all 
that unexpected for the plant workers. They got used to looking 
ahead here, and foresaw the "thinned-down" portfolio of orders. 
As far back as 1992 the specialists began to think about how to 
repair OP units (diesel locomotive and electric locomotive 
sections combined in one vehicle) for the open-pit coal mines of 
the Kuzbass. In May the designers and technologists rolled up 
their sleeves, in September they began to develop the repair of 
bogies, in November the first unit stood in the bogie pit, and 
in February its repair was finished. Last year they provided 
sound "treatment" for eight of these machines, and are now doing 
twice as many. 
  "All the same," I address V. Klimov, "has this become an `I 
Spy' game for the plant, for after all, there are not all that 
many open-pit coal mines in the country, and they do not use 
these units at them everywhere?" 
  "In fact, this is not our main stake," noted Valeriy 
Mikhaylovich, "but it is still quite a help in difficult times. 
Since the plant changed our specialty in 1945 and 1965, why not 
take a new turn now? We simply must do it -- after all, it is a 
question of the plant's survival under the new conditions." 
  The market means producing goods which are in demand and 
will 
sell. On the Russian mainlines, where the freight transport 
volume is dropping for the time being, the need for passenger 
transport is growing, and this means the demand for passenger 
locomotives and their repair as well. These are mainly 
Czechoslovakian electric locomotives. The Novosibirsk workers 
are beginning to deal with them. The only plant to repair 
electric locomotives of the ChS series remained abroad -- in 
Zaporozhye. The MPS [Ministry of Railways] made a decision: the 
direct current ChS2 electric locomotives would be repaired in 
Yaroslavl, and the alternating current ChS4T -- in Novosibirsk. 
  It is not an easy matter to master the new machine and put 
it 
on the flowline. Moreover, the Novosibirsk workers are not 
planning to trifle with the job -- they intend to start capital 
plant repair immediately. Will they succeed? 
  A. Sysuyev, chief engineer, V. Tretyanykh, chief 
technologist, and the design and technological departments have 
set to work energetically. They have to sweat over it: there are 
not even any plant blueprints for these machines. The main 
administration helps here, of course, but they basically have to 
work it out themselves. As Valeriy Mikhaylovich aptly put it, 
the entire plant intellect has been activated, and all the 
specialists are working at tremendous tension. After all, it is 
not just a matter of preparing the equipment, machinery and 
documents. A number of shops have to be rebuilt: instrument, 
bogie and electric machinery shops. A number of sections have to 
be redesigned, several new ones have to be organized and the 
bogie pits in the assembly shop have to be lengthened. All this 
is being done without shutting down the production facility. 
  Beyond the rebuilding and technological problems, another 
very important problem has not been forgotten -- personnel 
training and instruction. The NERZ technologists, designers and 
electricians visited the electric locomotive depot at Kirov. It 
has a large fleet of passenger machines, and the Kirov workers 
mastered their repair together with Czech and Slovak 
specialists. The plant began to send workers there beginning in 
March. 
  "A precise plan was worked out," says V. Klimov. "In the 
first six months, we must master repair of electric motors, this 
is the main thing. The second -- we take on the first electric 
locomotive. The intention is to do at least 70-80 locomotives in 
1995. There is enough work: after all, about 450 ChS4T machines 
are in operation on the Gorkiy, Southeastern and Volga 
railroads. There are also over 250 ChS4 electric locomotives, as 
well as ChS2T. We're "stretching" to them. 
  "We hope," continued Valeriy Mikhaylovich, "to have our own 
share in servicing the Czech machines, which is organized in 
Yaroslavl. The possibility of our having to go to direct 
relations with Skoda for spare parts is not ruled out." 
  This is how our conversation about the anniversary of the 
Novosibirsk Electric Locomotive Repair Plant turned out. 
Incidentally, they devoted only one day to the celebration -- 
there is no time to slacken the pace. I have no doubt that at 
the end of the year I will go to NERZ to write a report that the 
plant has made its third change in specialty. 

