Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Khurshid Ahmad Nadeem: "Defeat of Religious </F>
Parties: Other Reasons"] 
  [Text] The defeat of religious parties in the October 1993 
election has given birth to a new debate. Some people are openly 
expressing the opinion that Islam is not an effective partner in 
our politics anymore. Some circles oppose this opinion, and 
various persons have expressed all kinds of reasonings about it. 
Those who want to see Pakistan a secular nation are inferring 
from the election results that since the people have not voted 
for the people that use the name of Islam, it is definite that 
the majority of the people are not willing to include religion 
in their political affairs. Therefore, our national and 
political party systems should be taken care of in such a way 
that religion is not involved in them. 
  The way the analysts in the newspaper are viewing the defeat 
of the religious parties clearly indicates their superficiality. 
A few days ago a prominent columnist in an English newspaper, in 
discussing the reasons for the Islamic Front's defeat, wrote 
that the election program Qazi Hussein Ahmed espoused in his 
campaign had strongly condemned the landlord system. Before it, 
the founder of the Jamaat-i Islami showed his support of the 
landlord system in his book, "The Problem of Land Ownership." 
Qazi Ahmed should have removed that book from his list of 
literature before he condemned the landlords. Since he did not 
do so, there were some conflicts present. The people were not 
willing to vote for the Islamic Front. Let us analyze this 
commentary. Ninety percent of the voters in this country are 
unaware that Maulana Maududi has written: "The Problem of Land 
Ownership." Even if some are aware of this book, very few have 
read it. Now let us set aside this book for a while, and say 
that Maulana Maududi wrote in this book what he wanted to write. 
Let us consider how much this commentary relates to the facts. 
It is the habit of commentators to only look at a few point and 
write page after page about it. They do not try to find facts 
that have been decisive in this country's politics. They saw 
that only seven percent of the people voted for the religious 
parties, and therefore, it means that we should exile Islam from 
Pakistan's politics. 
  In our opinion, this is the desire of only a few people. 
Islam is still present as an important force in this country, 
just as it has been in the past. In the October election, the 
people did not vote for the religious parties. There are some 
reasons for this, and I am trying to explain those in these 
lines. 
  It is a known fact that elections in Pakistan are not based 
on any ideology, philosophy, or system. If the people have 
elected a person or a party, then they have not done so because 
of their association with a specific ideology. They always had 
different reasons. For example, when the PPP [Pakistan People's 
Party] got a majority vote in the 1970 election, it was not 
because the people had supported socialism against Islam. Those 
who keep an eye on the country's social and economic conditions 
know that 80 percent of this country's population lives in rural 
areas. It is their opinion that is decisive in election results. 
Generally, politics is divided into two groups in rural areas. 
This politics is based on the police station and the court. 
Mutual misunderstandings and disagreement over land are the 
problems that top the list of the problems that the rural people 
usually face. If some people have a disagreement in a village, 
then the political bigwigs in the region stand behind them, and 
the person with more influence in the police station or the 
court succeeds in getting his way. In order to influence the 
government, these people need the support of the administration. 
Therefore, they always try to stay on the good side of the 
government. If we paid attention, we would know that this is the 
basic reason that our politics has been introduced to "lotaism" 
[a form of nepotism]. The leaders who had influence in their 
districts in the 1970s joined the PPP. When the PPP won the 
majority, a large number of independent candidates also joined 
the ruling party because it was important for their political 
survival. Those who opposed them became weak, because they did 
not have the support of the government. 
  When martial law was implemented in 1977, and General Ziaul 
Haq's administration was established, he needed political 
support to establish his credibility among the people. Thus, the 
politicians who opposed the PPP gathered under the umbrella of 
the new government. They joined the "shura" of Ziaul Haq and 
started to establish their political clout from that time. The 
police station and SHOs [Station House Officer (police)] who 
worked on the order of the PPP before began to obey them now. 
These people were elected in large numbers during the 1985 
nonparty elections. Later, they were put together and labeled 
the Muslim League Party. When the PPP government returned to the 
Center in 1988, it started to strengthen its members, because 
the state government in Punjab was headed by Nawaz Sharif. He 
was controlling the police stations there. Since the PPP had the 
government at the Center, the people associated with it survived 
politically. The balance of power was almost equal at that time. 
  In 1990, both groups received an almost equal number of 
votes. The Islami Jamhuri Ittehad (IJI) received 54 percent of 
the vote, and the situation in 1983 was almost the same. All in 
all, the Muslim League has a one percent majority. This was the 
situation in Punjab. In the rural and urban areas of Sindh, the 
situation remained the same as in the past. The tribal chiefs 
won in Balochistan. The people of Sarhad were always close to 
religion, or the political parties had some illusion about it. 
If we look at it in light of this analysis, it is clear that 
religion and ideology are not playing any part in the election. 
It is clear that our political tradition of the last half 
century, over which this country was established, is divided 
into two groups. It is true that the actions, foreign policy, 
and ideologies of the former governments play an important role 
in urban areas. The Jamaat-i Islami had a very good position in 
urban areas in the past; however, these majorities went to Iltaf 
Hussein in Karachi and to Nawaz Sharif in Punjab. In Karachi, 
the people are getting out of this habit to an extent; however, 
it will take some time in Punjab. People will learn after a 
while which ideology did the PPP subscribe to, and based on 
which they hated it. Nawaz Sharif and his political allies are 
not sincere enough about their ideology to make him their 
permanent leader. 
  Based on this analysis, I am of the opinion that Islam does 
not play any effective role in our politics, and the reason for 
this is not that our association with Islam is weak; it is 
because of the division of our politics into these two groups. 
This division is based on vested interests and mutual 
association. Qazi Hussein Ahmed tried, through the Islamic 
Front, to get people out of this division, and to make 
character, ideology, and relationship with the nation the basis 
for votes. However, even after admitting the truth about these 
qualities, it is difficult to destroy the statues of vested 
interests and mutual associations. Still, it is a fact that when 
a group accepts a specific ideology, no power in the world can 
stop it from realizing it. After the fall of communism, the 
world has divided into secular and religious blocs. I assume 
that the next election in Pakistan will be between two groups, 
but these groups will be different from today's. The next 
division will not be based on vested interests, brotherhood, 
land ownership, or capital; they will be based on ideology, 
character, political programs, and patriotism. It is important 
that the candidates who will base their politics in ideology, 
character, and political program should take part as actively as 
the politicians who run politics of brotherhood, vested 
interests, and landownership. If they threw in their towels 
after this defeat and retired to holy places and private rooms, 
then our hopes will not be fulfilled and our nation will suffer 
in this sham struggle. 

