BFN 

  [Text] A source at the Export Promotion Department told 
PRACHACHAT THURAKIT that the PRC Government has taken action to 
punish Chinese textile and garment factories which made a false 
declaration concerning country of origin of their products in 
order to circumvent U.S. quotas for textile and garment imports. 
According to the latest report sent to the department, one of 
the four penalized companies used Thailand for its false 
declaration of the country of origin of the products. 
  A report was sent to the Export Promotion Department by 
Kunyaphan Raengkham, director of the Thai Trade Center in Los 
Angeles. It details penalties meted out to four Chinese 
manufacturers and exporters which falsified the country of 
origin by labelling the products as goods made in Fiji and 
Thailand. The four Chinese companies penalized are: the Shakou 
Branch Company of Dongmao Industries in Shenyang, the Guangyu 
Xiamen Company in Fujian, the Shifa Garment Company in Canton, 
and the Yongjia Garment Company in Canton. 
  Chinese authorities indicated that the Shakou Company had 
contracts with a company in Hong Kong to sell blue jeans to 
Singapore under the false label 'Made in Fiji.' From Singapore, 
the products were shipped to the United States. The Guangyu 
Xiamen Company was arrested by Chinese Customs authorities for 
attempting to smuggle out towels for export to the United 
States, with the towels bearing a 'Made in Thailand' label. 
  The Guangyu Xiamen Company was fined by the Chinese 
Government at 20 percent of the total cost of exports, and its 
export permission was suspended for two years. As for the 
Shakou Company, the Chinese authorities seized all its profits 
and banned exports by the company until 1995. This was the 
fourth time in April that Chinese authorities took action 
against companies for falsifying the declaration of the country 
of origin on their products in order to smuggle goods to the 
United States. 
  The Chinese Government arrests and fines such Chinese 
garment 
factories for circumventing U.S. import quotas under direct 
pressure from the U.S. Government. The United States estimates 
that losses caused by smuggling of textile and garment exports 
from China through false declaration of the country of origin 
amounts to U.S. $2,000 billion annually. 

