BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by King Husayn and Austrian President </F>
Thomas Klestil with unidentified correspondents at the Royal 
Hashemite Court in Amman on 11 April --recorded, in English with 
Arabic subtitles] 
  [Text] [Husayn] Your Excellency, and our dear friends: 
Sir, we once again, on behalf of all Jordanians, extend to you 
a very hearty welcome to Jordan, together with the group of 
friends from Austria who are accompanying you on this visit. We 
are more than happy to have this opportunity to speak as 
brethren do, and as friends do, interested in the same causes, 
interested in the same problems that confront us in our 
respective regions, and in this large global village, which is 
our world. We are proud of the very special relations, and 
relationship that has grown over the years, in terms of its 
roots and history between Austria and Jordan, Austria and the 
Arab world. We are very happy to have seen us coming closer 
together over the years, and to see our relations based on 
mutual respect and cooperation, and a desire to help and 
influence events around us for a better future for mankind. 
  Mr. President: Once again, on behalf of the Government of 
Jordan, and the people of Jordan, and for myself, a very hearty 
welcome. Thank you, sir. 
  [Klestil] Well, Your Majesty: It was with great pleasure 
that I have accepted the invitation, this state visit to Jordan, 
particularly at a time where the peace process has reached a 
point, where the hopes of people who, which were, maybe, too 
high, are endangered by many expectations, where frustration is 
coming up here and there. So, I came to his majesty as a close 
friend of Austria, of the Austrian people, as a key figure in 
the peace process, as an anchor of stability in the region, 
without whom there can be no solution of the Palestinian 
problem. And I was very happy to get an assessment of his 
majesty of the situation. We talked about the region, the 
possibilities if peace were to be achieved here, what kind of 
economic opportunities this would mean for the people of the 
region, and what role Europe and Austria could play. We also 
talked about developments in Europe. We talked about the crisis 
in Bosnia, where his majesty is personally also very interested 
in, and about the dialogue of the different religions. And I 
was able to inform his majesty about a conference we will 
organize in Vienna at the end of this year, a trialogue between 
leading representatives of Islam, Judaism, and Christianity. 
So, thank you very much, Your Majesty, for your kind 
hospitality. You make us all as Austrians feel like home. And 
I thank you for your friendship, and your confidence. 
  [Husayn] Thank you, sir. And I really hope that you will 
feel half as much at home as we feel whenever we are in Austria, 
which we love, not only for myself, but I am sure for all who 
know Austria from this country, sir. Thank you so much. You 
are most welcome, sir. 
  How can we handle this, the question is [words indistinct] 
myself. 
  [Correspondent, in progress] ...on Jordan's response to 
changing the inspection measures at al-'Aqabah? 
  [Husayn] You know of our position as far as this intolerable 
situation that has lasted far too long in regard to al-'Aqabah, 
and this treatment that has been directed at Jordan in 
particular out of all the countries of this region. We have -- 
regardless of our feelings -- done our utmost to implement 
Security Council resolutions as they affect our brethren in 
Iraq. Yet, this has been another unique and unusual treatment 
that Jordan has been selected for over many, many years. This 
situation is totally intolerable, and I had the opportunity a 
while ago to make a point of raising the problem with the 
ambassadors of the five permanent representatives at the 
Security Council, and, to explain at the same time that we are 
forced to suggest that our continuing efforts that have come 
from our hearts for the cause of a just, durable peace in this 
region from the outset -- our continuation in terms of these 
efforts is contingent on resolving this problem because we 
cannot be mistrusted on the one hand and humiliated as a people 
and yet continue to play this role that we have played sincerely 
and honestly. And we will not bow to any unwarranted pressure 
from any quarter. So, we have an indication that the problem is 
being addressed and we hope that we will have a positive 
response soon. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty: Jordan agreed to join the 
peace process based on the implementation of UN Resolution 242. 
Now after the Oslo agreement, do you still see that this 
process is heading in the direction of the implementation of 242 
as was conceived, or do you see that the Madrid formula for the 
implementation of the resolution has taken a different shape 
after the PLO-Israeli agreement? 
  [Husayn] As you know, we went to Madrid, and we provided the 
umbrella for our Palestinian brethren to go there. In terms of 
history, the Arab summit at Rabat in 1974 adopted a resolution. 
Let me be absolutely clear that the PLO was the sole legitimate 
representatives of the people of Palestine. We had historically 
been involved with 242 and its formulation. And then we had the 
Oslo agreement, which is an expression of a Palestinian will to 
address their problems by themselves, having accepted Security 
Council Resolutions 242 and 338. So, it is not up to me to say 
whether we are implementing 242 or not or seeing its 
implementation. But as far as I am concerned I believe that it 
has to be the foundation for the resolution of the problem and 
the tragedy of this area and this people. And I believe, as we 
have said, sir, that we are at a very critical moment where many 
of the hopes and aspirations of so many on either side of the 
divide were raised at a certain point but are now passing 
through a critical phase of wondering where it's leading to. 
  So, I hope and pray that we will see renewed efforts -- 
serious and determined and clear in the intent on establishing a 
just, durable peace that the future generations can live with 
and protect to the benefit of all concerned. And in finally 
addressing the root cause of instability in this entire region; 
the Palestinian-Israeli dimension of the problem and the 
Arab-Israeli dimension of it together. We are searching for a 
comprehensive peace. I think that this is a critical moment for 
things either progressing and soon, or the loss of hope and the 
slide into the abyss of despair and disaster as far as everybody 
is concerned. 
  [Correspondent] French News Agency. You talked of a 
conference, a trialogue in Vienna in December was representative 
of Christianity, Islam, and Judaism. Will you tackle the 
problem of Jerusalem in that conference as Jerusalem represents 
the three religions? 
  [Klestil] Well, I'm not the organizer of the conference. 
So, I cannot tell you about the details. I think it's the 
principles of a religious dialogue that is the main agenda of 
that conference. 
  [Correspondent] Austrian TV. Your Majesty, Austria has a 
major political crisis about 500 km far from its borders. I 
mean the crisis in Bosnia. What is your personal point of view 
on behalf of the crisis? I mean the strong reaction of the 
Atlantic Treaty forces, I mean the continuing resistance of the 
Serbs, and I mean the angry reaction of Russia. 
  [Husayn] Sir, I haven't been able to follow all the details 
of the latest developments. But, the crisis is very worrisome 
as far as we are concerned and it's a crisis we have felt 
ourselves all along. And it is a crisis that is awaiting a 
resolution which we haven't seen so far. It is a test to the 
international community's will and to the United Nations. And 
maybe it is the first major crisis that this world has seen 
following many changes that have occurred in this world in the 
recent past. 
  For our part, sir, we are a part of the United Nation's 
presence in the former Yugoslavia. And this country within its 
limited means has done everything that it could and will 
continue to do everything that it could in the future to help 
the cause of peace and tranquility and the end of suffering of 
people there. 
  As you know, we are proud to have been able to provide the 
second largest force of any in terms of the United Nations' 
efforts there. Now, we have to watch and see what happens in the 
coming period. But, failure there by all of us is going to open 
the way for all sorts of dangers beyond the limits of the areas 
affected immediately now. And it will be a problem for all of 
us, I believe, in Europe, here, and in the world as a whole in 
terms of this particular problem. But, it will also be a very 
dangerous precedent that could mean the spread of chaos in our 
world instead of the so called world order that people thought 
was coming into being. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. President, did Europe have any 
economics plan to help the Middle East countries after peace 
treaty? 
  [Klestil] I didn't understand. 
  [Correspondent] Did Europe have any economics plan to help 
the Middle East countries after achieving peace in our region? 
  [Klestil] There was recently at the meeting of foreign 
ministers of the European Union -- and this was a meeting for 
the first time also the Austrian foreign minister was invited to 
participate together with the other three countries that are 
about to negotiate their becoming a member -- and at that 
conference there was a decision that more attention of the 
European Union should be given and attached to the Middle East. 
And I am absolutely sure, as his majesty said and agreed with 
me in our talks, once there is peace and security in the region 
then all kinds of investment and economic cooperation and 
infrastructure for tourism will come in. And Europe, I am 
absolutely sure, will take over its share, because peace and 
security in the Middle East means peace and security for Europe, 
and danger in the Middle East means danger for Europe. So, 
there's absolutely the same principle interest. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, I want to ask if Jordan is 
going to send a team to the multilateral talks in Oman on water 
in April? 
  [Husayn] If conditions remain the way they are, at best we 
will probably send an observer. 
  [Klestil] Well, you asked about what Europe is doing. I may 
add, from Austria's point of view, we are active and I think we 
are in the chair of the committees within the multilateral peace 
efforts with regard to water, which is an absolute principle and 
main problem in the region, and energy. Those are two areas 
where we are active from the bilateral point of view within the 
multilateral peace efforts. 
  [Correspondent] I'd like to ask a question about the 
blockade 
on al-'Aqabah again. Jordanian officials have been talking 
about pressures on Jordan from mainly the United States and that 
it is linking Jordan signing a peace agreement with Israel to 
lifting the blockade. Can you confirm this? 
  [Husayn] I beg your pardon. 
  [Correspondent] That they are linking Jordan's signing of a 
peace agreement with Israel to the lifting of the blockade on 
al-'Aqabah. is that true? 
  [Husayn] We've made that clear that our continuing in the 
same way that we did is contingent on resolving this problem, on 
lifting this unwarranted embargo on al-'Aqabah. 
  [Correspondent] You've warned about the dangers which the 
region is passing through. Are you satisfied with the U.S. role 
in the peace process, and do you think that the peace process is 
being sidetracked since it was launched in Madrid over two years 
ago? 
  [Husayn] I hope that there will be a growing realization of 
the fact that we are now, in this region, and in regard to the 
peace process, are facing a crisis, or on the verge of it, and I 
hope that all will react to save the peace process from what may 
be a disaster that is looming ahead. And I hope that the United 
States of America and our friends in the world, and certainly 
those who are immediately involved, will realize that we are 
passing through a very difficult moment right now and that it's 
worth looking either at the alternatives, because if this fails, 
then what is left, except disaster for all. 
  [Correspondent] I am [words indistinct] from the Austrian 
Press Agency. From various sides, important [words indistinct] 
in the Middle East, it has been said that Austria should 
continue to contribute to the Middle East peace process. What 
could Austria do for the Middle East peace process in concrete 
terms? 
  [Husayn] I believe that Austria has, and Austria will, 
contribute continuously to the efforts for the establishment of 
peace in this region, hopefully beyond when it is a reality and 
a fact. I think that the opportunity I've had today, not for 
the first time, of discussing the problems of this region, and 
particularly the issue of the peace process with the president, 
is an indication of Austria's concern and determination to do 
whatever our friends can, and now, hopefully within the context 
of Europe in a more meaningful way. I am sure that Austria's 
voice will always be heard for peace, for a just peace, for a 
lasting peace, for a peace that future generations can live 
with. And Austria's contributions would be great in creating 
the understanding of what is happening in the minds of those who 
are not as aware of what is there in the world: Opportunity and 
threat to the peace process and the future of this region. And 
I hope also that Austria will be able to help once we have 
achieved what we have sought for so long: a just, and honorable 
and lasting peace. 
  [Correspondent] Sir, (?You're) speaking very strongly, but a 
bit vaguely about the possibility of a coming disaster. And 
now, I was hoping you might spell out in more concrete terms, 
Your Majesty, what the threats are now, and what you would you 
like to see the United States in particular, and also Israel do 
to move forward, in specific terms? 
  [Husayn] Well, sir: There is no doubt that there is a crisis 
that has developed out of the expectations of people that have 
not been met as yet, not even in the smallest possible degree so 
far. And therefore, the sense of alarm, and the sense of despair 
that is growing, and that is causing a great deal of distress to 
the peace camp, as such, and those who believe in it, wherever 
they are. I hope that the United States will realize how 
dangerous and difficult it is. I realize it is difficult for 
all concerned. But we've got to have the vision, we've got to 
have the determination, we've got to have the help to move 
beyond this point, and on clearly defined lines towards a 
comprehensive settlement, and towards resolving this problem 
once and for all, not on one track alone, but on all tracks, as 
soon as possible. And I hope we will see actions that will help 
us regain the sense of hope that was there, and encourage 
progress as soon as possible. 
  [Correspondent] [Words indistinct] this question to the 
president. Mr. President: You were accompanied by a large 
delegation. And I understand that there had been a talk of 
trade relations and economic cooperation. Are you hopeful, or 
are you sure, that these talks will lead into definite joint 
ventures and projects which will help benefit everybody here? 
Thank you. 
  [Klestil] Well, again, I think the precondition is that the 
business community feels that there will be security and peace 
in the future. As long as there is uncertainty about the future 
developments, there is hesitation for the business community to 
come in and to invest. So, we have a number of projects, and 
ideas brought with us we will discuss with our friends in the 
Jordanian Government. And I had the opportunity to discuss some 
of the more important ones with his majesty. But, as I said, I 
think first there has to be peace and security for the future, 
and then Jordan and the whole region, indeed, will see a 
tremendous positive development in which Europe will play its 
share, and Austria, with its traditional close ties with the 
Arab world in general, with Jordan in particular. And now, 
after our normalization, we have to also say this, after our 
normalization of relations with Israel. If you want to have a 
voice to be heard by all parties concerned, this is now the 
case. And as a future partner in the European Union, we will 
strengthen those voices who promote a strong involvement and 
engagement in the Middle East also as far as business and 
tourism is concerned. So, I am hopeful. But, they have first 
to give the business community the security that there is a good 
and secure future. 
  [Husayn] Thank you very, very much indeed, sir. 
  [Klestil] Thank you, Your Majesty. 
  [Husayn] Thank you so much. 

