Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by B.I. Bondarev, B.P. Kondakov, G.S. Makarov, </F>
All-Russia Light Alloys Institute; UDC 69.717] 
  [Text] Compared to iron, steel, copper, brass, wood, and 
glass, aluminum as a structural material is relatively young 
since it has been produced for a little over 100 years. Yet 
nevertheless, due to the considerable diversity of its 
properties, aluminum now substitutes these materials and even 
has certain advantages over them. No other material is known 
which would be represented in such diverse forms, e.g., sheet 
and plate rolled stock, plates (slabs), foil (with a thickness 
up to 5m, sections, forged products, shaped cast products, 
wire, and powder. 
  A unique combination of the most diverse aluminum properties 
makes it possible to use it efficiently in various branches of 
the national economy, primarily such large sectors as the 
automotive engineering industry, construction, container and 
packaging production, electrical engineering, agriculture, etc. 
  Noticeable successes in the development of materials, 
practices, and structures and their optimum utilization have 
been achieved in these particular applications. Let us consider 
several examples. 
  The most important issue for Russia is to solve the food 
problem, primarily the tasks of harvesting, storing, and 
transporting grain since its poor organization leads to losses 
of up to 30% or more. The solution used widely in world 
practices is to develop a system of metallic mechanized grain 
storage facilities which can be rapidly erected and positioned 
in direct proximity to the food production locations. The 
construction cycle of one elevator tower with a 250 t capacity 
in the field is 24 h while a "turnkey" mechanized complex with a 
1,000 t capacity can be completed in 30 days. 
  A structure has been set up which will make it possible 
annually to construct in Russia storage facilities for 2 million 
tons of grain. This will require 25,000 t of aluminum rolled 
products. 
  A large number of other efficient aluminum building 
structures for agricultural purposes which are characterized by 
a high degree of plant finish (chicken coops, greenhouses, 
potato storage, irrigation pipes for irrigated farming, etc.) as 
well as agricultural transport structures (refrigerators, truck 
trays for transporting fertilizer, milk tanks, etc.) has been 
developed. 
  The development of production of canning band as an integral 
component of a complex of efforts aimed to set up production of 
rolled sheets was a considerable achievement. Scientific 
principles and production methods have been developed and a 
large volume of design efforts has been carried out; large-scale 
production with a capacity of up to 75,000 t/yr of band has been 
set up at the SaMZ; together with the Dmitrov pilot plant, it 
produces approximately 90,000 t/yr which amounts to 30% of 
container production in the country. Yet, e.g., compared to the 
United States, per capita consumption of aluminum rolled 
products for packaging food is 15 times lower. 
  Another promising application of aluminum is in light motor 
transport (safety beams from aluminum sections with a high 
damping ability and even entire bodies including the reinforcing 
elements and the skin, pistons for highly stressed sports car 
engines from gasostat-treated powder alloys, and reliable 
superlight stamped wheel discs manufactured by aviation 
engineering methods). 
  Aluminum consumption in Russia's motor transport may reach 
300,000 t/yr. The energy outlays for the production of aluminum 
used will be quickly recovered due to fuel savings. 
  Aluminum has found successful applications in making 
railroad 
car axle boxes because of its ability to decrease their mass by 
twofold and lower the dynamic loads on the rails and car 
structures by 10% due to aluminum's damping properties. 
Furthermore, aluminum journal boxes require virtually no repairs 
during their entire service life. Up to 8,000 t of aluminum have 
been used annually for making the axle boxes since 1982. 
  Today, conversion made it possible to utilize in car 
structures large-size panels from aluminum alloys with an up to 
800 mm width and a length equal to that of the entire car, 
aluminum alloy pipes with inside corrosion-resistant cladding 
for water supply and heating systems, and slabs from weldable 
alloys for making railroad tank cars for acids. 
  The development of both today's comfortable high-speed 
railroad cars and subway cars would be impossible without 
extensive utilization of aluminum. 
  In recent decades, aluminum has been widely used in 
construction both as load carrying and barrier structures in the 
building interior and exterior. 
  Our designers and researchers have developed not only 
barrier 
structures but also three-dimensional load-carrying structures 
of building spans spanning 18, 21, and 84 m. 
  With respect to the foregoing, we should mention that a 
completely abnormal situation has developed in the country in 
the field of structural aluminum section production, primarily 
for making building structures. The ratio of extruded products 
to the total volume of commercial rolled stock from aluminum 
alloys has remained virtually unchanged in the past decade and 
amounts to close to 12%. Generally, the ratio of aluminum 
use 
in construction in the most developed countries, such as Japan, 
has settled at a 30% level, in Italy, at approximately 
20%, 
whereas in Russia, no more than 7% of all aluminum rolled 
products made is used in construction. 
  All of the roughly 120,000 t of section production is 
concentrated at six large aviation metallurgy plants and five 
specialized plants where two-to-five presses are in operation. 
Altogether, there are approximately 140 press production lines 
and complexes in the country, including 112 in aviation 
metallurgy. At the same time, approximately 1 million tons of 
sections in the United States is produced at 250 small 
specialized plants utilizing 450 press units. 
  The need to develop in the next 10-15 years a network of 
small plants producing aluminum sections at a rate of only 
200-250,000 t/yr and putting in operation a minimum of 50-60 
modern press production lines is obvious. In order to support 
the aforementioned billet production with the requisite metal 
quality, it is necessary to set up ingot smelting at primary 
aluminum plants, i.e., columns with a 130-250 mm diameter from 
alloys 6005, 6060, and 6063 with proper filtering, inoculation, 
and diffusion annealing. 
  Recently, the issue of broader utilization of aluminum in 
the 
petroleum and gas complex has been raised at an increasing 
frequency. We have developed considerable pipe production both 
for exploration and commercial drilling. Nineteen thousand tons 
of these pipes are being produced. 
  Due to the high sulfide compound concentration in petroleum 
in Orenburg area wells, steel pipes with double thick walls have 
been used, yet this does not solve the problem since the pipes 
have to be changed anyway as corrosion progresses. At the same 
time, aluminum is resistant in a hydrogen sulfide medium and can 
compete in resistance with corrosion-resistant steel. The demand 
for petroleum and pumping and compressor pipes from aluminum 
alloys is estimated as 100,000 t/yr. 
  One can cite numerous other positive examples of aluminum 
applications in various types of equipment, processes, 
structures, and devices. 
  The high technical and economic efficiency of aluminum 
applications in various fields of engineering and 
investment-financed projects for developing primary metal and 
rolled stock production gave the users a reason to plan for a 
long- term expansion of its application volumes to up to 4.5 
million t/yr (1978 and 1983 forecasts). 
  A reduction in project financing volumes, the absence of a 
noticeable increase in primary aluminum production and, 
likewise, aluminum rolled products and its constant shortages, 
and allocation of rolled stock for individual applications based 
on the residual principle led to a decrease in the user 
"appetite" and, most importantly, pushed the time of planned 
increase in aluminum use to 2005 and 2010. We should also notice 
that the forecast was made based on 1989 orders, i.e., prior to 
the start of an escalating price increase for metals, energy, 
and other types of resources. 
  In real life, a drop in rolled stock production volume has 
been observed in the last three years. The reasons for this 
phenomenon are dual in origin. On the one hand, the principal 
management difficulties causing unstable plant operation are due 
to the lack of raw material supplies and disruption of economic 
relations. 



  On the other hand, the consumers are moving away from using 
rolled stock, do not accept products already made to order, and 
return to old technologies and structures employing steel, cast 
iron, and other less expensive materials due to a sharp rise in 
aluminum rolled stock prices (Fig. 1) brought about by a 
multiple increase in prices for primary metals, energy, and 
other resources. In particular, such automotive enterprises as 
the KamAZ, MAZ, and OdAZ have ceased ordering extruded sections 
in the last two years while railroad workers are quickly 
restarting production of railroad car axle boxes from steel and 
pig iron. 



  If we compare thealuminum rolled product price index to that 
of steel, wood, or cement (Fig. 2), i.e., the materials which it 
effectively substitutes, one can see its considerable lead. For 
this reason, in the past two to three years, aluminum has 
catastrophically lost its position gained in previous years. 
  Process engineers, naturally, possess the reserves whose 
utilization will make it possible to decrease to a certain 
extent the rate of price increase for aluminum rolled stock; 
this is primarily a decrease in the energy outlays for its 
production. Enterprises of the former aviation metallurgy are 
heavy users of fuel and energy resources. In 1991, they consumed 
4 billion kWh of electric power, more than 1 billion 
m[.sup]3[/] of natural gas, and 13 million GJ of thermal 
energy. 
  The energy source price rise led to an increase in the ratio 
of energy outlays to the cost of production from 2.5 to 
10% 
while a further rise in the energy source price to the world 
level may boost the energy component of production costs to 
20%. Under such conditions, the role of energy 
conservation in 
the economic subenterprises changes radically. The reserves of 
energy resource conservation at enterprises are estimated to be 
at least 30%. Most of the largest operating energy 
consuming 
equipment is obsolete and has been greatly neglected while the 
energy consumption management level lags behind today's 
computerized planning and equipment operation control practices. 
  It is necessary to develop new combustion melting furnaces 
with a modern regenerative burner system and a high-speed flame 
and an automatic control system. 
  Utmost utilization of liquid aluminum from electrolyzers in 
smelting ingots in Krasnoyarsk and Kamensk-Uralsk may greatly 
lower energy outlays (up to 100 million rubles/yr). The 
power-to-output ratio for producing tin can band by using 
non-ingot blank rolling can be lowered by 25-30%. 
  The following should be substituted: obsolete traveling 
ovens 
for heating slabs--with modern pusher-tube furnaces at the 
Kamensk-Uralsk and Belaya Kalitva Metallurgical Production 
Associations and the Stupino Integrated Iron and Steel Works; 
the uneconomical and environmentally unacceptable saltpeter 
quenching baths at the Stupino Integrated Iron and Steel Works 
and Kamensk- Uralsk Metallurgical Production Association; and 
resistance furnaces--with gas-fired furnaces. 
  Due to the insufficient present level of investment, the use 
of secondary energy resources (VER) does not exceed 4% of 
the 
total output. Yet an increase in the secondary energy resource 
utilization by a mere 10% may lower the energy outlays by 
120 
million rubles/yr. 
  Another important reserve which is not adequately used today 
and which makes it possible under rising primary metal and 
energy resource prices to improve the situation with the use of 
aluminum in various industries is maximizing the involvement of 
secondary aluminum in production. In contrast to many other 
metals, the very nature of aluminum provides broad opportunities 
for its multiple use. Moreover, the energy outlays for its 
production amount to merely 5% of the primary production 
energy 
outlays. 
  Thus far, a lion's share of annually produced aluminum has 
been irretrievably lost from circulation and will not be 
returned in the form of recycled scrap until the end of the 
products' service life. The ratio of secondary aluminum to the 
total volume of its production in the country does not exceed 
18-20% while the rolled stock produced from secondary 
aluminum 
alloys amounts to merely 5% of the total volume. At the 
same 
time, the proportion of secondary aluminum in world practices 
reaches close to 25% (close to 38% in the United 
States and 
30% in Europe) and in individual developed countries, it 
exceeds 75% (79.1% in Japan in 1985). 
  The mining and alumina enterprises and primary aluminum 
production plants also have sufficient reserves and are faced 
with problems whose realization and solution may have a 
beneficial effect on increasing the technical level and lowering 
the cost of their production. 
  Yet when each enterprise individually addresses the 
aforementioned issues, both extracting and processing, most of 
the efficient large-scale measures cannot be implemented because 
they require considerable investment which an individual 
enterprise cannot afford. 
  At the same time, historically the aluminum-containing raw 
material mining (bauxites and nephelines) and alumina and 
primary aluminum production have been exclusively concentrated 
in nonferrous metallurgy while production of structural rolled 
stock from aluminum and its alloys (plates, sheets, bands, 
sections, panels, buses, rods, pipes, wire, stampings, and 
rings)--primarily at machining enterprises of the former USSR 
Ministry of Aviation Industry. 
  Thus, the issue of supplying the needs of the national 
economy with aluminum products has been thus far addressed by a 
large number of individual uncoordinated enterprises. 
  The three most important features can be identified among 
the 
many negative consequences of such lack of coordination. 

  -  Due to a rather frequent discrepancy between the 
departmental interests and natioal interests, the issue of 
stably supplying metalworking enterprises with primary metal has 
always been solved with great difficulties. As a result, the 
degree to which the national economy's need for aluminum rolled 
products are met has not exceeded 75-80%. 
  -  Under the conditions where state subsidies are severely 
limited 
and, at times, are not available altogether, and it is 
impossible to concentrate the financial resources for radically 
increasing the technical production level, each individual 
enterprise, as we have already indicated, is forced to limit its 
retooling plans in accordance with its own realistic 
possibilities. 
  -  Given the existing tax structure, only the added-value tax 
collected more than once due to the lack of enterprise 
coordination leads to a sharp increase in the aluminum rolled 
stock cost, a drop in demand, and a loss of positions already 
gained. 
  -  In our opinion, under today's conditions, these problems can 
be 
solved radically by deepening the vertical links and setting up 
unified commercial structures for manufacturing aluminum 
products, the so-called technological aluminum corporations. 
They are technological because they must unify enterprises which 
have long been connected by a common technological link which 
includes mining the ore raw material, processing it, producing 
primary metal, and manufacturing ready metallurgical production 
(rolled stock). 

    Prompt resolution of the issue of eliminating the 
bottlenecks, bringing the entire technological cycle to a proper 
technical level, ensuring stable operation of all links, and 
attaining high economic production indicators and total economic 
independence is possible only in the framework of sufficiently 
strong commercial structures and by concentrating intellectual, 
financial, and other sources. 


