Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V. V. Milyutin, V. M. Gelis, and R. A. Penzin; </F>
UDC 621.039.714] 
  [Abstract] The problem of deactivating liquid radioactive 
wastes formed during operation of nuclear reactors and refining 
spent fuel has become acute. Most of this waste is contained in 
effluents having medium to low levels of contamination. This 
problem became especially significant following the accident at 
Chernobyl and in connection with rehabilitation efforts at the 
``MAYAK'' Production Association in Chelyabinskaya Oblast. Both 
sorption and ion exchange methods are used to treat natural and 
waste waters and much work has been published in this area. 
However, the results obtained by various authors are difficult 
to compare analytically because they were obtained under a 
variety of experimental conditions, and estimating the 
sorption-selective properties becomes qualitative or only 
semi-quantitative in character. Over the past several years the 
Physical Chemistry Institute has been conducting a systematic 
study on the sorption- selectivity properties of organic ion 
exchange resins in respect to cesium and strontium nucleides 
within the framework of a government program to liquidate the 
remains of the Chernobyl nuclear accident. In the present work 
the sorption-selectivity characteristics of natural and modified 
aluminum silicates, synthetic zeolites, phosphates, transition 
metal ferrocyanides, and carbonaceous materials were determined 
in respect to cesium and strontium ions. Coefficients of 
distribution for micro- quantities of strontium-85 and 
cesium-137 in sodium and calcium nitrate solutions under static 
conditions were determined. Treatment of Moscow River tap water 
contaminated with cesium and strontium was studied under dynamic 
conditions. It was demonstrated that the most effective sorbents 
against cesium are the ferrocyanide sorbents and natural 
aluminum silicates, while synthetic zeolites type A are most 
effective against strontium. References 17: 16 Russian, 1 
Western. 

