Language: <F P=105>Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Text of Government Work Report Delivered by Chinese Premier </F>
Li Peng at the Opening of the Second Session of the Eighth 
National People's Congress at the Great Hall of the People in 
Beijing on 10 March 1994 -- live] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies: 
  On behalf of the State Council I would now like to deliver 
the government work report at this session. Please examine it. 
I also request members of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference [CPPCC] National Committee and other 
observers to present your views. 
  I. A Review of Domestic Affairs in 1993 and Basic Principles 
for the Work in 1994. 
  The past year was a year in which the nation implemented in 
all sectors the guidelines laid down by the 14th National CPC 
Committee in all sectors and proceeded victoriously along the 
course of building socialism with Chinese characteristics; and 
in which major achievements were made in reform, opening up, and 
modernization, and a new situation appeared in the work in all 
quarters. In an international environment marked by unrest, 
changes, and economic recession, our great socialist motherland 
stands tall in the east of the world with fast economic growth, 
political stability, national solidarity, and social progress! 
[applause] 
  Our national economy maintained rapid growth. On the basis 
of the fast growth in 1992, our national economy continued its 
vigorous development in 1993. The gross domestic product [GDP] 
exceeded three trillion yuan, topping that of the preceding year 
by 13.4 percent. Agriculturally it was a year of bumper 
harvests. Agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, side-line 
production, and fishery developed steadily. The added value of 
agricultural output increased 4 percent. The output of major 
agricultural products increased substantially, with the 
exception of cotton and sugar-bearing crops, the production of 
which declined. Grain output reached 456.4 billion kilograms, 
which was a record high. Village and town enterprises continued 
to develop rapidly. The added value of the nation's industrial 
output increased by 21.1 percent. The output of certain major 
goods increased by big margins. Steel output reached 88.68 
million tonnes. The pace of enterprises' technological 
transformation and product-mix restructuring quickened. 
Economic returns were higher. The domestic market thrived. 
The total volume of consumer goods increased 11.6 percent. The 
investment pattern was improved. Major construction projects 
were intensified. Remarkable results were achieved in energy, 
communications, and telecommunications construction. The 
capacity of generators was expanded by 14.38 million kw. The 
construction of the Beijing-Jiujiang, Nanning-Kunming, and other 
main railways was progressing smoothly; and the construction of 
high-grade highways and key seaports quickened. The development 
of postal and telecommunications services was particularly fast. 
The number of telephones in urban and rural areas increased by 
3.67 million units. 
  To deal with conspicuous contradictions and problems during 
the rapid economic development, the CPC Central Committee and 
the State Council took timely macroeconomic regulatory and 
control measures, made great efforts to rectify financial order 
and stabilize the economic situation, and maintained the good 
momentum of economic development, thus providing the necessary 
conditions for sustained economic development, and smooth 
progress of reforms this year. In addition, we have accumulated 
valuable experience in exercising macroeconomic regulation and 
control under the socialist market economic conditions. 
  While new progress has been made in reform and opening up, 
we 
have continued to promote reforms in all fields according to the 
requirements of establishing a socialist market economic 
structure. The reform, with emphasis on changing operational 
mechanisms, continued to deepen. Enterprises were given 
decision-making power step by step. The main role of the market 
was strengthened. While developing the state-owned and 
collective economy, the individual, private, and foreign-funded 
sectors of the economy continued to grow. Prices were further 
rationalized, and both the buying and selling prices of grain 
were basically decontrolled. The pace of development of markets 
for production factors, including capital, land, labor force, 
technology and information, was accelerated. 
  On the basis of conducting thorough investigation and study 
and seeking opinions from all quarters, we formulated plans for 
reforming the fiscal and taxation, financial, investment, and 
foreign trade systems. These reform plans now have in the main 
been promulgated, and are proceeding quite smoothly. This 
indicates an important step taken by China in establishing a 
socialist market economic structure. 
  In the past year, the country was opened to the outside 
world 
wider and wider, foreign investment remarkably increased, the 
area of investment was expanded, and the investment structure 
improved. Direct investment totaled $25.8 billion, the largest 
for one year since the start of reform and opening up. Foreign 
trade enjoyed an all-round development, with total volume of 
import-export trade amounting to $195.8 billion, up 18.2 percent 
from 1992. Of the export goods, the proportion of manufactured 
goods increased and the degree of processing was enhanced. 
  Scientific and technological cooperation and cultural 
exchanges with foreign countries further expanded. 
International tourism made rapid development. Contracting of 
projects and provision of labor services abroad became more 
brisk. Various social undertakings made further development. 
New progress was made in scientific and technological 
undertakings while deepening reform. Implementation of the plans 
for technological research and applied technology research, and 
for tackling key problems in science and technology proceeded 
smoothly, and over 30,000 major scientific and technological 
results were achieved. A number of scientific results including 
the Galaxy II supercomputer and the Dawn I robot reached 
advanced world levels. Construction of the new and high 
technology industrial development zones made new development, 
thus playing an obvious role in commercialization and 
industrialization of scientific results. Educational 
undertakings advanced amid reform. Basic education, vocational 
education, adult education, and higher education continued to 
develop and improve. 
  China successfully held the Seventh National Games and 
hosted 
the first East Asian Games. Chinese athletes won 103 world 
championships in major international sports meets. The mass 
sports activities continued to develop. New achievements were 
scored in the fields of literature and arts, the press and 
publishing, radio, film and television, the social sciences, 
public health, pharmaceutical production, family planning, 
environmental protection, disaster prevention, and disaster 
reduction. Celebration of Chairman Mao's birth centennial and 
the showing of 100 patriotic films produced excellent social 
effects. Work on the comprehensive management of social order 
was further promoted. New achievements were scored in national 
defense undertakings. The development of socialist spiritual 
civilization, democracy, and the legal system was stepped up. 
The livelihood of the urban and rural people continued to 
improve. After allowing for price rises, last year the average 
amount of per capita income that urban and rural dwellers used 
for living expenses increased 10.2 percent, and per- capita net 
income of rural residents went up by 3.2 percent. Bank savings 
deposits of urban and rural residents increased by a big margin, 
with the yearend balance of bank savings deposits reaching 
1,476.4 billion yuan, up 28 percent. In 1993, housing floor 
space totalling 270 million square meters was added for urban 
residents, and 570 million square meters were built in rural 
areas. Consumption levels of urban and rural citizens went up 
steadily, and their spiritual and cultural life was constantly 
enriched. 
  Deputies: Over the last year, under the leadership of the 
CPC and through struggle in unity by people of various 
nationalities across the country, we have in the main completed 
various tasks for 1993 set by the First Session of the Eighth 
National People's Congress. 
  On behalf of the State Council, I wish to express my 
heartfelt gratitude to people of various nationalities of the 
whole country for their trust in the work of the government and 
their support. [applause] 
  I also wish to express my sincere thanks to compatriots in 
Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macao; Overseas Chinese; and all foreign 
friends who have shown concern for and supported our country's 
modernization drive. [applause] 
  While affirming our achievements, we have soberly seen that 
there are still some deficiencies and shortcomings in the 
government's work. In the course of advancing, there are still 
some prominent contradictions and difficulties, principally, the 
scale of investment in fixed assets was overextended; increases 
in commodity prices were relatively large; the problem of the 
irrational economic structure remained fairly salient; some 
state-owned large and medium enterprises still had considerable 
difficulties in production and management; public order in some 
localities was bad; the fight against social ills was not 
forceful enough; corrupt practices such as embezzlement, 
bribery, favoritism, and fraud existed among a small number of 
government functionaries; and formalism and bureaucratism among 
government departments affected the government's ties with the 
people. The party Central Committee and the State Council have 
paid great attention to these problems and have been taking 
measures to solve these problems in an effective manner. 
  Fellow deputies, after having comprehensively analyzed the 
situations at home and abroad, the CPC Central Committee clearly 
put forward the basic principles for the work of the whole party 
and the whole nation, namely, to implement the guidelines of the 
14th National Party Congress and the Third Plenary Session of 
the 14th CPC Central Committee in an all-round way; accelerate 
the establishment of a socialist market economic structure; 
maintain sustained, rapid, and healthy national economic 
development [bao chi guo min jing ji chi xu kuai su jian kang di 
fa zhan]; maintain political stability; and promote sweeping 
social progress under the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
theory on building socialism with Chinese characteristics, and 
the party's basic line. The CPC Central Committee emphatically 
pointed out that seizing the opportunity, deepening reform, 
opening up wider, promoting development, and maintaining 
stability represent the overall interests of the work for the 
whole party and the whole nation. We must subordinate ourselves 
to and serve these overall interests in carrying out all our 
tasks. We must conscientiously and properly handle the 
relationships among reform, development, and stability in real 
earnest. Economic development is the center of all our work, 
reform and opening up are the motive force of development, and 
development and reform are the foundation of long-term social 
and political stability; and social stability, in turn, is a 
prerequisite for economic development and the smooth progress of 
reform. Judging from the conditions at home and abroad, we can 
see that China faces a rare historical opportunity now. So long 
as we conscientiously do a good job in all fields of endeavor, 
timely discover new situations existing in reform and 
development and solve new problems, and maintain coordination 
among reform, development, and stability, and enable them to 
promote one another, our cause of socialist modernization will 
surely be able to march from one victory to another. [applause] 
  II. Maintain Sustained, Rapid, and Healthy Development of 
the National Economy. 
  Nineteen ninety-four is a year in which the national economy 
has continued to maintain its growth momentum and is also an 
important year for us to press ahead with reform. In our 
economic work this year, we will deepen reform, open wider to 
the outside world, strengthen and improve macroeconomic 
regulation and control, vigorously readjust the economic 
structure, promote technological progress, actively open up 
markets, heighten economic efficiency, and control inflation to 
maintain sustained, rapid, and healthy development. In line 
with these requirements, the gross domestic product is projected 
to increase 9 percent this year. It is fairly appropriate that 
this growth rate has been arranged on the basis of 13 percent 
annual growth for two consecutive years. It will be a 
tremendous achievement if we can maintain a growth of between 8 
percent and 9 percent for a successive number of years. 
  Comrade Jiang Zemin has pointed out: New ideas are needed to 
promote development. It is necessary to truly switch onto the 
track which focuses on heightening economic performance. We 
must not blindly take the old road of blindly going after output 
value, growth rate, and expanding the scale of investment. The 
current conditions for economic growth are somewhat tight, and 
the effects of bottleneck restrictions and inflationary 
pressures are expanding. Reform requires a fairly relaxed 
circumstance. We must correctly analyze and grasp the 
situation. We must not only see favorable conditions but also 
pay attention to unfavorable factors in an effort to maintain a 
vigorous but also steady and proper growth rate. In line with 
their respective actual conditions, various localities should 
determine a rational growth rate for themselves. They should 
avoid competing with each other and recklessly going after 
output value. 
  We must strengthen the role of agriculture as the foundation 
of the national economy, and develop all sectors of the rural 
economy. Agriculture concerns the overall situation. As the 
majority of China's population resides in the countryside, at no 
time should we neglect the farmers' interests and rural economic 
development. The supply of farm products has a direct bearing 
on the stability of prices, and the improvement of people's 
living conditions in urban and rural areas. Moreover, increases 
in farmers' incomes also has a direct bearing on the expansion 
of markets. 
  Governments at all levels must conscientiously implement the 
guidelines of the central conference on rural work held last 
year, stabilize all basic party policies for rural areas, 
further deepen reform in rural areas, and appropriately resolve 
the outstanding contradictions and problems emerging in the 
course of economic development in rural areas. On the basis of 
ensuring the steady growth of grain and cotton production, it is 
necessary to promote an all-round development of agriculture, 
forestry, animal husbandry, sideline undertakings and fishery, 
bring about the sustained growth of town and village 
enterprises, and do everything possible to increase farmers' 
incomes. 
  The main measures are as follows: 
  To appropriately increase the purchase prices of grain and 
the prices of contract purchase of cotton; to support the 
development of the industry for agricultural use; to strengthen 
the management of the prices of agricultural capital goods; to 
increase the central and local governments' agricultural 
investment; to encourage and guide collectives and peasants to 
increase investment; to step up agricultural capital 
construction and comprehensive agricultural development; to 
refine the state's grain storage system and to establish grain 
risk funds; to strengthen the regulation and control of the 
grain market and stabilize grain price; on the basis of 
stabilizing the area of grain and cotton crops and increasing 
per-unit area output, to adjust the agricultural production 
structure and develop a diversified economy. 
  The state will give support to 500 selected key commodity 
grain production counties and 150 counties producing 
good-quality cotton, and will build a number of high-yield, 
good-quality, and highly efficient model agricultural zones each 
of which with its own characteristics. 
  Developing village and town enterprises is the way we must 
go 
to enable the rural population to live a relatively comfortable 
life. We should continue to support village and town enterprise 
development, especially in the middle and western parts of the 
country. 
  We will continue to advance agriculture through the 
application of science and technology and promotion of 
education. We will cultivate a large number of useful and 
dedicated agricultural technicians, make agricultural technology 
promotion organs more stable, take positive measures to prevent 
plant diseases and insect pests, and promote fine strains and 
the use of advanced and applicable technologies. 
  The measures on easing farmers' burdens have enjoyed popular 
support, and we should continue to carry them out. We should 
earnestly carry out the plan to help the poor. This plan is, 
over the next 7 years from now to the end of this century, to 
help the 80 million people in poor areas, especially in the old 
revolutionary base areas, minority nationality areas, and 
frontier areas, to have enough to eat and wear, and to help them 
free themselves from poverty and live a better life. This is an 
unshirkable responsibility of governments at all levels. We 
believe this plan will definitely win warm support from people 
across the country. [applause] 
  We must dearly cherish and protect cultivated land, 
continually promote the building of a socialized service 
network, further develop and perfect farm produce markets, push 
forward reform of the supply and marketing systems and the 
household registration administration system of small towns. 
The transfer of surplus rural labor to nonagricultural sectors 
and its rational flow between regions are the objective 
requirements of economic development and an inevitable trend. 
We must actively guide and strengthen the management of this 
work and carry it out step by step in a well-organized way. 
  We should improve management and do a good job of production 
on the industrial and communications front. Successfully 
carrying out industrial production and communications, 
especially the production and operation of state-owned large and 
medium enterprises, is of extremely great significance to 
maintaining the national economy's sustained development. 
Generally speaking, reform measures announced this year will 
have a positive impact on the enterprises' production and 
operations. However, they are also likely to bring temporarily 
unfavorable elements to some enterprises. Currently, some 
state-owned large and medium enterprises are still in a 
difficult situation and suffer from poor economic efficiency. 
The causes of this are in their operating mechanisms as well as 
in their heavy social burdens, numerous historical loads, and 
poor internal management. We must actively work from many 
aspects to resolve this. Given that our finances are still 
fairly difficult, the State Council has nevertheless decided to 
exempt state-owned enterprises from the energy and transport 
funds and budget regulatory funds, beginning this year. In 
addition, a special fund is appropriated to consolidate bankrupt 
enterprises and resettle their workers. All localities and 
departments should place the task of making state-owned large 
and medium enterprises successful at the head of their agenda, 
adopt feasible measures to create a favorable external 
environment for enterprises to carry out management and 
operations, and help them halt losses and increase profits. 
However, fundamentally speaking, state-owned enterprises must 
rely on their own efforts to overcome their difficult 
situations. While actively pressing ahead with reform, 
enterprises must actively adjust their product mix in light of 
market demands at home and abroad, strive to produce readily 
salable goods, and constantly develop new products to enhance 
their market adaptability and competitiveness. 
  Governments at all levels should attach importance to 
commercial work and unclog the channels of rural and urban 
markets in order to further enliven commodity circulation and 
smooth the flow of goods. Technical transformation of 
enterprises should be conducted by focusing on optimization of 
the product mix, improving the quality of products, reducing 
consumption, and lowering costs. Basic industries should upgrade 
their production capacity through technical transformation; and 
processing industries should seek advancement through technical 
transformation. We should attach importance to and support the 
transformation of the old industrial bases in order to enable 
them to continue playing an important role in the national 
economy. 
  The condition of production safety in some enterprises is 
not 
good, and serious accidents causing deaths and injuries have 
occurred quite frequently. Bad management is the main cause. 
Therefore, we must pay a high degree of attention to this 
situation. We should adopt effective measures to strengthen 
management on production safety and make sure that our efforts 
in this respect yield obvious results as soon as possible. 
  We must maintain a rational scale of investment and optimize 
the investment structure. A rational investment scale is an 
important condition for maintaining economic stability and 
enhancing the capacity to advance future economic development. 
Currently, the number of projects under construction throughout 
the country is already large, and the number of construction 
projects arranged for the new year is not insignificant. We can 
no longer permit the continued expansion of construction 
projects. Even in the construction of basic industries and 
infrastructural facilities, we should also undertake them in 
line with our financial capacity. In order to realize a 
sustained, rapid, and healthy development of the national 
economy, all localities and departments must draw up their plans 
rationally by bearing in mind the overall situation and 
following an order of importance and urgency. They must give 
priority to devoting their financial and material resources to 
projects under construction involving the transport, 
telecommunications, energy, and important raw and semifinished 
material industries, as well as to other key construction 
projects involving the harnessing of large rivers and lakes. 
The coastal areas should be encouraged to invest in central and 
western regions in China and to jointly exploit local resources 
by making use of the advantages of the labor force there. 
  This year, we will no longer approve the establishment of 
new 
development zones in the country. In the future, new capital 
construction projects must not start before necessary funds are 
available; it is necessary to have a certain proportion of 
capital to start new projects. Making investments by diverting 
circulating funds or by borrowing money will not be permitted. 
The banks should tighten supervision and management to ensure 
the sufficient amount of circulating funds needed when projects 
are put into production. 
  Deepening the reform of the investment system is a 
fundamental guarantee for maintaining a rational scale of 
investment, optimizing the investment structure, and heightening 
investment returns. The reform of the investment system this 
year mainly involves the establishment of the National 
Development Bank. The aim is to provide a steady source of 
funds for key capital construction projects, and at the same 
time to check inflation and investment expansion through the 
balancing of capital. In order to establish a mechanism for 
restricting investment, both investors and the banks which 
provide loans must undertake responsibility for investment 
risks. We must improve macroeconomic regulation and control 
over the scale of investment and investment structure and 
standardize the procedures of making policy decisions on 
investment in order to reduce recklessness in investment. 
  We will open up wider to the outside world and develop 
cooperation and exchanges with foreign countries. On the whole, 
the current international situation is favorable to our country. 
We must seize this opportunity and continue to do a good job in 
opening up our special economic zones, the Shanghai Pudong New 
District, coastal open cities and belts, and technological and 
economic development zones, as well as key cities located in 
border areas, along rivers, and in the interior; and continue to 
raise the level of opening up. To maintain and develop the good 
momentum of foreign investment in China, we should further 
improve the investment environment, improve our economic laws 
and regulations concerning foreign businesses, make earnest 
efforts to protect foreign-funded enterprises' legitimate rights 
and interests, guide foreign investment with our state 
industrial policy, and encourage foreign investors to 
participate in building our country's basic industries and 
infrastructures. Foreign-funded enterprises should also abide 
by China's laws and regulations and operate their businesses 
according to law. We should pay attention to maintaining a 
proper amount of foreign debts and a rational mix of debts. 
Maintaining a basic balance of international receipts and 
payments is an important condition for achieving a sustained and 
healthy economic development. China's economy is developing 
rapidly and the prospects of its market are very bright. Our 
imports last year increased quite considerably and the growth of 
our exports was relatively slow, causing a rather substantial 
deficit in our foreign trade. To ensure our needs of imported 
goods, we must actively expand our exports. We must follow the 
strategy of winning with quality and diversifying our markets, 
increase the intensity of processing, increase the technology of 
our goods, improve after-sale service, and actively explore new 
markets while consolidating and developing existing markets. We 
must continue to improve the tax refund system for exports, 
decontrol the import-export businesses in an orderly manner, and 
authorize more enterprises with the needed resources to trade 
with foreign countries. 
  Foreign trade enterprises must earnestly change their 
operating mechanisms, thinking, and styles, and develop in the 
direction of turning themselves into industrialized, 
internationalized, and group-type trade enterprises. We must 
strengthen the approval and management of investments outside 
the country, strengthen the supervision over enterprises 
established outside the country, strive to develop international 
tourism, and expand the business of contracting foreign projects 
and cooperation in labor service. Making continual and constant 
efforts to improve the people's living standards and the 
standards of their material and cultural lives on the basis of 
economic development is the basic purpose of developing our 
economy. It is also the basic objective of government work. We 
must firmly uphold the mass view and be concerned with the 
masses' plight at all times. 
  Though we reaped bumper agricultural harvests in recent 
years, the comparative grain and cotton returns dropped. The 
increase in peasants' income was relatively slow. Governments 
at all levels must attach a high degree of importance to the 
problem; they must strengthen leadership over and give more 
support to rural economic development; they must increase 
peasants' income by developing the rural economy and by 
appropriately increasing purchase prices for grain and cotton; 
and they must vigorously develop the tertiary industry to 
provide more job opportunities in urban and rural areas. State 
enterprises must increase the incomes of staff and workers by 
improving economic returns. A new wage system has been 
implemented for state functionaries, and it must be gradually 
improved. Housing construction must be sped up in a planned way 
in conjunction with the housing system reform in urban areas; 
the focal point of the work is to build a group of residences at 
medium or low prices for the people in an attempt to improve 
their housing conditions. Now, the masses in some impoverished 
and some disaster-hit areas and the staff and workers of 
enterprises with poor economic efficiency that have partially or 
completely halted production are still leading relatively 
difficult lives; and retired people's actual incomes have 
decreased somewhat. Governments at all levels must show special 
concern for them, and take positive measures to help them solve 
difficulties. We must uphold the policy of encouraging some 
areas and people to become prosperous ahead of others through 
honest labor and lawful business, and encourage those who have 
become prosperous ahead of others to bring along and help those 
who have lagged behind so as to gradually achieve common 
prosperity. Meanwhile, we must regulate excessive income gaps 
through a policy of rational distribution and the regulatory 
role of taxes. 
  Fellow deputies, family planning and environmental 
protection 
are basic national policies. Though we have scored great 
achievements in carrying out the family planning task, its 
development is uneven and some achievements are not adequately 
consolidated. It is still necessary for us to make continued, 
vigorous efforts to successfully handle the task; we must not 
slacken our efforts in the slightest degree. We must further 
improve the system of responsibility for attaining given 
objectives and strictly implement family planning policies, 
laws, and regulations. We must practically step up propaganda 
and education among grass-roots units and particularly at the 
village level, and improve services for them; and we must 
conscientiously study and solve new problems cropping up under 
the new situation. In conducting family planning work, we must 
put the stress on the rural areas and the floating population 
and we must satisfactorily integrate family planning work with 
economic development, universal education, and the efforts to 
shake off poverty and achieve prosperity. 
  Governments at all levels must include environmental 
protection in economic and social development programs; they 
must persist in mapping out plans for economic, urban and rural, 
and environmental construction; in carrying out the plans; and 
in achieving development in these fields of endeavor at the same 
time. They must carry out comprehensive treatment of urban and 
rural environments, they must strengthen supervision and 
inspection in accordance with laws, they must rationally exploit 
and protect natural resources, and they must make vigorous 
afforestation efforts to improve China's ecology. 
  III. Speeding Up the Establishment of a Socialist Market 
Economic Structure. 
  The general blueprint formulated by the Third Plenary 
Session 
of the 14th CPC Central Committee for the establishment of a 
socialist market economic structure is the program for action in 
further deepening reform. This year, we should combine package 
reform with breakthroughs in key areas to achieve substantive 
progress in reform of the economic structure. We should 
conscientiously implement the plan for fiscal and taxation 
reform and rationalize the distribution of revenues between the 
central and local authorities and between the state and 
enterprises. The main contents of the fiscal and taxation 
systems reform are to change the current local fiscal 
contractual responsibility system to a tax assignment system 
[fen shui zhi] on the basis of a rational division of power 
between central and local authorities. We will divide the 
revenue between the central and local authorities according to 
different categories of taxes and establish a separate taxation 
system for the central and local authorities. In the taxation 
system reform, we should establish a turnover tax [liu zhuan 
shui] based mainly on a value added tax. We will unify the 
taxes on domestic-funded enterprises and the individual income 
tax. Meanwhile, we will reform the system of distributing 
state-owned enterprises' profits. The reform plan takes into 
full account both the need of a gradual increase in the central 
authorities' financial resources and, at the same time, the 
interests of local authorities and the enterprises' current 
operational situation, which is conducive to bringing the 
initiative of both the central and local authorities into full 
play. This is a practical and feasible plan. Governments at 
various levels should take the overall situation into 
consideration and ensure the reform plan's smooth implementation. 
  At present, state finances are faced with some difficulties. 
With the economy's development and the fiscal and taxation 
systems reform, state revenues will increase steadily. However, 
it will take some time to alleviate the financial difficulties. 
This year, due to the fact that the government has to spend a 
relatively large amount of money to repay both capital and 
interest on domestic and external debts, lighten financial 
burdens on enterprises, carry out commodity prices reform and 
increase wages, there will be more factors of decreasing 
revenues and increasing expenditures. The central government 
deficit will be fairly large. The fiscal and taxation 
departments are required to strictly enforce the levying and 
management of taxes and to strive to increase financial 
revenues. In expenditures, we should adhere to the principle of 
belt tightening and strengthening budget control. Various 
localities should strive to achieve a balance in their revenues 
and expenditures and avoid deficits. The central government 
will solve its deficit by issuing state bonds this year and will 
no longer make overdrafts from banks. The state plans to give 
favorable treatment to those who purchase state bonds. This is 
a good thing that will benefit the country and the people. It 
is hoped that people across the country will enthusiastically 
purchase state bonds to support national construction. 
  We will steadily carry out the banking system reform and 
realize the unification of foreign exchange rates smoothly. 
With the socialist market economy's development, banking will 
play an increasingly important role in the national economy. We 
should steadily promote the banking system's reform and 
establish an effective system of macroeconomic regulation and 
control by the central bank, so that the People's Bank of China 
can effectively control the currency supply and stabilize the 
currency's value. We should actively and properly separate the 
functions of policy-lending banks from those of commercial 
banks. In addition to the establishment of a National 
Construction Bank, we will establish the China Import-Export 
Bank to support the import and export of whole sets of 
equipment. We will also establish the China Agricultural 
Development Bank, which will be responsible for the state's 
grain and oil reserve, the contractual procurement of 
agricultural and sideline products, and agricultural 
development. The existing state-owned specialized banks should 
gradually change themselves into state-owned commercial banks. 
Governments at various levels should support bank work and make 
it possible for banks to independently perform their functions 
and duties. Banks should consciously implement the state policy 
of macroeconomic regulations and control and establish 
self-regulating mechanisms 
  China's economy is in a period of rapid growth; therefore, 
a shortage of funds will exist for a long time to come. Over the 
last two years, the total amount of currency and credit has 
increased sharply. However, because the economy has developed 
rapidly and the scale of construction has been excessively 
large, the contradiction between the supply of and demand for 
funds is still very prominent. This year we should strive to 
maintain an appropriate scale of currency issuance and credit, 
and prevent investment from swelling. At the same time, we 
should continue to improve the investment structure, rectify the 
financial order, tighten account settling discipline, take 
positive measures to break debt chains between enterprises, and 
improve the effectiveness of fund utilization. 
  Linking the quoted price of renminbi to the foreign exchange 
regulation market is a reform measure of great significance. 
This will play an important role in linking the domestic and 
overseas markets, and in broadening the scope of opening to the 
outside world. We should strictly implement the management 
system for settling both import and export charges with full 
payment in foreign exchange, and tighten the management of 
revenue and expenditure of (?capital-related) foreign exchange 
to prevent losses of foreign exchange. We should further 
develop and improve the foreign exchange market. The People's 
Bank of China should strengthen its foreign exchange market 
management, provide services to both the supply and demand 
sides, regulate supply and demand, and stabilize foreign 
exchange rates. 
  We should transform the operating mechanisms of state-owned 
enterprises and search for effective ways to establish a modern 
enterprise system. Large- and medium-sized state-owned 
enterprises are the mainstay of the national economy; the reform 
of state-owned enterprises is both the focus and difficult part 
of the economic reform. The fundamental way to increase the 
vitality of large- and medium-sized state-owned enterprises is 
to deepen reform; transform enterprise operating mechanisms; and 
establish a modern enterprise system under which the property 
rights as well as the rights and responsibilities of enterprises 
are clearly defined, government administration and enterprise 
management are separated, and scientitic management is 
established. Establishing a modern enterprise system is 
definitely a requisite for developing socialized mass production 
and a market economy. This is difficult and complicated work. 
This year, the state will organize a number of large- and 
medium-sized state-owned enterprises, according to the Company 
Law, to experiment with establishing a modern enterprise system 
in order to accumulate experiences, and popularize them step by 
step. 
  We should continue to actively advance the reform of the 
social security system to ease the burden of enterprises in 
undertaking social welfare projects and to create conditions for 
enterprises to participate in market competition on an equal 
footing. 
  In the face of enterprise reform, we should continue to 
transform enterprises' operating mechanisms; truly give 
enterprises all their rights and responsibilities; continue to 
deepen the reform of enterprises' labor, personnel, and 
distribution systems; refine their internal mechanisms; and 
increase their vitality. We should truly strengthen the 
management of state-owned assets, do a good job in appraising 
fixed assets and circulating funds, and ensure that state-owned 
assets maintain and increase their value. We should strictly 
prohibit state-owned assets from being used at a low price as 
company shares, being sold at low prices, or even being given to 
individuals as gifts. 
  We should further straighten out price relationships and 
develop and foster a market system. Over the last decade and 
more, with little social shock, we have basically decontrolled 
commodity prices. Our reform has been successful. This year we 
will also appropriately adjust the prices of grain, cotton, and 
energy in order to rally peasants' production enthusiasm, to 
support the development of the energy industry, and to promote 
the conservation of energy. 
  In carrying out price reform, we should consider 
enterprises' 
and the masses' ability to cope with the consequences. We 
should work positively to make an overall arrangement and 
conduct the work in a positive and steady manner. Governments 
at all levels and relevant social sectors should make joint 
efforts to keep the increase of this year's retail prices within 
10 percent. 
  We should pay special attention to controlling the increase 
in the prices of basic consumer products and in the fees for 
services that are closely related to the masses' daily lives. 
We should continue to implement the major responsibility system 
and ensure the success of the vegetable basket project to 
stabilize non-staple food prices in urban and rural areas. 
  We must deepen the restructuring of the circulatory [liu 
tong] system and expedite the consolidation and development of 
the domestic markets. While continuing to develop and improve 
the commodity markets, we must actively develop the domestic 
production-factors markets, perfect market regulations, improve 
market order, strengthen market management and supervision, and 
protect consumers' legitimate rights and interests by punishing 
according to law all acts of producing or selling counterfeit 
and inferior goods. 
  We must continue to do a good job in restructuring 
government 
institutions and earnestly change government functions. Over 
the past year, the State Council's institutional restructuring 
proceeded quite smoothly. All departments have basically 
completed their assignments of designating responsibilities of 
specific organs and staffing them according to authorized sizes. 
This year, we will continue to work hard to change the 
functions of government departments and improve their working 
efficiency; provincial-level governments should basically 
complete restructuring their organs, and the governments of some 
cities and counties should also start restructuring their 
organs. We must persist in separating the government functions 
from enterprise management, let enterprises handle all the 
affairs within their operating autonomy, and let the market 
solve those problems which it should solve itself. We should 
give full play to the services of intermediary market 
organizations, such as trade associations and chambers of 
commerce, and improve the statistical work and administrative 
and auditing supervision. The government should primarily play 
the role of providing proper macroeconomic regulation and 
control, overall coordination, and social management [she hui 
guan li]. Cadres at all levels, especially leading cadres, must 
strive to study market economics and keep abreast with major 
reform projects, policies, laws, and regulations so that they 
can improve their leadership, and take greater initiative and be 
less reckless while doing their work. The State Council has 
decided to set up a state institute of administration to 
intensify the training of medium- and high-ranking public 
functionaries. 
  This year, major strides of reform have been made in 
establishing a socialist market economic structure. To make 
sure that the reform can proceed smoothly, governments at all 
levels must place greater efforts on reform, organize various 
projects meticulously, provide overall coordination, and provide 
reform with guidance through the media as well as by means of 
publicity and education. 
  Fellow deputies: Making greater efforts to build an 
efficient and clean government and fighting all phenomena of 
corruption is a basic task in building our political power and 
an important guarantee for the smooth progress of reform and 
development. Since last year, successes to varying degrees have 
been achieved in fighting corruption and promoting clean 
government with respect to disciplinary actions taken by cadres 
themselves to promote honesty, the major cases that have been 
investigated and handled, and efforts made by various 
professions and trade to stop unhealthy tendencies. During the 
new year, governments at all levels must not in the least 
slacken their efforts in this regard. We must understand the 
urgency, formidability, and complexity of the anticorruption 
struggle; fully depend on the masses; deal with the root causes 
as well as the symptoms; and strive to achieve new success. 
Government functionaries, especially leading cadres at various 
levels, must keep firmly in mind that the power in our hands is 
from the people. Seeking personal benefits by abusing power is 
totally against the objective of the people's government, and it 
is totally incongruous with China's socialist system. 
Introducing the principles for commodity exchange into state 
organs and government activities and trading power for money are 
absolutely not permissible because it is an act which has 
seriously distorted the principles governing socialist market 
economy. 
  We must continue to intensify the crackdown on such serious 
cases as abusing power for personal benefit, corruption, 
bribery, dereliction of duty, and malfeasance, as well as 
smuggling; and we must punish those lawless, undisciplined, and 
corrupt elements according to law. By no means must we tolerate 
them, otherwise we would have abetted them. We must oppose 
extravagance and waste, fraud, formalism, and bureaucratism; and 
firmly stop the unhealthy tendencies in various trades and 
professions. Through deepening reform, we must improve our 
legal system and establish effective supervisory and restraining 
mechanisms so that we can guard against and eliminate corruption 
institutionally. Cadres at all levels must uphold the thinking 
of serving the people wholeheartedly; do their work honestly, 
diligently, and conscientiously with self-discipline; strive to 
improve efficiency, maintain flesh-and-blood ties with the 
masses, and, under the leadership of party committees at all 
levels, carry out this anticorruption struggle, which has a 
close bearing on the state's survival, in a deep-going and 
sustained manner. [applause] 
  IV. Developing Scientific, Technological, Educational, and 
Cultural Undertakings 
  Developing scientific and technological, educational, and 
cultural undertakings and strengthening the building of 
socialist spiritual civilization are important aspects of 
modernization as well as important guarantees for the smooth 
progress of reform, opening up, and economic construction. 
While concentrating on economic construction, we should also 
attach great importance to reform and development in these 
spheres. It is necessary to promote the close integration of 
science and technology with the economy. Science and technology 
is a primary productive force. Economic construction must rely 
on science and technology. Scientific and technological work 
must be geared to the needs of economic construction. This 
year, we will comprehensively implement the Scientific and 
Technological Advancement Law; increase investment in science 
and technology; manage well new- and high-technology industrial 
development zones; transform scientific and technological 
results into practical productive forces; implement the 
principle of holding fast to one end and leaving the whole field 
open; give vigorous support to basic, applied, and new- and 
high-technology research; encourage cooperation between 
scientific and technological development institutes and 
enterprises so that they will compete aggressively on the market 
and enhance their own development vitality. Scientific 
development and application should be focused on equipping all 
sectors of the national economy with advanced technology. In 
particular, we should address such urgent scientific and 
technological problems as developing a high-yield, high-quality, 
and high-efficiency agriculture; bringing about enterprises' 
technical transformation; converting military industrial 
enterprises to civilian production; and assimilating and 
renovating advanced technologies from abroad. Activities in 
ecological innovation and offering rationalization suggestions 
should be extensively conducted among the people. Great efforts 
should be made to foster a technology market, to set up 
intermediate organizations for technological development, and to 
effectively protect intellectual property rights. We should 
concentrate our efforts on managing well the existing state new- 
and high-technology industrial development zones so that they 
will play an exemplary role and create a radiating effect in 
promoting technological progress, transforming traditional 
industries, and developing new industries. 
  This year, in basic, new, and high-technology research, we 
should continue to select and tackle a number of key scientific 
and technological problems that have a profound and far-reaching 
influence on the scientific and technological development of the 
next century. To promote the development of engineering science 
and technology in our country, the State Council has decided to 
establish the China Engineering College, and preparations are 
under way in this respect. We should do a good job of 
educational reform and development. Modernization depends on 
the improvement of people's quality and the training of 
qualified personnel. Governments at all levels should show 
foresight and a sense of urgency, earnestly implement China's 
program for educational reform and development, and give 
strategic consideration to developing education on a priority 
basis. They should quicken the pace of educational reform, 
earnestly increase input in education, strengthen the management 
of educational funds, and promote the development of educational 
services. Governments at all levels should economize in other 
areas and perform some practical deeds for education in every 
possible way. In educational reform, we should focus on 
revamping the educational structure and on improving the quality 
of instruction and the efficiency of running schools. Schools of 
all types should implement the principle of promoting 
development in an all-round way -- morally, intellectually, and 
physically. They should strengthen and improve moral education; 
pay attention to education in national conditions, in the 
prevailing situation, and in our fine traditions; and nurture a 
new type of citizen who has high ideals, moral integrity, better 
education, and a strong sense of discipline. 
  Primary and middle-school education is the basis of 
universal 
education. Basically universalizing nine-year compulsory 
education and basically eradicating illiteracy among young and 
middle-aged people are important tasks for the nineties, which 
must be carried out conscientiously and effectively. We should 
pay attention to admitting into school rural school-age 
children, strive to reduce the school dropout rate, mobilize 
resources in society to carry forward Project Hope, take 
practical measures to lighten students' excessive burdens, and 
change the way students engage in studies for the sole purpose 
of coping with examinations. We should fully inspire the 
initiative of all social sectors to use modern means of 
transmission, such as radio and television, to vigorously 
develop vocational education, adult education, and all types of 
social education; gradually accomplish the goal of providing 
training to people before they are employed and report to duty; 
and train large numbers of professionally trained people and 
skilled workers. In some localities, we should appropriately 
increase the proportion of vocational education in compulsory 
education. In higher education, we should change the system of 
running schools; actively but steadily and properly reform the 
systems of school admissions, fee collection, and employment for 
graduates; readjust the academic disciplines structure; and 
strengthen internal management. Moreover, we should establish a 
number of key institutions of higher education and academic 
disciplines. We should seriously implement the Teachers' Law, 
give full scope to the teacher's role, make great efforts to 
improve teachers' salaries, and foster the good custom of 
respecting teachers and stressing education in all of society. 
  We should actively create an environment and conditions 
favorable to fully exploiting people's talent and to bringing 
out large numbers of qualified people. We should gradually form 
a mechanism to facilitate the rational flow of qualified people; 
integrate the active training of qualified people with the 
rational employment of such people; continue to improve the 
working and living conditions of intellectuals; pay attention to 
training and employing young and middle-aged intellectuals; 
continue the principles of supporting overseas studies, 
encouraging students studying abroad to return to their home 
country, and allowing them to come and go freely; and encourage 
qualified overseas people to serve the motherland through 
various means. 
  We should promote the flourishing of socialist culture. We 
should adhere to the orientation of serving the people and 
socialism and the principle of letting a hundred flowers bloom 
and a hundred schools of thought contend; vigorously enhance our 
fine national culture; advance socialist culture with Chinese 
characteristics; and further develop literature, arts, the 
press, publishing, radio, film, television, and other 
undertakings to enrich people's spiritual lives and arouse their 
initiative to plunge themselves into socialist modernization. 
We must actively press ahead with reform of the culture 
management structure, enhance the vitality of cultural 
undertakings to advance, perfect economic policies related to 
culture, and correctly handle the relationship between social 
and economic benefits of spiritual works, placing social 
benefits at the top. Governments at all levels should support 
and help, with due emphasis, those fine literature and art 
creations and public-minded cultural undertakings that need 
support. We must step up the protection of cultural relics; 
attach importance to building libraries, cultural galleries, 
museums, science and technology centers, and archives; 
popularize putonghua [Mandarin]; promote the standardization of 
the written and spoken language; strengthen grass-roots cultural 
work; and do a good job of promoting cultural activities in 
enterprises, campuses, communities, and the vast countryside to 
enliven the cultural life of both urban and rural people. We 
must strengthen the management of cultural markets in accordance 
with the law and use rich, colorful, and healthy spiritual works 
to enliven cultural markets. 
  Develop cultural cooperation and exchanges with the outside 
world. While absorbing the fruits of civilization of all 
countries in the world, we must actively introduce to the world 
the Chinese nation's fine culture. Cultural workers shoulder 
the glorious mission of advancing socialist culture. They 
should go deep among the masses and into reality to publicize in 
a big way the main theme, eulogize advanced figures who work 
hard and keep forging ahead in a pioneering spirit and with 
selfless dedication, and strive to create outstanding works 
which are positive in content; which reflect socialist 
modernization, reform, and opening up; and which are worthy of 
our great times. 
  We will promote public health and physical culture. In 
public health work we should persistently put prevention first. 
This year, we will continue to carry out experiments in the 
reform of the medical insurance system in selected urban areas; 
expand rural cooperative medical services by adopting the method 
of integrating voluntary participation by peasants with mutual 
aid among them; establish a sound three-level health care 
network embracing counties, townships, and villages; stabilize 
the number of medical personnel in rural areas; and realize, 
step by step, the goal of enabling everyone to enjoy primary 
health care. We will attach importance to prevention and 
control of endemic diseases, occupational diseases, and 
infectious diseases which seriously jeopardize people's health; 
and give full play to the advantages of traditional medicine and 
tighten control over the production and sale of pharmaceuticals. 
The masses of medical personnel should provide good-quality 
service by carrying forward the lofty professional ethics of 
healing the wounded and rescuing the dying. 
  We will actively explore ways to reform the management 
system 
of physical culture in the new period and launch extensive mass 
sports activities to improve the people's physical fitness. 
Athletes must work hard to achieve good results at the 12th 
Asian Games and at other international competitions. 
  Deputies, here I want to specially emphasize the necessity 
of 
adhering to the principle of fostering both material progress 
and cultural and ideological progress and of attaching 
importance to both in the entire process of reform, opening to 
the outside world, and the modernization drive, and to 
strengthen the building of a socialist spiritual civilization. 
The building of a socialist spiritual civilization includes 
improvements in the fields of education, science, culture, 
ideology, and ethics, and is embodied in the economic, 
political, and cultural spheres and in social life. It is the 
common duty of all fronts and all departments to strengthen the 
building of a spiritual civilization. In ideological 
construction, we should focus on arming the people of the 
country with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics. The publication of 
Volume 3 of the Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping was 
an important event in the political life in China. We must 
study them conscientiously and implement them in line with 
actual conditions. Comrade Jiang Zemin said: It is necessary 
to arm people with a scientific theory, to guide people with 
correct mass media, to influence people with a noble spirit, and 
to encourage people with outstanding works of literature and 
art. It is necessary to strengthen research in philosophy and 
the social sciences under the guidance of Marxism and Mao Zedong 
Thought; attach importance to the role of philosophy and the 
social sciences; and unremittingly carry out education on 
patriotism, collectivism, and socialism. The power of examples 
is inexhaustible. We should vigorously commend heroes and 
models on all fronts, learn from Xu Hongguang's noble spirit of 
daring to take up the cudgels for a just cause and of fearing no 
brute force, as well as his heroic behavior, and publicize this 
Lei Feng spirit in the new period. [applause] We should take 
advantage of political-ideological work to guide people, 
especially the young people, in fostering correct ideals, a 
correct outlook on life, and correct values; strengthen 
education on professional and social ethics; and oppose money 
worship, extreme individualism, and a decadent lifestyle, so as 
to foster good social practice. 
  V. Strengthening the Building of Socialist Democracy and 
the Legal System. 
  Developing socialist democracy and perfecting the socialist 
legal system are important components in building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. This year we will achieve new 
progress, ensure the smooth progress of reform and development, 
and promote all-round social progress. 
  We should continue to strengthen the building of socialist 
democracy. Reform, opening up, and modernization are the 
undertakings of hundreds of millions of people. We must rely 
wholeheartedly on the working class and the broad masses of 
people, fully develop democracy, and bring the initiative of the 
masses into play and successfully protect and guide it. We must 
bring democracy into full play. Governments at all levels must 
establish a sound democratic, scientific, decisionmaking system, 
listen with an open mind to views from all quarters, draw on 
collective wisdom and absorb all useful ideas, and constantly 
raise our decisionmaking standards. We must consciously accept 
supervision of the people's congress and its standing committee 
at the corresponding level and supervision by the broad masses 
of people. We must further bring into play the roles of the 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, democratic 
parties, and nonparty people in political consultation and 
democratic supervision. We must attach importance to the roles 
of trade unions, the Communist Youth League, women's 
federations, and other mass organizations as bridges and links. 
We must give play to the supervisory role of public opinion, 
attach importance to letters and visits by the masses, and learn 
about grasping people's feelings by opening and unclogging a 
multitude of channels. We must continue to strengthen the 
building of political power at the grass-roots level, perfect 
the democratic management system in enterprises and the urban 
neighborhood and village self- management system, perfect the 
democratic supervision system, and ensure that citizens' 
legitimate rights and interests are not encroached upon. 
  We must attach great importance to building the socialist 
legal system. The establishment and perfection of a socialist 
market economic structure relies on a comprehensive legal system 
to provide a safeguard. Since the start of reform and opening 
up, the NPC and its Standing Committee have speeded up the pace 
of legislation. A large number of important laws have, one 
after another, been promulgated for enforcement to provide a 
legal basis for work in all fields. Governments at all levels 
must learn to use legal means to manage the economy and society. 
All government personnel must conduct official business in 
accordance with the law and resolutely rectify the phenomena 
that laws are ignored or not strictly enforced and that 
law-breaking is not dealt with, so as to safeguard the dignity 
of the law. 
  This year, we will step up the enactment of a number of 
administrative laws, strengthen the building of a 
law-enforcement contingent, raise law enforcement standards, 
strengthen and improve law enforcement supervision, establish 
and develop legal service organizations, and train a large 
number of qualified legal personnel to meet the needs of 
building the legal system. We must continue to conduct in-depth 
education about the legal system and disseminate legal knowledge 
among the entire citizenry, especially among cadres at all 
levels, to improve the sense of the legal system throughout 
society. 
  Conscientiously improving all facets of public security 
represents a strong desire of the people and a major 
responsibility of governments at all levels. It is the 
top-priority task of all law-enforcement departments to maintain 
stable public order this year. We must do our work in four 
areas: 1) Combating various criminal activities that jeopardize 
people's lives, property, and safety, and that disrupt 
modernization, in accordance with the law; 2) investigating and 
sternly dealing with major and important cases, punishing 
economic criminals in accordance with the law, and continuing 
the struggle against smuggling; 3) waging a deep-going struggle 
to ban prostitution, the practice of patronizing prostitutes, 
the abduction and sale of women and children, and drug abuse and 
smuggling; and eliminating the six vices and pornography; 4) 
strengthening the ranks of public security and judicial 
personnel, improving the quality of such personnel, and 
bolstering public security forces. Government at all levels 
should make comprehensive improvement of public order a major, 
regular task and strictly enforce a system of leadership 
responsibility. It is necessary to concentrate efforts on 
dealing with or to launch specific crackdowns on those criminal 
offenses and repulsive social phenomena about which the people 
have complained bitterly. We should properly handle the 
contradictions within the people and mediate civil disputes in a 
timely manner in order to provide against possible trouble. We 
should uphold the principle of integrating specialized 
departments with mass work and enlist the participation of all 
to ensure that measures for comprehensive improvement of public 
order are implemented at the grass-roots level and to create a 
fine social environment conducive to economic construction in 
which the people can live and work in peace and contentment. 
  Fellow depties: China is a unified, multinational country. 
Strengthening national unity is in the interests of people of 
all nationalities in the country, and it is our common 
aspiration. Chairman Mao Zedong once said: The unification of 
our country, the unity of our people, and the unity of our 
various nationalities -- these are the basic guarantees of the 
sure triumph of our cause. Reform, opening up, and the 
modernization drive have created a situation never before seen 
in our country for consolidating and developing our socialist 
national relationships in a spirit of equality, unity, and 
mutual assistance, as well as for promoting common prosperity. 
Primarily for historical, geographical, and social reasons, 
certain minority regions are still quite economically 
undeveloped today. It will take more time before we can change 
this situation once and for all. It is the responsibility of 
governments at all levels to expedite the minority regions' 
economic development and social progress, as well as the common 
mission of people of all nationalities in the country. Through 
carrying out reforms and opening up and with state support and 
assistance from economically developed regions, minority regions 
certainly can bring their own strengths into play, become more 
vital in developing their economies, and gradually reduce the 
difference with economically developed regions and achieve 
prosperity with them together. 
  We must comprehensively carry out policies for minority 
nationalities, uphold and improve the system for regional 
national autonomy, safeguard autonomous regions' rights to 
autonomy and national equality, safeguard national unity and our 
motherland's unification, and oppose national division [fan dui 
min zu fen lie]. We must comprehensively and correctly 
implement the policy governing religions, strengthen the 
management of religious affairs according to law, actively guide 
religions to adapt to socialist society, and lead people with 
and without religious beliefs and people of different religious 
denominations to respect each other, get along harmoniously with 
each other, and work hard in unity for the modernization of our 
great socialist motherland. 
  To safeguard our country's security, we must intensify the 
modernization of our national defense. China follows a strategy 
of active defense [ji ji fang yu di zhan lue]. Guided by Mao 
Zedong's Military Thought and Deng Xiaoping Thought for army 
building in the new period [deng xiao ping xin shi qi jun dui 
jian she si xiang], the Chinese People's Liberation Army [PLA] 
has strived to make a success of all military construction and 
reform projects and follow the path with Chinese characteristics 
of building crack troops, in light of the general requirement 
put forth by Comrade Jiang Zemin that the PLA must be 
politically qualified, militarily toughened, remarkable in work 
style, strict in discipline, and assured of adequate logistical 
support. The PLA must vigorously carry forward the fine 
traditions of the People's Army, intensify its ideological and 
political work, and firmly attend to military training so as to 
strengthen its capacity for fighting battles and defending the 
country in modern warfare. The PLA must also actively support 
reform, opening up, and local economic construction. 
Governments at all levels must be concerned with national 
defense construction and give the military the support it needs 
to accomplish its missions. We must persistently educate the 
people on national defense so as to heighten the whole nation's 
awareness of national defense. It is necessary to extensively 
carry out activities of supporting the government and cherishing 
the people and of supporting the Army, giving preferential 
treatment to families of revolutionary soldiers and martyrs, and 
safeguard soldiers' legitimate rights and interests in order to 
consolidate and develop army-government and army-people unity. 
Earnest efforts must be made to improve the militia and reserve 
service, build stronger reserve forces, and build a stronger 
people's armed police and public security forces so as to 
safeguard national security and social stability. 
  VI. Actively Promote the Motherland's Peaceful 
Reunification. 
  In the new year, we should continue to follow unswervingly 
the policy of peaceful reunification and "one country, two 
systems," and work actively to promote the great cause of 
reunifying the motherland. 
  The day is drawing near when China will resume its exercise 
of sovereignty over Hong Kong and Macao. The Chinese Government 
will, as always, go on preparing for a smooth transfer of 
government and a smooth transition in both places, in accordance 
with the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region [HKSAR], the Basic Law of the Macao Special 
Administrative Region, and relevant resolutions of the NPC and 
its Standing Committee. China and Portugal have cooperated well 
on the question of Macao. However, the talks between the 
representatives of the Chinese Government and the British 
Government on arrangements for 1994/1995 elections in Hong Kong 
have terminated, the responsibility of which rests completely 
with the British side. 
  In accordance with the Basic Law of the HKSAR and the 
decision of the NPC Standing Committee, the Preliminary Working 
Committee [PWC] for the Preparatory Committee of the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region has begun its work. The PWC's 
work is demanding and its responsibility heavy. It is hoped 
that the PWC will live up to the expectations and trust of the 
whole nation by uniting with Hong Kong compatriots on the 
broadest possible basis and doing good preparatory work for the 
first government and legislature of the HKSAR. [applause] 
  The Chinese Government and people have the determination and 
ability to resume the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong on 
schedule and to maintain Hong Kong's long-term stability and 
prosperity. British colonial rule in Hong Kong will soon come 
to an end, and cannot be stopped by any forces. [applause] 
  As a result of the coordinated efforts of people on both 
sides of the strait, cross-strait economic cooperation and trade 
grew continuously and personnel exchanges and exchanges in the 
fields of culture, science, technology, sports, and so forth 
further increased last year. A preliminary understanding was 
reached in talks of a functional nature. We maintain that, 
under the principle of one China, differences between the two 
sides of the strait should be settled through increased 
contacts and consultations. It is the common aspiration of all 
Chinese people to realize the peaceful reunification of the 
motherland, and any act or attempt of secession, no matter in 
what form, runs counter to the fundamental interests of the 
Chinese nation and will be in vain. We place high hopes on the 
Taiwan authorities and still higher hopes on the people of 
Taiwan. We hope the Taiwan side will attach great importance to 
the overall interests of the nation and join us in developing 
relations across the strait and working for the peaceful 
reunification of the motherland. 
  VII. On Diplomatic Work. 
  The world today is in the process of complicated and 
profound 
changes. The world is moving noticeably toward multipolarity. 
In general, the international situation is becoming more 
relaxed, and development is now a more prominent issue. 
Economics is becoming a dominant factor in the development of 
international relations. Peoples around the world share a common 
aspiration for the relaxation of tensions, cooperation, 
development, and progress. However, the world is far from 
tranquil. Many regions are in turmoil or suffering from endless 
war and chaos. Hegemonism and power politics remain. The major 
tasks for the international community are still to maintain 
world peace and promote economic development. In this 
complicated and changing international situation, China has 
unswervingly pursued an independent foreign policy of peace and 
has made fresh progress in its diplomatic work. It has 
continuously expanded its friendly relations and cooperation 
with other countries, and its international prestige has 
steadily grown. It has played an important role in maintaining 
world peace and promoting economic development. We have friends 
all over the globe. 
  China has further strengthened good-neighborly and friendly 
relations with surrounding countries. China's relations with 
the ROK and the DPRK have continued to grow. China's mutually 
beneficial and cooperative relations with Japan, Russia, and the 
ROK have expanded continuously. Meanwhile, our friendly 
relations and cooperation with other Asian nations, as well as 
developing countries in Africa, Latin America, and the South 
Pacific region have also developed further. Relations between 
China and the West European countries and the European Community 
have further improved. Sino-German relations have entered a new 
stage of development and a new chapter has been opened in 
Sino-French relations. There are broad prospects for economic 
cooperation and trade between China and the West European 
countries, and so long as the two sides work hard together, 
bilateral relations between China and each of the West European 
countries will continue to be consolidated and to grow. The 
maintenance of normal and stable Sino-U.S. relations not only 
accords with the vital interests of the two people but also 
benefits the stability and development of the Asia-Pacific 
region and the world as a whole. We should consider Sino-U.S. 
relations from a global perspective, looking beyond this 
century. We stand for resolving differences on the basis of 
mutual respect and through dialogue. Sino-U.S. relations will 
be improved and expanded continually so long as the various 
principles laid down in the three Sino-U.S. joint communiques 
are strictly observed to increase trust, reduce trouble, develop 
cooperation, and avoid confrontation. 
  As a permanent member of the UN Security Council, China has 
actively participated in international affairs and played a 
positive role in such matters as settling international disputes 
through peaceful means, protecting the environment, and 
promoting social progress. 
  The Fourth World Women's Congress will be convened in 
Beijing 
in 1995. The Chinese Government and people are preparing for 
this event. China stands for expanded economic cooperation and 
trade among nations and for enhanced south-south cooperation and 
north-south dialogue. It advocates the complete prohibition and 
destruction of all weapons of mass destruction, including 
nuclear weapons, proposes that all nuclear powers conclude a 
treaty undertaking not to be the first to use nuclear weapons 
and, supports the effort to conclude a comprehensive nuclear 
test ban treaty through negotiations. China does not engage in 
the arms race, nor does it participate in any military bloc or 
seek a sphere of influence. It supports the idea of conducting 
dialogues on matters of security and cooperation in Asia and the 
Pacific and has made contributions to that end. 
  No matter how the world situation changes, China will not 
swerve from its position of upholding the five principles of 
peaceful coexistence, nor will it change its policy of 
developing friendly relations and cooperation with countries of 
the world and strengthening solidarity and cooperation with the 
vast number of developing countries. Ours is a diversified 
world. It is essential to recognize the differences among 
nations in their social systems, ideologies, cultures, 
traditions, national characteristics, and religious beliefs, to 
respect each other, cooperate with each other for their mutual 
benefit, and develop state-to-state relations on the basis of 
the universally recognized norms of international relations. 
  China attaches importance to human rights and is willing to 
participate, on an equal footing, in discussions on the human 
rights issue in the international community. However, we will 
by no means allow anyone to interfere in China's internal 
affairs under any pretense. [applause] 
  The Chinese Government supports a resolution recently 
adopted 
by the UN Commission on Human Rights denouncing certain 
countries for putting pressure on developing countries in this 
regard. 
  Deputies, I would like to tell you a news dispatch we have 
just received. In a vote yesterday evening by the UN Commission 
on Human Rights, an anti-China motion raised by some countries 
met with failure once again. [applause] 
  This fully demonstrates how unpopular it is to use the human 
rights issue to oppose China. Here, on behalf of the Chinese 
Government and people, I would like to express my heartfelt 
thanks to all countries which upheld justice and supported 
China. [applause] 
  China is against hegemonism in any form. China is not 
seeking hegemony now, and it will not seek hegemony in the 
future when its economy is developed. China will never be a 
threat to any country or region and will always be a reliable 
force for the preservation of regional and world peace. The 
Chinese people will continue to work hard together with all 
other peoples around the world to establish a new international 
political and economic order that is just and reasonable, to 
maintain world peace, and to promote common development. 
[applause] 
  Deputies, to build a strong China and bring prosperity to 
the 
people is the common aspiration of people of all nationalities 
across the country. The current situation is excellent and we 
have a rare opportunity. In the new year, we should, under the 
guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics and the leadership of the CPC 
Central Committee with Comrade Jiang Zemin as the nucleus, 
unswervingly carry out the party's basic line, strengthen the 
great unity of people of all nationalities across the country, 
and work hard together with one heart and one mind to win a 
fresh victory in the reform, opening up, and modernization 
drive. [applause] 

