Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Appeal by Levko Lukyanenko, cochairman of the Preelectoral </F>
Democratic Union of Ukraine, adopted on 28 January] 
  [Text] Ukrainian people! You are free people and should 
act like free people! Realize the current situation and act -- 
go and vote! 
  You are at a crossroads on the path toward your national 
prosperity. On 27 March, you will be able to give direction to 
the development of Ukraine by doing one of two things: Either 
you will elect new people and we will choose a different path of 
development, or you will elect old bureaucrats and we will 
follow the old path. So, do you want life to go on the way it 
is? If you do not, change it! You can do it! 
  For 70 years you were taught that you were subordinated to 
the Soviet state; for 70 years you were instructed to work while 
the Communist Party was to think for you. 
  All-pervasive and continual propaganda and harsh repressions 
made you see your native Ukrainian land as a place of temporary 
residence; they tried to replace your motherland -- its ancient 
culture and the graves of your ancestors -- with communist 
Soviet power. 
  You were taken away from your native soil; they killed in 
you 
the feeling of rightful owner; they killed your national pride 
and implanted the inferiority complex that belongs to a person 
between a Ukrainian and a stateless Soviet citizen. They killed 
the feeling of dignity and importance in you and taught you to 
feel like a miserable creature in an enormous working 
conglomerate of people. In this working conglomerate, a person 
is only a cog in a huge state mechanism, the task of which is to 
strengthen the communist state and expand the power of Moscow 
across the whole globe. 
  This lie was encouraged by the system of total control over 
people's minds and behavior. Having taken away your economic 
freedom, your chances of merely surviving depended on the 
attitude of kolkhoz and factory managers to you. You had to 
debase yourself, and this is how you lost your personal dignity. 
You were financially dependent on the state and became a slave. 
  Over the lengthy years of harsh dictatorship, you became 
convinced that the communist authorities could do anything they 
wanted, and you could not oppose them. Before the elections, 
the authorities used to select subservient people and announce 
beforehand the number of communists, komsomol members, and 
nonparty members. They decided the percentage of men and women, 
industrial and agricultural workers, and officials -- including 
the level of their education and their nationality -- that were 
to be elected to the Supreme Soviet. You did not have any 
choice. You could not refuse to vote, because you risked your 
safe social status. Over this lengthy period, you used to think 
that the state does not depend on you and is beyond your 
control, while you were an appendage and cheap slave labor. 
  Times have changed. 
  Ukraine has become a democratic state. We have acquired 
freedom of speech, we can engage in political and social 
activities and rallies, and we have the opportunity to nominate 
any number of candidates in one constituency. State decrees are 
no longer formulated in the Central Party Committee but in the 
Supreme Council. While the lawmaking process used to be 
conducted behind closed doors, all Ukraine now follows the 
course of deputies drafting laws. 
  Since a civilized society develops in accordance with the 
laws formulated by the legislature, we can change the laws and 
thus change the nature and direction of our state's development. 
  The Supreme Council changes laws according to the demands of 
various deputy factions. Under democratic laws, politicians 
operate in full view of their voters, and the voters know their 
viewpoints. This is a good opportunity to alter the development 
of the state by electing people who supporting one political 
line, and at the same time not electing people who have the 
opposite political viewpoints. 
  Therefore, Ukrainian people can halt the fall in production, 
inflation, the collapse of the state, and the drop in living 
standards by dismissing the present communist authorities and 
electing new, progressive people. 
  You can see that just one vote can decide the destiny of a 
draft law, even if there are more than 300 deputies present in 
the session hall. Hence, the choice of a single family, a 
single voter, can determine whether a supporter of the old 
regime or a reformer is elected in a constituency of 86,000 
people. 
  Esteemed voter, take advantage of 27 March and use your vote 
to deprive the communists of their power and entrust the 
patriots to raise Ukraine from the ruins! 
  You are not a slave. The democratic independence of Ukraine 
has made you a citizen with full rights. Along with your 
rights, democracy has endowed you with the responsibility for 
your own destiny and the destiny of Ukraine. 
  Straighten your backs, raise up your heads, and use your 
power to create a better Supreme Council. 
  Your choice affects not only the destiny of Ukraine, but the 
destiny of the neighboring states. The entire world is watching 
you. If you do not follow the path of reform and democracy and 
if you ruin your economy, you will fall into the trap of the 
Russian imperialists who will revive the old empire. Then, the 
hopes of Lithuanians, Tatars, and Georgians -- the hopes of all 
the enslaved people of the former Union -- will die. We will 
lose our freedom; a cold war with the West will begin; this will 
lead to real war and the death of European Christian 
civilization along with Ukraine! 
  So show the world that you abandon Moscow's slavery and are 
open to wider contacts with the West by developing democracy and 
the implementation of reform. 
  Remember: God gave us a beautiful land, air, and sky. To 
enjoy these blessings, you must resolve our economic issues. 
Experience has shown that the old guard cannot implement these 
ideas, so send new people to the Supreme Council. 
  Do not ask for a better life! Improve it yourself! 
  You have to make a choice on 27 March. Make a choice in 
favor of reform. 
  Go! Choose! Change! 
  Open up a new life for a new and independent Ukraine. 

