BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Muhammad Salim Basindwah by </F>
Salah Salamah in Cairo on 11 May -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Salamah] Your Excellency Yemeni Foreign Minister 
Mr. Muhammad Salim Basindwah, you are now in Cairo. Today, you 
said that the fighting in Yemen between the northern and 
southern units in the Yemeni Army will end in one day or less. 
What is the latest information you have on the situation on the 
ground in Yemen? 
  [Basindwah] The latest information we have on the situation 
in Yemen is that the fighting is getting close to Aden and that 
the forces of Constitutional legitimacy are now in the Dar Sa'd 
area that is adjacent to the al-Shaykh Uthman quarter in Aden. 
  I would like to correct one point. The fighting is not 
between southern and northern forces. Forces born in the 
southern part of the homeland, as it used to be called in the 
past, are fighting under the banner of Constitutional 
legitimacy. It is fighting between the forces of Constitutional 
legitimacy and the forces of the rebel group under the Yemeni 
Socialist Party [YSP] that seeks to fragment unity. 
  [Salamah] Your excellency, disagreement in Yemen has taken 
on 
a hostile and vicious form between the leaders of the southern 
province and the central leadership in Sanaa. You have rejected 
Arab mediation. Have you determined on a military settlement of 
the issue? 
  [Basindwah] We do not reject any Arab good offices to stop 
the shedding of blood, on the conditions that Constitutional 
legitimacy is respected, that the Constitution is the judge, and 
that the forces controlled by the apostate and rebel gang 
holding sway over the YSP rejoin Constitutional legitimacy and 
obey the leadership of legitimate authority under President 'Ali 
'Abdallah Salih, chairman of the Presidential Council and the 
supreme commander of the Armed forces. There are Arab good 
offices that we value and welcome, on the condition that these 
good offices take place on the basis of the conditions I have 
set before you. 
  [Salamah] Your excellency the minister: Those conditions, 
which have been set by the central command in the north, are 
deemed binding on officials in the southern region. In a 
practical sense, this removes any possibility of an 
understanding. Is there a possibility of returning to the 
negotiating table to settle the existing differences? 
  [Basindwah] Of course, you are aware that the crisis was 
fabricated nine months ago. Many concessions were offered under 
pressure to end the crisis. However, the side that fabricated 
the crisis, which is the YSP command, insisted on continuing the 
crisis endlessly. People suffered a great deal as a result of 
the crisis. The situation became unbearable. At last, when some 
apostate, rebellious, secessionist elements in the YSP command 
failed to achieve their objective of separation, they again 
resorted to military means. Thus, they started the fighting. 
We had to defend ourselves. We did not start the fighting. 
It was the YSP commanding gang rebelling against Constitutional 
legitimacy, law, and order that initiated combat and the use of 
the military card. 
  I would also like to explain to you on this occasion that 
Yemen is not two countries or two peoples. Yemen is one country 
and one people. This is seen in the fact that even under 
separation, when there was a state in the north and another in 
the south, we used to describe each state as a part. We did not 
use the term country or people, or describe any of the two 
parts. Hence, Yemen's unity, unlike the unity between Egypt and 
Syria, is a unity of the same people and of two parts of the 
same country. 
  [Salamah] Your excellency the minister: Aden sources accuse 
the leadership in Sanaa of being supported by Iraqi and Sudanese 
troops in the fighting? 
  [Basindwah] This is not uncharacteristic of the YSP command, 
which is used to lying and fabrication. This is seen in the 
fact that a YSP leader -- the former Aden governor, Salih 
Munassar al- Suhayli -- told brother officials in Egypt that a 
large number of Egyptian al-Jihad organization members had been 
detained. He asked the Egyptian leadership to ask the 
legitimate leadership in Sanaa to send him a clear order to 
extradite those members to the Egyptian consul in Aden. 
Afterward, Interior Minister Brigadier General Yahya Muhammad 
al-Mutawakkil sent an official memorandum to the then Aden 
governor, Salih Munassar al-Suhayli, ordering him to extradite 
the members of the Egyptian al-Jihad organization whom he 
claimed to have detained to the Egyptian consul in Aden. 
  The Egyptian consul in Aden took the memorandum to 
Brigadier General Salih al-Suhayli. It was later confirmed that 
Salih Munassar al-Suhayli lied. Proof of this is the fact that 
al-Suhayli did not hand anything to anyone and that no one from 
the Jihad organization was with him. 
  It is said that there are Iraqi and Sudanese elements 
fighting within the ranks of the forces of legitimacy. This is 
untrue. We defy the influential and rebelling elements in the 
YSP leadership to show one of these elements or to prove their 
allegations. 
  Influential and renegade elements in the YSP resort to, and 
circulate, these rumors in order to instigate fraternal and dear 
Arab states against both Sanaa and the legitimate leadership in 
the Republic of Yemen. 
  [Salamah] Your Excellency Minister Muhammad Salim Basindwah: 
In the absence of deputies from the southern areas, the Yemeni 
House of Representatives in Sanaa took measures to expel and 
oust senior southern leaders. In your opinion, did the House, 
which included deputies from the northern areas, represent 
Constitutional legitimacy when it took these measures? 
  [Basindwah] Who told you that all the deputies present at 
the House meetings during which these decisions were made were 
from the northern governorates? There were deputies who 
represented constituencies in the northern governorates, and 
there were deputies belonging to the YSP itself ... 
  [Salamah, interrupting] Who participated in making these 
decisions? 
  [Basindwah] They participated in making these decisions. 
You can verify this. 
  [Salamah] Your Excellency the minister: You said Aden is 
currently besieged. Is there a decision to militarily storm 
Aden? 
  [Basindwah] 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih fully cares for the safety 
of all citizens residing in Aden, the economic and commercial 
capital of the Republic of Yemen and the place that embraced the 
national movement. Thus, Salih does not plan to storm Aden. He 
would have the citizens in Aden chase the elements which want to 
inflict further destruction and havoc on Aden, exactly like what 
they did in the past. 
  [Salamah] Your Excellency the minister, the last question 
is: In light of the ongoing fighting and the aggravating 
political problems in Yemen, what, in your opinion, are the 
prospects available for you now to restore national unity and 
preserve Yemeni unity as a whole? 
  [Basindwah] I believe there are among those born in the 
southern governorates those who can represent these governorates 
in the authority. They enjoy respect and appreciation. There 
are unionist elements in the YSP that now must determine their 
position on their comrades who rebelled and violated unity and 
Constitutional legitimacy. These elements would enjoy respect, 
and a dialogue would be held with them, exactly as it was held 
with all of them in the past. 
  [Salamah] Thank you, Your Excellency Yemeni Foreign Minister 
Muhammad Salim Basindwah for these statements to Radio Monte 
Carlo. 
  [Basindwah] Thank you. I wish you success. 

