BFN 

<F P=106> ["This report is excerpted from a Bank of Thailand document </F>
presented by Charung Nukhwan, assistant governor of the Bank of 
Thailand to the seminar organized by the Faculty of Law of 
Chulalongkon University in September 1993"] 
  [Excerpts] Money laundering is a process of turning 
illegally- or unscrupulously-earned money into legal currency 
and preventing attempts to prove its illicit origin. Not only 
narcotics traffickers but also criminals have been engaging in 
money laundering activities to purify their money. 
  Money laundering techniques vary from country to country. 
One way to do money laundering is to keep tranferring money 
from one bank or financial institution to another until it is 
difficult to trace the origin of that money. 
  In some cases, the money is first sent to countries where 
laws strictly prohibit financial institutions from revealing the 
identity and personal information of their customers. Later, 
the money will be sent back home. By so doing, authorities will 
find it rather difficult to gather sufficient evidence to take 
any legal action against the owner of the money. 
<H5>  Different Patterns of Money Laundering </H5>
  (1) Illegally-earned money is spent as cash abroad. 
However, carrying a huge amount of cash travelling abroad is 
rather difficult and can trigger official suspicion. Some 
countries impose strict controls on cash transactions while 
financial systems in many countries are not conducive to cash 
transactions. Therefore, cash dealings are practical only in 
countries where regulations are lenient. Cash can also be sent 
out across the borders to other countries with assistance from 
corrupt officials. 
  (2) Depositing the money with financial institutions in the 
country is a common practice. Depositors normally use false 
names in their account books to protect their identities. This 
method is popular in countries where laws do not require the 
disclosure of identities of persons who make transactions or the 
specification of the value of each transaction. This legal 
shortcoming is conducive to using financial institutions to do 
money laundering. 
  (3) Depositing cash with commercial banks and financial 
institutions in other countries where laws on the control of the 
operations of banks and financial institutions are lenient so 
that the money will be included in those countries' monetary 
systems. After that, the money is transferred back to its 
owners, traffickers or criminals, through different means such 
as the wire transfer service. The money is now considered 
clean. This is a weakpoint of the countries which fail to 
enforce the law to strictly control cash outflows. 
  (4) Setting up a business or company is another tactics used 
by traffickers or criminals to conceal the source and ownership 
of their illicit money. They might either set up or purchase a 
company in a tax-free zone abroad. They then have their 
enterprises at home take out a loan or buy goods at exorbitant 
prices from their company in the foreign country so that the 
illegal money can be circulated between the two enterprises. 
  (5) Other methods of money laundering include purchasing 
cash-earning businesses which have been operating at a loss such 
as hotels, foreign exchange ventures, restaurants, retail shops, 
etc. The illicit money then is used to revive these businesses. 
The money is later siphoned out to do something else such as 
buying assignable commercial papers issued by financial 
institutions which assume no responsibility over any change of 
holders of the documents. 
  Moreover, advanced communications technologies in money 
transfer only emphasize quickness. Officials handling the 
transactions have no way of knowing their customers or the 
objectives of the transactions. This is another good 
alternative for money launderers to clean their dirty money. 
<H5>  Prevention And Suppression Of Money Laundering In Foreign </H5>
Countries. 
  FATF, Financial Action Task Force, is an international 
cooperation program established with U.S. assistance in 1989. 
[passage omitted] 
<H5>  Money Laundering Prevention in Thailand. </H5>
  At present, Thailand is not a member of any international 
organization, nor has it concluded an agreement with any 
countries on money laundering prevention. There is not specific 
law dealing with this problem. Money laundering is not regarded 
as a criminal offense. Financial institutions have no 
particular measures against money laundering except those 
curbing the amount of money in domestic circulation and the 
risks borne by financial institutions in dealing with their 
clients. However, there are several rules and regulations which 
indirectly obstruct money laundering such as the control on cash 
inflow and outflow, the requirement for customers engaging in 
money transaction to reveal their identities, and the retention 
of transaction records. In fact, these are regular pratices of 
commercial banks. 
  Despite the lack of a secrecy law, it is the etiquette of 
financial institutions to keep the identities of their customers 
secret. 
<H5>  Suggestions: </H5>
  There are some shortcomings which can obstruct the 
introduction of a money laundering law. Here are some 
suggestions to overcome the problems. 
  (1) At the initial stage, a law must be promulgated to give 
legal immunity to commercial banks and financial institutions 
which release information about their customers who are 
suspected of doing money laundering. After a period of time, 
commercial banks and financial institutions are required to 
report to the authorities any irregularities, such as the 
transfer of a suspiciously high amount of money so that the 
latter can closely follow it up. 
  (2) Commercial banks and financial institutions must be 
required by law to know their customers in person and be 
prohibited from opening accounts for customers who use fake 
names or refuse to give their real names. Withdrawing or 
depositing huge amounts of cash, for example over 10 million 
baht, would require some written justification, which must be 
keep in the records for a period of time. Suspicious cases must 
be reported to authorities immediately. Commercial banks and 
financial institutions must work out an effective system for 
watching out for and following up any money laundering. 
  (3) A special working unit should be set up to investigate 
monetary offences, confiscate or impound property purchased with 
the money from drug trafficking and other criminal activities, 
and receive information from commercial banks and financial 
institutions for coordination with other agencies concerned. 
This unit can be established independently or under the 
jurisdiction of a ministry. 
  At present, Thailand is in the process of opening its 
financial market and relaxing regulations on the operations of 
financial institutions. New requirements for financial 
institutions in monitoring their customers and reporting to 
authorities can become obstacles to the implementation of the 
said liberal policy. Several countries, such as Singapore, have 
started enforcing this law. Therefore, Thailand can still wait 
to see the result first. 
  Laws and regulations on the control of operation of 
commercial banks and fiancial institutions in Asian countries 
are not much different. The enforcement of the money laundering 
legislation must be carried out step by step to ensure the 
country's maximum interest. 

