Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] THAI RAT correspondents went to Shan State to 
interview Khun Sa, who was surrounded by his armed security 
guards. For the first time, he made known his wish to quit 
being the number-one drug kingpin. He has appealed to U.S. 
President Bill Clinton and Prime Minister Chuan Likphai to help 
the Shan State become heroin-free, instead of spending large 
sums of money on drug suppression. 
  The interview with the Drug Warlord Khun Sa or Chang Si-fu, 
took place after the drug kingpin, who declared himself 
president of the Shan State Restoration Council, sent his close 
aide to contact THAI RAT. Khun Sa said he wished to tell the 
world about the present situation in Shan State, once a major 
heroin production center. He wished to make known to the world 
that the Shan State is now heroin-free. He added that he wanted 
the U.S. president to assist the Shan State in this way instead 
of dumping huge amounts of money into drug suppression. 
  THAI RAT correspondents left with Khun Sa's men for an 
interview with the drug kingpin. They went north by car for 
about 75 kilometers from the Thai-Burmese border in Mae Hong Son 
Province passing ridges and forests. At 1245 on 20 January, 
they arrived in Shan State where they met Khun Sa, a 60-years 
old man whose Thai name is Chan Changtrakun. He was wearing a 
white shirt, a green-colored field jacket, and blue trousers. 
He had about ten bodyguards with him and they arrived in a 
minitruck. Khun Sa invited reporters to a house in the middle 
of the forest where he receives guests. 
  Then the interview began. Chang Si-fu, the most-wanted drug 
kingpin with a huge ransom on his head, told THAI RAT that he 
would like countries playing a major role in narcotics 
suppression to know that he has given up all narcotics-related 
activities, and that he wants the Shan State under him to become 
heroin-free. He asked THAI RAT to relay this message to Prime 
Minister Chuan Likphai, and U.S. President Bill Clinton. 
  Khun Sa said that whenever a drug crime was committed, 
people 
would point their fingers at him and accuse him of being the 
source of the drugs. He said that he has closed off the 
trafficking route. Opium products peddled to the outside world 
now come from another area close to Shan State where production 
amounted to some 6,000 tons annually. He admitted that he 
received a toll on those products. Now that other routes are 
being used in heroin trafficking, he said he is not earning any 
money and is short of funds to support the eight million people 
in Shan State. 
  "The United Nations did not pay us any attention. We need 
help in the training of jobs that are different from opium 
growing. Shan State is rich in mineral resources. We have 
forests and blue sapphires. I want the world to be fair to the 
Shan people. I want Shan State to be heroin-free. But I don't 
know who is going to believe me. If the Thai prime minister 
considers this an important issue, he should then coordinate 
with the U.S. president," he said. 
  Khun Sa said the Thai Government could turn the Golden 
Triangle into an opium-free zone. If the Thai Government offers 
him cooperation, Thailand would become the first country to 
successfully close off the trafficking route in which Thailand 
is a transit point. He said he is willing to open up Shan State 
for investment, trade, and tourism. And as drought is a problem 
that plagues Thailand annually, he is willing to let the Thai 
Government divert water from the Salween River for the Thai 
people. 
  "If Thailand and the United States are sincere about 
narcotics suppression at the Golden Triangle, this is a good 
opportunity because I have quit and I am ready for visits and 
inspections from every party, in exchange for development of the 
Shan State. We want to have legitimate contact with the outside 
world," Khun Sa said. 

