Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Thomas Buehrke: ``Aircraft Engines on the Test </F>
Bench -- New Ideas for Reducing Polluting Nitrogen Oxide 
Emissions From Aircraft''] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] In the light of satellite 
surveys, experts from the German Aerospace Research Institute 
(DLR) in Oberpfaffenhofen, near Munich, believe that passenger 
aircraft have given rise to a half-percent extension in 
cloudage. However, the effect that this has on temperature is 
not known. Thin ice clouds bring about warming, whereas thick 
clouds cause cooling; which effect predominates is not known. 
<H5>  Raising Profits by Using Less Fuel </H5>
  Meanwhile, engineers are seeking ``new aircraft engine 
designs that will consume 10 to 20 percent less kerosine and 
discharge up to 80 percent less nitrogen oxide,'' says Jost 
Schmidt, head of Munich- based MTU's development division. Fuel 
still accounts for about a third of an aircarft's overall 
running costs, and a 2-percent cut in running costs would double 
an airline's annual profits. Moreover, there are countries that 
levy an environment duty: For instance, the Swedish government 
has for four years been levying an emission- dependent tax on 
civil aircraft landing at Swedish airports. 
  There is a large market waiting for the engine builders: 
Experts put sales over the next 10 years at $120 billion in the 
civil sector alone. However, the cost of a research program to 
develop a new type of engine is put at $1-2 billion, an 
investment that the experts say would take about 15 years to 
amortize. 
  Four years ago, Pratt &amp; Whitney, FiatAvio, and MTU 
formed a 
joint venture to build the advanced ducted propulsion (ADP) 
proposed by Pratt &amp; Whitney engineers and prepare it for 
testing. The project is linked to an experimental and 
engineering program for future propulsion systems subsidized by 
the Research Ministry in Bonn, which has already poured a total 
of 100 million German marks into the project. 
  A test proptype of this new engine successfully underwent 
initial trials on a test bench in Florida just under a year ago, 
and special functions, such as the reverse thrust, have just 
been tested in a NASA wind tunnel in California. 
  ADP is based partially on conventional principles but 
operates with greater efficiency than current engines. The 
engineers have achieved this result by substantially raising 
what is known as the by-pass ratio. Part of the air normally 
flows through the inner core area, while the rest flows past it 
on the outside, providing the desired propulsion. The drawback 
inherent in raising this by- pass ratio is that it increases 
engine diameter by about 50 percent. If the advantage of lower 
fuel consumption is not to be canceled out by the weight gain, 
new materials must be developed that will be as light as 
possible while withstanding extreme loads. MTU is therefore 
undertaking research into fiber-reinforced composites about 
three times as light as titanium. The engineers are confident 
that ADP will be in use by the turn of the century. 
  An MTU idea known as CRISP (counter-rotating integrated 
shrouded propfan) goes a step further, having not the usual 
single rotor at the engine intake, but two rotating in opposite 
directions, thus increasing the air throughput. However, CRISP 
research is currently on the ``back burner'' for financial 
reasons. 
<H5>  Hydrogen Brings Problems </H5>
  Last but not least, ``alternative'' fuels are still being 
fielded as a means of reducing exhaust emissions. Veritable 
miracles are being attributed to hydrogen in particular, 
although engines running on hydrogen discharge double the amount 
of water vapor emitted by a conventional engine and would thus 
increase cloud formation. Moreover, the assumption that an 
aircraft running on hydrogen would discharge nothing but water 
vapor is false. 
  NASA research showed 20 years ago that at high combustion 
temperatures nitrogen oxidizes out of air to form nitrogen 
oxides. Discharges of these gases cannot actually be reduced by 
introducing alternative fuels: New, more efficient combustion 
chambers would be required even in this case. Creating them 
would entail exploring virgin territory in engineering, because 
the hydrogen has to be cooled to below minus 252 degrees Celsius 
in the tanks, with the risk that components might ice up or 
become brittle. Moreover, energy content for energy content, 
hydrogen is four times more voluminous than kerosine, so 
additional tanks would inevitably have to be incorporated. 

