Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by ITAR-TASS correspondent Anatoliy Starukhin, </F>
special for ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA: "Tickets to Satiety: On the 
Distribution-by-Coupon System in Voronezh Oblast"] 
  [Text] Voronezh--As usual, the doorbell rang in the 
evening: "Here are your coupons for this month." And now I hold 
in my hand pale-green chits: "Margarine products--250 g, 
vegetable oil--9.5 kg, sugar 1 kg, eggs--10." 
  Thank you! Thank who? Naturally, the Voronezh Oblast 
administration. Just now I was sitting in front of the TV, 
absorbing the program, "The Executive Branch Hour," which, 
following an established pattern, once again featured the 
oblast's governor, Aleksandr Yakovlevich Kovalev. A considerable 
part of these communications, which as a rule are broadcast 
live, deals with food prices. The substance of exhortations from 
the screen: We are trying to contain price rises; we cover a lot 
by subsidies; we will not let anyone live in poverty, and our 
Voronezh Oblast always has and will look probably better against 
other regions in Russia. 
  These days, populism is a word that is somewhat insulting to 
those at whom it is directed. For what is meant in this instance 
is a simplistic game with the popular masses. But let us go back 
to the freshly issued coupons. For the so-called "margarine 
products," whether sold with or without coupons, the price 
differential is negligible. Especially considering that it is 
usually not sold for these coupons. "Vegetable oil"--these 
coupons have sat like especially valuable securities in a vase 
since who knows which month. They have not been used, for the 
simple reason that it is unknown who sells this substance in 
exchange for chits printed in a printing house, and when and 
where that might be. Finally, "sugar" coupons are total 
nonsense: it costs 570 rubles [R] a kilogram with the coupon, 
and R520, or sometimes even R500, without it. 
  The system of ration cards or coupons works with a market 
only at its initial stage, when there are still not enough basic 
necessities for everyone. What is happening in this particular 
case, however? Oblast warehouses are overflowing with sugar. We 
talk to Viktor Kodentsev, the director of Yevdakovskiy fats and 
oils combine: this major enterprise is ready to ship margarine 
and vegetable oils to America if necessary. By railcar, by the 
trainload. Or perhaps hens no longer lay eggs?--not at all; 
while in some places agricultural output has declined, Voronezh 
poultry breeding is on the rise. 
  Until recently, vodka also was sold for coupons--but the 
local liquor industry cannot find enough of a distribution 
market, and for this reason is holding back the production line. 
The root of the problem is prices. Somehow, foodstuffs 
production cost is very high, and the producers present a 
critical price ultimatum, which the buyer is unable to accept. 
What to do--wait for the desired market self-regulation? In 
Voronezh, they do it differently: they ban selling the products 
outside of the oblast. There have been long, heated arguments 
regarding the expediency, and most importantly, the legality of 
this decision between the oblast administration and its 
opponents, the product owners. Naturally, the strongest one 
wins. There are bans whichever way you turn; the roads are 
littered with checkpoints. 
  At one of the largest consumer cooperatives' food processing 
complexes in Russia, which is located on the outskirts of 
Voronezh, I was told a bitter tale: they have to curtail 
production of sausage because their own cities and settlements 
have an adequate supply, and to sell it outside--to the 
northern, solidly industrial regions--is strictly forbidden. 
Another lament worthy of sympathy: guest workers from the very 
near abroad came to Voronezh villages to earn money; they worked 
hard, and were paid in kind, that is, in potatoes, but those at 
the top forbade taking the potatoes out. And honest workers had 
been sitting on their sacks until mid-winter. 
  What has the distribution-by-coupon and simultaneously 
proscriptive system produced? Reports are coming from the 
extensive network of checkpoints about detaining transports with 
eggs, flour, margarine, and butter. Is the system working? 
  I go to Voronezh's central market and join a line for cheap 
flour; my neighbors run to a truck from which someone is selling 
unexpectedly affordable sugar. Where are the goodies from? 
From.... Volgograd! Does this make sense? Gasoline alone costs a 
fortune! "It pays," they reply. The populist myth that Voronezh 
foodstuffs are the cheapest of them all develops a perceptible 
crack in the eyes of the public at the market, in whose pockets 
there are more coupons than money. And on top of that, Central 
Television reports sternly impartial statistics: the most 
expensive eggs in Russia are in the Central Chernozem region; 
neither are prices for other foodstuffs quite affordable, while 
average wages of, for instance, Voronezh residents are close to 
the bottom. The myth, alas, explodes. 
  So what is it--are the actions of the oblast leadership in 
this direction completely void of good intentions? On the 
contrary, they ooze with the most sincere concern for the 
people. What is questionable is something else: Is the intensive 
shifting of levers of the old machinery, familiar to everyone, 
constructive? At all times, bans and leveling-type distribution 
did not require especial economic acumen, a deep analysis of the 
state of affairs, or, finally, honest and careful control over 
production and price formation. Are the lamentations of goods 
producers always justified when they point out their superhigh 
production cost and thus justify "biting" prices? And what goes 
into this production cost? Are increasingly new taxes--both 
federal and local--justified if they are becoming a noose around 
the neck of food processing and other enterprises? Why only in 
Russia, and not at the best time of its life at that (are we 
again ahead of the entire planet?), and in particular in 
Voronezh Oblast salaries of high officials can be simply 
mind-boggling, not subject to any control or restrictions, and 
exceed labor remuneration of lower-ranking "ordinary consumers" 
by a factor of 26 (according to the same statistics)? To solve 
at least these problems, one has to work assiduously and think 
things through. 
  Until then, they keep ringing my doorbell. Handing out 
coupons. 

