Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Rogachev article under "Russia-United States: </F>
Dialogue About Partnership" rubric: "Common Home in Space"] 
  [Text] The question of Russian-U.S. cooperation in 
creating a joint space station is the focus of attention for 
specialists and experts in both countries. At the same time the 
attitude of various representatives of the U.S. side to Russia's 
participation in this project can hardly be called unequivocal. 
Viewpoints differ very greatly and cover virtually the entire 
range of opinions. Whereas NASA Director Daniel Goldin 
maintains that neither the United States nor Russia can create 
such a station independently and that Russia's involvement 
enables the United States to save $2 billion and to speed up the 
station's commissioning by two years, in the opinion of James 
Oberg, an expert on Soviet and Russian space programs, the 
United States' "ingenuous and too-rapid advance toward this 
starry union could sow seeds which will lead ultimately to 
disappointment and failure." 
  It must undoubtedly be admitted that the dominant viewpoint 
supports the development of Russian-U.S. cooperation in space 
orbits. As Senator Barbara Mikulski (Democrat from Maryland) 
declared, in particular, when appearing on a CBS-TV program, 
"without the support of the Russians and without a saving in 
money and time, efforts to create a space station will prove 
risky." "The Russians," she pointed out, "are valuable because 
they will share their tremendous experience in launching and 
docking -- spheres in which they are superior." But at the same 
time she voiced the fear that "a Russian-U.S. joint space 
venture will result in some U.S. jobs being exported to Russia." 
  At the same time there is a view according to which the 
agreement on an orbital station has to a very significant degree 
resulted from political and certainly not scientific motives. 
Thus the WALL STREET JOURNAL maintained that "Washington's 
decision to conclude an agreement with the Russians to implement 
a project to create an orbital station is the basis of an 
ambitious and risky strategy aimed at consolidating Russia's 
orientation toward reforms after the U.S. and Western pattern by 
establishing ties with its military, scientific, and industrial 
elite." In the newspaper's opinion, the agreement represented 
"at the same time both a reward for Russia's aerospace industry 
for its agreement not to sell secret rocket technology to India 
and an opportunity for the United States to involve Russian 
scientists in efforts to further limit the spread of dangerous 
weapons." 
  Mindful of the December election results in Russia, the 
article's authors warn that "for President Clinton...the new 
strategy raises the stakes" and, given a certain combination of 
circumstances, "the United States could lose the orbital 
station, which has already cost the U.S. taxpayers $10 billion." 
In the opinion of Nicholas Johnson, a specialist on the Russian 
space industry and a high-ranking staffer of the scientific 
department of the Keymen [name as transliterated] Sciences 
Corporation, which is involved in research and development at 
Colorado Springs (Colorado), "if we think about the worst option 
for the development of events and assume that in two or three 
years' time Russia will completely stop abiding by common sense, 
we will have to start all over again." 
  At the same time some members of the U.S. Congress are 
concerned about "the possibility of hidden expenditure, which 
will build up as the project is carried out -- expenditure 
connected, for example, with the need to repair the Baykonur 
Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, which is increasingly going to ruin." 
  In summing up this brief review of the U.S. side's views it 
may be worth dwelling on statements by James Oberg cited in THE 
WASHINGTON TIMES: "Benjamin Franklin once gave an excellent 
prescription for a successful marriage: `Before the betrothal 
keep your eyes wide open, but afterward keep them half-closed.'" 

