Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by Hong Kong Governor Christopher Patten to </F>
members of the Legislative Council at the Legislative Council 
Chamber in Hong Kong--live] 
  [Text] Mr. President [Legislative Council President John 
Swaine], I would like to begin my reporting to members on my 
recent visit to Australia. I paid an official visit to 
Australia at the invitation of the Australian Government from 
13-19 February. I am very grateful to the Australian Government 
for the invitation and for arranging the visit so well and so 
generously. 
  Australia is an important trading partner for Hong Kong. 
Three hundred Australian companies operate here, employing 
70,000 Hong Kong people. Total trade between us rose 12 percent 
last year. Hong Kong is Australia's seventh largest export 
market and tenth largest trading partner overall. There are 
growing human contacts between our communities. Almost 10,000 
Hong Kong students are studying in Australia, with a large 
number of Australians teaching at our own universities. Twenty 
thousand Australians live and work in Hong Kong, and some 80,000 
people from Hong Kong now live and work in Australia. Over 
300,000 Australians visited Hong Kong last year and over 120,000 
Hong Kong people visited Australia. My visit took in Sydney, 
Canberra, and Melbourne. I had good meetings with Prime 
Minister Keating in Sydney and the minister for foreign affairs, 
Senator Evans, in Canberra. I also had meetings with the 
governor general, Mr. Hayden, the governors of the states of New 
South Wales and Victoria, as well as with the premier of New 
South Wales and the deputy premier of Victoria. I made four 
public speeches and I visited a number of companies doing 
considerable business with us here in Hong Kong. I encouraged 
firms not already active here to consider using Hong Kong as a 
regional base. Equally, I was able to provide reassurances to 
those firms that are here that Hong Kong would continue to be an 
excellent place to do business. Everywhere I went I found 
enormous warmth and understanding among Australians, in 
government and outside it, for Hong Kong. And I found as well a 
great deal of goodwill for Hong Kong's future. Australia is a 
good friend to Hong Kong. We warmly appreciate and value the 
ties of friendship and trade that link our communities. I hope 
those ties will grow in the months and years ahead. 
  Turning now to developments closer to home, I was very 
pleased to see that this Council last night passed the 
legislation dealing with the less controversial elements 
relating to the arrangements for the elections in 1994 and 1995. 
This was the second bill relating to the 1994 and 1995 
elections, which the Legislative Council has now passed. After 
we first put forward proposals in October 1992, we made it clear 
that we were keen to discuss them with the Chinese side. 
Unfortunately, talks did not begin before we had to legislate 
on the Boundary and Election Commission. That body is now 
established and doing very good work. 
  Talks did begin in April 1993, but regrettably it was not 
possible to reach agreement before time pressure meant we had to 
press on with the next stage of legislation, which the Council 
has just passed. The voting age and voting method for all three 
tiers of elections are now agreed, so too the abolition of 
appointed membership of district boards and municipal councils. 
This means that we now have a proportion of the necessary 
legislation in place, and we are ready to move on to the next 
stage. The fact that this legislation, the less controversial 
part, has taken some two and a half months to pass through this 
Council, underlines how fine we have been cutting things. 
  We now have only four months left in which to pass the 
remaining legislation. We need to have that through by the time 
this Council rises in July. It is our firm aim to do so. We 
had hoped that it would be possible for the talks with China to 
resume. We have since last November, repeatedly asked the 
Chinese to continue talks on the outstanding issues. There have 
been innumerable such requests on diplomatic channels, including 
a message from the British prime minister to the Chinese 
premier. As you know, China was only willing to do so on 
condition that the first stage bill was withdrawn. That was not 
possible. Time is now pressing. If we are to have the 
legislation through in time to enable us to hold elections in 
good order and on schedule, we therefore need now to proceed 
with the third bill without delay. We intend to gazette the 
remaining legislation, that dealing with the arrangements for 
the Election Committee and functional constituencies, tomorrow, 
25 February, and to introduce it to this Council on 9 March. 
This decision has been taken following full consultations with 
the Executive Council and with ministers, who agree with this 
approach. 
  The legislation which we will publish tomorrow will contain 
in, legislative form, the proposals which I put forward in 
October 1992 for the functional constituencies and the election 
committee. It will propose an election committee composed of 
members of district boards. It will propose that the nine new 
functional constituencies envisaged under the Basic Law should 
be made up of members of the entire work force. And it will 
propose the abolition of corporate voting in existing functional 
constituencies. Members will recall that I have promised on many 
occasions that if it became necessary for us to proceed with the 
remaining legislation without Chinese agreement, Hong Kong 
people would be entitled to expect an explanation of why that 
was necessary and why we believe it to be in the best interests 
of Hong Kong. The British Government will, therefore, today be 
publishing a White Paper, setting out the background to the 
present position, the approach which the British side took in 
the negotiations with China, and the modifications which we were 
prepared to make to the Hong Kong Government's 1992 proposals as 
part of an overall agreement, including on the through train. 
It is a thorough, factual account. The White Paper will be 
published at 5:00 pm this afternoon. Its publication is 
essential to informed debate in Parliament, in this Legislative 
Council, and in the community. 
  Let me say a word about why we have chosen to recommend to 
this Council, the Government's original 1992 proposals. We 
believed then, and we still believe, that these proposals are 
the best ones on the table. They have been debated at length 
and already endorsed in general terms on three occasions by this 
Council. These proposals have enjoyed widespread and consistent 
support amongst most sections of the community. We continue to 
regard them as the best way to secure our objective of open and 
fair elections. We were prepared to offer during the 
negotiations, modifications to our 1992 proposals to secure an 
overall agreement with China, including on the through train. 
Although it is has not proved possible to reach such an 
agreement, we obviously stand by those modified proposals as a 
way to produce open and fair elections, albeit a less attractive 
way in our view than our original proposals. Plainly the 
judgment on these matters now lies with the Legislative Council. 
That has always been the constitutional position. For our part, 
we shall argue strongly for the legislation we are now putting 
forward. The proposals it contains were deliberately framed to 
be consistent with the Joint Declaration, the Basic Law, and the 
relevant agreements and understandings between the two sides. 
We firmly believe that they are, and we are supported in that 
view by the overwhelming majority of independent legal opinion. 
  I want to say to this Council and to the community how much 
I 
regret that we have not managed to reach agreement with China on 
these very difficult electoral issues. I fervently wish we 
could have done so. But I equally fervently believe that it 
would have been wrong to abandon the principles we have set out 
for the sake of an agreement which would not have been in the 
best interests of Hong Kong. 
  The White Paper sets out clearly the issues which were, and 
which are, at stake here. I regard it as my overriding 
responsibility, faithfully to implement the terms of the Joint 
Declaration on which the concept of one country, two systems is 
based. The Joint Declaration promises a legislature constituted 
by elections to which the executive shall be accountable. I 
take that to mean real elections in which Hong Kong people have 
a genuine choice. As I have explained many times before, it is 
upon a credible Legislative Council, openly and fairly elected, 
that so many of our other freedoms and institutions depend. So 
we differ with China on this important point about the 
elections. But it does not follow that we have to argue with 
China about everything. Let us try to draw a line under this 
dispute and cooperate together in other areas in the interests 
of the people of Hong Kong. We now have less than three and a 
half years left before the transition, and there is a great deal 
of work to do. For our part, for Britain's, and for Hong 
Kong's, we stand willing and able to work together with China in 
Hong Kong's interests on other matters, even if on this 
admittedly important one, it has unfortunately not proved 
possible to do so. 

