BFN 

    [Editorial Report] 
<H8>  THE STAR </H8>
  Country's Leaders Now `On Trial' -- Johannesburg THE STAR in 
English on 10 May in a page-10 editorial says the unanimous 
election by the National Assembly of Nelson Mandela as state 
president "signals acceptance of his leadership by his 
adversaries in the election." The unanimous election of 
provincial premiers is "similarly propitious, for South Africa 
and for Mandela's dream of building a unifying sense of national 
identity amid cultural diversity." Also, the inclusion of 
Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi and two 
IFP leaders in the Cabinet is a manifestly positive development. 
It means the Government of National Unity will be one in 
substance as well as in name. The IFP presence in the Cabinet 
should serve as inspiration to the provincial government in 
KwaZulu/Natal and help bring an end to the fratricide which has 
torn that province asunder for the past decade. The foundations 
have been laid for a new South Africa by the men and women who 
drafted the new constitution and by the generosity and sagacity 
displayed by political leaders since the election." Now there 
must be "sustained follow-through, in the form of economic 
growth, upliftment of the poor -- most of whom were victims of 
past racial oppression -- and steadfast commitment to the broad 
national interest rather than party-political agendas. South 
Africa's leaders are on trial." 
<H8>  SOWETAN </H8>
  Government Appointments `To Repay' Those Who Helped Them -- 
The new government now faces the task "to repay those who helped 
in setting them up," says a page 14 editorial in Johannesburg 
SOWETAN in English on 10 May. "There may be doubts about Mr 
Alfred Nzo's appointment as Minister of Foreign Affairs but we 
think it was a good choice. It is true that, as an honourable 
man, Mr Mandela does not forget old friends." "The Minister of 
Finance perhaps needs the skills in such matters of a man like 
Mr Derek Keyes. But even Keyes might find himself in an 
uncomfortable position if he insists on strict financial 
disciplines to a government that will be forced to concentrate 
on development and reconstruction." 

