Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
fileworthy reports on economic developments in Cuba carried on 
Havana radio and television in Spanish on 16 and 17 February. 
  Radio Reloj at 2209 GMT on 16 February reports that the 
Ministry of the Sugar Industry is planning to organize in 
Matanzas, this month, 24 state farms for the self-sufficiency of 
agroindustrial workers. "The self-sufficiency granges implement 
the principles of linking workers to the land, building housing, 
and financial self-management, "and 50 percent of the profits of 
a given accounting period is distributed among the members." 
  Radio Reloj at 2229 GMT on 16 February reports that "(Lynn, 
Dorothee), president of the Guadeloupe-Cuba Friendship 
association, has delivered an important donation of food, school 
supplies, and cleaning products to the headquarters of the 
Santiago de Cuba branch of the Cuban Institute of Friendship 
With Peoples." (Dorothee) "is also a member of the Politburo of 
the Communist Party of Guadeloupe." Also, an Italian delegation 
from the cultural association called World Liberation presented 
two packages of antibiotics, anesthetics, and cortisone to two 
hospitals in Santiago de Cuba. 
  Cuba Vision Network at 2320 GMT on 16 February reports that 
Chile's minister of public health "has announced that Chile is 
going to begin a field test in March with meningitis vaccines 
from Cuba and Norway." The test will study the vaccinated 
persons' response to the different vaccines. "The test will be 
supervised by the Pan American Health Organization, a Cuban 
physician, and international experts." 
  In the same newscast, Cuba Vision reports that "the 
important 
Canadian hotel chain Delta Hotels has begun operating, with 
Cubanacan, several hotels in Santiago de Cuba: the Sierra-Mar, 
the Los Galeones Diving Center, and the Salton, all located west 
of the city -- a total of over 260 rooms." Delta also has a 
tradition of helping nearby communities; therefore, the hospital 
in the town of Chivirico received a big gift consisting of 
uniforms and tires, which the businessmen say is just a start. 
Tourists seem to like the hotels: "The Sierra-Mar is at present 
100 percent full. To begin this way is a good omen for the 
future, because this alone says much about the importance of the 
agreement." 
  Radio Rebelde at 0000 GMT on 17 February reports that an 
oceanographic atlas of the waters off the Sabana-Camaguey 
archipelago has been published. Engineer Angel Luis Chirino, 
interviewed at the Third Oceanographic Sciences Congress under 
way in Havana, notes that the atlas constitutes a solid basis 
for conducting research that will be done within the framework 
of a UN Development Program project. He explains that the 
Sabana-Camaguey archipelago area off the northern coast of 
Camaguey is being studied because it is one of the areas most 
greatly changed by man in recent years, and "is beginning to be 
exploited, from a petroleum point of view. That is, platforms 
are being built offshore. This is the first time this has been 
done in Cuba." 
  In the same newscast, it is reported that remodeling of the 
Hotel Habana-Riviera in Havana is among the projects of the 
(Caguama-Caribe) Hotels business group. 
  Tele Rebelde and Cuba Vision Networks at 0100 GMT on 17 
February report that a new variety of tobacco called Habana-200, 
as well as others also resistant to blue mold and other tobacco 
diseases and pests, has been tried out on certain small farmer 
and state sector lands in Pinar del Rio Province with 
encouraging results. Yields are expected to be 500 or 600 
quintals of tobacco per caballeria, with many high quality 
leaves. 
  Radio Rebelde at 0000 on 17 February reports that the Raul 
Cervantes tire recycling plant recycled 13,000 tires in 1993, 
which will be used in the agricultural sector in the current 
harvest. The plant was limited in production because of a 
shortage of resources. 
  Radio Rebelde at 1800 GMT on 17 February reports that in 
1993 
Cuba received $50 million worth of donations from friends in 72 
countries. These figures were given by Sergio Corrieri, 
president of the Cuban Institute of Friendship with Peoples, in 
an article printed in the 17 February issue of GRANMA. 

