BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava June 27 (CTK) -- It is in the interest of 
both Slovakia and the Czech Republic [CR] to quickly sign an 
agreement on dividing the claims that individual companies have 
towards Russia, Deputy Premier Brigita Schmognerova said today. 
  On Friday [24 June] she signed an agreement in Moscow about 
resolving the debts of the Russian Federation and the former 
Soviet Union. However, the issue of receivables of individual 
companies worth $385 million remained open. 
  The Slovak side disagrees with the fact that the agreement 
attributes $330 million to the Czech side, which includes the 
receivables of Slovak firms exporting through Czech foreign 
trade companies. 
  Jozef Trojak, state secretary of the Finance Ministry, 
pointed out that the agreement concerns around $1.6 billion from 
the $5- billion Soviet debt to the former Czechoslovakia. 
  This comprises $666 million from government loans and $115 
million in interest, $166 million arising from mutual 
accounting, $42 million and $16 million for technical loans, 
$345 million for participation in building a gas pipeline in 
Yamburg, Russia, and an iron ore complex in Krivoy Rog, Ukraine. 
Receivables to the value of $385 million will remain untouched 
until the Czechs and Slovaks agree on them. 
  Trojak said that, in contrast to government claims, company 
receivables are not to be divided in a 2:1 ratio (as the rest of 
the property of former Czechoslovakia) but "according to who 
produced the goods." 
  Nevertheless, it is proving extremely difficult to ascertain 
the exact amount of the receivables, and the help of foreign 
trade companies will be needed as well. Trojak estimated Slovak 
receivables at $166 million, of which a part has probably been 
paid, so he calculated the present debt at $140 million. 
  Schmognerova said that Russia will start paying back the 
first part of the Czechoslovak Government loan from November 
1989 (worth $666 million) as of January 1, 1996 and the 
remainder as of January 1, 1999. 
  She pointed out that the payments would be effected in 
various ways, including with supplies of goods or through a 
capitalisation of the debt. For instance, the interest compiled 
in 1993-94 has already been covered through imports of military 
technology to Slovakia. Trojak did not exclude the possibility 
that payment through these imports would continue. 
  Schmognerova also signed an agreement on the prevention of 
double taxation, and a trade agreement which acknowledges 
Slovakia's unfavorable balance in trade with Russia. 
  An agreement on long-term crude oil supplies was signed as 
well, in which Slovakia strives to ensure annual supplies of 5 
million tons of crude oil until 2003. An agreement on Russian 
supplies of nuclear fuel and the storage of spent nuclear fuel 
was signed, as well as on a credit of $150 million for the 
completion of the first two units of the nuclear power plant in 
Mochovce, West Slovakia. 

