BFN 

<F P=106> [Paul Brown report: "Pesticides Kill 40,000 a Year Says UN </F>
Expert"] 
  [Text] At least 40,000 people are killed each year by 
misuse of pesticides and up to one million are made ill or 
permanently damaged, Jan Huismans, of the United Nations 
environment programme said yesterday. 
  Many of the chemicals are made in Europe and North America 
and are exported to developing countries where they are used by 
illiterate farmers who have no concept of the damage they are 
doing to themselves, he said. 
  Mr Huismans, who is assistant executive director of the 
unit, 
was speaking on the opening day of the conference in Stockholm, 
aimed at controlling the worldwide use of chemicals. 
  Many of the delegations from 130 countries have been paid 
for 
by the United Kingdom which after the United States and Japan is 
the largest contributor to the International Programme of 
Chemical Safety. 
  The big worldwide increase in chemical use has led to 
widespread misapplications on crops and application in climates 
for which the chemicals were not designed. Many of those used 
on food crops have never been tested to see what long-term 
effects they have on the environment or people. 
  Dr Hirishi Nakajimo, director general of the World Health 
Organisation, said in other areas ignorance was also widespread. 
The UN inspectors who visited the Iraq chemical warfare 
factories after the Gulf war were shocked to find operators had 
no idea what they were dealing with. 
  Professor Klaus Topfer, the German environment minister, 
said 
his government was trying to clean up some of the problems in 
East Europe caused by exports from the former East Germany. 
  The Stockholm meeting is the first International Conference 
on Chemical Safety and is expected to set up a worldwide system 
to classify chemicals, test them and control their use. 
  Dr Gerald James, from the Department of Health, leading the 
British delegation, said training of people in countries that 
used the chemicals was vital. "People have to realise that 
pesticides are extremely nasty, made deliberately toxic to kill 
something." 
  The UK was keen on the principle of "informed consent." This 
meant that before chemicals were exported the country receiving 
them was fully aware of the dangers if they were not controlled. 
  Sometimes governments receiving the chemicals were informed 
but the people who used them had no idea of the consequences of 
handling them. 
  Professor Topfer said with the world population increasing 
by 
28,000 a day many would starve unless food production was 
stimulated and protected by chemicals. 

