Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Mo Fei (5459 7236)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 11 Mar (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE) -- Today, Xie 
Fei, member of the CPC Central Political Bureau and secretary of 
the Guangdong Provincial CPC Committee, said that it is 
necessary to work intensively to build up the rule-of-law 
mechanism and the democratic supervision mechanism. He said 
that the establishment of these two mechanisms represents the 
key point of the current political structural reform in 
Guangdong and should be carried out simultaneously with the 
economic structural reform so that the reform in these two 
aspects can complement each other in guaranteeing the healthy 
development of the socialist market economy. 
  This afternoon, when attending the meeting of the Guangdong 
delegation to the Second Session of the Eighth National People's 
Congress [NPC], Xie Fei, who is also a deputy to the NPC, 
pointed out: This year, the state has adopted and will adopt a 
series of financial and taxation, banking, foreign trade, and 
enterprise reform measures. Guangdong must make efforts to 
implement these measures, and should discover and properly 
settle new problems in good time in the course of implementing 
these measures, and thus continuously improve the new systems 
and gradually establish the structure of the socialist market 
economy. 
  Xie Fei said: It is necessary to give play to Guangdong's 
advantages, enhance the level of opening, expand the scope of 
opening, and actively do a good job in the following eight 
aspects: 
  Attach importance to introducing advanced management 
expertise, technology, and experienced personnel in order to 
eventually enhance economic efficiency. 
  Actively absorb funds to develop infrastructural facilities, 
basic industries, new and high-technology industries, and to 
transform old enterprises and old urban districts. 
  Bring in financial and commercial institutions to promote 
the 
development of the tertiary industry. 
  Establish mechanisms of operation in convergence with the 
international market and in compliance with international 
practice. 
  Properly manage and run the three types of existing foreign- 
funded enterprises and the enterprises processing imported 
materials for reexport purposes according to samples offered by 
importers, as well as those involved in compensation trade so 
that they may influence and bring along other domestic 
enterprises in expanding overseas economic cooperation and 
overseas markets. 
  Launch economic cooperation projects and open up markets in 
overseas areas and in other provinces of the country. 
  Give play to the advantages of various types of localities 
in 
Guangdong, further develop the multitiered and multiformed 
opening pattern. Continue to give play to the role of the three 
special economic zones and the four economic and technological 
development zones as windows for opening, and effect 
across-the-board opening in the whole province. 
  Improve the style of work, improve the investment 
environment, and create better conditions for the expansion of 
opening. 

