Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Samsung Petrochemical Co. has recently developed a 
new environment-friendly synthetic resin that can decay far more 
quickly than current degradable resins, a company spokesman said 
yesterday. 
  The resin decomposes within 60 to 80 days of being discarded 
and buried. When exposed to light for 30 days continuously, it 
totally poses its function as plastic, leaving for less 
environmental pollution, he said. 
  Developed by the company's umbrella research institute in 
Taejon, the bio-photo-degradable polyethylene resin is a 
commingling of polyethylene resin, and starch and other fillers 
which facilitate decomposition by germs and light. 
  The resin can be widely used for making vinyl bags and 
packing materials for a range of products, contributing to 
lowering environmental pollution, he said. 
  An ordinary degradable resin, when thrown away and buried, 
takes nearly five years to disintegrate. After disintegration, 
it still remains underground, polluting soil and ground water, 
he added. 
  The Samsung Group subsidiary, which has already begun 
production and sales of the new product, expects a high demand 
for the product both at home and abroad, given the growing 
worldwide awakening to environmental issues and the product's 
high quality. 
  Next year, the company, anticipating a 30 percent 
year-on-year growth in domestic demand, plans to produce some 
20,000 tons of the bio-photo-degradable resin, priced at roughly 
800,000 won ($1,000) per ton. 
  "We will have ample domestic demand as environment-conscious 
consumers are expected to seek out less environmentally harmful 
plastic bags," the spokesman forecast. 
  The company also aims to export the new resin as well as its 
manufacturing technology to the United States, Japan and EC 
nations where the use of degradable resins is mandatory, the 
spokesman said. 
  In addition, he said, the new resin will have an effect of 
import replacements worth 8 billion won by sharply bringing down 
the prices of photo-degradable resins sold in the country. 
  Based on the product's potentiality, Samsung plans to make 
efforts to develop new uses and expand its supply, he said. 
  The company, meanwhile, has already applied for a patent for 
two skills in manufacturing the resin, and is also pushing ahead 
with getting an international patent, the spokesman said. 

