Success 

<F P=102>   943E0010B Hanoi TAP CHI CONG SAN in Vietnamese Feb 94 pp 3-5 </F>
<F P=103> 943E0010B </F>
<F P=104>  Hanoi TAP CHI CONG SAN </F>
<F P=105>  Vietnamese </F>
CSO 

  [Text] A major piece of good news has reached our entire 
party and people while we are preparing to celebrate the party's 
anniversary and the lunar New Year: The Midterm National Party 
Conference of Delegates (held from 20 to 25 January 1994 in 
Hanoi) has achieved fine success. With 647 delegates from 64 
party organizations directly subordinate to the central echelon 
in attendance and with the participation of the three comrade 
advisers to the party Central Committee, the conference 
discussed and made decisions on many important issues. The 
conference appraised the implementation of the seventh party 
congress Resolution in the first half-term, reviewed the 
renovation process since the sixth party congress, further 
clarified a number of important issues regarding lines and 
viewpoints in the process of advancing to socialism in our 
country, set forth major policies and solutions aimed at 
stepping up the implementation of the seventh party congress 
Resolution and continuing to advance the cause of renovation to 
even greater success. The conference also elected 20 additional 
members to the party Central Committee. 
  This is the first time that our party held a midterm 
conference of delegates in accordance with the new Party 
Statutes, showing a new work style in keeping with the 
democratic spirit. It can be said that holding a midterm 
conference is a mechanism designed to guarantee democratic 
activities, develop dynamism, and combat sluggishness within the 
party. 
  The conference observed that, since the seventh party 
congress, the world situation had undergone very rapid and and 
complex developments, and that once again our people's cause of 
national defense and socialist construction had to experience 
extremely severe--and at times dangerous--trials. But thanks to 
the party's correct leadership, the state's active management, 
and the entire people's all-out efforts, our country has 
overcome all difficulties and trials. To date, although there 
still remain numerous difficulties, shortcomings, and problems, 
we have overcome a very important stage of the socioeconomic 
crisis, have firmly maintained political stability, have 
consolidated national defense and security, have significantly 
broadened foreign relations, and have created the necessary 
premises for gradually shifting our country to a new 
period of development, the period of taking 
industrialization and national modernization one step forward. 
  These achievements prove that our party's renovation line is 
correct and our steps are appropriate. Our party and state have 
accumulated substantial experience in leading and guiding the 
building of socialism in our country. A profound lesson of 
experience for us is: We must firmly maintain the 
socialist orientation in the renovation process, must 
combine steadfast adherence to the revolutionary principles and 
strategies with tactical flexibility, and must promptly grasp 
the new. We must carry out renovation in a comprehensive and 
uniform manner, but there must be appropriate steps, 
forms, and methods. We must always firmly maintain the party's 
leadership and the state's management in the process of 
developing the multisectorial commodity economy and implementing 
socialist democracy; we must promptly detect and correctly 
resolve new problems, pay attention to reviewing practice, 
and ceaselessly refine the theory of socialist construction in 
our country. 
  To consolidate the achievements already recorded and 
gradually shift the country to a new period of development, the 
entire party and people should clearly recognize the situation 
and perceive all the achievements and difficulties, 
opportunities, and challenges. At present a major challenge is 
that the national economy is still very weak; moreover, it has 
to move forward in an environment of severe competition, 
therefore, it runs the risk of falling further behind 
neighboring countries, which in turn may lead to bad 
consequences for employment and the people's living standards, 
for the people's confidence in and support of the regime, and 
for our national defense and security capability. Meanwhile, 
hostile forces are still doing their utmost to carry out 
"peaceful evolution" to oppose and sabotage our people's 
revolutionary cause. Our party and state still have weak points 
and are not yet capable of fully meeting the requirements of the 
revolution; if they do not pay attention to overcoming 
deviations in guiding the implementation of their political 
program and line, they run the risk of deviating from the 
socialist direction. Corruption and bureaucratism remain very 
serious. 
  However, we have reason to believe that, with their 
indomitable tradition, our people, under the seasoned, 
experienced leadership of our party, will certainly uphold their 
self-reliant spirit, intelligence, and creativity; will surmount 
all trials; and will make the most of all opportunities to 
create historic turning points in national development. 
  Our country's important direction of development for the 
coming years, as clearly pointed out by the conference of 
delegates, focuses on the following vital domains: 
  -- Speed up the development of the economic structure 
along the line of national industrialization and 
modernization. This is aimed at creating many more jobs, 
accelerating the pace of growth, increasing labor productivity, 
enhancing socioeconomic efficiency, and improving the people's 
material and cultural life, thereby strengthening political 
stability; defending national independence, sovereignty, and 
territorial integrity; and firmly maintaining the socialist 
orientation of development. This is really our country's 
strategic task of primary importance in the economic field. 
Today, we understand that industrialization does not mean only a 
simple increase in the pace and ratio of industrial production, 
but also a process of structural development linked with 
technological innovation aimed at laying the groundwork for a 
steady, highly efficient growth of the entire national economy. 
The party and state will carefully weigh and calculate the 
orientation, scale, and steps to ensure their compatibility with 
the needs and actual situation of the country. 
  -- Consistently implement the policy of multisectorial 
economy, create a moving force and environment even more 
conducive to a rapid and highly efficient development of various 
sectors and forms of business. Build and consolidate 
state-operated businesses in the key branches and areas so that 
they may assume the leading role and serve as the activists in 
guiding and helping other economic sectors develop in the right 
direction. Basically renovate the organization and management 
mechanism of state-operated businesses, implement various forms 
of corporatization, and profit sharing...in conformity with the 
nature and areas of production and business to attract more 
sources of capital, to create a moving force, to check 
negativism, and to prod state-operated businesses into operating 
for efficiently. 
  The cooperative, individual, small-proprietor, and private 
capitalist economic sectors and joint ventures with foreign 
countries should continue to be freed from illegal interdictions 
and prohibitions and from troublesome red tape so that they may 
develop even more strongly. On the other hand, the state should 
adopt measures to intensify inventory, control, guidance, and 
regulation to check and overcome the state of unlawful business 
operations, smuggling, tax evasion...which may lead to deviation 
from the party and state line. 
  -- Continue to renovate the management mechanism and to 
uniformly build the state-managed, socialist-oriented market 
mechanism. State management and regulation must encompass 
the entire economy and all economic sectors, not the state 
sector only. This must be reflected first of all in maintaining 
political stability and ensuring a peaceful environment for 
economic activities; in building the legal system and creating 
sufficient legal frameworks for economic operations; in 
developing strategies, projects, plans, long-term programs, and 
major equilibriums to orient socioeconomic development; in 
applying essential mechanisms and policies, especially in the 
fields of finance, pricing, information service, technological 
research and application... to guide and support the progress of 
economic activities in the right direction; in implementing an 
income regulation and distribution policy to ensure social 
justice; and in managing national property and resources and 
protecting and improving the ecological environment. 
  -- Devote oneself to cultural and social problems 
in order to care for, foster, and bring into play the human 
factor as both the moving force and the objective of the 
building of the new society. Pay special attention to the issues 
of employment, social justice, heightening the people's 
intellectual standard, making society healthy, and protecting 
and developing national cultural characteristics. Carry out the 
distribution of income according to labor as the main policy, 
treat talents fittingly; and at the same time, expand social 
welfare, take good care of those who have rendered services to 
the country, wipe out hunger and reduce poverty, and aid poor 
people and poor areas. 
  Resolutely and absolutely struggle against corruption and 
social evils in the entire administrative apparatus at all 
levels and in all sectors by means of a system of uniform 
measures; and combine immediate settlement and solutions with 
the prevention and radical resolution of these problems at their 
roots. 
  -- Ensure national defense and security and broaden 
foreign relations. Uphold vigilance, actively consolidate 
the political bases and movements for national security 
protection, build the people's security disposition and link it 
with the all-people national defense disposition. Strengthen the 
state management of public order and combat crime. Enhance the 
quality of the national defense and security forces' operations. 
  Continue to implement the foreign policy of independence, 
sovereignty, diversification, and multilateralization to create 
favorable conditions for the building of socialism and for 
national defense and, at the same time, to make positive 
contributions to the world people's common struggle for peace, 
national independence, democracy, and social progress. 
  -- Renovate the political system and enhance the 
party's leadership capability and fighting strength. Build 
and gradually perfect the rule-of-law state that is really of 
the people, by the people, and for the people; and manage all 
aspects of society by law and according to law. Adopt a 
mechanism to protect human rights and the bacic rights of 
citizens as stated in the Constitution. Establish social order 
and discipline, develop democracy in conjunction with struggling 
against manifestations of anarchy, the abuse of democracy to 
cause trouble and hurt public interest, and resolutely punish 
all sabotage and reactionary activities. 
  Broadly implement the policy of great national unity, rally 
all patriotic Vietnamese at home and abroad, and strive for a 
peaceful, unified, and independent Vietnam, for a prosperous 
people and a strong country, and for a just and civilized 
society. The Vietnam Fatherland Front and various political and 
social mass organizations should gear their activities toward 
these objectives. 
  Renovating and reorganizing the party to make its leadership 
quality and fighting strength equal to its tasks is a key issue 
ensuring that the renovation undertaking proceeds in the right 
direction and scores even greater achievements. It is necessary 
to continue implementing the Resolution of the Third Party 
Central Committee Plenum on Party Building. Pay special 
attention to consolidating ideological unity within the party 
and seriously implementing the principles guiding party 
organization and activities. Inculcate in cadres and party 
members the will to persist in the path to socialism, and 
creatively apply Marxism-Leninism and Ho Chi Minh thought; 
criticize and rectify deviationist viewpoints and ambiguous 
perceptions and overcome manifestations of opportunism, rightist 
deviationism, dogmatism, and conservatism. Radically renovate 
cadre work--especially the concepts and methods of evaluating, 
selecting, recruiting, and assigning cadres--along the line of 
true democracy and putting talents in important positions. At 
the same time, step up the reorganization of the apparatus, 
renovate the mode of leadership, and increase the fighting 
strength of the contingent of party members and grass-roots 
party organizations. 
  The decisions made by the national conference of delegates 
are the concretization, supplementation, and development of the 
seventh party congress Resolution. These decisions, which 
represent the crystallization of the entire party's intellect 
and the summing up and screening of realities, also contain the 
suggestions made by the people. Together with the other 
resolutions of the party Central Committee, they form the basis 
of our entire party's ideology, perception, and action; at the 
same time, they are the orientation of our country's advance. To 
enable the conference Resolution to penetrate life and be 
translated into reality, all party committee echelons and all 
cadres and party members should seriously and profoundly study 
and fully understand it in order to achieve the unity of 
perception, the unity of views, and the unity of action. All 
cadres and party members must talk and act in accordance with 
the party's resolutions. The state should promptly 
institutionalize the party's decisions, turning them into 
mechanisms, policies, and programs of action for the entire 
people to implement. On the occasion of the forthcoming midterm 
party conferences of delegates at various levels (from districts 
and precincts up), the party committee echelons should 
creatively apply the Resolution of the national party conference 
and various state policies and plans in order to set forth 
positions and solutions appropriate for their local situations, 
paying special attention to the key and urgent issues, and 
focusing guidance on implementing these positions and solutions 
in a resolute and efficient manner. 
  We are convinced that, with our entire party and people 
displaying singlemindedness, staying united, upholding their 
independent and self-reliant spirit, economically building the 
country, and striving to satisfactorily fulfilling the tasks set 
forth by the party conference of delegates, we will certainly be 
able to overcome all difficulties and trials and to continue 
advancing the cause of renovation to even greater success. 

