BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed EHK: "Delcroix Advocates Division of Tasks </F>
Regarding European Defense"] 
  [Text] Brussels, 25 Apr (BELGA) -- Defense is becoming 
increasingly expensive and will become unaffordable in the long 
term. We are not long away from the time when, especially for a 
small European country, maintaining a full-fledged land, air, 
and sea force will be a utopian endeavor. In a federal Europe, 
the solution can be found in a highly advanced division of tasks 
and a streamlining of the "cost" factor. This is what Defense 
Minister Leo Delcroix said on Monday [25 April] during a speech 
given to the Belgium-Netherlands Association. 
  As far as this division of tasks is concerned, Leo Delcroix 
is thinking in particular of the Netherlands, a country which, 
together with Belgium, is a member of a number of international 
organizations. He said "he was convinced that they are both 
being called upon to go even further into bilateralism." 
  He also came out in favor of greater selectivity and better 
quality in defining defense needs and wondered how prepared we 
were to invest in defense to ensure our security as well as our 
policy of development aid. 
  Finally, he once again raised the matter of Belgian 
participation in UN operations and the latest events in Rwanda. 
According to him, security and development are closely linked, 
and we are currently working on a development policy "in the 
broad sense of the term." He felt that we must have the courage 
to review old conceptions and the customary definitions and 
classifications. The minister also said that "we must check and 
see whether the means at our disposal could be used better or 
whether the time had come to think of new means which did not 
seem available before or which, in any case, were not wanted." 
The defense minister added that "he was holding a `constructive 
dialogue' with State Secretary for Development Cooperation Erik 
Derycke. We have already been able to achieve certain things 
together," he said. 

