Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] At least 223 people have died in Zimbabwean prisons 
since January, 130 of them of Aids-related diseases, the 
Minister of Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, Cde 
Emmerson Mnangagwa, told Parliament yesterday. 
  The grim statistics show that not less than 15 prisoners 
have 
died each month in Zimbabwe's gaols since the beginning of the 
year. 
  The highest number was 43, who died of various ailments in 
July. 
  Of the Aids-related illnesses, the lowest number of deaths 
was seven in April, while the highest was 30 for May. 
  Responding to a question by Chief Edgar Musikavanhu, who 
asked what measures were being taken to improve living 
conditions in Zimbabwe's prisons, Cde Mnangagwa said most of the 
deaths occurred after a short stay in prison. 
  "We are made to understand from a medical point of view that 
these illnesses, particularly those which are HIV-related, could 
not have been contracted in prison on account of the short 
period of incarceration." 
  "It is true that there is an increase in the number of 
prison 
deaths. It should, however, not be forgotten that this is a 
phenomenon which is not peculiar to the prison system only. 
Hospitals countrywide are reporting increasing numbers of 
deaths," he said. 
  The longest period of stay in prison of those who died was 
31 
months and the shortest was 14 days. 
  Cde Mnangagwa said there had been an increase in the number 
of deaths in prisons over the past five years with a 
corresponding increase in HIV-related deaths. 
  "On the other hand, it should also be noted that with the 
increase in the prison population figure the number of deaths is 
likely to increase," he said. Zimbabwe's prison population rose 
from 15,000 in 1989, to the present figure of 19,600. 
  In 1992, there were 20,600 people in jails, but the number 
came down following a general amnesty earlier this year. 
  Cde Mnangagwa denied that deaths in prison were due to the 
living conditions or to alleged outbreaks of diarrhoeal diseases. 
  A committee had been set up to look into the issues related 
to deaths in prisons and a comprehensive report would be 
submitted to the ministry in "due course." 
  A report by the Catholic Commission for Justices and Peace, 
which described conditions in Zimbabwe's prisons as "horrible," 
lacked detail and did not give a balanced picture. 
  The report alleged rampant sexual abuse, food shortages, 
poor 
health facilities, diseases, overcrowding and assaults by prison 
officers. 

