Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Installment No 136 of the serialized memoirs of Xu Jiatun: </F>
"Xu Jiatun's Hong Kong Memoirs"] 
  [Text] The Passing of the Basic Law Draft (Part One of Two) 
-- In the Voting on the Political-System Plan, Ji Pengfei Asks 
Me To Work With Figures, Such as Huo Ying-tung; as the Draft 
Still Needs Chinese and British Agreement To Be Finalized, the 
Drafting Committee Is Mocked for Being a Rubber-Stamp Body 
  On 13 February 1990, the last full meeting of the Basic Law 
Drafting Committee was held in the west wing of the Great Hall 
of the People in Beijing. This convention's major mission was 
to vote on the Basic Law draft proposals one by one, and then to 
submit the approved draft for deliberation and approval by the 
Third Session of the Seventh NPC. While this was the final 
working procedure in the drafting of the Basic Law that had 
taken four years and eight months, it seemed that most of the 
committee members in attendance were more somber than elated. 
  By this time, I had already retired, being succeeded by Zhou 
Nan [0719 0589] [former Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs] as 
Director of the Hong Kong Office of the NCNA and as Secretary of 
the Hong Kong and Macao Working Committee. Thus I was no longer 
either taking part in the meetings of the Hong Kong and Macao 
Affairs Office on Hong Kong and Macao work, or seeing documents 
pertaining to it. At the start of the meeting, I took the 
initiative to see Ji Pengfei, who told me that while the 
negotiations with Britain in the political-system area had not 
yet reached agreement, he guessed that there would be results 
prior to the balloting. Ji Pengfei asked me to, before the 
voting on the political-system plan, find and work with figures, 
such as Huo Ying-tung 7202 5391 2639], Li Chia-ch'eng [2621 0857 
6134] and Huang Li-sung [7806 7787 2646], in hopes that they 
would vote to endorse the convention's draft plan, so that the 
most controversial article on the counting of votes by group 
would be ensured of winning the necessary two-thirds votes for 
passage. I told Ji Pengfei that I would do all I could to "make 
a good last stand." 
  The Sino-British dispute was focused mainly on the number of 
directly elected seats to the 1991 legislature, with the British 
holding out for 20 seats, to be increased to 30 by 1995, on 
which they later retreated to 24; and the Chinese were sticking 
to 18 seats by 1995 (with legislative members not to exceed 60, 
and directly elected legislators not to exceed 30 percent). 
The second dispute between China and Britain was about after 
1997, on the timetable for direct elections of LEGCO members and 
the Chief Executive. Neither side would give in, with the 
British stating that if agreement was not reached, they would 
act unilaterally, and the Chinese saying that [plans] must be 
"dovetailed," or they would counterattack. Even matters that 
had been essentially resolved after the "storm over my notebook" 
became the focus of controversy again. 
  As far as I knew, this "dovetailing" originally referred to 
the political-system plan, as well as to scheduling 
arrangements. British plans and schedules before 1997 must be 
"dovetailed" with the plans of the SAR Government after 1997 as 
provided by the Basic Law. The Sino-British agreement process 
at the time involved discussion not only of legislative 
"dovetailing," but also of civil service "dovetailing" and the 
first Chief Executive. The British actually promised that the 
political-system plan and its implementation schedule would be 
"dovetailed" with the Basic Law. The Chinese also promised that 
the British Hong Kong government's civil servants, except for a 
few senior officials of foreign nationality, would be completely 
retained by the SAR Government after 1997; and both sides also 
exchanged views on matters, such as the first SAR Chief 
Executive, and on ways of "on-the-job training" to "become 
familiarized with the British Hong Kong government's conditions 
and operations" before 1997. While the British had proposed 
installing before 1997 a Hongkonger approved by China as deputy 
governor of Hong Kong who would serve as the Chief Executive 
after 1997, the Chinese held that it would be offensive for the 
first Chief Executive of the SAR to have been a British deputy 
governor, so refused to consider it. While both sides could 
not reach a specific concensus on certain promises, they 
unofficially came to a "tacit agreement" on the possibility of 
exchanging views. 
  By the eve of the balloting on the Basic Law draft, as I had 
already left my post, the only thing I knew about the substance 
of the Sino-British dispute over "dovetailing" was what Ji 
Pengfei told me, or the matter of the number of directly-elected 
legislative seats. Prior to this meeting, British Foreign 
Minister Hurd had visited Hong Kong and publicly promised that 
the development of Hong Kong's representative system of 
government would be dovetailed with the political system after 
1997, as well as stating that Britain would not unilaterally 
decide Hong Kong's political system, but would definitely 
consult with China, showing that both sides had resolved the 
dovetailing matter in principle. But the day before the 
meeting, Li Hou and Lu Ping stated publicly that the Basic Law 
draft on the political system [or system of government] had 
still not been finalized, and was still awaiting Sino-British 
consultation, which publicly disclosed that the Basic Law's 
political-system draft still needed a Sino-British agreement to 
be finalized. This led some Hong Kong media to mock the 
Drafting Committee as a rubber-stamp body. 

