BFN 

  [Text] Paris, June 23 (AFP) -- France launched its 
UN-mandated mercy mission to protect minority Tutsis in 
southwestern Rwanda overnight, flying in troops and equipment to 
the Rwandan-border, military officials said here Thursday [23 
June]. 
  The operation started hours after the UN Security Council on 
Wednesday gave lukewarm support to a two-month mission by 
French-led troops to stop the ethnic carnage in the central 
African nation. 
  French officials said none of the 2,500 French soldiers 
assigned to Operation Turquoise had yet crossed into Rwanda, 
where up to 500,000 people, mostly ethnic Tutsis have been 
killed since the April 6 death of the president of Rwanda, a 
Hutu, in an unexplained plane crash. 
  The UN Security Council authorized the mission, expected to 
comprise 2,500 French troops and some Senegalese, to use all 
means necessary to assure the protection of displaced people, 
refugees and civilians in the African state. 
  The mainly Tutsi rebels of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, 
which 
controls about two-thirds of the country, accuse France of 
backing the government and have warned that they would consider 
any French intervention as hostile. 
  The French officials said French forces were being ferried 
to 
the Zairean military bases of Goma and Bukavu near the Rwandan 
border while French Air Force Jaguar planes were flown from the 
Central African Republic to Kisangani airport in northeastern 
Zaire in a support role. 
  French General Jean-Claude Lafourcade, who commands 
Operation 
Turquoise, left Paris late Wednesday to join his expeditionary 
force, which includes 1,000 troops from France and 1,500 
stationed in Gabon and Djibouti. 
  France said Wednesday that its soldiers would cross the 
Rwandan border from Zaire starting Thursday morning on a 
strictly humanitarian mission. 
  Thursday afternoon, between 500 and 600 men were to deployed 
on Goma and Bukavu and the foray into the soutwestern Rwandan 
region of Cyangugu will then be envisaged. France said 8,000 
Tutsis were surrounded by Hutu-dominated government forces in 
that region. 
  The UN Security Council also obliged the troops to be 
impartial in the battle between majority Hutus and minority 
Tutsis that erupted 2-1/2 months ago. 
  The vote was 10-0 with five countries abstaining: Brazil, 
China, Nigeria, New Zealand and Pakistan. 
  The force would be deployed for a maximum of two months to 
protect civilians from massacres until the arrival of 
reinforcements for the UN Mission in Rwanda, which now has 500 
soldiers and military advisers. 
  The Security Council last month passed a resolution 
approving 
the expansion of the UN mission by 5,000 peacekeepers. But a 
lack of equipment and logistical support has delayed their 
deployment. 

