Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Tang Ling (0781 5480): "CPC To Deal With Hijacking With </F>
Violence"] 
  [Text] Successful Hijacking With Two Packages of 
Cigarettes 
  Nine cases of hijacking have taken place in the same sky and 
same place within a year (this article was written on 14 
December 1993.) This figure can go down in the world history of 
civil aviation and deserves an entry in the "Guiness Book of 
World Records." 
  It is true that hijacking from the China mainland to Taiwan 
could well be described as "easier than asking for a fire." 
Take, for instance, the hijacking that took place on 13 
December. Qi Daquan from Harbin made use of two packages of 
cigarettes in his pocket by saying that they were a "bomb remote 
control"; should the plane fail to follow orders to be go to 
Taiwan, he would activate the bombs. Thus did two packages of 
cigarettes succeed in hijacking a passenger plane. 
  In the wake of the hijacking, Taiwan public opinion 
unanimously lashed out at the CPC for harping on the same old 
tune of "repatriating both the hijacker and the aircraft" while 
deliberately implementing blockade on news concerning hijacking 
with the aim of blinding people on the China mainland to the 
conditions of handling hijackers in Taiwan; such practices have 
helped the frequent repetition of hijacking incidents. However, 
Taiwan media neglected the following signal: In his action, Qi 
Daquan fought with the crew on the aircraft who had attempted to 
halt the hijacking. Only his "realistic performance" in 
expressing his intention to activate the bombs gained him 
control over the situation. 
  In several past hijacking incidents, the crew would act 
according to the principle central instruction, namely, "they 
may decide on their own how to handle such incidents according 
to the conditions of the hijacking," and headed for Taiwan based 
on the hijackers' instruction. That was the result of changing 
past foolish practice demanding the crew to "fight heroically", 
which consequently led to the tragic crash of the hijacked 
plane at Baiyun Airport a year or two before. 
<H5>  The Central Authorities Have Already Revised Their Principle </H5>
  Nevertheless, with the high incidence of hijacking cases, 
the 
central authorities have negated what was once negated, revised 
their "principle," and issued the instruction that emergency 
measures can be adopted to halt hijacking "according to the 
actual conditions of the scene." 
  That was a decision made by the State Council at a meeting 
for such departments as civil aviation, public security, armed 
police corps, and customs on 15 November. At that meeting, Vice 
Premier Zou Jiahua presided, and the participants made the 
initial decision on how to increase checks and security of 
airports and aircraft, adopted the resolution "On Augmenting 
Safety and Security of Airports and Aircraft," and proposed a 
series of new measures as follows: 
<H3>  The New Measures Stress "Taking Emergency Measures on the 
Scene" </H3>
  1. Be strict in checking passenger identification 
certificates according to rules, regulations and institutions, 
implement repeated checking on luggage, and there must be some 
restrictions on hand- carried luggage. 
  2. Separation of security work and an on-the-job 
responsibility system should be strictly implemented in the 
waiting room (or lounge), parking apron, and hangar. 
  3. The number of security men accompanying the aircraft 
should be increased. 
  4. In the wake of hijacking, or an attempt to sabotage the 
aircraft's safety, the security men, captain, head of the crew 
service group make take emergency measure to promptly halt such 
attempts under the condition of insuring passenger safety. And, 
  5. A comprehensive check of conditions in implementing 
safety measures of civil aviation airports across the country 
would be conducted in November; takeoffs and landings would be 
immediately suspended in those airports operating against rules 
and regulations. Safety examination work would be implemented by 
an institution of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
<H5>  To Stop Hijacking With Violence </H5>
  The new measures have authorized security men to "take 
emergency measures according to the actual conditions at the 
scene"; does this spell that violence can be taken against 
hijackers in flight? In the course of hijacking, the aforesaid 
Qi Daquan demanded that the crew leader open the door to the 
pilot's compartment; when his demand was rejected, Qi Daquan 
kicked and banged on the door with all his might; simply his 
bulging pockets, which the crew members believed containing 
bombs, halted the crew from taking "emergency measures"; 
otherwise, a disaster might take place any minute should a fight 
take place on an airborne craft. 
  According to some classified materials from the Civil 
Aviation Administration and public security departments, several 
attempted hijackings have occurred since implementation of the 
new measures; the hijackers did not succeed simply because 
security men on the aircraft had resolutely resorted to violence. 
  Some materials which the authorities did not publish are as 
follows: 
  On the morning of 17 November, a passenger on a 
Guiyang-bound 
plane that took off from Guangzhou pulled a knife from one of 
his boots 15 minutes after takeoff and burst into the pilot's 
compartment, but was tripped by a security man on the plane and 
subdued. The hijacker was a staffer from Zunyi City Materials 
Administration and a demobilized ex-serviceman who was sentenced 
to one year's imprisonment for hoodlum behavior in early 1989. 
  On the morning of 22 November, a Beijing-bound passenger 
plane that took off from Shanghai was over the sky above Nanjing 
when a passenger passed a note to the stewardess demanding that 
the plane head for ROK, saying that he carried a powerful bomb. 
When the security man took the hijacker to negotiate with the 
captain, he attacked the hijacker when the latter was not on 
guard and rendered him unconscious; then an emergency landing 
was conducted. The hijacker was an individual householder from 
Wenzhou. 
  On 26 November, a Guangzhou-bound passenger plane from 
Changzhou received an anonymous telephone call saying that an 
explosion would take place on the plane upon its arrival in 
Guangzhou and that the explosives were placed inside a milk 
powder can. When the relevant department received the report, 
it gave instruction to the plane to conduct an emergency landing 
in Hangzhou; there the armed forces, police, and expert searched 
the plane; a milk power can was found, but only some industrial 
chemical dyestuff was contained in it. 
  After takeoff on a Jinan-bound passenger plane from Shenzhen 
on the afternoon of 30 November, a stewardess was distributing 
drinks when a passenger walked into the pilot's compartment, 
saying that a time-bomb was concealed in a cake, which he was 
carrying with him, and demanded that the plane head for Taipei; 
he pointed at the crew leader and captain with some hard object 
which he asserted was a gun in the shape of a fountain pen. At 
this crucial moment, the public security man punched him down 
with a heavy blow. The hijacker was a retired security man from 
Qingdao. 
  A Shenzhen-bound chartered plane from Shenyang carried a 
delegation from 12 departments organized by Liaoning provincial 
authorities to visit Shenzhen and Zhuhai and conduct 
professional talks. The plane made an emergency landing in 
Tianjing, for two men accompanying the delegation from the 
foodstuff trade suddenly gave orders for the plane to head for 
Taiwan, while announcing that they were "seeking refuge with 
freedom," and threatened that they would blow up the plane if 
they found the flight path to be incorrect, then every one on 
the whole plane would perish together. In the chaos, the 
security men on the plane jumped the two hijackers, whereas the 
captain called on the passengers to subdue the hijackers in 
joint efforts. For a while, the plane lost control in the 
course of fight, and it was shaking. News from the scene said 
that one of the hijackers was shot dead by the security man with 
a pistol with a silencer. 
<H5>  Under News Blockade, People Flinch From Taking the Plane </H5>
  Later, the CPC related department gave instructions in early 
December, regarding coverage of attempted hijacking incidents, 
namely, it should be reported to higher authorities for 
examination and approval; attention should be paid to social 
impact to avoid negative effects on the reputation of civil 
aviation and passengers' sense of security. 
  That has roused people's anxieties. In the past, airline 
tickets were in short supply on the mainland and were very hard 
to get without going through the back door, and travel by plane 
was a symbol of one's social status. However, by November and 
December, namely, when hijacking incidents were frequent, the 
number of passengers on the eight major domestic civil aviation 
air routes dropped between 15 and 30 percent, which was a rare 
phenomenon in recent years. At the same time, soft-seat train 
tickets became the most sought-after, and even with increased 
cars related departments have failed to meet the demand; 
soft-seat sleeper tickets on the Beijing-Guangzhou, 
Beijing-Shanghai, Guangzhou-Fujian, and Shanghai- Chongqing 
lines were the most difficult to get. In addition, another 
interesting phenomenon was that during that period, the majority 
of cadres at office and bureau levels would take soft-seat 
sleeper trains on errand instead of travelling by plane. 

