Language: <F P=105> Indonesian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Government efforts to improve the welfare of workers 
by raising the present minimum wage have become a national 
commitment. Businesses were warned not to take advantage of the 
weakened position of the workers in order to keep on exploiting 
them. Now is not the time to increase company investment by 
exploiting the workers. These statements were made by three 
members of the DPR-RI [Republic of Indonesia Parliament]: 
Tadjuddin Nursaid (FKP) [Functional Groups Faction], Aberson 
Marle Sihaloho (F-PDI) [Indonesian Democracy Party Faction], and 
Bachtiar Chamsyah (F-PP) [Development Unity Faction], who were 
interviewed separately in Jakarta yesterday. 
  All three urged the government to reject the request made by 
businesses for a temporary postponement of the increase in the 
minimum wage. Abdul Hakim Garuda Nusantara, LSM [Social 
Self-Help Society] activist and Luhut M.P. Pangaribuan, director 
of the Jakarta LBH [Legal Aid Society], expressed the same hope. 
"The government must reject the request made by businesses to 
postpone an increase in the minimum wage," said Luhut 
Pangaribuan. 
  When he appeared at KADIN's [Indonesian Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry] prenational-congress ceremonies yesterday, 
Minister of Manpower Abdul Latief affirmed that the government 
had good reasons for setting a regional minimum wage. They 
arrived at that conclusion after examining the results of a 
survey and investigation carried out by the National Salary 
Research Board (DPPN), which concluded that workers' 
productivity had increased but that their wages had not gone up. 
That is why the minimum wage must be increased. 
  At the same time as the decision to raise the minimum wage 
was reached, strikes by workers in BOTABEK (Bogor, Tangerang, 
Bekasi) continued to flare up. These three industrial regions 
employ hundreds of thousands of workers. 
  In Tangerang at least 1,000 employees of Pratama Abadi 
Industries Inc., which produces Nike and Reebok shoes in the 
village of Pakulonan, held demonstrations yesterday. They asked 
factory owners, who employ 5,000 employees, to raise the minimum 
wage retroactive to 1 January 1994. 
<H5>  Too Low </H5>
  Tadjuddin believes that Indonesian wages are too low at the 
present time. An example is that even though wages in the 
Jakarta DKI [Special Capital District] were raised to 3,800 
rupiahs per day on 1 January, their real value is still too low 
considering that the daily cost of living in the DKI is so high 
and is getting higher. 
  Now is the right time to try to improve wages as we approach 
the Sixth PELITA [Five-Year Development Plan] and the present 
era of industrialization. It turns out that the Fifth 
PELITA--during which the industrial and the nonoil and gas 
sectors produced rather convincing figures--was not or has not 
yet been matched by a satisfactory improvement in wages. "In 
short, up to this point we have not yet noticed the trickle down 
effects of development," he said. 
  Indonesian wages are still based on the KFM (minimum 
physical 
needs) standards, which were formulated about 37 years ago in 
1956. The components used to calculate the KFM have not kept 
pace with present-day developments or needs. For example, the 
KFM only lists a pandanus mat to sleep on, a kerosene lamp for 
illumination, thong sandals for shoes, etc. 
  Ironically, said Tadjuddin, employers only use the KFM 
standard calculations for unmarried workers; but when the 
workers--both male and female--get married, they must provide 
food and other necessities for their spouses and children. 
  This situation must be improved in the Sixth PELITA and 
afterwards. Tadjuddin believes that the APINDO (Indonesian 
Business Association) proposal that the increase in the minimum 
wage be postponed is really an attempt to compensate for their 
inability to face up to the recent pressures of a high-cost 
economy. These high expenses contain various elements, including 
illegal fees, manipulated legal fees, and requests from various 
parties for contributions. 
  For that reason, the basic problem is that all parties 
concerned, including the government, must be aware of and 
eliminate those "obstacles." "If we can accomplish this, 
business will automatically be able to improve and raise wages 
without having to add to the cost of production." 
<H5>  Include the Workers </H5>
  Aberson thinks that companies must increase their assets and 
company investments by including the welfare of the workers. It 
is meaningless if the welfare of the workers does not follow 
from the company's growth and development. 
  "I'm convinced that increasing the welfare of the workers 
will also increase the positive image of the company. But if the 
welfare of the workers is low, the company will also have a 
negative image," said Aberson. 
  Aberson and Bachtiar also called on the government to reject 
business requests for a temporary postponement of the increase 
in the minimum wage of occasional workers. If the government 
does not listen to that plea, the DPR will step in and protect 
the rights of the workers, who they believe have suffered so 
much. 
  As reported, many companies have requested a temporary 
postponement of the increase in the minimum wage which went into 
effect on 1 January 1994. This request for a postponement is 
real since one of the articles in Minister of Manpower SK 
[Directive] Number 461/MEN/1993 points to that possibility. 
  Pangaribuan and Abdul Hakim consider that the inclusion of 
that article shows the government's ambivalence. On the one 
hand, the government wants to raise the minimum wage, but on the 
other hand the government wants to give business the opportunity 
to request a postponement. 
<H5>  Objections Raised </H5>
  Minister of Manpower Abdul Latief himself thinks that the 
objections raised by business to that increase are perfectly 
natural. In their business calculations businesses basically 
always want to make a profit by decreasing their labor costs. 
  There were good reasons for the government to raise the 
minimum wage to 3,800 rupiahs in the DKI Jakarta and in parts of 
West Java. The minister of manpower said that before that 
agreement was enacted as a government directive, the government 
considered various aspects: the industries involved, the growth 
of bank interest rates, field data, productivity analyses, and 
surveys carried out by the Department of Manpower itself. On the 
basis of all these aspects, plus input from business, workers 
and the SPSI [All-Indonesia Workers Association], these 
materials were formulated as a directive. Casting all of these 
materials in the form of a directive did not come about 
suddenly; it had been in preparation for a long time after it 
was noticed that wages had not been going up, but that the 
productivity and export performance of those industries kept on 
increasing. 
  "It is really not true that the various formulations we used 
did not take the needs of business into consideration." For that 
reason, his department, which handles technical matters, is 
willing to listen to the objections raised by those businesses. 
  However, as has been noted, they must be accompanied by good 
reasons, including a clear and detailed analysis of the 
company's cost of production structure. On that basis the 
government will be able to study whether those objections should 
be taken into consideration or whether they are merely fears. 
  "The problem, in my opinion, is that under present 
conditions 
the cost structure of those industries is not fair. To continue 
to defeat the competition they must try to keep wages low 
without reducing other income sectors. The government thinks 
that now is the right time to raise wages," said the minister, 
who is himself a former businessman. 
<H3>  The Atmosphere in JABOTABEK [Jakarta, Bogor, Tangerang, 
Bekasi] </H3>
  At the same time as a decision to raise the minimum wage was 
reached, there have been continual strikes in BOTABEK (Bogor, 
Tangerang, Bekasi). In Tangerang at least 1,000 workers from 
Pratama Abadi Industries Inc, which produces Nike and Reebok 
shoes in the village of Pakulonan, demonstrated yesterday. They 
were asking the plants, which employ 5,000 workers, to raise the 
minimum wage retroactive to 1 January 1994. 
  Those workers believe that the company is on the Tangerang 
Department of Manpower list of companies which submitted a 
request to postpone the wage hike. But after the matter was 
discussed, they learned that their wages had already been raised. 
  Strikes affected a number of industries in Bogor last week. 
Among those hit hardest by a strike is the Chiki snack food 
company in the village of Ciomas. The strike by 500 workers has 
been going on since last Monday [3 January]. 
  After some discussion, the company claimed that it could 
raise the wages of only those workers still earning under 3,800 
rupiahs. But the raise would be postponed for those workers who 
had been working for the company for many years but whose wages 
were above 3,800 rupiahs. This policy did not satisfy those 
workers who had devoted many years to the company. 
  There also were strikes in Bekasi. As in the other areas, 
the 
strikes stemmed from worker anxiety that the companies might be 
allowed to postpone the implementation of the minimum wage 
directive. 
  Amar Syamsura, head of the Department of Manpower in Bekasi, 
admitted that many companies, including a factory which makes 
ready-made clothing, had requested a postponement. "But there's 
no need to worry. We have 60 letters from companies in Bekasi 
about complying with the new KUM (minimum wage directive)," he 
said. 
  The Bekasi Department of Manpower promised to take action 
against those businesses which do not comply with the new 3,800 
rupiah per day KUM. The most extreme action would be to take the 
company to court. 
  KOMPAS noted that when the government raised the minimum 
wage 
in Bekasi last year from 1,600 rupiahs per day to 2,600 rupiahs 
per day, many businesses "juggled" the figures. Temporary 
company subsidies, such as money for food, transportation and 
medical treatment were turned into permanent subsidies, so that 
the workers received a total of 2,600 rupiahs per day. 
  In Bogor the staff of the Department of Manpower in the 
Municipality and District of Bogor said that five companies had 
submitted a request to postpone the implementation of the wage 
hike on grounds that company conditions did not permit it yet. 
In Tangerang at least eight companies submitted the same 
request. The Department of Manpower is unwilling to state the 
names of those companies. But they operate in the following 
industries: rattan, pharmaceuticals, food and drink, and shoes. 
  In the West Jakarta region at least 29 companies are subject 
to strikes; 883 companies are classed as being subject to 
strikes [as published] and 83 are in the stable class. If a 
company does not have a PKB (joint work agreement) or an SPSI 
work-unit steward, it is classified as being subject to strikes. 

