Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by editorial staff member Shunji Taoka: "Defense </F>
Agency's Defensive Battle Regarding the Revision of the National 
Defense Program Outline"] 
  [Text] "I thought it might hold good for 10 years," said 
Noboru Hoshuyama, director of the Secretariat of the Defense 
Agency [DA] who created the draft of "The Defense Program 
Outline" adopted by the National Defense Council in October 
1976. In the autumn of 1974 Hoshuyama, who at that time was a 
staff member of the Defense Planning Division within the Defense 
Agency, took leave and completed the draft in one week, living 
in the hall owned by the Defense Agency's Mutual Aid Association. 
  At that time, partly because of the inflation which occurred 
following the first oil shock, the defense budget for 1975 
increased by 21 percent compared to the previous year. On the 
other hand, the world was experiencing detente following the 
Vietnam war, and it became necessary for the government to frame 
the defense program outline in order to show the people to what 
extent the defense capabilities were to be reinforced. 
  With the lapse of the 18 years since they were framed, the 
"outline"--which provides for basic defense capabilities, with 
the East-West confrontation as background, and the "attached 
sheets to the outline" which provide the military forces and 
equipment to achieve the outline--has become outdated. Besides, 
with the end of the East-West confrontation, it has become 
necessary to review Japan's security policy as a whole. 
  The "panel on defense problems" established on 28 February 
as 
an advisory council to Prime Minister Hosokawa is trying to 
frame a new basic plan. 
<H5>  Things Did Not Go as the Defense Agency Expected </H5>
  A number of councils established in the past were expected 
to 
play the role of "invisible cloak" to cover up the fact that 
intellectuals are also giving their consent to the plans 
proposed by the ministries and agencies. However, the newly 
established panel was of a different nature. Originally the 
Defense Agency planned to establish an advisory organ to the 
director-general, but its intention was not realized as the 
advisory panel was suddenly established by the prime minister. 
  Flurried, on 1 March the Defense Agency established a "panel 
to discuss ways of defending the nation" consisting of the 
director-general, the vice ministers, the bureau directors, the 
chiefs of staff of the three Self-Defense Forces, and other 
staff members. 
  A leading staff member of the Defense Agency says: "We 
intend to take the initiative in dealing with the situation. We 
intend to compile a complete plan before they reach with their 
conclusion, and to prevent the panel from running alone." The 
Defense Agency seems to be aiming at an "active defense," not a 
"passive defense." 
  The key member of the panel is Seiki Nishihiro, former vice 
minister for the Defense Agency. Retired Admiral Makoto Sakuma, 
former chairman of the Joint Staff Council, also joins the 
panel. Thus there is little possibility that the panel will come 
up with a plan totally different from the previous one. 
However, Nishihiro is the person who once proposed that the 
Ground Self-Defense Force should be drastically reduced, that 
equipment should be imported to cooperate with the United 
States, and so on. Therefore, Defense Agency officials who are 
his juniors are taking a cautious attitude toward him because 
"Nishihiro tends to make philosophic expressions and come up 
with fantastic ideas". 
  "The panel is not capable of making a concrete proposal as 
to 
the scale of the Self-Defense Forces in the future," states a 
high-ranking official of the Defense Agency. He added his own 
advice that "it would be easier to effect reductions if the 
outline was abolished; as used to be the practice before the 
outline was framed, a five-year plan will be framed to meet the 
situation." 
  However, the "threat from the North" has sharply decreased. 
With serious economic and financial confusion taking place, the 
amount Russia spends in real terms on national defense declined 
to below one-eighth the level of two years ago. While defense 
expenses in nominal terms increased by 3100 percent, inflation 
rose 26000 percent during the same period, and the country faces 
difficulty in procuring equipment maintenance expenses and 
salaries. In fact, the percentage of evaders of military 
service has reached as high as 80 percent. 
<H3>  Defense Agency Claims the Military Power of the PRC Has 
Increased </H3>
  Nishihiro, Sakuma, other officails, and the Defense Agency 
itself attempt to explain the necessity of the Self-Defense 
Forces on the grounds that the military power of the PRC has 
increased following the collapse of the USSR. 
  However, from a long-range view, the actual increase in the 
PRC's military expenditures is almost on the same level as the 
rate of inflation. 
  A drastic reduction is underway in China's army. The navy 
has also sharply decreased the number of its submarines; it now 
maintains 30-odd submarines, whereas five years ago it 
maintained more than 90. The air force, which maintains 5,000 
outdated airplanes which are on the verge of retirement, has 
purchased only 26 Russian-made Su-27 planes during the past two 
years. Far from increasing its armaments, the country is having 
difficulty in modernizing its forces. It will not be 
justifiable to designate the PRC as the threat which replaces 
the USSR. 
  With the East-West confrontation coming to an end, changes 
are also taking place involving the defense relationship between 
Japan and the United States. High-ranking government officials 
and the mass media in the United States are expressing anxiety 
over Japan's nuclear armaments, and are directing their 
attention to the increase in Japan's defense expenses while 
other advanced countries are reducing their own defense 
expenses, even though the amount of the increase may be small. 
  The panel plans to develop its tentative conclusions by this 
summer. However, it is likely an actual battle involving 
reductions will take place sometime thereafter. 

