Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [New Year's Day address by Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, </F>
followed by a question and answer session with unidentified 
domestic reporters, at the prime minister's official residence 
on 30 December -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Hosokawa, reading from a prepared text] I wish all 
of you a happy New Year. On this New Year's Day, I would like 
to state candidly my thoughts on what Japan should pursue and 
where it should head to prepare itself for the 21st century. 
Last year, 1993, was an epoch-making year. It was a year when 
a political stalemate was broken in the midst of the people's 
high expectations and the coalition government was inaugurated. 
It is a historical inevitability to fundamentally rebuild 
Japan's political, economic, and social systems which have 
become obsolete into new ones. Therefore, my new government is 
strongly feeling anew its responsibility to lay a major 
historical turning point for changes in Japan while regarding 
the responsibility as a historical mission. 
  There are various factors dictating the need for Japan to 
change. I would like to explain those factors, confining them to 
the following two points. First, Japan is moving toward a 
society of senior citizens at an unprecedented rate. Looking at 
the population's composition, Japan is shifting from the most 
vital age to the most difficult age. Basic ideals, which so far 
have shored up Japanese society, are being forced to change. 
For example, Japan should develop new plans of action, after 
departing from the economic expansion policy that Japan has 
adopted since the Meiji Era, to catch up with and overtake 
European nations and the United States. I have often wondered if 
people around the world really want to live in Japan. To be 
sure, Japan has many characteristics such as safe living, high 
income level, and long life expectancy that it can boast to the 
rest of the world. I am convinced that Japan can build itself 
into a proud society by taking the initiative in pushing for 
reforms even if it may bring some suffering to the people. I 
would like to make three specific proposals to prepare Japan for 
the 21st century. First, I would like to mention the building 
of a society where senior citizens can lead their lives full of 
vitality. The senior citizens of the 21st century are a 
generation consisting of people like me. We will have to feel 
that we can work and contribute to society as long as our health 
permits us to, as Japan moves toward the world's top life 
expectancy society. It is necessary to work on building a 
society to fulfill such a need. I believe that it is important 
to build a society where 65-year-old people can work. I intend 
to help senior citizens continue to work by creating a new 
employment insurance. I will strive to build a society where 
65-year-olds can work by revamping the current pension system 
and providing social insurance to part-time workers. At the 
same time, I will strive to create a climate where women can 
work easily, establish a new child-care leave payment system, 
and improve the facilities of child-care centers in an effort to 
help raise our children to bear Japan's future. What concerns 
senior citizens the most is home care service, and the costs of 
such service. I intend to work vigorously on improving 
home-care service after reviewing the current 10-year strategy, 
the so-called Golden Plan, for the insurance of senior citizens. 
I also intend to review the current medical insurance system 
and vigorously promote a new nurse-service system which does not 
require patient's family members to take care of him while in 
the hospital. From the standpoint of improving the current 
medical system and Japan's international contributions to the 
medical arena, I am thinking of shaping a new 10-year strategy 
to combat such intractable diseases as cancer. I believe that 
if we vigorously come to grips with building a society of senior 
citizens, the society will become vital and bright. In line 
with the ideas I put forth just a while ago, I am thinking of 
shaping a comprehensive welfare vision for the society of senior 
citizens. Second, I would like to mention the building of a 
living infrastructure which is of affluence and high quality. 
  Looking at our daily lives, people residing in local 
areas complain that they have fewer job opportunities than those 
residing in urban areas and they feel that the cultural and 
educational level in their local areas is low. Many urban 
residents complain that they do not feel comfortable with their 
lives, citing housing problems and commuting hell. I believe 
that it is essential to gradually turn all of those areas into 
attractive areas for the people. To that end, I intend to 
formulate a guideline for decentralization within this year and 
push for the administrative reform of local governments with 
legislation on decentralization in mind. At the same time, I 
also intend to vigorously seek to upgrade the infrastructure 
while giving priority to creating a living environment that is 
compatible with the actual situation of localities. For 
example, only 10 percent of cities, towns, and villages with 
less than 50,000 residents now enjoy a sewage system. The 
present situation is that more than half of the people live 
without a sewage system. I intend to help more than 90 percent 
of the people gain access to a sewage system. I plan to examine 
the possibility of raising the paved road rate in rural villages 
to that in medium cities. Building an efficient high-speed 
traffic network, which links major local cities with each other 
by highway, rail, and air, is essential to turning our nation 
into a multipolar and diversified land. For example, I intend 
to enable 98 percent of the population to arrive in interchanges 
within one hour by extending the current 6,000 km of the 
superhighway network to 14,000 km by the early 21st century. 
  Next, I would like to propose the Housing 21 Plan designed 
to 
have all the people live in a comfortable housing climate in the 
21st century. The plan calls for widening the per capita living 
space 30 percent and I intend to work to make it possible for 
every person to enjoy 40 square meters of living space. I also 
plan to promote the construction of housing in concert with the 
construction of towns. To that end, I intend to boldly reform 
the housing industry, promote competition among housing 
builders, and largely cut the high costs of housing construction 
with the goal of making it possible for the people to build 
their own houses with one-third the money they have spent in the 
past. The effective use of land is a major policy task. From 
the standpoint of effectively using land, I will aggressively 
study the possibility of relaxing regulations concerning land 
use. In addition, I plan to make towns beautiful by drawing up 
a greenery plan to increase the acreage of greenery in urban 
areas by three times. In a bid to relax urban traffic gridlock, 
I will aim for comfortable commuting in urban areas by improving 
the rail service and constructing quadruple-track rail lines 
[double tracks going in each direction] in urban areas. In this 
way, I intend to upgrade the people's living infrastructure. 
  Third, I would like to mention the building of a 
comprehensive and characteristic society. When I think of the 
future world, I believe that the full growth of diversified 
characters will give rise to unique cultures and economic 
activities which will in return become a source of new vitality. 
This is an important element for Japan to act as a responsible 
member of the international community and contribute to the 
community. From that point of view, I believe that my 
government should strive to promote research in high- 
technology, in which Japan is said to lag behind other nations. 
I think that to that end, it is necessary to promote basic 
research in the areas of space, life, material, and energy. I 
intend to give budgetary priority to important research and 
development programs to prepare Japan for the 21st century, 
while seeking to consolidate the infrastructure to train 
outstanding researchers and upgrading research facilities. 
Regarding the promotion of culture and arts, I plan to foster 
young artists who will bear the future of Japan's arts, increase 
subsidies to unique local cultural activities and build a 
society where culture prospers. At the same time, it is 
important to create a climate wherein Japan can freely talk with 
other nations and they can understand each other's diversity. 
From that point, I plan to promote truly meaningful 
international exchanges under which Japan accepts 100,000 
foreign students for study here. 
  Next, there is the information industry which may be a 
typical example of an economic area filled with creativity. 
Thanks to fast progress in information communication 
technology, it will become possible early in the 21st century 
for people to watch programs all over the world at any time and 
to even receive medical and administrative services at home. 
  It will become necessary to push for overall deregulation of 
the communications sector to enable accelerated improvement of 
existing networks and the launching of new projects by private 
businesses. But it is never easy to realize such an invigorating 
and abundant society. It takes so many financial resources to 
implement social security programs and to improve social 
overhead capital, while aiming to create a creativity-filled 
society. No doubt, necessary costs and responsibilities should 
be shared among us in a fair and appropriate manner. Without 
that, it will be impossible to realize the society we seek to be 
in by the 21st century. 
  To ensure that society does not lose its vitality from high 
tax burdens, we are resolved to contain the people's burdens to 
below 50 percent, even at the aging population's peak time in 
the 21st century. We must think hard and come up with the best 
possible ideas. 
  We must implement administrative reform, with an emphasis on 
deregulation, as well as fundamental revision of government 
expenditures. My government should boldly relax regulations 
which will generate the maximum effect -- in areas closely tied 
to people's lives like distribution, housing and land, new types 
of businesses like information communications and industries 
which will contribute to expanding employment. 
  Even when these efforts are made, however, I think that if 
an 
abundant and invigorating society is to be realized in the 21st 
century, some increases in individuals' tax burdens will be 
unavoidable. Right now, one senior citizen is supported by five 
working citizens, but when our aging society peaks, one senior 
citizen will be supported by only two working citizens. 
  Simply put, the burdens will more than double. No doubt, we 
must also think about increased social security insurance 
premiums with a further aging population and increased tax 
burdens to improve social overhead capital. If we look at the 
existing tax system from such a viewpoint, because the weight of 
individual income tax in the tax system is so large, so much of 
the burdens need to be borne by the generation of working 
people. If the present condition is allowed to continue, it 
will excessively task the generation supporting the aging 
society. If the willingness of the working generation and the 
vigor of the society as a whole are to be fully maintained, it 
will become necessary to reconsider the burdens of the people 
and to bring a tax system which ensures a balance between 
income, consumption, and assets. 
  As such, I have come to think the best choice given to us is 
to push for a tax system reform with a national consensus -- 
along the lines of the tax reform policy recommended by the Tax 
Commission which is aimed at realizing a fair and invigorating 
society of the aged population. I would like to have the 
nation's understanding on this. 
  Lastly, I would like to speak about international affairs. 
Japan's prosperity is only possible if the world's free trade 
system is maintained. I believe that the recent conclusion of 
the Uruguay Round is truly significant. It is a matter of 
course for my government to give full consideration to the 
impact of the Round's conclusion. In particular, my government 
will take measures to enable farmers to engage in farming free 
of concerns. I believe the government must take measures to 
ensure the future of the farmers and thus prevent the nation's 
food self-sufficiency rate from further dropping. 
  Listening to voices from other nations, Japan is still 
closed. Japan's savings are too high while its investments are 
too small. Japan is criticized for that. Needless to say, some 
of such criticism is based on misunderstanding, but we have to 
vigorously improve what needs to be improved. The aggressive 
upgrading of the current infrastructure to prepare for a society 
of senior citizens is not for the sake of other nations, but for 
the sake of ourselves. To do that, we need to secure revenue 
resources which will not leave excessive burdens to the future 
generation. Once that is done, I think we will have to review 
the basic plan on public works investments including possible 
revisions and increases of the investment allocations. 
  I am convinced that we will be able to build Japan's 
economic 
society into one that is open to other nations through the 
course of implementing those policies. 
  Of course, the economic and social reforms being proposed 
here are not something that can be done by the government alone. 
And all reforms accompany pains. Besides, the choices we can 
take are very limited. I hope we will be able to challenge 
difficulties with the cooperation of the people, and build an 
age which is full of ideals of hopes -- by sharing pains among 
all of us. 
  With the so-called economic bubble having gone and with 
inventories having undergone readjustments, this is the year 
when the economy should recover in full scale. I am confident 
that we will have a good economic new year if we move toward the 
vision presented today, while doing the best in overcoming the 
immediate issues of the economy. I pray that this year may be a 
fruitful year for all of you, the people of the nation. Thank 
you. 
  [Reporter] Then, we would like to begin asking questions. 
First, Mr. Prime Minister, I would like to ask this question in 
connection with the vision you talked about just now. Talking 
about the tax system reform, you have said that the reform would 
not mean simply raising or lowering tax rates, and that you 
would present a vision. So, I assume the vision you mentioned 
today is the vision you have said was forthcoming. Bluntly put, 
can I say that you are asking the people to understand that an 
increase in the consumption tax is unavoidable? 
  [Hosokawa] No, I did not mean to refer to the consumption 
tax rate issue. The vision for the 21st century is, as the 
words say, the vision for the 21st century. I presented a 
long-term view on what the future economic society should look 
like. With the aging population, an increase in [tax] burdens 
is unavoidable. If we choose to avoid increasing burdens, then 
we will have no choice but to reduce social security benefits. 
  On the other hand, if we choose to rely on debts, while that 
may be all right with the people of our generation, it will 
result in leaving many burdens to our children and 
grandchildren. If the working generation bears excessive 
burdens with the population aging proceeding, there will arise 
the question of whether society's vitality can be maintained or 
the question of whether the working generation will not lose 
their will to work -- despite that. When we think about this 
point, it becomes clear we have to consider -- as pointed out in 
the Tax Commission's recommendation and the Hiraiwa Commission's 
report -- about the relationship between the interests and 
burdens of the people and about the tax system which can ensure 
balance between income, assets, and consumption. 
  As such, I presented in the vision my view on how the 
people's interests and benefits should be balanced. 
  [Reporter] I would like to ask once again. Today, you said 
you will push for an overall tax system reform based on the 
national consensus. Could you have used that expression with 
the reduction of income tax and the increase of consumption tax 
-- in the future -- in mind? 
  [Hosokawa] I may be repeating what I said just now. With 
the aging society arriving, an increase in burdens will be 
unavoidable. I think it will be irresponsible to avoid bearing 
the increased burdens. The consultative committee of the 
government and ruling parties is now discussing what 
specifically we should do -- from a broad perspective, in 
consideration of the Tax Commission's recommendation. By the 
time the 1994 budget is formulated in mid- or late-January, the 
committee will come up with a conclusion. The government will 
make a decision after seeing the committee's conclusion. 
  [Reporter] You did not make yourself clear on the question 
of the consumption tax increase. But according to the vision 
you presented, you want to go for an overall tax system reform 
based on the Tax Commission's recommendation. I think it is 
clear what you wanted to say really was that there is no choice 
but to raise the consumption tax rate in the future. The reason 
you cannot speak clearly about it is because the Social 
Democratic Party of Japan [SDPJ] is strongly opposed to it. I 
would like to ask if you can convince the SDPJ? 
  [Hosokawa] That is a tough question. I think there are 
several prerequisites for promoting a comprehensive tax system 
reform. For example, we must rationalize expenditures and 
correct unfair practices in taxation. Among these 
prerequisites, a drastic review of the balance between direct 
and indirect taxes is one of the biggest issues related to the 
nation's comprehensive tax reform. Regarding the government's 
conclusion on the issue, however, I must repeat that is still 
under debate among the coalition parties. The consultative 
committee composed of all parties is discussing the matter. 
Since the burdens are unavoidable, I think the committee will 
come to some sort of conclusion. 
  [Reporter] Mr. Prime Minister, it seemed your statement 
today focused on mid- and long-term government tasks; however, 
in your New Year's statement, I think the public wanted to hear 
your stance toward emergency pump-priming measures. What is 
your actual plan for the new pump-priming package? 
  [Hosokawa] With respect to economic measures, the government 
has already hammered out several pump-priming packages. And, 
through the third supplementary budget for fiscal 1993 and the 
initial budget for fiscal 1994, we are going to implement 
ceaseless economic stimulus measures to cover the coming 15 
months. Our budget formulation work gives much consideration to 
stimulation of the economy, and it will certainly brighten the 
Japanese economy's future. By the time the [1994] budget is 
formulated, economic measures will become fixed, and I certainly 
hope the measures will meet the people's expectations. 
  [Reporter] In connection with the previous question on the 
people's greatest concern, could you tell me the size of the 
income tax reduction and its revenue resources? 
  [Hosokawa] I cannot give an answer to that at this point. 
The government and the ruling parties are discussing the matter 
now. I think a conclusion will shape up by the middle of 
January. 
  [Reporter] You have just stated that the government will 
take actions to secure employment of workers over 65 years old 
as a mid- to long-term task. However, the unemployment rate is 
gradually picking up nationwide, and the number of jobless is 
increasing in the business sector. In this regard, how much do 
you estimate the nation's unemployment and economic growth rates 
in 1994 will be? 
  [Hosokawa] The government is scheduled to announce its 
economic forecast in mid-January in definite figures. 
Concerning employment-securing measures, I have repeatedly said 
in Diet interpellations that the government is trying its best 
to draw up measures for securing employment at the Labor 
Ministry's initiative. In fact, employment conditions are 
becoming serious in the nation, and I am really concerned about 
the present circumstances. As I noted in my New Year's 
statement and a previous news conference, the government intends 
to deal with employment-related issues with every possible 
measure. I am serving as the chairman of the government's 
employment policy headquarters to fully engage in the task. 
  [Reporter] Mr. Prime Minister, my question is again about 
the government's tax reduction plan. Chairman Hiroshi Kato, of 
the advisory Tax System Research Council, met with you 
yesterday, and insisted that the government should promise a 
future increase of the consumption tax if the income tax is 
implemented this fiscal year. In other words, he said a bill for 
income tax cuts should include a pledge on a future increase of 
the consumption tax rate. While you take a stance to attach 
importance to tax panel policies, are you really going to enact 
the income tax cut and the consumption tax hike at the same time? 
  [Hosokawa] As a matter of course, we have to attach much 
importance to the tax panel's opinions; but the government's 
attitude toward the panel's advisory report is also under debate 
at the consultative committee organized by the coalition 
parties. The committee will determine the coalition's tax 
reform policy hopefully in consideration of the tax panel's 
advisory report. 
  [Reporter] In the statement's conclusion, you said the 
business climate will improve this year after the stock 
adjustment phase. When we assess if the stock adjustment phase 
is well under way, we must pay attention to the fact that 
financial institutes' bad loans are one of the main reasons for 
the prolonged recession. This is a significant difference from 
the preceding recessions. So, some people are questioning if 
the government has the proper remedy for the stagnant economy. 
They say the government must have drastic and unusual remedies, 
such as large-scale public investments and income tax cuts with 
the issuance of deficit-covering bonds. What is your attitude 
toward such an opinion? 
  [Hosokawa] I have repeatedly noted that we must be very 
careful of thoughtless dependence on deficit-covering bonds. On 
the other hand, the government is seriously seeking measures to 
encourage transactions of real estate. While we have no 
definite plans right now, we are trying very hard to seize some 
good ideas. 
  [Reporter] Again on the consumption tax. Mr. Prime 
Minister, it seems you intend to wait for the coalition parties' 
discussions to end, but you will have to make your own decision 
sooner or later. Do you have the resolve to demonstrate your 
leadership to make a future-oriented decision on tax revenues? 
  [Hosokawa] I am very sorry, but I cannot answer that 
question at this point. Taking into account a conclusion drawn 
by the coalition parties, I would like to make a proper decision 
for the future. 
  [Reporter] To cope with the aging society, you have 
clarified your stance to ask heavier burdens of the public. To 
improve services for the aged, it is necessary to reinforce 
manpower to work on this field. On the other hand, the 
government is expected to have more manpower through 
deregulation policies. Do you intend to minimize the public's 
burdens by utilizing the surplus manpower to overcome 
bureaucratic sectionalism? 
  [Hosokawa] That is an interesting idea but I have no 
definite plan yet. 
  [Reporter] Your statement includes guidelines on various 
issues; however, it may be difficult to carry them out under 
bureaucratic sectionalism. While the statement advocates 
administrative reform, how will you draw up definite measures? 
  [Hosokawa] As a matter of course, individual ministries and 
agencies are primarily in charge, and outlines of reform plans 
are introduced to the coalition parties' leaders. They will 
thoroughly discuss administrative reform, and its details will 
be materialized in the 1994 budget and other government 
policies. Of course, proposals in my statement are based on 
ministries' policies, such as economic programs, the five-year 
plan for improving social infrastructures, and the national 
development plan. Also, the Hiraiwa Commission and the tax 
panel gave me lots of suggestions. My statement was made in 
accord with all of these. I am just explaining such proposals 
in my own words; they may look more drastic, though. I will 
request the ministries draw up tangible measures for carrying 
out administrative reform based on my principles. 
  [Reporter] Please let me ask again on this point. Since the 
Finance Ministry and the SDPJ are not in accord on the treatment 
of the consumption tax, your leadership as prime minister is 
likely to be strongly expected on this issue. Could you explain 
your resolve again? 
  [Hosokawa] Needless to say, I have to make final 
decisions, regardless of whether it is a matter of rice or 
something else. Anyhow, it is an important issue. We have to 
find a desirable balance between receiving benefits and sharing 
burdens. Anyhow, as I have said earlier, our society is aging 
and it is unavoidable that the working people's burden will grow 
heavier. Under such a circumstance, some people may say that 
they do not want to shoulder the burden. Others may say that 
they do not want to see a further decline in social security 
services. What kind of decision are the people going to 
support? Are they going to say that it is important not to 
lower the standard of the social security services, even at the 
cost of bearing some burdens? Are they going to say that they 
will accept lowering the standard of income security [shotoku 
hosho] because they do not want to shoulder the burdens? Or, 
are they going to accept a significant increase in the burden on 
people in the prime of their working lives or the loss of this 
vital power of society? Anyhow, we have to make our decision on 
the choices we have. Of course, it is very difficult to have 
everybody's consensus. However, the ruling parties are studying 
these matters to make their decision, which will be accepted by 
as many people as possible. They will be able to show the 
people several choices. After going through these processes, I 
will have to make my final decision. 
  [Reporter] Let me ask you a question regarding a final 
decision you have just mentioned. You said earlier that the 
ruling parties, which are currently studying the issue, will 
make their decision around mid-January. Are you going to make 
your final decision before the end of January even if they fail 
to reach an agreement by mid-January? 
  [Hosokawa] They have to make a decision. I want them to do 
their best to come up with some kind of decision by all means. 
  [Reporter] I am going to ask you about the political reform 
bills. Discussions in the House of Councillors are virtually at 
a standstill. How are you going to display your leadership to 
find a way out of this situation? 
  [Hosokawa] Frankly speaking, I would like them to start 
discussions immediately. Anyway, more than 40 days have passed 
since the bills were sent to the House of Councillors. Well, we 
had to deal with the supplementary budget proposals and other 
things, such as the Uruguay Round, during this time. 
Accordingly, discussions at the House of Representatives did 
not go smoothly. I understand this very well. However, we 
still have a considerable number of days left for discussions 
after New Year's Day. Therefore, I do want to pass the political 
reform bills during the current Diet session; in the past five 
years, we have vainly tried to approve political reform bills. 
I will do my best to promote Diet deliberations on the bills. 
A fundamental way is to have detailed discussions in the Diet 
on the bills in the presence of both ruling and opposition 
parties. If an agreement can be reached at Diet discussions, 
the government, of course, is ready to respect it. 
  [Reporter] Are you not planning to make a compromise by 
making major changes to the bills? 
  [Hosokawa] Well, the answer to your question may be a 
repetition of what I have said earlier. However, I am of the 
opinion that the fundamental approach is to have discussions 
between the ruling and opposition parties to reach an agreement. 
  [Reporter] Regarding the political reform bills, it seems 
that some people are again saying that an election system reform 
should be treated apart from the prevention of political 
corruption. What is your opinion on this? 
  [Hosokawa] As I repeatedly said during the Diet meetings, 
these issues are like front and rear wheels of a car. We have 
to change the current medium-sized constituency system, in which 
members of the same parties fight with each other during 
elections. I do not think the bill on preventing political 
corruption alone will improve politics. I think simultaneous 
approval of the four bills is necessary by all means to realize 
political reform. 
  [Reporter] Some members of the ruling parties are also 
talking about the possibility of dissolving the lower house. 
What do you think of dissolving the lower house amid the 
depression? 
  [Hosokawa] I have no such plan. 
  [Reporter] Let me go back to the economic issue. [words 
indistinct] Do you think that ruling parties will hold joint 
meetings in January to talk about short- and medium-term 
comprehensive matters -- not only emergency economic measures -- 
while keeping an eye on the 21st century in particular? 
  [Hosokawa] We have to form a draft budget for the next 
fiscal year while keeping an eye on long-term matters. 
  [Reporter] You said earlier that you were not thinking about 
dissolving the lower house. In a recent news conference, you 
said that you were prepared for the worst. What are you going 
to do if the reform bills are not approved? 
  [Hosokawa] I cannot disclose what I am planning to do. 
There are many things that I am thinking about. 
  [Reporters] You have canceled your planned trip to Europe. 
Japan-U.S. summit talks will be held in February. Can you give 
us an outline of your diplomatic schedule for this year? 
  [Hosokawa] Japan-U.S. summit talks will be held in February. 
Dealing with the Japan-U.S. comprehensive economic consultations 
is a very difficult task. We are now doing our best to deal 
with the negotiations, which are very difficult. As a major 
topic, the results of the consultations will probably be 
confirmed at the upcoming Japan-U.S. summit talks. Other than 
that, I have no urgent diplomatic plan for the time being. Of 
course, summits [of the Group of Seven developed countries] will 
be held in July. However, I have no concrete diplomatic plans 
for the period between now and July. 
  [Reporter] Reportedly, you were invited to visit China. Are 
you planning to visit China? 
  [Hosokawa] I have received an invitation from China and from 
some European countries. But, I have not decided yet on a 
concrete schedule. 
  [Reporter] I will ask you questions about a totally 
different matter. It is regarding 100 million yen you borrowed 
from the Sagawa group. The opposition parties are determined to 
ask you questions on this matter at the Diet meetings right 
after New Year's Day. Do you think that the document, which you 
submitted earlier to both lower and upper houses, is enough to 
explain the situation? Also, are you not planning to correct 
what was written in the document? 
  [Hosokawa] I am earnestly trying to see if I can submit 
something additional. At this moment, I cannot say for sure 
whether or not I will be able to submit anything else. However, 
I believe that the document I submitted earlier dispelled the 
doubt that I did not pay back the money. However, I heard some 
people are still suspicious. Therefore, I am trying to see if I 
can submit additional documents. 
  [Reporter] In addition to a doubt regarding whether or not 
you have paid back the money, some people suspect that the money 
was used toward expenses for your gubernatorial election. They 
suspect that the money was not used in the way you have 
explained. Can you comment on this? 
  [Hosokawa] As I repeatedly explained at the Diet, I did not 
borrow the money to use for political purposes. 
  [Reporter] I would like to ask you again a question 
regarding the consumption tax. It sounded to me as if you were 
saying at the beginning of your speech that you had no choice 
but to increase the consumption tax rate. I think what you said 
was not very clear to the people either. You have been saying 
that you had entrusted the ruling parties with studying the 
consumption tax issue. Do you not think that the people would 
have a clear understanding if you explained to them that the 
government has no choice but to increase the consumption tax 
sooner or later? 
  [Hosokawa] I understand what you mean. But, it will be like 
putting the cart before the horse if I explained my ideas and 
showed a certain direction before the ruling parties come up 
with their proposals. In their meetings, the ruling parties are 
studying various choices the people can make. I am of the 
opinion that I should make my final decision after the ruling 
parties come up with their proposals. 
  [Reporter] Concerning an income tax cut, you repeatedly 
said since last autumn that you want to wait for discussions on 
the issue and a report to be worked out by the Tax Reform 
Council. But all of a sudden, in December, you expressed a plan 
to set up the ruling parties' Economic Affairs Consultation 
Council to ask the council to discuss the income tax cut issue. 
In this connection, however, Manae Kubota, director general of 
the Economic Planning Agency, said in a news conference that a 
political decision should be made on this issue. There is a 
voice among the people that you lack leadership and that the 
government has missed the timing of carrying out the income tax 
cut. How do you answer this view? 
  [Hosokawa] Well, I fully understand that the people greatly 
expect the government to carry out the income tax cut. But as I 
have repeatedly mentioned earlier, if we carry out the income 
tax cut without securing the revenue sources, the next 
generations will have to pay for it, and I do not think this is 
desirable. For that reason, my view is that we need to 
seriously study this issue. I know that the situation will be 
more serious if we miss the opportunity. With this in mind, I 
think it is necessary to promote discussions on this issue while 
seeking the ruling parties' understanding. 
  [Reporter] Mr. Prime Minister, you have constantly said that 
the excessive issuance of deficit-covering bonds is undesirable. 
It is probably ideal for the government to include both the tax 
cut and tax hike in the government's draft bill on tax reform. 
But assuming that the government fails to include the tax cut 
and hike in its bill but instead reaches an agreement with the 
ruling coalition to issue short-term bonds to make up for a loss 
caused by the tax cut, do you think the issuance of 
deficit-covering bonds under the agreement among the ruling 
parties is still undesirable? 
  [Hosokawa] I am asking the ruling coalition to strain their 
wits to study this issue including the possible issuance of 
short-term deficit-covering bonds, and I also hope that they 
will come up with some ideas. 
  [Reporter] I think you probably have difficulties in 
adjusting policies with the ruling parties and ministries or 
agencies concerned, but I think that not only the reporters here 
but also the people feel that your political stance is changing 
now from your original position wherein you said that you would 
show your policies to the people in a straightforward manner. 
I think this is why the people think you lack leadership in 
solving issues, including the issue of cutting taxes and raising 
the consumption tax. How do you consider your current position? 
  [Hosokawa] I know what you are saying. But I am required to 
manage the government in the unprecedented political situation 
wherein the eight parties form a coalition. On the rice issue, 
I gave my utmost to the very limit to obtain consensus from 
members of the ruling parties to prevent Japan from being 
isolated from the international community. From my office, I 
repeatedly called GATT Director General Sutherland and asked him 
to wait for another one or two hours while waiting for an 
agreement among the ruling parties. So, eventually, as you know, 
I made a decision on the partial opening of the rice market. If 
I should make any decision without discussions among the ruling 
parties, the coalition government composed of the eight parties 
would collapse. I do not think it is desirable to break the 
coalition government. I fully understand that the people are 
eager to see my early decisionmaking. In the past, the cabinet 
was allowed to solve issues one by one. However, many issues 
are simultaneously falling upon the current coalition 
government. I think that even when it was the one-party rule by 
the Liberal Democratic Party, there must have been sharp debates 
within the party on such difficult issues. But now, exchange of 
sharp debates within the government is inevitable because the 
coalition government is formed by eight parties. Given such a 
situation, what I can do is to promote discussions among the 
ruling parties to reflect the people's expectations in the 
government's policy as much as possible and then make a decision 
while seeking possible compromise among the ruling parties. So, 
this is what I want the people to understand. 
  [Reporter] There is the view that the Hosokawa government is 
attaching importance only to domestic issues and ignoring its 
relations with the United States. What do you think of this? 
  [Hosokawa] As I said earlier, Japan and the United States 
are facing very difficult economic issues. However, I think 
that through the previous two meetings, the President and I have 
further deepened our understanding that the basic relations 
between Japan and the United States have been playing a great 
role in the world and the international community. 
  The issues concerning the Japan-U.S. economic framework 
talks need to be immediately solved. For example, priority is 
given to such microeconomics issues as autos and auto parts, 
government procurement, insurance, and ways to beef up the U.S. 
companies' competitive power. The Japanese Government is facing 
too many difficult issues. But aside from these issues, the 
government is making efforts to provide good results regarding 
the important issues between Japan and the United States by the 
time a summit is held in February. Although the issues may not 
be solved perfectly, I think we have to come to some conclusions 
which both Japan and the United States can accept. President 
Clinton and I also have fully confirmed it is significant and 
important to deepen firm bilateral relations in the 
international community and accomplish global cooperation in 
solving such issues as environmental protection and measures to 
cope with the growing world population and AIDS other than the 
immediate microeconomics issues. And I understand that our 
views remain unchanged. 
  [Dean of the press corps] Time has come now to close the 
prime minister's New Year news conference. Thank you very much. 

