BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Walid Junblatt, minister of refugee affairs, </F>
by an unidentified correspondent on 12 April; place not given] 
  [Text] [Correspondent] Your Excellency: Yesterday you 
announced the closing down of Voice of the Mountain radio. Why 
did you make this decision? 
  [Junblatt] The decision is in line with the government 
decision to reorganize the audio and visual media. The reasons 
that led to the establishment of Voice of the Mountain in 1983 
or 1984 no longer exist today. They were political, military, 
regional and other reasons that have ceased to exist. 
  [Correspondent] You mean it will be closed down for good? 
  [Junblatt] I believe it will be for good, because Voice of 
the Mountain is not just a radio that broadcasts musical or 
non-musical radio. It is a political radio. Now since all the 
political voices will be represented in the official media, that 
is, the official radio and television, there is no reason to 
keep Voice of the Mountain. I do not believe there are 
political reasons that necessitate the existence of private 
radios that belong to parties or sects. At the extraordinary 
cabinet meeting yesterday, we discussed the issue of 
reorganizing the audio and visual media. I pointed out that it 
is impossible in Lebanon to have a single media service, namely, 
the state media, because this is against the nature of the 
Lebanese and against the age. In the meantime, it is impossible 
to go back to the past media chaos, which posed political and 
security dangers and jeopardized the march of internal peace and 
the return of the refugees. Thus, I suggested that we follow 
the example of a democratic and civilized state such as France. 
In France, there are four or five television stations. I 
believe this is good. After all, we are not better than France. 
  [Correspondent] What do you think are the rules needed to 
tackle the media issue? 
  [Junblatt] There is a committee in charge of this. There are 
technical rules of which I am not expert, as well as political 
bases. In the end, citizens have the right to express their 
views through official channels. As I have already stated, a 
state-controlled media similar to some Arab media would be dull, 
impossible to apply in Lebanon, and would run counter to the 
nature of the political pluralism in Lebanon. We seek media 
pluralism that allows for an effective state control and 
partnership, up to 51 percent or more [of the capital], to 
prevent parties and sects from controlling the media once again. 
In addition, to allow four or five television channels to 
operate in the country, as is the case in France, with the 
participation of the private sector on economic, not political 
or sectarian, foundations. For instance, it would not be 
permitted for a representative of one of the sects to say that 
this is the Druze, Maronite, Shiite, or Sunni television 
station. There are economic rules. It could take the form of a 
joint-stock company. However, I stress the importance of the 
state's partnership as a form of control. 
  [Correspondent] To what extent do you want the state's 
control? 
  [Junblatt] There are specific rules that the information 
minister is working on. This is because media, political, and 
cultural control is a must. Today the country is living with 
the tunes of Maria [name indistinct] and others, an example of 
the moral decay that comes from we don't know where. This is 
disgraceful. Add to this the modern Egyptian films modeled 
after the soap opera Dallas. We must not impose such of 
cultural decay on the people. We must upgrade the standards, 
and I believe that the information minister, backed by a 
committee of his choosing, is qualified to undertake this job. 
  [Correspondent] Do you believe that the amendments 
introduced 
to the Publication Decree 104 yesterday [word indistinct] public 
and private [word indistinct] 
  [Junblatt] I believe so. 

