Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Construction on the world's first advanced boiling 
water reactor (ABWR) is proceeding at Tokyo Electric Power 
Company's Kashiwazaki Kariwa NPP (Kashiwazaki City, Niigata 
Prefecture). This is a cutting-edge NPP developed jointly by 
Tokyo Electric Power and other Japanese electric power 
companies, Hitachi, Ltd., Toshiba, and the U.S. company General 
Electric. 
  The ABWR uses a large capacity turbine, which gives it a 
thermal efficiency of 34.5%, 1.1% better than 
previous BWRs. 
Its output will be 1,356,000 kW, the largest in Japan. 
Modifications include placing the recirculation pump inside the 
pressure vessel rather than outside to simplify the piping 
system. 
  Two plants are under construction at Kashiwazaki. As of the 
end of October, NPP No. 6 was 50.6% completed and No. 7 
was 
22.3% completed. Every day seventy concrete mixers go in 
and 
out of the facility, and so far they have poured enough wet 
concrete to fill the Tokyo Dome twice. 
  Kashiwazaki faces the Sea of Japan and experiences harsh 
winters. Plant director Masao Takuma says, ``The length of the 
construction period will depend on how efficiently we can work 
during the three winter months.'' 
  Another important problem has been how to counteract winter 
lightning. Lightning in the Kanto area has about 10,000 amps of 
current, but at Kashiwazaki it can reach 150,000 amps. The power 
plant is susceptible to direct strikes because it sits on a 
sandy beach. Tokyo Electric Power had the Central Research 
Institute of the Electric Power Industry design a special tower 
150 meters high as a lightning rod. They expect it to capture 
80% of the lightning. 
  NPP No. 7, which is being built by Hitachi, sports the 
world's largest self-propelled crane. The steel girders were 
subassembled first at the factory, transported all at once, and 
assembled on site. This crane has a maximum capacity of 840 
tons. Using the crane enables much faster setup than building a 
scaffold and stacking up the girders one at a time. 
  On the other hand, the NPP No. 6 construction site, 
supervised by Toshiba, is covered by a roof to create an 
environment with total climate control that is unaffected by the 
weather. This idea came up to handle the heavy snowfall at 
Kashiwazaki. The steel frame supporting the roof will be buried 
in the walls of the building after the reactor core is finished. 
Because the roof receives its strength from a meshwork of 
interwoven steel girders, the steel frame is no longer needed, 
but it eliminates the time and trouble of disassembly. 
  Generally speaking, electric power companies that use BWRs 
will equip their future plants with ABWRs. They will also use 
advanced construction methods that provide the speed of the 
huge, self-propelled crane and the pleasantness of total climate 
control at their future construction sites. We can also expect 
more modifications to the ABWRs in the future. 

