Language: <F P=105> Greek </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Mirella Kalostipi from Brussels--recorded] </F>
  [Text] The Greek side appears completely satisfied with 
the results of the Brussels visit, both with regard to the 
outcome of the NATO summit and inter-Atlantic cooperation as 
well as with the prime minister's contacts with the U.S. 
President. 
  Telemakhos Khitiris, the deputy prime minister, discussed 
the 
mission, saying it has been crowned with full success since, as 
he put it, there was an opportunity to outline at length the 
Greek positions on the issues occupying the Balkans as well as 
the Cyprus problem, which the Clinton Administration appears 
determined to end. 
  At last night's dinner of the 16 NATO leaders, as well as at 
today's luncheon with President Bill Clinton and Jacques Delors, 
the prime minister discussed thoroughly the situation in the 
region and the dangers inherent in an expansion of the war 
southward and the Skopje issue. The harsh positions which were 
heard from certain sides before last evening on ways of 
addressing the crisis in the former Yugoslavia were not included 
in the final statement of the NATO summit that was issued today. 
The interventions, particularly by Greece and Canada, 
contributed a great deal to the final resolution, which, 
although it warns the belligerent sides that a NATO air attack 
is not ruled out, gives priority to a solution through 
negotiations. 
  Greek-U.S. relations today entered officially into an 
extremely positive stage, since the time allotted for the 
Clinton-Papandreou-Delors luncheon was extended because of the 
personal interest shown by the U.S. President in being briefed 
by Mr. Papandreou on the Greek positions on a series of issues. 
The Greek prime minister outlined to President Clinton his 
views on the Yugoslav issue in general, the situation in 
Bosnia-Hercegovina and Kosovo, and ended with the Skopje issue, 
saying that it is a tragic irony for pressure to be exerted only 
on Greece which is stable, European, and a NATO member and who 
has no designs on anyone. Mr. Papandreou drew the U.S. 
President's attention to this issue and asked that there be 
similar pressure and moves in the direction of the other side 
for the sake of stability, cooperation, and peace in the region. 
  The Greek prime minister also referred to our country's 
desire for good, cooperative relations with Albania and the 
initiatives Greece is prepared to take in this direction. 
  Mr. Clinton thanked the prime minister for the analysis, 
saying that he will take it into serious consideration. 
However, the U.S. President also wanted to have further 
discussions on the Cyprus issue. Following the prime minister's 
review of the situation since the Turkish intervention and 
analyzing the Greek positions, President Clinton reaffirmed his 
campaign positions on Cyprus and pledged that after his European 
tour he will deal personally with this problem, which, as he put 
it, must be solved because it leads to more general problems and 
obstacles. 
  The prime minister will return to Athens tomorrow. 

