Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Paul Brown and John Vidal report: "Catastrophe Threatens </F>
World's Fisheries as Stocks Fall"] 
  [Text] The world's fishing stocks are being rapidly 
depleted with disastrous repercussions in places as far apart as 
the corridors of power in Brussels, the unemployment queues in 
North America's eastern seaboard and the diets of people in the 
Third World. 
  According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organisation [FAO], which monitors fish stocks, nine of the 
world's 17 main fishing grounds are suffering potentially 
catastrophic declines in some species. 
  An FAO paper to be published later this month warns of the 
"severe" political and economic consequences of not 
rationalising the industry along "sustainable lines." 
  While rich countries will find previously common fish 
becoming luxury foods, the FAO warns that rising populations, 
migration to coastal cities and sustained high demand in the 
North could be catastrophic for many poor countries. 
  "The most severe impacts would be in East and South Asia 
where fish play a vital role in the diet," says the report. "An 
additional 8.5 million tons of fish a year will be needed by 
2010 just to maintain present consumption levels in this region." 
  The FAO attempts to address the problem of managing the 
free-for-all in the world's oceans at a four-day meeting which 
starts in New York on Monday. But the political problems, as 
seen this week in negotiations over Norway's entry to EU 
[European Union], are intractable. 
  Europe's fishing industry shows the failure to cope with 
competing ecological and political demands. In Hull, 30,000 
jobs have gone in the fishing industry since 1945, and a 
deep-sea trawler fleet of 300 smallish vessels has been replaced 
by 15 superships. 
  In 1976 the herring fishery collapsed completely and fishing 
was banned. It took until the 1980's for stocks to recover but 
quotas are set far below historic catches to prevent another 
population crash. 
  The cod, haddock and plaice fisheries are now going the same 
way even though quotas are in place. Fish are getting smaller 
and fewer and most do not reach sexual maturity before being 
caught. Scientists believe that by 1995 there may be so few cod 
and haddock left that commercial fishing may be uneconomic and 
it may be years before stocks recover sufficiently to sustain 
even a small European fishing industry. 
  Most of the world's 200 million people who directly and 
indirectly depend on fishing for a livelihood live in coastal 
communities in the developing world. Marine fishing is the 
world's most valuable source of protein, providing more than 
beef or pork. Twenty percent of the world's animal-based protein 
comes from the sea but many developing countries depend for more 
than half of their diet on the sea. 
  The roots of the fishing crisis lie partly in the 
over-exploitation of northern fishing grounds but also in the 
heavy subsidising of fishing fleets. The FAO estimates that 
annual spending on fishing amounts to $124 billion (83 billion 
pounds) to catch $70 billion (47 billion pounds) of fish. 
  European Union and international fleets are increasingly 
moving in on traditional Third World fisheries, says Indrani 
Lutchman, fisheries officer at the World Wide Fund for Nature. 
The FAO estimates that almost 45 percent of the money earned by 
the fish trade comes from fish caught in developing world waters. 
  "Having exhausted many of their own fishing grounds, the 
North is now turning to the South and undermining the 
livelihoods of coastal communities. More than 25 percent of all 
fish consumed in the EU are caught by EU-registered boats 
fishing in unpoliced Third World waters." 
  Uncontrolled fishing by foreign fleets off Sierra Leone has 
led to a serious decline in the catch of traditional fishermen, 
who supply 75 percent of their country's consumption of animal 
protein. 
  Developing countries, backed by international loans, have 
invested heavily in fishing to earn foreign exchange via 
exports, says Peter Weber, a researcher with the Worldwatch 
Institute in Washington. Much of their catch is denied local 
consumers and threatens the inshore fisheries. The FAO 
estimates that almost 40 percent of the fish caught in the world 
are exported, 90 percent of it to Japan, the United States and 
the EU. 
  New technology, including satellites, is used to locate fish 
and has boosted world catches 6.6 percent a year from 22 million 
tons in 1950 to a record high of 100 million tons in 1989. 
Fishing became a boom industry in the 1980's, increasing a 
third in size and doubling its economic value. 
  In the last three years the world catch has declined to 
about 
97 million tons largely because of declining catches and the 
confusion in former Soviet fleets. Twenty countries, led by 
China, Japan, Peru, Chile, the United States and India catch 
almost 80 per cent of all fish. 
  Not all the over-exploitation of the oceans can be explained 
by overfishing. Coastal waters contain the richest sources of 
food for fish but are also the most polluted and vulnerable to 
development. Almost two thirds of all commercially valuable fish 
spend the first, vulnerable stages of their life in these waters 
where 90 percent of the world's marine catch is caught. 
  Tourist industry pressures have depleted many wetland, 
mangrove and estuary habitats in the Far East and the 
Mediterranean. Pacific salmon have largely disappeared, says 
the Worldwatch Institute, because the freshwater streams where 
they spawn have been soiled or are blocked by dams. Restoring 
the streams may cost more than $2 billion (1.3 billion pounds) 
in the United States alone. 
  The only hope of maintaining stocks at present levels, says 
the FAO, is through better management. This could yield 
approximately 20 million more tons. The second source of 
additional food could come from the 30 million tons of fish 
presently converted into fishmeal for pigs, chicken, shrimp and 
salmon. Ten million tons could be saved from discarded fish. 

