Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Riga, Mar 21, BNS -- The second round of free trade 
talks between Latvia and the European Union [EU] takes place 
March 21-22 in Brussels, the Latvian Foreign Ministry reports. 
  On Monday, the parties are scheduled to look at the text of 
a 
regulation providing to lift import tariffs of 
Latvian-production goods immediately after the free trade pact 
is ratified. 
  On Tuesday, panels will discuss customs quotas for various 
kinds of industrial and farm produce. 
  Latvia must lift import duties of EU goods within four years 
after the free trade agreement is ratified, according to an 
agreement reached during the first round of bilateral talks in 
February. The measure is aimed at protecting the Latvian 
economy from too swift an influx of EU goods. Currently, it is 
difficult to fix concrete quotas for textile and farm products 
because the Latvian parliament has not ended discussions on the 
issue yet. 
  EU plans to grant Latvia the status of its associated member 
right after the signature of the free trade accord. As 
reported, the Baltic-EU free trade talks are unlikely to be 
hampered by any major obstacles. 
  The Baltic states, however, may face difficulties when 
trying 
to convert this initial agreement into a Euro agreement in one 
or two years. The Euro agreement grants its signatories the 
status of full fledged members in EU. 
  EU experts prognosticate that the union will enroll EFTA 
[European Free Trade Association] states (except Switzerland and 
Iceland) by 1995. 
  The Visegrad group (Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and 
Hungary) and, probably, the Baltic states, could join EU by 1995. 
  Latvia's aspirations to enter into EU are endorsed by 
Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, France and Great Britain. 
The Latvian delegation to the talks is headed by Olgerts 
Pavlovskis, the country's minister for foreign trade and EU 
affairs. The group includes officials from several related 
ministries. 
  The third round of free trade talks is scheduled for April 8 
in Riga. The free trade agreement between Latvia and EU could 
be ready in May, experts said. 

