CSO 

  [Text] Regional telephone company Tokyo Tsushin Network 
(TTNet, Minato ward, Tokyo) is going to invest in the leading 
Tokyo CATV [cable television] company Cable Television Tokyo 
(Minato ward, Tokyo; Makoto Ujigawa, president). The investment 
is expected to represent about 3 percent of Cable Television 
Tokyo's capitalization in the amount of 100 million yen. This 
will be the first time that a telephone company invests in a 
CATV station, since the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications 
[MOPT] in December 1993 launched a policy to "promote 
participation in communications operations by CATV firms." TTNet 
plans to use this opportunity to invest in CATV firms in various 
regions and expand its telephone network. It appears that CATV 
and telephone companies will increasingly engage in capital and 
business affiliations as we see progress in the integration of 
broadcasting and communications. 
  Cable Television Tokyo's operating area covers Minato ward, 
Tokyo, and services just under 10,000 households. Because of 
slow progress in enlisting new subscribers, it is expected to 
continue losing money until fiscal year 1995. On the other hand, 
in response to deregulation measures taken by the MOPT at the 
end of 1993, it is currently considering augmenting operations 
to include expansion to other areas and integrated broadcasting 
and communications services such as home shopping using the CATV 
system. 
  On the other hand, TTNet is a Tokyo Electric Power 
Company-affiliated communications company and operates in the 
Kanto area. TTNet was also considering participation in 
communications services linking CATV stations in response to 
deregulation, enabling compatibility of interests between the 
two companies. 
  TTNet plans to use the tie-up with Cable Television Tokyo as 
the first step in investing and affiliating itself with other 
CATV stations throughout the Kanto region and to set up a 
communication network that rivals NTT's urban telephone system. 
TTNet explains, "CATV companies are having difficulty raising 
the capital needed to invest in the installation of cables; we 
would like to assist in this respect." 
  A number of major capital and business affiliations are 
being 
formed between U.S. regional telephone companies and major CATV 
stations in connection with the integration of broadcasting and 
communications services. In the past, in Japan, the concept of 
broadcasting and communications being separate businesses 
persisted in both government and the private sector and 
integration of the two businesses made no progress. In the 
future, we can expect progress in the integration of CATV and 
telephone companies. 

