BFN 

  [Text] Odessa -- Lieutenant General Volodymyr 
Shkidnychenko, the Odessa military district commander, has met 
personnel of the 1st Ship Brigade for the Protection of Odessa 
Water Area and introduced the newly appointed commander, Captain 
Second Rank Volodymyr Marchenko. The military district 
commander's press secretary, Colonel Vyacheslav Voronkov, told 
UNIAN that the former commander of Ship Division 318, Captain 
First Rank Oleg Feoktistov was transferred on 11 April from the 
guest room of the Odessa military commander's office to the 
district hospital and was diagnosed as suffering from "acute 
alcoholic poisoning -- chronic alcoholism." His deputies, 
Captains Second Rank Aleksandr Zelenko and Dmitriy Starikov, are 
staying on the territory of the former 318th Division of the 
Black Sea Fleet which has been transformed into the Ukrainian 
1st Brigade for the Protection of Odessa Water Area, but have 
been relieved of their duties. 
  According to Vyacheslav Voronkov, not only the majority of 
the former Russian Black Sea Fleet division, but also six Navy 
officers and 14 junior officers have to date submitted a written 
statement of their wish to serve in the Ukrainian Navy. 
  Col. Voronkov said that the consequences of the 
"pirate-style 
dismantling" of the hydrographic navigation equipment worth at 
least $10,000 and its transfer from Odessa to Sevastopol was a 
very serious matter. "The radar station RLS-5 Mars would provide 
for the nonstop operation of seven lighthouses in the western 
part of the Black Sea," he said. "Its absence can completely 
halt navigation from Odessa to the Zmeinyy island, as sailing 
safety would be at risk. In order to prevent this, the military 
district command has decided to assemble and operate the reserve 
units of the lost hydrographic navigation complex." Voronkov 
also said that the ship brigade for the protection of the water 
area is joined in a 24-hour watch by the marines of the 
Ukrainian control ship Slavutych which had arrived in Odessa to 
take part in the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the 
city's liberation from the Nazi occupiers. 
  Col. Voronkov denied Russian media allegations of "hostile 
actions" against Russian sailors and their families in Odessa, 
adding, however, that the Odessa military district prosecutor's 
office is contemplating criminal proceedings against the former 
command of the 318th Conservation Division of the Black Sea 
Fleet previously deployed in Odessa. 

