Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Ruy Fabiano: "PT Seeks out Military"] </F>
  [Text] The high command of the PT [Workers Party] is 
solidly mobilized in search of something it calls a "new power 
pact." The starting point for that pact is a genuine 
rapprochement with the Armed Forces (which still fear the 
party's leftist talk) and with businessmen of a more progressive 
bent. The party wants to break down its political isolation. 
  Dialogue with the PSDB [Brazilian Social Democracy Party] 
has 
helped the party move in that direction. The PT now has stable 
channels of communication with the FIESP [Sao Paulo State 
Federation of Industries] and the PNBE [National Board for 
Entrepreneurial Bases]. But that is still not much. Dialogue 
with the military is still arduous, distrustful, and 
unproductive. 
  Actually, the PT is faced with a dilemma: it needs the 
stigma 
of the accursed in order to win the election, especially among 
the working masses and young people, but it needs to free itself 
of that same stigma in order to take power and govern. How can 
it maintain the proper balance between those two needs? A little 
theater obviously helps--something for which the party's leaders 
have shown a fair amount of talent--but the party needs to 
establish channels of communication with the conservative world. 
The Armed Forces are part of that universe. And there is no 
possibility of governing without them. 
  Although it is more supportive on the pay issue than any 
other party in the country--and pay is currently a priority 
issue among the military--the PT continues to be seen as a 
potential enemy. The formulators of the party's policies--the 
intellectually most qualified cadres, who are in charge of 
thinking out strategies and recommending alliances--attribute 
that distrust to the ideological conditioning of the past. The 
Brazilian military, or at least a considerable number of their 
top leaders, still cling stubbornly to principles and 
fundamental ideas dating back to the days of the Cold War, when 
the ideological split between Left and Right guided and decided 
questions of power. 
  With the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the end of 
Brazil's automatic alignment with the United States, there was 
no longer any reason to view Brazilian leftists as enemies. The 
issues currently of concern to the Brazilian military are the 
exact opposite of those in which the United States is 
interested: the internationalization of the Amazon Region, for 
example, or the abolition of Armed Forces in the Third World 
countries by turning them into nothing more than antidrug police 
forces, while the United Nations (an agency under the command of 
the United States) takes responsibility for the security of 
those countries. 
  If it were up to the younger officers in the Army (and 
possibly those in the other two services: the Navy and the Air 
Force), a rapprochement with the PT would be easier. The younger 
officers, being less committed to the ideological commitments of 
the past, are more receptive to the PT's message, especially on 
the pay issue and the issue of cleaning up political morals. The 
military, most of whom are recruited from the middle class, have 
always been sensitive to moralistic rhetoric. 
  It was with the middle class that the old UDN [National 
Democratic Union] under Carlos Lacerda and Afonso Arinos 
mobilized the Armed Forces against Getulio Vargas in 1954 and 
against "Jango" [Joao Goulart] in 1964. And the current UDN, at 
least as far as its role as defender of morals and good 
political behavior is concerned, is undoubtedly the PT. It is 
true that there is less verbal brilliance and a substantially 
lower IQ, but the script is the same. With due allowance for 
talent and performance, Senator Suplicy is a PT version of 
Carlos Lacerda. 
  In short, the party is placing its bet: once ideological 
prejudice has been overcome, it will be possible theoretically 
to seal a power pact with the military. 

