Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Hamdan al-Hajj] </F>
  [Text] Brigadier General Mujahid Abu-Shawarib, deputy prime 
minister, has emphasized that the final signing of the pledge 
and accord document, concluded on 18 January, will take place in 
Amman on 15 February, and will be attended by His Majesty King 
Husayn, Yemeni President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, and his deputy 
'Ali Salim al-Bid. 
  In a telephone interview with AL-DUSTUR from Paris, where he 
is receiving medical treatment, Brigadier General Abu-Shawarib 
said he will arrive in Amman next Friday to supervise and put 
the final touches to the signing ceremony. 
  He said the protocol arrangements have been left to the 
Jordanian side while the Political Forces Dialogue Committee in 
Yemen will finalize on Thursday the steps that will follow the 
signing ceremony, such as the return procedures for Yemeni 
officials to Sanaa and activating political action roles in 
Yemen. 
  Brigadier General Abu-Shawarib said participation in the 
signing ceremony will be restricted to President 'Ali 'Abdallah 
Salih and five ranking members of his party and 'Ali Salim 
al-Bid and five prominent members of his party, in addition to 
10 others representing the other organizations and national and 
independent figures. 
  He said the Socialist Party, headed by the Yemeni vice 
president, had demanded the attendance of ambassadors of some 
friendly and sisterly countries, but it was agreed that this 
issue be left to the Jordanian side because it is unacceptable 
to impose conditions on the host country. 
  Brigadier General Abu-Shawarib highly appreciated His 
Majesty 
King Husayn's sincere efforts toward realizing this agreement, 
and hailed the Jordanian people who showed concern about this 
issue, even more than the Yemenis themselves, and emphasized the 
need to return the situation to normal in Yemen. 
  He said all higher Yemeni organs and apparatuses, such as 
the 
Council of Ministers, Shura Council, and the House of 
Representatives, should be revitalized and convene so that 
things will return to normal. He expected that meetings would 
be held in Sanaa, but did not rule out that some meetings would 
be held in Aden if there was a need. 
  He said he hoped the agreement will be implemented and that 
Yemeni unity will be preserved. He added that His Majesty King 
Husayn's wisdom, spirit and presence will eliminate any obstacle 
to the agreement so that all will return with a satisfied and 
unified spirit. 
  Brigadier General Abu-Shawarib told AL-DUSTUR that he 
delayed 
surgery he should have undergone recently until after the 
signing of the agreement in Amman, adding that Yemen is more 
durable than individuals. Abu-Shawarib is suffering from a lung 
infection. 

