BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Havana Cuba Vision Network in Spanish at 
0033 GMT on 25 June carries a recording of President Fidel 
Castro's 16 June meeting with Colombian businessmen in Cartagena 
de Indias, Colombia, following the closure of the Fourth 
Ibero-American Summit. Castro is wearing a guayabera and is 
seated at a long table with various persons on either side, 
facing approximately 60 businessmen and officials who are 
attending the meeting. 
  President Castro begins the meeting with the following 
statement: "We are here full of hope for encouraging this 
fraternal, friendly spirit that has been created, the 
perspectives that have opened. The only thing I really deplore 
about this is that we are not the PRC instead of Cuba. Cuba is 
tiny; it is a small country, while the PRC is enormous, millions 
of square km, with a population of 1.2 billion. All the 
businessmen, industrialists, and investors want to go there, to 
the PRC. Cuba is small, but we can certainly do something in 
Cuba. We can fulfill a principle, above all -- to develop 
economic, friendship, cooperation, trade, and peace relations 
among nations. We can encourage economic and trade ties. 
  ``We are willing to cooperate based on one essential thing, 
seriousness. I can tell you that whatever can be done in Cuba 
will be done with absolute and total seriousness by us. Since 
this is the case, I am sure you want to know about many things. 
I will not tell you about the summit. The newspapers have 
already reported it. Perhaps we can appoint a moderator. Whom do 
we appoint governor? No, not governor, [chuckles] moderator. He 
must play the role of governor to act as moderator here.'' 
  Castro and those seated at the main table speak softly among 
themselves and decide who will be appointed to act as moderator. 
Castro is heard commenting: "He must have tremendous experience." 
  An unidentified moderator in the front row stands and begins 
by "cordially greeting" Castro "on behalf of the business 
community in Cartagena and the region;" adding that "the 
resumption of diplomatic and trade relations between Colombia 
and Cuba" led to "unusual intensive activity. In Cartagena de 
Indias' case, this was a result of the declaration of sisterhood 
signed between Santiago de Cuba and Cartagena de Indias." He 
adds: "The Cuban ambassador and his cultural and trade" attaches 
have already visited Cartagena de Indias and participated in "a 
series of meetings that have already shown various excellent 
perspectives" between this region and Cuba. 
  The moderator says the meeting is being attended by 
representatives of many business groups in the region -- large 
and small industries, hotels, stores, investment firms, 
fisheries, etc. -- and "they want to comment on the possibility 
of establishing trade with Cuba. They also have questions 
concerning issues they have already reviewed with the Cuban 
ambassador," including "the mechanisms that will be implemented 
to facilitate these relations." The moderator asks businessmen 
to stand up, identify themselves, and give the name of the 
company or activity they represent. 
  Miguel Parra stands up, introduces himself, and says he is 
"the owner of Milpa Investments, which operates coal mines in 
the central part of the country" and has "been doing business 
with the Cuban company MAPRINTER [Cuban Raw Materials and 
Intermediate Products Import Enterprise], a branch of the 
Foreign Trade Ministry, for the last two years. Within this time 
we have sent 23 shipments -- worth over $4 million -- of this 
product to Cuba, through the port of Barranquilla." Parra then 
mentions the medal he was given by the Cuban Government at the 
1992 international fair in Havana, in a ceremony that was 
personally attended by Castro. 
  Parra specifically asks "the Colombian people, 
industrialists, and businessmen to have faith in Cuba, to 
believe in Cuba, to pay little attention to international 
propaganda because, in our case and with the experience acquired 
in two and a half years, we have realized that what the 
international media shows is not reality. Cuba is a country with 
credibility; it is serious concerning its commitments, as the 
president has said. In fact, on three occasions, we shipped 
merchandise without a confirmed letter of credit. This does not 
mean Cuba does not have the money to pay because Cuba pays us 
when it pledges to buy something. Instead, due to the blockade 
we all repudiate, we have to go the long way around, through 
other countries, to legalize our operations in U.S. dollars; and 
this obviously delays the procedure. Today, in fact, we are 
sending a shipment of our product -- coke coal -- to Cuba and we 
are doing it without having received the letter of credit 
confirmed by the president. But I repeat, this does not mean you 
do not fulfill your pledges." 
  Castro says: "We can stay here as a guarantee." [laughter, 
applause] 
  Parra says he and Mayra Tomas, MAPRINTER official, already 
have plans to establish a port in Barranquilla that "will 
expedite coal shipments" and give priority to Cuban ships or any 
ships chartered in other countries, "to overcome the gap that 
has occurred in maritime transportation." He explains that 
Thomas has already managed to get various ships to send 
refractory bricks and other products to Cuba. He promises Castro 
that a port will legally operate in Barranquilla soon and that 
the facilities will be at his service so he may use them to ship 
all the Colombian products he wants to Cuba. 
  Castro says: "Thank you, thank you. [applause] Which Cuban 
industry is using this coal right now? The steel industry?" 
  Parra answers: "It is used to manufacture gas for domestic 
use; it is used in the steel industry, in foundries, to 
manufacture acetylene. It is specifically used by Minaz 
[Ministry of the Sugar Industry] industries...." 
  Castro interrupts: "And the metalworks industry and basic 
industry, particularly the one that manufactures gas for the 
population in an old plant we have over there." 
  The next speaker is Carlos Banegas, manager of Exclusive 
Minerals, who invites Colombian businessmen to buy Cuban 
products and explains that he is the local distributor of Cuban 
zeolite, which is used in the agriculture sector, "to 
manufacture fodder, soft drink filters, and beer filters." 
Speaking of trade with Cuba, he says his company has "imported 
3,000 tons of zeolite this year" and has plans to import 5,000 
tons by year end. Banegas says he is also the local 
representative for a new Cuban product, a vaccine to innoculate 
bovines against ticks. He said "protocol research has been 
conducted" and its sale should be approved in a month, when it 
will be available in the local market. Banegas adds that his 
company expects to initially sell "5 million doses of this 
vaccine in Colombia." 
  Banegas is followed by Freddy Lehner, manager of BIOLEHNER, 
local representative of the Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology Center's recombinant vaccine against hepatitis. 
  Castro turns to Banegas and asks: "What is yours?" 
  Banegas answers: "A vaccine against bovine ticks." 
  Castro adds: "Ah, yes, the vaccine against ticks. It is very 
important and yields good economic results." 
  Lehner says the Colombian Health Ministry has purchased "a 
large number of hepatitis B vaccine doses for a large-scale 
vaccination program" in the country; adding he is also the local 
representative for the Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
Center's (Eyverkinasa), which is a recombinant streptokinase 
used in case of a heart attack; (Evermin), which is an epidermic 
growth factor; and Interferon. 
  Castro states: "(Ateromixol) comes from another center. It 
is 
the famous PPG [expansion unknown]." 
  Lehner suggests that it be called (Ateromixol) in Colombia 
rather than PPG. 
  Castro replies: "Yes. Coincidentially, the name was 
arbitrarily invented when they were involved in its research. 
One day they went to register a product in Spain and discovered 
a product named PPG in Spain. Imagine, what a coincidence. So 
many letters, so many combinations; yet they could not register 
it as PPG, but it is known as PPG almost everywhere." 
  Lehner smiles and says: "I am always asked why the product 
is 
called PPG, but I still do not know." 
  Castro answers: "It was an arbitrary decision, yet people 
invent names for the PPG." 
  Lehner says his company is also the local representative for 
the Carlos J. Finlay Institute's meningococci vaccine, which was 
tested with "excellent" results in Antioquia, where 20,000 
children were inoculated with doses donated by the Cuban 
Government. 
  Castro says: "That vaccine is important because meningococci 
disease sows terror. It is not only a matter of how many 
children are saved, which is priceless, but the fear this 
disease instills in the family. It involves millions of people, 
parents, siblings, uncles, everyone. Whenever a person sees a 
child with fever or any symptom, he immediately thinks about the 
possibility of meningococci. We eradicated that scourge, that 
terror in our country precisely as a result of that vaccine. The 
use of this vaccine has expanded considerably; it is being sold 
in Argentine. Its sale is being discussed with the Brazilians 
and other countries. It is a product with many perspectives." 
  Lehner explains that the Colombian authorities are working 
hard to inoculate children in rural areas and poor sectors, 
adding that maningococci cases have been detected in 
Barranquilla, Buenaventura, Cali, and Cartagena de Indias, and 
every effort is being made so the people learn about this 
vaccine. 
  Castro states: "It is the only vaccine of its kind in the 
world. The same goes for the tick vaccine. It too is the only 
one of its kind. We have people working there, wracking their 
brains, to see how they can help the country counter its 
difficult situations. We have made important investments in the 
research sector. We are now completing the construction of a 
center that has already begun to produce monoclonal antibodies. 
These are tremendously important, not only for the diagnosis of 
diseases, but also for the struggle against cancer, where new 
theories and possibilities have appeared. 
  ``I think there is a possibility of finding a cancer 
vaccine, 
above all, one dealing with viruses. The goal is to find 
specific antibodies that directly attack malignant cells because 
the medicine available right now attacks all the cells and has 
damaging side effects. Nevertheless, I think the center we are 
completing right now has a possibility of doing this because it 
will be one of the leading centers, one of the best centers in 
the world. I am glad we were able to help. I am glad we were 
able to meet; it is a pleasure. I am proud that [words 
indistinct] symbolically representing [words indistinct]'' 
  An unidentified speaker asks about AIDS research in Cuba, 
to which Castro answers: "Yes, we are working on AIDS, too. 
Research began in the very beginning and we have achieved great 
success concerning AIDS. It is a terrible threat right now and 
apparently, it is very difficult to control because it is a 
mutant virus. A mutant virus is difficult because you may find 
the way to attack a specific type of virus -- for example the 
flu virus -- but if it mutates, it becomes another type of 
virus. [Words indistinct] using Interferon, an antiviral [words 
indistinct] from blood, and we have been using special measures 
to prevent its propagation because AIDS spreads like wildfire. 
Sometimes all it takes is one case to infect 30, 40, or 50 
persons. People have a mentality. Sometimes they ignore this, 
granted, but we know of cases in which people know they are 
infected, but do not care if others become infected. The 
situation concerning that disease is truly dramatic and everyone 
has a responsibility to work on AIDS, cancer, parasites, and 
virus research. 
  ``We are trying to find a multiple vaccine that immunizes a 
person against many diseases with a single dose. We are trying 
to do this through genetic engineering, which will perfect the 
vaccine. We now have the maningococci vaccine and the hepatitis 
vaccine through genetic engineering, just as we have the 
streptokinase through genetic engineering. Just see the 
difference between this and the natural product. Some people 
manufacture it from natural products, extracting the serum from 
people and all that, but what does a dose cost? $1,500. How much 
does a dose of streptokinase cost? More than $300 -- I do not 
know what the current price is, but the cost is five times less 
when the same medicine is a result of genetic engineering. 
  ``I am taking this opportunity to tell you that part of the 
medicine we currently export to Colombia is destined to pay some 
old debts that are still pending. We intend to honor our 
commitments and pay some debts this way. I believe the 
possibilities are many because you have a large population -- 30 
million, or more than 30 million.'' 
  The moderator says: "33 million." 
  Castro exclaims: "How you have grown! You were half that 
many 
a few years ago. You also have different climates -- tropical, 
temperate -- and yours is one of the countries most concerned 
about people's health. Let me tell you, the recent Colombian 
Governments have been most concerned about health programs." 
  The last speaker is Rizo, president of the Cartagena de 
Indias Chamber of Commerce, who has reviewed Cuba's progress in 
the technology, science, and engineering sectors. Colombia has 
achieved various degrees of development, which entails various 
degrees of technology. Rizo says he "believes an enormous 
exchange of technology could occur between Cuba and Colombia in 
this concern," and he would like to exchange information with 
Cuban professionals, engineers, and consultation firms. This 
would enable them to carry out excellent work, both in Cuba and 
Colombia because "if there is something Cuba has done, it has 
been to improve the quality of people's lives. We still have a 
lot of people whose quality of life must be improved, and 
advanced technology is too expensive for them." 
  Castro asks: "Does this include low-cost housing?" 
  Rizo answers: "Yes, Sir." 
  Castro emphasizes: "You must work hard to find solutions, to 
build low-cost houses, as we call them." 
  Rizo says this also includes sewers, aqueducts, 
communication, roads, and all the services needed for a better 
lifestyle. 
  The meeting ends with Castro's statement: "I wanted to tell 
you I feel very satisfied about this meeting with you. The 
Fourth Ibero-American Summit has just been held. Its main goal 
was integration, and we are specifically working on issues 
dealing with our two countries' integration. We have achieved 
progress and who knows how far we can go -- until one day we are 
fully integrated. We should strive to be fully integrated, and 
we must first do it with our neighbors. As I said, the flight 
from Havana to Santiago in a turbo- prop aircraft takes 
practically as long as the trip from Havana to Cartagena de 
Indias in a jet aircraft. I was astonished by this. I had not 
realized this even though I was here recently. This time, I sat 
down, read some papers, and chatted for awhile, and suddenly we 
were landing here. The communications revolution has brought us 
closer. 
  We are very similar; at least we are quite similar to the 
people in Cartagena de Indias, perhaps because we live in a 
warmer, more tropical climate. Maybe the people in Santa Fe de 
Bogota are not so communicative because they live on a plateau 
and it is colder over there. It is colder there, and I am told 
the city has grown so much and there is so much cement that it 
is now like Mexico City, where the average temperature has 
increased. We are very much alike however, and it is a truly 
promising step to discover there are so many possibilities for 
getting closer, working together, developing the economy 
together. 
  ``Once again, we have reason to dream what our liberators 
dreamed of -- that one day our Latin American nations would be 
united, a strong united front. We speak the same language, have 
the same culture, and we can speak here without translators. We 
know we can talk, while it is difficult to do this in the world 
today if you do not speak another language. If we have no other 
choice but to learn English, then we will learn English. In the 
end, it is not our fault that the English were great colonizers 
and spread the language throughout Asia, Africa, Canada, and 
other places. We will do this to speak with the others, with 
outsiders, but we only need to speak Spanish among ourselves -- 
except for one or two words that have different meanings here 
and there. It is a language in which we can perfectly well 
understand one another. What an advantage this is for becoming 
closer; what an advantage for us to unite; what an advantage for 
becoming a union someday. When I have a meeting like this, I 
believe more than ever in the things I have always believed in. 
Thank you.'' [applause] 

