Language: <F P=105> Bulgarian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Magdalina Andonova report: "Zhan Videnov Met Montgomery, </F>
Filip Dimitrov --Avdeyev"] 
  [Text] On 18 March Zhan Videnov, leader of the Bulgarian 
Socialist Party [BSP], met Richard Schiffer from the U.S. 
National Security Council [NSC], Charles Donas, executive 
director of the State Department Group for Central and Eastern 
Europe, William Montgomery, U.S. ambassador to Bulgaria, and 
Helen Walls from the Treasury Department. According to Videnov, 
the participants in the meeting discussed the basic problems of 
our country in the socioeconomic sphere, international financial 
relations, and foreign policy in the Balkans, as well as our 
country's Euroatlantic orientation, an issue on which, according 
to Zhan Videnov, a national consensus exists in Bulgaria. 
  The BSP leader said the following to NOVINI 5 and Khorizont 
Radio reporters: 
  "We think that the United States has precise information 
regarding the situation of the Balkan states today. They may 
underestimate a little the grave economic and social 
difficulties that countries like Bulgaria, which are in a 
process of transition, are encountering. They see the processes 
as much more controllable and prone to subjective political will 
than they really are. The U.S. guests will generate 
contradicting impressions from their meetings with the various 
political forces. However, I think that the BSP has responded 
more adequately to their interest by revealing its ideas about 
the country's socioeconomic development in the next few years." 
  Aleksandr Avdeyev, Russian ambassador to Bulgaria, gave a 
dinner in honor of Filip Dimitrov, leader of the Union of 
Democratic Forces [SDS]. It was a friendly dinner, Mr. Leonid 
Reshetnikov, press attache at the Russian Embassy told the 
BALKAN NEWS AGENCY. Mr. Dimitrov and Mr. Avdeyev exchanged 
information regarding the situation in Russia and Bulgaria. 
Both noted the necessity of developing relations between the 
two countries in all possible directions, something that 
corresponds to the national interests of Bulgaria and Romania. 
  Filip Dimitrov heard with great interest Russia's position 
on 
the situation in the Balkans, and more specifically on the 
Yugoconflict. He and Mr. Avdeyev discussed the necessity of 
reviving diplomatic relations between Bulgaria and Russia. 
  The dinner at the embassy, which lasted two hours, included 
only vegetable dishes, because both Mr. Dimitrov and Mr. Avdeyev 
were observing Lent. 

