Language: <F P=105> Greek </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Samir Abu-Ghazalah, head of PLO diplomatic </F>
mission in Cyprus, by Rena Koulermou-Larkou -- place and date 
not given] 
  [Excerpts] [Koulermou-Larkou] Mr. Samir, it appears from 
your biographical note that you have experienced up close the 
contemporary history of the Palestinian people, you have not 
been a mere spectator. How do you feel now that the talks are 
being held to achieve peace in the region? 
  [Abu-Ghazalah] We Palestinians are by nature optimistic 
people, despite that fact that we have suffered massacres, 
terrible difficulties and all sorts of terrorism--from expulsion 
and the refugees in exile, the bombings of our refugee 
settlements with every sort of bomb including even napalm, to 
the recent massacre in Hebron. [passage omitted] 
  We want peace in the Middle East, we want our children to 
grow and live under conditions of peace. We want to see the 
flag of Palestine fly over our land, we want to see our world 
use Palestinian passports and identity cards. 
  We are a people with history and culture. We have 
contributed to the civilization of the whole region and it is 
our right to exist. 
  We went to Madrid believing in peace and we continued the 
peace process of talks without actually having seen any positive 
step by the other side. We even lose credibility in the eyes of 
our own people because we continue to negotiate under such 
conditions. 
  Even after the recent massacre in Hebron we are ready to 
continue the negotiations. In spite of this, the other side 
does not make a positive gesture. For instance, take the 
question of Jericho. We actually talk about the granting of an 
area of 360 square kilometers and we are negotiating 
persistently only for a part of 67 square kilometers. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Koulermou-Larkou] Mr. Samir, when you referred to your 
people's struggle you said that the Palestinians suffered from 
every sort of terrorism. However, for many years in the West at 
least those who were identified with terrorism were the 
Palestinians. Today, do you believe that it is the Palestinians 
who have changed the way in which they struggle or is it the way 
the world and the mass media view you that has changed? 
  [Abu-Ghazalah] First of all, the Palestinians have not 
changed. It is our right, as it is also the right of every 
people struggling for their land, to resist and defend our 
people's basic human rights. 
  We have been deprived even of the right to call ourselves 
Palestinians. Unfortunately, too, things are presented exactly 
the opposite of what they really are. The conqueror who uses 
every kind of attack is not called a terrorist but the one who 
is in defense is regarded as a terrorist. 
  However, sincerely, we do not demand that everyone be tagged 
this or that. We are the victims in this problem and despite 
all this we are committed to the goal of achieving peace in the 
area and to the peace process. 
  [Koulermou-Larkou] What are your personal concerns? 
  [Abu-Ghazalah] The settlers and their settlements. There 
was a commitment made in Madrid that the talks be based on UN 
Security Council Resolution 242. This means that all the 
Israeli troops and the settlers who were established in the area 
after 1967 must withdraw. 
  My view is that the settlements and the settlers are time 
bombs and they certainly constitute an obstacle to the peace 
negotiations. 
  I do not believe that there can be a solution as long as the 
settlements and settlers remain. The settlers are armed and 
attack simple civilians, even passers-by and, as you have seen, 
they even attack places of worship. Moreover, the Israeli 
Investigatory Committee on the Hebron massacre yesterday heard 
complaints from the Palestinians who described how they are 
provoked daily by the settlers, even before the recent massacre. 
  [Koulermou-Larkou] In other words, the settlers are more 
aggressive against the Palestinians; why do you think so? 
  [Abu-Ghazalah] Certainly they are more aggressive. I will 
give you a very recent example. One week ago during a 
demonstration, the children of settlers were shouting slogans 
for the massacre of every Arab or Palestinian. [passage omitted] 
  [Koulermou-Larkou] You said earlier that the other side 
has not made even a single positive step in the negotiations 
process. What, in you opinion, would be a positive step? 
  [Abu-Ghazalah] There are many questions on which the other 
side could show understanding, such as the question of the 
settlers and settlements, the Jericho area, and many other 
questions that are pending on the agenda of negotiations. 
However, now it is like going around in circles without making 
progress. The other side promises that it will make a 
concession and then it reneges. 
  Unfortunately, many Palestinians are still detained in 
Israeli prisons, there is still intimidation and oppression of 
our people. Of course, the issue of Syria and Lebanon, where 
there are also occupied lands, is still pending. Agreements 
should also be made with these countries and this is envisaged 
in UN Security Council Resolution 242. 
  We hope that with the recent involvement of the Americans in 
the negotiations we will have some tangible results. 
  [Koulermou-Larkou] What you just said offers me the 
opportunity to ask two questions. Since we here in Cyprus also 
seems to pin many hopes on the active involvement of the 
Americans, do you think that the Palestinian and Cyprus issues 
are similar problems? Also, concerning the Americans, do you 
get the impression that today's sole superpower has changed its 
policy toward long- standing problems such as the Palestinian 
and the Cyprus problems? 
  [Abu-Ghazalah] Concerning your first question, yes, I 
believe that there are similarities in the Palestinian and 
Cyprus issue. However, there are also big differences with 
regard to the refugee aspect and the life in exile. You did not 
have generations born in refugee settlements nor have you been 
forced to live in exile. 
  However, what is necessary in both of these problems is the 
implementation of the UN resolutions on the Cyprus and the 
Palestinian issues. 
  Now, concerning your second question about the involvement 
of 
Americans in long-standing problems, I agree that this is a new 
U.S. policy toward such problems and what appears as a crusade 
to resolve all these problems gives the message that the United 
States is trying to achieve peace in the whole Middle East 
region. Besides, this would be to the benefit of the Middle 
East people as well as to the benefit of the Americans 
themselves. Think of the big economic and geopolitical 
interests that are at stake in the Middle East. [passage omitted] 
  [Koulermou-Larkou] Are you disturbed by the fact that Cyprus 
has recently opened an embassy in Israel? 
  [Abu-Ghazalah] This is an internal affair of Cyprus. We 
respect the view and decision of the Cyprus Government and 
people, provided, of course, that the embassy will not be in 
Jerusalem. 

