Language: <F P=105> Vietnamese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] On 16 February in Can Tho City, Prime Minister Vo 
Van Kiet held a meeting with key Mekong River Delta leaders to 
discuss the transfer of the regional economic structure until 
the year 2000. Representatives of ministries, government 
components, and the 9th Military Region attended the meeting. 
  In his statement, the prime minister stressed: This exchange 
of views is aimed at understanding the party's practical line, 
policies, measures, and investment planning from now until the 
year 2000. The meeting, together with its follow-up opinions, 
will actively contribute to the seventh party plenum to be held 
in the middle of 1994. 
  Vo Van Kiet mentioned two major issues for the delegates to 
discuss: common issues of the transfer of economic structure in 
the Mekong River delta and urgent issues relating to isolated 
areas, former revolution bases, and areas inhabited by ethnic 
Khmer people. He reminded the delegates to pay more attention to 
the construction of infrastrucuture projects in the region. 
  With respect to economic programs, the prime minister held 
that the Mekong River delta needs to change its economic 
structure under the direction of industrialization and 
modernization to develop its production capacity by exploiting 
its regional economic advantages and biological conditions to 
meet demand on domestic and foreign markets. At the same time, 
the region needs to broaden its mechanization and 
electrification at different levels to suit the varying rural 
situation. The local agriculture-industrial economic models 
with different economic sectors to attach agriculture production 
with processing industry must be established. 
  Regarding agriculture, the Mekong River delta needs to 
improve its production quality and ensure stable and firm rice 
production. We must gradually solve problems relating to the 
post-harvest area and consumption market. We must continue to 
increase our advantages in aquaculture by semi-extensive and 
extensive breeding. At the same time, we have to consider 
policies to encourage production such as credit policy and so 
forth. 
  In industry, we must mainly develop processing industries 
for 
agricultural and aquacultural products. We must gradually 
increase the production of building materials to fully exploit 
local advantages and meet regional demands. Fundamental 
industries such as electricity, machinery production, and 
chemicals must be improved to provide better service for 
processing industries. 
  The meeting was held on 16-17 February. 

