Pyongyang       Sees U.S., IAEA Shift, Limits Rhetoric 

                         SUMMARY 

   Responding to what it has portrayed as a "clarification" of 
Washington's and the International Atomic Energy Agency's (IAEA) 
stance on the nuclear inspection issue, Pyongyang has hinted at a 
willingness to compromise on the nuclear inspection issue. 
Pyongyang's tentative search for common ground comes amid other 
signs of leadership efforts to limit both the scope and tone of 
its current public criticism of Washington. 

                        END SUMMARY 

   Pyongyang's intimation that it is seeking a possible compromise 
solution on the nuclear issue came in a Foreign Ministry 
spokesman's remarks ostensibly made to a KCNA reporter on 12 
February (Pyongyang Television).  In stating that Pyongyang has 
conveyed its 31 January public allegation of U.S. bad faith to 
Washington through "a relevant channel," the Foreign Ministry 
spokesman also claimed that the U.S. side has "clarified" points 
raised by North Korea--a formulation that could conceivably 
provide Pyongyang with an acceptable way to modify its stance 
without losing face.  The spokesman, softening Pyongyang's 
recently heightened rhetoric, claimed that Washington has assured 
Pyongyang that: 
   + IAEA nuclear inspections should be "purely to ensure the 
continuity of safeguards."  (The spokesman did not elaborate on 
what constitutes the "continuity of safeguards "--a point of 
contention between Pyongyang and the IAEA.) 
   + There is no change in the U.S. willingness to continue DPRK- 
U.S. talks and that Washington is ready to discuss improvement of 
bilateral relations, along with the nuclear issue, at the next 
round of high-level talks. 
   In a further move that could provide Pyongyang with the context 
to amend its heretofore rigid stance on the nuclear issue, the 
spokesman on 12 February also claimed that the IAEA has modified 
its demands, asserting that the IAEA has "hinted" at "renouncing" 
its "absurd former demands" for "full-scope inspection." 
   Pyongyang's Demands     Pyongyang apparently still expects 
Washington to make concrete moves to demonstrate the resolve to 
negotiate the nuclear issue, including the cancellation of the 
U.S.-ROK joint maneuvers.  The spokesman said that if Washington 
is "truly" interested in a negotiated settlement on the nuclear 
issue, it should prove its good faith "by action."  Without 
directly listing Pyongyang's demands, the spokesman called on 
Washington to halt its "pressure" tactics, expressing, in 
particular, a concern about the following recent developments 
that cast "deep doubts" about U.S. sincerity: 
   + Team Spirit preparations.  To underscore the importance North 
Korea attaches to this issue, Pyongyang radio in a commentary on 
14 February revived the once standard warning that staging Team 
Spirit would be an "intolerable" act that would bring the Korean 
peninsula "to the brink of war." 
   + Reported U.S. moves toward sanctions against the DPRK, 
including a U.S. Senate resolution on that issue and U.S. 
discussions of the topic with other UN Security Council permanent 
members. 
   + Continued demands by "U.S. hardline conservatives" for the 
application of "pressure" against the DPRK. 
   Efforts to Limit Rhetorical Scope     Suggesting that Pyongyang 
wishes to avoid expanding the scope of current polemics with 
Washington, the spokesman avoided mentioning the issue of 
deploying the Patriot missile to South Korea.  The Patriot issue 
had previously generated a considerable amount of criticism in 
Pyongyang media (Pyongyang radio, 28, 31 January). 
   North Korea's monitored central media have also failed so far to 
even mention a 6 February New York Times article on purported 
U.S. war plans, which received extensive, and even sensational, 
coverage in South Korean media.  Instead of reporting on the 
article in its central media, Pyongyang relegated protests over 
the article to the clandestine radio Voice of National Salvation 
(VNS), which is beamed from the North to the South.  Going beyond 
merely reiterating Pyongyang's recent charges that Washington is 
pursuing DPRK-U.S. talks solely for the purpose of "crushing the 
DPRK," VNS's 8 February commentary on the New York Times article 
depicted the United States as a "vampire who cannot live even a 
single day without blood" and with whom North Korea "cannot live 
under the same sky"--harsh rhetoric that has not appeared in 
central Pyongyang media criticism of Washington in recent years 
(SEE NOTE). 
   NOTE: The last monitored use of similar language was against ROK 
President No Tae-u's government in 1991.  Protesting against 
Seoul's crackdown on student demonstrations in which one student 
was killed, KCNA called the ROK government a "vampire" with whom 
"no one can live under the same sky" (18 June 1991). 
   The fact that Pyongyang central media appears to be passing up 
opportunities to publiciZe what could be characteriZed as 
evidence of U.S. intentions to "crush" the DPRK suggests that the 
North Korean leadership is taking the New York Times article 
seriously and is attempting to avoid provoking a potential 
showdown with Washington.  In the past, North Korea tended to 
delay authoritative comment when the situation on the Korean 
peninsula became critical, as was the case after the 
assassination of ROK President Pak Chong-hui in 1979 and student 
riots in Kwangju in 1980, both of which resulted in the 
proclamation of martial law in South Korea. 
   Implications     Pyongyang media treatment of recent developments 
surrounding the nuclear inspection issue suggests that while the 
North Korean leadership is still reluctant to foreclose 
negotiations, it has no illusions about the seriousness of the 
situation.  The Foreign Ministry spokesman's 12 February 
pronouncement suggests that Pyongyang is hoping to use perceived 
shifts in U.S. and IAEA "clarifications" to justify a compromise 
on the nuclear issue.  Nevertheless, Pyongyang is signaling a 
concurrent readiness to risk aggravated international isolation- 
-or worse--if Washington and the IAEA do not provide a symbolic 
concession, such as cancellation of Team Spirit. 
   (AUTHOR:  YIM.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
ASIA DIVISION ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6534.) 
EAG/BIETZ/cth 14/2351z Feb 

