BFN 

<F P=106> [Report from Moscow by Pavel Davidov: "Moscow Secret </F>
Intelligence Report Warns: World Threatened by Leaking Russian 
Secret Nuclear Technology"] 
  [Text] Russia is incapable of protecting its national 
security and monitoring the dangerous weapons it owns. 
Therefore, its intelligence and security services are incapable 
of protecting the world against the threat of proliferation of 
its nuclear bombs, radioactive materials, missiles, and all 
weapons of mass destruction, as well as atomic scientists 
willing to go to any country that will pay them. This 
information is significant because it does not come from Western 
intelligence or foreign sources but is found in a very official 
and top secret report submitted to President Yeltsin a few days 
ago by the Russian Counterespionage Service. The report 
contains a clear warning that it is impossible to prevent 
thefts, smuggling, and secret trade, which is on the rise in 
military plants and sensitive laboratories. The report also 
points out that the states that broke away from the Soviet Union 
are also unable to protect the dangerous Installations they have 
inherited. These states are selling the Installations to 
dealers from Iran, Pakistan, Iraq, and other nations, or to 
trade firms that specialize in gunrunning. Sometimes plants are 
being sold, along with all their equipment, weapons, and 
experts. The report gives evidence that 900 thefts from 
military and nuclear plants and 700 thefts of secret technology 
were reported only during the second half of 1993, including 
nuclear weapons for Iran and Pakistan. It is worth mentioning 
that the information provided in this report was so serious that 
the head of the Counterintelligence Service had to resign. 
  The following are the important highlights of the report: 
  Counterintelligence Service analysts are of the opinion that 
the reorganization of the security services was enacted 
thoughtlessly and without planning and did a great deal of 
damage to the aim of ensuring political and social security and 
stability. They say that the mistakes in establishing the new 
structure of national security might lead to Russia becoming a 
source of threat to other countries and to the world at large. 
  It seems that the source of threat at present is not a 
military threat, because the Army and the military intelligence 
service are still responsible for this factor. The sources of 
danger are apparent in other areas; namely, the environment, the 
threat to the constitution, the intelligence forces, the border 
guards, the military industrial complex, the economy, organized 
crime, administrative corruption, and the nuclear complex. 
  In the past, these sectors were under the control of the 
State Security Committee, the KGB. Now the issues of the 
environment, intelligence, and the border guard have been 
transferred to a special department under the head of state. 
Organized crime and administrative corruption have been 
transferred to the Interior Ministry. Important issues such as 
the threat to the constitution, the military industrial complex, 
the economy, and the nuclear complex are the work of nobody. 
Suitable national security measures have not been taken to face 
possible dangers. These dangers really exist. 
  Despite the establishment of a government emergency 
committee, which should ward off any possible dangers to the 
environment, and the creation of a civilian force for this 
purpose, the immense geographic area of Russia makes the 
civilian force, which is composed of a three battalion brigade, 
clearly insufficient. It may be recalled in this regard that 
the removal of the traces of the Chernobyl disaster required the 
work of 12 KGB teams, internal security forces, and special 
forces in radiation and chemical protection from the Defense 
Ministry. In Ukraine today, the civilian forces are composed of 
one company, and they are nonexistent in Armenia where there is 
a war going on and the possibility of a casual hit or a possible 
attack on the electroatomic [kahrudharriyah] station cannot be 
ruled out. Such an attack would be a disaster for the entire 
Caucasus, Turkey, and Iran and possibly Syria and beyond. In 
spring and summer, prevailing winds in this area could carry the 
radioactive cloud from this Armenian electroatomic station to 
Iraq, the Arabian Gulf coasts, and Israel. 
  The Russian border guard forces have been established on the 
vast Central Asian territory to protect the borders of the CIS 
states as well as the Russian borders. The border posts and 
centers have no security cover and therefore they could come 
under attack not only from the front, but also from the rear by 
various armed groups of diverse affiliations. The same 
situation will soon prevail in the far eastern, northwestern, 
western, and southern areas of Russia. Before the Russian 
Security Ministry was disbanded, the Ministry's local bodies 
protected the rear of the border forces there. As for the 
Russian Counterintelligence Services, they have no such local 
bodies, and therefore, the rear of the border forces will remain 
unprotected. 
  However, the most dangerous situation is manifested in the 
sectors of the military industrial complex, the economy, and the 
nuclear complex where the situation threatens dire consequences 
for not only Russia's national security, but also for the 
security of many countries if not the entire world community. 
  In the past, the protection of the military industrial 
complex and most of the big establishments in the Soviet economy 
and in Russia was one of the prerogatives of the KGB forces. 
Local KGB bodies guarded their technologies within the 
establishments and protected the production secrets. When the 
KGB was disbanded in late 1992 and early 1993, this became the 
work of the Russian Security Ministry. The federal Russian 
Counterintelligence Service, which was established in 1993, was 
denied this job. Eventually, only certain major establishments 
in the military industrial complex were given protection from 
outside guard forces manned by militiamen. The vast majority of 
these establishments are protected by elderly personnel armed 
with old shotguns or pre-World War I pistols. Thus, the 
military factories and establishments as well as scientific 
institutions and important laboratories have been denied 
official state protection. Contrary to what happens in the 
United States and Europe, no private security bodies have been 
established due to lack of funds and the general deterioration 
in the country. 
  As a result of all this, only in the second half of 1993, 
900 
thefts of various kinds of weapons and equipment, and 700 thefts 
of secret technology (designs and description of chemical 
reactions and processes, etc.) were registered at the 
institutions of the Russian military industrial complex and the 
nuclear complex. This includes special documents on 
manufacturing weapons of mass destruction, chemical weapons, and 
even biological weapons. In general, the special documents on 
the minute details of the manufacturing of weapons. It is 
possible that these secrets could fall into the possession of 
people who will use these terrible weapons without hesitation, 
and without even thinking of the grave consequences of this 
step, just for the sake of achieving their selfish and national 
objectives. 
  What makes the situation even more complicated is that most 
of the republics that became independent of the former USSR, 
have on their territory some of the institutions, factories, and 
scientific centers and laboratories which, in one way or 
another, are affiliated with the military industrial complex, 
the nuclear complex, the production of chemical weapons, or 
production of mass destruction weapons. Several of these 
institutions, which used to be secret, are now located on the 
territory of newly independent states, whose leaderships do not 
know how to dispose of them. In fact, they believe that the 
best solution is to sell them, along with their means of 
production and their technology, to the highest bidder, 
regardless of who it is. If the nuclear material and their 
technology were sold with some caution and secrecy, the mass 
destruction weapons and the technology of their production, and 
even the chemical weapons, were sold publicly. Here are some 
examples: 
  In November 1993, a medium-size ship, with 40 families of 
Russian refugees from the city of Krasnovodsk in Turkmenistan on 
board arrived in the city of Astrakhan. Among these families, 
there were six families whose breadwinners used to work at one 
of the secret workshops of the ammunition depot of the former 
Soviet war fleet. At this workshop, all the nuclear charges of 
the torpedoes and sea mines were tested and most of them were 
sent to the Black Sea fleet. Following the disintegration of the 
USSR, the new state of Turkmenistan decided that it did not need 
these charges in the depot because it does not have a fleet or 
naval air force units. The entire depot was sold in one year. 
The sea mines workshop was also sold. The already-made 
production was sold, and the equipment was sold later. The 
experts who returned to Russia said that Iranians and Pakistanis 
were among the buyers. The buyers offered the engineers and the 
technicians working at the workshop contracts to work on the 
equipment back in their countries for five years. Some of the 
former officers of the Caspian Sea fleet signed contracts and 
left with the equipment after working for more than a year and a 
half without salaries. Arrivals in Astrakhan said that the 
families of other officers lead a very miserable life in the 
open, and that they cannot return to Russia. 
  In the same way, the gunpowder factory in the town of Shusta 
[place name as published] in the suburbs of Namangan in 
Uzbekistan, was sold. When it was built in 1910, this factory 
used to produce gunpowder. Later, it became a huge war 
institution specializing in producing air-dropped bombs. It was 
one of the three Soviet factories where cluster bombs and vacuum 
bombs, which are considered a kind of mass destruction weapon, 
are assembled. 
  After the break-up of the Soviet Union, Uzbekistan no longer 
needed the factory and there was no way to convert it to 
civilian production. Work stopped in the factory and the 
Russians, fearing nationalist clashes, began to leave Uzbekistan 
for Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus. The local central government 
in Tashkent began to sell the very expensive equipment and 
technology that was in use at that time. The same thing 
happened at the design office, which can be compared to a small 
research institute in this field. The string of buyers again 
included Iran and Pakistan, followed by India, Indonesia, and 
Iraq. 
  We can give dozens of examples of this kind. The weapons of 
mass destruction spread all over the Third World from all the 
republics of the former Soviet Union because of the lack of 
control and protection exercised in the past by the KGB. These 
weapons can easily fall into the hands of irresponsible 
adventurers. Here is another example: A secret laboratory, 
which carried out near-production level scientific research in 
chemical weapons and lasers, in the town of At Bashi, a suburb 
of the Kirghiz town of Naryn, was lost. Kirghizia did not need 
this laboratory. The new nation could not use it or convert its 
products because it had no trained Russian personnel who use to 
work there. The Russians left Kirghizia in a hurry after 
nationalistic sentiments rose. Only the walls of that 
laboratory remained. Where is the equipment? Where are the 
documents? Are they in China, Iran, Pakistan, Iraq, or in 
another country? Very few Kirghiz figures know the facts, and 
they prefer to remain silent. 
  In none of the CIS states where nuclear weapons are 
distributed do we find any government monitoring of radioactive 
and nuclear radiation, except in Russia, where a special 
committee, Roscomatomnadzur, [as published] or the government's 
committee to supervise nuclear materials, exists. However, the 
committee's duties and resources are very limited. Monitoring 
is confined to ascertaining that the storage and use of nuclear 
material does not harm the health of people or the environment. 
At best, committee employees can record a radiation leak or a 
violation of the rules for storing nuclear materials. 
  The tragedy today is that the state has not organized the 
protection of materials and related technologies against 
ordinary theft, illegal sale, or smuggling abroad -- protection 
that was the job of state bodies. The Counterintelligence 
Service was robbed of this job and the information branch, which 
belongs to the KGB, was given the task of fighting nuclear 
terrorism. However, this body has no local branches in the 
Russian areas, where the nuclear sites exist. It is doubtful if 
such branches will be established in the near future because 
this is not within the duties of the KGB information branch, 
which should operate outside the country. Therefore, the 
country's powerful nuclear establishment, which includes the 
nuclear fuel factories for the electroatomic stations, ship 
reactors, and plutonium weapons factories, as well as the 
research centers, the nuclear waste burial grounds, and test 
fields are now denied the state's protection and the monitoring 
of dealing with nuclear and radioactive materials, which in the 
past were under the protection of the state organizations, as is 
the case today in all other nuclear countries. 
  As far as nuclear and radioactive security are concerned, 
the 
situation at the Semipalatinsk field for underground nuclear 
tests and at Russian nuclear establishments previously linked to 
this field as part of the general Soviet nuclear program is 
extremely serious. 
  Until recently, Russian specialists worked in this field. 
After Kazakhstan became independent, the Kazakhs -- on the 
pretext of imposing their control of the suspension of all 
nuclear experiments -- managed to withdraw the external Russian 
Army guard units, as well as the internal guards traditionally 
composed of special KGB units. Russian specialists in all 
sections of the field are now being replaced by Kazakhs, most of 
whom have no experience in handling this kind of material, not 
to mention the fact that they do not have any scientific degrees. 
  No special documents were written regarding the delivery and 
acceptance of radioactive and nuclear equipment or material in 
this field. Likewise, no special documents were written 
regarding the amount of radioactively polluted sand and rock 
resulting from previous tests. This allows long-term 
radioactive waste material resulting from many years of active 
work in carrying out powerful underground nuclear tests to be 
squandered. This waste can be used to obtain, by retrieval, 
nuclear fuel for nuclear reactors and first-generation nuclear 
arms containers, such as used in the kind of bombs dropped on 
Japan in 1945. Apparently, this is a profitable area for the 
seller, purchaser, and mediator. The role of the mediator who 
sells retrievable equipment [al-mu'-iddat al-salihah li 
al-isti'adah] from the Semipalatinsk field is played by a 
London-based firm called "United Ration Trading Limited" [name 
as transliterated]. Money is paid through this firm's channels. 
The radioactive equipment and waste are exported to northern 
Iran from the Port of Shevchenko. The subsequent route, 
however, is still unknown to the Russian counter-espionage 
organizations. 
  In the fall of 1993, this London-based firm contacted the 
plants in the Tomsk-7 [name as transliterated] city. These 
plants are among the largest producers of weapons-grade 
plutonium in the entire former Soviet Union. Controls still 
enforced by the Russian Security Ministry prevented the 
smuggling of a batch of the plutonium abroad. The firm's 
representative was expelled from Russia. However, the 
reorganization of this ministry denied the Counterespionage 
Service the right to control the nuclear complex. It is not 
impossible that weapons-grade plutonium could now leak from 
Tomsk-7 into the so-called "potential states", states on the 
verge of making nuclear arms. 
  For more than two years Russia and Kazakhstan have been 
arguing sharply over this question and over the fate of the 
Baykonur space base, and all the other installations and 
institutions, including nuclear facilities, on Kazakh territory. 
It is in these installations that nuclear reactors are 
assembled and prepared for launching into outer space aboard 
special spacecraft. The problem has not been resolved yet. The 
facility is still under the control of Russian warplanes. 
However, an agreement has been signed between Kazakhstan and 
Ukraine on joint use of the Baykonur spaceport for trade 
purposes. 
  It has been noticed that the report of the Counterespionage 
Service says this agreement contains a paragraph binding the 
signatories to "coordinate efforts regarding maintaining unified 
prices of tradable nuclear waste". This means Ukraine and 
Kazakhstan have not abandoned "trade in nuclear and radioactive 
materials." The only thing they care about is to avoid 
competing with each other over the sales of this extremely 
hazardous "stuff". 
  The secret report devotes a chapter to the future of 
scientists and specialists working at the war industrial 
complex, that is, in military industries, as well as experts in 
treating nuclear and radioactive materials and in the missile 
industry, outside the boundaries of the CIS. The report 
discloses that more than a third of the scientists and 
specialists in the nuclear field and in highly sophisticated 
technology, who total 3,000 people that used to work in the 
Soviet Union, have left the country and now work at major 
scientific institutions in the United States, Japan, Germany, 
France, Britain, and Sweden. Also, around 6,000 
"medium-caliber" engineers and science experts have left the 
country. Some of them settled in countries with nuclear 
potential. They are now conducting nuclear and atomic 
technology research. 
  It is worth mentioning that the people who drafted the 
report 
point out that the major part of this threat to Russia's 
security is attributed to repeatedly reorganizing the Security 
Ministry and its agencies. Perhaps it is against this 
background that Boris Yeltsin has dismissed Nikolay Golushko 
[name as transliterated], director of the Counterespionage 
Service that prepared the report, and appointed Sergey 
(Shibashin) as a replacement. 
  Security circles in Moscow fear the Counterespionage Service 
will experience yet another reorganization that could aggravate 
the current chaos and threaten continued proliferation of 
nuclear weapons and radioactive agents and more Chernobyl 
disasters. 

