Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Richard Savill: "Hume Challenges IRA To Make </F>
`Great Act of Moral Courage'"] 
  [Text] Belfast -- Pressure on Sinn Fein and the IRA to 
halt violence and to accept the Anglo-Irish peace declaration 
intensified last night after Mr John Hume, leader of the 
nationalist Social Democratic and Labour Party, said the reasons 
that Republicans gave for continuing the armed struggle no 
longer existed. 
  In his longest and most detailed statement on the Downing 
Street initiative, Mr Hume said the Republican movement was 
facing a challenge which amounted to "one of the greatest acts 
of moral courage this century." 
  Mr Hume urged the two governments to clarify parts of the 
declaration for Sinn Fein. He said: "If all that has to be done 
is to clarify certain parts of a certain document I would hope 
that both governments would do everything in their power to make 
clarification." 
  Both governments have said they would not meet Sinn Fein's 
demands for clarification until it renounces violence. 
  His comments appeared to be an attempt to keep alive the 
peace process in the face of the growing impatience of Unionists 
and the Government at Sinn Fein's continued failure to respond 
to the declaration and renounce violence. 
  In a five-page statement, Mr Hume, whose joint initiative 
with Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president, has played an 
important part in the peace process, said the document addressed 
the reasons for armed struggle given by the IRA. These were 
that the British were in Ireland defending their own interests 
by force -- economic and strategic interests -- and that they 
were preventing Irish people from exercising self-determination. 
  The Government had pledged it had "no selfish economic or 
strategic interest in Northern Ireland," and the Downing Street 
declaration also accepted the principle that Irish people have 
the right to decide their own future by agreement. 
  Mr Hume said the challenge facing all sides was that they 
should come to the negotiating table armed only with their 
convictions. 
  The republican movement was facing "one of the greatest acts 
of moral courage of this century. But it is moral courage that 
gives real leadership and that creates truly historic 
opportunity." 
  His deputy, Mr Seamus Mallon, accused republican leaders of 
putting out "contradictory" statements in response to the 
declaration. Mr Mallon added: "I have to believe that this is 
deliberate and that, in effect, there is an approach being taken 
by them (Sinn Fein) that is trying to confuse those who want to 
get the movement to peace accelerated." 
  Mr Adams and his deputy, Mr Martin McGuinness, have 
reiterated support for republican principles but have stopped 
short of outright rejection of the declaration. They appear to 
be trying to reassure hardline republicans that there will be no 
"sell-out" while indicating they see merit in the peace process. 
  As Sinn Fein continued to delay its formal response to the 
declaration and maintained it would "not be coerced into a hasty 
decision," Unionists warned the Government that there should be 
no "stretching or development" of the document. Mr James 
Molyneaux, Ulster Unionist party leader, said at Lisburn, Co 
Antrim, last night that the IRA's "not unexpected refusal to 
accept" the declaration "clears the way for a really effective 
antiterrorist campaign." 
  Mr Molyneaux added: "While Irish governments usually have 
little stomach for such decisive action, this time they have a 
moral duty to deny sanctuary to terrorists." 
  Mr Molyneaux said that Mr Hume was mistaken in his comments 
because the IRA had already rejected the declaration. "He 
seemed to say it would require great moral courage on the part 
of republicans to stop murdering people," Mr Molyneaux told the 
BBC. "I don't think it should require courage to do that. It 
is common Christian action." 
  An Ulster Volunteer Force parcel bomb was sent to the Sinn 
Fein offices in Dublin and another to AN PHOBLACHT, the 
republican newspaper. A bomb disposal officer lost part of his 
thumb and another was slightly hurt when a device exploded while 
being examined. 

