BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Release"] </F>
  [Text] Tallinn, 20 April -- Annual meeting of the European 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), that ended in 
St. Petersburg, Tuesday [18 April] night, was very successful 
for Estonia, with interest towards our economy being 
considerably great, Estonian Minister of Finance Heiki Kranich 
told ETA. 
  He told a press conference on Wednesday that the aim of the 
Estonian delegation at the meeting with the President of the 
bank Jacques de Larosiere was to point at the need for the bank 
to be more flexible and to take more risks. What Estonia 
proposed was that a risk capital fund could be created with the 
resources of EBRD, out of which direct equity investments could 
be made, so that the bank would be a shareholder in Estonian 
enterprises, Kranich said. He said that in Moscow also 
foundation of a joint Baltic risk capital fund was discussed. 
  According to the statutes of EBRD 60 per cent of credits are 
channeled into private sector and 40 per cent into public 
sector. This distribution is a problem in the former Soviet 
republics where the amount of private sector firms that own 
credit guaranties is still small. 
  An important event for Estonia was signing the agreement 
between Estonia, EBRD and Japanese Export-Import Bank on a $30 
million credit line. Kranich said that Estonia was the first 
East European state that started a similar agreement, being only 
later joined by Latvia and Lithuania. 
  Kranich said that de Larosiere expressed great interest 
towards Estonia and readiness to take Estonian proposals into 
consideration and that he hopes that the results will be felt in 
the relations of Estonia and EBRD soon. 
  Kranich added that Baltic finance ministers who met in 
St.Petersburg, are to meet again in June this year to specify 
principles of cooperation and discuss possible projects. 
  "Invest and experiment in Estonia, for we have been 
successful and we are relatively small. You have all 
possibilities of success, which will do good also to the image 
of the bank," was Estonia's message to EBRD. "Estonia is a 
strong sign for other states as well and we have all 
prerequisites in order to take advantage of it," Kranich said. 

