CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by LUK: "Service Provided By Robot"] </F>
  [Text] Industry expects the '94 Hannover Trade Fair 
20-27 April to send signals as to whether the hoped-for upward 
economic trend has finally arrived. Meanwhile the automation 
sector is looking for new markets. Example: At this largest in 
the world industrial fair the future market for service robots 
will attend the opening show. 
  All the 6,600 exhibitors and about 350,000 expected visitors 
see in Hannover a mirror image of the world market. The key 
items on display this year are about 250 exhibits of assembly 
and handling robots which include industrial ones, over 670 
material flow technology and logistics (CeMAT) exhibits, about 
100 compressed-air technology exhibits covering tools and plant 
equipment, and 420 surface treatment exhibits. In a special 
exhibit, first organized in Halle 17, are displayed service 
robots. 
  Modern assembly and handling technology boosts the 
competitiveness of the customer. Integration of sensors and 
electronics, as well as of image and data processing in the 
assembly and handling technology, can also reduce the cost of 
small-scale production. The slogan "lean production" means not 
simpler or proven techniques but more automation and more 
flexibility within less intricate and easily monitored units. 
  "In 1992 the German MHI industry reached 3.9 billion German 
marks [DM] in sales against DM4.1 billion in the previous year," 
calculates Dr.-Eng. Hans Muno, business manager of the MHI 
Specialty Group in Frankfurt am Main and member of the German 
Machine and Plant Equipment Manufacturers (VDMA) Association. 
"Neither domestic nor export business saw any incentives in 
1993, so that a further 5-7-percent decline in this market must 
be reckoned with." 
  Alongside assembly and handling robots, including industrial 
ones, there are shown building blocks and peripherals for 
complete MHI systems. According to VDMA estimates, this group 
made DM1.1 billion in sales. That corresponds to a 26-percent 
share of the total sales made by the robot industry. 
  Components and peripherals supplement assembly and handling 
facilities in formation of complete systems. Assembly and 
handling accounted each time for DM1.4 billion and thus 37 
percent of the total sales. "In 1993 there is seen a distinct 
shift in their share of total sales," estimates Doctor Muno. 
Further development of the sensor, control, and guidance 
technologies leads to an increasingly easier automation of 
intricate assembly processes. Assembly, components, and 
peripherals will assume a further increasing share, while 
handling has already been highly automated. 
  The share of about 200 mostly medium-size German MHI 
enterprises in exports is on the average 35 percent. The 
significance of European Union countries as their trade partners 
is clearly demonstrated by the example of service robots. Their 
export in 1992 amounted to DM181 million, 75 percent of it on 
the intracontinental market: Belgium, Luxembourg, and Italy with 
18 percent being the three top ranking buyer countries followed 
by France with 15 percent. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-EST-014-17A>      Sales Made in West European Machine Manufacturing Sector} </FIG>


  Firms engaged in assembly and handling technologies depend 
on 
the economic position of their customers. This is how German 
machine manufacturing slided into the deepest recession in the 
last 40 years. The initially normal cyclic slowdown of the 
economy has been accelerated by the downhill trend which all 
other industrial nations including our trade partners are 
experiencing since 1992. 
  The decline in demand for machines in West Europe in 1993 
was, according to Dr. Muno's figures, about 8 percent. The 
decrease of production amounted to only 5 percent, however, 
inasmuch as exports to North and Latin America, Asia, and East 
Europe increased. 
  The industry hopes that the recession in Europe will slowly 
come to an end. In a few countries it has already bottomed out, 
some other ones report even increases of machine production. The 
German machine manufacturing industry counts on a slight, actual 
2-percent, increase of production. 
  This will be in a large measure attributable to the overseas 
export, however, inasmuch as the West European demand for 
machines is expected to dry up. The same is true of domestic 
demand, as far as this one does not depend on export. 
  "The cyclic swing of the economy could possibly be overcome 
by 1995-1996," predicts Dr. Muno. "Machine manufacturing should 
be among the winners, not least because many enterprises have 
utilized the recession period for restructurization. They will 
emerge from this process much strengthened." 
  It is all the more important, therefore, to acknowledge 
internationally visible promising market segments by responding 
to them at the right time. Appropriate stimuli will be offered 
at the 25th International Symposium on Industrial Robots to be 
held on 25-27 April next to the exhibition site. 
  A special exhibit, "Service Robots Have Arrived," indicates 
a 
certain trend into the future. Their future market potential, 
according to expert estimates, is greater than that of already 
widely accepted industrial robots. Available prototypes and 
first series-produced units will convey an idea about coming 
developments of their service capabilities. 
  One service of undeniably great value and with 
correspondingly great market potential is cleaning: buildings, 
airplanes, and machines. Special-purpose walking monitor robots 
are offered for inspection tasks or rounds in industrial 
facilities, in museums, and in warehouses, also in places not 
accessible to a person, such as the inside of pipes and 
channels. Particularly in Europe, in Japan, and in the U.S. 
people are less fastidious, even though robots for health care 
services still encounter doubts or even rejection there when the 
question of replacing the human touch comes up. Potential 
customers there have, however, no acceptance problems. This is 
symbolized by the "Helpmate" service robot already operating in 
U.S. hospitals. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-EST-014-18A>      Capital Outlays for Equipment </FIG>



