Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ren Kan: "No Trades of Special-Price Shares Soon"] </F>
  [Text] State and corporate-owned shares sold under 
preferential terms will continue to be kept out of the open 
trading market, declared the China Securities Regulatory 
Commission (CSRC) yesterday. 
  CSRC announced that it was suspending the implementation of 
a 
circular issued by the Shenzhen Securities Administration Office 
that said in half a year trading of these special-treatment 
shares would begin. 
  Analysts said the Shenzhen circular resulted in a heavy blow 
to the stock market, because it means a large amount of shares 
will be listed. 
  In the past two days, the Shanghai stock market dipped by 
15.5 points while the Shenzhen market went down 5 points. 
  The shares are known as right issues. Listed companies sell 
them to shareholders at lower prices and at a certain ratio. 
  Zhu Li the spokesman of the commission said that it is not 
proper for local securities administrations and exchanges to 
make some regulations on policy-related issues before the State 
can make unified rules on these policies. 
  He urged them to "take the interests of the whole into 
account" while making decisions. 
  The local securities administration office did not inform 
the 
CSRC before they published the circular. 
  CSRC officials said they knew the information only through a 
story published in yesterday's Shanghai Securities newspaper. 
  In China, shares are divided into State and corporate-owned 
and individual shares. 
  At present, only individual shares are traded on securities 
exchanges while a small number of companies have listed their 
corporate shares with the Securities Trading Automated 
Quotations System and National Electric Trading System. 
  State shares are kept completely out of the market. 
  The circulation of State and corporate-owned shares has been 
a hot topic for both securities administration and investors. 
  CSRC said that the country is working on regulations 
covering 
the listing of corporate-owned shares. 
  Before the regulations are issued, the listing of new 
corporate-owned shares will be suspended. 
  And it said the listing of State-owned shares could not be 
dealt with before the transaction of corporate shares. 
  In another development, Zhu denied that about 1O billion 
yuan 
($1.1 billions) of shares will be listed this year. 
  "At least, the commission has never heard of such a huge 
figure," he said. 
  He made the statement at yesterday's press conference in 
response to newspaper stories that gave such a prediction. 
  China last year issued 4 billion yuan ($459 million) of 
shares and is set to issue 5.5 billion yuan ($632 million) of 
shares to domestic investors this year. 
  Chinese securities investors have complained that too many 
companies have been listed on the market, which has made the 
market bearish. 

