Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "PF Seizes 51 Kilos of Cocaine Paste"] </F>
  [Text] The Federal District Regional Superintendency of the 
Federal Police Department [DPF] yesterday reported the results 
of the work done by the Drug Enforcement Headquarters to seize 
51 kg of coca base and a number of packages of the starch that 
is used to adulterate--"step on"--the drug. Adulteration 
increases the weight of the drug and, consequently, its value. 
The seizure took place on the ranch owned by trafficker Antonio 
Alde Paiva ("Chimarrao"), who got away. The ranch is located 
near the municipality of Santo Antonio do Descoberto in Goias. 
Three traffickers were arrested. 
  Investigation of the trafficker intensified when Federal 
Police agents obtained information that Antonio Alves--a 
trafficker well known to the DPF--would be receiving a large 
shipment of cocaine from Bolivia. The Federal Police discovered 
that "Chimarrao" owned some rural property in the municipality 
of Santo Antonio do Descoberto on the banks of the Areias River 
and that the drugs would probably be hidden there. By 
maintaining surveillance on the trafficker, police were able to 
dismantle part of that drug connection by arresting three 
members of the gang. 
  During their investigation, the Federal Police learned that 
"Chimarrao" had frequent contacts in Goiania, Cuiaba, and 
Abadiania in Goias. It was discovered that Edison de Abreu Gama, 
Agenor Jose Alves, and Jose Lima Rodrigues had arrived in 
Abadiania with some large casks, and that was when the Federal 
Police Superintendency in the Federal District decided to start 
its operation. 
  Arrest--The DPF agents arrested Edison de Abreu Gama, Agenor 
Jose Alves, and Jose Lima Rodrigues at Kilometer 13 on Highway 
BR-060. They were in a white Niva automobile with Sao Paulo 
license number SZ-4772. Found in the vehicle were a radio 
communications set and a .38 caliber revolver. The three men 
confessed that they had left the drugs on the side of Highway 
BR-060 near Abadiania, the place where they had been the night 
before. 
  Carrying a search and arrest warrant and aided by 
drug-sniffing dogs, the federal agents were able to seize not 
only the drugs but also three shotguns, eight cartridges, and a 
number of blank documents--dummies for printing--belonging to 
the Federal District Traffic Department. The seizure occurred at 
the home of "Chimarrao," who owns the ranch alongside Highway 
BR-060. 
  After the drugs were seized, Agenor confessed that his job 
in 
the gang was to accompany a truck driver named Mauro to the town 
of Abadiania and that the drugs were taken from a false bottom 
in the fuel tank of a truck--the license number of which is 
being kept secret by the Federal Police so as not to jeopardize 
the rest of the investigation that is now under way. Agenor also 
said that seven days earlier, he had brought 35 kg of coca base 
to "Chimarrao," who is a now a fugitive. 
  Edison de Abreu Gama was the escort while the drug was being 
transported--that is, he drove ahead of the truck in the car 
with the radio set so as to warn truck driver Mauro of possible 
problems. The gang members were arrested and are being held at 
the DPF jail in the Federal District, where they have been 
charged with the commission of a crime under Article 12 of Law 
No. 6368. 

