Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Last year we gave a report on suicides in the 
province of Mazandaran. The Islamic Republic's official sources 
are now reporting that last year 4,000 people committed suicide 
in the province of Khorasan. The main reason for the suicides 
was the pressure of poverty and the inability to make a living. 
It was announced that 2,800 women and 1,300 men committed 
suicide. Almost 50 percent of those who kill themselves are 10 
to 30 years old. 
  Last year 4,000 people killed themselves in Khorasan. 
Research and studies by physicians and sociologists at Mashhad 
University show that almost all these people were under heavy 
and unbearable economic pressure and were unable to manage their 
families. 
  A cleric from Mashhad said that economic pressures alienate 
a 
human being from God, and alienation from God makes suicide easy. 
  The supervisor of the toxicology ward at Emam Reza Hospital 
in Mashhad said the statistics on suicide in the province of 
Khorasan are very worrisome in terms of their numbers and 
motivation for doing so. Moreover, the number of people who are 
taking their own lives as a way out of economic and social 
problems is on the rise. Of the 4,000 people who killed 
themselves last year, 2,800 were women and 1,200 were men. These 
people used tranquilizers and chemical poisons to kill 
themselves, or immolated themselves. 
  Statistics from Khorasan's hospitals show that men are more 
determined about their decisions to kill themselves than women, 
because they usually do so in such a way under daily pressures 
that there is no way to save them. Research by the supervisor of 
the toxicology ward at Emam Reza Hospital has shown that 49 
percent of the suicides take place between the ages of 10 and 
30. Of these 4,000 people, 53 percent were married, 45 percent 
were single and 4 percent were divorced. A sad point, according 
to this doctor, is that a small number of the individuals who 
immolate themselves survive, but become depressed because of the 
changes in their bodies and faces. A sociologist at Ferdowsi 
University in Mashhad believes that these days, for reasons that 
are clear, suicides that were once done secretly are now done in 
the open. This professor emphasized that economic disruptions in 
societies such as Iran's cause these kinds of suicides. He 
warned the government that suicides take place when there is no 
other option, and this is the reason the number of suicides is 
increasing every day. 
  A judge in Khorasan said the reason for the increase in 
suicides is the lack of correspondence between incomes and 
costs. Of the 4,000 who killed themselves last year in Khorasan, 
74 percent had high school diplomas or less, 23 percent were 
illiterate, and 3 percent had studied in universities. Last year 
only 60 people who immolated themselves were taken to the 
accident ward at Mashhad's Qa'em Hospital. Of these, 98 percent 
were women, and unfortunately 99 percent of them died. 
  Hospital officials and Khorasan judges have said: Most of 
the 
self-immolations are done because of financial pressures, which 
are followed by family disputes. Many people in the province of 
Khorasan wonder how in a religious region in the country where 
religious beliefs are supposed to meet the spiritual and 
psychological needs of the people and give them peace of mind, 
the suicide rate is higher than in other parts of the country. 

