Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The crisis between the Air Force and the Defense 
Ministry resulting from the purchase of the 36 Skyhawk planes is 
jeopardizing the operation that represented the end of the U.S. 
weapons embargo imposed on Argentina. 
  Disagreements between the Air Force and the ministry headed 
by Oscar Camilion originated with the ministry's decision to 
assign the Lockheed company the task of repairing and 
electronically equipping the planes (half of them at the 
Military Aircraft Factory [FMA] in Cordoba). The ministry thus 
overlooked prior contracts for these services that already had 
been signed with the U.S. Navy and Smith Industries and the $3.3 
million that already had been paid to them. 
  Brigadier Juan Paulik, chief of staff of the Air Force, now 
is studying the possibility of suspending the purchase if 
Lockheed takes more than 23 months to deliver the planes or 
fails to equip them with the same electronics and radar 
equipment authorized by the U.S. Government. 
  Although the Defense Ministry decision has yet to be made 
official, Military Affairs Secretary Jorge Baeza on 14 February 
adopted a measure that made the decision evident: He forbade 
Brigadier Ruben Zini to travel to the United States before 
consulting Paulik. Zini's trip to the United States was 
contemplated in the prior contracts signed with the two selling 
companies. 
  Friction between the Air Force and the Defense Ministry is 
based on the purchase of 36 Skyhawk fighters and the difficulty 
in equipping them with high-technology radars, which was a 
result of British pressure on the United States to prevent 
Argentine military rearmament. 
  The government deemed the U.S. Navy's decision to sell the 
planes with the radar equipment Argentina had requested as a 
victory. After months of tough negotiations, the Argentine 
Government saw, with satisfaction, that the British pressure was 
rendered without effect. Minister Camilion elatedly said on 1 
February: "The weapons embargo is over." 
  The Air Force decision not to purchase the Skyhawks now 
would 
not only ruin an operation resulting from careful military, 
commercial, and diplomatic negotiations, but also destroy the 
political victory resulting from the U.S. Government decision to 
sell the Skyhawks with high-technology equipment. 
  This tension began last September when the Air Force and the 
Defense Ministry decided to give the U.S. Navy (which sells the 
planes) and Smith Industries the task of repairing the planes 
and equipping them with modern electronic equipment, at an 
overall cost of $250 million, which will be divided almost 
equally between the two. Thus, the Lockheed and McDonell-Douglas 
companies were left out of the deal. 
  Notwithstanding, by mid-January Lockheed made a tempting 
proposal: To buy FMA and transform it into a plane repair center 
for South America. In exchange, it demanded to be given the 
contract to repair and equip the Skyhawks, although it promised 
to perform 50 percent of the work at the FMA in Cordoba. 
  This proposal has divided the Defense Ministry and the Air 
Force. While Camilion's people support the Lockheed proposal 
with enthusiasm in view of the possibility of reactivating FMA, 
the Air Force bluntly refused it. 
  In a report handed to the ministry by Paulik the proposal is 
rejected for many reasons. Here are some of them: 
  -- The planes' delivery will be delayed two years longer 
than 
planned if they are repaired and equipped in Cordoba. 
  -- Confidence in the materials used in the Cordoba plant 
will 
be less. 
  -- A landing strip for the Skyhawks will have to be built at 
the Cordoba plant because it does not have one. 
  In addition, the Air Force is concerned about its future 
relations with the [U.S.] Navy. According to Paulik's report, 
the Air Force will lose credibility if it goes back on something 
already agreed upon. 

