CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Marat Salimov: "Briefing of the Association of </F>
Joint Ventures. The State May Take Back Its Words"] 
  [Text] At a news conference of the Association of 
Joint Ventures, International Associations and Organizations 
(ASP MOO) held yesterday it was announced that foreign investors 
are raising doubts about the possibility of continuing to 
operate in the Russian market. This reaction followed the 
introduction by the State Tax Service of fees collected from 
joint ventures for the utilization of phrases that contain 
phrases with words derived from the word Rossiya [Russia]. 
  This financial obligation was placed on joint ventures by 
the 
State Tax Service on the basis of the Law "On the Fee for 
Utilization of the Names 'Russia,' 'Russian Federation,' and 
Words and Phrases Based on Them," which took effect in 1993. 
Initially the fees were imposed on enterprises using these words 
and phrases as a private name. But in a letter of 14 February 
the State Tax Service made it incumbent on regional tax 
inspectorates to collect the fee from all joint ventures, since 
their registration documents where it indicates the country to 
which the enterprise belongs contain words derived from the word 
Russia. Further, so that no confusion will arise, the State Tax 
Service explained after the fact (28 March) that the fees are 
being collected from joint ventures because the rule concerning 
the use of phrases including the words "Russia" and "Russian 
Federation" as a private name had been abolished by it. 
Moreover, in addition to payment of fees for 1993, a fine of 
three times the amount of the sum of the fees was imposed on 
joint ventures. Typically, all these actions of the State Tax 
Service were approved by the Ministry of Finance. 
  The leadership of the ASP MOO was able to arrange a meeting 
with representatives of the government in which they discussed 
the question of the legality and expediency of establishing the 
fees. As a result of the conference held yesterday in the 
government with the participation of representatives of the 
association, a decision was adopted to consider the 
justification for the collection of these fees. The instructions 
of the government commission that has jurisdiction over these 
questions was signed by Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandr Shokhin. 
Nonetheless, the time periods for overriding the decisions of 
the State Tax Service are still uncertain. At the news 
conference held by the ASP MOO after the government conference 
its leaders characterized the establishment of fees from joint 
ventures as "unprecedented and extortionate." In particular, 
after the directive from the Russian Tax Service, one of the 
largest joint ventures, Leninvest, was presented with a bill for 
a total of 600 million rubles. As the executive vice president 
of ASP MOO, Aleksandr Pavlyukov, said at the news conference, 
this kind of interpretation of the laws by the departments and 
the very nature of the application and introduction of executive 
acts "caused shock" among the foreign founders of all joint 
ventures. In his words, which sounded like the harshest warning, 
"If as a result of the deterioration of the investment climate 
in Russia the activity of the joint ventures is curtailed, this 
will entail a reduction of jobs and will completely halt the 
influx of foreign capital." 

