Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ester Marlene Amaya: ``According to a Current </F>
Study by DIMA, 20 Industries are Contaminating Rivers With Their 
Wastes''] 
  [Text] San Pedro Sula--Based on the results of a new study 
of the protection and management of water resources that has 
been carried out over the past six months by the Municipal Water 
Division (DIMA), the new mayor of the city will have to take 
measures regarding the contamination caused by a number of 
industries that discard their untreated solid wastes into rivers. 
  During the televised forum in which the candidates for the 
San Pedro Sula mayorship participated, the subject of industrial 
contamination was examined in greater depth by Nationalist 
candidate Samuel Bogran. 
  Bogran revealed that industry is contaminating all of the 
natural water courses around San Pedro Sula, causing eight times 
more contamination than the entire population of the city could 
cause with its solid wastes. 
  He said that four of the industries alone produce twice the 
contamination that could be caused by the entire population of 
San Pedro Sula. 
  Liberal candidate Luis Garcia Bustamente said that his 
platform for governing called for the installation of treatment 
plants for residual waters. 
  Based on a preliminary study conducted by DIMA, in 1991 the 
municipality of San Pedro Sula passed an ordinance that 
requested businessmen whose firms discarded wastes into the 
Bermejo, Blanco, and Sauce Rivers to seek ways to treat those 
wastes in order not to contaminate the rivers. 
  DIMA's technical manager, engineer Jose Tulio Gomez, said 
that in addition to industrial wastes, the rivers are also 
contaminated by human waste, and diesel and petroleum residues 
discarded by a number of factories. 
  Businessmen have indicated that investment in treatment 
plants involves high costs, and for this reason the directors of 
the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Cortes (CCIC) have met 
with citizens and with Mayor Hector Guillen, to seek a 
coordinated solution to the problem. 
  In addition, Gomez said that according to the results of the 
study that includes a plan for inspection of residual waters, 
the new mayor will have to define the measures to be 
implemented, taking into account that the new law on the 
environment is more specific on the subject, as is the sanitary 
code. 
  Gomez said that the current study on the protection and 
management of water resources will be completed in January 1994. 
  The study is being conducted by the firms Hazen and 
Sawyer-Saibe and Associates, at a cost of $2.5 million financed 
by the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). 
  Gomez said that 20 kinds of industry (dairy, plastics, 
tanning, paint, etc.) typically discard their industrial wastes 
into rivers. 
  He explained that at the moment the study does not propose 
solutions because it is not completed, and what exists so far is 
a preliminary report. 
  In past years DIMA has produced other studies of liquid 
industrial wastes, one at a cost of $30,000 and another for 
100,000 lempiras. 
  These studies indicate that industrial discharges into the 
Blanco, Sauce, and Bermejo Rivers have a very high organic 
content, as well as metals and acids. 
  The master plan for potable water, still under preparation, 
provides for the construction of a residual water treatment 
plant for the city, but industry must meet certain standards so 
that the plant does not incur higher costs and, as a result, 
cause higher fees for users. 
  According to DIMA, the plant is expected to begin operation 
in the year 2000, and a study is now being completed that will 
be presented to the IDB with a loan request. 

