Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article entitled "Inspection of Rupture of Negotiations </F>
Between Japan and U.S.; Foreign Ministry's 'Internal 
Disruption'"] 
  [Text] When the talks between Tsutomu Hata, foreign 
minister and concurrently deputy prime minister, and Mickey 
Kantor, U.S. Trade Representative (USTR), were called off at 
0400 on 11 February immediately before the Japan-U.S. summit 
talks held in Washington, Takakazu Kuriyama, Japanese Ambassador 
to the United States, offered his resignation to Hata, saying "I 
shall resign." It was a moment when a de facto decision was 
made to announce the rupture of the comprehensive economic talks 
at the summit, which was to start a few hours later. 
  Foreign Minister Hata, who arrived in Washington on 10 
February to break the negotiations deadlock, started the final 
negotiations at the USTR Office. The first meeting started in 
the morning [of 10 February] followed by two more meetings. 
They lasted seven hours in total. However, the third meeting 
between Hata and Kantor started at 0100 on 11 February, but both 
sides were unable to reach an agreement over the numerical 
target issue. 
  At 0300, USTR Kantor called for a meeting with Foreign 
Minister Hata alone. Only Hata and Koichiro Matsuura, deputy 
vice foreign minister of foreign affairs who is in charge of 
working-level negotiations, remained at the negotiation table. 
Other negotiators of the Foreign Ministry, Finance Ministry, 
and the Ministry of International Trade and Industry left the 
room. Heated debate continued between USTR Kantor, W. Bowman 
Cutter -- deputy assistant to the President -- Foreign Minister 
Hata, and Matsuura. 
  Japanese bureaucrats were worried that "Hata may resign" 
because Kantor's demands were very severe. Foreign Minister 
Hata returned to Blair House, where he was staying, after the 
heated debate and explained the outcome of the one-hour debate 
to the negotiators of the three ministries. 
  Sad-looking Ambassador Kuriyama drew the negotiators' 
attention. He called after Foreign Minister Hata, who was on his 
way to his room after the explanation session, and asked the 
latter if he should resign. Foreign Minister Hata strongly 
dissuaded Kuriyama from resigning, saying that "there is no need 
for you to resign." 
  Some concerned people point out that the United States took 
the strong stand at the final phase of the negotiations because 
it though that Japan would change its mind and compromise. This 
idea had taken a hold on the United States due to the fact that 
Foreign Minister Hata arrived in Washington one day earlier than 
originally scheduled. 
  When he talked with U.S. Ambassador to Japan Walter Mondale 
in Tokyo in the evening of 7 February, Foreign Minister Hata 
said: "It is necessary to make a compromise to conclude the 
negotiations." The United States took this as an indication that 
Japan would compromise regarding the numerical target issue. In 
addition, Foreign Minister Hata came to Washington one day early. 
  The foreign minister himself did not like the idea of 
visiting the United States. He did not think the negotiations 
would be successfully concluded if he went to the United States 
without a compromise plan. It was Deputy Foreign Minister 
Kunihiko Saito who asked Foreign Minister Hata to visit the 
United States. 
  Opinions were divided in the Foreign Ministry. At a working- 
level meeting held in mid-January in Washington, Ambassador 
Kuriyama insisted on his view that "since the United States is 
becoming flexible, Japan should not smear salt on a wound." He 
was saying that Japan may need to flexibly deal with the issue 
of numerical target. However, the negotiators took an opposite 
stand. 
  In late January, Ambassador Kuriyama came home and met with 
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and advised the latter to make 
a compromise. Around this time, the Foreign Ministry was 
divided into a group that supported a compromise plan and one of 
hard-liners. Deputy Foreign Minister Saito's view was getting 
close to Ambassador Kuriyama's. A senior Foreign Ministry 
official, who was of the opinion that Japan should refuse to 
accept the numerical target, disclosed to a senior official of 
other ministries that "we are being attacked by other members of 
our ministry." 
  Some people analyze the situation thusly: "It is possible 
that the Foreign Ministry group in favor of making a compromise 
sent Hata to Washington, secretly hoping that Japan would accept 
the numerical target." We cannot deny that the Foreign Ministry 
"split" had some impact on the negotiations. 

