Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Leonid Repin, commentator, under the title: RA </F>
Virus With Yellow Eyes: You Haven't Heard of This Disease, But 
by the Way, More Than 10 Million Russians Are Infected With It] 
  [Text] Two types of hepatitis, B and C, bearing frankly 
mortal danger for man, having been growing here into an enormous 
problem: according to the calculations of specialists, more than 
10 million Russians are infected with hepatitis C, and it can be 
supposed - in fact no one knows this precisely - many more are 
infected with hepatitis B. It is the agent of this disease in 
particular that is more widespread than of all the other 
hepatitis, and it is, into the bargain, more dangerous: it is 
following hepatitis B in particular that cancer frequently 
develops, to an even greater degree than from hepatitis C. If 
one looks at the problem from opposite perspective, it turns out 
that the virus of hepatitis C is found in ninety per cent of 
patients with cirrhosis and cancer of the liver. 
  The situation is complicated by the fact that the majority 
of 
oncological patients are also treated, among other methods, by 
means of the scalpel and are transfused with donated blood, and 
that no one can state with certainty that ill-fated hepatitis is 
not introduced into these patients with this blood, because here 
we do not carry out such investigations. If that is the case, 
and most likely it is the case, then frequently operated 
oncological patients die not of the cancer, but of subsequent 
complications like acute hepatic insufficiency. 
  But, after all, that's how matters turn... It's not 
accidental, however, that hepatitis C in particular is more and 
more often called the plague of the twentieth century. Not AIDS, 
but this cursed hepatitis of ours. 
  The Americans were the first to become alarmed and to take 
up 
the struggle against hepatitis C in a concerted manner. They 
developed and began to produce diagnostic preparations to 
identify cases of hepatitis C; it was they who carried out the 
first mass surveys. The result proved staggering: 85 per cent of 
patients with chronic hepatitis had acquired the ubiquitous 
virus following blood transfusion. 
  The problem in our country has become especially acute. 
About 
22 million doses of blood were given in the last year of the 
existence of the USSR. That means that there should have been an 
equal number of analyses. Even if it is assumed that one 
analysis costs a dollar, while in fact is it is more expensive, 
it is not difficult to imagine how much such analyses for the 
hepatitis C content would cost. Understandably, we did not do 
such analyses, and indeed, they are not done now. I donUt know, 
perhaps they are in special, exceptional cases. But it is 
necessary to do them! If for no other reason than otherwise the 
consequences will be unpredictable. 
  People who, by the very character of their work, know the 
nature of the hepatitis virus transmitted with blood, are 
ringing the alarm, attempting to attract attention to the mortal 
danger lurking in the shadows of many other problems. Oncologist 
Professor G. A. Tkacheva, analyzing the pathways along which the 
hepatitis C virus reaches the organs of healthy people, 
concludes: about 60 million people pass through Russia's medical 
hospitals a year. People who is operated on and transfused with 
blood are treated conservatively. But they must all be 
administered drugs intravenously. And that is the path of 
infection. 
  All else aside, the trouble lies in the fact that even the 
acute forms of hepatitis very often progress with weakly 
manifested symptoms, and therefore many cases remain totally 
unrecognized. Someone is sick, and gravely sick, and no one 
knows why. 
  This alarming situation is aggravated also by the fact that 
this virus is transmitted not only through every possible 
medical manipulation, but by sexual intimacy as well, like the 
AIDS virus, and even through the most ordinary social contacts 
between people. So you see the kind of disaster... 
  So, is there no rescue? Specialists believe that a national 
program of unreserved examination of donor blood and of all 
blood going into the preparation of every possible type of 
pharmaceutical, of all patients subjected to contact with needle 
and scalpel, of all pregnant women and all children -is the only 
way the chameleon virus can be conquered. 
  It stands to reason, the creation of the domestic 
manufacture 
of diagnostic preparations must be provided for in this program. 
Otherwise, after all, we are preferring to pay insane amounts of 
money to foreign firms for ready-made preparations, and are 
therefore condemned to buy them into the future, instead of 
organizing our own production. 
  My old, good friend, Corresponding Member of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Professor M. S. Balayan, who has been 
dealing with the hepatitis all his life, and has carried out an 
extremely dangerous experiment on himself, nevertheless confided 
to me with a smile: Perhaps we shouldn't panic. Although, of 
course, all that is so, all that is correct - the danger is 
great. Just consider the fact that in the last ten years about 
fifteen previously unknown infections have come to light. It is 
normal that they come to light. What is abnormal is that we 
begin to combat them late. 
  Yes, in fact he and I recall together: an unknown bacterial 
disease had suddenly broken out, striking down the majority of 
the participants of a Congress of Legionnaires who had gathered 
not so long ago in the US. Thus it was called Legionnaires 
disease. Vilyuisk encephalomyelitis, unknown to science, a 
terrible, slow infection, inexorably destroying the brain, was 
discovered in this country. They learned to treat Legionnaires 
disease; the Vilyuisk disease has remained a riddle. But it has 
not attempted to extend its boundaries. Hepatitis, on the other 
hand, runs about, raging wildly throughout the entire 
unprotected land. 
  That, you see, is the kind of danger it is. 


