CSO 

<F P=106> [Meeting of Commander-in-Chief Baltic Fleet Admiral </F>
Vladimir Yegorov aboard destroyer Nastoychivyy with ship 
officers not long before service holiday; prepared for press by 
Captain 2nd Rank Yu. Golovin, Baltic Fleet Press Center under 
rubric "From the Horse's Mouth": "Admiral Vladimir Yegorov: I 
Wish You Loyalty"] 
  [Text] Not long before today's holiday there was a 
meeting of Commander-in-Chief Baltic Fleet Admiral V. Yegorov 
with ship officers in the wardroom of the destroyer 
Nastoychivyy. It would appear that the not at all holiday-like 
questions raised during this frank conversation trouble more 
than just its participants... 
  [Audience] Prestige of personnel afloat... It has been 
discussed for a very long time. At one time fleet newspapers 
even started a special rubric, but things did not go beyond 
discussions: It continues to be much more "prestigious" to serve 
ashore than on ships. Is there a hope that the situation finally 
will change? 
  [Yegorov] I am sometimes reproached because of the 
personnel afloat, whose interests of course are paramount. You, 
they say, still are forgetting the personnel ashore... But the 
fact is that as of today there are more than a thousand homeless 
among the ship element. With those housing crumbs we have in the 
Baltic it is very difficult to say how to observe parity in 
distributing it. My position is invariable: The priority must 
remain with personnel afloat. Believe me, this position is 
present in all decisions which I have to make, for if there are 
no ships, there also will be no fleet... 
  Recently, I together with an interdepartmental commission 
headed by Vice Premier Yu. F. Yarov prepared a government 
program with all adjusted figures for construction of housing in 
Kaliningrad Oblast both for the Fleet as well as for the 11th 
Guards Army and a border guard group. Supporting this three-year 
program requires R700 billion in current prices. We are not 
figuring on being allocated such money right away, but even 
one-third would be enough to correct the state of affairs, and 
very significantly. This is the main question for officers and 
warrant officers of ships and staffs of formations afloat. If 
there is a roof over the head, I am sure that service also will 
be normal. 
  I must say that much also depends on you yourselves in 
maintaining and elevating your prestige. Recently, for example, 
I met a young ship's officer who had not gone on leave for 1993. 
Was it really difficult to release him from the ship in good 
time as prescribed? The fact is that today a leave probably is 
one of the few things that supports a person on a ship in 
service, in health, and in contact with the family. One must be 
very attentive to each commander in such questions. If an 
officer has gone on leave, let him rest as prescribed; if he has 
gone ashore, give him the assurance that he will not be called 
except in an emergency. Of course, feedback is needed here as 
well: Each ship's officer must give his commander the assurance 
that he too will not let him down. 
  In short, a genuine ship's family should behave in a family 
way... Especially now. 
  [Audience] Ships need to sail. The professionalism of 
each specialist, the cohesiveness of the crew as a whole, and 
that same question of material support and the prestige of our 
service depend on this. Of course, a ship's long deployment, 
especially for one as large as ours, costs the state dearly. 
Nevertheless, how often will we see the sea this year? 
  [Yegorov] A very important question, and it was 
posed for the chief of the Navy Main Staff during his visit to 
our Fleet. Admiral V. Ye. Selivanov personally named the ships 
which must be sent on combat duty and sent to perform missions 
of official visits. Our counterproposals also were briefed to 
him. One was to send a group of ships to the Northern Fleet for 
an exchange of experience and joint performance of missions. 
This version is fully realistic. Participation of our ships -- 
and under the full program -- in joint Exercise Baltops-94 as 
well as official visits to ports of Belgium and Finland also is 
planned. 
  So you can be sure that my position and that of the Fleet 
Military Council unequivocally coincides with yours: Ships must 
be on long deployments as often as possible, no matter how 
serious the economic situation. We will take advantage of all 
opportunities for this. 
  [Audience] Things are very difficult today with the 
manning of ships and units. Are there hopes for their 
improvement? 
  [Yegorov] The Fleet now is at 65 percent strength 
in authorized first-term positions, and this is double that of 
our Army colleagues. It is of course difficult to compare, 
inasmuch as our specifics differ. Nevertheless, it is possible 
to draw some kind of practical conclusions. One is that 
appropriate positions in our shore units must be manned by women 
on a contract basis and the seamen and petty officers freed up 
from this must be sent aboard ships. And the priority here will 
be given to ships specifically of your formation so they can 
properly maintain technical readiness and perform missions at 
sea. 
  The second path of manpower acquisition is to increase 
contract recruitment for ships. Already today contract personnel 
make up 25 percent of first-term personnel. It is no easy task 
to surround these people with proper attention. The main 
question is where and how are they to live? We can offer them 
nothing for now other than a cabin or crew space. This means we 
must give the contract personnel an opportunity for normal rest 
and normal liberty, but many commanders are not even doing this. 
They are afraid, they say, that the seaman will use the freedom 
clumsily and get drunk... That also happens, but you must 
understand that with all the costs, we must force this new 
institution to live. Remember 1975 for comparison, when warrant 
officers began coming to replace extended-term personnel. Then, 
too, there was much skepticism and even egging on. But the time 
came when they got on their feet and subsequently, including 
also today, turned out to be the most stable part of Fleet 
cadres. Now, for example, we are at 75 percent strength in 
warrant officers. 
  All this experience also must be transferred to work with 
contract personnel, giving special attention to seamen being 
discharged to the reserve. With consideration of removal of 
deferments from certain categories of the draft contingent, we 
are confident that we have the opportunity to improve manning 
significantly. 
  [Audience] More and more often one has occasion to read 
and hear questions such as the following: Inasmuch as the 
military-political situation in the world as a whole and in 
Europe in particular has changed, is it advisable today for 
Russia to have large ships at all here in the Baltic?.. 
  [Yegorov] The situation really has changed. For 
Russia these changes also affected the basing of Fleet forces in 
a most serious manner. We are moving to that minimum which, in 
accordance with the new military doctrine, would allow ensuring 
state interests in the Baltic Sea. Do not forget that favorable 
periods such as the present do not always happen... And the 
defense of Russian borders from sea sectors can be provided only 
by a fleet, especially in the Baltic, inasmuch as our borders 
here now have been moved back. And in contrast to the previous 
status of defense, it is specifically the ships that also are 
given the mission of covering our borders from the air... 
  And after that, genuine fleet service specifically begins 
with shipboard service, with service on 2nd and 1st rank ships; 
our ships cannot and must not limit their functions to 
deployments only in the Baltic Sea... 
  So Russia cannot get by here from any standpoint without 
large ships. 
  Take note: In all the talks on arms and armed forces, the 
Americans, for example, simply exclude their naval forces from 
discussion. They say that the Navy for us is the very same as 
railroads for you in Russia. But we will not forget that Russia 
also was and remains a great naval power, and I am deeply 
convinced that this difficult time will pass and the Russian 
Navy will take its fitting place, for the Navy always was the 
quintessence of the nation. 
  [Audience] If one looks at how much money is being 
allocated for laying down and building new ships and equipment, 
there are few grounds for such optimism... 
  [Yegorov] Funds for maintaining and developing the 
military-industrial complex really are insufficient, especially 
if we compare them with previous times. But there also is no 
longer that gap which existed in 1992... Financing is growing. 
Most important, in my view an understanding already has formed 
"on top" that if we let it go today, we never again will make up 
for it. 
  So I remain an optimist, and I am not the only one, judging 
from the fact that submission of requests by officers to be 
discharged to the reserve practically has stopped... I would 
like to thank you, too, that you are preserving loyalty to your 
profession, to your ship and to our flag. Without this loyalty 
we would not have been able to safeguard the backbone of the 
Fleet. I hope that our officers and warrant officers will 
preserve this loyalty tomorrow as well. I wish you this 
specifically. 

