Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text]A group including professor Go Endo and assistant 
professor Tomiki Ikeda, Resource Chemistry Laboratory, Tokyo 
Institute of Technology, and Akihiko Kanezawa, Japan Chemical 
Industry Association, have synthesized a new cation type 
antibacterial agent. The new antibacterial agent is a 
phosphonium salt polymer with long alkyl group side chains. 
Researchers have confirmed that it is more potent than the 
quaternary ammonium salt polymers that are currently in use, it 
kills bacteria rapidly, and it has high heat resistance. Because 
cation antibacterial agents are also effective against MRSA 
(methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus), the 
group will proceed with applied research for use of this polymer 
as an antibacterial material. 
  Cation antibacterial agents have received attention in 
recent 
years because of problems with infections spreading inside 
hospitals. Currently quaternary ammonium salt compounds are 
widely used because of their effective antibacterial action, 
etc. The structures of these compounds feature a dimethyl or 
trimethyl core with long alkyl group side chains, and it is 
believed that the long chain alkyl groups play an important role 
in antibacterial activity. 
  Professor Endo's group began research on the antibacterial 
action of phosphonium salt polymers with structures containing 
trialkyl phosphonium salts as their side chains. They based 
their study on their knowledge of phosphorus from research on 
epoxy hardening agents and on assistant professor Ikeda's 
research on antibacterial action. Their experiments confirmed 
antibacterial action of phosphonium salts. 
  They synthesized phosphonium salts (see diagram) by taking a 
long chain alkyl dimethylphosphine, which was formed by a new 
method, as a starting material and synthesizing a methyl 
chloride (1), by using chloromethylstyrene and ethylbenzyl 
chloride monomers to form a polymer (2), and by synthesizing a 
model compound (3). 


  In the CD software market for home use, a wide range of 
applications is seen not only in simple full motion playback but 
also in music software combining FMV and still pictures, 
education, and electronic publishing. In order to interface with 
this software group, the 704x480 pixel high resolution still 
picture playback specification, and playback control were added 
to the playback menu. 



  Table 1. Video CD Specifications 

Physical Format                            CD-ROM (XA) 

Digital Video                              MPEG 1 Based 

Pixel Dimension (Number of Pixels) / 
Frame 

Frequencies: 

352x240/29.97Hz (NTSC) 

352x240/23.976Hz (Film) 

352x288/25Hz (PAL) 

Data Transmission Speed: 

Maximum 1.152 M bit/second 

Video Pack: 2296 byte 

Digital Audio                              MPEG 1 Layer II 

Sampling Frequency : 44.1 Khz 

Data Transmission Speed: 224 k 
bit/second 

Audio Pack: 2279 byte 

Playback Time                              Maximum 74 minutes 

Number of Pixels of Still Picture          Standard level: 352 x 240 

High Resolution Level: 704 x 480 

Playback Specification                     Regular Playback, Slow, Pause, 
                                           etc. 

Menu playback Using Playback Control 

Video signal output                        NTSC/PAL 

Applications                               Movies, Karaoke, Music, Education, 
                                           Photo Album 


  Figure 2 shows a block diagram of the CD player. The 
complicated OS part is eliminated, and by adding a MPEG chip and 
RAM to the CD player, the hardware was organized so as to make 
it possible to create an inexpensive player including various 
models such as a radio-cassette player. 


  Since the purpose of Video CD is to explore the home market, 
it is important for it to be compatible with existing CD-I FMV. 
Continuity and compatibility with existing products is 
maintained by bridging the regulations and enabling playback on 
a CD-I FMV player. 
  Furthermore, the Video CD regulation is different from that 
of CD-I. Since the OS is not specified, a personal computer or 
game computer with an MPEG animation board can be used. 
  Video CD disks can be manufactured at existing CD factories. 
The manufacturing cost is less than that of tape, and large 
scale duplication is easy. Business functions have already been 
established and range from a rich resource of video software, 
disk manufacturing, and sales, to distribution. By preparing for 
an MPEG encoder necessary for the production of software, new 
disk media for video playback with music software will become 
feasible. 
<H5>  Establish Memory Area For Disk Information </H5>
  The CD organization for Video CD, is based on the form 1 
specification of CD-ROM XA. File management follows the ISO 9660 
format. 
  The disk memory area roughly consists of read-in block, data 
block (track 1-99), and read-out block. The video CD information 
block (INF VCD), which is new, was added at this time. In this 
block disk information is recorded. Full motion and still 
picture IDs recorded on the disk are stored in the list, which 
is the ID offset table (LOT) located in that block. The playback 
procedure is recorded with a list of descriptive forms in 
playback control (PBC). It became possible to write data in the 
segment play area for still pictures used for the screen menu. 



  CD-I application software is also established. When the disk 
regulated by the Video CD is played back by a CD-I FMV player, 
the player first reads this part, and playback is processed 
according to the procedure specified by the application. If 
directory management is necessary as in the case of a personal 
computer, the file is managed according to the file structure 
shown in figure 4. 



  Usual MPEG data is recorded in track 2 or a later track. A 
maximum of 99 tracks can be used. However, in the case of Video 
CD, it is possible to playback high resolution still pictures 
using only track 1, rather than using simple interactive 
software utilizing playback control. 
<H5>  FMV And Voice Recording Based On MPEG 1 </H5>
  Full motion Video CD and audio signal recording formats are 
based on MPEG 1; 1.2M bit/second for video and 0.2 M bit/second 
for audio were assigned. Screen dimensions are: 352x240 pixels 
in the case of NTSC (30 Hz), and film (24 Hz); and 352 x 288 
pixels for PAL (25 Hz). Image quality will be almost the same as 
the home VHS video. 



  If a player with NTSC specification is used to playback a 
Video CD disk with PAL specification, then about 20 lines are 
lost. If an NTSC disk is played back with a PAL player then a 
black band will appear on the top and bottom of the screen. 
Also, in the specification this time, the ratio of horizontal to 
vertical lines is 4 : 3, suitable for regular TV reception, and 
it is hard to say if it will be suitable for 16 : 9 wide screen 
TV. This problem will be a future topic to study. 
  The audio format of Video CD uses MPEG1 layer II. MPEG audio 
can interface with a wide range of high speed encoding from 32 k 
bit/second to 448 k bit/second. Considering simple software 
production and high quality sound, the speed is limited to 224k 
bit/second. Playback mode is stereo (2 channels). It is also 
suitable for Karaoke software enabling Channel 0 for music 
recording, and channel 1 for music and songs. 
  Figure 6 shows the organization of the Video CD tracks. The 
MPEG video MPEG and audio data are stored with interleave on the 
disk, and set with a ratio of 6 : 1 on average. Assuming a 
search by track number just like existing CD players, there is a 
front and rear margin of 15 sectors and a pause margin of 150 
sectors. This is done so to reduce the influence of the bit 
stream when searching. 



  As seen in figure 7, the MPEG video sector format consists 
of a pack header and pack data. One pack is 2324 bytes which is 
1 sector of a user data block in a CD-ROM. 



  The MPEG audio sector format is basically the same as that 
of video. However 12 bytes are a pack header, 13 bytes are a 
packet header, and 2279 bytes are allocated to data and with the 
left over 20 bytes (record 0) added make 2324 bytes as one pack. 
<H5>  Simple Interactive Software Realized </H5>
  Interactive playback of FMV and still pictures on the Video 
CD is realized by a function called playback control. Figure 8 
shows an example of playback using this feature. The example 
shows the possibility of simple branch playback by preparing 
several menus of still pictures in the segment play area of 
track 1 and combining the MPEG FMV and still pictures stored on 
or after track 2. 



  [Text] Playback control is also called play sequence 
descriptor, 
and branching playback procedures are listed descriptively. 
There are play lists and selection lists in playback control. 
The full motion playback procedure is described in the section 
list, and the menu playback procedure is described in the 
selection list. Access the desired full motion or still picture 
data by following the playback control function here, the 
address of the full motion and still picture stored in the list 
ID offset table (LOT) should be referenced. The size of the 
control data necessary to realize the playback control function 
is about 512K bytes maximum. 
<H5>  Toward ``General Video'' Era </H5>
  The best characteristic of the Video CD regulation this time 
is to be able to provide consumers with an inexpensive playback 
function as well as rich video software in form of CD by 
utilizing the existing huge CD industrial base. If a real time 
encoder is available, then production of video software using 
CD-R, which can add descriptions and can record once, will be 
possible. The era of ``General Video'' in which people enjoy 
digital video comfortably and easily will have arrived. 
  The CD Video is expected to be used in various fields once 
the market is penetrated successfully, which will be in 1994. 
The contribution of those people who helped to establish the 
Video CD regulations is appreciated. 

