BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS analyst Mikhail Krushinskiy] </F>
  [Text] Moscow June 20 TASS -- The first stage of the big 
sell-off in Russia has entered the home stretch. From June 1 
[as received], the so-called voucher privatisation will 
automatically switch to privatisation for ready money. This 
poses serious problems for Russians and encourages some of them 
to heightened activity. 
  The majority, those who have already acquired portions of 
the 
national wealth in exchange for vouchers, are in suspense 
because only trade in shares for money will make clear the real 
price of what they have acquired. Not all of them have a clear 
idea of the functioning of the market mechanism. Hence, 
confusion and disappointment of those who see security as a 
source of certain mandatory and steady income. The simple fact 
that the loss-making enterprises will never give any dividends 
to the holders of their shares can become a source of serious 
social tension. 
  The minority, those who have not yet invested their vouchers 
and not sold them for cash, are no less tense. True, official 
sources keep encouraging the hope that the exchange rate of the 
voucher is likely to jump soon on the anticipation of the 
"choice morsels" being put on the bloc on the last voucher 
auctions. The common sense prompts however that if on July 1 
the price of the voucher will equal nil, the day before it must 
be very close to nil. The only help the late-comers can count 
on is that the voucher stage will be prolonged, but this hope is 
growing less and less with every passing day. 
  The most serious tests will have to be taken and passed by 
the direct participants in the upcoming "big-time game", 
entities on the domestic stock market. It has hardly taken 
shape and looks like forest path minutes before powerful motor 
vehicle are due to begin their onward march along it. Russia 
has a few dozens of stock markets, all of which are presumably 
ready to receive the swelling tide of securities but have very 
few experienced stock market dealers and brokers, not enough 
floor space and offices, no more than a trickle of financial 
resources and virtually no modern technical equipment at all. 
As a result, trading in shares of privitised enterprises will 
inevitably spill out onto the streets and be carried out in 
wild, uncivilised forms. Some people will probably snatch and 
run, others will feel deceived, and altogether will hardly feel 
secure. 
  In developed market economies trading in securities is 
seldom 
associated with their physical movement. They are usually kept 
in specialised depositories and when a deal is struck, the only 
thing that changes is a record in the electronic memory. All 
stock markets are interlinked with a system of modem and 
computer communication, which enables the client to buy or sell 
his shares wherever he or she may be at the moment, free of any 
fear of deception. Russia with its vast expanses needs such a 
system more than any other country. Will it create a system of 
this kind in foreseeable future. 
  Quite possible, according to Sergey Kravchuk, vice-president 
of Moscow's central stock market. But this will require a 
serious support on the part of the state, particularly at the 
outset. The stock markets themselves, which, as is known, are 
non-profit organisations, will be unable to cope with this heavy 
financial load on their own. There is no point in counting on 
the dissociated participants in the stock market who are only 
keen, quite naturally, on their own profit. 
  Mr. Kravchuk bemoans the fact that Russia has yet to pass a 
law on the securities market. The only regulatory enactment on 
which the stock markets can rely is the government resolution 
dated December 1991 and covering only shares and bonds, and 
saying nothing about promissory notes, cheques and other 
securities. A draft law on securities was recently drawn up by 
the Central Bank, and an alternative draft was worked out by the 
Russian Union of Stock Markets. But it will take time for the 
parliament to consider the drafts, while only ten days remain 
before the "D-Day" on which the "voucher dam" is scheduled to 
fall. 
  The legislative vacuum will be at least partially filled by 
a 
presidential decree, which is expected to be published one of 
these days. It remains to be regretted that Russia is again 
coming up to an important turning point in its economic reform 
without due preparation. 

