BFN 

<F P=106> ["hll" report: "SPD Wants to Be `Protective Power'"] </F>
  [Text] Bonn, 18 March -- In their draft of a government 
program, which was presented on Friday [18 March], the Social 
Democrats present themselves as a "strong protective power" for 
the social interests of families and for those at a material 
disadvantage, in particular in eastern Germany. In addition, 
they announce that they will act against disturbances of 
peaceful coexistence with "determination and consistency." 
  In order to combat organized crime, the Social Democratic 
Party of Germany [SPD] wants to have assets impounded if there 
"is the urgent and justified suspicion that they come from 
serious crime or are to be used for such crimes, unless the 
owner proves the opposite." If all other methods fail, the 
authorities "must have the right to mount microphones in 
apartments and to record conversations," which, however, is to 
be linked with strict preconditions. 
  The SPD also wants to "strengthen the presence of police in 
streets and squares." Combating right-wing extremism as well as 
the integration of foreigners are cited as focal issues. 
  Regarding energy policy, the draft program sticks to the 
goal 
of opting out of nuclear energy, but it does not give a schedule 
for it: "We want to set a course toward opting out of nuclear 
energy by replacing the nuclear law with a further developed law 
on opting out of nuclear energy." Just as the current coalition 
government, the SPD wants to reduce the emission of carbon 
dioxide by one-fourth by the year 2005. German hard coal and 
brown coal are to be used as ongoing energy supplies and the use 
of hard coal is to be financially secured also beyond the year 
2000. 
  As for foreign policy, Germany's co-responsibility for 
worldwide problems is stressed under the keyword "partnership 
for development and peace." The draft notes: "No Bundeswehr 
participation in wars" but only in peacekeeping and humanitarian 
missions. It demands "restrictive European arms export 
controls." Europe must become an "environmental and social 
union." 
  The government program will be finally adopted by the SPD 
congress in Halle on 22 June. The authors of the draft, the 
size of which has doubled compared with earlier versions, are 
convinced that the majority of the party agrees with their 
statements. 

