Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Damascus -- AL-THAWRAH -- Statistics from the 
Planning Directorate at the Ministry of Tourism have confirmed 
that the number of tourists who came to Syria in 1993 reached 
1.91 million; an increase of 10 percent over 1992 when the 
number of tourists reached 1.74 million. 
  A spokesman for the directorate said the number of tourists 
this year is expected to exceed two million, judging by the 
current figures, which is considered a positive indicator of the 
development of Syrian tourism. 
  The spokesman added that facilities given to all visitors in 
the form of simplified entry and exit procedures and greater 
latitude in bringing in and taking out currencies, have played a 
major role in increasing the number of tourists, especially Arab 
tourists whose number reached 1.42 million. Arab tourists are 
given the same treatment as Syrians since they do not require 
entry visas, as in the case of foreign nationals, and they also 
enjoy the right of residence and ownership. 
  The spokesman added that proper preparations for the tourist 
season have also had a great effect. The Ministry of Tourism, 
in cooperation with the competent quarters, has made up for all 
shortages and has met the needs of tourists and visitors of all 
nationalities. The number of beds in Syrian hotels now exceeds 
30,000. This is in addition to 8,000 beds in summer camps 
catering to internal tourism, and 20,000 beds in villas and 
furnished apartments. 
  The spokesman said that, due to its richness in beauty and 
history, Syria has become a great tourist resort and a vast 
museum visited by people from all over the world. There has 
also been progress in all aspects of life. In addition to the 
improvement in the hotel industry, Syria has been active in 
other fields as well. Its 24,000-km road network includes 783 km 
of highway and 2,000 km of modern railroad. Its airports and 
seaports are provided with tourist lounges. This is in addition 
to a large fleet of tourist transport buses. Law No. 10 of 1991 
has encouraged many financiers to establish new tourist 
transport companies. [passage omitted] 

