BFN 

<F P=106> [Viktor Litovkin report: "The Sunken Komsomolets Puts Out </F>
SOS Signals"] 
  [Text] Sergey Khetagurov, deputy minister for emergency 
situations, has told an INTERFAX correspondent that 15 June this 
year the ministry will mount an expedition to the site of the 
disaster involving the Russian nuclear-powered submarine 
Komsomolets, which sank in the Norwegian Sea in April 1989. The 
purpose of the two-month expedition, aboard the research ship 
Akademik Keldysh, is to seal the torpedo tube hatches. 
  The submarine has two torpedoes on board with nuclear 
warheads, and these fill specialists with the greatest 
apprehension, the deputy minister said. "It is impossible to 
rule out, in principle, a possible spread of radioactivity as a 
result of corrosion of their casing," he believes. 
  At the very same time Academician Vladimir Zuyev, department 
head at the Russian Academy of Sciences Institute of Oceanology, 
has sent a letter to the Russian president's staff. He reports 
that, despite the real possibility of a volley discharge of 
weapons-grade plutonium into the marine environment from the 
sunken Komsomolets, the expedition to it and the actual sealing 
of the vessel are in jeopardy. Leading specialists with rich 
experience of underwater work have been taken off it. The 
necessary ecological expert appraisal has not been carried out. 
There is no federal program for the reliable corrosion-proofing 
of an increased source of radioactive danger, and the necessary 
financial resources have not yet been allocated to this. 
  What is the problem here? Why does the situation with regard 
to the sunken Komsomolets elicit such increased attention and 
such contradictory assessments? Several nuclear-powered ships 
have sunk in recent years, and so much radioactive waste has 
been dumped in the oceans that the possibility of a leak of 
plutonium from two torpedoes appears a mere trifle compared with 
the constant discharge of radiation from these graveyards. 
  Dr. of Technical Sciences Tengiz Borisov, former chairman of 
the Committee for Carrying Out Special-Purpose Underwater Work, 
whose functions have now been transferred to the Ministry for 
Emergency Situations, believes that this is not quite the case. 
The question of ensuring the Komsomolets' radiation safety is 
far more serious than other similar tragic instances. There are 
several reasons. 
  First, the submarine lies off the coast of Norway, in 
Norway's traditional fishing grounds. The discharge of 
plutonium into the water -- and traces of it were already 
detected last year, although they do not yet exceed the 
background values -- could deprive that country of fisheries for 
hundreds of years, destroy the modern fish-processing industry, 
deprive tens of thousands of people of their livelihoods, and, 
as a consequence, drastically undermine Russia's prestige and 
force it to pay compensation running into many millions in 
foreign currency. 
  Second, Russia, its leadership, and its specialists still 
have the technical and economic possibility of preventing the 
radiation pollution of the ocean, corrosion-proofing the sunken 
vessel, and delivering Europe from the threat of an ecological 
disaster. But precious time must not be lost here. We are left 
with virtually the last chance of carrying out the work this 
summer. There will not be another opportunity -- the torpedoes' 
beryllium casings are bound to break up within the next few 
months, and then all efforts will be in vain. 
True, not all the specialists familiar with the situation on the 
submarine share the anxiety of Tengiz Borisov, his colleagues at 
the Institute of Oceanology, or other scientists and practical 
underwater workers. Some of them -- mainly employees of the 
Ministry for Emergency Situations -- maintain that fishing is 
not conducted at a depth of 1,700 meters, where the Komsomolets 
lies, and so there is simply no threat that plutonium will get 
into the fish diet and thence onto people's tables. 
  In addition, they say, in the opinion of nuclear scientists 
at the Scientific Research Institute of Experimental Physics at 
Arzamas-16, where the torpedoes' nuclear warheads were created, 
the discharge of plutonium following the destruction of the 
torpedoes' casings will not have appreciable radiation 
consequences either for the population or for the fauna. If a 
100-percent discharge does occur, all the material will settle 
in a compact stain between 30 and 400 km long. At the same time 
the radiation doses will be virtually insignificant at the far 
limits of the seat of radiation. 
  The IZVESTIYA editorial office has a copy of this opinion of 
the Scientific Research Institute of Experimental Physics, 
approved by Academicians Yuriy Trutnev and Stanislav Voronin of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences, the chief designers of nuclear 
warheads. Its conclusions do not coincide with those reached at 
the Ministry for Emergency Situations. "It is not yet clear," 
the scientists write, "whether the uncertainty that exists at 
the present time in the estimates of seabed pollution by the 
fissionable products of plutonium corrosion can affect the 
global conclusion that `the escape of plutonium from the nuclear 
weapons as their insulating casing is destroyed has no 
appreciable radioactive consequences....'" Further: "It is 
necessary to make a more detailed assessment of the possible 
movement of plutonium from the bed to surface layers as a 
consequence of the seasonal migration of plankton which winters 
on the bed and the competing processes of spreading of the 
plankton patch on the lifting of plutonium build-ups from seabed 
deposits...." 
  If we translate the scientists' words into simple language 
understandable to everyone, it becomes clear that large areas of 
plankton plastered with the decomposition products of nuclear 
warheads or, rather, precisely plutonium, have zero buoyancy. 
They can be moved by underwater currents any distance from the 
scene of the tragedy and thus end up, ultimately, in the food of 
someone living thousands of kilometers from the Norwegian Sea. 
  The academicians believe that it would be premature to 
conclude that in work with the nuclear-powered submarine 
Komsomolets it is possible to confine ourselves just to 
radiation monitoring; everything must be done to make naval 
weapons systems safe, bearing the possibility of accidents in 
mind. A similar conclusion was reached by the Russian Security 
Council Interdepartmental Commission on Ecological Safety, which 
discussed this problem at the end of last year. 
  What, then, is preventing this from being done today? 
Particularly as the Ministry for Emergency Situations, as Sergey 
Khetagurov declared, is ready and has plans to carry out the 
special expedition to seal the stricken submarine? 
  In the opinion of many specialists with whom I have spoken 
about this, work on corrosion-proofing the sunken submarine is 
being hindered by departmental differences and by ambitions 
which, no less than the actual corrosion, are eating away at 
formerly amicable and united collectives. 
  The people who last year organized and carried out the 
unique 
deep-water experiment in the Norwegian Sea, who ascertained and 
analyzed the actual condition of the sunken vessel and its 
systems, and who used unique underwater robots to peep inside 
the Komsomolets, proposed their own program for 
corrosion-proofing it -- packing the torpedo compartment with a 
special sorbent, isolating it from seabed currents by means of 
metal covers with rubber seals, and, in addition, giving the 
Ministry for Emergency Situations disinterested assistance in 
implementing it and working on the expedition on a voluntary 
basis. But there was not even a reply to their appeal. 
  At the same time the new structures of the Ministry for 
Emergency Situations, which have never before encountered such 
complex underwater work, are acutely short of such specialists. 
Yet in many cases they antagonize former employees of the 
Committee for Carrying Out Special-Purpose Underwater Work and 
other organizations. There is very little time left until the 
start of the expedition. It will be very difficult during the 
remaining days to make up for what has been neglected during the 
preceding months. 
  Ships with deep-water apparatus on board could be delayed 
from putting to sea because ecological expertise and money are 
lacking and all the necessary equipment has still to be 
prepared. The favorable weather in the ocean will pass. Then 
will come new interdepartmental accusations, a search for guilty 
parties.... Who will benefit from this? 
  Experts of my acquaintance believe that in the interests of 
the getting the job done the departmental differences and 
ambitions must be overcome and discarded. We must not reject 
anybody's help, because too much is at stake. Not only the 
country's prestige but also people's health. There is an 
extremely great need today for a government program for the 
corrosion-proofing of the sunken submarine -- a program approved 
by the president and with powers to involve all the necessary 
organizations and structures in this operation. We must not put 
our trust in foreign assistance. We ourselves are capable of 
rectifying what we have done. 
  This is now becoming a matter of honor for the country and 
its specialists. 

