BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Czech Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec by </F>
Jan Horak; place and date not given: "The Czech Republic Is No 
Longer a Rookie in Europe"] 
  [Text] [Horak] What is your assessment of the independent 
Czech Republic so far? 
  [Zieleniec] The first year of our foreign policy was really 
remarkable. It was very important for us to emphasize the Czech 
state's continuity in relation to the traditions of 
Czechoslovakia in the 1920's and 1930's and, in the wake of 
1989, to follow up on the prestige that Czechoslovakia had in 
the world. It goes without saying that this year also 
symbolized the republic's inclusion in the international-legal 
structure. It meant intensive negotiations in connection with 
transferring the validity of Czechoslovakia's treaties to the 
Czech Republic. It also meant specifying our foreign policy 
position in relation to other countries. The same applies for 
countries as for people; that is, anyone who newly enters into a 
collective or society is faced with all sorts of pressures. We 
were also faced with these pressures; this is natural. It is 
like a rookie entering military service. He must demonstrate 
clearly his interests, his strengths. The same thing applies 
for states. I believe that this stage is behind us: The 
majority of states, especially the surrounding European ones, 
are clearly aware of our position, our interests, and our 
values. I am pleased that our situation is now the way it is. 
  [Horak] Membership in the European Union (EU) and NATO is 
one of the main goals of Czech foreign policy. Part of Western 
Europe, for example, the French socialists, object to the 
admission of Eastern Europe. 
  [Zieleniec] I would be reluctant to use phrases that specify 
the French socialists as part of Europe. Of course, this 
problem is obvious to us. States with whom we have experienced 
our history and with whom we share a system of values and a way 
of life are part of the EU. This is the family to which we 
belong and want to belong. If we take this as a starting point 
and if we agree that the absolute majority of these states 
realize that the borders created by the Cold War are artificial 
and have no civilizational or cultural justification, then this 
issue is placed in a different light. Naturally, the admission 
of a specific country represents for individual entities in 
various countries of Western Europe this or that problem. 
  The admission of a large country, for example, Poland, means 
a problem for agriculture in France; the EU's common 
agricultural policy would find it hard to come to terms with 
Polish agriculture today. It is possible to give many such 
examples. Therefore, specific special-interest groups express 
themselves in this or that manner. However, what I said in the 
introduction and what the political creme de la creme of the 
intellectual elite realize and what -- in my opinion -- the 
absolute majority of the citizens of Western Europe recognize 
generally applies, that is, we belong to each other and 
maintaining this artificial division is not only unnatural, but 
is dangerous for all of us. 
  [Horak] Let us be more specific: What will entry into the 
EU actually mean for us? 
  [Zieleniec] Our entry into the EU may not be automatic for 
these reasons. Membership in the EU means many specific 
commitments and it is sui generis a transaction. This is not 
only a boon for us, it must also be a boon for them. In order 
for this to happen, we must, first and foremost, transform this 
state and we have to achieve what we set out to achieve in 1989: 
The Czech Republic must become a standard democratic Western 
European state with an efficient Western European-type economy. 
We have made a good start in this direction. I am convinced 
that it will not be too long before this happens. However, we 
must be aware of our responsibility for the integration process. 
I would like to emphasize one thing that is terribly important 
for me. One is not accepted among advanced states, we must 
simply become an advanced state. 
  [Horak] The so-called Balladur Plan says in a nutshell 
roughly the following: Become stable first, and then we will 
admit you into our structures. The Czech Republic does not 
quite agree with this; why has it not rejected it officially? 
  [Zieleniec] I would be averse to formulating the Balladur 
Plan the way you formulated it, and I would also be reluctant to 
say that I agree or disagree with such a thing. The so-called 
stability pact, which is now under discussion, is not for us 
directly linked with the issue of entry into the EU. Its 
starting point is the Yugoslav crisis and the attempt at 
preventive diplomacy. This is an attempt to ascertain the 
problems within Central and Eastern Europe and to try to resolve 
these problems somehow before they become more than we can 
handle. The motive or objective, therefore, is praiseworthy 
and, of course, we share it. The problem is that it is not only 
important to have proper objectives, it is also important to 
have the instruments for realizing these objectives. If we do 
not have them, these objectives may often be turned against 
their original aim. The key concepts for the stability pact are 
the ethnic minorities and the attempt to resolve this issue on 
the basis of these minorities' collective rights and on their 
international confirmation. 
  [Horak] Is the issue of minorities in Europe not being 
exaggerated? 
  [Zieleniec] I personally feel that the minority issue, which 
is common in Europe because ethnic borders cannot be drawn here, 
is soluble within a democratic law-governed state. This is a 
pillar on which modern Europe stands. Another pillar is a 
functioning, efficient economy. In places where these pillars 
have been given strong foundations and society has been erected 
on them, minority issues do not represent a threat to society's 
stability and do not become the focus of international tension. 
If, from this point of view, the whole of Western Europe is in 
principle stable, then this is because it is erected on these 
very pillars. It is an illusion to believe that it is possible 
to resolve this issue otherwise and we are also concerned that 
viewing it insensitively and isolating it out of context without 
linking it to these two pillars could lead to a renewal of 
tension and to the destabilization of many states in Central and 
Eastern Europe. We are not against the conference on a 
stability pact in Europe; I think, however, that the key to 
resolving the problem is not a pact that would concentrate only 
on the minority issue, but that the solution lies elsewhere. 
There are two processes or two institutions in Europe that know 
how to deal with this type of problem: The CSCE and the Council 
of Europe. I would welcome it if the Paris conference, which is 
now under preparation, were to culminate in a recommendation to 
these two institutions to deal more intensely with the 
aforementioned issues. 
  [Horak] The Central European Initiative and the Visegrad 
Group are two such institutions of which we are members. What 
is your opinion of the Czech Republic's participation in them so 
far and of their prospects? 
  [Zieleniec] I would protest a little about the use of the 
word institution. The SEI has some of the traits of an 
institution, it even has a small secretariat and a regime of 
regular meetings, expert commissions, and so on. The Visegrad 
Group has nothing like this. This has always been more of a 
symbolic name for the meetings involving the representatives of 
several neighboring states. We feel that the region should live 
together more intensively. The problem consists of how to 
achieve this. We are convinced that it is incredibly important 
for economic cooperation to function well; it is the basis for 
good relations between states. Therefore, we are pushing very 
much for the speedy creation of a Central European Free Trade 
Zone (CEFTA). We are pushing for cooperation in concrete 
projects that are specific to the region such as, for example, 
the construction of railroad or other transportation networks, 
cooperation in the environment, and so on. We do not want 
political and military cooperation to become a regional 
activity; this would imply the formation of alternative 
institutions to the EU. We also do not want to organize 
pressure groups aimed at achieving our admission into the EU or 
NATO. 
  [Horak] We sometimes hear from Poland and Hungary that 
Prague is in too much of a hurry. 
  [Zieleniec] We do not want to leave anyone behind; we do not 
want to be the first at any cost. The issue is associated more 
with my reply to the previous question: We feel that it is 
impossible to become a member of the EU or the North Atlantic 
Alliance by means of pressure. The center of gravity for the 
integration process is here in our countries and we are creating 
a united Europe by their transformation. We would be giving our 
citizens the wrong sign if we were to claim that the center of 
gravity for integration consists of constant visits to Brussels 
and of clamoring for information on admission. 
  The SEI is an open institution to us, an institution that, 
by 
affiliating states that belong to what I would call the 
traditional West, such as Italy and Austria, states that are 
relatively advanced in transforming their economies and 
societies, such as the Czech Republic, Hungary, or Poland, and 
states that are not quite so advanced, is perhaps a suitable 
platform for exchanging experiences on coming to terms with the 
complicated process that is taking place in so many European 
countries. Therefore, I proposed at the last meeting in Trieste 
that the SEI does not act like a closed group that establishes 
complex admission procedures, association statutes, and so on, 
but opens itself up to the other countries of Central and 
Eastern Europe. 
  [Horak] Cooperation with Slovakia is significant, especially 
in the economic sphere, which the public is also most aware of. 
The foreign policy contacts between our two states will always 
have a special stamp. Do you see any problems in this sphere? 
  [Zieleniec] I think that the period since 1 January 1993 has 
been a major success. Our foreign partners often ask me what 
our relations with Slovakia are like and I describe to them what 
we achieved in the complex conditions for dividing the state and 
how we managed to organize our lives, mutual contacts, trade, 
and so on. Our partners then say that this is a major success. 
They realize that we, who see these relations in the newspaper 
headlines -- for example, that we have still not managed to deal 
with movement on the borders, or this or that item in trade, the 
certificates, and so on -- have a tendency to view our relations 
through these problems. However, when we realize that these are 
the only problems -- which, at the same time, are constantly 
being resolved -- and that, from this technical point of view, 
our mutual relations are being enhanced, then this is a major 
success. I am convinced that our Slovak partners also look at 
it like this. We have done a great deal of work together. 
  [Horak] Germany is, without doubt, one of our most 
important foreign policy partners. Do you think that, in this 
so-called super-election year, it is worth negotiating with 
Germany on certain more weighty issues without reference to 
whether it would be better to wait until the post-election 
period? 
  [Zieleniec] The political process with regard to Germany is 
proceeding and it is good that it is proceeding. The relations 
between our states are definitely not influenced so 
fundamentally by domestic political opportunism for it to matter 
which government in Germany we negotiate with. I assume that 
the same thing applies in our country, that the majority of the 
parliamentary parties in the Czech Republic would conduct a 
similar policy toward Germany. It is a question, in our country 
and in Germany, of national interests and these have a slightly 
broader base than party ideology. 
  [Horak] The former Soviet Union was the most important 
trading partner of the former Czechoslovakia and it is possible 
to say that the intensity of relations between Russia and the 
Czech Republic has declined somewhat along with the rapid 
reduction in mutual trade. Is any change to be expected soon in 
this regard? 
  [Zieleniec] When I think of the contacts in recent months 
alone -- several ministerial visits, for example, Minister 
Dlouhy's, then there was my visit, Prime Minister Klaus' visit, 
President Yeltsin was here, and Minister Kozyrev -- then it 
seems to me that this is an intensive level of contacts. I 
would find it difficult to accept that the intensity of mutual 
contacts has declined. Perhaps it has, if you relate it to the 
period before 1989, but I do not know if these were 
international contacts in the true sense of the word; it was 
more that visits were made to Moscow for instructions. Now 
these are relations between equal states, they are intensive 
relations as corresponds to Russia's position as a superpower, 
as a huge market, and as a country with which we conduct 
extensive trade and from which we receive a great deal of our 
energy raw materials. It is flattering for us that we are able 
to maintain balanced relations with Russia, despite the fact 
that there was a fundamental shift in our alliance orientation 
in 1989. We now consider ourselves to be a country that is not 
only striving for membership in the EU, but a country that 
belongs to the Western system from an alliance point of view. 
  [Horak] How much weight does current Czech foreign policy 
attach to cooperation or contacts with Czechoslovakia's former 
fraternal countries, for example, the DPRK, Cuba, China, or 
Vietnam where, to this day, authoritarian regimes are still in 
power? 
  [Zieleniec] We have to differentiate a little here. If you 
are referring to China and Vietnam, these are countries that 
have embarked upon development toward a market economy, 
countries that are becoming democratized gradually. This is 
logical; a market economy cannot operate for long without 
democracy. There is an obvious trend in these countries. 
Something slightly different applies to countries such as North 
Korea or Cuba where the level of human rights violations is 
unacceptable to us. They are excluding themselves from the 
international community. This, however, does not mean that we 
are overlooking these issues elsewhere. I gave my partners in 
Vietnam a list of the people we know are being persecuted for 
political reasons. I have also discussed these issues in 
China. However, it is very important to find the correct 
balance for the individual concerns. Our partners must see that 
we talk about these issues with compassion, that it is not just 
empty instruction. 
  On the other hand, as I said, I look upon these countries 
with optimism and, following my visits to them, my optimism has 
increased. 
  [Horak] Taiwan has opened a Taipei office in our country. 
As we do not have diplomatic relations with each other, is some 
thought being given to a change in this respect? 
  [Zieleniec] We recognize the People's Republic of China, 
but, on the other hand, we maintain trading relations with 
Taiwan. For these reasons, we do not have a diplomatic mission 
in Taiwan. As far as I know, however, our Chamber of Commerce 
has opened a representative office there and is representing the 
Czech Republic in a certain non-governmental, unofficial fashion. 

