BFN 

  [Text] Lieutenant General brother 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, 
Presidential Council chairman, has welcomed the arrival of 
brother Lakhdar Ibrahimi, envoy of the UN secretary general to 
our country on a fact-finding mission. The brother president 
underlined the commitment of our Armed Forces' -- the forces of 
unity and legitimacy -- to the letter and spirit of the UN 
Security Council resolution. He emphasized that this was 
despite the secessionist gang's breach of the cease-fire 
resolution and its refusal to be bound by it with the object of 
influencing world public opinion and calling in international 
forces to monitor the cease-fire. He said that we reject this 
in part and parcel. The ongoing war is not one between two 
countries or two systems of government; it is one between the 
Yemeni people and secessionist elements within the [Yemeni] 
Socialist Party [YSP] command. Yet, within the context of the 
new world order, we consented to the resolution and are prepared 
to deal with it, despite our deep conviction that the resolution 
amounts to blatant interference in our internal affairs. In this 
particular case, the Security Council undoubtedly curried favor 
with certain Arab regimes that sponsored the resolution, 
although permanent members of the council were not convinced of 
the resolution on the grounds that it constitutes meddling in 
our internal affairs. The consent of these states was only to 
please the resolution's sponsors. 
  The president emphasized that the military option has been 
forced on the homeland and the people by the rebellious 
secessionist gang. He said we are for dialogue, to which we 
committed ourselves as long ago as nine months when the crisis 
was stage managed by the secessionists who were paid for it, 
just as they were paid for the secession and the fratricidal 
fighting and the souls of the martyrs and the Yemeni blood that 
has been spilled. 
  The Yemeni state, the brother president added, will have a 
bright future and modern state institutions, with streamlined 
local government in order to cut back on centralization, and 
provincial administrations armed with sufficient powers, once 
the relevant amendments are introduced. 
  The brother president stated his interest in keeping up the 
dialogue with the unionists within the YSP. We are not prepared 
to talk with those who proclaimed secession and plotted against 
Yemeni unity and cashed in on the internecine fighting and 
secession. There can be no dialogue with these treasonous and 
criminal elements, now that they arrest warrants have been 
issued by the Republic's prosecutor general. 
  The remarks were made at a news conference the brother 
Presidential Council chairman held for local, Arab, and world 
news media. At the outset of the conference, he welcomed them 
and noted that this was the second such meeting with journalists 
since the traitor and war criminal al-Bid declared the invalid 
secession and formed the secessionist government. It also comes 
on the heels of the Security Council's resolution. The Yemeni 
Government said it will cooperate with all its clauses. 
  Regrettably, we had to make a decision, which we 
communicated 
to the UN secretary general, the Arab League secretary general, 
and the Islamic Conference Organization's secretary general, 
welcoming the resolution and declaring our intention to deal 
with its clauses. 
  Most regrettably, however, the treasonous secessionist 
elements refused to be bound by the resolution. The UN 
secretary general and international organizations have been 
informed of the breaches of which the secessionists are guilty. 
  Taking questions from journalists at the news conference, 
the brother chairman of the Presidential Council was asked what 
the forces of legitimacy were waiting for before they entered 
Aden, and if the delay is for military, political, or 
humanitarian reasons. Entering Aden is a political decision, he 
said, so as to avert as much material destruction as possible on 
humanitarian grounds, because the secessionist fighters are 
using citizens as human shields. If we do not send forces into 
Aden, this is out of our concern for the lives of civilians. 
  President Salih was asked about what measures could secure a 
cease-fire and whether he would sanction the presence of 
observers to monitor a cease-fire. We have informed the UN 
chief, the president said, that the secessionists have turned 
down the Security Council resolution and pursued their air 
attacks on the forces of legitimacy and the units positioned at 
the Aden Governorate's main approaches. We informed the UN 
secretary general that the separatists rejected the resolution 
despite their announcement that they were bound by it, which is 
not true. This is because the scenario of the command of 
apostasy and secession in the YSP calls for pursuing the 
hostilities to influence world public opinion under the pretext 
that the cease-fire is not holding, thus it may be possible to 
call in international forces to monitor the cease-fire. This we 
reject in part and parcel. We consented to the resolution, the 
president said, although we regard what is taking place in our 
country as an internal affair. The ongoing war is not one 
between two countries or two systems of government, but between 
the Yemeni people and secessionists within the YSP command. 
  Asked about the method of observing the cease-fire, the 
brother president said this is for the legitimate leadership to 
decide; the secessionists have to submit to the Security Council 
resolution, or else they will have to submit to the force of 
Yemeni legitimacy's military. 
  Asked how he felt about the Gulf Cooperation Council's 
stance 
on the situation in Yemen and whether he deemed it personal or 
political meddling in Yemen's domestic affairs, the brother 
president said: We had wished that efforts and good offices 
would be brought to bear by neighboring states on the bilateral 
level. We never wanted these efforts exerted by the brothers to 
adopt such a resolution at the Security Council. This is 
because if these efforts had been made within the framework of 
bilateral contacts and relations, they would have been welcomed, 
and we might have arrived at better results, short of escalating 
the situation and going to the Security Council so the Yemeni 
issue would be dealt with within an international framework. If 
the neighbors had cared for Yemeni blood, they would have 
refrained from adopting such decisions and meddling in our 
internal affairs, and consequently the matter would probably 
have ended. 
  The brother president noted that interference in our 
country's internal affairs could prolong the conflict. He hoped 
that others would stay out of this affair and stop their 
diplomatic activity out of concern for Yemen. He said that if 
they halt this activity, then probably the problem would be 
solved immediately. However, the more they act politically and 
the more they interfere in Yemen's internal affairs, the longer 
the conflict will continue in our country. 
  Asked what if the sons of Aden say they are not willing to 
join legitimacy, the brother president said: The Yemeni people 
are one and the operations carried out at the entrances of Aden 
are against rebellious elements that have departed from 
constitutional legitimacy. We are doing our best to spare 
civilians any harm. We are opposing the rebellious elements 
that are entrenched behind the civilians. When those elements 
are arrested or if they surrender or flee, then the government 
is fully prepared to move all the state institutions to Aden 
Governorate to provide all food and medical supplies, rebuild 
the city, and repair telephone, electricity, and water networks, 
and others. 
  The brother president added: We are preparing for a campaign 
in which all institutions and bodies will improve the conditions 
of Aden, whose status as a commercial and economic capital will 
be better than its status before the establishment of unity on 
22 May 1990 and during the interim period, during which the 
separatists had attempted to tighten their grip on the heroic 
city of Aden, the commercial and economic capital. Thus, Aden 
will be just like the political capital, Sanaa, which 
accommodates the sons of Yemen from all the governorates of the 
republic, and not from a certain region or faction. 
  The government will also provide care and attention so that 
Aden will witness prosperous trade activity in the future, since 
it is considered a free zone. Its status will be better than 
ever before, especially after evicting what is left of the 
forces of traitors and secessionists. There will be civilian 
police in Aden to maintain order, but it will not be the way it 
was before -- an arsenal of weapons in the hands of the 
secessionist, which they had inherited from the socialist camp, 
in addition to the weapons they acquired during the interim 
period, particularly since 19 August [1993] after the veil was 
lifted from the face of the traitor, agent, deviator al-Bid. 
  The brother president reiterated that the status of Aden 
will 
be better than any other capital, as a major port of the Yemeni 
Republic. We will give it our utmost attention and care, he 
said. 
  Answering a question on how differences between brothers had 
turned into a war in which the loser will be the Yemeni people, 
the brother president said: We had wished that the brothers 
would not turn personal and bilateral differences -- that could 
happen between one country and another for cumulative reasons -- 
into settling scores. We regret that these differences have 
claimed the lives of the sons of the Yemeni people in return for 
settling scores. The people should have blamed each other at 
bilateral meetings and through dialogue and diplomatic channels. 
If the differences are between persons, governments, or 
leaders, then these should not be allowed to harm the Yemeni 
homeland, which will have negative repercussions on bilateral 
relations between the neighboring countries. 
  In reply to a question on whether he is willing to discuss 
all issues, including the issue of unity, with the other side, 
which is setting the precondition of a cease-fire for any talks, 
the brother president said: There can be no dialogue with the 
secessionists. Dialogue can be held only with the leaders who 
have been subdued by the secessionists, who have received a 
price for the blood of the Yemenis shed on the Yemeni scene. 
There can be no dialogue with the secessionists. God willing, 
if the UN Security Council resolution is complied with, and if 
the unity-orientated elements operating in Aden are allowed to 
come out and make their voices heard, then we can hold a 
dialogue with them. However, there can be no dialogue with the 
elements whose names were mentioned in the decision issued by 
the Public Prosecution Office. This is because these elements 
are behind the ordeal being experienced by the homeland. They 
will either be apprehended and tried, or they will have to leave 
the homeland, just as the Hamid-al-Din family left it. This is 
because they are more dangerous than the Hamid-al-Din family. 
Some traitors have begun to make arrangements for their 
departure for some Arab and foreign capitals. 
  The brother president noted that traitor al-Bid, the 
archleader of this gang, is currently making preparations to 
flee the country. He added that the forces of legitimacy will 
continue their efforts to pursue him. God willing, they will 
manage to apprehend him. 
  When queried about the future of inter-Arab ties against the 
background of the Yemeni crisis and the conflicting Arab stands 
on it, given the fact that the Gulf crisis has caused a wide 
rift in inter-Arab ties, the brother president said: It is our 
hope that the repercussions of the Gulf crisis will become a 
thing of the past. The repercussions of this crisis should not 
affect the situation in Yemen, because Yemen had nothing at all 
to do with what happened during the Gulf crisis. This is 
reminiscent of the unfair campaign and the biased media, which 
attempted to misrepresent Yemen's stand during the Gulf crisis. 
During that campaign, it was alleged that Yemen had tactical 
and strategic missiles, Iraqi aircraft, and an Iraqi army on its 
soil; and that this was part of a scheme. As a matter of fact, 
it has become clear to the entire world that all these 
allegations were baseless. This harmed the credibility of some 
media organizations that promoted these allegations to the Arab 
and world public. He noted that this media bias and 
misrepresentation of facts is being repeated at present. The 
situation in Yemen is being misrepresented. Most regrettably, 
some fraternal Arabs are engaged in this to settle some scores 
in bilateral ties. These Arabs seek to take advantage of what 
is taking place in Yemen nowadays. He regretted this, and hoped 
that the Arab media will shoulder their responsibilities toward 
the Arab nation's causes. 
  The brother president noted the misrepresentation of facts 
carried out by some media organizations, which transmitted 
footage of the legitimacy forces while they were engaged in 
military operations, and claimed that these forces were the 
forces of apostacy and secession. Thus, these media 
organizations lost their credibility, because the Arab public is 
aware of their bias. 
  The brother president reiterated that these practices 
prompted our people to line up in a mammoth support of their 
unity. These practices also enabled them to identify those who 
oppose their unity. 
  Asked about his expectations concerning the visit of the 
envoy of the UN secretary general, the brother president said: 
First, we have faith in political dialogue. Since the eruption 
of the crisis, we have made immense efforts to reach a solution 
with the secessionists. This dialogue lasted almost nine 
months. It resulted in the drafting of the accord document. 
This document reflected our sense of responsibility, which was 
dictated by a desire on our part to avoid the situation 
currently plaguing the homeland and avert a military solution. 
  The brother president added: We welcome political dialogue. 
We do not believe that the military solution is the only 
possible solution. However, it was imposed on us by the 
secessionists, who received huge amounts of filthy money. They 
had been supplied with weapons before they decided to espouse 
the war option. During the crisis, they were supplied with a 
squadron of Sukhoi aircraft, not to mention a quantity of 
self-propelled guns enough to equip two battalions, received 
from Bulgaria and Hungary. The cost of each of these guns was 
$5 million. Some 400 tanks in the possession of the 
secessionists have been seized, not to mention almost 500 guns, 
approximately 300 track armored vehicles, wheeled armored 
vehicles, and large amounts of ammunition. 
  The brother president indicated that he has information 
regarding new contracts to purchase one MiG-29 aircraft 
squadron, several T-82 tanks, and tactical missiles. 
Nonetheless, he affirmed that the fate of these weapons will be 
similar to that suffered by previous weapons. They are 
incapable of confronting the Yemeni people. 
  The brother president called on those who are paying for 
these weapons not to repeat the mistake. He said: We say to 
those who are financing the purchase of such weapons not to make 
such a mistake again and to try to invest the money to rebuild 
what was destroyed by the war, so they will be highly 
appreciated by the Yemeni people. 
  The brother president welcomed the envoy of the UN secretary 
general and reiterated our country's readiness to cooperate with 
him to render his mission a success. Asked what will happen if 
the Unites Nations insists on dispatching international 
observers to monitor the cease-fire, the president noted that 
our country complies with the letter and spirit of the UN 
security Council. He said: We will not defy international 
legitimacy, but the separatist gang is the one that violates the 
cease-fire and gambles on instigating public opinion -- by 
claiming that our Armed Forces are not complying with the 
cease-fire -- to call in international forces. This will be 
rejected. 
  Asked about development issues and whether Yemen will 
reconsider some agreements concluded in the field of oil 
investments and in other fields, the brother president said that 
all aspects of life will be reviewed, particularly the 
agreements ratified outside the homeland by some elements of the 
separatist gang, such as [former prime minister] al-'Attas and 
[former oil minister] Bin-Husaynun. He said the government will 
be reorganized on a modern and developed basis, government 
administrative and economic institutions will be also 
reorganized, and democracy and freedom of press will be 
consolidated. He noted that the separatist leaders were one of 
the factors of frustration over the past four years, since the 
transitional period. Those leaders, he added, did not want our 
people in the southern and eastern governorates to enjoy the 
fruits of unity. The brother president that everything will be 
reviewed to guarantee that every governorate in the republic 
will enjoy the goodness of unity. He noted that the traitors 
from the separatist elements were a stumbling block to social, 
political, and cultural progress despite the political slogans 
raised in their political platform. He said: They were not 
concerned about our people's interests inasmuch as they were 
concerned about their personal interests. The big evidence of 
this is that they withdrew part of the people's money and 
deposited them in their bank accounts in Europe and elsewhere. 
  The brother president said that thanks to the efforts and 
cohesion of all people we will proceed toward achieving 
agricultural and industrial development and digging out mineral 
and oil resources to benefit our Yemeni people. He stressed 
that the government will offer all facilities and support for 
national and foreign investments to build the Yemeni homeland, 
noting in this regard that observers and journalists have 
noticed the great progress we achieved in the field of 
development before unity. However, the factors of apostasy and 
secession in the YSP worked, in the wake of establishing the 
unity, toward aborting the development, as they frustrated our 
people in Aden, Lahij, Abyan, Shabwah, Hadhramaut, and 
al-Mahrah. This is because these elements have nothing but 
political platforms. They exploited all potentials, state 
revenues, and loans for their own interests during the pre-unity 
period. However, when we make promises to our people, we keep 
these promises. 
  The president said: We will work to expand participation in 
the government so that this participation will include all 
influential political forces and producing forces which will 
join hands to rebuild what was destroyed by the destructive war 
and achieve comprehensive awakening. He noted that the 
difficult ordeal facing our people now has produced this 
splendid coherence to defend unity and democracy, safeguard 
security and stability, and confront all the secessionist 
elements that tried to undermine the gains of the people, 
expressing his satisfaction with national coherence. 
  The president then wished the pressmen success in their 
work. 
  The news conference attended by brothers Dr. 'Abd-al-Karim 
al-Iryani, minister of planning and development; Ahmad Hasan 
al-Lawzi, minister of information; and a number of officials. 

