BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, April 29 (YONHAP) -- South Korean Defense 
Minister Yi Pyong-tae signed a ``memorandum of understanding on 
bilateral military exchanges between Korea and Russia '94-95,'' 
which puts emphasis on exchange of personnel, at a meeting 
Friday with his Russian counterpart Pavel Grachev in Moscow, the 
South Korean Defense Ministry said. 
  Yi and Grachev talked about major international issues in 
Northest Asia, including Pyongyang's nuclear ambitions, the 
ministry said. The two ministers shared the view that the 
suspected North Korean nuclear problem should be checked to 
ensure peace in Northeast Asia and that the North must return to 
the nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty to assume its responsibility 
as a member of international community, the ministry said. 
  The two agreed to enhance bilateral military cooperation 
including exchanges of students and military personnel, the 
ministry said. 
  In accordance with the agreement, Mikhail Kolesnikov, 
Russian 
chief of General Staff, will visit South Korea during the second 
half of the year while South Korea's vice defense minister and 
the Air Force chief of Staff will visit Russia next year, 
according to the ministry. Russian Defense Minister Pavel 
Grachev will reciprocate with his Seoul visit next year, the 
ministry said. 
  The two sides agreed that South Korean military officers be 
assigned to Russian military education centers to help them 
learn the Russian language and enhance understanding between the 
two countries, the ministry said. 
  South Korean Naval Academy cadets will also be allowed to 
call at Russian ports while on their tour of foreign countries 
in their training ships, the ministry said. 
  The two also exchanged views on Russia's idea of repaying 
Korean loans in kind, particularly in weapons, the ministry said. 
  During his stay in Russia, Yi will meet with Russian Prime 
Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev 
and other high-ranking officials, the ministry said. Yi will 
also visit major Russian military facilities including tank 
units before leaving for Germany on May 3. 

