Language: <F P=105>Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] We have a report that there are about 600 people in 
front of the Primate Palace [in Primate Square, Bratislava]] 
today. 
  My colleagues from Radio Free Europe and I estimate that 
there were over 1,000 people there at the time I left the 
Primate Palace, shortly before 1730. I shall read out an agency 
report, and then I will tell you my own experience: 
  The crowd of about 600 demonstrators in front of the 
presidential palace in the center of Bratislava, a TA SR report 
says, who are demanding the resignation of the head of state, 
today beat up two journalists from the U.S. radio station Radio 
Free Europe: Stefan Hrib was kicked to the ground and had his 
jacket and briefcase with all of his documents stolen. 
  A CTK reporter has said that the second person attacked was 
Milan Zitny, a member of the Czech section of Radio Free Europe 
in Slovakia. He went on to say that there was no policeman in 
the vicinity, and when Stefan Hrib found a police car, the 
police refused to take him to the police station. Milan Zitny 
was punched and kicked at the other end of Primate Square, where 
a demonstration was taking place. Milan Zitny said: The police 
tried to defend me, but the people were furious and they were in 
the majority. The aggressive demonstrators broke his camera. 
Then the police took him away in their car. According to Milan 
Zitny, he did not require treatment. 
  This is all from the TA SR report. I should like to add 
that, when Zitny was being insulted and screams were heard, 
Ljuba Lesna, my Radio Free Europe colleague, and I went to find 
out what was happening in Primate Square. During the meeting, 
the crowd, the aggressiveness of the people gathered there, for 
the most part older people of pensionable age, turned against 
us. Ljuba Lesna was physically attacked, and I got a slap in 
the face, but the policeman who was standing beside me, whom I 
asked for help, said: I am not here. 

