Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Positive View of Jordanian Role"] </F>
  [Text] After a tour of a number of Middle Eastern countries 
and at the conclusion of talks with His Majesty King Husayn and 
ranking officials, British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said 
that Jordan plays a basic role in this part of the world and 
that a just and comprehensive peace cannot be achieved without 
an effective Jordanian role. 
  The British foreign secretary did well when he recognized, 
at 
close hand, not only the importance of Jordan's role but the 
extent of economic difficulties which Jordan finds itself facing 
from time to time -- economic difficulties caused by this role 
Jordan is playing and as a result of its moderate and realistic 
policies. 
  There is no doubt that such an appreciation of Jordan's role 
is good and a source of pride for all of us. However, this 
prompts us to say that this role should be maintained and 
supported by all possible means, foremost of which is helping 
Jordan overcome its economic difficulties that, in fact, were a 
result of continuous political developments. The most recent of 
these developments is the forced immigration of thousands of 
citizens during the Gulf crisis. 
  It was important for the British foreign secretary to also 
notice that despite what has been accomplished on the 
Jordanian-Israeli track, it is not yet time to sign any 
agreement with Israel. This is because more efforts should be 
made before signing any agreement in order to achieve balanced 
progress on all the other negotiating tracks until Jordan's goal 
of achieving a just and comprehensive peace in the region is 
realized. 
  Jordan is delighted by this British appreciation of its 
role. 
It also hopes that all this appreciation will be accompanied by 
economic support. Such economic support includes writing off 
Jordan's debts, alleviating its problems resulting from the 
implementation of UN sanctions on Iraq, and developing some 
programs and various projects, including water projects This is 
especially since Jordan is aware of the seriousness of the 
dangers which could threaten its agricultural and industrial 
projects if the water issue is not tackled. 

