BFN 

<F P=106> [By David Healy in London and our Political Desk] </F>
  [Text] An all-party committee of British MPs comes out 
strongly today in support of Governor Chris Patten's democratic 
package for Hong Kong. 
  The influential Foreign Affairs Select Committee of British 
legislators rejects the evidence they heard from critics of Mr 
Patten's stand -- including that from former adviser to Lady 
Thatcher, Sir Percy Cradock -- and stand squarely behind more 
democracy in the territory. 
  The future of Hong Kong takes up the biggest section of the 
110-page report from the all-party, Tory-dominated committee 
headed by former Conservative Cabinet Minister David Howell. 
  In all, the committee list 14 conclusions and 
recommendations 
that the British Government should pursue in its policy towards 
China in relation to Hong Kong. Mr Patten described the report 
as "a very useful document" and said it "gives solid and 
complete support" for Britain's approach in the territory's 
political development. 
  Speaking after touring Sha Tin yesterday, he said he was 
confident that the legislators would bear this support in mind 
as they consider the last part of the more controversial 
electoral legislation in the coming weeks. 
  Tam Yiu-chung, a pro-China legislator, said the committee's 
firm support for Mr Patten's electoral proposal was expected, 
but it would fuel the already tense Sino-British relationship. 
  Independent legislator Christine Loh Kung-wai said she was 
disappointed at the committee's retraction from its 1989 
position that full democracy be introduced before 1997. 
  The report is deeply pessimistic about the future of 
relations between Britain and China on Hong Kong. It says that 
relations between the two have broken down and are unlikely to 
be repaired. In a long section on the issue it says the 
situation has to be set against the background of the Tiananmen 
Square massacre, the appointment of a "high profile political 
governor" and the recent deterioration in relations between 
Beijing and London. 
  The report says these developments "have been followed by a 
breakdown in negotiations and the probable end of the process 
envisaged in 1984 of a through train to 1997 and beyond". 
  "As a consequence the Hong Kong and British governments are 
confronted with a choice they sought for a decade to avoid: to 
choose between meeting the legitimate aspirations of the people 
of Hong Kong for a distinctive democratic government and an 
agreement with the Chinese. "The British Government had hoped 
that these two aspirations would not have been incompatible. 
They now appear to be so. The holy grail seems out of reach." 
  Had it not been for Tiananmen Square, the committee report 
says, a deal over Hong Kong might have been achieved. "But the 
mutual distrust of the two sides as a result of the Tiananmen 
Square events have given China an opportunity to exploit the 
gaps in the joint declaration and the Basic Law and to seek to 
block the development of democracy in Hong Kong. 
  "We have been convinced by the arguments put to us both by 
the Foreign Secretary and the Governor that a democratically 
defensible set of arrangements for Legco must be put in place," 
the committee says. It says, however, the Chinese have now 
adopted what is in effect a veto on democratic developments in 
Hong Kong, and the Chinese threat to demolish any structures put 
in place will undermine the authority of democratic advances in 
the territory. "The British Government is powerless to prevent 
this happening." 
  The MPs say in their report that the probability of the 
Chinese dismantling any democracy in 1997 forced them to 
consider the alternative, pro-Chinese approach put forward in 
evidence to them by Sir Percy, the former British ambassador to 
Beijing who, in evidence to the committee, criticised Mr Patten. 
  The report says unequivocally: "We have concluded that this 
would not be a tenable position, and that it would not be an 
honorable one either. 
  "It would represent a failure to discharge Britain's 
commitments to advancing democracy in Hong Kong and it would fly 
in the face of the Hong Kong people's aspirations for more 
democracy." 
  The MPs say that the Tiananmen Square events have changed 
the 
desire for democracy in Hong Kong into "an urgent necessity". 
In addition the appointment of the "high profile" Mr Patten as 
governor has added to the desire for change to democracy and the 
committee strongly backs him. "While we have received a number 
of criticisms of the tactics and the handling of the issues 
since the appointment of the new governor we have firmly 
concluded that the Governor has rightly chosen the course of 
seeking to satisfy the demands of the people of Hong Kong." 
  The MPs also say it would be "curious, to say the least", if 
international public opinion continues to press for more human 
rights in China but fails to back the same in Hong Kong, and 
they call for the British Government to continue to seek 
international support for its stand on the territory. 

