BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Talkative People"] </F>
  [Text] The policemen, who drove by a restaurant in 
Berggiesshuebel near Pirna in Saxony, did not notice anything 
prohibited. Outside the restaurant, flags of the National 
Democratic Party of Germany (NPD) were fluttering -- entirely 
legally. However, behind the facade that was put up as a 
camouflage, brown [fascist] comrades from banned neo-Nazi groups 
or from groups that are threatened with a ban were holding a 
meeting, guarded by stewards in SA-like uniforms. 
  About 50 cadres from Bavaria, Berlin, Brandenburg, and 
Saxony, most of them under 30, applauded a trio who intend to 
put new elan into the fragmented movement. 
  On a podium decorated with the Silesian banner and the Reich 
war flag, two chairmen of illegal organizations proclaimed the 
new political line: Frank Huebner, 28, from Cottbus, leader of 
the German Alternative (DA), which has been banned since 
December 1992; and Michael Swierczek, 32, from Augsburg, head of 
the banned National Offensive (NO), talked about the topic 
"rightist struggle." 
  The third in the trio was Christian Worch, 38, from Hamburg, 
who preached about the "resurrection of our people." He is the 
leading head of the National List (NL), against which an 
application for a ban has been made to the Federal 
Constitutional Court. 
  In total, seven right-wing extremist organizations have been 
banned since November 1992. Therefore, Swierczek demands to 
"change strategy and tactics." He calls on as yet rival groups 
to form a "common front." A network without central structures, 
which is "difficult to see" for the opponent, must be formed. 
  During secret meetings Huebner, Swierczek, and Worch have 
buried former controversies over who is supposed to be the 
spokesman. However, it seems to be too risky for the trio to 
form a new organization with common leadership. 
  Thus, Huebner warns the comrades not to run "into the knife 
and fall into the traps of the system." The occasion for such 
appeals: About 100 of the 350 former DA members are facing 
investigations for the suspicion of their continuing a banned 
organization. This may result in up to five years in prison. 
  State pressure involving searches, as in January and 
February 
against Direct Action/Central Germany, against members of the NO 
and of the Nationalist Front has indeed reduced the ranks of the 
active neo-Nazis. 
  However, Worch, Huebner, and Swierczek rely on their efforts 
for unification to produce a maelstrom. Thus, they are already 
cooperating closely with Fred Eichner, 36, chairman of the 
banned National Bloc in Bavaria, and Meinolf Schoenborn, 38, 
chief of the banned Nationalist Front. 
  In addition, leading functionaries of the NPD youth 
organization Young National Democrats (about 200 members) are 
also looking for closeness to the troika. Young functionaries 
of the Liberal German Workers Party (FAP), which has about 400 
members and is facing a procedure for banning at the Federal 
Constitutional Court, are also pleased by the efforts for 
unification. FAP chief Friedhelm Busse, 64, who is an old Nazi 
and an opponent of the rightist unity front, is being isolated 
internally. 
  According to the Cologne Federal Office for the Protection 
of 
the Constitution [BfV], the militant neo-Nazi scene comprises 
about 2,500 activists, not including skinheads. The rightists 
do not lack young newcomers. The Brandenburg BfV analyzes "that 
the potential of rightist young people, who can be mobilized, is 
currently remaining approximately stable." 
  So far, bans have "not eased the burden greatly" for the 
rule-of-law state, Lothar Jachmann, deputy head of the Bremen 
Land BfV says. With the formula that "penetrating legalism" 
(Worch) must be practiced, the neo-Nazis are looking for forms 
of action against which there are no legal provisions. 
  Thus, DA chief Huebner ran in the Brandenburg local 
elections 
last December for the office of mayor of Cottbus on the ticket 
of the German League for People and Homeland, which split off 
from the Republikaner. With slogans against "lack of housing, 
excessive rents, and speculators" he managed to get 2.8 percent 
of the vote. 
  In the numerous election campaigns this year the militant 
neo-Nazis, who are nowadays mostly dressed inconspicuously and 
wear longer hair, will "mingle with the people quite normally" 
during rallies, says Oliver Kulik, 18, a former member of the DA 
and now head of the German Interests neo-Nazi work group in 
Berlin. 
  Before the Bundestag elections on 16 October the neo-Nazis 
want to mobilize their followers for a tactically motivated 
"action alliance for Republikaner to the Bundestag." They 
expect a strengthening of the entire right-wing extremist camp 
if the Republikaner and their chairman, Franz Schoenhuber, 71, 
get into parliament. 
  The strategists of the scene see themselves as virtually 
condemned to use such legalistic tricks. Their leading cadres 
are all known to the security authorities. And the right-wing 
extremists know from a classic of the movement that secret 
nationalist societies have little chance in Germany. 
  It is not possible, a brown ideologist complains in this 
classic book, "to establish an organization of reasonable size 
and, at the same time, keep it secret toward the outside." The 
reason for that is the "talkative nature of the German people." 
  This insight dates back to Adolf Hitler, to Mein 
Kampf. 

