Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Kourou--Europe's 59th Ariane rocket was scheduled to 
make a one-shot launch of seven satellites during the night of 
24-25 September, between 0127 and 0145 hours UT. One of them was 
the SPOT 3, France's third Earth observation satellite. Its 
siblings were launched in 1986 and 1990, and served in the Gulf 
War in addition to performing their overwhelmingly civilian 
duties. 
  Arianespace decided to employ the least powerful of its 
models, the Ariane-40, for the flight. Though it has no strap-on 
booster, the 40 is still more than sufficient for the job. 
  The multiple launch has nothing in common with the volley 
firings (eight satellites at once) of Russia's Proton rockets. 
The 31st Ariane-4 is being asked to place into polar orbit at 
820 km above the earth total payload of 2,357 kg, including 
2,118 kg that make up the total weight of the 7 satellites. 
  SPOT 3 alone weighs 1,907 kg at launch, while its seven 
traveling companions weigh between 12 and 90 kg. The heaviest of 
them, STELLA, a National Center for Space Studies (CNES) space 
geodesy satellite, will circle the Earth for 2,000 years as part 
of the world laser satellite network to study global 
deformations. It will be France's second contribution to the 
project since Starlette in 1975. 
  Ariane's 59th flight has essentially been set aside for 
SPOT-3, and will thus insure the continuity of Earth observation 
using the SPOT pictures that are marketed by Spot Image and its 
international subsidiaries. Presently the world leader in remote 
sensing, ahead of the Americans, Spot Image must defend its 
hard-won position against growing competition from American, 
Russian, and--soon--Japanese firms. 
  Besides the obvious military uses (surveillance, spying, 
tactical tracking, and strategic preparation), Earth observation 
has other, civilian and scientific purposes. SPOT has uncovered 
previously unknown faults in the Himalayas, facilitated the 
drawing of accurate relief maps, detected new mineral resources, 
and evaluated harvests and crop and forest diseases. Oil 
companies employ Spot documents (detection, exploration), which 
are also used to monitor ocean pollution, study urban centers 
and archeological sites, and so on. 
  Spot images are not photos taken at an altitude of 800 km. 
They are a succession of computer data that are recorded aboard 
the satellite and sent to earth stations. The Toulouse 
processing center extracts, at customer request, the desired 
marrow. Whether displayed in true or false colors, the 
magnificent images recreated by SPOT are like so many abstract 
paintings showing atolls, sebkhras (salt-water swamps), volcanic 
cones--and even the Eiffel Tower's shadow on the Champ de Mars, 
the cargo boats in front of the Statue of Liberty, Chernobyl's 
smoke plume, or burned Kuwaiti oil wells. French armed forces 
are using Spot technology to develop the future military 
satellite Helios in conjunction with Matra and the French space 
agency. 
  SPOT 3 is identical to its predecessors and will be followed 
in 1997 (perhaps sooner) by SPOT 4, and in 2000 by SPOT 5. The 
4th and 5th versions of the satellite are expected to have an 
orbital life exceeding the current three years, and resolution 
of less than 10 meters. They will be equipped with infrared 
radiation detectors, and will be able to shoot one region from 
two different angles while traveling the same orbit. 
  It had become urgent to launch SPOT 3. Although still alive 
and kicking despite its launch date of 22 February, 1986, SPOT 1 
has no recorder at this point. And the recording equipment of 
SPOT 2, which was launched 22 January, 1990, is also showing 
signs of fatigue. 
<H5>  SPOT 3's Five Microsatellite Companions </H5>
  The five microsatellites that will be making the trip with 
SPOT 3 are American, Portuguese, Korean, and Italian. They weigh 
from 12 to 50 kg, and will all be placed into polar orbit at an 
altitude of 800 km. 
  The launch costs of microsatellites are minimal since they 
are launched with big ones, and the smaller satellites are 
considered one of the best ways to test new, often complex 
techniques being developed in university research centers and 
laboratories. Microsatellites are playing an increasingly 
important role in preparing the technologies of tomorrow. 
  The 12-kg Italian satellite ITAMSAT is being sent up by the 
Associazione Radioamatori Italiani to exchange the messages of 
its radiohams with the rest of the world. It was built by the 
American firm Interferometrics. EYESAT-A, 12.5 kg, is an 
experimental satellite for the location and monitoring of 
industrial equipment, to provide information about the equipment 
to its manufacturers. The first should operate for between seven 
and ten years, and the second from five to seven years. 
  The other three fall into the 50-kg weight class and employ 
the same platform design, which was devised by Surrey Satellite 
Technology Ltd. SSTL is a subsidiary of Britain's Surrey 
University, one of the world's leaders for this type of 
microsatellite. 
  The chief aim of the Portugeuse satellite POSAT-1 is to 
stimulate and train Portugal's space applications industry. It 
will receive and transmit images and messages using signal 
compression. The microsatellite will establish its position with 
the help of the American Global Positioning System (GPS), and 
will measure the radiation it receives and the effects of that 
radiation during its five years in orbit. 
  HEALTHSAT-1, sponsored by SateLife (United States), is 
humanitarian in purpose, and will supply information to medical 
schools and universities, hospitals, and health documentation 
centers in Africa. 
  Finally, Korea's KITSAT-B will conduct telecommunications 
experiments designed to round out those of its sibling, 
KITSAT-A, which Ariane has already launched. Integrated and 
tested in South Korea by SaTReC (Satellite Technology Research 
Center), the microsatellite will capture and process digital 
images, implement--also for five years--signal compression 
techniques, and receive, store, and transmit messages. 
<H5>  STELLA, France's New Space Geodesy Satellite </H5>
  STELLA is the National Center for Space Studies' second 
contribution to the world network of laser satellites that are 
vital to space geodesy research. It consists of a 
uranium-238-alloy ball measuring 240 mm in diameter and covered 
with a skin bearing 60 reflectors. STELLA will serve until 2000 
as a target for the lasers of world specialists who are studying 
the deformations of the Earth's globe, the force of the Earth's 
gravity field, and the variations in that force over time and 
space. 
  Like Starlette, France's first geodesy satellite launched in 
1975, STELLA will enable scientists to measure ocean, ground, or 
atmospheric tides, the movement of tectonic plates, and the 
consequences of the variations in polar glacial masses for 
several decades. It will also add to their knowledge and 
understanding of convection motion inside the earth's mantle and 
offer new data for research into the Earth-Moon system. 
  STELLA will be joining a constellation of laser-target 
satellites that travel orbits of varying altitudes and 
inclinations. Exact knowledge of their position is vital to 
gradually refining measurements and thus establishing the 
respective positions of the stations that "take aim" at the 
satellites. 
  Roughly the size of a soccer ball, STELLA will circle the 
globe at an altitude of 800 km and a speed of 28,000 km/hr, 
along an orbit inclined 98 degrees. That gives you some idea of 
the crack marksmanship skills of the laser stations. 
Fortunately, the stations possess projected arrival times and 
astronomical tables, and their firing turrets are trained by 
computer. 
  Several French teams under the umbrella of the Space Geodesy 
Research Group (GRGS) are coordinating the reception--notably at 
the Grasse station--and processing of the data obtained. In 
Europe, an organization called Eurolas is centralizing and 
distributing the raw data, organizing measurement campaigns, and 
putting together the astromical tables. 

