BFN 

  [Text] The Panama Canal Treaties 
  In September 1977 the United States and the Republic of 
Panama signed two new treaties and thus embarked on a consortium 
to administer, operate and defend the Panama Canal. The Panana 
Canal Treaty of 1977 regulates the operation, administration, 
and defense of the canal until midday on 31 December 1999. On 
that date the Panama Canal will revert to Panama and the U.S. 
military presence in Panama will end. After that date, only 
Panama will maintain forces on its national territory. The 
other treaty, the Treaty of Neutrality and Operation of the 
Panama Canal, establishes the permanent neutrality of the canal 
for an indefinite period; it pledges that Panama and the United 
States will continue defending the canal and will ensure its 
permanent neutrality after the Panama Canal Treaty expires. 
  Both treaties were approved by Panama in a plebiscite on 23 
October 1977, and the U.S. Senate gave its consent for 
ratification in March and April 1978. With the treaties taking 
effect on 1 October 1979, the Canal Zone and the Canal Zone 
Government were dissolved; the Panama Canal Company was replaced 
by the bi-national Panama Canal Commission; and Panama assumed 
general territorial jurisdiction over what until then had been 
the Canal Zone. The treaties also replaced the 1903 treaty 
between the United States and Panama (Hay/Bunau-Varilla Treaty), 
which regulated the operation and defense of the canal from the 
time of its construction (which concluded in 1914), and its 
subsequent amendments through the 1936 and 1955 treaties. 
  The Panama Canal Treaty assigns to the United States primary 
responsibility for the canal's defense until 1999. It grants 
the United States the right to maintain its military quarters 
and Armed Forces in Panama. These base rights will end when the 
treaty expires. 
<H5>  Initial Efforts in the Execution of the Treaty </H5>
  Comprehensive planning for the total withdrawal of U.S. 
military forces from Panama began in 1986, which led to the 
creation of the Preliminary Plan for the Execution of the 
Treaty. This plan was an initial draft for the orderly and 
gradual withdrawal of U.S. forces from Panama by the end of the 
century and the transfer of their military installations and 
other facilities to the Panamanian government. Approval of the 
Treaty Implementation Plan was given by the U.S. assistant 
secretary of defense in February 1988 and the plan's preliminary 
structure was developed during the early months of 1989. These 
preliminary plans by the U.S. Department of Defense for the 
execution of the treaty were interrupted by the political crisis 
during the final part of the Noriega regime and by Operation 
Just Cause. Once Panama's democratic government was restored, 
the United States resumed planning of the transfer process. 
<H5>  Approval of the Treaty Implementation Plan </H5>
  The Panama Canal Treaty Implementation Plan (PC-TIP in 
English), approved by the defense secretary on 3 February 1993, 
supersedes the preliminary plan for the implementation of the 
treaty and provides a conceptual guide and path for all the U.S. 
Defense Department agencies to implement the Panama Canal 
Treaty, in other words, to undertake in an orderly manner the 
gradual withdrawal of the 10,000 U.S. troops stationed in Panama 
and the reversion to Panama of the U.S. military installations 
and facilities by the end of 1999. 
  The PC-TIP was developed by the Southern Command 
headquarters 
and its different components (Army, Air Force, Navy, and 
Marines), jointly with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Defense 
Secretary's Office. The Department of the Army was appointed 
executing agent to coordinate subsequent plans and those 
logistical and financial requirements that are not unique to a 
specific military component. The Treaty Implementation Center of 
the Southern Command coordinates the plans for the continual 
implementation of the treaties. The center is the liaison of 
the Southern Command with the executing agent of the TIP 
(planning agency of the Panama Canal Treaty within the 
Department of the Army's headquarters), the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff, the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the U.S. Embassy 
in Panama, and the Panamanian Government for treaty 
implementation affairs. 
<H5>  Previously Transferred Military Properties </H5>
  Several military properties were reverted to the Panamanian 
Government from 1979 to 1984, in compliance with the specific 
dates stipulated in the Panama Canal Treaty and related 
documents. There are no specific obligatory dates for reversion 
before 1999 of the 10 remaining major military installations and 
several other military facilities located outside these 
installations. From 1979 to the end of 1993, a total of 405 
buildings (including 113 housing units) and 16,000 acres of land 
with their infrastructure of roads, water and power systems, 
fences, etc., have been transferred to Panama. 
  The remaining military facilities to be transferred to 
Panama 
by the end of 1999 encompass a total of 4,290 buildings located 
on approximately 77,000 acres of land. 
<H5>  Working Jointly With Panama </H5>
  Since 1990, planning has included meeting with key 
Panamanian 
Government authorities in order to ensure an effective 
transition up until the end of 1999. In 1992, the U.S. Southern 
Command began to organize tours for the Panamanian authorities 
to the main military installations and facilities in order to 
provide a better idea of the magnitude of the structures to be 
turned over to Panama. In April 1992, the office responsible 
for coordinating the treaty execution plan was presented to the 
Panamanian Government. 
  A Joint Planning Group established in 1992 in Panama meets 
regularly in order to discuss issues related to the day-to-day 
planning of treaty implementation. The U.S. Southern Command 
continues to work closely with the Panamanian authorities 
through the Joint Planning Group, the Interoceanic Region 
Authority (ARI), and the Panama Treaty Affairs Executive 
Directorate (DEPAT), which falls under the Foreign Relations 
Ministry. The DEPAT was created in 1993 in order to develop the 
best conditions for a successful transfer of the aforementioned 
facilities. 
<H5>  Transfers and Short-Term Reductions </H5>
  During 1992, while continuing with implementation plans by 
the three U.S. Southern Command service branches (that provide a 
detailed plan of the components to be executed by the PC-TIP), 
on 14 January 1993, the Department of Defense and the U.S. 
Southern Command announced the short-term transfer (1993-1995) 
of military assets to the Panamanian Government and the 
reduction of military personnel associated with this activity. 
  The military facilities scheduled to be transferred by the 
end of 1995, together with personnel reductions, includes Fort 
Amador and the Curundu housing area, on the Pacific side, and 
the rest of Fort Espinar (know before as Fort Gulick) and Fort 
Davis, as well as the rest of Coco Solo, including the Cristobal 
High School, on the Atlantic side. 
  Another significant building transfer is scheduled to take 
place on 31 May 1994 when the Coco Solo Medical Clinic (better 
known as the Coco Solo medical complex) will be turned over to 
the Panamanian Government during an official ceremony (through 
the ARI). The same complex will immediately be turned over to 
the Panamanian Social Security Fund, which will convert it into 
a social security hospital on the Atlantic side. 
  At present the PC-TIP calls for a 40 percent reduction of 
military personnel by the end of 1995, which means that the 
number of U.S. troops currently in Panama will be reduced from 
10,000 to approximately 6,000. Consequently, the number of 
military families in Panama will also be reduced by 
approximately 3,000. 
  The number of troops will be reduced through the reduction, 
relocation, and deactivation of units. Army South's 193d Light 
Infantry Brigade will be deactivated in October 1994, and other 
Army units will also be reduced. The Air Force, Navy, and 
Marine Infantry will remain basically intact during this period. 
  The first large-scale reduction of forces will take place at 
the farewell ceremony on 3 June 1994 for the 193d Light Infantry 
Brigade at Fort Clayton. By the end of 1995, there will be 
reductions in the Army, Navy, and Marine Infantry to bring their 
numbers to approximately 6,000 troops. 
  The remaining U.S. military personnel will eventually be 
consolidated at the few remaining military installations as the 
units withdraw from Panama or are deactivated. Most of the U.S. 
forces will be consolidated at Howard Air Force Base, Rodman 
Naval Station, and Fort Kobbe (known as the HOROKO complex) at 
the entrance to the Panama Canal on the Pacific side, with a 
small force on the Atlantic side. These troops' withdrawal from 
Panama will be completed by the end of 1999, and the 
installations are scheduled for reversion to Panama at a 
relatively uniform pace during the four final years of the 
Panama Canal Treaty. 
<H5>  Relocation of the Southern Command General Headquarters </H5>
  Thus far the place and date of the Southern Command General 
Headquarter's relocation is still unknown. The process of 
relocating a general headquarters is very complex and could 
generate very costly military construction. The Department of 
Defense is still studying this phase and considering 
alternatives. Nevertheless, the Southern Command General 
Headquarters will be relocated during the time remaining in the 
treaty. 

