BFN 

  [Text] ROK President Kim Yong-sam accepted DPRK President 
Kim Il-song's proposal to hold unconditionally a South-North 
summit as soon as possible. In this regard, the Japanese 
Government on 18 June welcomed the acceptance, saying that "it 
is in line with Japan's idea of peacefully settling the issue" 
(according to Foreign Minister Koji Kakizawa). Prime Minister 
Tsutomu Hata said: "The circumstances favor the settling of the 
issue of the suspected development of nuclear weapons. We by 
all means hope that because of this, the talks will be 
successful." In this way, Japan is strongly hoping for the 
realization of the South-North summit talks. 
  However, some Ministry of Foreign Affairs [MOFA] officials 
are saying that the true objective of North Korea's call to hold 
the South-North summit, which will be the first of its kind in 
the history of the two countries, is "still not clear." They 
are wary of the proposal and say that "it might be a DPRK tactic 
to gain time." Because of this, the government plans to 
"carefully observe developments concerning the South-North 
summit talks while holding closer contacts than before between 
Japan, the United States, and the ROK and while unifying the 
three countries' objectives in dealing with North Korea" 
(according to a senior MOFA official). 
  The uncertainty concerning the relationship between the 
resumption of the third round of U.S.-DPRK negotiations, for 
which the time is becoming ripe, and the holding of the 
South-North summit is one of the reasons why the MOFA is feeling 
uneasy. 
  Preparations are being made for a resumption of the 
U.S.-DPRK 
negotiations, on the condition that North Korea freezes its 
nuclear weapons development program. Issues such as North 
Korea's acceptance of nuclear inspections and methods of 
verifying the DPRK's past extraction of plutonium will be 
discussed in the negotiations. On the other hand, the 
aforementioned matters, of course, will also be discussed at the 
South-North summit talks and at working-level meetings to 
prepare for the summit. 
  However, the "difference in temperature" between the United 
States and the ROK over the issue of the "verification of past 
events" has been pointed out. The MOFA is worried by the 
possibility that "North Korea may be trying to disturb 
cooperation between Japan, the United States, and the ROK by 
saying different things during negotiations with the ROK and the 
United States" (according to a MOFA source). Some people 
analyze the situation as that "North Korea's true intention is 
to gain time and to avoid sanctions by increasing channels for 
discussions" (according to a government source). Moreover, some 
other people are warning against an optimistic view. They say 
that a "future of discussions through the two channels will be 
tough" (according to a MOFA source). 

