Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Counselor Muhammad Sa'id al-'Ashmawi: "Religion </F>
and Ideology"] 
  [Text] One of the most difficult things for a normal human 
being to achieve during his lifetime is to set or absorb a 
definition for each subject, idea, or opinion. As a result, 
most people lead a blurred existence where concepts are not 
defined, issues are not clarified, and a balance is not 
attained. Since the condition of such a life is continuous 
blindness where objects and people always clash against each 
other, the result will be successive catastrophes leading to a 
confusion of religion and ideology. When things get to this 
stage, religion deteriorates from being a belief into being a 
sect and topples from religious tolerance to a rigid system. 
Therefore, what is religion and what is ideology? 
  It is difficult to find one definition for religion. 
However, one of its definitions is a sense of spirituality 
regarding the existence of an omnipotent single supreme power. 
This feeling becomes manifest in the various courses of life 
and is reflected in various behaviors. As for ideology, it 
consists of theories and the comprehensive objectives that 
constitute the basis for a social and political program. This 
is known as an ideology. 
  Islam is the religion. But the doctrines followed by some 
groups, especially the political Islam groups, are an ideology, 
not religion. This is because once politics enters religion, it 
destroys the latter's concepts, changes its content, and 
influences its essence. Religion is more noble than a doctrine, 
finer than regimes, more comprehensive than theories, and above 
taking sides and joining groups. When religion is restricted to 
an ideology, confined within a system, summarized into a theory, 
or formed into a party or group, when this happens it detracts 
from the freedom and divinity of religion and transforms it into 
a sectarian struggle, fighting regimes, contradicting theories, 
or clashing parties. 
  This cannot be justified by claiming that the Prophet, God's 
peace and blessings be upon him, practiced religion through 
politics. The reality is that when the Prophet, God's peace and 
blessings be upon him, practiced politics, he did so as part of 
his message with the intention of spreading it. This, according 
to Islamic understanding, took place under the supervision and 
follow- up of the inspiration, where every shortcoming was 
rectified on the spot. Any Muslim who attempts to practice 
politics after the Prophet's time, God's peace and blessings be 
upon him, where there is neither prophet nor inspiration, does 
so to realize certain goals and specific objectives. He does 
not do so because he is following a message from God or a part 
of a prophesy. Prophesies are over and done with. Evidence of 
this is that when politics infiltrated Islam, the great sedition 
took place. Muslims were divided into various parties--the 
Umayyads, the Hashemites, the Khawarijites [the oldest dissident 
religious sect of Islam], and other such parties. Each of these 
parties portrays the other as a heretic, and believes that its 
ideology is the absolute and the whole. Whoever does not adopt 
the ideology of that group becomes a rival, nay even an enemy, 
that must be fought and defeated. His blood and property become 
sanctioned. The practice of the Islamic parties and groups 
becomes killing each other and sanctioning the blood of Muslims 
outside their groups. Then, this turned into a war against 
Islam to kill Muslims. 
  Religion brings people together, and religious ideology 
divides them. Religion unites and ideology fragments. Religion 
reconciles people and ideology separates them. Religion is 
forgiving and ideology creates grudges. This is because 
religion comes from a perfect God while ideology was created by 
imperfect man. 
  This is why loyalty in religion is to God and God alone, 
the God of all mankind. All people are considered the family of 
God: They learn and practice the values of religion, accept and 
apply its morality, become linked to its history, and then 
spread it throughout humanity. When talking about ideology, 
loyalty is to the organization, or the party, or the group; 
belief is in the ideology even though it may be wrong; 
allegiance is to the amir even if he is misguided; obedience is 
to the rules set by mankind regardless of how clearly they 
contradict religion or call for killing innocent people or 
destroying homelands. 
  Many people have noticed that religious ideology is bad and 
that it is based, in the first place, on dividing people for 
earthly reasons. It is based primarily on changing religion 
into warring parties and fighting groups. These people have 
fought this ideology and made enemies with it. But because of 
the difficulty in setting definitions, and the confusion in and 
vagueness of issues, their enemies -- that is, the supporters of 
ideology -- accused them of being enemies of religion. The 
former, in actual fact, are the enemies of ideology, not 
religion. They might even be more religious and stronger 
believers than the people with ideologies who believe only in 
their ideology, adhere to the opinion of an individual, and obey 
the orders of a human being. 
  Ideology is the true enemy and actual foe of religion. This 
is because it restricts religion to one ideology, when religion 
has the capacity to incorporate many ideologies; ideology 
confines religion to the opinion of one person, while religion 
has the capacity to absorb many opinions; it limits religion 
inside empty slogans while religion rises above all slogans; it 
explains religion through general terms, while religion is based 
on a text and specific explanations. In the name of this 
ideology, many institutions have been created throughout history 
all over the world, monopolizing allegiance to themselves and 
waging wars in their own interests. They falsely allege that 
loyalty should be to them, not to God, and that wars are 
religious, while religion has nothing to do with war and killing. 
  Perhaps it is vital in this age, where many issues are 
intertwined, values are vague, and knowledge ambiguous, to 
clarify all matters, thus leaving no room for ambiguity or 
inadequacy. Facts should be made clear and specified. Religion 
should be distinguished from ideology. Religious laws should be 
distinguished from sectarianism to stress that religion is from 
God and ideology comes from humans. What stems from God calls 
for unity in worshipping the one and only God. No man or 
doctrine other than God's should be worshipped. "The same 
religion has He established for you as that which He enjoined on 
Noah - the which We have sent by inspiration to thee and that 
which We enjoined on Abraham, Moses, and Jesus: Namely that ye 
should remain steadfast in religion and make no divisions 
therein." [Koranic verse] "Say: "O people of the book! Come to 
common terms as between us and you: that we worship none but 
God." [Koranic verse] 
  The just person is one who does not confuse religion with 
ideology, but knows the scope of religion and the place for 
ideology. He does not place his belief in an organization, 
party, or group. He is not denying his own religious beliefs 
when he claims that an organization is not religious, or when he 
denies that religion is confined to a party or welded into a 
group. In fact, he would be a moderate capable of telling the 
difference between ideology and religion. He would be 
dedicating himself to his belief in God, and would work hard to 
spread his belief through his noble personality, good manners, 
harmony, and ability at reconciliation. These are qualities that 
start with the individual, and then spread to the family, the 
society, humanity, and the whole globe. He would thus be the 
person who through his creation wants to shape the world, and 
allow humanity to progress and the world to prosper. 

