BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ugur Sefkat: "The Greece-PKK Cooperation"] </F>
  [Text] Ankara--The tension between Turkey and Greece, which 
has been created as a result of the support Greek officials give 
to the PKK [Workers Party of Kurdistan] and the Greek intention 
to extend its territorial waters in the Aegean Sea to 12 miles, 
is continuing. Meanwhile, the support Greek officials have 
given to the PKK has come to light. In a report to the Prime 
Minister's Office some time ago, the officials explained how 
Greece uses the PKK to ax the Turkish tourism sector, which has 
become a serious rival to the Greek tourist industry, and the 
financial aid that country gives to the PKK sympathizers. Last 
week, President Suleyman Demirel sent a letter to President 
Konstandinos Karamanlis based on that report. He also furnished 
Karamanlis with an intelligence report on PKK activities in 
Greece. The report and the letter outline the names of the 
Greek Government officials who have contacted several PKK 
members, and discloses the dates those contacts were made. For 
example, the report revealed that Kharalambidhis, one of Prime 
Minister Andreas Papandreou's advisers, met with PKK leader 
Abdullan Ocalan some time ago and promised to establish a 
shipping agency in order to transport arms from Athens to the 
PKK. 
<H5>  Evidence </H5>
  The report outlined information on the support Greece gives 
to the PKK as follows: 
  1. Former Foreign Minister Andonios Samaras held secret 
talks 
with the PKK's ERNK [Kurdish People's Liberation Front] 
representative in Athens on 6 and 7 June 1991. 
  2. Following talks between the two sides, the Greek Ministry 
of Public Order instructed the immigration department, in 
writing, not to create problems for the PKK militants when they 
enter or leave Greece. In fact, 50 PKK militants entered Greece 
with no obstruction after they crossed the Maritsa River on 20 
July 1991. 
  3. Greek Deputies Mikhalis Galenianos, Elevtherios 
Verivakis, 
Elisavet Papazoi, Dhimitrios Vonatsos, and Elevtherios Verivakis 
met Abdullah Ocalan in Lebanon in October 1991. Speaking on TV 
Channel 29 after returning to Greece, they claimed that the PKK 
is not a terrorist organization and argued that it is waging a 
national liberation struggle. 
  4. Greece allows PKK militants to work as highly paid 
seamen. Some 25 percent of the wages paid to the militants is 
donated to the ERNK office. 
  5. In a statement to the Greek Cypriot daily O 
FILELEVTHEROS, Ocalan has claimed that the Kurds have reduced 
the strength of Turkey's threat to Cyprus and Greece. 
  6. Members of the PKK office in Athens cooperate with the 
EYP [Greek secret service organization]. They have infiltrated 
the Macedonian community in Greece to inform the EYP of its 
activities. 
  7. The first plan to hit Turkey's tourism sector, which 
grows every year, was drawn up in 1992. Several retired Greek 
officers, who work with the Greek secret service organization, 
met with the PKK members in Greece to draw up a plan to sabotage 
Turkey's tourism industry in that year. Their plan was put into 
effect in 1993. 
  8. PASOK [Panhellenic Socialist Movement] Deputies 
Verivakis, Kaloyianni, and Makhouris argued in a program on TV 
Channel 19 that Greece should support the PKK against Turkey. 
  9. Greek Deputy Alexandros Alavanos was arrested for trying 
to prevent the arrest of two members of a PKK group, which 
occupied the European Parliament during the ceremonies held to 
mark Nevruz in March 1992, by helping them to escape in his car. 
However, he was released because of his diplomatic immunity. 
  10. In a statement to the KURDISTAN REPORT, retired Admiral 
Andonios Nakhakis argued that the Greek people should cooperate 
with the PKK. 
  11. An account has been opened in the Greek National Bank's 
branch in Kaningos for the PKK militants in the camp on Lavrion 
Island. The account number is: 129/62639077. Two PKK 
militants, Samil Asmaad and Sinan Aslan, are taking care of the 
Kurdish people's affairs in Greece. 
  12. Under Secretary of the Greek Foreign Ministry Viryinia 
Tsoudherou claimed in May 1992 that the EC should support the 
Kurds. 
  13. The refugee camp on Lavrion Island, which is 70 km from 
Athens in the southeastern part of Greece, has been allocated to 
the PKK militants. The PKK maintains its activities through the 
Kurdistan Committee in Athens and the ERNK office. 
  14. The radio channel, which is known as the Voice of 
Kurdistan, is operated by the PKK. 
  15. Greek officials pay 30,000 Greek drachmas monthly to the 
ERNK members. 
  16. The Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs provides 
scholarships to 33 PKK members in Greece. 
  17. The mayor of Athens attended the Congress of Kurds in 
Bonn some time ago. The prime minister of Lower Saxony also 
attended that convocation. The Greek mayor argued that a 
Kurdish State should be established. 
  18. Deputies Dhimitrios Vonatsos, Elisavet Papazoi, Andonios 
Makhasis, and Kostas Dhimitris held a press conference in the 
ERNK office in Athens on 25 June 1993. A retired admiral held a 
news conference with several PKK militants on Kos Island on 8 
July. 
  19. Some 100 Greek drachmas are transferred to an account in 
the Ethniki Bank for the PKK militants. (The overall amount in 
that account is rather high) 
  20. A PKK delegation called on Minister of Public Order 
Stilianos Papathemelis on 14 October 1993. It asked that the 
officials facilitate the formalities for the PKK militants when 
they enter or leave Greece. 
  21. The ERNK office and the Kurdistan Committee are based in 
Athens. Their address is: 72/1 Ipokratis Avenue, Athens. 
However, the Greek Government has persistently denied their 
existence. 
  22. Kharalambidhis, who is one of Prime Minister Andreas 
Papandreou's advisers, held talks with Abdullah Ocalan in the 
al-Biqa' Valley in Lebanon some time ago. He promised to see to 
it that a shipping agency is established in Greece to facilitate 
the supply of arms to the PKK. He also promised to help that 
organization acquire arms and explosives, establish an 
import-export company as a front for that purpose, acquire 
forged passports, facilitate the entry of its militants who are 
expelled from foreign countries, and provide ideological 
training for the Kurds. As a result of Haralambidhis' meeting 
with Ocalan, ideological training courses have been organized 
for the PKK militants in the camps in Athens and Piraievs. The 
militants are dispatched to the al-Biqa' Valley after receiving 
ideological training for six months. 
  23. A ship with a cargo of arms for the PKK was dispatched 
from Greece to the Port of Latakia in Syria in May 1992. 
  24. Former Foreign Minister Andonios Samaras instructed the 
donation of 10 million dollars from Greece's secret funds to the 
PKK. 
  25. Greece allocates 1 million dollars for the PKK in 
support of its campaign to prevent tourists from visiting Turkey. 
  26. A group of Greek deputies visited Lice some time ago at 
the invitation of the PKK. When Deputy Dhimitrios Vonatsos 
returned to Greece he said the following: "Had it not been for 
the PKK, the two army corps in Diyarbakir would have been based 
in the Aegean region." 
  27. A group of Greek deputies attended the Democracy Party 
Congress in Ankara some time ago. They promised to support that 
party. 

