Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Francis Ahouadi] </F>
  [Excerpts] Lome, Jan 6 (AFP) -- Unidentified gunmen tried 
to assassinate Togolese President Gnassingbe Eyadema before a 
shootout left 12 dead at the army camp here where he lives, 
sources close to him said Thursday as further gunfire could be 
heard. A group of men shot at the the West African leader's 
armoured Mercedes car Wednesday with automatic weapons and a 
rocket-launcher, but Eyadema was not in the vehicle at the time, 
the sources said. His chauffeur, driving the car at a time when 
the president often returns to his official residence in the 
camp, was unhurt, they added. 
  Shots and explosions could be heard Thursday morning from 
the 
western parts of Lome close to the border with Ghana, but 
residents had begun to venture out on to the streets by 11:00 
A.M. (1100 GMT). 
  In a shoot-out that followed the assassination bid, 10 of 
the 
assailants and two soldiers were killed, officials said. 
  Authorities have not fully identified the attackers, 
referring to them only as "armed elements," but charged that 
they came from Ghana, in what observers took to be an accusation 
targetting exiled opposition leader Gilchrist Olympio. Olympio 
was not in the Ghanaian capital Accra on Wednesday and told AFP 
from London that he knew nothing about the operation. In May 
1992, Olympio's own car was ambushed in an attack widely 
attributed to the armed forces loyal to General Eyadema, which 
left him badly wounded and killed another opposition leader. 
  Mopping-up operations continued Thursday as the army and 
police sought members of the group said to be hiding here after 
trying to "encircle the camp and close in on the people inside," 
according to an official statement. 
  Eyadema and Prime Minister Joseph Koffigoh were at Eyadema's 
private home less than two kilometers (a mile) from the camp. 
The president "personally directed the counterattack" from his 
home, an informed source said. [passage omitted] 
  Opposition leaders reached by AFP refused to comment on the 
attack, saying they had inadequate information. [passage 
omitted] 

