BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 24 a government panel on Friday [24 
June] approved a long-term plutonium use program that rules out 
the manufacturing and possession of plutonium in a greater 
amount than needed for its nuclear power generation, officials 
said. 
  The peaceful plutonium use program received approval by the 
Atomic Energy Commission, the nation's highest nuclear 
policy-formulating panel, headed by Science and Technology 
Agency Director General Mikio Omi, they said. 
  To this end, the committee decided to defer a plan to start 
the operation of a projected second plutonium extraction plant 
until after 2010, when it was originally scheduled to start up. 
The second plant is only on the drawing board, with its 
construction site undecided. 
  Completion of the second extraction plant would increase 
Japan's plutonium production capability beyond that of an 
extraction plant now under construction at the village of 
Rokkasho in Aomori Prefecture, they said. 
  The Rokkasho factory is Japan's first plutonium extraction 
facility that will start producing plutonium in 2001. 
  The officials said the new program was officially adopted to 
eliminate international anxieties that Japan may divert excess 
plutonium into atomic weapons production. 
  On top of its compliance with safeguards obligations to 
accept regular, unimpeded checks by international atomic energy 
agency monitors, Japan will never exchange nuclear technologies 
with countries other than Britain, France, Germany and the 
United States to prevent nuclear arms proliferation, the report 
says. 
  The report, adopted by the commission Friday, says the 
government will make policy decisions around 2010 concerning the 
extraction capacity and technology for use in the planned second 
extraction plant. 
  The program calls for burning plutonium from Japan's 
existing 
nuclear reactors at a few light water-type nuclear reactors for 
electricity generation, starting in the latter half of the 
1990s, the report says. 
  Japan now entrusts British and French extraction plants with 
extracting plutonium from its nuclear reactors. 
  The number of light water-type nuclear reactors that will 
use 
plutonium as part of its fuel will be increased to more than 10 
by 2010 to consume an increased amount of plutonium coming from 
the Rokkasho plant, it says. 
  However, Japan will not scrap its basic nuclear policy of 
counting on "nuclear fuel cycle" for its future electricity 
needs, the report says. 
  Nuclear fuel cycle refers to electricity-generation use of 
plutonium extracted from spent fuel rods downloaded from a 
nuclear reactor that is energized by enriched uranium. 
  In line with this basic stance, Japan will start building a 
"demonstrator" fast-breeder reactor (FBR) with the power 
generation capacity of 660,000 kilowatts at the onset of the 
21st century, they said. It will be followed by construction of 
another FBR to be put into commercial use by 2030, they said. 
  The FBR, which generates electricity by burning plutonium, 
is 
known to produce more plutonium than it consumes. 
  The new decision to defer the planned operation of a second 
plutonium extraction plant will force Japan to store spent 
nuclear fuel downloaded from various reactors inside the 
premises of various nuclear power plants, the report says. 
  While storing the spent nuclear fuel in the nuclear plants 
for the time being, Japan will consider how to more effectively 
store the spent nuclear fuel that will accumulate in coming 
years, according to the report. 

