BFN 

<F P=106> [By Geoffrey Crothall in Beijing] </F>
  [Text] China's best-known dissident, Wei Jingsheng, could 
be facing new criminal charges and a possible second prison term 
following his detention by the Beijing public security 
authorities. 
  The official Chinese media announced yesterday that Wei was 
being investigated by the police for what it called "suspected 
new criminal offences." 
  "Wei is being interrogated and placed under surveillance by 
the public security authorities in accordance with the law 
because he violated the law on many occasions and is suspected 
of having committed new crimes while on parole and while being 
deprived of his political rights," Xinhua (the New China News 
Agency) said. 
  "Surveillance," according to the Chinese legal code is a 
form 
of house arrest whereby "the judicial authorities will appoint a 
place for the criminal to live and use forceful measures to 
monitor his freedom of movement." 
  While a court official said Wei was being placed under 
surveillance "where he lived," his family said they had no 
information of his whereabouts. 
  Xinhua did not specify what crimes Wei was suspected of 
committing but it is understood his outspoken criticism of the 
Government and the Communist Party and his contacts with other 
members of the dissident community and foreign journalists could 
provide grounds for new charges. 
  Wei's original 15-year sentence was based on his alleged 
provision of "military secrets" to a foreign journalist and 
engaging in "counterrevolutionary propaganda and incitement," 
referring to his publications during the Democracy Wall movement 
of the late 1970's. 
  Analysts said that Wei's statements since his release on 
September 14 last year have been just as critical as those made 
during the Democracy Wall period but point out that the 
political climate in Beijing has changed considerably since 1979. 
  Most analysts believe Wei will be kept under surveillance at 
least until the fifth anniversary of the June 4 Beijing massacre 
so that he cannot take part in any new protests. 
  "What happens after that will very much depend on the 
political situation at the time," a diplomat said. 

