Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Chisinau BASAPRESS, 12/2/1994 -- "Moldova has a 
strategically important geo-political situation and therefore 
Europe and the whole world wants Moldova to be stable," states 
to the newspaper PAMANT SI OAMENI (LAND AND PEOPLE) Dumitru 
Diacov, head of the political section of the Moldovan Embassy in 
Russia and Moldovan Democratic Agrarian Party [PDAM] candidate 
in the [27 February parliamentary] elections. Concerning the 
unionist options expressed on both banks of Prut [unification 
with Romania], Diacov says that "even though it seems a paradox, 
there are people against the unification in Romania itself. 
These are first of all young people, engineers, and 
intellectuals who fear to become unemployed as a consequence of 
the unification. He refers to a poll made in Romania in 1992, 
"which had surprising results." It revealed that "19 percent of 
the polled persons were against Moldova's unification with 
Romania and 35 percent said this process could take place in the 
future. Hence the conclusion that most Romanians do not want to 
unite," says Diacov. "During four years of my staying in 
Romania (as bureau head of the TASS news agency in Bucharest) I 
realized that I have there a lot of real friends. We could 
learn much from each other, and as to the issue of unification 
let our grandsons who will be less interested in the `heritage 
of the past' decide," says Diacov. According to him, any 
attempt to revise the borders in Europe might cause danger and 
due to several objective causes it will remain so for a long 
time. Russia should not consider Moldova a region that 
threatens its stability; it should have a more clear attitude 
regarding the issues of the Dniester Republic and that of the 
14th Russian Army. Moldovan diplomacy should promote a more 
active, clear, and better coordinated policy in its relations 
with Russia. Small countries should have only friends and not 
enemies, states Diacov. 

