BFN 

  [Text] Brussels, May 18 (XINHUA) -- A senior Chinese 
leader stressed here today that China respects the general human 
rights principle but that must be combined with the specific 
conditions of each country. 
  Li Ruihuan, chairman of the National Committee of the 
Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference, said China respects 
the general human rights principle acknowledged by the 
international community, which is positive to the development 
and progress of mankind, 
  In a keynote speech at the Royal Institute of International 
Relations in Brussels, the Chinese leader said that China, as a 
member of the United Nations Human Rights Committee, supports 
and has taken an active part in the UN efforts to promote and 
protect human rights and basic freedom under the UN Charter. 
  Apart from acceding to eight international human rights 
documents including the "Universal Declaration of Human Rights," 
China has also made important contributions to the deliberation, 
drafting and conclusion of "The Vienna Declaration and Program 
of Action" approved at the world human rights conference last 
year, he added. 
  However, the Chinese official pointed out that "the general 
human rights principle must be combined with specific conditions 
of each country, without which human rights would simply be 
hollow words." 
  As the historical background, cultural tradition and social 
economy vary from country to country, so do the content, forms, 
methods and measures of the human rights policies, he said. 
  It would never work to require different countries to 
indiscriminately apply the same model and take same measures in 
implementing the general human rights principle, he said. 
  "The human rights principle would not be effectively carried 
out until various conditions are taken into consideration," he 
added. 
  For many developing countries, the first and foremost human 
rights to be enjoyed is the right of subsistence and 
development, without which other human rights and freedom just 
could not make sense. 
  The Chinese leader pointed out that people in many 
developing 
countries are still living in poverty with heavy burdens of 
foreign debts, and therefore "the international community, 
especially the developed countries, should fully study these 
problems and seriously push for their solution when they are 
showing concern over the human rights situations there." 
  He also said that the human rights situation of each country 
is inevitably bound to its social development and at the same 
time can be improved gradually along with the progress of the 
society and deeper understanding of the human rights. 
  If the world was divided into two categories, with one just 
supervising the human rights situation in other countries 
without improving that of their own and the other always being 
supervised with no right to speak for themselves, this itself 
would be in contrary to the general human rights principle, he 
noted. 
  In fact, Li said, the human rights situation also has room 
for improvement in some developed countries, where a 
considerable portion of the population are living below the 
poverty line and some minorities are suffering from 
discrimination. 
  He said China guards against interference in other 
countries' 
internal affairs under the human rights pretext and favors the 
principle of mutual respect and understanding, seeking common 
ground while keeping differences and making joint progress in 
the process of carrying out the general principle of the human 
rights. 
  He stressed that China opposes using human rights issue as a 
means to impose political pressure and interfere in another 
country's internal affairs as the practice itself is in 
violation of the human rights of the whole people of the other 
country. 
  Having suffered a lot from imperialist aggression and 
bullying for more than 100 years, the Chinese people are quite 
aware that the human rights of individuals are closely linked 
with their state sovereignty, as the individual's human rights 
would be totally lost if his country can not have independence, 
he said 
  "Therefore, the Chinese people are extremely sensitive to 
and 
will never tolerate any form of interference in China's internal 
affairs," Li underlined. 
  Nevertheless, the Chinese leader noted, the Chinese 
Government is willing to participate in international dialogues 
in the human rights field. 
  "It is normal to have different views on human rights issue 
in the international community, but the differences can be 
bridged through consultation, dialogue and exchange of views 
rather than resorting to pressure and sanction from time to 
time, he said. 
  "Dialogue is always better than confrontation," said Li. 
  As a permanent member of the UN Security Council, China will 
continue fulfilling its duty and contributing to promoting 
international cooperation in the human rights field, Li pledged. 
  The Chinese official arrived here Tuesday [17 May] for a 
five- day visit to Belgium, the last leg of his 
five-European-nation tour. 

