Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Dmitriy Kamin: "Federal Assembly Begins Work. A </F>
Package of Presidential Edicts Submitted to the Duma for 
Consideration"] 
  [Text] The government is ready to use the most 
constructive elements from programs of the parliament's 
political factions when adjusting its economic policy. This was 
said yesterday by Viktor Chernomyrdin in his opening address to 
the State Duma. No specific proposals of the factions were 
mentioned, however. At the same time, the legislators' starting 
positions with regard to the executive authorities may become 
clear in the very near future -- yesterday the Duma received a 
package of 64 presidential edicts, the legitimacy of which must 
be confirmed by the Federal Assembly. Apparently, the 
parliamentarians' reaction to the president's lawmaking activity 
in the period of the "phased Constitutional reform" will be the 
first step in establishing a new relationship between the two 
branches of power. 
  At the first Duma meeting, which was devoted to procedural 
matters, coordinated actions of the communists, agrarians, and 
members of the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia did not allow 
"Russia's Choice" to push through a decision reducing the 
minimum number of deputies required for setting up a 
parliamentary faction. Thus, the "Russia's Choice" plan to 
increase its clout in parliament by fragmenting the bloc into a 
number of smaller factions did not materialize, which may give 
the parliamentary opposition a shot in the arm. 
  Given this, the results of the State Duma's review of the 
package of presidential edicts holds particular interest, 
because the negative influence of the opposition has so far been 
minimized by a lack of actual mechanisms of appealing against 
presidential edicts -- there is no procedure for ruling them 
unconstitutional, whereas a direct challenge to the president is 
dangerous for the Duma's current lineup: Three incidents of 
disagreement may give grounds for dissolving the chamber. In 
addition, the presidential edicts may find serious support in 
the influence of parliamentary lawyers and economists who are 
presently analyzing the practice of their application, while the 
opposition has concentrated its efforts on political tussles. 
  For instance, State Duma Deputy Aleksandr Pochinok (former 
deputy finance minister, earlier chairman of the Supreme Soviet 
planning and budget commission) is certain that splitting profit 
tax revenues between the federal and local budgets and 
establishing new tax rates for individuals were "progressive 
steps" taken by the president. On the other hand, the increase 
in value-added tax, in his view, may elicit disgruntlement, "and 
the essentially progressive change in the procedure of bank 
taxation (in which profits, not incomes, are taxed) requires 
that the practice of its application be analyzed." Nonetheless, 
Pochinok believes that the bulk of the presidential edicts from 
the package, including the edict on benefits granted to domestic 
banks, "need to be approved as quickly as possible," because 
this will speed up drastic changes in the budget, taxation, and 
banking sectors, an effort that will require another 60 or so 
new laws. Among priority steps he also mentioned enactments on 
audits, on the securities market, and on indexing deposits. 
  It is worth noting that the president's Commission for 
Legislative Proposals may just as well accelerate the passage of 
presidential edicts through the Duma -- a lack of serious expert 
appraisal structures in the new parliament may render the 
former's recommendations decisive. 

