BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 28 (XINHUA)--The Chinese Government 
still hopes that the Dalai Lama will abandon his idea of 
"Tibetan independence," stop living in exile and return to China 
for his remaining years, a spokesman said. 
  The spokesman for the United Front Work Department of the 
Chinese Communist Party Central Committee said that negotiation 
is the "only appropriate" method for making arrangements to 
resolve this question. 
  "We hope that the Dalai Lama will size up the situation, go 
with the tide of historical development and make a correct 
choice," he said in a recent interview with XINHUA in the run-up 
to the 43rd anniversary of the peaceful liberation of Tibet, 
which falls on May 23. 
  The spokesman answered questions about development and 
construction in the Tibet Autonomous Region and the policies of 
China's central government regarding the Dalai Lama. 
  Question [Q]: What profound changes have taken place in 
Tibet 
over the past 43 years? 
  Answer [A]: On May 23, 1951, the central government and the 
Tibetan local government signed a 17-article agreement on the 
peaceful liberation of Tibet, realizing the liberation of Tibet 
by peaceful means. 
  The peaceful liberation of Tibet is an important component 
of 
the Chinese people's liberation cause. Since then, as other 
nationalities in China, the Tibetan people have fully enjoyed 
all rights of equality among all nationalities and have embarked 
on the road of freedom and happiness. 
  Over the past 43 years Tibet has undergone sweeping changes, 
from the extremely backward serf system to modernization. 
Millions of serfs have become masters of their fate, while 
large numbers of Tibetan workers, intellectuals and officials 
have taken up the task of building and managing Tibet. 
  With the assistance and support from the central government 
and other parts of China, and through the common efforts of the 
Tibetan people, Tibet has scored great achievements in 
construction in various fields. 
  In 1993, Tibet harvested a record 620,000 tons of grain; the 
number of large domestic animals in Tibet rose to 23.2 million; 
its modern industry, which started from scratch, manufactured 
470 million yuan worth of goods; and its energy, transportation 
and telecommunications conditions improved markedly. 
  Meanwhile, the fine traditional Tibetan culture has been 
inherited and developed, and big strides were made in education, 
science, culture, public health and other undertakings. The 
Tibetan people's living standards have improved markedly, with 
the Tibetan population soaring to two million from one million 
in the 1950s. 
  The policies of the Communist Party and the government on 
nationality and religious affairs enjoy wholehearted support of 
the Tibetan people and all patriotic persons in Tibet. All 
parts of Tibet are now a picture of vitality and prosperity. 
  The Tibetan people have made great contributions to 
maintaining the motherland's unity, the unity among the people 
of various nationalities and the country's modernization drive. 
  In the future, in the course of reforms, opening up and 
establishing a socialist market economic structure, the central 
government will continue to pursue policies conducive to Tibet's 
economic growth and the improvement in living standards of the 
Tibetan people. 
  It will continue to mobilize people of various nationalities 
in China to assist Tibet in speeding up its development. It 
will also combine its assistance with Tibet's self-development 
efforts and gear its economic assistance with the great 
environment of reforms in order to lay the groundwork for 
sustained economic development in Tibet so as to achieve common 
prosperity. 
  Q: It is a historical fact that Tibet is an inseparable part 
of China. However, even today, the Dalai Lama is still in exile 
and engaged in activities to split the motherland. What are the 
policies of the central government concerning the Dalai Lama? 
Have there been any changes in these policies? 
  A: The principled stand and basic attitude of the central 
government regarding the Dalai Lama and his followers have been 
consistent and clear, with no changes at all. 
  As long as the Dalai Lama recognizes the fact that Tibet is 
an inseparable part of China, totally abandons his idea of 
"Tibetan independence" and stops engaging in activities to split 
the motherland, the central government would welcome his 
stopping to live in exile as soon as possible, returning to 
China to contribute to upholding the unification of the 
motherland, national unity and economic development and do 
something good for the prosperity and happiness of the Tibetan 
people. 
  In 1979 Deng Xiaoping made it clear to a private 
representative of the Dalai Lama that the question of overriding 
importance is that Tibet is part of China, and this should be 
the criterion to judge what is right and what is not. 
  In answering a question from a XINHUA reporter on May 19, 
1991, Premier Li Peng reiterated the policies of the central 
government, saying that there is only one fundamental principle 
-- that Tibet is an inseparable part of China. 
  On that question there is no room at all for bargaining, Li 
said, adding that the central government is always ready to 
contact the Dalai Lama, provided that he must stop engaging in 
activities to split the motherland and change his position of 
"Tibetan independence." 
  Negotiations can be held on any questions, but definitely 
not 
on "Tibetan independence," the premier stressed. 
  The above policies of the central government remain 
unchanged. 
  Tibetan affairs are China's internal affairs. Any attempts 
to "internationalize the Tibet question" will never succeed and 
will be opposed resolutely by the Chinese people. 
  Q: According to reports by foreign wire services, the 
Dalai Lama has claimed on different occasions that he has made 
"maximum concessions in a series of initiatives and proposals 
which clearly lie within the framework for negotiations" in 
which all questions except the independence of Tibet can be 
negotiated. Is that true? 
  A: It would be the Dalai Lama's maximum progress if he has 
genuinely abandoned his stand for "the independence of Tibet". 
But it is regrettable that we have seen no signs of such 
progress up to now. The Dalai Lama has never admitted that 
Tibet is an inseparable part of China since he went into exile, 
neither has he stopped the activities to split the motherland. 
  His various claims or proposals have always centered on the 
"independence of Tibet". Recently, he referred to Tibet as a 
"captive nation," saying that "I firmly believe ... will 
eventually lead our captive nation to freedom and peace in 
dignity" [as received]. His so-called "concessions" are nothing 
but an adjustment in tactics, essentially still sticking to his 
claims of "independence of Tibet." 
  Q: It is said that the central government has made 
painstaking efforts for negotiations with the Dalai Lama. But 
the Dalai Lama has alleged on many occasions that the central 
government is unwilling to negotiate with him. What are the 
actual facts? 
  A: Up to now the Dalai Lama has not abandoned his stand for 
the "independence of Tibet." This is the largest obstacle to 
negotiations. The central government has worked hard to bring 
about the result that through negotiations, the Dalai Lama and 
his followers are reunited with the motherland after they 
abandon their independence stand. This has demonstrated the 
sincerity and patience of the central government. 
  Since 1979, the central government departments have agreed 
and actually received the Dalai Lama's private representatives 
back in the motherland and listened attentively to their reports 
of the Dalai Lama's intentions. Some representatives have been 
greeted by leading members of the central government. 
  Early in 1989, the Panchen Lama died. Zhao Puchu, president 
of the China Buddhist Association, personally handed a letter of 
invitation to the private representatives of the Dalai Lama, 
inviting him back home to attend the funeral ceremonies. 
  Such a solely religious invitation provided an excellent 
opportunity for the Dalai Lama to meet with people in Buddhist 
circles at home after spending over 30 years in exile. However, 
the Dalai Lama turned down this invitation. 
  After the changes in the international situation in the 
later 
half of 1989, the Dalai Lama suspended contacts with the central 
government. In the same year, the Dalai Lama brazenly split 
China into several parts, like "Tibet, Xinjiang, Mongolia, 
Manchu," etc, in maps in his book "Freedom in Exile". 
  In 1992, as China's domestic situation had not turned in the 
direction which the Dalai Lama had anticipated, he asked to 
resume the contacts with the central government. On two 
occasions in 1992 and 1993, central government departments 
received the Dalai Lama's private representatives. 
  The reason that the central government did not publicize the 
over a dozen years' talks with the Dalai Lama's private 
representatives was that the central government departments 
explained on various occasions during the talks with the Dalai 
Lama's private representatives that the contacts were secret and 
should not be publicized. The Dalai Lama's private 
representatives made the same promises. We regret that the 
Dalai Lama's side has broken its promises. It not only 
publicized such contacts, but distorted the talks so as to 
mislead the public. 
  Q: Why have the bilateral contacts not produced any results? 
  A: The reason that the contacts have not produced any 
results and we cannot start our negotiations is that the Dalai 
Lama's side has not reached a common understanding with us on 
the fundamental issue that "Tibet is an inseparable part of 
China." 
  They have even referred to the fundamental principles held 
by 
the central government as "preconditions and obstacles to 
negotiations". We think that the fundamental principle is not a 
so-called precondition and obstacle to hinder negotiations, but 
the basis and guarantee for successful negotiations. 
  Q: It is clear that the responsibility for not being able to 
hold negotiations lies with the Dalai Lama's side. But is there 
any possibility for progress as the situation stands now? 
  A: In China, we have a saying: "When the melon is ripe it 
falls off its stem; when the water flows, a channel is formed," 
which means that when conditions are ripe, success will come. 
  Everything has its own laws of development. But some things 
will not be obvious or widely perceived as long as they have not 
developed to a certain stage. The central government will 
continue its efforts with sincerity and patience. After all the 
Dalai Lama is a Chinese citizen. We still hope that he will 
abandon his idea of "independence of Tibet", stop living in 
exile and return to China for his remaining years. Negotiation 
is the only appropriate method for making arrangements to 
resolve this question. We hope that the Dalai Lama will size up 
the situation, go with the tide of historical development and 
make a correct choice. 

