Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Legislative and Parliamentary Affairs Division. On 
the occasion of the beginning of the 16th anniversary of the 
triumph of the Islamic revolution and the arrival of the blessed 
Ten Days Dawn Celebration, five Majles deputies answered three 
questions from RESALAT. With thanks to Hojjat ol-Eslam Baghani, 
deputy from Sabzevar and chief of the Legislative and Judicial 
Affairs Commission, Dr. 'Abdkhoda'i, deputy from Mashhad and 
chief of the Culture and Higher Education Commission, Seyyed 
Reza Taqavi, deputy from Tehran and chief of the Guidance and 
Islamic Art Commission, Engineer Mohsen Yahyavi, deputy from 
Tehran and chief of the Oil Commission and Mohsen Kuhkan, deputy 
from Lanjan, we direct your attention to the questions and 
answers. 
<H5>  Three Questions From RESALAT to Majles Deputies </H5>
  1. What are the best gains of the revolution? 
  2. What are the shortcomings of the revolution? 
  3. What is the most important duty of the officials and the 
people to preserve and continue the revolution? 
<H5>  Answer From Mr. Taqavi, Deputy From Tehran </H5>
  Public participation in the affairs of the revolution is one 
of the important achievements of this revolution. 
  In answer to the first question he said: As the greatest 
event of the century, the Islamic revolution has affected the 
world in various ways. Today the international societies and 
world policy planners cannot ignore this great intellectual and 
revolutionary wave in their projects and decisions, because in 
the world's political geography the Islamic revolution of Iran 
has achieved its high position and no power has the ability to 
eliminate it. The world that opposes this revolution's 
aspirations has spared nothing in its enmity, its rancor, its 
brutality and its attempts to overthrow this change, from the 
economic embargo to domestic assassinations, the imposed war and 
other plots. One of the wonders of the Islamic revolution is 
that it has resisted proudly and has continued to make its way 
through these obstacles. 
  One of the Islamic revolution's most important successes is 
that it has been able to awaken the light of awareness and 
wakefulness in the hearts and minds of a great mass of the 
world's oppressed and deprived people. It has created an 
intellectual and cultural wave concerning the place of religion 
and religious practice. In a world of polytheism and lust, this 
is a great achievement this revolution has made. Today this 
revolution inspires religious crusading and struggle for the 
deprived people of Lebanon, the oppressed people of Palestine, 
the heros of Algeria and the upright people of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, and they have risen to fight and wage religious war 
relying on this idea. It is not without reason that the 
imperialists and idolaters of our age are very afraid of this 
wave of awakening in the nations that adhere to Islam. [passage 
omitted discussing the accomplishments of the revolution in 
general terms] 
  1. A dangerous disease in the revolution is reactionary 
thought, which is besetting it like a plague; it will soon have 
the ability to convert any proud movement to silence or 
withdrawal. Reactionaries, with their deceptive and apparently 
concerned appearance, initially attract to themselves the naive 
and fearful, those with little substance and a superficial view, 
and they make them pessimistic about the changes of the 
revolution. They gradually make the people lose enthusiasm about 
the affairs of the revolution and bring the revolution up 
against problems. It appears to be a simple thing to deal with 
these people, who have a handsome exterior, because the Noble 
Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "Two groups have broken my 
back, the reckless world and the ignorant recluse." 
  2. Another disease in the revolution is "extremist 
revisionism." This group, like the reactionaries, is also 
destructive. They distort the principles and fundamentals of the 
revolution with inappropriate and unacceptable analyses, and 
they draw the revolution into deviation by using the appeals of 
renewal and the inner tendency of human beings towards diversity. 
  3. Another disease in the revolution is that its aspirations 
and programs do not go beyond slogans and talk. To get more 
public support and to create conditions for its export, every 
revolution must get beyond slogans and into action as quickly as 
possible, and it must solve the problems of life to an 
acceptable extent. A revolution that is unable to correct 
malfunctions will not succeed. 
  An important mission for every revolution is to set models 
in 
various sectors. A good model is the best and most evocative 
evidence of a revolution's capability. The model is the precise 
action and physical manifestation of slogans and aspirations. 
Therefore, one of the important shortcomings of the slogan is 
the nonconformity of action to words. 
  1 [as published] - Another disease in the revolution is 
disputes and alienation among the revolutionary forces. 
Opportunists and flatterers benefit greatly wherever these 
disputes exist. They have gained a foothold for themselves 
inside the structure of the government by making use of the 
atmosphere of conflict, and they have made the revolution 
deviate with their explanations and justifications. 
<H3>  Mr. Taqavi Said in Answer to the Third Question [sentence as 
published] </H3>
  Officials must serve, and they must work sincerely and set 
their hearts on solving the problems of the people, and the 
people must also support the officials in view of the criteria 
mentioned. 
  The officials and the people must keep the revolution's 
deprived in mind in whatever they do, and they must act in the 
framework of guidance, aspirations, explanations and sacred 
ideals. 
  In the Islamic revolution this framework is the imamate and 
the concept of the vice-regency of the chief jurisconsult. The 
chief jurisconsult is a person who is fully qualified in terms 
of theological knowledge and whose actions are effective and 
just. The people and the officials must make the chief 
jurisconsult their standard for truth and falshood and justice 
and oppression, just as has been done so far, to guarantee the 
revolution's continuation. 
  Full public supervision of official activities will mean 
that 
work will be done on the straight path of the Islamic revolution 
and with greater soundness, and weakness and deviation will be 
reduced. Consequently positive effects such as growth in public 
confidence will occur, and following that, the desire and 
enthusiasm for support will reach a peak. 
  For the revolution to continue, the people and the officials 
must think beyond themselves and their personal and class 
interests. They must think of the revolution and its Islamic and 
human aspirations. They must put the needs of the revolution 
ahead of their own needs for the revolution to continue. 
<H5>  Answer From Dr. 'Abdkhoda'i, Deputy From Mashhad </H5>
  The more our country leans toward consumerism, the more 
dependent it will be, and with dependence the foundations of the 
revolution are shaken. 
  In answer to the first question, Dr. 'Abd Khoda'i said: 
  The Islamic revolution was a bright star shining on the 
world's dark horizon. It made Muslims aware of their Islamic 
essence. This must be considered the revolution's most important 
achievement. Before the triumph of the Islamic revolution the 
world was ruled by the Eastern and Western blocs. They made 
plans in any way they wished for the weak people and the Third 
World. One billion Muslims had no identity. The leaders of the 
Islamic nations were dependent on the West or on the East, and 
what was not a factor in the world of politics was Islam and its 
aspirations. 
  With the emergence of the Islamic revolution, the people 
understood their orthodox authenticity. The Muslim people of 
Algeria, who had been put down by hand-picked imperialist 
agents, proved to the world that love for Islam burns in the 
depths of their souls. Although the brave Muslims of Egypt are 
in prison, instead of "glory to the Arabs" the cry "glory to 
God, his prophet and to the believers" is ringing in their 
hearts. Although the Muslim people of Bosnia spend the dark 
nights under savage Serb bombardment, the heartening cry of 
"there is not god but God" rises to the sky from their minarets. 
In short, a great many of the world's Muslims have returned to 
themselves and have understood their Islamic essence. This in 
itself is the beginning of a great world change with regard to 
Islam. Today many intellectuals admit that Islam is the source 
of the greatest world changes, a change that fills the hearts of 
the world's deprived people and has shaken world imperialism. 
  Before the triumph of the Islamic revolution in our country, 
a few educated people under the influence of Marx and Mao said 
that their ideas were liberating and progressive, and some 
people also thought progress and advancement in the country 
depended on putting religion and religious practice aside and 
traveling the road taken by the Western nations. Before the 
revolution art, television and movies portrayed the ugliest 
films. There were shameful images on the streets of Tehran and 
many other cities that modesty of expression and writing would 
never have permitted. In a nation whose foundation was Islam and 
Shi'ism, millions of people were disgusted, and their disgust 
was imprisoned in their breasts. 
  The greatest fruit of the revolution was that it made the 
world of Islam and the Muslims aware of their Islamic identity. 
Although we have not yet fully achieved Islamic goals, we have 
found salvation from the failed situation of the past. 
  He said another achievement of the Islamic revolution was 
political independence. He said: Our country was under the 
domination of foreign governments for years. Since the time of 
the Qajars our country was the center of attacks and invasions 
by Russia and the English, so that at the time the interests of 
England and America were achieved, the most humiliating things 
were imposed on our nation such as the capitulation, but in the 
Islamic Republic the officials have risen from among the nation 
and are not dominated by foreigners. 
  Inside the monarchy most officials spent the evenings at 
fancy gatherings, but in the Islamic Republic a group of 
officials spends the evenings in prayer. At that time officials 
went to work with their thinking clouded by the effects of 
alcohol, but in the Islamic Republic of Iran they think for the 
people with the Imam's ideas taken from the Koran and the Nahj 
ol-Balagheh. 
  Our dear people must realize that our three government 
powers 
make their decisions independently and there is no type of 
foreign dominion over them. This is the greatest source of pride. 
  In this connection a point that must be noted is the role of 
the position of the vice-regency of the chief jurisconsult and 
the leadership. In recent years as changes have occurred with 
our neighbor to the north, meaning the Soviet Union, they have 
suffered impotence-causing domestic wars because of not having 
proper leadership, and there have been continuous problems for 
them. 
  The people must never forget the role of orthodox faith and 
leadership. Our nation, taking inspiration from the exalted 
orthodoxy of Islam and the principle of the vice-regency of the 
chief jurisconsult, has overcome the difficult conditions of the 
period of the revolution and is now moving with political 
stability and national harmony along the path of reconstruction. 
  One of the blessed effects of the Islamic revolution is the 
nation's growth and development. The valuable services the 
Islamic Republic gives to the deprived and remote areas cannot 
be compared to what was happening before the revolution. Before 
the revolution there were 160,000 university students. Today 
this number has risen to 900,000. The literacy crusade has had 
outstanding success in making many people literate who could not 
read or write. Before the triumph of the revolution Muslim women 
had to see male physicians for simple surgery and to give birth, 
but the number of female physicians has now increased 
significantly. The infant mortality rate has dropped 
significantly since the time before the revolution, in such a 
way that Iran has been praised by the WHO. 
  In the years after the triumph of the revolution thousands 
of 
kilometers of rural roads and several thousand schools and 
health clinics were built throughout the country, and thousands 
of villages were afforded the blessings of electrical power and 
healthy drinking water. Although the country was caught up in 
the imposed war for eight years, overall it has had outstanding 
growth and tens of thousands of development, industrial and 
service projects have been created in the country. 
  Of course, the people must take note of the basic point that 
under the regime of the idolaters world conditions for buying 
oil were better than they are today, and every barrel of oil 
sold for $36, in some years oil revenues were more than $24 
billion and the nation's population was about 30 million. In 
recent years, however, the price of oil has gone as low as about 
$10 and the nation's population has reached about 60 million. 
  In the past, however, except in a few cases infrastructure 
work was not done. Even though the country was sitting on a sea 
of oil and gas, petrochemical products were imported. Those 
affiliated with the royal court plundered the nation's revenues 
and put it in their accounts outside the country. They made 
thousands of home and real estate purchases abroad and spent the 
money on their own entertainment. Today, however, with less 
revenue than was available at that time and despite the losses 
caused by the war, the nation is moving in the direction of 
reconstruction and self-sufficiency. Of course, I am not denying 
the existence of problems in the country. We have problems with 
education, the economy and inflation. 
  The deputy from Mashhad then said in answer to the second 
question: One of the diseases of the revolution is the 
weakening of the aspirations of the revolution. If we are 
indifferent to the aspirations of Islam, it will be the greatest 
affliction for the revolution. The problem of the cultural 
invasion that is being imposed on the country by foreigners is 
one of the revolution's most important afflictions, which is 
sometimes direct and sometimes indirect. This can take the form 
of films, videotapes, or propaganda in the area of ostentation 
and consumerism. The more our country leans toward consumerism, 
the more dependent it will be, and with dependence the 
foundations of the revolution are shaken. At the present time 
our country has political independence. We must therefore strive 
to achieve economic independence as well. We will be independent 
economically when we decrease consumption and increase 
production. 
  One problem that could afflict the revolution is high prices 
and inflation, especially in the area of public needs. If the 
people see that they are having a hard time managing their 
lives, they may become indifferent. The greatest task before the 
government and the Majles is to anchor inflation. In this regard 
attention must be given to the differences between incomes. If 
the income gap becomes too great, some people will be engulfed 
in materialism and others were be under such severe pressure 
that life will be like a dark night for them. 
  Continuing, Dr. 'Abdkhoda'i mentioned dependence on the 
outside world and borrowing as other problems for the revolution. 
  He also answered the third question as follows: One must 
note 
initially that the people and the officials in the Islamic 
Republic are brothers, and the officials have come from the 
people. The commander of the faithful (peace be upon him) gave 
important commands in his 216th sermon concerning relations 
between the people and the officials. 
  In this sermon His Holiness said: The condition of a nation 
will not be good unless it has good leaders, and the leaders 
cannot do good work unless the people are firm and steadfast. 
  In the first place those running the country must be sound 
and they must feel that they are indebted to the people. They 
are responsible before the blood of thousands of martyrs who 
gave their lives during the revolution. Most important of all, 
we are responsible to a glorious Shi'ite history, which has 
always suffered throughout 14 centuries but has never given up 
its high goals. In the Islamic Republic time must not be a 
consideration for officials. They must serve the people to the 
best of their ability. On the other hand the people must also 
have a sense of responsibility. They must realize the conditions 
we are in and realize that we are in a situation where world 
imperialism is united against Islam, religion, orthodoxy, and 
our high Islamic aspirations and it creates a new problem for us 
every day. In such a situation each person in the country must 
look for ways to serve the government. 
<H5>  Answer From Mr. Yahyavi, Deputy From Tehran </H5>
  Seeking welfare, consumerism, and lack of concern for 
cultural work along with the economic work is one of the 
afflictions besetting the revolution. 
  He said in answer to the first question: One of the very 
important effects and great achievements of the Islamic 
revolution is its revelation of the unknown talents of the 
people. Taking inspiration from the life-giving commands of 
Islam, following the leadership of His Holiness Imam Khomeyni 
and giving up life and property, the Muslim nation of Iran 
brought the heavily armed idolater regime to its knees and 
established the Islamic Republic. With confidence in the life 
the Islamic Republic created among the Muslims of the world, the 
people of Algeria and south Lebanon found the courage to fight 
their enemies. I remember that during the pilgrimage to Mecca 
when I met with African Muslims they said that our revolution 
gave them heart, and the inclination towards Christianity became 
an inclination towards Islam after the triumph of the Islamic 
revolution in Iran. 
  One of the valued achievements of the Islamic revolution was 
dealing with the deprived class and the nation's remote rural 
areas. There were 10 times more rural roads created than were 
created in the time before the revolution, and many services 
have been rendered in the construction of classrooms and health 
clinics. 
  About five times as much university classroom space has been 
built as existed in the past, and we cannot stop developing 
classroom space as long as there is one student waiting to take 
the entrance examination. 
  Concerning the second question, the deputy from Tehran 
noted: 
The greatest affliction threatening the revolution is seeking 
welfare, consumerism, and lack of concern for cultural work 
along with the economic work. Up until now, because of being 
preoccupied with economic activities and the nation's 
infrastructure, we have not done the kind of cultural work that 
should be done. We have not succeeded in teaching religious 
beliefs to the young generation in the way that is appropriate, 
and this cultural weakness could make the enemy successful with 
the cultural invasion. If the officials make more effort to do 
cultural work, the cultural invasion will have no effect. If the 
inner faith of individuals is not reinforced, the goals of the 
enemy's cultural invasion will certainly be achieved. 
  Another affliction threatening the revolution is the seeking 
of welfare and the great inclination towards consumerism. 
Currently the prevailing attitude is to seek easy incomes 
without effort. If someone wants to perform his responsibility 
in society properly, his income should play some role in 
production, and he should not be thinking about getting more 
privileges. 
  In answer to the final question, Engineer Yahyavi said: The 
people have the responsibility to take part in various public 
affairs with political awareness and vigilance. The people must 
have political awareness in various sectors, from the university 
to the workplace. They must be able to analyze the issues and 
problems, and in my view an individual should have full 
understanding of the world in which he lives. He must be 
familiar with the various fronts and make decisions. In that way 
he will be able to take proper positions. A person should not 
prevent the people from becoming familiar with political 
affairs. If people have political awareness, they certainly will 
not be fooled by the enemy. Another responsibility of the people 
is to supervise the issues properly and to make constructive 
criticism. No official is exempt from constructive criticism. 
All must accept criticism to correct their work. All people and 
officials on all sides must try to perform their 
responsibilities properly to please God. 
  The responsibility of the officials to preserve the 
revolution is heavier than that of the people, and they must not 
put personal and occupational interests ahead of the interests 
of the people. Our people have done their duty in the best way 
to create and maintain the revolution, and now it is the 
responsibility of the officials to make every effort to serve 
these people. 
  It is the duty of officials to assign responsibilities to 
worthy people by identifying worthy elements, and to apply 
encouragement and punishment in the work in the assessment of 
performance. It is also the duty of officials to be a force for 
unity and harmony among the people, and they must avoid creating 
any kind of separation or alienation. They must use knowledge 
and other resources with proper management to compensate for the 
sacrifices of the people. 
<H5>  Answer From Mr. Baghani, Deputy From Sabzevar </H5>
  One of the things afflicting the revolution is discord, and 
if discord is created in the nation, the existence of the 
revolution will be endangered. 
  Mr 'Ali Asghar Baghani, deputy from Sabzevar, said in answer 
to RESALAT's first question: The most important achievement of 
the Islamic revolution is stabilizing the government of the 
Islamic Republic, because at the beginning of the triumph of the 
Islamic revolution problems were created in various ways for the 
Islamic government by minigroups, liberals and people seeking 
power. [passage omitted on the accomplishments of the revolution 
in general terms] 
<H5>  Answer From Mr. Kuhkan, Deputy From Lanjan </H5>
  One of the revolution's most important achievements is 
putting the nation on the path of God and achieving political 
independence. 
  Mr. Mohsen Kuhkan, deputy from Lanjan, said in answer to the 
first question: The Islamic revolution's most important 
achievement for the Muslim nation of Iran is putting it on the 
path of God, because before the revolution the idolatrous 
government ruled every dimension of life and called upon the 
people to enjoin evil and prohibit good. Today the government 
has formed and is advancing based on enjoining good and 
prohibiting evil. 
  Another of the revolution's achievements is political 
independence. Today we can claim that we are the world's most 
independent nation in terms of political independence. Another 
of the revolution's successes is that despite all the problems 
such as the economic embargo, the imposed war, and the damage 
caused by natural disasters such as floods and earthquakes, it 
is using the nation's economic resources for development and 
prosperity and to provide the minimum services need by the 
nation's cities and rural areas. [passages omitted on the 
accomplishments of the revolution] 

