BFN 

<F P=106> [Reports by Yevgeniy Skukin under general heading: "We </F>
Discuss Draft Agreement on Civil Accord"] 
  [Text] We Are For Moncloa Plan; Vladimir Goman, 
Deputy Chairman of the Committee for Federation Affairs in 
Regional Policy 
  Our deputies' group, "new regional policy," was the 
initiator 
in elaborating a memorandum on accord in the State Duma. We 
were the first to come out with the proposal to adopt this 
document, similar to the Moncloa pact signed in Spain in 1977, 
to ensure that a consolidating basis appears in the work of the 
State Duma. If the sides which sign this document are sincere 
in their desire to lead society to civil accord and peace in 
order to implement the economic reforms which have been outlined 
then in that case the document on civil accord will play its 
part. But if a dual and triple philosophy is in operation and 
we say one thing, think another, and do a third, then the 
document will be doomed. 
<H5>  I Support It Although.... Sergey Yushenkov, chairman of the </H5>
State Duma Defense Committee 
  The actual idea of civil accord agreements with the 
existence 
of a Constitution seems dubious to me. But on the other hand an 
agreement after the amnesty is indeed essential. The statements 
and actions of those who have been amnestied show that they by 
no means assess the pardon as an act of well intentioned 
conciliation and the path toward accord and they openly oppose 
the existing system, the president, and other structures of 
legal power. In this connection we must of course prevent 
conflicts in society. But how to do this? The memorandum on 
accord adopted by the Duma is in my view a hollow thing. It 
contains no real mechanisms of implementation except the 
primitive appeal to live in harmony -- there is nothing there. 
The president's draft provides for a mechanism of 
implementation -- not only organs for coordinating actions but 
also certain sanctions. 
  When the "Russia's Choice" faction said that such agreements 
are impossible right now, we were by no means opposing the idea 
there should be an agreement. We were simply saying that the 
tasks which can be resolved should be resolved. I am skeptical 
about such documents and at the same time I understand the need 
for such steps from the viewpoint of creating an atmosphere of 
conciliation in society. 

