Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with ENEA President Prof. Nicola Cabibbo by </F>
Francesco Prestipino; place and date not given: "ENEA Has Faith 
in the Future;" first five paragraphs are RICERCA &amp; 
INNOVAZIONE 
introduction] 
  [Text] It has increased its research effort in the sectors 
it covers and, something new, it is working as an "agency" by 
publishing and distributing the results of its activities 
throughout Italy. 
  With over 5,000 employees, nine large research centers, and 
other smaller areas where it is working, ENEA [Agency for New 
Technologies, Energy, and the Environment] is present throughout 
Italy. 
  Amongst its new lines of intervention there are plans for 
the 
transfer and distribution of innovation to production, industry 
and agriculture, the development of components and technologies 
for the utilization of renewable sources of energy and energy 
saving, as well as research and experimentation of innovative 
nuclear reactors that are safer than those of the past. 
  This redefinition of its areas of competence is laying the 
foundations for the ENEA of the year 2000. It will be a 
producer of technological and managerial culture, and be at the 
service, in particular, of the manufacturing world. 
  Nicola Cabibbo, whom we have interviewed, has recently been 
called to direct this research giant. He is a scientist who is 
well known and respected by the international scientific 
community, and has come from the presidency of the INFN [Italian 
National Institute for Nuclear Physics]. 
  Prestipino: Prof. Cabibbo, the handbook of the 
new ENEA is definitely the 1993-95 three-year program, that was 
published in December 1992 and presents the programs and new 
objectives of the agency in 115 pages. How much of this 
reflects the situation of the old agency and how much describes 
the new one? 
  Cabibbo: Let us say immediately that this is a 
"sliding" plan, that has suffered from the time when it was 
drawn up, and allows for changes of direction as it goes along. 
The developments of the coming years will influence the way it 
is followed. 
  Prestipino: It has been said that the plan is 
already old or that anyway it reflects the ideas of the old 
agency. 
  Cabibbo: When I arrived at the ENEA I did not 
consider reviewing the plan because it is a lengthy procedure. 
Perhaps I will participate in the preparation of the next one. 
Let us not forget that it has been approved at ministerial 
level. 
  I think that it is very important for the agency to focus 
its 
activities better. Its nuclear activity having been 
interrupted, ENEA has found itself without the burden of this 
institutional duty. From this point of view the reform law of 
August 1991 is to be viewed very positively since it gave the 
agency precise goals. Nuclear energy was an enormous job that 
required commitment, involved great responsibility, care for the 
environment, and the development of advanced technologies. 
  Now my idea is to focus and gather the various initiatives 
around major projects, in a context that is easier to understand 
so that the objectives to be pursued are clearer. 
  The structural elements are still there. I mean to say, 
there is still the expertise in the energy field, and the fields 
of related problems, from the rational use of energy, to the 
alternative sources, to nuclear energy and so on. 
  Prestipino: So is it a plan without an itinerary 
that is to be reviewed as it goes along? 
  Cabibbo: Certainly. In the environmental field 
for example, a central problem is that of working in harmony 
with the others who are involved in this field. Let us not 
forget that there are about 3,000 researchers scattered around 
in various research centers working on the environment in Italy, 
and that about 800 of them are in ENEA. 
  Prestipino: Could ENEA have a role to play in 
this harmonization process? 
  Cabibbo: In the environmental field work is also 
done for projects. It is clear that ENEA will launch its own 
projects, like the one on the "Mediterranean Basin" that was 
presented at the end of September at our marine research center 
at Santa Teresa. 
  Yes, in some ways we put ourselves forward as promoters and 
coordinators, a little like we are for the Antarctic, but we are 
always ready to compare what we are doing with what others are 
doing. 
  Instead, that which ENEA can specifically provide and make 
available to safeguard the environment, on the one hand is 
systems ability, and on the other is technological ability. 
These two riches permit ENEA to take on important roles, at a 
global level, in programs that do not take single aspects into 
consideration, but that consider the environmental problems as a 
whole, since they are necessarily interconnected and often 
require multidisciplinary interventions and collaboration with 
other countries. For example, Spain is very interested in 
collaborating with us, and France, being very active in the 
environmental field, is already doing so. 
  Prestipino: Amongst the strategies for the 
renewal of the agency, what effect will the new line that you 
announced have on the use of the APE [Array Processor 
Experiment] super computer? 
  Cabibbo: The super computer is a central element 
for the transfer of scientific knowledge to major applications, 
ranging from those of the environment such as meteorology and 
climatic changes, to those of great technological interest such 
as metallurgy and combustion processes. ENEA has ordered a 
large parallel computer capable of performing 100 billion 
operations per second, an APE Quadrics, produced by Alenia 
Spazio under license from the INFN. At present it is the most 
powerful parallel computer available in the world and the 
technology is entirely Italian. 
  We have also ordered six small Quadrics that will either be 
used for developing programs or for new types of applications, 
made possible by the availability of the power of a super 
computer that has the size and advantages of a work station. 
  Prestipino: Will the super computer also be used 
in the energy sector? 
  Cabibbo: Certainly. For example, one of the 
problems that we are carefully studying in the energy field is 
that of combustion and this requires a combination of 
experimental techniques and numerical simulation. The trend is 
to consider the experimental techniques as the validation of the 
simulation techniques. The latter, in fact, are much richer, 
and permit a more detailed and careful study. ENEA has a very 
important experimental combustion center at Casaccia. We are 
trying to integrate this experimental center, so that it forms 
part of a more complete picture that will involve the use, once 
the Quadrics computer is available, of numerical simulation. 
This will put us in the vanguard. 
  Prestipino: At this stage of renewal, while the 
structure of the agency is being planned out on a grand scale, 
what would be a burden and what would be helpful? 
  Cabibbo: Compared to other agencies, ENEA is 
divided into large research centers, such as those at Casaccia 
and Frascati near Rome, Saluggia in Piemonte, Trisaia in 
Basilicata, Brasimone in the Tuscan-Emilian Appenines, Portico 
in Campania, Santa Teresa in Liguria and Bologna. This 
structure creates, on one hand, a managerial and organizational 
burden, but on the other it offers the advantage of being able 
to put an imposing striking force into the field to work on 
specific problems that require the simultaneous use and synergy 
of various types of expertise. This is what ENEA has always 
done in the past for the complex programs for nuclear power 
stations. 
  A very interesting program that has been recently managed by 
ENEA has been the "Antarctic Project." The agency was able to 
pour its technical-scientific and managerial ability into this 
program. ENEA received merit for having enabled Italy to 
present itself on the international scene in "full dress." A 
modern base was constructed in a short time and the quality of 
the research programs carried out has allowed us to become one 
of the nations of the Antarctic Treaty with full rights, and to 
collaborate, with equal scientific dignity, with the other 
countries that are already present, such as the United States 
and France. But the Antarctic program is a paradigm from 
another point of view in the sense that ENEA does not deal only 
with those aspects that it finds more congenial, such as the 
systems engineering and logistics that require extremely complex 
operations and the use of advanced technologies, but does so in 
close collaboration with other research bodies. The scientific 
program is multidisciplinary, and ENEA, although it is also 
present at this level, has a minor position with respect to the 
CNR [Italian National Research Council] and the universities 
that play the major part. 
  Prestipino: What direction will the new ENEA 
take, will it turn toward pure research or to a closer 
collaboration with industry? 
  Cabibbo: It will pass through research, but also 
through its applications. ENEA is able to do valid research and 
as the institutional duties of ENEA also include direct 
interventions, such as those on the environment, we are 
directing our work toward the concrete problems of the country. 
In order for this to be possible and for it to give the results 
that are wanted, the agency must have strong research components. 
  Prestipino: How is the agency preparing for its 
new duties? How are the personnel and the engineers being 
retrained? 
  Cabibbo: Technical abilities are easily 
transferable, particularly when you are working in complex 
sectors. For example, the director of the Antarctic program is 
a nuclear engineer. New expertise is certainly necessary to 
enter new fields, but the possibility of self training is also 
to be valorized. 
  When we think about training we also think about it as a 
further field of service that ENEA could offer the national 
community. 
  [Cabibbo continues] For example, today there is an extensive 
request for training that has arisen from local requirements for 
new expertise, resulting from the necessity to look after 
certain aspects of the safeguarding of the environment and to 
increase energy saving. ENEA has a wealth of expertise to offer 
in these sectors. 
  Prestipino: In a certain sense the reform law has 
put ENEA on the market, pushing it to find its own funding for 
autonomous survival. How is it doing? 
  Cabibbo: I would say well. One third of the 
funding is covered by collaboration programs with the ministries 
and with the European Community. It is enough to consider that, 
in terms of funding, international commissions entrusted to ENEA 
amount to about 120 billion per year. 
  Prestipino: The south of Italy, what lines of 
intervention are planned for this area by ENEA? 
  Cabibbo: ENEA is moving toward the actuation of 
the agreement on the Mezzogiorno [southern Italy] Program. For 
example we have already taken on 55 of the projected 80 
researchers. At present we are waiting, but in the meantime we 
are working on a new collaboration agreement with the ministry 
of scientific research. 
  We are not so interested in the value of the initiative 
being 
discussed, as we are in its ends, the goals of such a 
collaboration. 
  Prestipino: Energy. What is ENEA doing at an 
international level to have safe nuclear energy? 
  Cabibbo: Examining and reviewing current nuclear 
technologies following the referendum is of dramatic importance 
for ENEA. 
  An interesting point is that our European partners, in 
particular Germany, that were reluctant to accept the commitment 
to a new generation of reactors are now more disposed to do so. 
Work is being done on a new project at a European level. ENEA 
intends making its own contribution to this project, the EPR 
(European Pressurized Reactor), because it seems to meet our 
requirements in terms of social acceptability. 
  The safety characteristics of new reactors can no longer be 
expressed in terms of probabilities. The design must be such as 
to guarantee that even the biggest possible accident has no 
consequences, either for the environment, or for the population. 
  The research for these new generation power stations must 
continue to lead to reactors that are intrinsically safe, with 
which, in the worst case, it would be possible to lose the 
reactor itself, but without emissions outside the plant that 
were above the safety level. The construction of these plants, 
already technologically possible, depends on a number of 
factors, these being high costs, social acceptability, and the 
problems of managing them. ENEA's research program is very 
limited with respect to what the agency was doing in the 
'eighties, also because the new reactors require development and 
certification at a European level, if not at a world level. 
This is not a road that we can take alone. 
  Prestipino: Alternative forms of energy. Other 
countries have moved on to their commercialization. In Italy we 
are still at the research stage. What does ENEA intend to do? 
  Cabibbo: The renewable sources that ENEA is 
concerned with are wind energy and the energy that can be 
obtained from biomasses, such as garbage. They are already 
competitive, particularly if the social costs (pollution etc.) 
of the traditional sources of energy are taken into account. 
However, with respect to what is technologically possible 
today, Italy is behind as far as the use of energy derived from 
the wind is concerned. 
  It is necessary to provide incentives for the construction 
and use of this type of equipment, as has been done in Denmark 
and the United Kingdom, guaranteeing those that use the 
equipment (usually small producers) that their energy will be 
purchased. ENEA has collaborated with two Italian industries in 
the research and development for the construction of various 
models that are slightly different from those used in the 
northern European countries because of the lower wind speeds 
found in our regions. Denmark and the United Kingdom are 
demonstrating that already today it is possible to produce 
abundant energy from the wind, and to do so at competitive 
prices. 
  The time is also ripe for us to make the jump in quality 
from 
research to industrial application. It is one thing to 
construct a single prototype unit generating energy from the 
wind and it is another to construct a hundred, being able to 
count on the economies of scale. 
  Prestipino: And solar energy? 
  Cabibbo: Solar energy is less conventional than 
wind energy. The energy produced by solar power plants has a 
higher cost. It is an interesting technology for certain 
specialized applications, such as isolated houses. However, it 
still cannot make an impact on the energy consumption of the 
country. 
  Solar panels that are cheaper than those currently available 
are necessary if their use is to have a relevant impact. Once 
we have gotten over this problem, the solution to which could be 
found in the coming years, (ENEA is doing a lot of work in this 
direction, both at the Portici center and in collaboration with 
other countries) the photovoltaic cell will become very 
desirable, both for ecological motives, and from the aesthetic 
point of view. Let us not forget that wind-powered generators 
have been strongly contested in the United Kingdom because, 
according to some environmentalists, the blades of the windmills 
disfigure the countryside. 
  Prestipino: In conclusion, Prof. Cabibbo, where 
is ENEA going? How will it respond to the many older employees 
who are retiring early? How will the agency be renewed? 
  Cabibbo: ENEA is still feeling the influence of 
nuclear energy, which required an organizational set-up that is 
too burdensome today. As an agency that dedicates itself to 
other activities it will be necessary to adjust the team. 
  The early retirements would be very positive if it were 
possible to bring young people into the agency. At present we 
can only hire about 10 percent with respect to the number of 
people who are leaving. An ideal turnover figure would be 20/30 
percent. Without hiring young people, the agency is getting 
older. Two thousand people will be leaving and it will be 
necessary to hire at least 600 young people during the next 10 
years. 

