Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Straight Talk" Program with host Carlos Santana Ojeda and </F>
guest Osvaldo Rodriguez from weekly JUVENTUD REBELDE -- live] 
  [Text] [Santana] Osvaldo, are there indications of an 
economic recovery, and if so, in which sectors are these 
indications emerging at this moment? 
  [Rodriguez] Well, first I want to tell you, Carlos, that 
"Straight Talk" has already made some predictions for this year, 
1994, for the beginning of the year, to be exact. On making 
those predictions, we said that this year, 1994, was the year 
when some symptoms of economic recovery would be emerging. They 
would be modest symptoms, as you said, but recovery after all. 
  At this moment we cannot yet talk about economic 
reactivation. I think we can only talk about symptoms of 
economic reactivation, because so far some areas which have been 
declining, [words indistinct] of the Steelworking Industry 
[SIME] which in 1993 announced that it managed to stop its 
decline, and even managed to pick up somewhat. But this shows 
that compared to 1992 there is a recovery. 
  Let us consider tourism. Tourism is today the most stable 
sector of our economy. It is a sector that has been growing on a 
yearly basis with net and gross income. I also think that 
tourism is having a domino effect on the rest of the economy. 
Why? Well, because the tourism industry demands a number of 
resources that the country itself can supply. Today these 
resources are sought abroad. This forces the Cuban economy to 
divert its merchandise toward tourism. 
  I was also talking about the steelworking industry. This 
industry has strong investments dedicated exclusively to 
tourism. But not only the steelworking industry. Agriculture 
must also seek strong investments and sufficient production in 
order to meet all the needs of tourism, and in addition to this, 
there must be other services such as laundering, dry cleaning, 
water supply systems, electricity lines, etc. All these things 
ensure that the gross tourism income is redistributed among the 
rest of the economy. 
  [Santana] Does this mean that you see tourism as the sector 
that is showing signs of reactivation? 
  [Rodriguez] Well, tourism in itself is a sector where.... 
  [Santana, interrupting] I am asking this question, Osvaldo, 
because I would not mention tourism as a sector of reactivation, 
but as a fully consolidated branch. 
  [Rodriguez] Well, both things. It is a branch that is 
consolidating itself. But in relation to the national economy, 
growing tourism is a sign of economic reactivation because it is 
only a sector, which together with petroleum, has been expanding 
all these past years, including these recent crisis years. I am 
happy to remember the case of petroleum because I have almost 
forgotten the efforts made by the petroleum workers. The fact 
that our country extracted 100,000 tons of petroleum last year 
is another symptom of the economy's reactivation. But this year, 
the work being carried out with some foreign companies, namely 
through the so-called risk contracts, must also begin yielding 
results. Nothing has been announced so far, but they have been 
working for a little more than a year looking for petroleum. 
  [Santana] Suppose we have to make an anlysis of those 
sectors 
-- which do you think is most responsible for that economic 
reactivation, or at least, which do you think is the most 
important? 
  [Rodriguez] Well, unquestionably, the sugar industry is the 
most important of all. But the most representative of economic 
reactivation, as I said before, is tourism. I have explained the 
reasons for this, and I am now going to explain why the sugar 
industry is the most important. 
  The sugar industry is what has always maintained the Cuban 
economy, what has yielded the most important fruits, both for 
the current foreign trade structure and for the previous 
structure, when the socialist bloc was still in effect, when our 
most important sales to the world market, including to the CEMA 
market, had been by the sugar industry. The sugar industry, seen 
in its broadest sense, produces not only sugar, but also 
alcohol, molasses, other byproducts such as bagasse; now the 
medicines, the cattle feed, and many other products resulting 
from the sugar industry. 
  But today, we are facing an energy crisis. In addition to 
the 
great crisis, energy or the lack of petroleum, is what has led 
us to this profound crisis. Cane has therefore also become our 
petroleum. I think, therefore, that we must be careful when 
dealing with the sugar industry, because the future of Cuba must 
be the sugar industry future. Cuba cannot dream of a future that 
is not the sugar industry. Even though we might find a large 
petroleum deposit, sugar will always be the source of all the 
things I have mentioned. 
  [Santana] Yes, sugarcane is considered the economic 
activity that can help us most under the current circumstances. 
However, is this hope justified? 
  [Rodriguez] Of course. There is the sugarcane recovery 
program. We have to keep in mind that our fields have been 
highly exploited, which makes the soil lose its fertility. It is 
therefore necessary to fertilize the land used for sugarcane. 
The lack of fertilizer, first, and the lack of herbicides, 
second, have resulted in a significant drop in sugarcane 
production. This hope is justified because we are very seriously 
working in the recovery program. Today, the main goal of the 
Basic Cooperative Production Units [UBPC's] is to restore 
sugarcane production to former levels. 
  Whenever sugarcane production is restored, the harvest will 
of course regain its rate, which had been stabilized at the 
8-ton mark. We have to return to that level of harvest. 
  [Santana] You also spoke of the steelworking industry. I am 
still not clear. You spoke about this industry in light of the 
importance of production of equipment for other industries? 
  [Rodriguez] For other industries.... [pauses] The 
steelworking industry is capable of building mills, and also 
many other types of equipment. It is capable of manufacturing 
pumps. Significant investments are being made. This industry 
puts out a considerable amount of electricity and telephone 
cables. It is also a great provider of spare parts. It is a 
tremendous producer of steels, not only carbon steels, but also 
stainless steel, which is now produced in Cuba. I believe that 
the potential of this industry, which has taken years to shape 
-- this is not something done overnight -- is marked by the 
specialization of its workers, technicians, and engineers. This 
allows us to use this industry to develop the country and also 
as a source of exports. 
  [Santana] Once again on tourism: I understand that Cuban 
tourism has performed favorably in terms of international 
marketing in recent months. Is this true? What do you know about 
it? 
  [Rodriguez] Yes, I have read about this issue. I believe it 
is very interesting that Cuba is already being seen extensively 
by tourists in the Caribbean Basin. It is predicted that by the 
end of the century, the Caribbean will be the world's top spot 
for tourism. Cuba is not competing with many Caribbean islands 
today. There are very small Caribbean islands -- perhaps 
slightly larger than the Isle of Youth -- that welcome 1 million 
tourists. We are beginning to develop. We began tourism late. We 
must remember that it is difficult to reduce that distance. Of 
course, we must keep the U.S. blockade in mind. The greatest 
number of cruise ships in the Caribbean and around Cuba, 
transporting approximately 8 million tourists, are based in 
Miami. These are American businesses. The blockade bans all 
those ships, although they skirt every Cuban coast without 
touching Cuban ports. This, undoubtedly, affects us seriously. I 
believe that despite this, tourism is arriving. We have many 
European, particularly German and Canadian, [as heard] tourists. 
Latin American tourism is also beginning to increase. I believe 
that this will fulfill those predictions that Cuba will welcome 
1 million tourists. 
  [Santana] In what measure is this reactivation the result of 
the opening to certain foreign capital investments on one hand, 
and on the other, the result of the increase in our productivity 
and quality, in the economic effort based on efficiency and 
controls? 
  [Rodriguez] I believe it is a combination of all these 
things. The foreign capital investment has allowed us, first of 
all, to access markets, access technologies and capital. This is 
the case with tourism. We said that tourism is one of the model 
industries of this reactivation. Foreign capital not only forms 
part of the tourism industry, it also plays a role in 
reactivating other important industries within Cuba. I believe 
this has played a role. Undoubtedly, the increased awareness of 
Cuban workers -- better yet, the collectives -- of the need to 
perform more efficiently, work better, and even come to believe 
that the products must be consumed immediately and not be 
produced to be stored away, and with poor quality, becoming 
aware of all these things has resulted in higher efficiency, 
which today cannot yet be seen in any plans because the Cuban 
economy has just completed the process of decline. 
  [Santana] How can we guarantee the soundness of that 
reactivation being experienced? 
  [Rodriguez] First of all, we have to consolidate the Cuban 
economy on the basis of our national structures -- to defend 
what is ours, to advocate the best possible use of our 
resources, and learn to work with high levels of efficiency, 
economizing, and using true economic controls. There is no need 
to think that a foreigner is needed to teach this to us. I 
believe we have foreigners here teaching us very interesting 
things, but we can also make our own contributions because when 
you speak with workers, they know quite well what needs to be 
done. 
  [Santana] We have discussed macroeconomic issues. When will 
the reactivation be felt at home? 
  [Rodriguez] First of all, in terms of nutrition, I believe 
this is the first thing that the people are expecting. We speak 
of symptoms, and even some comrades have smiled and said: 
Symptoms! With the needs we have today! 
  I have had to explain that the economic reactivation has to 
take place before the domestic part of the economy will feel the 
reactivation. The first problem at home is food. I believe we 
have to solve this first. In what measure can this be solved? 
Well, this is perhaps a subject for another program. 
  Secondly, we need to satisfy a variety of primary needs 
because this crisis has resulted in the lack of many things. We 
could make an endless list of household items we need to 
provide. These are perhaps not vital for tackling tomorrow, but 
are vital to the life of any civilized individual today. 

