BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Captain First Rank Valeriy Gromak: "First </F>
Russian-German Exercise in History Held Abeam Ruegen Island"] 
  [Text] When fire broke out on board a German missile fast 
attack craft and the crew were unable to cope with it on their 
own, the commander of the Hermelin put out an SOS. In a matter 
of minutes the Baltic Fleet's patrol combatant Neustrashimyy 
sent its own emergency rescue party to fight the fire, and it at 
once began localizing the flames. At the same time the Russian 
patrol combatant's lookout noticed someone floundering in the 
waves not far from the German craft. Captain Second Rank Igor 
Ryzhkov, commander of the Neustrashimyy, sent up a rescue 
helicopter piloted by Lieutenant Colonel Aleksandr Petrov. From 
on board the helicopter Majors Anatoliy Lysenko and Andrey 
Goncharov lowered rescue paramedic Ensign Vasiliy Yakubovskiy, 
who returned to the helicopter with a drowning German sailor 
("This was the happiest day of my life," Seaman Wolfgang 
Weitsaecker would later remark). It took the helicopter crew 
just 38 seconds to rescue the drowning man. 
  In the evening, on board the Westerwald, the base for the 
German missile fast attack craft, where the first day of the 
exercises was being analyzed, the Hermelin's commander made the 
following comment on that episode: "We must learn from the 
Russian helicopter pilots." I am sorry to say that at that 
moment I thought the German commander was flattering us. But I 
had to abandon that thought the very next day. Spending five 
hours on board the German missile fast attack craft Hyaene, I 
saw for myself the skill of the German sailors and the fact that 
at sea they work flat out. If they assess their own work and 
that of others, then they do not cast their words to the wind. 
  For example, a Sea King helicopter was lifting Western 
journalists off a fast attack craft traveling at 12 knots: 12 
takeoffs in 15 minutes. Or take this breathtaking sight: An 
attack aircraft was in a screaming dive against a missile fast 
attack craft moving at 33 knots. Just when the Tornadoes [as 
published] seemed ready to hit the target, the attack craft 
executed an abrupt antiaircraft maneuver.... 
  Eleven ships and several aircraft took part in the first 
bilateral naval exercise in the Baltic in the history of Russia 
and Germany. On the German side were new missile fast attack 
craft and modern minesweepers. The Russian Navy was represented 
by the patrol combatant Neustrashimyy, the Baltic Fleet's latest 
ship. 
  "In these exercises we had three goals," Rear Admiral Hans 
Lyussov [name as published], chief of staff of the German Navy, 
told KRASNAYA ZVEZDA's correspondent. "The first goal is 
political -- to demonstrate to our population joint work. The 
second goal is military, since we are military people -- to 
jointly rehearse tasks in a regime of full trust. The third 
goal is to learn from each other. All three of these tasks have 
been successfully fulfilled." 
  Vice Adm. Viktor Litvinov, deputy commander of the Baltic 
Fleet and the senior officer in the exercises on the Russian 
side, in turn confirmed: "These 48 hours of exercises were 
useful to both sides. We have gotten to know each other 
better...." 
  Of course, as in anything new, problems could not be 
avoided. 
Before my eyes a glitch occurred during the exercise in the work 
of the Neustrashimyy's primary control station: The watch 
officer was unable to decode a signal transmitted from the 
German missile fast attack craft Puma. It turned out that the 
command was being transmitted according to the NATO signal code, 
which, naturally, is not used on Russian warships. Therefore 
special bilateral signals will be used in the future when 
holding other Russian-German exercises. 
  I do not know what conclusions politicians will draw from 
this naval exercise, but the sailors' conclusions are obvious: 
At sea it is important to be friends. 

