Language: <F P=105> Indonesian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Those evil drugs are like an octopus entangling 
several Indonesian cities. As reported by TEMPO's Heddy Lugito, 
in Semarang, for example, the snack center in the Simpang Lima 
Plaza Complex has become a place for young people to get high. 
When an emaciated man showed up on Friday afternoon last week, 
young people surrounded him. 
  The man then distributed pills which looked like buttons. 
Gulp! They shoved the buttons down into their throats. In a 
short time they were grinning like idiots. 
  The skinny young man goes as far as Denpasar and Jakarta to 
get his goods. "They've got good stuff there," he said. That 
includes Ecstasy. Unfortunately, since the Ria case, that evil 
drug has disappeared. But the customers are making every effort 
to order it. "They're stubborn; they keep ordering that great 
stuff. Ten people have ordered it, but the stuff isn't around," 
he said. 
  In Semarang alone drugs can be gotten around campuses, in 
discotheques, in pubs and in hotels. The skinny, near-sighted 
man is a middleman who has dealers in various locations in 
Semarang. Just hand over 20,000 rupiahs and an hour later the 
dealer will bring you a package of Marlboros containing 
cigarettes laced with marijuana, also known as suket, plus six 
5-gram Somnil pills. 
  Children of Semarang bigshots and businessmen are looking 
for 
Ecstasy. The middle class and the lower class look for 
inexpensive pills, such as Mogadon, Arthan, also known as double 
"L" (for lele, the word used in young people's slang), Somnil 
and Nepam, which cost around 15,000 rupiahs for 10 pills. School 
kids, college students and even government employees like those 
hallucinogenic pills. They also like BK pills, which are cheaper. 
  Those illegal drugs sell like hotcakes. "Every week I can 
sell around 1.5-million-rupiahs worth," said a dealer in 
Semarang. The SDSB [a kind of lottery] has been discontinued but 
the drug business is skyrocketing. The drugs come from Surabaya, 
Bandung, Jakarta and Yogya. But the dealers don't know who the 
boss of the suppliers is. It's hard to track the links in the 
illegal drug ring, they say. 
  Solo is also involved. Especially the stands around the 
campus. "Do you have any benik," asks the buyer when he looking 
for drugs. Some tradesmen in Solo's Klewer Market have also been 
infiltrated by the narcotics ring. "We keep chasing after them 
to break the links in the narcotics ring," Colonel H. Suseno, 
Chief of the Surakarta Regional Police, told TEMPO's Kastoyo 
Ramelan. 
  Last month, for example, the syndicate planned a meeting. 
They wanted to straighten up the distribution network in 
Tawangmangu, Solo. There was also supposed to be a sex party in 
the villa. The police infiltrated it. But they got wind of the 
police activity (they call the police tawon) and the raid failed. 
  It's the same in Yogya and in Medan. Do you want ngurtak? 
That's the word in Medan for illegal drugs. The price of a 
Riportil pill, which addicts usually call by the code word R two 
dots, is 1,500 to 2,000 rupiahs a pill. Rohypnol, also known as 
R one dot, sells for 2,500 to 3,000 rupiahs a pill. Addicts say 
that if you take too much Riportil, it makes you drool without 
your being aware of it. That's why this drug is also called the 
mad-dog pill. 
  Illegal drugs create the opportunity for making counterfeit 
drugs. A student who graduated from the ITB [Bandung Technical 
School] School of Pharmacy, for example, took advantage of this 
opportunity. He produced counterfeit pills imprinted with the 
names BK and Mogadon. "The counterfeit pills got you high very 
fast because the dosage had been increased on purpose so that 
the consumer would be happy," said a TEMPO source. The 
counterfeit pills usually have simple packaging and the pills 
are dull in color. 
  Besides that, at the end of November a counterfeit-drug 
factory was discovered by accident in Bandung. A house in the 
Cikutra subdistrict burned down. It turned out that the house 
had been producing illegal drugs for nine months. Four 
perpetrators were arrested--Rudi, Husen Sebastian, Maman and 
Tata. The police also seized three kilograms of Mogadon, 37 
kilograms of Voltaren, six kilograms of Rohypnol, 5.5 kilograms 
of Nipam and other prescription drugs. 
  The four gang members confessed that the drugs were marketed 
in Jakarta, Cirebon and Central Java. A short time later the 
police arrested the middlemen in Bekasi, South Jakarta, Mataram, 
East Java and in the South-Central Kalimantan Police District. 
  It's been said that competitors burned down the secret 
factory on purpose. But the police denied this. "The house 
burned down because the oven used to prepare the drugs exploded. 
We found illegal drugs and counterfeit drugs there," said 
Colonel Waliran, chief of the Bandung Metropolitan Police 
District. 
  In Bandung these drug transactions take place in a cafe 
which 
is well-known as a gathering place for local artists. It's easy 
to tell who is an addict and who isn't. "Just look at their 
glass of beer. If it doesn't get finished but it isn't refilled, 
that means he's using drugs," said Deddy Stanzah, the champion 
of druggies, 43 years old, who has now woken up to what he was 
doing. 
  According to that rocker, Bali is a hotbed of the narcotics 
trade. It's no surprise that the Island of the Gods has had 105 
cases, involving 145 individuals, over the last five years. 
There were 106 Indonesian citizens and 39 aliens -- seven 
Italians, four Australians; the rest were from America, Nepal, 
Switzerland, Japan, etc. In 1992 there were 12 cases and the 
following year it jumped up to three times that number. 
  In the final quarter of last year in Bali, Bhisnu Bahadur 
Karki, a 21-year-old driver and citizen of Nepal, was arrested 
carrying 4.88 kilograms of heroin which originated in Bangkok. 
Then there was Abul Kalam, a 37-year-old common laborer from 
Bangladesh, who was carrying 3.3 kilograms of heroin. 
  Even hotter was the case of a 33-year-old Brazilian tourist 
Frank de Castro Dias. In the middle of January he brought a 
surfboard into Denpasar. When he passed through the X-ray 
inspection at Ngurah Rai Airport, officials were suspicious 
because a dark spot on the back side of the surfboard showed up 
on their monitors. 
  But Dias kept calm. "In fact, he helped cut the surfboard 
open," F. X. Djoko Budiono, chief of the anti-smuggling section 
of the Ngurah Rai customs service regional office, told TEMPO's 
Putu Fajar Archana. Dias had flown from Rio de Janeiro to South 
Africa and then stopped off in Singapore. When he stopped in 
Bali, well, he was thrown into a jail cell. 
  Ngurah Rai Airport is now equipped with 13 X-ray detection 
machines. "With that equipment, at least we have an indication 
that there is something suspicious," said Djoko. But frankly 
speaking they have never netted any Ecstasy pills at the 
airport. Besides depending on X-rays, officials also have other 
ways of suspecting tourists from certain countries considered 
police "customers". 
  During the investigation, the syndicate's chain always 
breaks 
somewhere in the middle. They always claim they don't know who 
they are supposed to contact when they arrive in Bali. In short, 
they claim they're not dealers, just couriers. "Dealers don't 
transport the illegal drugs themselves," said Djoko. He feels 
that the five kilograms seized up to now could not be marketed 
in Bali. "It's a matter of buying power," he added. 
  On the other hand, narcotics have never been flown out of 
Bali. Heroin seized in Bali always comes from the mainland of 
Asia (Hong Kong, Bangkok, Myanmar, Taipei and Laos). Cocaine 
comes from South America and marijuana from South Asia 
(Pakistan, India and Afghanistan). If the opium sap is harvested 
in August to October, it is certain that Customs in Bali will 
harvest arrested drug tourists from November to January. 
  Heroin and pills are smuggled into Bali in the traditional 
way. For example, they are put into cans, surfboards or in the 
lining of bags. Nobody, for example, goes so far as to swallow 
them; as soon as they pass through airport inspection all they 
have to do is wait in the bathroom. 
  Actually, some people believe that the narcotics ring also 
supplies Bali and other areas through the port of Benoa as well 
as through the airport. Many foreign cruise ships tie up there. 
This is a possible opportunity. "I have seen tourists come 
ashore without passing through any inspection," said a tour 
guide. 
  Drug distribution is no less frenzied in Jakarta than it is 
in Bali. The areas of Pasar Senen, Blok A, Glodok, Jatinegara 
and Bendungan Hilir are well-known if you know your way around. 
Illegal-drug transactions, they say, take place in several 
discotheques, for example discotheques in the Blok M area, South 
Jakarta, or in the Central Jakarta area. 
  In Blok M, for example, a discotheque hostess freely 
answered 
a guest who asked for "buttons". "What kind do you want? Rohib 
or Nipam? BK pills are outdated. They're no longer in style," 
she said. In Jakarta BK pills, which are packaged in simple 
plastic, are only 1,000 rupiahs for seven pills. "They're for 
pedicab drivers or kids who work in the market," said a college 
student. Rohypnol is now the popular drug in their circles. 
  But if you're looking for morphine or heroin the market is 
closed up. The singer Fariz R. M. and the rocker Gito Rollies, 
who used to be heavy intravenous drug users, claimed they didn't 
know how to find those drugs because they're outdated. Both of 
them claimed that they had repented in recent years. "I don't 
know a thing about the drug ring. And if I knew, maybe I 
wouldn't tell you about it," said Gito, 45 years old. 
  Deddy Stanzah, who was once mixed up in a narcotics ring, is 
convinced that narcotics are brought into Indonesia by officials 
who serve abroad, as well as by the Mafia and by professional 
dealers. The reason? The business is very profitable. "Take a 
look. Security is very tight but drugs are available," he said. 
  So far drug dealing here is still a puzzle for the police. 
Are Bali and Jakarta transit points or are they markets? Nothing 
is clear. But just look at the figures. At the end of August, 
for example, Kara Alexander Webber, a citizen of New Zealand, 
was arrested in Brisbane, Australia. As she was about to fly to 
Denpasar it was discovered that this girl was carrying 140 grams 
of heroin wrapped in condoms inserted into her anus and vagina. 
  Then, in the middle of September, Bishnu Kumar Bisha, a 
citizen of Nepal flying to Jakarta, was arrested in Bangkok. He 
was carrying 11.7 kilograms of heroin. A week later Obassa 
Napoleon Lobiniji, a citizen of Kenya, was arrested in Singapore 
as he was about to leave for Jakarta carrying 10.2 kilograms of 
heroin inserted into a television tube. 
  Other facts: on September 25 Yong Peng Ang, a citizen of 
Singapore, was arrested in Sydney (he had arrived from Jakarta 
on Garuda) because he was carrying 79 condoms containing 462 
grams of heroin wrapped around his body. The following day, Seow 
Toon Han and Jack Beng Chin, both citizens of Singapore, were 
also arrested in Sydney (they had also arrived from Jakarta) 
because they were carrying almost 800 grams of heroin in condoms 
also wrapped around their bodies. 
  Is inspection lax at Soekarno-Hatta Airport, Cengkareng? Not 
so. On 8 September a citizen of Myanmar carrying 6.9 kilograms 
of heroin was arrested at Cengkareng. Four days later, Prem 
Kumar Ray, a citizen of Nepal, was arrested with 11.45 kilograms 
of heroin. Then at the end of September officials at the airport 
arrested a citizen of Myanmar because he was discovered carrying 
nine kilograms of heroin. 
  The problem is that neither the Jakarta nor the Denpasar 
police have been able to get to the bottom of the ring. No 
answer has been found to the question of who is behind them. The 
suspects claim they are only couriers. They're given a 
round-trip ticket and paid thousands of dollars if the goods 
arrive at their destination safely. 
  It seems that there are other reasons for the inability of 
the authorities to break up the ring. The suspects are arrested 
at the airport by officials of the Customs Service. As soon as 
they arrest them, they report the matter to the police. In those 
few minutes their accomplices disappear. 
  But is it true that Jakarta and Bali are only transit 
points? 
A source at Police Headquarters confirmed this. Heroin is still 
too expensive for consumers here. The price is $500-700 for 
three grams. Besides that, heroin is taken intravenously, and we 
don't like that very much. Cocaine, for example, is different. 
The price is lower, around $150 per gram, and it's taken by 
inhaling. 
  The police keep on hunting for illegal drugs. The problem is 
that as soon as they are eradicated they turn up again. There 
are a lot of "factories" making counterfeit drugs, you know. The 
upper class thinks that Mogadon, BK, Dumolid, Somnil or Rohypnol 
are outdated. They're not trendy any more. And then the idle 
jetset brings some new stuff back from abroad: Ecstasy. It's 
expensive, it's hard to get, and its quality is fantastic. 
  It looks like this evil pill killed Aldi and in the end this 
brushed up against film star Ria Irawan. The police have yet 
another job--finding out how Ecstasy is distributed. 

