BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Eva Lozano Estrella] </F>
  [Excerpt] Tula de Allende, Hgo [Hidalgo], 28 Apr -- 
Francisco Rojas Gutierrez, Mexican Petroleum (Pemex) director 
general, has warned there are risks and pressure tactics, mainly 
by the United States, to privatize the country's petroleum 
industry. This is why, he said, the best way to maintain the 
parastate company as a public company is to avoid 
ineffectiveness, inefficiency, and the lack of productivity; 
otherwise, the state will be forced to place the tapping of 
crude oil "in hands more capable than its own." 
  In a brief interview, the official pointed out that insofar 
as we appreciated the country's social harmony for many years, a 
harmony that remains broken for the time being, we must also 
appreciate the government's efforts to not negotiate the tapping 
of crude oil within the framework of NAFTA. 
  As Rojas highlighted the need "to be more efficient, 
productive, and capable" to keep Pemex away from the world trend 
of privatizing national petroleum industries, as currently faced 
by such countries as Colombia, Venezuela, Peru, and Russia, 
among others, he said the pressure tactics of 1938, when the 
industry was expropriated, are the tactics currently used to 
have Mexico transfer the tapping of its petroleum reserves under 
the old argument that "we Mexicans lack the capacity to manage 
our crude oil." 
  As he unveiled a plaque to mark the opening of the second 
Catalytic Disintegration Plant at the "Miguel Hidalgo" Oil 
Refinery, owned by Pemex, Rojas noted that the political stature 
shown by the Mexican oil industry while negotiating NAFTA, a 
time when the Mexican Government did not negotiate the tapping 
of its national petroleum reserves, has yet to emerge. 
  After opening this new facility, which will provide 24,000 
gallons of Magna Sin gasoline for daily domestic consumption, he 
admitted there is international pressure to induce the 
privatization of the world's national enterprises, as is the 
case in Venezuela, where there is unlimited access to its oil 
industry because of the government's inability to make it more 
efficient. To that effect, during his speech to oil union 
members, the Pemex director general said in view of the domestic 
and foreign pressure, the uncompromising defense of the oil 
industry kept the country's sovereignty over its energy 
resources unharmed. In his 9-page speech, Rojas estimated that 
the best way to defend Pemex is to avoid inefficiency and lack 
of productivity; otherwise, Pemex will be forced to cede its oil 
to more capable hands. 
  Further on, he stressed the endeavors that the law 
stipulates 
as exclusive rights of the state, through Pemex, were not ceded. 
He added that thanks to the oil policies of the current 
administration, there is full confidence hydrocarbons will 
remain Mexican property. 
  During the event also attended by Hidalgo Governor Jesus 
Murillo Karam, Rojas said five years into the Carlos Salinas 
administration, changes have broadened, the country has evolved, 
inflation has been successfully controlled, and public finances 
have been cleaned up. Now, the challenge is to create more and 
better paying jobs because only productive and well-paid workers 
can guarantee all Mexican families welfare and good quality of 
life, he added 
  During his visit to the Catalytic Disintegration Plant, the 
construction costs of which amounted to $135 million, the Pemex 
director general stressed the Mexican Government's commitment to 
fight pollution. [passage omitted] 

