CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Eldar Zeynalov: "Baku: Censorship and a </F>
Subsequent Search; The Press Is Dying in Azerbaijan. The 
Diagnosis Is That It Is Being Throttled"] 
  [Text] Baku--In civilized societies, the enemies of a 
regime are first given the last word and then sentenced. In 
countries with a chilly attitude toward the law, the ruling 
circles try to manage with the least amount of formalities and 
strive, primarily, to silence their enemies during a political 
struggle. The sacred: "There cannot be a pluralism of two 
opinions!" is apparently also the main slogan of the authorities 
in post-totalitarian Azerbaijan. 
  This naturally affects primarily the lot of free press 
pen-pushers. Since the beginning of the 1988 political upswing 
in Azerbaijan, I do not recall a single government which had 
loving feelings for them. The difference was only in the choice 
of means for putting pressure on the press. Whereas the "reds" 
with their taste for respectability, which had been developed 
during 70 years of power, preferred economic methods for 
throttling the press, the "democrats" clearly were in sympathy 
with simpler and more easily understood might-makes-right police 
methods of "education." 
  Life shows that the present government is actively using the 
"inheritance" of both its party and "democratic" predecessors 
using words disowning the "glorious" past. 
  The censorship -- both military, to which no one in warring 
Azerbaijan objects, and political -- which the "democrats" 
revived, was inherited from the People's Front. The latter type 
of censorship has not existed since last year's 9 December 
National Assembly decision; however, old acquaintances from the 
Main Administration for Protecting State Secrets in the Press 
are effectively rejecting "from stem to stern" any sharp 
opposition material. Even such articles as last year's report by 
Strobe Talbott to the U.S. Senate giving that country's official 
position towards Azerbaijan, the Amnesty International report on 
violations of human rights in the republic during 1992 (!) and 
even the press conference of Makhmud el-Said, the UN 
representative, go under the knife. 
  The last case, incidentally, is very typical in describing 
censorship methods. During the 16 February press conference, 
el-Said spoke against political censorship in reply to a 
"provocative" question from the AZADLYG newspaper of the 
Azerbaijan People's Front. However, the vigilant comrades -- the 
"defenders of state secrets" -- cut this section out. When the 
UN permanent representative, who had been away for several days 
on his own business, returned and beheld the white spot, he 
asked the newspaper for an explanation. Since censorship 
prudently selects both specimens of the newspaper mock-up 
presented to it and does not produce special documents about the 
text correction made by it, AZADLYG naturally was not able to 
show anything and el-Said, (a UN representative) probably from 
political considerations expressed dissatisfaction not with the 
censorship but... with the abridgment of his presentation. It 
turned out that the newspaper people themselves had abridged it, 
treading on the throat of somebody else's song. It was not very 
funny and a painful feeling remained that the notorious "world 
association" was deeply indifferent to the fate of a free press 
in Azerbaijan. 
  Beginning with the New Year and based on "aesthetic" tastes, 
the most zealous of the censors have forced the lines in an 
article subject to censorship to move further apart or the white 
spots to be filled with loyal articles. As one of them artlessly 
said: "You see, abroad they think that our censorship has no 
democracy." 
  Police oppression of newspapers, whose apogee was the 
dashing 
adventures of I. Gamidov, the minister of internal affairs, and 
his beating of "guilty" editors with his own hands, resumed only 
quite recently. True, V. Novruzov, the present minister, does 
not condescend to a visit by journalists; however, his 
subordinates have already begun to inflict "courtesy visits." 
Thus, on 19 February, the police deigned to look over a file of 
bulletins from the independent TURAN information agency, after 
which a wordy dressing-down went from the police to Mekhman 
Aleyev for "anti-government propaganda" (a quotation from an 
interview with ex-president A. Mutalibov by one of the Russian 
newspapers was the spark that lighted the fire). 
  On 1 March, a search, which provided no results but which, 
on 
the other hand, frustrated the production of articles, was made 
in the building where this agency and the editorial board of the 
AZADLYG newspaper are located. The next day, the police 
organized a true pogrom in the editorial board of the TYURKYUN 
YOLU newspaper, which is not very well known. Having broken the 
windows, the police entered the premises and search them, after 
which they carried off the metal plates required for offset 
printing, a typewriter, a press, and dies. 
  It comes down to the fact that the police are hindering the 
correspondents' work. For example, on 19 February Yadigar 
Mametli and Ali Khaziguliyev, employees of the Azerbaijan 
People's Front information center, who had come for a meeting of 
the opposition, were subjected to administrative arrest; later, 
this also fell to the lot of Khalid Askerov, a REUTER 
correspondent. On 9 March, 10 correspondents were not admitted 
to a press conference by Abulfaz Elchibey, ex-president and 
leader of the Azerbaijan People's Front, in the Nakhichevan 
Autonomous Republic. If one looks at last year, 26 of the 33 
journalists, who were victims in 1993, were persecuted during 
the period of the new authorities. 
  Even the recent re-registration of members of Azerbaijan's 
Union of Journalists took the shape of a political act: New 
membership cards were issued only to those journalists who were 
in the organization prior to 1990 (that is, during the communist 
period). 
  However, the main methods of the new authorities are 
undoubtedly economic ones. After the only newspaper publishing 
house, AZERBAYDZHAN, was transferred to the jurisdiction of the 
president's staff in view of certain derelictions in its work, 
such openly opposition newspapers as MUKHALIFYAT, KHYURRIYYAT, 
YENI MUSAVAT, 525-DZHI GAZET, DZHUMKHURIYYAT, AZAD SEZ, and 
PRESSFAKT have been able to publish only a few times in 1994 and 
some -- not at all. The reason was a decision of the publishing 
house's new board that the newspaper editorial boards themselves 
should supply the paper and metal plates for the offset 
printing. These had previously been supplied centrally. 
  The recent case involving the independent press distribution 
Gaya firm is at the junction of the genres, that is, of the 
police and economic measures used to throttle the press. As its 
director, Matanat Aliyeva, reported, police officials smashed a 
kiosk belonging to the firm on 17 March and unmercifully beat 
the invalid kiosk-keeper for selling the satirical CHESHMA 
newspaper which had a caricature of the minister of internal 
affairs (later, it turned out that it had been published in a 
different newspaper with the same name). Soon after this 
happened, M. Aliyeva's apartment was subjected to a search not 
authorized by the procurator and editions of objectionable 
newspapers were confiscated. The next day, the police blockaded 
the operation of all Gaya kiosks. In general, there was no 
discussion of indemnification for the losses; on the contrary, 
financial control bodies were set against the firm. 
  In M. Aliyeva's opinion, the persecution of the firm, which 
began its activities recently, has the goal of throttling the 
embryonic alternative to the Gasid state firm (the former 
Soyuzpechat), whose work is evoking much unfavorable criticism, 
especially from the editorial boards of opposition newspapers. 
  Persistent discussions about a certain "newspaper mafia" are 
circulating in journalistic circles. By printing additional 
editions of the most popular newspapers and illegally selling 
them through Gasid newsstands, it is earning large sums (besides 
selling cigarettes and other similar commodities through these 
kiosks). It would be different if they had to pay the editors 
for the returned copies, of which there are more, naturally, 
with the increased circulation. According to the version of 
certain editors, the government winks at these tricks, first, 
because economic harm is being inflicted on the popular (that 
is, independent or opposition) newspapers and, second, because 
Gasid, as journalists and readers have pointed out, has been 
used in a number of cases for the purpose of not distributing 
some newspaper or other by failing to deliver it to rayons that 
actively "read" or hiding it under the counter. It makes no 
difference that the kiosk-keepers hold their own in Snickers and 
cigarettes and must pay the editors for the losses. 
  As a result of the situation that has taken shape, only 225 
(now, probably even less) of the total number of approximately 
700 press publications registered on 1 January have published. 
Because of the increase in prices for newspapers and magazines, 
the number of subscribers has decreased by 57 percent and 66 
percent, respectively, 
  Is it advantageous for the government to throttle the press? 
Judging from the results of a public opinion survey conducted at 
the end of January in Baku and Sumgait, 75 percent of those 
surveyed preferred to obtain their information from television 
whereas 39.1 percent preferred it from newspapers, 10.1 percent 
-- from radio, and 4.8 percent -- from magazines. 
  By keeping television under control (R. Guliyev, the speaker 
of parliament, recently assured us that there will not be an 
opposition broadcast before a new nation-wide television channel 
is opened, i.e., until there is a blue moon), the government can 
form public opinion in an optimum manner for itself. 
  Incidentally, television broadcasts have recently been 
reduced by two hours "because of economic considerations." 
Observant journalists have pointed out that the reduction 
affected Iranian broadcasts after they showed ex-president 
Mutalibov, who is hated by the authorities, at a time when the 
multi-hour British Super Channel remains inviolable. 
  The journalists, however, do not intend to surrender. In 
this 
connection, the anecdote about the "decadent intellectual" is 
recalled. An intellectual is travelling in an overcrowded bus. 
At each turn, a slightly tipsy ruffian, who reacts rudely to 
every comment by the intellectual with a "Stop your whining!" 
falls against him. The intellectual waits until his stop, exits 
and, after the doors have closed, shouts with feeling: "But I 
will continue to whine, on principle I will whine!" 
  Azerbaijan's non-governmental journalists are just as 
inclined in principle. They have still not forgotten "samizdat" 
habits and have already tasted freedom. In any case, however, 
they will find a way to express their "sour" words. 

