BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 2 KYODO -- Countries meeting in Paris 
next Monday [6 Jun] to frame a convention to prevent 
desertification are still at odds over how to fund the effort, 
despite an unofficial Canadian-Zambian initiative for a 
compromise proposal, government sources said Thursday. 
  The desertification convention is due to be adopted at a 
fifth intergovernmental negotiating committee meeting June 6-17. 
  But due to continued disagreement between advanced countries 
and developing countries, which have requested the establishment 
of a fund for prevention of desertification, the sources said it 
is likely the treaty will be adopted without a final agreement 
on the funding issue. 
  The convention document is one outcome of the United 
Nations-sponsored Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in June, 1992. 
  The document is an action plan to combat desertification, or 
aridity caused by human intervention due to overgrazing or 
excessive cultivation. 
  It calls for technical assistance and funding from advanced 
countries to carry out preventive measures. 
  Estimates put the annual rate of desertification around the 
globe at 60,000 square kilometers in more than 100 countries. 
  Aid from developing countries to combat the trend is 
estimated at 850 million dollars a year. 
  Developing countries want a new funding mechanism and the 
inclusion in the convention of an undertaking reached at a UN 
General Assembly meeting prior to the Earth Summit for developed 
countries to reserve 0.7 percent of their gross national product 
for government official development assistance (ODA). 
  But a number of advanced countries, including the United 
States, have insisted that inclusion of the UN target in the 
convention would justify demands by developing countries for 
increased funding. 
  They have said they have no room to increase their funding 
because of a worldwide depression and are insisting that funding 
is possible if existing forms of ODA are used effectively. 
  Canada and Zambia are behind an unofficial drive to produce 
a 
last-minute compromise draft. 
  Japanese Government officals said developing countries need 
such assistance and tend to accept the view that a new funding 
mechanism should be established with certain conditions attached 
while making the UN target nonbinding. 
  Advanced countries and developing countries have also 
differed over the inclusion in the convention of measures to 
prevent the spread of poverty in African countries in addition 
to those designed to prevent desertification. 

