Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Valeriy Vyzhutovich report: "The Return of the </F>
`Party-Economic Nomenklatura' to Power in the Regions Could 
Force Yeltsin To Make Concessions"] 
  [Text] Nikolay Medvedev, chief of the Administration for 
Work With Territories under the Russian president's staff, has 
stated that he does not rule out the possibility of the 
formation of a kind of "red belt" around Moscow consisting of 
regions with strong anti-reform and anti-president tendencies. 
The danger of this in connection with the elections to the 
local organs of power was also noted by Sergey Filatov at a 
conference with the president's representatives in the provinces. 
  The first signs of the return of the party-economic 
nomenklatura to power at local level were convincingly and 
graphically demonstrated by Penza Oblast, where 40 out of the 45 
seats in the legislative assembly went to former party committee 
secretaries, deputies of abolished soviets, heads of 
administrations and their deputies, and directors of plants and 
sovkhozes. In a report in IZVESTIYA yesterday our correspondent 
in Penza said that one reason for this triumph was manipulation 
by the local electoral committee, which formed the district in 
such a way as to ensure that the number of voters in the city 
district exceeded the rural electorate two to three times over. 
However, according to the Statute on Elections approved by the 
president's edict, that discrepancy in size should not exceed 10 
percent. 
  "This norm, however, is purely a recommendation," Aleksandr 
Ivanchenko, deputy chairman of the Central Electoral Commission, 
told your IZVESTIYA commentator. "That is why the outright 
violations of the Statute on Elections in the actions of the 
Penza authorities are not being examined. The election 
procedure in the provinces is determined by the heads of 
administrations, according to Article 77 of the Constitution, 
which prescribes that the system of organs of state power in the 
republics, krays, oblasts, cities of federal significance, the 
autonomous oblast, and autonomous okrugs is established by the 
components of the Russian Federation independently. The Central 
Electoral Commission has no right to impose rigid standards on 
the regions. These may be established only by the federal law 
on elections when that is adopted." 
  The lack of any possibility of effectively influencing the 
manner and procedure of elections in the provinces is presenting 
the central authorities with a dilemma: Either they indulge in 
propaganda rhetoric with routine complaints about local 
conservatism and the fueling of alarm about imminent 
nomenklatura revenge or else they adjust their course and bring 
it closer to the real moods and expectations of the Russian 
regions. 
  As Nikolay Medvedev told IZVESTIYA, the election association 
of democratic forces which some party romantics are ceaselessly 
calling for is hardly possible. The leader of the 
administration for work with the regions believes that, no 
matter what propaganda efforts are made, the representatives of 
opposition organizations (above all, Communists, Agrarians, and 
Zhirinovskiy supporters) will score at least 43 percent in the 
elections. The areas that look most desperate in this regard, 
according to Medvedev, are Lipetsk, Tambov, Orel, Ryazan, 
Voronezh.... This feeling is aggravated by the "absence of 
really structured democratic parties" with broad social support 
in the provinces. 
  Judging by this statement, the political distance between 
the 
"reformist" federal authorities and the "conservative" local 
authorities will be narrowed during the elections. There is 
already candid talk about an adjustment of the economic course 
and its considerable social orientation. For the first time it 
is officially confirmed that it is no longer just the premier 
but also the president himself who will personify and guarantee 
this course. 
  Given this prospect, fears of a possible confrontation 
between the central and local authorities seem exaggerated. It 
seems that the president himself will not permit anything of the 
kind: His political course will most probably undergo changes 
in directions already defined by Viktor Chernomyrdin. 

