CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tito Oldani: "The Massive Defeat of Scalfari </F>
 &amp; 
Co.: `Evenings, We Trod the Gramsci Path'"] 
  [Text] What was the intelligentsia's mistake? First of all, 
they underestimated their adversary, and then they demonized 
him. And so a cultural hegemony that lasted 30 years is coming 
to an end. 
  Consider that the philosopher Lucio Colletti, in the very 
columns of L'ESPRESSO, the masthead most hostile to Silvio 
Berlusconi, had advised them early on: "Never demonize your 
adversary; never yield to the temptation to make him into an 
enemy of the people. Demonization can sometimes turn out to be a 
boomerang." Words as prophetic as they were useless. For months, 
using all the cultural instruments at its disposal--newspapers, 
TV, the cinema, the judicial bureaucracy, and academia--the Left 
attempted to destroy the leader of Forza Italia who was depicted 
in the most offensive terms ("Black Knight," "little South 
American dictator," "Robin Hood in reverse," "charlatan," and 
most recently, even "Mafioso"), together with his allies of the 
Freedom Alliance. 
  In the forefront, LA REPUBBLICA Editor Eugenio Scalfari and 
L'ESPRESSO Editor Claudio Rinaldi for months waged an 
anti-Berlusconi campaign that paid off neither in circulation 
nor politically. The accusations of "trash journalism" hurled at 
the Fininvest networks, and L'ESPRESSO's attacks on PANORAMA 
that masqueraded as "editorial wars," dealt a blow to their 
prestige that can be likened to a bullet from a gun that 
backfired. 
  For Scalfari, who had to run the headline "Berlusconi Wins," 
it was the ultimate humiliation. Not only did the Left lose 
along with Scalfari but also the cultural nomenklatura who for 
decades dominated the mass media [preceding two words in 
English], the publishing industry, and the academic world, in 
accordance with the principle of Gramscian hegemony that says: 
Whoever controls the culture, the classroom, and the press 
controls people's minds and in the long run also their votes and 
therefore the state. It was a system of manifest persuasion that 
only three months before, following Francesco Rutelli's victory 
in the Rome municipal elections, appeared destined to give 
Achille Occhetto the victory that had eluded Enrico Berlinguer. 
In his Sunday homilies, Scalfari celebrated the ancient rite of 
organizing a consensus in Italy: the good guys on one side, the 
bad guys on the other. When Berlusconi took the field, however, 
it upset the apple cart and destroyed the "not being of the 
Left" complex that at one time--at the level of the masses--had 
paralyzed many people in their living rooms and at the polls. In 
politics, not just in business, votes are counted and not 
weighed. In the end it became apparent that the majority of 
Italians not only feel alienated from the theorems of the 
preachers of the culture of the Left but reject them. Whereas 
since 1948 the DC [Christian Democratic Party] was able to 
obtain maximum support using a moderate slogan ("progress 
without adventures"), it sufficed for Berlusconi to reinvoke the 
result ("the Italian miracle") that the slogan had obtained and 
offer it once again as a model for emerging from the crisis. 
  The culture of the Left dramatically underestimated the 
danger and the impact of the challenge. When it did become 
aware, too late, of the danger, it was forced to resort to 
traditional propaganda techniques for destroying one's opponent, 
including lies and slander. These techniques were put into 
practice in the cinema by a legion of new "progressive" 
directors led by Nanni Moretti who shot and sent to movie 
theaters many 20 minute spots [preceding word in English] 
designed to smear the leader of Forza Italia. In one of these 
spots there was even a fleeting glimpse of someone who resembled 
Berlusconi attempting to seduce a little boy. The Freedom 
Alliance accordingly used the opportunity to speak of "trash 
cinema" in the service of "trash politics." Was it not obviously 
a case of self-destruction? And yet not one of the movie critics 
understood this. Indeed, a discerning mind such as Lietta 
Tornabuoni, writing in a usually discerning newspaper, LA 
STAMPA, devoted a seven column article to ecstatic praise of 
Moretti &amp; Co.'s initiative. 
  Not only the activist cinema but even state television 
contributed to the demonization of Berlusconi, and thereby to 
the defeat of the Left. The newscasts of the three RAI [Italian 
Broadcasting Corporation] networks appeared to be more anxious 
to please the PDS [Democratic Party of the Left] than to grasp 
the meaning of the Forza Italia phenomenon. But it was programs 
such as Mixer; Milano, Italia; and Il Rosso e il Nero [The Red 
and the Black] that, taken together, sounded an alarm bell among 
most voters because of the perception they received of a 
progressive Minculpop [Ministry of Popular Culture] that they 
needed to reject with their votes. "In the eyes of not a few 
voters," Colletti wrote, "Berlusconi actually appeared to be a 
victim. Michele Santoro should be on the Fininvest payroll. To 
devote three hours of state TV to the subject of Berlusconi's 
debts when every major entrepreneur is more or less in the same 
situation is something that cannot help but appear as defamatory 
and counterproductive." 
  Academia also suffered from the Gramsci effect. In addition 
to the old and honorable progressivism in the style of Norberto 
Bobbio, we witnessed the extracurricular battle waged by Umberto 
Eco, who used a university auditorium to hurl scurrilous songs 
and slogans [preceding word in English] against the adversary. 
These were followed by innumerable ex cathedra pronouncements 
and appeals, which were also unfailingly disregarded by the 
average voter. Does this reflect an endemic ignorance on the 
part of Italians? Apparently not, according to the explanation 
offered by Giuseppe Bedeschi, instructor in moral philosophy at 
Sapienza University in Rome, who maintains that at least one 
segment of academia consists of intellectuals who are more 
concerned with preserving their jobs and their stipends than 
with scientific progress--a harsh and assuredly unpleasant 
assessment. This has not prevented the average voter, however, 
from quickly perceiving the importance of what is at stake 
behind the brief but salutary controversy over the issue of 
public education versus private education, and over its 
corollary: the university (which with only a few isolated 
exceptions has been reduced to an "examination-giving machine") 
versus private universities (such as Bocconi and Luiss), which 
young people vie with each other to enter. 
<H5>  The Keynesians' War </H5>
  No less hostile toward Berlusconi was the lobby [preceding 
word in English] of the economists. This was, moreover, in the 
eyes of the public, the strangest of all the contradictions that 
have surfaced within the intelligentsia. But how is it possible 
for Berlusconi to take the field proposing free-market remedies, 
and then to have authoritative professors of economics from 
Nobel Laureate Franco Modigliani to Luigi Spaventa, and from 
Nino Andreatta to Michele Salvati, give him an "F?" "If after 
Berlusconi is in government he were to put into practice what he 
is saying," Modigliani wrote, "it would be a disaster." And many 
venomous portraits were reserved for the few economists, such as 
Antonio Martino, who sided with Forza Italia. 
  The science of economics obviously had nothing at all to do 
with any of this. What was involved, and heavily involved, were 
the power relationships among the economists' lobbies [preceding 
word in English] in the universities and the public enterprises, 
which for 30 years have been dominated by Keynesians, both 
Catholic and secular. Here is a fact not generally known: in the 
1960's the Catholic Siro Lombardini and the secular leftist 
Paolo Sylos Labini--the former a Keynesian and the latter a 
Schumpeterian-- reached an agreement to appoint their disciples 
to university chairs, to the detriment of the disciples of the 
neolaissez-faire school. The result? According to Simona 
Quintili's research on the past 30 years of economic thinking in 
Italy, 49 of the 50 economics textbooks most in use today at the 
universities are Keynesian and only one is monetarist and 
neolaissez-faire. Moreover, the cultural tradition of the Bank 
of Italy has always been Keynesian. This is why the word 
"neolaissez-faire"--despite the fact that it refers to economic 
principles that are in vogue in all the major industrialist 
countries--is viewed almost as heresy in the overwhelming 
majority of our universities. And the slogan "less state, more 
market"--the slogan that was victorious at the polls--is viewed 
as basically an illusion, or perhaps, in one's heart of hearts, 
as blasphemy. 

