BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Jacques de Larosiere, president of </F>
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, by special 
correspondent Laurent Zecchini in St. Petersburg on 18 April: 
"It Is Not Our Job To Exercise Political Influence"] 
  [Text] In an interview granted to LE MONDE on Monday 18 
April in St. Petersburg, where the annual meeting of the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development [EBRD] is being 
held, Jacques de Larosiere emphasized that the EBRD's role is 
not to "exercise political influence in states." He insisted on 
the need to introduce a social security system to reduce the 
consequences of economic restructuring. 
  The image has been telling: As St. Petersburg was Russia's 
"window on Europe" in the days of Peter the Great and Catherine 
II, it was a highly symbolic gesture to select the banks of the 
river Neva as the venue for the annual meeting of the EBRD, 
which aims to facilitate the transition of postcommunist Russia 
and East European states toward the market economy and 
democracy. Admittedly, it was originally Jacques Attali's idea. 
The memory of the former EBRD president is therefore present in 
St. Petersburg, but not to his best advantage: No homage was 
paid to his work, which, despite everything, led to the bank's 
creation and helped it take its first steps. There was only 
thinly veiled criticism in the form of praise for the 
"exemplary" action of his successor, Jacques de Larosiere. 
  To a somewhat irritated IZVESTIYA journalist, who asked her 
in what way things had changed since the arrival of the former 
Bank of France governor, Anne Wibble, the president of the board 
of governors and Swedish finance minister, replied that: "The 
bank's internal way of operating is based more on consensus, 
which is a good way of stimulating people." Mr. de Larosiere 
himself does not go that far. In the interview with LE MONDE, 
he appeared, faithful to his personality, to be a discreet man 
who brings people together and seeks consensus. He does not 
deny that the EBRD has had "an image and credibility problem," 
but he does not want "to dwell on the subject," and would even 
like "to turn the page." 
  This is visibly what everyone wants. Certain EBRD governors, 
such as Lawrence Summers, U.S. under secretary for international 
affairs, were quite clear on this subject: "In the United 
States, consternation has given way to trust and admiration." 
This may be a little exaggerated, but it illustrates a general 
sense of relief. Jacques de Larosiere is not a man to wave 
around great ideas; he is a banker with an impeccable reputation 
and who inspires confidence. No idealistic statements, and 
certainly no "iconoclastic" proposals, are to be expected from 
him, but strict management in line with his mandate. The 
change, according to Poland's governor Hanna Gronkiewicz-Waltz, 
"consists in the bank's commitment to budgetary constraint and 
limited publicity." 
  This does not mean that the EBRD will lack a "political 
dimension," but Jacques de Larosiere wants to place it in "a 
more appropriate operating context." If countries fail to make 
sufficient progress on the path toward greater democracy, for 
example, when it comes to introducing multiparty systems, "then 
we will not lend them any more money," he stated. But it is not 
our job to seek to exercise political influence in states. The 
basic idea is that we are an institution which lends money to 
develop the private sector. At the same time, we have to ask 
ourselves whether, in so doing, we are adding something, whether 
we are contributing to this process of transition." This idea 
was picked up in a more trenchant way by Anne Wibble: "The 
primary responsibility for the reforms," she went on to say, 
"lies with the countries themselves." 
  The EBRD president's caution and modesty visibly please his 
interlocutors. These, the bank's president believes, were upset 
by the enormous confusion in its internal organization. "They 
used to ask themselves who did what." Now things are clearer, 
thanks in particular to the geographic reorganization and the 
decentralization which have taken place, and which should permit 
better analysis of local needs. Mr. de Larosiere believes that 
the EBRD's action should be judged "less in terms of amounts 
committed and more in terms of its impact on transition and, in 
particular, on the introduction of a competitive, efficient 
private sector." He thinks it is important to insist on the 
"quality" of the projects, in particular as these are 
"disbursed" fastest. 
  Given the enormous demand for financing, however, the bank 
needs to be more pragmatic, for example with regard to the 
statutory rule requiring 60 percent of financial commitments to 
go to the private sector and 40 percent to the public sector. 
Jacques de Larosiere noted a general wish for "flexibility" in 
this area, quite simply because this rule is impossible to apply 
in certain countries of the former communist bloc where the 
private sector is still in its infancy. Apart from this, the 
EBRD president, along with several governors, is concerned about 
the impact of the reforms which are already under way: In 
Russia and in several Central and East European countries, the 
transition toward a market economy is in a difficult stage, 
which entails a deterioration in citizens' individual situations. 
  The "euphoria" seen in East Europe in 1989 and 1990 was 
misplaced, Anne Wibble emphasized. "Many people believed that 
prosperity was just around the corner. The fact is," she 
emphasized, "that given the totally inefficient production and 
employment structures under the old system, this was not very 
realistic." Hence the need, in Jacques de Larosiere's view, for 
every structural reform to be made in "a stable macroeconomic 
framework with controlled inflation. Hence the importance," he 
added, "of introducing, where necessary, social security 
measures to reduce the human consequences of the unavoidable 
restructuring processes. What is needed," he stated, "is to 
create a self-financed social security system." 
  However, it is illusory to believe that Western countries 
will be able to assume such a financial burden, as the American 
governor emphasized. For an initial period, given the budgetary 
constraints which the former communist countries are facing, it 
might be necessary to find "supplementary financing," Mr de 
Larosiere suggested. Such "targeted social security protection 
measures," he added, "will enable enterprises to operate 
according to the rules of international competition." 
  An idea picked up, in another form, by French Economy 
Minister Edmond Alphandery: "This transition is possible," he 
explained, "only if the reforms are supported by the entire 
population, which will only do so if it sees the first fruits of 
the transition in everyday life. The EBRD should place special 
emphasis on projects which benefit citizens." It is this more 
modest, more traditional, and at the same time more demanding 
role which the EBRD intends to assume under Mr. de Larosiere's 
presidency. In the light of the lessons drawn from two and a 
half years of muddled experience. 

