Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Belgrade, 4 Mar (TANJUG) -- The Government of 
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia [FRY] at its session today 
concluded that Yugoslav Prime Minister Radoje Kontic's visit to 
New York was successful and useful, the Federal Ministry of 
Information has announced. A statement from the session says: 
  The federal government at its session today examined and 
endorsed a report on the working visit by Yugoslav Prime 
Minister Kontic to New York between 15 and 19 February this year. 
  It was concluded that the visit was successful and useful 
and 
that it took place at a critical time of expiry of NATO 
ultimatum to the Bosnian Serbs, which was reflected in the 
topics of his meetings and talks. [passage omitted] 
  The federal government tasked the relevant departments with 
drawing up a platform regarding possibilities of developing 
Yugoslav-U.S. cooperation under the sanctions and after the 
lifting or the alleviation of the sanctions, taking into 
consideration concrete initiatives that were put forward by the 
American side in the course of Prime Minister Kontic's visit to 
New York. 
  The federal government today examined and endorsed a report 
on Yugoslav-U.S. relations under the conditions of crisis on the 
territory of former SFRY and the U.S. policy toward the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia. In this regard, the importance of 
normalization of bilateral relations with the United States was 
emphasized, which was assessed as an important precondition for 
the just resolution of the Yugoslav crisis, the lifting of the 
UN Security Council sanctions and reintegration of the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia in the international community. 
  A report on issues relating to cooperation with the 
Hague-based International War Crimes Tribunal, which is to try 
war crime- perpetrators from the former SFRY, and with a UN 
expert commission that was founded to investigate war crimes, 
was endorsed. In this connection the federal government 
concluded that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia had a firm 
standpoint as regards prosecuting and punishing all persons who 
have committed crimes and have violated international 
humanitarian law. All such crimes are also punishable by the 
laws of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and therefore our 
judicial bodies are duty-bound to examine all relevant documents 
charging citizens of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and 
persons staying on its territory, and if found guilty prosecute 
and punish them. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia also 
accepts cooperation with all UN bodies, on this equal basis, not 
on the discriminatory basis on which the tribunal was founded, 
it was concluded at the session. 
  A platform for official visits by Yugoslav Foreign Minister 
Vladislav Jovanovic to Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria, Benin, and Gabon 
by the end of the month has been adopted. Guidelines have also 
been adopted for the participation of a Yugoslav delegation at a 
festival devoted to Nikola Tesla, which is to be held in 
Timisoara, Romania on 11 and 12 March. 
  The federal government set 20 March as the new deadline for 
the completion of final financial reports for last year. 
  Asim Telacevic has been relieved of his duties as federal 
deputy prime minister, because he is taking up a new post. 
Prime Minister Kontic appointed Uros Klikovac, hitherto the 
chairman of the committee for justice and federal administration 
of the Federal Assembly's Chamber of Republics, as the new 
federal deputy prime minister. 
  Vasilije Medenica, hitherto an official in the Federal 
Ministry of Transport and Communications, has been appointed 
acting federal flights inspector. 

