Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Navy is willing to give the coast guards the 
necessary assistance in protecting the South Kuril sector of 
Russia's border, a high-ranking naval official told Interfax. 
  Russian coast guards, he said, are considering several ways 
to strengthen the border in the area of the South Kuril Islands. 
"The Navy will support any of them and grant the necessary aid: 
speed boats, fuel and the like," he said. 
  As Interfax learned from the press bureau of Russia's 
frontier troops, no gross violations of Russia's sea border in 
the South Kuril direction have been registered since the end of 
January. "Several Japanese fishing vessels were noticed in the 
vicinity of Russia's territorial waters during the period in 
question, but they launched no illegal actions," said a member 
of the press bureau. 
  According to him, massive border violations in the South 
Kuril direction were noted between the 21st and the 24th of 
January, when Japanese fishing ships committed about one hundred 
violations of Russia's sea border. 
  "The coast guards, their patrol ships and helicopters are 
ready to prevent any violations of Russia's border," Interfax's 
interviewee pointed out. 
  Russia's position remains unchanged: we recognize the 
existence of a territorial dispute in our relations with Japan 
and are willing to discuss it, a senior Foreign Ministry 
official dealing with the "Japanese problems" told Interfax. 
  As he said, the territorial dispute will be discussed in 
Moscow on February 21st, when the Russian-Japanese group working 
on a peace treaty convenes for a session. The exchange of views 
will be continued on February 22nd, when bilateral working 
consultations presided over by Russia's Deputy Foreign Minister, 
Aleksandr Panov, and his Japanese counterpart, Hiroshi Fukuda, 
take place in Moscow. 
  According to the diplomat, the Russian side intends to 
discuss in detail the problem connected with the increasingly 
frequent violations of Russia's frontier by Japanese fishing 
vessels in the area of the four disputed South Kuril islands. 

