Language: <F P=105> Georgian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Temur Mirianashvili: "A Good Stone Doesn't Quit </F>
the Wall. Thoughts on Today's Emigration"] 
  [Text] These days we keep repeating Niko 
Lortkipanidze's words, "Georgia is being sold off!" 
  Indeed, Georgia's copper and timber, works of art and 
historical relics, are being sold off--in short, anything that 
can be sold and hauled off. 
  The worst harm, however, is being done by what is 
universally called the "brain drain" and universally considered 
national self-genocide. 
  Obviously, we haven't realized the danger posed by the 
brain drain--despite the fact that our best artists, scientists, 
specialists, businessmen, and athletes are leaving Georgia. Our 
fittest and smartest youth are leaving Georgia. 
  Yet we seem almost proud that our elite are emigrating. Our 
terrible sickness--snobbism--is to blame for this strange pride; 
we rejoice in any contact with the West, even if it is 
destructive. 
  The brain drain is bad enough for the nation, but most of 
the 
"drainees" themselves are not very well off. Only a handful have 
decent lives in the West (to say nothing of a happy life, let 
alone one of luxury). There are more than 25 million unemployed 
persons in the countries of the European Union. They can't find 
jobs for their own qualified cadres, so are they supposed to 
clasp graduates of Soviet colleges (or nongraduates) to their 
bosom? 
  Hence, our emigres have to take the kinds of jobs which the 
natives there won't touch. Some can't even get those jobs and 
have to support themselves by crime and prostitution. Some even 
take the easier route--begging. True, the Western beggar is 
materially better off than a scientist here, but material 
wellbeing alone doesn't make a life! It's sad to have to argue 
these things now in Georgia. 
  So that you won't think that I am against all emigration, 
I'll try to make myself more clear. 
  There are two kinds of emigration, political and economic. 
The political emigre is someone who goes abroad because he is 
being persecuted at home on political grounds, his life and 
liberty are threatened, or he is banned from work in his 
profession. 
  You cannot accuse political emigres of unconcern for their 
country's fate or of shirking their patriotic duty; economic 
emigres, however, do deserve that accusation. 
  The economic emigre is also one who claims that he is going 
abroad in order to have better working conditions, to work more 
fruitfully and eventually benefit his homeland. Our elite should 
not use such things as the economic crisis, the paralysis of 
industry, and material want as excuses to seek the good life 
abroad; rather, they should do everything they can to revive the 
economy, revitalize science, and restore industry here. 
  Otherwise, Georgia will perish. 
  All countries have suffered crises, but the only ones which 
have survived are those whose most gifted and knowledgeable 
citizens have fought and done everything they could to save 
their homeland. No country can get ahead any other way. 
  Many of our fellow countrymen became political emigres both 
under the communists and under the "Rounds" [the Gamsakhurdia 
regime]. Most of them were dedicated to their country, and for 
them it was a tragedy to have to go abroad. Official propaganda 
reviled them, and naturally our people tended to sympathize with 
the emigres. 
  Today, political emigration from Georgia is unnecessary, 
because no one is persecuted on political grounds and no one is 
banned from professional activity. Hence, attitudes toward 
would-be emigres ought to change. 
  In my opinion, Georgian emigration today is of three 
categories. 
  The first category comprises the majority of those 
who have left their homeland. These people are more or less 
essential to Georgia. In the West, however, which has tens of 
millions of unemployed specialists of its own, nobody needs 
Georgian seekers of the good life. Hence, their efforts abroad 
neither bring glory to their homeland nor do them much good 
materially. In fact, many of them--though I wouldn't say this of 
every emigre in this category--bring shame and disgrace to 
Georgia with their begging, crime, prostitution, and other 
unworthy actions. 
  The second category comprises a small minority of 
Georgian emigres. These are people who have a certain amount of 
authority (sometimes high prestige) in the West and are, of 
course, materially well off. 
  There are those who justify these people's living 
abroad--after all, many have brought fame to Georgia and have 
even helped us with hard currency. 
  I personally, however, think that they are much more 
essential in Georgia. Quite aside from the precious value of the 
activities of scientists and specialists, when people are in 
trouble their efforts are magnified a hundredfold by working 
side by side with eminent countrymen. Gifted artists can greatly 
alleviate their countrymen's heavy burden. 
  All else aside, the moral example which the popular 
celebrity 
sets for ordinary people who have remained in their cold and 
hungry homeland is priceless. 
  As for bringing renown to Georgia in the world and 
generating 
hard currency, that can be done without pulling up roots--for 
example, by touring [gastroli]. 
  The third category comprises students, who are 
temporary emigres, so to speak. After completing their studies 
they ought to come back to Georgia--they ought to, 
but I'm certain that many of them do not intend to do so and 
won't, if they can get citizenship abroad. 
  I know many will disagree with me, but I think it is wrong 
to 
go abroad to school--especially on such a mass scale. 
  Someone will, no doubt, remind me of Ilia [Chavchavadze], 
Akaki [Tsereteli], Vazha [Pshavela], and the other Tergdaleulebi 
["Drinkers of the Terek"--19th-century Georgians who went to 
Russia to college and returned to lead Georgia]. Yes, yes, I 
know. But in the time of the Tergdaleulebi it was impossible to 
get a higher education in Georgia; we didn't have universities 
and professors. Our library holdings were extremely small. The 
situation is entirely different today: a diligent youngster can 
get a high-quality education even without leaving Georgia. 
  Second, surely no one imagines that anyone among that 
brilliant constellation of Tergdaleulebi would choose to stay in 
a foreign country, even a foreign country's library, at a time 
when Georgia was in a grave crisis, at war, and the nation was 
fighting for its very life. 
  Also, consider this: there are rumors from the West that 
most 
of our young people there are not studying very hard. These 
reports are coming by the grapevine and also from students who 
have been there. Just read and listen to what Dato Turashvili 
and others have to say. They practically never mention the 
interiors of libraries and university lecture halls. Instead, 
Georgia's "future pride" talks lavishly about drinking, drugs, 
and "getting laid." 
  Some readers may think I'm overly exaggerating and 
categorical, but I must repeat what I firmly believe: Georgia 
can only be saved if its sons and daughters, especially the 
gifted and talented ones, do their civic duty. Georgians 
shouldn't seek haven in other countries just because life in 
Georgia is hard; they should try to make life better here. It 
has never been easy to build a country. 
  We also need to learn that life is more than merely enough 
food, warmth, and entertainment. Life is much deeper and more 
wonderful. It is a misfortune, of course, to live in a 
devastated country. But it is happiness to rebuild a devastated 
country. It is happiness just to try. 
  Remember the Georgian proverb, A Good Stone Doesn't Quit the 
Wall. I quote it not because I think our emigres are "bad 
stones"--not at all. I don't consider them to be "quitters" from 
Georgia's "wall." It's just that most of them have not thought 
their position through. Probably only a very few of our emigres 
are like bad stones, or like rats who are the first to leave a 
ship in trouble (and, incidentally, the first to die). 
  Georgia will certainly survive and win. There will certainly 
be a real Georgian celebration in Georgia. And then all our 
countrymen will yearn to come home. But those who stood by 
Georgia to the end in times of trouble and those who stayed safe 
and warm in a foreign country will never eat and drink at the 
same party. 
  Not because anybody will be locked out of that Georgian 
celebration, but because some will be contented men (in the 
civilized West they attained the standard of living where most 
citizens are content with their lot), while the others will be 
happy men (there is no greater happiness than to take part in 
your homeland's victory). The contented man and the happy man 
have nothing in common, because contentment and happiness are 
mutually exclusive. 
  P.S. A few words about people who are getting rich off 
the brain drain. Someone named Giorgi Bagaturia wrote in 
IVERIA-EKSPRESI last summer that he had created a company which 
helps highly trained Georgian specialists become Australian 
citizens. Bagaturia emphasizes that only top specialists need 
apply. So this man is getting rich by selling his own people, 
his own kind. 
  Unfortunately, the Bagaturias have proliferated among 
us. Some newspapers, for example, publish photos of foreign men 
seeking friendly ladies--but the friendly Georgian ladies, for 
some reason, have to be young and good looking (is friendship 
possible only with a woman, one who is beautiful and young?). 
You can tell from their photos, moreover, that many of these 
friendly men are sex maniacs. 
  What we are seeing in Georgia, then, is the emergence 
of the heirs of those who marketed their own flesh and blood in 
the bazaars of Istanbul and Cairo in past centuries. 

