BFN 

  [Text] Alija Izetbegovic, president of the Presidency of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Ejup Ganic, vice president of the 
Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina, this afternoon held a news 
conference on the reasons the Bosnia-Herzegovina delegation has 
not gone to the Geneva peace negotiations called by Yasushi 
Akashi. Here is a report by Mladen Bosnjak: 
  [Bosnjak] Alija Izetbegovic, president of the Presidency of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, stressed at the outset that he wanted to 
comment on two issues: the first being the failure of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina delegation to go to Geneva, and the second in 
connection with Tuzla airport, following reports today that 
UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] allowed a (?Serbian) observer to 
be present at the airport. Here is Mr. Izetbegovic explaining 
why the delegation did not go to Geneva. 
  [Begin Izetbegovic recording] Our condition was that 
Karadzic's Serbs withdraw from Gorazde. They had not withdrawn 
by noon today. We established this fact after talks with our 
representatives in Gorazde. This was also confirmed by UNPROFOR 
and Mr. Akashi [words indistinct]. The meeting has therefore 
been canceled and we are not to be blamed for it. 
  We even made a concession in Gorazde by agreeing that our 
soldiers not enter the so-called exclusion zone -- a zone of 3 
km under UNPROFOR control -- only our civilians may enter it. 
Since this has not been implemented thus far, we are 
withdrawing this concession and demand that Resolution 913 be 
fully implemented. 
  Regarding Tuzla airport, we were informed today that 
UNPROFOR, without our approval and knowledge, allowed the 
arrival of a Serbian liaison officer at Tuzla airport. We have 
stated in the past that we do not accept any Chetnik force 
presence or their representatives at this airport. Therefore, 
we demand that UNPROFOR remove the chetniks from Tuzla airport. 
If it does not care to do that, it should then gives us the 
airport back. [end recording] 
  [Bosnjak] Ejup Ganic, member of the Presidency, vice 
president of the Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina, and the head 
of our delegation that was supposed to travel to Geneva, was 
also categorical. The peace negotiations have been canceled by 
Mr. Yasushi Akashi himself. 
  [Begin Ganic recording in English with passage-by-passage 
translation into Serbo-Croatian] Let me make a brief statement 
that we heard from Geneva that Mr. Akashi made an announcement 
that he is canceling the talks, because Karadzic's Serbs had not 
satisfied the condition that Mr. Akashi had set for (?these 
talks). [end recording] 
  [Bosnjak] The Bosnia-Herzegovina delegation will travel to 
Talloires for the talks convened by the contact group. The 
topic of these talks will be decided upon in association with 
members of the contact group. Kresimir Zubak, president of the 
Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina, will travel to Talloires. He 
will not negotiate in Geneva either. 
  We will insist that the aggressor forces leave the Gorazde 
exclusion zone according to Resolution 913 and the NATO 
ultimatum. All civilians, including Serbs, who can prove that 
they used to live there may return to their homes in the Gorazde 
region. If the aggressor observer is not removed, we will 
demand that Tuzla airport be given back to us within a 
reasonable period of time, according to our agreement with 
UNPROFOR. These were short and clear answers by Mr. Izetbegovic 
to journalists' questions. 
  Mr. Izetbegovic briefly said, in answer to the last question 
at today's news conference posed by a Swiss journalist, namely, 
what the reasons were that our delegation did not go to the 
peace talks: 
  [Begin Izetbegovic recording] You have probably not 
understood that it was Akashi who canceled the meeting, having 
established that the Serbian side did not meet its obligations. 
This was not our fault. It is clear that this was not our 
fault. [end recording] 

