BFN 

<F P=106> [Italicized passages recorded] </F>
  [Text] The clashes are still on in the country. Kuito, 
N'dalatando, Malanje, and Benguela are the focus of tension over 
the past 24 hours. The shellings are continuing in Kuito, Bie 
Province, and the government forces are still blocking the 
enemy. Our correspondent Abel Abraao reports: 
  [Abraao] The Angolan Armed Forces [FAA], 
National Police, and civilian defense are still scoring 
victories whenever the rebel forces try to break any of the 
government lines. Unable to attack the government positions 
directly, the Black Cockerel soldiers have chosen to shell with 
its heavy artillery the major centers sheltering large crowds. 
Shells of various caliber have been fired since the early hours 
of this morning at the center of the city. The number of 
victims over the past 24 hours is not known, but hospital 
sources say that more than 15 people were killed early today. 
Well informed sources of the FAA Operation Command in Bie say 
that judging by the movements and intensified shelling of the 
National Union for the Total Independence of Angola [UNITA] 
rebels, the next few hours may hold serious violence, 
pain, and mourning for the martyred population of Kuito which 
has been (?besieged) for 502 days. 
  There is a similar situation in the city of N'dalatando, 
where UNITA is still shelling. After the UNITA rebels were 
repelled by the government forces yesterday, Savimbi's soldiers 
requested reinforcement from Huambo, Uige, and Zaire Provinces. 
Our correspondent Abilio Correia reports: 
  [Correia] Five Armed Forces for the Liberation of 
Angola [FALA] battalions that tried to occupy government forces 
positions in the west part of the city were repelled due to the 
bravery of the valorous FAA combatants, National Police, and 
civilian defense. In their disorderly retreat, 12 UNITA rebels 
were killed, and they abandoned four 82-mm mortars, five PKM 
weapons, seven AKM's, and an assortment of ammunition. 
Lieutenant General Manuel Jose Nego also said that UNITA is 
still moving soldiers and war materiel from Huambo, Zaire, and 
Uige Provinces to reinforce its positions in the outskirts of 
N'dalatando and launch a big offensive over the next few days, 
with the aim of taking the city. Today, the rebels shelled the 
city with more than 80 shells from long-range guns between dawn 
and 0900. The N'dalatando residents yesterday had a bloody day 
because the Black Cockerel shelling killed 50 people, mostly 
children, and wounded 80 others. 
  In the city of Malanje the situation is very different. The 
FAA were able to reverse the situation, killing 54 UNITA 
members. Francisco Curingana reports: 
  [Curingana] Brigadier (Ozoi), commander of the Malanje 
Operation Command, says in the operation an assortment of 
military equipment was recovered, including 39 AKM weapons, four 
PKM machineguns, two G-3 automatic arms, four U.S.-made antitank 
missiles, a radio [words indistinct]. Still at dawn, 
precisely at midnight [as heard], the rebel group was 
repelled by the civilian defense when they tried to place 
dynamite under houses belonging to civilians. Four rebels were 
killed, and an assortment of war materiel was recovered. 
  In Benguela Province, Savimbi's soldiers attacked a convoy 
of 
vehicles carrying foodstuffs for the Ganda District residents. 
The prompt intervention of the government forces blocked the 
rebels' plans. Our correspondent Julio Marinheiro reports: 
  [Marinheiro] The FAA thwarted the plans of Jonas 
Savimbi's men, killing nine rebels and capturing an assortment 
of war equipment. Jose Manuel Moreno, Popular Movement for the 
Liberation of Angola's first secretary in Benguela, who reported 
this in Ganda, said that the UNITA actions are aimed at 
hindering his government's efforts to solve the people's 
problems. 
  [Moreno] UNITA yesterday prevented a food convoy from 
arriving in this district and has been creating obstacles on the 
road linking Cubal to Ganda District, and this hinders any kind 
of assistance the government may eventually plan for this 
district. 

