Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS diplomatic correspondent Georgiy Shmelev] </F>
  [Text] Moscow January 31 TASS -- Russia needs an integral, 
sovereign, stable and economically prosperous Georgia to 
preserve centuries-old friendly relations between the two 
republics, Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev said. 
  Speaking at a meeting with North Caucasian leaders in Moscow 
on Monday on the eve of President Boris Yeltsin's visit to 
Georgia, Kozyrev said that the visit will go beyond purely 
Georgian-Russian relations as it will signify a serious step 
towards carrying out a strategy based on the balance of national 
and regional interests in the Caucasus. 
  The Russian foreign minister brushed off as groundless 
suspicions of a "military-political alliance" between Russia and 
Georgia against Abkhazia. Russia does not divide Caucasian 
people into "friendly" and "alien." It seeks to push forward 
the conflict settlement in Abkhazia and South Ossetia and 
confirm Russia's role as an active mediator in this process, 
Kozyrev noted. 
  If no comprehensive political settlement is reached and no 
documents are worked out and signed with the participation of 
Russia and the United Nations, it would be complacency to hope 
for peace and stability in that region, Kozyrev stressed. He 
warned that in that case extreme nationalists will take over in 
the region. 
  He stressed that reaching an agreement on peace-keeping 
measures in Abkhazia is a top priority. Those should involve 
international peace-keeping forces and observers. Russia has 
vital interests in that region, Kozyrev recalled, and will have 
to take part in the operation as well. Both Georgia and 
Abkhazia request so, he added. 
  Kozyrev denounced "mentorship or malevolence of outside 
observers and speculations about the `Zhirinovskiy factor', both 
in Russia and abroad. We need not lectures about the norms of 
the United Nations or the Conference on Security and Cooperation 
in Europe (CSCE), but practical assistance to promote them in 
the Caucasus and the entire post-Soviet space." 
  During Yeltsin's visit to Georgia due to take place on 
February 3-4, the Russian leader will raise the question of 
conflict settlement in South Ossetia where peace has been 
maintained by Russian peacekeepers and CSCE representatives. 

