Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bonn (DPA) -- In his talk with Indian Prime 
Minister P.V. Narisimha Rao, Chancellor Helmut Kohl called on 
German industry to make more investments on the subcontinent, 
which is inhabited by 900 million people. On Thursday [3 
February], the second day of his visit to Germany, which will 
last four days, Rao met in Bonn with Foreign Minister Klaus 
Kinkel (Free Democratic Party of Germany) and was then received 
by Kohl with military honors in front of the Chancellor's Office. 
  It has been said that in the political part of this talk 
with 
Rao, Kohl clearly expressed the Western community interest in 
having India sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. Kohl had 
broached this topic already during his visit to India last 
February. During this visit representatives of German and 
Indian industry signed an agreement on building two conventional 
power plants with an order value of 5.6 billion German marks. 
  After the political exchange of opinion, Kohl and Rao opened 
a German-Indian economic conference in the Chancellor's Office, 
which is under the patronage of the "Asia-Pacific Committee" of 
German industry. Kohl cited the focal issues of cooperation, 
which he sees as part of the Federal Government's Asian concept. 
The dialogue of the consultation forum, which was established 
during Rao's first visit to Germany in 1991, must be continued 
with representatives of industry, science, and members of the 
governments. Kohl announced that a German-Indian committee for 
science and technology, which will be staffed with high-ranking 
officials from both states, will soon start its work. 
  Kohl pointed out that the FRG is currently India's second 
most important supplier and its fourth most important sales 
market. "Our investments in India are remarkable, but they 
could still increase," the chancellor said. The deregulation 
and liberalization of the Indian economy also plays a big role 
in that. The successful conclusion of the GATT round is of 
great importance for the further development of the 
German-Indian economic relations. 
  On the first day of Rao's visit the Fraunhofer Society for 
the Promotion of Applied Research and the "Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research" had signed an agreement on cooperation 
in the fields of, among others, microelectronics and 
environmental research. 
  The Indian prime minister's schedule also included meetings 
with the chairmen of the Christian Democratic Union/Christian 
Social Union and Free Democratic Party of Germany Bundestag 
groups as well as a continuation of the exchange of views with 
leading representatives of German industry. On Friday, Rao will 
receive Rudolf Scharping, minister-president of 
Rhineland-Palatinate and chairman of the Social Democratic Party 
of Germany, before he goes to Berlin, where he will be welcomed 
by President Richard von Weizsaecker. 

