Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Zhang Weihang (1728 5898 5300): "Public Security </F>
Organs Across China Attained Remarkable Results in Fighting 
Crime in 1993"] 
  [Text] Public security organs nationwide scored great 
successes in fighting crime last year, with a sharp rise in the 
detection rate. 
  According to information provided by the Public Security 
Ministry's Criminal Investigation Bureau, China's public 
security organs last year cracked 1.21 million criminal cases 
occurring in the same year, of which 370,000 cases were serious 
and important ones, with the detection rates going up by 6.8 and 
3 percent, respectively, as compared with the previous year. A 
number of felons were arrested and a total of 3.95 billion yuan 
in cash and goods were recovered. 
  Acting on the plan made by the Public Security Ministry, 
public security organs in various localities launched a series 
of campaigns in 1993 against train robbers and highwaymen, 
criminal gangs, criminals involved in abducting and selling 
women and children, drug and firearms traffickers, economic 
criminals, smugglers and snakeheads [traffickers in illegal 
emigrants], and those engaged in transnational and transregional 
criminal activities. They scored great successes and thus made 
significant contributions to social security. In 1993, 21,000 
"train and highway banditry" cases and a number of cases of 
abducting and selling women and children were solved. Some 
4,000 kg of heroin and 3,000 kg of opium were seized in the 
course of 14,000 cases, and a number of criminal gangs were 
broken up. In another development, public security organs in 
various localities detected a number of serious and important 
economic cases, prosecuted a number of criminals involved in 
transnational and transregional criminal cases, and extradited 
20 felons from foreign countries or from outside the borders. 
  It has been learned that the Public Security Ministry has 
called on public security organs in various localities to focus 
on "identifying serious cases, cracking down on criminal gangs, 
and pursuing escaped criminals," so as to continue following the 
principle of dealing harsh and quick blows against serious 
crimes. They should double their efforts to crack down on 
murderers, robbers, thieves, and organized criminal activities 
in order to eliminate evil forces in urban and rural areas, and 
should truly maintain social security and stability, thus 
creating a more favorable social environment for reform and 
economic construction, as demanded by the Public Security 
Ministry. 

