CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Babayan: "Should a Man Love His </F>
Motherland If It Does Not Love Him? Armenia Actively Votes for 
`New Life' With Its Feet. One Out of Five Inhabitants Has 
Recently Left the Country"] 
  [Text] Yerevan--It is probably old-fashioned to bring 
up the topic of emigration. And especially to brand those who 
leave in search of bluebirds and sweet pies. For goodness sake! 
The entire country is sitting on suitcases: We have become 
strangers to each other, we are being driven out from 
everywhere--either for our faith, or for the color of our hair, 
or for our language, or, God forbid, for all of the above. In 
the past, emigration in its geographical sense meant Europe and 
the United States. Now you just step outside the neighborhood 
and you are in the near abroad. It does not matter that it is 
near--the important part is that it is abroad. 
  Official statistics tell us that one out of five inhabitants 
have left Armenia recently. This is only part of the problem, 
though. A recent sociological survey showed that a further 2 
million citizens are ready to follow these 600,000-700,000. 
Which means that only those who cannot move will remain in the 
homeland. Truly, had it been my choice, I would nominate a man 
with a suitcase as Man of the Year. 
  Is this a dangerous trend, this curve that resembles the 
trajectory of an aircraft taking off? Let us refrain from 
nervous monologues. The best cure for phrase-mongering dandruff 
is the guillotine of facts. And they go as follows: In 1920 the 
population of the republic numbered 720,000. During subsequent 
decades, up to the population exodus of our times, this figure 
reached its current level--3.5 million. Now let us permit 
ourselves a cynical question: Is this a lot or a little? For 
China--I do not have to tell you; as for Armenia, some 
sociologists believe that its optimal population should be 
2.2-2.3 million. It turns out that the democratic capacity is a 
sensible balance between the number of consumers and the number 
of producers. To put it simply, those who eat must be fed by 
their own workers and the fruits of their own land. This is all 
fine, except that those who leave are mostly the workers, not 
the eaters. 
  One independent sociologist suggested at a "roundtable" on 
the subject of migration that we should resign ourselves to it 
and accept that blockades, the energy crisis, migration, and 
other ills are an "eternal given" and try to adjust to these 
conditions, as was done, for instance, in Japan during the times 
of crisis: grow quails at home and consume their meat and eggs; 
build miniature hydroelectric power stations--in short, set 
microgoals for ourselves. 
  I can foresee a reasonable question: How then did our 
republic live before? In the last normal year of its life--1987 
(that is, before the earthquake, the Karabakh events, and the 
blockade)--the volume of gross national product in Armenia 
exceeded consumption by approximately 1.3 billion rubles [R]. 
Academician Yuriy Khodzhamiryan of the International Engineering 
Academy comes to the conclusion that Armenia did not in any way 
live at Russia's expense and made a substantial contribution to 
the country's central fund. The proportional share of national 
income utilized in the national income produced between 1980 and 
1987 is within the range of 90 percent. The scholar believes 
that Armenia can feed itself, provided that transportation and 
energy communications function normally, and relations with 
other states--first and foremost our neighbors--are normal. 
  What does it mean, however--feed itself? There is no country 
in the world that produces everything it consumes. Even the 
United States exports [as published] petroleum products, metals, 
and a number of foodstuffs, not to mention machine-building, 
electronics, and light industry products. 
  Yes, our current situation is extremely difficult in the 
socioeconomic and political sense. But the demographers made the 
forecast not for the present but for the future. Which says that 
Armenia is doomed to have a 2-million population. One wants to 
ask what there is more of here--pessimism, or the desire to 
somehow justify the migration by presenting it as a blessing and 
refusing to analyze the real causes of the outflow of 
inhabitants? Meanwhile, they, these causes, are quite puzzling. 
Their basis is psychological fear of the present, extreme 
hardship of life, and everything that stems from the 
Azerbaijan-Karabakh confrontation. Add to this list discontent 
with the current authorities and their methods of governing. 
After all, flight from domestic reality is voting with one's 
feet. Is this not so? 
  A few months ago the sociological research center of the 
National Academy of Sciences conducted a survey aimed at 
identifying more precisely society's attitude to current 
processes. Its results show people's strikingly high degree of 
alienation from the social sphere, social indifference of 
different strata of society. To the question: "Do you believe 
that you personally can influence public life?" slightly more 
than one-quarter of the respondents answered positively, 73.4 
percent--negatively. Among those who answered negatively were 75 
percent of students, school pupils, and young people polled, 83 
percent of workers, and 93 percent of nonworking housewives. By 
the way, a little more than a quarter of the respondents 
consider Armenia their "homeland forever." And about 18 percent 
believe that "Armenia does not have any future, and even if it 
does not disappear from the map of the world, most Armenians 
will leave." 
  Uninformed people may get the impression that Armenians are 
a 
nation on the go. This is not so. Resettlement of compatriots 
abroad began in 1915, when the Ottoman Empire subjected to 
genocide a million and a half Western Armenians. In the 1920's, 
however, the biblical mountain began to accept into its bosom 
the first repatriates. Convoys of wanderers began coming to the 
ancient homeland from everywhere--Greece and Iran, France and 
Syria, Lebanon and Cyprus. Repatriates from all continents came 
together at the hospitable table of the homeland. This was noted 
by Mikhail Koltsov, who visited at the time at the foot of 
Ararat: "One has to resort to speaking with an Armenian drama 
actor from Paris in French, finding a common--English--language 
with an Armenian novelist from New York, and arguing with a 
music critic from Vienna in German. And also recalling at least 
a few Turkish words for the owner, who brings fresh cups to the 
debaters in such a fatherly manner." 
  Repatriation became truly large-scale after the war. People 
were coming back not just to their homeland--they were coming 
back to a victorious country. By the way, from the Syrian city 
of Aleppo with a convoy of refugees also came the family of the 
future president, Levon Ter-Petrosyan. 
  Repatriates were called "brothers"--"Akhpars." The top 
echelons, however, distrusted blood brothers who had escaped the 
Yataghans by fleeing to foreign lands, had for decades cherished 
the dream of the holy mountain, and had finally come back to 
native parts. Strangers or not, they were the first to 
experience the hellish machine of Stalin's terror. 
  One way or the other. It seemed that the West Armenian 
mirror, fragments of which flew over all five continents, put 
itself back together. Alas, today it has cracked again, and 
again there are convoys, except now in the reverse direction. 
Away from the motherland. 
  Let us look the truth in the eye: Emigration has been, is, 
and will be. The point is why people leave the motherland, and 
this reason could be legitimate. Famous compatriots 
abroad--Charles Aznavour, Michel Legrand, the artist Garzu [as 
transliterated], member of the French Academy, and the famous 
director, Henry Verneuil, are emigrants, and it was not the 
sweet life that made their forebears leave the cities of their 
childhood. I will never forget how in Washington an Armenian 
physician was upbraiding a young immigrant who had just moved to 
the United States. 
  "What kind of an Armenian are you? You left behind your sick 
mother; the motherland is strong because of loyalty and the sum 
strength of its sons." 
  The other hunched over and mumbled something as an excuse. 
  "Here is an Armenian!" exclaimed the doctor, pointing to a 
reproduction of Saryan's famous painting on the wall. "He was 
always with Armenia in its dramatic hour. He is a real patriot." 
  Many compatriots whom I happened to meet on my foreign 
travels told me frankly: "We will come to Armenia to live out 
the last years of our lives." My God, can the motherland have 
functional significance only as a cemetery? 
  There is no question that it is quite uncomfortable right 
now 
on this rocky land. A Frenchman opens his eyes and sees the 
Louvre and the Eiffel Tower, a warm and comfortable life, the 
kindness of the motherland; a citizen of Armenia is haunted from 
his very first steps by a tragic past--the genetic code of 
sadness and tears. Is it not strange that the same songs are 
sung at our weddings and funerals--the sad tunes of our distant 
forebears... 
  Those who returned were subjected to apprehension and 
mistrust. I knew a mathematician in Yerevan who worked at a 
secret facility. In the 1970's his sister came to visit from Los 
Angeles as a tourist. He was summoned to a certain competent 
organization and sternly warned: "Do not seek a meeting with 
your sister--remember, you have been entrusted with state 
secrets." As if his sister had come for the single purpose of 
fishing out her brother's secrets. "How can this be," the 
bewildered mathematician was saying, "they entrusted me with 
secrets but do not trust me to meet with my own sister." 
  Several years later he moved to the United States, to join 
his sister. 
  It is all true: Ararat is not always hospitable to us. 
But--to be angry at one's motherland? What if Yerevan trees got 
upset that they are being chopped down, folded their branches 
like wings and flew away to warm parts? What if Sevan got angry 
at some malfunction in the works and quietly, perfidiously, by 
an underground route known only to it, moved to foreign 
countries? 
  This is the bitter truth--it is not easy to be an Armenian 
today, it is not easy to live in the paternal home. That is why 
the attitude toward emigration among the public is ambiguous. 
  I talked once with Genrikh Ignatyan, an art critic, a former 
USSR people's deputy. 
  "There is no question--this is a painful topic. People like 
Saryan, Tamanyan, Spendiarov, and Kodzhoyan started coming here 
at a time of hardship. I have met many times the people who left 
several years ago, and I can tell you for certain--they all 
think about Armenia. I met a young man once in Spain, who told 
me with tears in his eyes: "Why do I need a Sayat-Nova 
restaurant in Madrid--I want to open one in Yerevan; I will make 
it better there." 
  Do we need to moralize? Foreign Armenian parties and 
organizations have an unequivocally negative attitude toward 
emigration. But here, in Yerevan, many have began to treat with 
understanding those leaving for foreign lands: "Why should I 
love my motherland if it does not love me?" And really, why? 
  Then answer this question: Why should the motherland love 
you 
if you do not love it? Everything gets so complicated when the 
mind and the heart are at odds! On the other hand, only he who 
lives by his conscience has peace of mind. 
<H5>  Shakespeare's Prayer: </H5>
  Leave me, but not at the last moment, 
When I grow weak from small troubles. 
Leave me now, so I may learn right now 
That this tragedy is greater than all other troubles. 
That there are no troubles but one-- 
To be deprived of your love forever. 
  The poetic verse flies high into the sky; train routes and 
tracks go by land. This is the point. 

