BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 2 KYODO -- A friendship promotion 
organization headed by Ichiro Ozawa, secretary general of 
Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party], received 100 million yen as a 
donation from the construction industry in 1991, sources said 
Thursday [2 June]. 
  The Japan Federation of Construction Contractors 
(Nikkenren), 
which groups 57 building firms, contributed a total of 100 
million yen to John Manjiro No Kai, a nonprofit organization to 
boost grass- roots exchanges between Japan and the United 
States, sources said. 
  The revelation could provide ammunition to opposition 
parties 
that are renewing a call for Ozawa's Diet testimony over 
suspected donations from scandal-tainted general contractors, 
observers said. 
  A group of 23 individuals filed a complaint in February with 
public prosecutors against Ozawa, accusing him of illegally 
receiving a 5 million yen political donation in December 1992. 
  Ozawa, former secretary general of the Liberal Democratic 
Party (LDP), has denied the charge. 
  The friendship organization, established in November 1990, 
when Ozawa was the LDP secretary general, sought donations from 
businesses to host a November 1991 conference to boost 
Japan-U.S. grass-roots exchanges. 
  Nobuo Matsunaga, the organization's director and former 
ambassador to the U.S., brought a request for donations to then 
Nikkenren chairman Teruzo Yoshino, former chairman of Shimizu 
Corp. 
  In response, the Nikkenren member companies contributed 1.5 
million to 3.5 million yen each to Ozawa's organization. 
  Many major construction companies have been involved in a 
bribery and bid-rigging scandal that has claimed four regional 
government leaders, a former construction minister and more than 
30 exeutives from Japan's eight biggest building firms. 
  Nikkenren defended the 1991 donation as a good-will 
contribution for advancing international exchanges. 
  "Japan's construction industry was then in a difficult 
position due to the Japan-U.S. construction talks, and we 
donated the money in a belief that grass-roots exchanges between 
the two countries are important," one Nikkenren official said. 
  He admitted the construction group was aware that Ozawa 
headed the organization. 
  Sadao Hirano, a Shinseito member of the House of Councillors 
and acting chairman of the organization, said, "It was a project 
supported by the Foreign Ministry on the occasion of the 50th 
anniversary of Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor." 
  He added that the construction companies contributed because 
"they shared our view." 
  John Manjiro No Kai, which later developed into a fund 
approved by six ministries, continues to sponsor an annual 
grass-roots summit, held alternately in Japan and the U.S. 

