BFN 

  [Text] Bonn -- The Social Democratic Party of Germany 
[SPD] and the Free Democratic Party of Germany [FDP] have again 
rejected a proposal made by the Christian Democratic Union [CDU] 
to use Bundeswehr troops in the event of threats to German 
internal security. Juergen Ruettgers, CDU/Christian Social 
Union [CSU] Bundestag group manager, said in the KOELNER 
STADT-ANZEIGER on Wednesday [30 March] that the CDU/CSU wants to 
effect an amendment to the constitution after the Bundestag 
elections that shall allow Bundeswehr missions within Germany as 
a "risk reserve" for emergencies. Bundestag Group Chairman 
Wolfgang Schaeuble had made a similar suggestion late last year. 
SPD defense expert Walter Kolbow called this proposal "absurd." 
  In view of last week's riots by militant Kurds, Ruettgers 
said that the fight against Kurdish terrorism is in good hands 
with the police and judicial authorities. "But it is obvious 
that the security situation in our country is changing," 
Ruettgers said. Conflicts in other countries are also affecting 
Germany. This can easily bring about situations where the 
capacities of police and border police are depleted. FDP 
Secretary General Werner Hoyer stressed that Ruettgers 
"unfortunately let himself be carried away to show a thoughtless 
overreaction." There is no need for Bundeswehr missions in 
Germany going beyond the possibilities clearly defined in the 
Constitution. 
  Hoyer warned that the "incredible discussion" about amending 
the constitution could jeopardize the consensus on the 
Bundeswehr's tasks, diminish citizens' confidence in the armed 
forces, and undermine the troops' self-image. FDP Deputy 
Juergen Koppelin emphasized that the Bundeswehr is not to be 
seen as reinforcement of police and border police. SPD Deputy 
Kolbow said that following a militarization of foreign policy 
the government now wants to militarize domestic policy. Anybody 
making proposals like Ruettgers' threatens compulsory military 
service. Anybody who wants to improve internal security in 
Germany has to increase the presence and efficiency of the 
police and border police. 

