BFN 

<F P=106> ["Gy.Z"-signed interview with Istvan Gyarmati, head of the </F>
Security Policy and European Cooperation Department of the 
Hungarian Foreign Ministry; place and date not given: "Anyone 
Who Expects a Quick Solution Will Be Greatly Disappointed"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [MAGYAR HIRLAP] Since its 
presentation, the Balladur plan has gone through considerable 
changes, and not always changes favorable for us. To what 
extent are Hungarian interests represented in the Paris document 
that has only started its process but has not yet finished? 
  [Gyarmati] Of course, the Balladur plan has changed, 
compared with its original form. This is natural, because one 
thing is absolutely certain in diplomacy: Whatever one suggests 
at the beginning, will definitely not be the final result of the 
negotiations. It is a fact that some things were omitted from 
the original proposal, some things that Hungarian diplomacy and 
the Hungarian public would have welcomed in the proposal, like 
the need to guarantee the collective rights of national 
minorities. It is also true, however, that a few elements 
favorable for us have been included in the document in the 
meantime, like the one that the European Union will also support 
financially the implementation of certain projects, like border 
crossing points and national minority cultural institutions. I 
think that the current version of the document meets Hungarian 
interests, because it does not want to force on us any solution 
that we decline to accept. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] What minimum and maximum goals has Hungarian 
diplomacy formulated for the series of negotiations following 
the Paris document, particularly regarding the fact that the 
Hungarian position regarding an adequate settling of the 
minority issue does not meet with the approach of either our 
regional partners or our Western partners? 
  [Gyarmati] Our position regarding the borders is unchanged: 
There are no open border issues for Hungary. Our neighbors are 
also aware of this; nor do they claim that there is such an 
issue. At the same time, they think the present borders should 
once again be confirmed in a basic treaty. We always said we 
would find an adequate form for this, but we do not commit 
ourselves to what this form should be because, in the course of 
negotiations, one never commits himself to a single form. 
Therefore, the border issue has never been a real problem for 
Hungary; it is still not a problem for us. At the same time, we 
do see problems regarding national minorities. This is a mirror 
reflection of the border issue, because our neighbors claim that 
there is no national minority issue, while we say that there is 
such an issue. 
  The Paris document says that the accepted UN, CSCE, and 
Council of Europe documents represent the basis of the national 
minority issue. This means that one cannot go below the already 
accepted international norms. At the same time, it does not 
mean that one cannot exceed these norms. Obviously, we want to 
exceed them at the negotiations, while our partners do not want 
to exceed them. If it is true that the starting position of 
neither side will be the final solution, the final result will 
lie somewhere between the currently accepted standards and our 
maximum goals, and this can only be a better solution than the 
current one. Therefore, I think that there can be clearly 
positive developments here. 
  There can only be one issue in which we have serious 
difficulties. We say that it is not nice to discuss minorities 
without consulting these minorities. We think it is necessary 
for these national minorities to be able to say what is the 
problem and the recipe in their view, and to comment on whether 
or not the emerging solution is acceptable for them. Who else 
could tell how many school classes are needed in the areas 
inhabited by national minorities? I think we can achieve a 
solution in Paris that leaves the issue and the possibilities 
open, so that we can return to them at concrete negotiations. 
[passage omitted] 

