Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Leaders of G-15 countries have expressed serious 
concern over attempts by developed countries to raise new trade 
barriers after of the conclusion of GATT agreement. At the 
plenary meeting of the summit in New Delhi today, they pointed 
out that new areas of trade distortions are being created by 
raising issues like human rights and environment. This could 
create new difficulties for developing countries who are now 
carrying out economic reforms. Instead the leaders wanted 
greater market access to developing countries to help their 
reform process. 
  The summit leaders have agreed to have wider consultations 
among member countries to achieve a concerted and coordinated 
approach to promote trade in the wake of protectionism. They 
said it is the mandate of the developing countries that there 
should be greater cooperation between the South-South countries. 
Eighteen on-going projects were reviewed and the need for 
setting up a monitoring system to speed up the implementation 
was highlighted. The heads of state and government have also 
decided to establish two projects. They include the setting up 
of a renewable energy promotion center and a project on the 
transfer of technology and development to achieve 
self-sufficiency in food production and energy supplies. 
  The prime minister, Mr. Narasimha Rao, himself set the tone 
of the summit by cautioning against replacing the old barriers 
lowered by GATT proposals with new ones in the guise of 
noneconomic concerns. Inaugurating the three-day summit, he 
said there is reason for concern over attempts to undermine 
multi-lateralism because of unilateral action and demands for 
concessions beyond those agreed to at Uruguay Round of 
negotiations. Mr. Rao called for mobilizing world opinion 
against forces of terrorism, separatism, and fundamentalism. He 
also referred to the wide-ranging issues, including the 
restructuring the United Nations, constructive dialogue with the 
G-7 industrialized nations and the need for closer economic 
cooperation. President Suharto of Indonesia, who spoke as the 
Asian group representative, regretted that developing nations 
have very little to say in shaping global economic policies. He 
warned that if the changing international scenario is not 
managed with care now, it may end up with pernicious North-South 
economic divide. Speaking on behalf of the African group, 
President Sani Abacha of Nigeria called for specific projects 
for removal of poverty, job creation, industrialization ,and 
debt reduction. 
  AIR [All India Radio] correspondent reports that the main 
concern of the leaders who spoke at the summit today was on 
creating closer economic ties among the developing nations at 
this critical juncture. President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe and 
President Abdou Diouf of Senegeal were also seated on the podium 
of the plenary hall in the Vigyan Bhavan [conference hall], 
which was decorated for the summit with flags and buntings. 
  Briefing newsmen later, an official spokesman said all the 
leaders participated in the plenary session. The special envoys 
representing other countries joined them in informal 
consultations later. They discussed at length the restructuring 
and democratization of the United Nations, including the 
security Council, and international financial institutions like 
the IMF and the World bank. The business forum of the G-15 
countries, which also met simultaneously today, expressed 
concern at advanced countries raising nontariff issues like 
human rights and child labor to block exports from developing 
countries. Presiding over the meeting, the commerce minister, 
Mr. Pranab Mukherji, called for collective action of the group 
to counter such moves. 

