BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 8 (XINHUA) -- Fourteen foreign 
scientists, including five Nobel Prize laureates, have been 
elected as the first foreign academicians of the Chinese Academy 
of Sciences (CAS) today at a general meeting of CAS. 
  Among them two are citizens of Britain and the other 12 
citizens of the United States. 
  The new inductees are: Derek Barton and Joseph Needham of 
Britain, L.L. Chang, S.S. Chern, Y.C. Fung, T.D. Lee, C.C. Lin, 
Peter Raven, Herbert Simon, C.L. Tien, S.C.C. Ting, C.S. Wu, 
C.N. Yang and S.T. Yau of the United States. 
  The five Nobel Prize laureates are 1957 physics prize 
co-winners T.D. Lee and C.N. Yang, 1969 chemistry prize winner 
Derek Barton, 1976 physics prize winner S.C.C. Ting and 1978 
economics prize winner Herbert Simon. 
  The election of the first CAS foreign academicians, CAS 
President Zhou Guangzhao said, signals that China's science and 
technology community is opening ever wider to the outside world. 
  Scientific activities belong to the whole world, as they are 
very international and have no boundaries. The foreign CAS 
academicians all have enjoyed high academic reputations and 
contributed greatly to the advancement of China's science and 
technology, he noted. 
  He added that their election to CAS is a proud moment for 
the 
scientific body and will be conducive to China's scientific and 
technological development as well as a stimulus to pump new 
vigor into CAS. 
  Zhou said that China, a country with a long history, once 
enjoyed glory in its scientific and technological development. 
The testing and weathering of contemporary times have brought 
China's science and technology into the international arena. 
  "This will add glories to the already prestigious academic 
careers of the foreign academicians of CAS," he said. 
  All the foreign academicians are scientists active on the 
most advanced frontiers of world science and technology, said 
Zhou, adding that CAS should actively do its part to keep them 
well connected with and well informed of CAS activities as well 
as hear their opinions so as to accelerate the 
internationalization process of China's science and technology. 
  Song Jian, director of the State Science Commission, said 
that the election of the first group of CAS foreign academicians 
symbolizes China's efforts to open wider to the outside world 
and enhance international cooperation in science and technology. 
  During the Ninth Five-Year Plan (1996-2000), the Chinese 
scientific and technological community should take full 
advantage of the favorable domestic and world environment 
created by the country's reform and opening policies to open 
even wider and expand international academic cooperation, he 
said. 
  The community should keep refreshing its banks of knowledge, 
absorbing new information and picking up new energy so as to 
step up the development of China's science and technology, Song 
said. 

