Language: <F P=105> Belarusian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by S. Gusak, deputy chairman of the Belarusian </F>
United Democratic Party: "The Time of `Soft' Reforms Has 
Passed"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] Currently, the structural 
reconstruction of the Belarusian economy requires the following 
measures: 
  1. It is necessary to create a transportation net for 
delivery of oil from third countries, that is, to implement the 
idea of a Baltic-Black Sea oil collector [BBSoc]. Politicians 
and experts from Latvia, Lithuania, Belarus, and Ukraine, who 
participated in the international conference addressing the 
issue of fuel deliveries to our region, supported this idea. 
The costs for the reconstruction of oil pump stations and the 
building of a gas pipeline could stand at $350-400 million. 
This is an acceptable sum for several states. The BBSoc 
operation will do away with the Russian monopoly on oil in the 
region and our oil and gas shortages. Costs for oil 
transportation from Saudi Arabia through the territory of the 
Baltics to the Novopolotsk oil processing factory will represent 
some 12-14 percent of the total cost paid for oil purchases. In 
general, this oil from Saudi Arabia will be cheaper than that 
from Russia, which we are receiving on a barter or 
clearing-house basis. Hence, the first and foremost task of our 
government is to protect our market from monopoly control. 
  2. To do away with Russian gas deliveries, we deem it 
expedient to deliver condensed gas from Algeria. Algeria has 
enormous potential to condense extracted gas and is looking for 
markets. We could charter gas tankers in Algeria. To pump the 
condensed gas, we could use existing gas pipelines and install 
the necessary cryogenic equipment. Gas pipelines, as well as 
oil pipelines, will connect Belarus with the Baltic and Black 
Seas. Several dozen tankers per year will satisfy 50 percent of 
our oil requirements. 
  All civilized states have antimonopoly laws, according to 
which deliveries of raw materials or fuel (under one title) 
cannot exceed 25-30 percent of the overall amount used by the 
state. We expect that the 1994 price for Russian gas will 
approach the level of world prices, therefore, we will have to 
pay more for municipal services; prices will jump. All this 
will twist the inflation spiral, which in turn will sweep the 
goods out of our shops. 
  3. We should reconstruct our oil processing factories and 
provide for their full capacity, which exceeds the republic's 
demand for oil products. The excess of oil products could be 
sold abroad and the money used to purchase oil. 
  4. The BBSoc states should unite their efforts with other 
CIS states and pursue a single economic policy with Russia to do 
away with its crushing terms. 
  5. Specific measures should be taken to cut down 
hard-currency expenditures and we should learn to pay for only 
imported goods in hard currency. For example, Belarus does not 
have the branch of power mechanical building, while our 
equipment for power engineering is already worn out and requires 
deliveries of very expensive spare parts. At the same time, the 
giant Zhodino truck factory is living through a difficult period 
of unplanned production stoppages due to lack of orders. This 
automobile giant could be retooled and turned into a host 
enterprise of power mechanical building. 
  6. Enterprises should introduce energy conservation 
technologies into their production. In connection with this, 
appropriate departments should establish a Republican standard 
of energy use per unit of production. Enterprises that have 
reached a high level of energy conservation should enjoy tax 
breaks. The amount of tax breaks should enable these 
enterprises to continue the introduction of advanced 
technologies. In capitalist states, such practices have proved 
successful and quite advantageous. 
  7. Expenditures on state staff and nomenclature should be 
sharply reduced. All official cars should be sold at public 
auctions. Only two personal cars -- for the Supreme Soviet 
chairman and the prime minister -- can be maintained at state 
expense. Money for the sold cars should be directed to the 
Health and Education Ministries. The costly staff of state 
bodies should be cut by 50 percent. When our fat cats begin 
filling their cars with gas at private gas stations, they will 
work out a new approach to oil issues in Belarus. 
  8. A law banning the employment of all former communist and 
soviet nomenclature -- fed during the Gorbachev era -- in high 
places should be adopted. Law enforcement bodies should begin 
to legally investigate economic crimes and corruption of high 
officials. Stolen money should be returned to the state 
coffers, while law violators should be prosecuted. If this is 
not done, the Republic will not defeat the Mafia-nomenclature 
clan, which lives at the expense of people, and economic reforms 
will lead to the creation of a political regime akin to those in 
Latin America. 
  9. We should begin to profoundly reconstruct the economy 
with the aim of raising its efficiency and decreasing the 
power-output ratio and input of materials. To do this, we 
should reevaluate the significance of the agricultural sector of 
the economy. 
  There are a lot of models of economic reforms causing a 
certain degree of social unrest or a degree of radical change. 
A lot depends on the starting point. The time of soft reforms 
has gone. Currently, our industrial output equals postwar levels 
in Germany, Japan, or Korea. The models of economic reform in 
those states have been different, while they had one thing in 
common: People worked nine hours a day and 6 days a week; they 
had a week's unpaid vacation, and the unemployment rate was 
around 10 percent. Our government will likely introduce the 
same parameters for us. 
  So, please, do not be happy if you happen to shake hands 
with 
our prime minister. 

