Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by editorial staff member Hideo Tamura] </F>
  [Text] With the breakdown of the Japan-U.S. economic 
framework talks, there is now a possibility that Japan-U.S. 
economic relations will enter a "cold peace" (according to 
Jeffrey Garten, U.S. under secretary of commerce). At a time 
like this, the issue of UN economic sanctions against the DPRK 
over its suspected manufacture of nuclear devices has come up. 
This is symbolic of the fact that even after the end of the 
Cold War, cooperation in security between Japan and the United 
States is still of much more importance than their economic 
relations. Whether Japan is able to separate security matters 
from the overall framework for coordinating economic interests 
will be a key issue for Japan from now on. 
  It is said that while Japanese and U.S. Government officials 
were repeating their arguments and counterarguments in the 
framework talks last fall, secret contacts were under way in 
Beijing between Israel and North Korea. The DPRK allegedly 
proposed that in return for its commitment to refrain from 
selling missiles to Israel's Middle Eastern enemies, such as 
Iran, Israel should pledge arms assistance to the DPRK amounting 
to $1 billion. 
  The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was able to 
obtain 
this information, while Japan was unable to do so. This was in 
spite of the fact that the intermediary between Israel and North 
Korea was a foreign trading firm closely connected with Japan, 
and that if the deal had been concluded, it would have had a 
great impact on security relations in East Asia. Moreover, 
while North Korean residents in Japan remit more than 60 billion 
yen a year to the DPRK, and they travel to and from North Korea 
quite often, Japan is never informed of developments inside the 
DPRK. 
  Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa strongly asserted at his 
talks with President Bill Clinton that bilateral relations "have 
matured" to the extent where Japan has come to be able to say no 
to the United States. However, even without bringing up the 
Japan-U.S. security pact, it is a fact that Japan is 
unilaterally dependent on the worldwide U.S. security umbrella. 
It is far from having achieved an "equal and matured 
relationship." Only the U.S. Government was able to stop Israel 
from assisting North Korea. 
  On the issue of sanctions against North Korea, Japan has 
informed the United States that it is impossible to stop 
remittances from Japan to the DPRK. However, the truth about 
the Japan-U.S. relationship is that if the United States insists 
on its demands, Japan has no other recourse but to comply. 
  One factor that complicates the Japan-U.S. framework talks 
is 
that, as in the case of the North Korean issue, the talks 
overlap with the "security" issue. A year ago, the Clinton 
administration declared that "trade is a matter of national 
security" and designated Japan, which it viewed as increasing 
its trade surplus while refusing to open its market, as its 
current main target in the area of trade. Garten wrote that 
after the end of the Cold War, the world has entered an era of 
"cold peace" in terms of economic interests between the United 
States, Japan, and Europe. 
  Japan's refusal to accept numerical targets is, indeed, 
valid 
in terms of economic theory, as pointed out by economists in 
both Japan and the United States. However, this question has 
always been regarded as a political issue in the United States 
which Ambassador to Japan Walter Mondale often terms a 
"political football game." From the political point of view, 
Japan lacks the overall capability to repel pressure from the 
United States. If the relationship of trust between the two 
countries in security matters is undermined, this would 
certainly bring chaos to the Japanese financial and capital 
markets and unsettle the Japanese economy. 
  Japan should face the security issue as a fact of life, and 
it can only convince the United States by achieving results in 
reducing the trade surplus and market liberalization through its 
own efforts. At the same time, both the government and the 
private sector should strive to acquire better planning and 
implementation abilities to minimize the impact of bilateral 
trade frictions on political and security issues, because the 
weakening of Japan-U.S. relations will undermine security and 
economic stability in Asia and the world. 

