Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Ankara -- While the Greek stand toward Turkey 
prompted the National Defense Ministry and General Staff into 
action, Turkish warplanes are continuing flights over the Aegean 
Sea and in international airspace. While the deterrence 
operation against Greece is continuing with 28 F-16 and F-4 
aircraft, the warships and submarines are making shows of force. 
The flights and shows of force will continue until further 
orders. 
  Baki Tug, chairman of the Turkish Grand National Assembly 
National Defense Commission, and members of the commission were 
given a scheduled briefing at the General Staff the other day. 
The deputies asked questions on the existing tension with 
Greece. Dogan Gures, chief of the General Staff, was not 
present at the briefing, which was attended by General Teoman 
Erkan, under secretary at the National Defense Ministry, Gen. 
Ahmet Corekci, deputy chief of the General Staff, and a number 
of officers. 
  The deputies were briefed on Turkey's military strength. 
When asked about the extent of the Greek threat and the 
measures being taken against it, the General Staff officers 
enumerated the measures being taken. In accordance with these 
measures, Turkish warplanes have started deterrence flights over 
the Aegean Sea and in international airspace. Twenty-four F-16 
and F-4 aircraft are intermittently conducting flights, dubbed 
the "24 plus 4" plan by the General Staff, because four fully 
equipped standby F-16s will start support flights if the need 
arises. In addition, our warships and submarines sailed into 
the Aegean the previous day and started a show of force. 
  After the briefing at the General Staff, the following 
members of the Commission met Chief of the General Staff Dogan 
Gures at lunch: "Baki Tug, Ural Koklu, Mustafa Kacmaz, Hasan 
Basri Eler, Mustafa Dursun Yangin, Halil Ibrahim Artvinli, 
Tevfik Diker, Aydin Mirkelam, Muhtar Mahramli, Turgut Tekin, Ali 
Uzun, Huseyin Aksoy, Gurhan Celebican, Safa Giray, Faruk Saydam, 
Abuzer Tanriverdi, Cemal Sahin, Mukadder Basegmez, and Cevat 
Ayhan." 
  It was learned that Chief of General Staff Dogan Gures said 
that Papandreou, who has come to power in Greece, is an 
unreliable person, and added: "Greece is acting like an enemy. 
For that reason, we have to strengthen our Army. In addition 
to our aircraft, we are having a show of force in the Aegean 
with our surface and underwater forces. We have to show our 
strength to the enemy. We will show it. We will immediately 
retaliate if Greece attacks." 
  In stressing during the meeting that Turkey's dialogue with 
the neighboring states is not sound, Gures is reported to have 
said: "We know well who is supporting the PKK [Kurdish Workers 
Party]. The PKK is our internal problem, but they have support 
from the outside. We know their leaders are in Syria. We have 
contacts with Syria, but it appears that nothing will occur as 
regards his [PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan] hand over to us. Iran 
and Iraq do not appear to be Turkey's friends. Iraq constantly 
says it has not forgotten Turkey's position during the Iraqi 
war." 

