CSO 

  [Text] If urgent measures are not adopted, the Chiman 
Forest, located in Beni, in the country's northeastern section, 
will be destroyed by the plundering activity of the lumber 
companies and sawmills. They are still continuing their 
operations, and no one has succeeded in ousting them, not even 
the decrees on protection signed in 1990 after the march for 
"territory and dignity." 
  The Chiman Forest, considered the area most endowed with 
mara 
or mahogany wood ("Swietenia macrophilla," of the Meliaceae 
family), is facing a process of extinction. Despite this, its 
exploitation is intense, in contrast to the minimal 
reforestation. 
  Experts and ethnic groups warn that the mara will disappear 
here in the Chiman Forest within two or three years, as has been 
confirmed by the director of the Forest Development Center, 
Javier Lopez Soria, an expert on the problem. 
  A total of 80 percent of lumber exports, worth as much as 
$48.8 million per year, consist of mara, produced mainly by 
Beni, followed by Santa Cruz. 
  Every year, the Beni sawmills receive 100,000 cubic meters 
of 
tree trunks. 
  It is calculated that at least 190,000 cubic meters of mara 
are exploited annually throughout the country. A large portion 
of it comes from the Chiman Forest, inhabited by 2,266 Indians 
who led a historic march on foot, from Puerto San Borja to La 
Paz, in 1990. 
  Added to the disappearance of mara is the pollution of 
rivers 
by the wood waste, which is creating upheaval in aquatic life, 
and, finally, the extermination of fauna, to supply an army of 
power saw operators who tour the Chiman Forest daily, felling 
young trees and squandering the wood. 
  Overflights by small planes through the Chiman Forest, and 
tours along the Apare River, with 13 Indian communities and 17 
settlements located on its shores, have succeeded in proving to 
a government committee the danger threatening the Chiman Forest. 
The threat is present despite the legal regulations existing to 
protect it, and the efforts on the part of the Indian peoples 
and private organizations. 

