BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by the News Research and Commentaries Group] </F>
  [Text] On 9 April 1980 the complete severance of 
Iranian-U.S. diplomatic relations was announced. At first 
glance, some people who had lost face vis-a-vis the power of the 
United States as a superpower said that this would weaken and 
defeat Iran and called for the removal of the elements that had 
led to the deterioration of Iranian-U.S. relations. However, 
the founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran adopted a decisive 
stance and removed the negative impacts of this incorrect 
interpretation which was weakening the revolution. By 
describing U.S. relations with Iran as relations between a wolf 
and a lamb, Imam Khomeyni, may his soul be sanctified, rejected 
such unjust relations and explicitly stated that not only are 
these relations not to the benefit of Iran but they are also to 
the detriment of the revolution and its sacred objectives. 
  With the passage of 14 years since the complete severance of 
Iranian-U.S. relations and with the developments and changes of 
conditions in the various fields that have come about, the issue 
of Iranian-U.S. relations is again in the limelight, and some 
people are optimistically advising the resumption of relations. 
The reasoning of this group is that, given our country's 
economic problems, we can solve these problems if we establish 
relations with the United States. This group claims that by 
improving our relations with the United States, we can enjoy 
U.S. assistance and that the obstacles that the United States 
creates on the international scene will be removed, thus 
allowing us to enjoy assistance and support by other countries 
too, which will make us stronger in dealing with problems. 
  There may be a similarity between this group's argument and 
the argument of those who intended to oust the Sandinists from 
the Nicaraguan power scene. When the duel between the 
Sandinists and the opposition coalition started in Nicaragua, 
the anti-Sandinists' reasoning was that once they came to power 
and relations with the United States improved, all of 
Nicaragua's problems would be solved. With this promise, this 
group succeeded in gaining power with a very small majority of 
votes. But contrary to what the propaganda had said, neither 
was there the flood of U.S. assistance to Nicaragua nor did 
Nicaragua's economic problems end. The assistance that the 
United States allocated to Chamorro's government was not an 
amount that could solve Nicaragua's problems. It was only a 
tool to control that country. 
  Under the current conditions, even as some people speak 
about 
a change in U.S. behavior toward Iran and consider the desire of 
U.S. officials for improved relations with Iran reason to 
establish relations with the United States, a look at White 
House politics makes us realize that no change has taken place 
in that country's behavior. Use of instruments such as human 
rights and nuclear arms to defame Iran in international forums; 
efforts to prevent assistance to and support for Iran by 
international organizations; and efforts to upset the relations 
of European countries and Japan with Iran to inflict as much 
pressure as possible on Iran all show that the United States' 
hostile position regarding Iran has not changed. Moreover, 
Iranian assets continue to be frozen in the United States even 
though, on several occasions, Iranian officials have called on 
the United States to halt its policy of blocking Iranian assets. 
  The enmity of the United States toward Iran is actually the 
result of the independent policies of the Islamic Republic of 
Iran. What the United States wants is that Iran give up its 
independent path and follow U.S. policies. As long as the 
Islamic Republic of Iran continues on its independent path, the 
United States will not make peace or establish friendship with 
the Iranian nation. This is why, when commenting on the unjust 
and hostile U.S. stance on Iran, the esteemed leader of the 
Islamic Republic compared the current conditions for the 
establishment of relations with the United States with the 
conditions that prevailed in 1980 and said that nothing has 
changed. This is why, in answer to whispers about the 
commencement of talks with the United States, he stated that 
beginning talks with the United States is a prologue to 
impositions and defeats. 

