BFN 

  [Text] Brussels, 29 May (EFE) -- Belgian Foreign Minister 
Willy Claes today said that negotiations have begun with the 
Cuban authorities to ensure no reprisals will be taken against 
the 114 refugees once they leave the Belgian Embassy in Havana. 
"We are trying to get the authorities' assurance that no 
reprisals will be taken," Minister Claes said. "The refugees 
want to issue a political message of despair," the minister 
added, stressing that the embassy is facing a space problem 
because it is not big enough to accommodate the large number of 
people who yesterday jumped the fence and sought refuge at the 
embassy. 
  A Foreign Ministry spokesperson said that talks are under 
way 
in Havana and Brussels. The spokesperson did not specify 
whether there are well-known political activists among the 114 
refugees, 24 of whom are children. 
  "The refugees are led by a couple of doctors," Minister 
Claes 
said. According to the minister, the refugees "must not build 
up their hopes that their request for exit permits will be 
granted promptly." The minister added: "They know how the 
Cuban authorities work; they systematically deny exit permits." 
There has been only one exception to this rule; this was in the 
case of the Cubans who sought refuge at the Mexican Embassy in 
September 1993. They were issued exit permits shortly after the 
incident. 
  This is the third time that Belgium has faced a similar 
situation; however, never before has the number of people been 
so large. In 1990 four people entered the embassy, and in 
January seven others did the same. The last time a group of 
people entered the embassy it took several months of 
negotiations to solve the problem. 
  Foreign Ministry sources have said that this time the 
situation must be solved promptly in light of the problems such 
a large number of people create in such a small building. 
  Seeking refuge in embassies is a common practice; however, 
never before has an avalanche, such as the one observed 
yesterday, occurred. 

