BFN 

<F P=106> [Studio interview with Foreign Minister Alain Juppe by </F>
correspondent Annette Ardisson; from the "Questions From A to B" 
program -- live] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [Ardisson] Let us move on to 
another serious subject, Bosnia. France already feels concern, 
shared by the United States, over the region of Brcko, which, 
one should mention, is the narrowest part of the corridor 
linking the Serbian enclaves together, and then there is also 
this matter of the tanks that the UN forces have allowed past 
into the exclusion zone around Sarajevo. In terms of symbols 
this is quite a strong one, what use is it for France to supply 
so many peacekeeping troops to the United Nations if its voice 
is not heeded? 
  [Juppe] The question arises, and you are right to ask it. 
You know that for a year now we have made considerable efforts 
to attempt to make progress toward a solution. Today, I am 
concerned for two reaaons. First of all, because of the 
situation on the ground: Our troops, our peacekeeping troops, 
are extraordinarily vulnerable, and I am not certain that the 
force that we have established by means of the UN Security 
Council resolutions and NATO ultimatums is working as it should. 
In fact, we need firmness on the ground, and this firmness is 
absent. I regret to say that, as you have pointed out, we are 
likely to encounter new setbacks at Brcko, if we are too weak 
and take too long as was the case in Gorazde. 
  The second matter for concern is that the diplomatic process 
is likely to become bogged down again. As you know, personally, 
I wanted a negotiating group involving Americans, Russians, and 
Europeans to be formed. This has been done, but what do I see? 
This group moves about between the different sides to question 
them -- this has been going on for months now -- and no progress 
is being made. So, I have come to a point where I say that we 
now have to tackle the basic question, and the basic question is 
as follows: Do we or do we not want to make peace in Bosnia, or 
do we want to make the different sides believe that the war is 
going to continue? If we want to make peace then we have to 
provide ourselves with the means, in other words: Here is the 
settlement we are putting to you, and it must be accepted. If 
we are unable to get this line accepted -- and the deadline is 
close, early next week there will be a meeting at ministerial 
level -- then we will have to draw the appropriate conclusions. 
We cannot continue to expose our peacekeeping troops to danger 
indefinitely if it is not serving any useful purpose. 
  [Ardisson] What conclusions, please be more specific? 
  [Juppe] I believe I have been quite specific enough, and 
that 
everyone has understood my meaning. 
  [Ardisson] There is another issue, that of Premiere Urgence 
and of its 11 French members who are being held hostage. You 
said: We will be firm, it is out of the question to bargain. 
However, what means do we have of exerting pressure on the 
Serbs without giving anything in return so as to obtain the 
freedom of these French nationals. 
  [Juppe] They have been set up. I will not go back over the 
details, but we know perfectly well that there was a scheme to 
make people believe that this organization was involved in arms 
smuggling. We cannot accept a mockery of a trial. We cannot 
accept a bargain with some being freed and others being tried. 
We have multiplied steps to obtain the freeing of our fellow 
nationals through international organizations, through the 
European Union Presidency, through certain influential 
diplomatic channels, namely the Russians. Serb authorities must 
know that we hold them responsible for what might happen. I 
mean the authorities in Belgrade. One cannot play a constant 
double game and tell us that it is not them but the others. 
When the UN secretary general is negotiating a cease-fire with 
the Bosnian Serbs, he does so in Belgrade, this is where things 
are taking place. If our demands for a total and speedy freeing 
of our nationals are not met, it must be clear that France will 
never accept the implementation of a process aimed at lifting 
sanctions against Serbia. Things must be clear. 
  [Ardisson] Is this the only means we have to exert pressure? 
  [Juppe] This is a major one and we will naturally employ all 
others as well. [passage omitted] 

