Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on regional narcotics developments monitored through 27 
March. 
<H5>  Costa Rica </H5>
  National Drug Control Directorate personnel impounded 0.5 kg 
of high-grade heroin at the Tobias Bolanos Airport on 20 March. 
According to one official, "the drugs were hidden in a broken 
glider and were discovered by a group of children playing in the 
area." (San Jose LA REPUBLICA in Spanish 22 Mar 94 p 10A) 
  Costa Rican police today reported that Judicial 
Investigation 
Agency personnel have arrested three Colombians, a U.S. citizen, 
and a citizen of the Dominican Republic--all of whom are accused 
of being "members of a heroin-trafficking band." The arrests 
occurred in Alajuela, 20 km north of San Jose. Authorities also 
seized 1.5 kg of high-grade heroin, a large amount of expensive 
jewelry, and about $11,000 in cash. (Mexico City NOTIMEX in 
Spanish 1736 GMT 23 Mar 94) 
<H5>  Guatemala </H5>
  The Prosecutor's Office has begun legal proceedings against 
five Mexicans--three men and two women--who were arrested on 
drug trafficking charges during searches at the Melendres bridge 
in Tecun Uman, San Marcos. Police found 116 kg of cocaine in 
the Chevrolet Suburban van in which Jose de Jesus Martinez 
Rodriguez and Clara Esther Mecias Medina were traveling on 1 
March. On the following day, police arrested Jesus Acosta Cano, 
Alicia Cano de Acosta, and Erica Murillo Avizu after officers 
discovered 97 kg of cocaine in their vehicle, a similar 
Chevrolet Suburban. (Guatemala City PRENSA LIBRE in Spanish 20 
Mar 94 p 15) 
  Treasury Police reportedly have foiled Cali Cartel plans to 
ship large amounts of cocaine in vehicles to the United States. 
So far this month, police have seized large amounts of drugs 
and impounded land vehicles and water craft "that were to be 
used in the so-called Angel Plan." For example, on 13 March 
police seized 499 kg of cocaine hidden in the Idemar-265 barge 
which was being towed by a U.S.-flagged tugboat. During this 
action they arrested six U.S. citizens and two Colombians. 
  On 18 March at Tecun Uman, San Marcos, police arrested two 
Guatemalan citizens who were travelling in two pickup trucks 
with hidden compartments in which 22 kg of cocaine were hidden. 
Police also arrested Luis Adolfo Mijangos Gonzalez, who was 
transporting 60 kg of cocaine in a GMC pickup truck, in Centro 
Comercial Montufar, Guatemala City. (Guatemala City PRENSA 
LIBRE in Spanish 20 Mar 94 p 2) 
  Treasury Police have reported that more than 800 police are 
guarding several border entry points between Guatemala and 
Mexico to counter any new Cali Cartel action under the so-called 
"Angel Plan." Police said the drug traffickers' plan is designed 
to introduce more than 40 drug-carrying vehicles into the United 
States. (Guatemala City PRENSA LIBRE in Spanish 21 Mar 94 p 167) 
  Treasury Police have reported impounding a marijuana 
plantation with 120,000 marijuana plants and 10.4 kg of 
processed marijuana in an area bordering with Belize. No 
arrests were made. (Panama City ACAN in Spanish 1512 GMT 21 Mar 
94) 
<H5>  Mexico </H5>
  Federal Judicial Police have arrested two smugglers bringing 
$110,000 in cash into the country--"money that was generated 
from the shipment of 45 kg of cocaine to Houston, Texas." The 
arrests were made at the Cola de Caballo and Santiago-Linares 
highway intersection on 19 March. (Monterrey EL NORTE (Foreign 
Edition) in Spanish 20 Mar 94 p 16B) 
<H5>  Panama </H5>
  Panamanian Police and Colombian Army authorities have held a 
final meeting to coordinate their efforts in destroying 100 
hectares of coca plants discovered growing in Darien Province 
between 1993 and 1994. Police officials said about 100 
Panamanian and Colombian police will destroy the crops. The 
Panamanians will spray them with insecticide and set fire to 
them and the Colombians will give ground support and secure the 
area. According to officials, coca paste processing 
laboratories have been operating in the area. These labs are 
believed to belong to Colombian drug traffickers. So far, no 
arrests have been made. (Panama City LA PRENSA in Spanish 22 
Mar 94 p 2A) 

