Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Sun Hui (1327 6540) and Wu Mengshuan (0702 1322 </F>
2165): "Underground Criminal Societies Rapidly Expand Their 
Influence"] 
  [Excerpts] First of all, the influence of recently formed 
underground criminal societies within China is expanding at an 
alarming rate! Currently, more and more criminal gangs and 
unhealthy organizations are turning into underground criminal 
societies with even stronger and more one-pointed devotion to 
crime. The rapid numerical growth in underground criminal 
societies stems from the major increase in criminal gangs over 
successive years. In 1990, 100,527 criminal gangs with 368,885 
members were identified throughout the country. Both the number 
of gangs and their membership were three times as large as that 
of 1985. And while the numbers of those involved in underground 
criminal societies has rapidly grown, the influence of these 
societies has spread throughout all regions of the country. 
Fairly large-scale underground criminal societies have been 
identified in Harbin, Shaoyang of Hunan Province, Guiyang of 
Guizhou Province, Yancheng of Jiangsu Province, and Yuncheng of 
Shanxi Province, while the situation in the southeastern coastal 
regions is even more critical than in the north or in the 
hinterland. Looking at an individual province, underground 
criminal societies have been found operating in 18 regions and 
cities of Hunan Province, as an example. The members of 
underground criminal societies are primarily the dregs of 
society's idlers, while the nucleus and backbone of these gangs 
is made up of wayward habitual criminals, recidivists, those 
running from the law, as well as those who have not been 
reformed through the two types of labor. These types of 
individuals have long taken an anti-social stance, conducting 
themselves in a wicked, merciless, and unscrupulous fashion as 
they engage in unbridled criminal activity without regard for 
the consequences. They represent the worst sort of criminal 
influence we are confronted with, and they are the hardcore 
operators behind the exercise of underground criminal society 
influence. A significant segment of the underground criminal 
society operates under a clear reactionary agenda colored deeply 
by political designs. For example, the "China crime party" and 
the "plum blossom gang", both of which were located and busted 
by public security organs, had clearly established reactionary 
agendas based on "seizing territory and political power." The 
huge growth in underground criminal society influence is also 
shown by the massive wealth these individuals have acquired 
through illegal means. They have used every sort of method to 
lay hold of firearms, ammunition, hand grenades, daggers, 
electrical billy clubs, poison guns, tear gas cannisters, and 
other lethal weapons, and they illegally manufacture firearms 
and ammunition for themselves. For example, in early April of 
1991, the "wolf gang" was busted in the Yuncheng region of 
Shanxi Province, and they were found to possess 22 firearms, 10 
of which were home-made. At the end of 1991 and the beginning of 
1992, eight underground criminal gangs were busted in Guiyang 
and they were found to have 17 handguns and rifles, as well as 
military grenades, mortars, bulletproof vests, hunting knives, 
daggers, and other lethal weapons. Underground criminal 
societies generally possess modern means of transportation and 
advanced communications facilities. For example, the underground 
criminal society headed by Wu Jiazhen [0702 0502 3791] in a 
certain suburb of Yancheng, Jiangsu Province, has vehicles for 
all of its thugs. Also, it has set up communications links by 
purchasing a radio station and walkie-talkies, and it has 
installed a tower antenna over 20 meters high in front of the 
entrance to its headquarters building. The "wolf gang" of Shanxi 
Province controlled all of the drivers of our unit and used our 
vehicles to carry out their criminal activities. 
  Underground criminal societies have many members, they are 
tightly organized, they have a considerable stockpile of 
weapons, and most of the members are more hardened in their 
criminal ways than the run of the mill criminals and gangs, and 
for these reasons, the influence of the underground criminal 
societies is deeper and more pernicious. For the most part, 
these people brazenly commit their crimes in the open, not 
hesitating to kill, injure, rob, steal, swindle, blackmail, 
kidnap, smuggle, or traffic in and use narcotics, and they will 
go so far as to illegally imprison individuals. In addition to 
these serious crimes, members will freely beat up and insult 
people, oppress whole towns by bullying the businessmen, eat and 
drink their fill without paying, forcibly take whatever they 
desire, wantonly insult women, extort money and items form 
sources public and private, commit every manner of crime, 
seriously prejudice the good order of society, and disturb 
normal social order. They have become a new form of mass 
oppressor, they try to dominate through evil deeds, and they 
represent a wicked force that challenges the political power of 
the people and the laws of the state. For example, since 1988, 
the city of Shaoyang has had at least 25 cases of persons having 
their hands and/or feet chopped off. In some cases, persons have 
had their fingers chopped off or smashed, while others have had 
the tendons in their feet slit out and discarded. When the same 
persons go to the hospital to have new tendons transplanted, the 
savage criminals track them down to re-slit and discard the 
tendons, and then smash their kneecaps and ankles. Another trend 
is that criminal societies are infiltrating the business world, 
actively seeking legal business fronts, thereby establishing a 
base for operations. Some criminal societies even use ill-gotten 
wealth to make contributions and donations and to render aid, 
seeking political capital in the process and ensconcing 
themselves in protective surroundings. Criminal societies employ 
various means to bribe, entice, and corrupt personnel of party 
and government organs, and in particular public security and 
justice workers, into acting as protective umbrellas. They use 
these people to shelter criminal actions, to facilitate crime, 
and to gain priviliged information. A small minority of cadres 
and policemen become corrupt after failing to resist 
temptations. They shelter the criminal societies and either do 
nothing about the illegal criminal activity or they do next to 
nothing about it. Some even drink toasts with the criminals and 
pass along priviliged information. Several major crime society 
stings have shown this to be the case, and it has forced public 
security organs to set up secret operational cells in secret 
locations to work in a highly concealed manner. As the influence 
of underground criminal societies grows wildly within China, 
outside and foreign criminal elements are taking advantage of 
our country's gradual opening to the outside world. They are 
stepping up their infiltration of Mainland China, trying to 
establish a foothold, open up a "new battlefield", or seek 
refuge on the mainland. Underground criminal societies from Hong 
Kong, Macao, Taiwan, and Japan have been the most pernicious in 
this regard. They have infiltrated the southeast coastal regions 
and have conspired with evil elements in those areas to join 
forces. The harm this represents is significant. Especially in 
the last few years, international drug cartels have tried to 
open up routes for their drug trade through China. The drug 
trade has become the medium for underground criminal societies 
both within China and abroad. For example, in July of 1990, when 
the Taiwan police launched a crime raid under the code name 
"sudden thunder", the "kingpin" of the so-called "firefly bridge 
gang", Zhang Zhenqian [1728 4176 3383], moved to the mainland 
and set up the Zhongshan Trading Company in Xiamen. His business 
expanded to Fuzhou, Shanghai, and Beijing, among other places, 
and Zhang became "brothers" with a certain Chinese painting 
master. He registered in Beijing and continued to engage in 
crime. In February of 1992, our police captured him and 
extradited him to Taiwan. According to the estimates of the 
Taiwan press, there are now over 200 underground Taiwan 
criminals of the big brother rank or higher operating on the 
mainland, approximately 30 of whom carry guns. It is obvious 
that outside criminal influence permeates our country party and 
government organs and departments are the focal points of 
outside criminal infiltration. Customs, border defense, and 
public security organs are particular targets. In Guangdong 
Province, a small percentage of the border defense station 
officials have been bribed by criminal societies from Macao into 
helping sneak things across the border. And a very small number 
of public security cadres and policemen have been recruited by 
the Shuifang and Shenghe gangs of Hong Kong. While infiltrating 
the mainland, underground criminal societies from abroad 
wantonly engage in criminal activity. For example, in the 
Friendship Market robbery case in Shenzhen, aside from one 
student being involved, all of the perpetrators were members of 
the "14K" and "Shuifang" gangs. 

