Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by John Carvel: "EU Is `Tough and Tender' on </F>
Migrants"] 
  [Text] Brussels -- Legislation to crack down on employers 
who give jobs to illegal immigrants is included in a package of 
ideas which the European Commission is preparing for its first 
substantial foray into immigration policy under new powers in 
the Maastricht treaty. 
  Companies would be penalised for hiring illegal residents 
and 
public sector contractors would be held responsible for 
non-compliance by subcontractors. 
  The Commission plans to publish a green paper later this 
month to trigger a public debate about migration issues which 
have previously been handled in secret by justice and home 
affairs ministers. 
  The almost-final version now being discussed inside the 
Commission contains a blend of tough and tender policies that 
would buttress Europe against further immigration, but would 
improve the lot of people from ethnic minorities who live in the 
European Union [EU] legally. 
  The Commission says that failure to get these policies right 
could threaten democracy. Faulty perceptions about the numbers 
of immigrants have contributed to the "ferocity of 
racially-motivated attacks which have scarred the immediate 
past." 
  Governments should emphasise the economic and social 
benefits 
of immigration, but they need a strategy to show that it is 
under control, says the paper by Padraig Flynn, the social 
affairs commissioner. 
  He appears sceptical about plans agreed by the EU ministers 
for identifying and expelling illegal immigrants. "It is 
unlikely that the police will be in a position to invest many 
resources in locating illegal immigrants. Nor is it easy for the 
police to identify these people in a multicultural society." 
  The alternative was to act against employers of clandestine 
labour. The Commission stood ready to table measures to 
establish a common legislative approach across the EU. 
  The idea is part of a 30 point action programme to turn 
piecemeal and unenforceable agreements among ministers into a 
comprehensive EU policy on immigration. This would be 
impossible without more reliance on legally binding accords. 
  The Commission wants a migration "observatory" to monitor 
inflows and provide early warning of big movements. It thinks 
EU foreign policy should penalise human rights violations in 
countries from which refugees are fleeing. The overseas 
development programme should concentrate on areas where economic 
or environmental schemes could help to retain local populations. 
This could be helped by "profiling" migrants to provide jobs 
and housing in rural areas before they move to the cities and 
thence to Europe. 
  "Migration management" in the EU might include a convention 
to determine how long families could be made to wait to be 
reunited and admissibility of unmarried partners. 
  Third-country nationals who are legally resident in one EU 
country might be given priority for filling job vacancies in 
another. That would require "an effective Union-wide labour 
exchange." Favourable treatment might be needed for groups such 
as women who are victims of prostitution traffickers. 
  The Commission calls for asylum policy to be harmonised, 
with 
a common definition of who is a refugee and how to treat those 
who fail to qualify. 
  It wants better arrangements for coping with sudden influxes 
of crisis victims. No formal commitment would be needed to share 
the burden among member states, but countries facing serious 
problems should be able to reckon with support. 
  The Commission proposes harmonising procedures for 
repatriating illegal immigrants. But it also wants much stronger 
measures to combat racial discrimination and help the 9 million 
third-country nationals who are legally resident to overcome 
problems of unemployment and bad housing. 
  The document says it is paradoxical that third-country 
nationals who live in one member state are unable to take 
advantage of the single market by moving to another, though it 
stops short of recommending full mobility. 
  The Maastricht Treaty gave the Commission new rights in this 
area of policy, but national governments retain the whip hand. 
Immigrant support groups will fear that ministers might select 
the more restrictive proposals from the green paper and ignore 
its liberal ingredients. 
  Restrictions on political asylum imposed last year cut the 
number of refugees entering Germany by more than 25 per cent to 
323,000, Bonn's interior ministry said yesterday. 

