Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Remigijus Barauskas: "A Temporary Illusion of </F>
Success in Combating the Mafia"] 
  [Text] After the adoption of the law on preventive 
detention, 58 groups of organized crime were identified and 
detained in Lithuania over a short time. "However, their 
removal has resulted in the annexation of their spheres of 
influence to other groups or to the establishment of new 
organizations. The fight against crime by police and legal 
measures alone produces a temporary illusion of success. If we 
do not eliminate the economic factors promoting crime, this 
fight may lose any sense," said Lithuanian Interior Minister 
Romasis Vaitekunas at a collegium meeting yesterday. 
  According to the minister, some leaders of criminal gangs in 
Vilnius, Kaunas, and Siauliai have emigrated and established 
contacts with international criminal organizations. According 
to Interpol reports, Lithuanian criminal groups have relations 
with those in the United States, Israel, Germany, Russia, and 
other countries. The list of criminals includes large-scale 
leaders of groups known both to Interpol and the police in 
different states. The key areas of Mafia activities are drug 
trafficking, trade in oil products and arms, money forgery, 
racketeering, prostitution, and gambling. 
  Resolute actions of the police in applying the law on 
preventive detention helped stabilize the criminal situation in 
the country. The rate of crime has dropped from 40 in early 1993 
to 10 percent by the end of the year. Criminal police have 
uncovered one-third of the crimes. However, the fact that the 
number of violent crimes has increased considerably is 
worrisome. In comparison with last year, the number of recorded 
murders with premeditation and attempts to murder have increased 
by 53 and 76 percent, respectively. The criminals' 
aggressiveness and violence is growing. Firearms were used 127 
times (or twice) more often than last year, and 124 explosions 
were registered this year. There are increasingly more attacks 
on policemen. In the opinion of the interior minister, trust in 
law enforcement institutions has risen, because the number of 
people informing the police about racketeers has increased 
five-fold. 
  R. Vaitekunas predicted that the level of crime should 
stabilize next year. Combating organized crime remains the key 
task of the police. This task should be facilitated by a law on 
control over criminal communities (or an anti-Mafia law) which 
is currently being drafted. 

