BFN 

<F P=106> [By XINHUA reporter Xu Yiming (6079 0001 7686), RENMIN RIBAO </F>
reporter Pan Didu (3382 1593 6757), and FUJIAN RIBAO reporter 
Huang Zhongsheng (7806 4429 3932)] 
  [Text] Fuzhou, 27 Jun (XINHUA) -- During an inspection of 
Fujian, Jiang Zemin, CPC Central Committee general secretary, 
Central Military Commission chairman, and president of the 
state, called on leading cadres at all levels, under the 
guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics and the party's basic line, to 
correctly size up the situation focusing on the party and 
government's overall work and to pay close attention to major 
tasks, especially the two major economic tasks related to 
agriculture and state enterprises. He said: By taking a firm 
and effective grip on these two major tasks -- that is, by 
strengthening the position of agriculture as the foundation of 
the national economy and building up the economic strength of 
state enterprises -- and, on the basis of accomplishing these 
two tasks, by ensuring a good job in other fields -- that is, by 
closely relying on the working class and uniting peasants with 
the other masses of people -- we will be able to further 
stabilize the party and the government's overall work and 
provide a reliable guarantee of reform and development. 
  From 22 through 27 June, General Secretary Jiang Zemin -- 
accompanied by Fujian Provincial Party Secretary Jia Qinglin, 
Governor Chen Mingyi, Nanjing Military Region Commander Gu Hui, 
and Fujian Provincial Military District Commander Ren Yonggui -- 
defied sweltering summer heat in inspecting state enterprises, 
foreign-funded enterprises, and village and township enterprises 
in Xiamen, Quanzhou, Putian, and Fuzhou prefectures and cities 
along the west coast of the strait, familiarizing himself with 
agriculture and party building, and attending discussions with 
cadres and ordinary people in various localities. He also 
showed deep concern about flooding in Sanming and Nanping, 
repeatedly inquiring about the disaster situation and asking the 
provincial party committee to convey his solicitude to people in 
the disaster areas. 
  Jiang Zemin fully affirmed Fujian's impressive achievements 
and contributions to the national economic and social 
development since the implementation of reform and opening up. 
He said: Fujian is experiencing tremendous changes, developing 
rapidly and witnessing an excellent situation. What has 
impressed people the most is that by bringing into play Fujian's 
advantages, you have basically carved out a path with your own 
development characteristics, which is suitable for the 
province's realities in opening up to the outside world and 
economic development. These achievements and experiences have 
been obtained by cadres and people throughout the province who, 
led by the provincial party committee and provincial government, 
have persisted in taking Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics and the party's 
basic line as the guide in implementing the party Central 
Committee's various important decisions, principles, and 
policies; and, on the basis of Fujian's actual conditions, have 
seized the opportunity for reform and development in 
emancipating minds, seeking truth from facts, making active 
exploration, and working hard to start an undertaking. The party 
Central Committee is pleased with Fujian's accomplishment. 
  While attending discussions with cadres in various 
localities, General Secretary Jiang set forth a four-point plan 
for Fujian's future development. First, Fujian should 
accelerate the pace of various reform programs, focusing on the 
establishment of the basic framework of socialist market 
economic structure. As Fujian has been designated by the 
central authorities one of the pilot regions for comprehensive 
reform, the province is tasked with numerous pilot programs. 
Therefore, it should persistently proceed from realities in 
everything, seek truth from facts, boldly experiment with new 
reforms, and dare to make innovation in order to provide more 
and better fresh experiences for deepening reform nationwide. 
Second, Fujian should step up efforts to readjust economic 
structure and industrial patterns and accelerate the upgrading 
of a number of key industries and products, striving to improve 
the overall performance level of the export-oriented economy. 
It should also import new and high-technology, raise the 
quality of laborers, strengthen comprehensive management, and 
improve product quality in order to constantly build up the 
competitiveness of export-oriented enterprises in international 
markets. Third, Fujian should continue to promote rapid, 
healthy, sustained economic development by bringing into play 
its advantages in neighboring Taiwan and in having a large 
number of Overseas Chinese, special economic zones, a long 
coastline, and numerous ports. After more than a decade of 
reform and development, the coastal area has a better 
infrastructure and other conditions and can be developed at a 
faster pace if deemed necessary. Southeastern Fujian should be 
built into a prosperous area on the west coast of the strait to 
bring along the development of the inland mountainous areas. In 
inducing and utilizing Taiwan, Overseas Chinese, and foreign 
capital, it is necessary to pay attention not only to the volume 
of funds but, more importantly, the improvement of utilization 
efficiency and returns. Fourth, Fujian should adhere to the 
principle of grasping two links at the same time. He said: 
Under no circumstances should we sacrifice spiritual 
civilization to achieve economic growth. As I stated at the 
National Propaganda and Ideological Work Conference, we should 
arm people with a scientific mind, guide people with the correct 
public opinion, portray people in a noble spirit, and inspire 
people with outstanding works. If you agree with my statement 
and do things accordingly, the construction of socialist 
spiritual civilization can be continuously strengthened. 
  On the afternoon of 26 June, after listening to the 
provincial party committee's work report, General Secretary 
Jiang Zemin made an important suggestion concerning the current 
situation and economic development work. 
  Discussing the issue of strengthening agriculture's 
position, 
Jiang Zemin emphatically pointed out: As ours is a large 
country with a vast population, we should always strive not only 
to be self-sufficient but also to have surplus grain in order to 
protected against poor harvests and famines. All provinces and 
regions should, in principle, be basically self-sufficient in 
grain. They should adopt effective measures to ensure "three 
stabilities" in grain, i.e., to stabilize grain-crops areas, 
grain output, and grain reserves, while resolutely protecting 
cultivated land. This issue should merit more attention in some 
coastal provinces which have developed more quickly in industry 
and the tertiary trades. He added: To strengthen the position 
of agriculture as the foundation of the national economy, we 
previously called for "relying, first, on the policy; second, on 
science and technology; and third, on investment." Practice has 
proved that this is a correct approach which should be continued 
in the future. Today, based on the new situation of 
establishing a socialist market economic structure and on the 
actual condition of agriculture nationwide, we should add two 
more ingredients to the approach, that is, the reliance on 
protection and work. As agriculture faces the risk of markets 
and natural disasters, the state must adopt measures to protect 
and assist agriculture. Moreover, in view of the realities of 
weak work in quite a few rural areas, party committees and 
governments at all levels must strengthen the leadership, 
organization, and service work related to agriculture and the 
rural economy. 
  While commenting on ways to improve state enterprises, 
Jiang Zemin stressed that we should further strengthen our 
concept and reach a common understanding on five issues. First, 
state enterprises, especially large and medium state 
enterprises, have made major contributions to enhancing China's 
economic development, and have been key stimulants [zeng zhang 
dian 1073 7022 7820] for economic progress. Their various 
existing difficulties have been accumulated in previous years 
against a very complicated background. These difficulties should 
not undermine our confidence to revive state enterprises, and we 
should not regard state enterprises as "burdens." Second, as 
the backbone of China's national economy, state enterprises, 
especially large and medium-sized state enterprises, still play 
a leading role in developing the socialist market economy. 
After decades of effort, we have established a comprehensive 
system of state-owned industries. It is a unique advantage in 
China's economy and we should fully understand its importance. 
Third, we allow and encourage individual, private, and 
foreign-funded enterprises to develop and to actively play their 
supplementary roles in the national economy. This requirement 
must be unwaveringly and absolutely upheld for a long time. 
Meanwhile, we should also notice that even though the 
nonstate-owned economic sector is an important integral part of 
China's national economy and is an important economic stimulant, 
it only plays a supplementary role in the national economy. On 
the other hand, the state-owned economic sector, including state 
and collectively owned enterprises, has always played a leading 
role and maintained a key position in China's national economy. 
Therefore, party committees and governments at various levels 
and economic departments must make major efforts to properly 
develop state enterprises. Fourth, while deepening reform and 
changing operating mechanisms, state enterprises can choose 
suitable operational formats in accordance with their own actual 
conditions. Various state enterprises with different conditions 
can have different operational formats. However, no matter which 
operational format they adopt, state enterprises must ensure 
they maintain or raise the value of their assets. They are, 
under no circumstances, allowed to cause the value of state 
assets to deteriorate. Fifth, the key to improving state 
enterprises is to accelerate the change in their operating 
mechanisms and to establish a modern enterprise system that has 
specific ownership and responsibilities, separate government and 
enterprise functions, and scientific management. Governments at 
various levels should strive to create an internal and external 
environment in which state enterprises can change their 
operating mechanisms and establish the modern enterprise system, 
and should properly handle the experimental work in this regard. 
After taking into account their own actual conditions, various 
localities should send separate groups of competent cadres to 
state enterprises where they will investigate, study, and 
strengthen guidance according to different conditions. Jiang 
Zemin also stressed: The fundamental way to improve state 
enterprises is to deepen enterprise reform. Facilitating 
microeconomic reform in enterprises is the foundation for 
macroeconomic reform whereby a state system of macroeconomic 
regulation and control is established and improved. If 
microeconomic reform is inadequate or mishandled, we may find it 
hard to implement measures for macroeconomic reform. Such 
inadequacy and mishandling may even adversely affect the ongoing 
fruitful macroeconomic reform. Therefore, while carrying out 
microeconomic reform in enterprises and state macroeconomic 
reform, we must coordinate and integrate the transactions so 
that they are mutually adaptable and complement each other. The 
key tasks for economic restructuring in 1995 are to 
expeditiously deepen reform in enterprises and to study and 
promote various relevant comprehensive reform measures in an 
effort to make new breakthroughs in changing enterprise 
operating mechanisms and in establishing a modern enterprise 
system. 
  While commenting on the correct handling of development in 
coastal and inland regions, Jiang Zemin pointed out: Since 
reform and opening-up policies were implemented, we have been 
pursuing policies whereby some localities are allowed to get 
rich earlier than others. Practice has shown that such measures 
are absolutely necessary and correct. China is such a vast 
country. Conditions in various localities differ very much and 
the localities have encountered very unbalanced progress. We 
should let some localities with better conditions and 
foundations to get rich earlier than others. Later, with their 
actual achievements and successful experiences, they should lead 
and help other, poorer localities to become rich gradually. 
Eventually, all China's localities will be rich. Such a 
concept suits the objective conditions of China's economy and 
the law of development. The central authorities' stance has 
been very specific: We resolutely uphold policies that allow 
some localities to get rich earlier than others. In accordance 
with their actual conditions and foundations, the coastal 
regions can develop as fast as possible. Naturally we must 
insist that the higher speed brings greater results and that 
speedier progress should be accomplished within our capability. 
By utilizing their own advantages and striving to create 
favorable conditions, the inland regions should also gradually 
accelerate progress. Eventually all of China's localities will 
be prosperous and rich. Such an objective is an inherent 
requirement of our socialism; it is a requirement of reform, 
opening up, and modernization drive; and it is an important 
condition for safeguarding social stability and consolidating 
China's reunification. Jiang Zemin also pointed out: The 
principal ways that relatively developed coastal regions can 
support development in China's central and western inland 
regions are as follows: They should strengthen horizontal 
economic ties with inland regions; they should transfer advanced 
technology and management experience to inland regions; they 
should invest in inland regions; they should shift 
labor-intensive industries there; they should convey economic 
information; they should set up joint-venture production and 
operational projects; they should join in rectifying some old 
inland enterprises; they should help inland regions to develop 
export-oriented bases; and they should set up corresponding 
projects to help some poor inland localities shake off poverty 
and become rich. In short, coastal and inland regions should 
mutually coordinate and cooperate with one another, and take a 
common stand for joint progress so as to facilitate common 
development, advancement, and prosperity. The whole country 
should apply such measures. Likewise, in a province or an 
autonomous region, relatively developed areas and relatively 
backward areas, including Fujian's coastal and hilly areas, 
should also form and develop such relations. 
  General Secretary Jiang Zemin also urged Fujian to 
strengthen 
economic and trade relations with Taiwan. He said: Fujian has 
been closely linked with Taiwan through geographical proximity 
and blood relations. I hope you will make use of your 
advantages and work harder so as to make more contributions to 
facilitating cross-strait economic and trade relations, enhance 
the development of cross-strait relations, and promote the great 
cause of reuniting the motherland. 
  During his inspection tour in Fujian, Comrade Jiang Zemin 
also called on commanders and fighters of military units, public 
security departments, and the armed police corps in Fujian. He 
urged closer unity between the military and the government, and 
between service members and civilians. He said: Military 
comrades should improve their roles as the mainstay and vital 
new force while continually carrying out urgent, arduous, 
dangerous, and important tasks such as protecting coastal 
defense, supporting the local spiritual and material 
civilization drive, and undertaking rescue and relief work so as 
to make more contributions to enhancing local construction. 
Local comrades should pay more attention to Army building and 
should actively help military units to resolve their actual 
problems in production and daily life. So long as there is firm 
unity between the military and the government, between service 
members and civilians, throughout the party, and among the 
people of various nationalities across China, we shall have a 
reliable guarantee for our reform, development, stability, and 
security. 
  Accompanying Comrade Jiang Zemin during his inspection tour 
in Fujian were responsible figures of relevant departments from 
the central authorities and the State Council, including Liao 
Hui, Zeng Peiyan, Hu Baoguang, Teng Wensheng, and Yu Xiaosong. 

