Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Carmen Gonzalez Hernadez: "Research and Experience. The </F>
Cuban Population is Aging"] 
  [Text] [no dateline as received] -- Local experts have said 
a drop in the nation's fertility rate in which the number of 
young people goes down raises the population's age and brings it 
closer to the demographic patterns of the world's more developed 
countries. 
  Based on Cuban Statistical Research Institute projections 
for 
the next century, Cuba will have 11.504 million inhabitants, 
with more women, by the start of the next millennium. 
  "By the year 2020, approximately 28.9 percent of the 
population will be 60 years old or older, thereby drawing closer 
to Sweden's levels, for example, where the percentage of elderly 
people was 22.8 percent in 1992," Dr. Raul Hernandez Castellon 
told PRENSA LATINA. 
  The head of the Cuban Center for Demographic Studies said 
Cuba is one of the few countries in Latin America experiencing 
an early demographic revolution process; a transition that began 
its first phase during this century's first three decades. 
  "From 1902 to 1928, the United States invested approximately 
$1.5 billion in the island, generating a great migratory current 
to meet the labor force needs," he indicated. According to 
statistics from that time, approximately 750,000 Spaniards and 
250,000 Haitians, Jamaicans, and Puerto Ricans entered the 
country. This situation influenced the age and gender structure 
because most of the immigrants were working-age, single men. 
  At the same time, the high levels of urban development 
reached and the relative progress in education, he said, were 
factors that influenced the reproductive behavior of the Cuban 
population. Studies indicated that the major characteristics 
of the second phase of the demographic transition was the change 
in the direction of the migratory movements, since the nation 
had become a source of emigrants owing to contradictions in the 
economy and other factors. 
  Afterward, when the new government took over in 1959, 
another 
migratory movement of economic and political nature evolved. 
  Later, the fertility rate dropped below the replacement 
level 
and, finally, a stunning increase in the life expectancy rate 
occurred. That was when the first signs of aging began to appear. 
  In making a detailed analysis of this phenomenon, Dr. 
Hernandez Castellon indicated that, with few exceptions, the 
Cuban population has maintained a rather low annual growth rate 
compared to developing countries. 
  Over a period as long as 62 years, between 1919 and 1981, he 
added, the rate was 1.95 percent, although the population 
increased approximately 6.8 million, as the census indicated. 
  In fact, until 1950, the arrival of emigrants contributed to 
a relatively high growth rate of 2.31 percent. 
  Although the rate went from 2.8 children to 1.8 per woman 
from 1919 to 1953, the migratory flow basically influenced the 
age and gender structure. 
  For that reason, there were more men than women from 1919 to 
1981, but by 1990, statistics showed a balance with women had 
been reached. 
  "Regarding people younger than 15 years of age, Cuba is on 
par with Europe's developed countries, with 22.8 percent in 
1990," Dr. Hernandez Castellon noted. 
  The profound socioeconomic changes in the country since 1959 
have undoubtedly influenced the recent demographic evolution in 
the island, the experts stated. 
  "There was a noticeable increase in births in the early 
1960's and the "baby boom" [preceding two words in English] 
peaked in 1963, when the birth rate shot up to 35.1 births for 
every 1,000 residents," the expert noted. 
  The reason for that was, in addition to the couple's 
economic 
security and their confidence in the future, abortions were 
restricted, and there were no contraceptives on the local market. 
  The arrival of electricity to remote areas allowed the news 
media to reach those places, which resulted in more education 
for the residents. 
  Family planning orientation was also extended throughout the 
country; an aspect that was accompanied by making diverse 
contraceptive means available to every woman. We must also 
mention the legalization of abortion, which, though it may not 
be regarded as a contraceptive, allows the couple to have the 
children they want. 
  "Another very important aspect regarding the aging of the 
population is found in the life expectancy rate from birth. In 
1950, it was 58 years and now is over 75 years," Dr. Hernandez 
Castellon reiterated. 
  This has been possible, he said, even though the infant 
mortality rate has dropped every year, so that by 1993 it had 
decreased to 9.4 for every 1,000 live births. 

