BFN 

  [Text] Kuala Lumpur, April 7 (XINHUA) -- Malaysia's 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi today met with visiting 
Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan. The two sides 
expressed during the meeting the confidence that the existing 
bilateral friendly relations would be enhanced. 
  Abdullah and Tang reviewed with satisfaction the all-round 
fruitful cooperation between the two countries since their 
establishment of diplomatic relations on May 31, 1974. 
  Both believed the bilateral cooperation was very important 
to 
the prosperity of the two countries and the stability of the 
region. 
  Tang arrived here on Tuesday [5 April] to attend the third 
round of consultation between officials of the foreign 
ministries of the two countries. 
  During a consultation meeting yesterday, Tang and Ahmad 
Kamil 
Jaafar, secretary-general of the Malaysian Foreign Ministry, 
exchanged views in a friendly and cordial atmosphere on 
bilateral, regional and international issues, and reached a 
broad consensus. 
  The two sides also discussed the issue of the Nansha 
[Spratly] Islands and arrived at understanding to some extent. 
  The Chinese side pointed out that the Nansha Islands have 
been China's territory since old times, judging either from the 
historic origins or legal principles. China holds indisputable 
sovereignty over the Nansha Islands and their surrounding sea 
waters. 
  He said that countries concerned should seek peaceful 
solution to the dispute over Nansha through negotiations. In 
this respect, he proposed, the sole effective way towards a 
possible solution and to peace and cooperation is to shelve the 
dispute for joint exploitation of Nansha. 
  The Chinese side noted that this proposal was entirely based 
on the consideration of advancing Sino-Malaysian friendship and 
maintaining peace and stability in the region. 
  Tang also put forward several principal viewpoints on the 
subject for the Malaysian side to consider. 
  Kamil Jaafar expressed his consent to the idea for a 
solution 
of the Dispute over Nansha in a peaceful manner through dialogue 
and consultation. 
  He said the Malaysian side will seriously study the views of 
the Chinese side, and will further discuss within a bilateral 
framework with the Chinese side the joint exploitation of Nansha 
by shelving the dispute. 
  The Chinese vice-minister and his party left here for Brunei 
today. 

