BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Aleksandr Makovskiy, chairman of the Council </F>
of the CIS Private Law Scientific-Consultative Center, by Andrey 
Kolesnikov; date and place not stated: "The Civil Code: The 
First Major Post-Reform Law -- It Is Geared Toward a Stable 
Market Society, Aleksandr Makovskiy, One of the Chief Architects 
of the Civil Code, Believes"] 
  [Text] In line with the president's 5 May edict, the first 
(general) part of the new Civil Code is being submitted to the 
State Duma for immediate examination. The code's main authors 
-- Yevgeniy Sukhanov, dean of the Faculty of Law at Moscow State 
University; Stanislav Khokhlov, executive director of the 
Private Law Research Center; Aleksandr Makovskiy, chairman of 
the Council of the CIS Private Law Scientific-Consultative 
Center; and Russian Federation Minister of Justice Yuriy 
Kalmykov -- have been appointed as presidential representatives 
for the duration of the examination of the draft Civil Code. 
  ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI has reported on the progress of work on 
the 
code and its significance for the market economy on more than 
one occasion. Following approval of the draft Civil Code in the 
Government Presidium, a working group, taking due account of the 
observations of 34 Federation components, 38 departments, and 
various scientific organizations, completed the general part of 
the code, which is expected to enter into force as of 1 July 
1994. The second, specific part of the Civil Code will be 
completed by the end of the year. 
  The code's entry into force will open the way for the 
unification of civil legislation and strictly licit civil 
exchange on new principles -- the principles of private 
ownership and private law. Through the adoption of the general 
part of the code, the first step will be taken toward overcoming 
the monstrous contradictions between a whole series of 
specialist normative acts and laws of fundamental significance 
for the development of the market, and toward constructing a 
stable, defined, civilized system of market law. 
  At the behest of ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI's observer, Aleksandr 
Makovskiy evaluated the prospects for the Civil Code's passage 
through parliament and the further development of civil law in 
CIS countries. 
  [Kolesnikov] Aleksandr Lvovich, it is no secret to anyone 
that the code definitively and irrevocably establishes private 
ownership. But this circumstance is bound to prompt a negative 
reaction from the extreme left-wing and extreme right-wing 
factions in parliament.... 
  [Makovskiy] In establishing private ownership, the Civil 
Code follows on from the Constitution, although in respect of 
the latter it occupies a subordinate position. The Civil Code 
is not a reform-based law. It does not privatize anything, nor 
does it implement land reform. Private property exists already, 
and the code sets the rules for handling it. This is an act of 
post-reform legislation, and it is geared toward stable 
relations. 
  It is possible that the question will arise in the Duma as 
to 
why it is that only the first part is being adopted and not the 
whole code in its entirety. By dint of the fact that the first 
part contains the general rules, it can be applied independently 
of the second part. For instance, it contains no specialist 
rules on contracts of sale or on subcontracting, but there are 
rules concerning all contracts. And arbitration courts are now 
impatiently awaiting the adoption of the general section. 
Deadlines are of secondary importance. A market economy 
requires appropriate legal regulation, which the first part can 
guarantee to a greater or lesser extent, but the second part is 
still some way away from completion. The draft of the general 
section which is being submitted to the Duma is the fourth 
version. In respect of the more specific part, it may just be a 
matter of the first or section versions. However, work on the 
second part will be finished by the end of the year. 
  Many political movements went into the elections to some 
degree under the "banner" of the Civil Code. Obviously, all 
market-oriented factions voted in favor of it. 
  [Kolesnikov] What are the aims and tasks of the Council of 
the CIS Private Law Scientific-Consultative Center which you 
head? 
  [Makovskiy] In the course of the past century, the majority 
of autonomous and independent states have been striving for 
maximum unification of national systems of civil law, which 
often differ greatly from one another. Until recently, here on 
the expanse of the former Union, we did have unified 
legislation, albeit geared toward a planned economy. Because 
the scientific and information links have been destroyed, and 
because at times top priority is accorded to bogus national 
interests, civil legislation in CIS countries is developing in 
different directions. So far we have not felt this in full 
measure, but it is inevitable that we will feel it. So is it 
not be simpler for us to avoid this stage? Major differences in 
civil legislation may impinge upon economic relations between 
Commonwealth countries and significantly affect investment in 
CIS states. It is easier for any foreign investor to do 
business with a Commonwealth country which has legislation 
similar to its neighbors. 
  So it is that within the framework of the interparliamentary 
assembly a working group has been set up to elaborate a specimen 
draft Civil Code. And its first part will even by ready by 
fall. The specimen code is not a carbon copy of the Russian 
Civil Code. Its basis will comprise the Russian, Belorussian, 
and Kazakh codes, and possibly even versions of those of other 
countries. I know that vigorous work is under way in Ukraine, 
and the draft Kirgiz [Kyrgyz] code has already been submitted to 
the parliament of that state. 
  The specimen code is not a law but a recommendation. But we 
have the opportunity to prepare it so skillfully that people 
will undoubtedly take heed of it. 

