Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Taipei, March 11 (CNA) -- The Executive Yuan 
Thursday [10 March] introduced further amendments to the 
Wildlife Conservation Law which stipulate longer prison terms 
and heavier fines for violators. 
  After two days of debate, yuan members completed new 
amendments to the Wildlife Conservation Law which introduce 
tougher measures to crackdown on illegal trade in wildlife in 
Taiwan. 
  The amendments stipulate that those found guilty of hunting 
or killing protected wild animals face prison terms of up to 
five years and fines as high as NT [New Taiwan] $1 million 
(U.S.$37,037). Repeat offenders face up to seven years in prison 
and fines up to NT$2.5 million (U.S.$92,592). 
  Previously, prison terms for such violations ranged from six 
months to three years, and most sentences were commuted to small 
fines. 
  The amendments also stipulate that persons who abuse animals 
and display protected wildlife, either publicly or privately, 
will be fined NT$300,000 or sentenced to less than one year in 
jail. 
  Medicine shops which sell products labeled as containing 
endangered species preparations but actually containing legal 
substitutes also face fines of between NT$100,000 and 
NT$500,000, the draft said. 
  The amendments will be sent to the Legislative Yuan next 
week 
for approval. 
  Meanwhile, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said Friday that 
pressure from the United States Government to boost wildlife 
protection is mounting as U.S. lawmakers and conservationists 
have become "impatient" and "disappointed" at Taiwan's efforts 
to crack down on illegal trade in rhino horn and tiger parts and 
the late enactment of an efficient Wildlife Protection Law. 
  Senator Jack Fields (R-Vt.) said Thursday in Washington that 
he and a number of other senators will soon send a letter to 
President Bill Clinton demanding trade sanctions against 
Mainland China, Taiwan and Korea for their illegal trade in 
endangered animals and products. 
  Fields said the letter will also ask Taiwan for cash 
donations to help preserve rhinoceroses and tigers. 
  President Clinton has until March 25 to decide whether to 
impose trade sanctions against Mainland China and Taiwan for 
illegal trade in rhino horn and tiger parts in violation of the 
international Convention of International Trade in Endangered 
Species (CITES). 

