BFN 

  [Text] Washington, May 2 (XINHUA) -- U.S. President Bill 
Clinton told visiting Chinese Vice Premier Zou Jiahua here today 
that he and his administration are willing to work with China to 
overcome the differences existing between the two countries so 
as to enable their relations to grow further. 
  In a meeting at the White House this morning, Clinton said 
that China is a very important and great country which has the 
longest history in the world and a most rich culture. Both his 
government and himself attach great importance to the 
development of friendly relations with China, he promised. 
  The United States and China, he remarked, should become 
partners of cooperation in their efforts to safeguard world 
peace and promote economic progress. "We are willing to take 
part in China's development program," he said, and U.S.-China 
relations should be based on sincerity and mutual respect. 
  Chinese Vice-Premier Zou Jiahua, who is here on an official 
visit at the invitation of the U.S. Government, said during the 
meeting that China always takes a serious, positive and 
forward-looking approach to the Sino-U.S. relations. The 
principal objective of his current visit to the United States 
was to increase mutual understanding, promote Sino-U.S. 
friendship and develop mutually-beneficial cooperation. 
  He also stated that over a long period of time, China has 
made continued and unremitting efforts in order to improve and 
develop its relations with the United States. China sees and 
deals with this relationship from a long-term and worldwide 
perspective and it maintains that the two countries do share 
extensive common interests. It is China's view that good 
Sino-U.S. relations and the continued strengthening and 
expansion of mutually beneficial cooperation in various areas 
are in the interest of the two peoples and the people of the 
whole world as well. 
  Zou also said that Sino-U.S. relations are now at a crucial 
juncture. There are still differences existing between the two 
sides on some issues, but he insisted that their common 
interests far overweigh the differences. It is China's hope 
that the two sides should do more in seeking things in common 
and expanding their common interests, put an end to their 
disputes of the past as soon as possible, resume and increase 
the exchange and cooperation between them in various areas and 
open up the way to the future of bilateral relations. 
  Zou conveyed the regards from Chinese President Jiang Zemin 
and Premier Li Peng to President Clinton. Clinton expressed 
thanks for this and asked Zou to convey his regards to the 
Chinese leaders. He recalled that he and President Jiang had a 
very good summit in Seattle last November. 
  During the meeting which took place in a friendly and candid 
atmosphere, the two sides also exchanged views on other issues 
of mutual concern. 
  Ronald Brown, U.S. secretary of commerce, Anthony Lake, 
national security adviser to the president, Strobe Talbott, 
acting secretary of state, and Robert Rubin, chairman of the 
National Economic Council attended today's meeting. Also 
present were Zeng Peiyan, vice minister of China's State 
Planning Commissionn, Liu Huaqiu, vice minister of foreign 
affairs and Li Daoyu, Chinese ambassador to the United States. 

