Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] The oldest, most powerful Burmese guerrilla 
group will probably win the support of the rest of the 
opposition for negotiations with the military junta in Rangoon, 
the group said yesterday. 
  "We are optimistic," said Karen National Union (KNU) 
spokesman Arthur Shwe. 
  The spokesman was referring to the Democratic Alliance of 
Burma meeting in progress at Mannerplaw, the headquarters of the 
KNU, in the Karen state across the Thai border. [passage omitted] 
  At the meeting, expected to end today, Shwe said, the KNU 
intends to obtain the Democratic Alliance's support for opening 
a dialogue with the SLORC, which should begin with a ceasefire. 
  "I think there will be no problem," he said. [passage 
omitted] 
  Analysts say the possible opening of negotiations between 
the 
KNU and the SLORC is the clearest indication of the beginning of 
a thaw between the dictatorship and the opposition. [passage 
omitted] 
  Negotiations with the SLORC are in progress at Loi-Kaw, 
capital of the state of Kayah, home of the Karen's "cousins", 
the Karennis, who have also been fighting Rangoon, Shwe said. 
[passage omitted] 
  Dissident Burmese students who fled a bloody crackdown 
against democracy to join ethnic minority rebels vowed yesterday 
to press on with their war against Rangoon's junta. 
  The students were reacting to a decision of their allies to 
enter peace talks with the generals. 
  "Even if the Karen and other rebel organisations reach 
agreements with the regime we will continue our struggle because 
our goals are different," Kyaw Kyaw, 29, vice chairman of the 
All Burma Students Democratic Front (ABSDF) told reporters at a 
jungle camp on the Thai-Burmese border. 
  "The ethnic minority rebels have been fighting for their 
autonomy but we students are fighting for democracy throughout 
Burma," he said. 
  Another pro-democracy dissident said they would never 
abandon 
efforts to free Burma's detained opposition leader Aung San Suu 
Kyi. 

