Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Gerard Longuet, Republican Party president </F>
and minister of industry, post, and telecommunications, and 
foreign trade, by Paul Guilbert and Joseph Mace-Scaron; place 
and date not given: "The Lack of Economic Growth Forces Us To 
Implement Reform" -- first paragraph is LE FIGARO introduction] 
  [Excerpt] Gerard Longuet defends the philosophy which led 
to the establishment of the youth vocational training contract 
(CIP). He says he is convinced that cohabitation has not 
prevented the government from introducing reforms. Furthermore, 
he thinks that the current period of zero growth is forcing it 
to implement reform. With regard to the presidential election, 
the PR president is convinced that organizing primaries within 
the majority offers the Right the advantage of having a 
candidate backed by everybody right from the first round. 
Finally, with regard to the European elections, he favors a 
single majority list led by Jean-Francois Deniau. 
  [LE FIGARO] Was the youth vocational training contract 
clumsily presented to the public, or was it in fact questionable? 
  [Longuet] Everybody has to accept reponsibilities. The CIP 
is a result of the five-year law, which was preceded by a 
lengthy parliamentary debate and by long negotiations between 
the government, employers, and trade unions. Specific clauses 
of the CIP contracts were amended one or more times, or 
renegotiated. Thus the text we have now is the result of a real 
social debate and a thorough legislative process, no rush 
decision out of the blue. It is one element of a strategy 
designed to tackle an undeniable problem: the growth of youth 
unemployment, especially among those under 26. 
  We felt absolute priority had to be given to youngsters who 
have never worked before. In my opinion -- as a parent too -- 
there are no two ways about this. For those without any 
training, the CIP constitutes an undeniable step forward 
compared to previous reforms, both for industry and for the 
youngsters involved: for industry, because exemptions are 
clearly defined, the regulations are much simpler, and there are 
no particular constraints on hiring -- companies can really open 
their doors wide to youngsters. The CIP is a stepping stone for 
youngsters, allowing them to get their foot inside a company's 
door. 
  What I demand in this period of crisis is the right to 
experiment. I am shocked by the obstacles encountered in our 
society. Youth unemployment is a real drama for all of us, but 
one is not allowed to touch minimum wages or the hierarchy of 
diplomas. I fear the students have won a Pyrrhic victory: They 
have safeguarded the theoretical value of their diplomas, but 
they are shutting a gateway to industry. 
  [LE FIGARO] Did you expect that sort of reaction? 
  [Longuet] I am not responsible for the CIP issue. The decree 
was prepared with a view to getting it approved as fast as 
possible. 
  [LE FIGARO] This issue, together with the abrogation of the 
Falloux law, raise a fundamental question: Is it possible to 
reform, to experiment, in a period of cohabitation? 
  [Longuet] Reforms are possible in a situation of 
cohabitation. We have introduced and are introducing reforms. 
For instance, we reformed the retirement system. We are 
reforming contractual relationships within the health insurance 
system. In my ministry we have privatized Elf and 
Rhone-Poulenc; we passed a law against counterfeiting; we 
reorganized Bull; and we negotiated the GATT agreement. So 
reforms are possible in France. But everything is difficult; 
any reform is exacting. The real question should be: Are 
reforms possible in a period of zero growth? 
  Personally, I think that the absence of growth compels us to 
implement reform. If we were in a period of growth, certain 
problems would automatically disappear. The government is 
sparing with its reforms, but not with essential reforms. 
  [LE FIGARO] Are there not two periods in a situation of 
cohabitation: first, an observation period; and, second, the 
period preceding the presidential elections, during which 
reforms seem difficult to introduce? 
  [Longuet] We have a responsibility toward our electorate, 
which voted for a program. I am surprised that anyone can 
harbor resentment against a majority for being consistent with 
its commitments, especially in extremely urgent cases. Youth 
unemployment is a problem requiring reforms. Can you think of 
any government which would not, of its own free will and because 
it is its duty, tackle problems affecting public opinion? 
[passage omitted] 

