Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] From late this afternoon there have been reports of 
absolute chaos in Mmabatho, the Bophuthatswana capital. There 
have also been reports that President Lucas Mangope has left 
Mmabatho and that security forces and the police have laid down 
their arms. Our reporter, Nan Roux, is on the line from the 
Mmabatho Sun Hotel. Nan, what's the latest? 
  [Roux] Well, as we were driving into Mmabatho this 
afternoon, 
some journalists, the city, the town was covered in smoke. 
Then, as we came into the hotel, we were stopped by security 
guards wanting to know whether we were residents. Then we knew 
something was wrong. As we came in, the entry hall was milling 
with reporters. Apparently there is a section in Mmabatho called 
Megacity, and this is apprently burning. 
  Shooting and looting is going on, security forces are 
apparently having great problems controlling the people. There 
have also been rumors that President Lucas Mangope has left. 
Apparently at 6.30 [1630 GMT] this afternoon, and they saw him 
leave in a helicopter and they believe he might have gone to 
Lehurutshe, there are also rumors that he might have gone to Sun 
City. There were also rumors that the security forces have laid 
down their arms. 
  In Megacity, there is a policeman's store which was gassed 
and then set alight. The problem with the police is apparently 
they are trying to -- there are too many entrances to Megacity. 
They cannot control all these entrances, so they are having 
problems controlling the people. It seems as if the majority of 
the security forces are anti-President Mangope, however, there 
are still some loyalists. One reporter told me that apparently 
he was chased by two men in a bakkie [pickup truck] -- he said 
they might be AWB [Afrikaner Resistance Movement]. There have 
been reports of AWB in the town. 
  A huge crowd then, just earlier this afternoon, walked to 
the 
South African Embassy and handed over -- a huge crowd of 
Bophuthatswana Police -- and handed over their memorandum 
demanding the reincorporation into South Africa, and also the 
resignation of the commissioner of police. The police also went 
to the university where they laid down their arms and they have 
given in their vehicles. They've just physically sort of given 
in. Some of our reporters that went down now said they have 
just come back from Megacity, and apparently it is completely 
out of control. The crowd is breaking in. Apparently they've 
seen them stealing jewelry, clothing, alcohol. 
  Police are apprently half-heartedly trying to control--they 
are shooting tear gas, but the crowds, huge crowds keep on going 
in. Also, at some stage, the reporter says she saw the police 
just standing helplessly, not knowing what to do. Then at some 
stage they also told the people to give back the stuff that they 
had looted and sort of piled it up on one side, not knowing what 
they were going to do with it. At Bop University the latest is 
that there is a Nyala burning in the entrance, and apparently 
the one reporter followed three ambulances in and was followed 
out by two more ambulances. She says people are lying in the 
street, and he cannot say how many, and he cannot say whether 
they are alive or dead, but there are definitely ambulances 
going into the area. He also saw white soldiers in camouflage 
uniform. He cannot say from which defense force they are. So 
there is generally chaos. 
  [Announcer Adrian Steed] Nan, we hear that the behavior of 
the Bophuthatswana police has left a lot to be desired. What did 
you see? 
  [Roux] Well, yesterday I saw police arive at a house which 
was burning. Curious bystander and residents of the area were 
just looking to see what was happening. The police fired almost 
five tear gas canisters for no reason. This morning I saw them 
assault three international newsmen. We were stopped and 
interrogated and they were very rude and very aggressive, but 
they let us stay. But then in front of us they cordoned off the 
car, they beat up the journalists. One was kicked, they were 
hitting with the butts of their guns. They seemed to be out 
of control. Nobody seems to be controlling them. They are 
shooting at random. They seem to be the people that are, well, 
they are causing some of the trouble. 
  [Steed] Nan, a news service has just reported that the South 
African Defense Force has moved into Megapark. They are firing 
into the air and they are telling poeople to go home. Any news 
on that for us? 
  [Roux] I cannot confirm that at all. I have not seen, I have 
not heard reports of a South African Defense Force presence. 
All I have heard about before is that there are some -- 
somebody did see white soldiers in camouflage uniform but they 
cannot say from which defense force they are. No, that rumor 
cannot be confirmed yet. 
  [Steed] Nan, thank you very much, and take care. 
  [Roux] Thank you. 

