CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Igor Schellander: "Blow to the `Yugomafia'"] </F>
  [Text] Splendid success by the Austrian police; 35 
individuals and the leadership of an organization headquartered 
in Belgrade arrested; further proceedings under way. 
  Vienna--The Austrian police have succeeded in a decisive 
blow 
against part of the organized crime operating from Austrian 
territory. At a news conference, representatives of the Group 
for the Struggle Against Organized Crime [EDOK], a special 
section within the Austrian Ministry of Internal Affairs, 
reported the arrest of 35 individuals and the leadership of an 
organization that was named the "Yugomafia" in official jargon. 
With indictments, the Austrian security authorities have 
initiated proceedings against 150 other individuals. In 
connection with this, Director for Public Security Michael Sika 
revealed that the state authorities had managed to obtain 
concrete evidence of the organized activity of the so-called 
Yugoslav mafia for the first time. 
  Both the head of the international criminal 
network--33-year-old Zajim Sabanagic--and most of the captured 
members are former Yugoslav citizens from Serbia. The goal of 
the well-organized gang was to acquire and cash in on monetary 
funds that were derived primarily from the theft of credit cards 
and bank checks, dealing in drugs, automobiles and weapons, and 
protection rackets. The Yugomafia's network, according to the 
Austrian detective, was professionally organized and 
commercially well-concealed. 
  The theft of credit cards and bank and traveler's checks 
(they found 1,500 checks worth 3.5 million schillings) was 
organized abroad. For that purpose the gang--its cooperation 
with Italian and South American organized crime was very 
close--employed a real army of South American pickpockets. The 
members of the "Serbian syndicate" handled the exchange and sale 
of the stolen means of payment in Austria. A bank robbery in 
Milan is also attributed to the gang. 
  With the aid and cooperation of colleagues abroad, the 
Austrian detectives came across the trail of thefts and diverse 
other criminal activities by the gang throughout Europe. 
International warrants have been issued for two other members of 
the organization's leadership, 36-year-old Ratko Bjelobaba and 
28-year-old Goran Sojic. 
  The monetary funds accumulated by the "Yugomafia" at its 
Vienna headquarters did not improve the lifestyle of its members 
in only nonessential ways. A large part of the criminally 
acquired monetary loot found its way to Belgrade--the funds were 
also intended to finance the war in the Balkans. 
  In connection with this, one circumstance during the 
questioning of the syndicate's head was eloquent: It was only 
when the Austrian police officials threatened, of course as a 
joke, that they would send the confiscated money to Bosnia that 
Sabanagic became "cooperative" and yielded some information. 
  The damage caused by the syndicate's activity is estimated 
at 
100 million schillings. 
  The successful operation by the Austrian security 
authorities 
will probably be included in a collection of exemplary and 
illustrative documentation at European Interpol. 

