Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Yeung in Beijing] </F>
  [Text] A provincial leader of poverty-stricken Gansu has 
shrugged off the central Government's order for a slower pace of 
economic growth. 
  Lu Ming, a vice-governor, said Gansu needs a more rapid 
growth rate to lift the people out of abject poverty. 
  He said: "(Vice-Premier) Zhu Rongji can make his criticism. 
We will be going ahead with our own plan. We are so poor that 
(a slow growth rate) should not be applied to us." 
  "Gansu is a piece of land without God's blessing," he 
lamented, referring to the poor physical condition of the 
central province. 
  Rain has fallen mainly on the mountainous area in the 
eastern 
part of the province while the vast plains to the west, suitable 
for cultivation, have been scorched by drought. 
  The average annual income of farmers in Gansu last year 
stood 
at 550 yuan (HK$488). Four million people, most of whom live in 
the mountainous area, earned less than 400 yuan. They are part 
of the 80 million people across the nation classed as not having 
enough food and clothing. 
  Mr Lu said the only way to solve the problem was to quicken 
the speed of reform towards building a market economy. 
  "Now that the central leadership has abandoned the planned 
economy and adopted the road of the market economy, it is a 
golden opportunity for us. 
  "We will promote the growth of the private economy," he 
said. 
  Unlike ethnic minority regions such as Xinjiang and Tibet, 
where there are racial disputes, Gansu has not been a priority 
on the list of recipients of subsidies from the central 
government. 
  "Funding is our major problem. Our annual total revenue is 
about 5.3 billion yuan. But very little is left for 
construction after paying salaries (for government workers). 
  "We will have to rely on local funds. There is more than 
seven billion yuan in the hands of the people." 
  Mr Lu is hoping the modest funds will be pooled and used in 
the most cost effective way to enliven the economy. 
  The poor region will also take measures to keep the funds of 
local enterprises in the province, following an outflow of 
capital to the coastal region for speculative activities such as 
real estate development last year. 
  Mr Lu believed that the momentum of growth in Gansu would be 
no less than in other regions of the mainland. 
  "Our growth rate this year will be an average figure for the 
nation. I believe that will be above nine percent. We will 
stick to nine percent as the starting point, but we hope to go a 
bit faster," the provincial leader said. 
  "China is at the early stage of industrialization... The 
phenomenon of part of the population getting rich first will 
exist. 
  "We (were the first to) raise the issue of the gap in income 
between the west and east. Efforts from both the central 
Government and the regions are needed if we want to solve the 
problem," he said. 

