Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Olga Bychkova report: "Court Leaves for Chamber"] </F>
  [Text] The fourth estate in Russia receives a new 
counterbalance--the Judicial Chamber for Information Disputes, 
created by the president's edict. 
  The Chamber, in fact, appears in the place of the 
Arbitration 
Information Court, which oversaw information guarantees of 
participants in the election campaign. The composition of the 
new body remains almost the same, with Anatoliy Vengerov, law 
professor, as its chairman. But members of the Chamber will 
work in it on a permanent basis and with no right to combine it 
with work for the media. 
  The formulated main objective of the new structure is to 
assist the president in exercising his constitutional powers as 
a guarantor of the rights and liberties of citizens, and 
primarily the right to freedom of speech. The Chamber has 
gained great powers in resolving disputes that involve 
distribution of air time on television and radio among the 
Federal Assembly factions. A totally new type of activity is 
"the protection of moral interests of children and adolescents 
in the mass media." 
  In practical terms, the Judicial Chamber will be able to 
give 
official warnings to publications for breaching the principles 
of "authenticity and objectivity" of information, and even to go 
to court to withdraw licenses. In the case of officials' 
violating the press law the Chamber can only reprimand them. 
This "inequality of rights," Anatoliy Vengerov thinks, is 
explained by the fact that a reprimand for an official is a 
terrible punishment threatening the ruin of a career, whereas in 
the case of a newspaper the last word belongs to the ordinary 
court. It it underscored separately that the Chamber's sphere 
is a public, rather than a legal, assessment of information. 
Still, as far as warnings go, the Judicial Chamber gains the 
functions of a press ministry. 
  The question of "authenticity and objectivity" so far 
appears 
one of the most debatable. Vengerov cites as an example the 
recent incident where Boris Yeltsin was ascribed the authorship 
of a personal letter to Anatoliy Lukyanov regarding the latter's 
deputy status, whereas the letter addressed all deputies in 
general. "Had the press secretary failed to deny the claim 
right away, we would have had to do it. And we would also have 
had to find out who and why presented the fact in a distorted 
way," the head of the Judicial Chamber explained. But he noted 
there his deep conviction that similar cases often involve 
elementary professional negligence rather than ill design. 
Making such instances public, Vengerov thinks, is the most 
powerful sanction of moral impact first and foremost. 
  How precisely the Judicial Chamber for Information Disputes 
will function is yet to be determined by special regulations. 
Members of the Chamber have been instructed to elaborate them 
by mid-January. Only then will it become clear what these 
innovations mean for the freedom of speech. 

