Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Sinan Yilmaz] </F>
  [Text] Ankara--Turkey's human rights record has suffered 
another blow with an increasing number of deaths and abuses 
occurring in the past year, according to a recently issued 
report by the Ankara-based Turkish Human Rights Association 
(IHD). In announcing these findings in its 1993 annual report 
the IHD said that because of the rapid increase in human rights 
abuses, this year it would begin issuing reports on a monthly 
basis. 
  The association said that in 1993, attacks by security 
forces 
on groups and individuals increased as did extrajudicial deaths 
(killings by security forces without due legal process), 
especially in Istanbul. In the Southeast 3,750 civilians were 
killed and 1,490 wounded in ongoing clashes and there is still 
no solution in sight to the Kurdish problem. 
  The association, whose report concentrated on alleged rights 
violations by the security forces and state agencies, did not 
refer to deliberate attacks on civilian targets by the outlawed 
Workers Party Kurdistan (PKK). It did, however, accuse Ankara 
of hiding Turkey's economic and social realities behind the 
excuse of terrorism. 
  No mention was made in the report of the PKK's systematic 
campaign in the southeast which targeted engineers, teachers, 
students and civil servants, but association sources said that 
in 1994, such activities would be closely monitored. The 
commentary noted that 1993 had been a negative year regarding 
democratization and human rights and said that "day by day 
Turkey is being dragged into darkness." 
  It continued that all criticism of current economic, 
political, social and cultural policies was regarded by the 
authorities as a criminal offense and that any struggle for 
rights was faced with new bans and oppression. 
  The report also noted that the debate on capital punishment 
had resurfaced in 1993 and that nothing had yet been done 
regarding the formation of a ministry of human rights as had 
been promised by the coalition government. State Minister 
Mehmet Kahraman has recently threatened to resign if the 
proposed ministry is not established. 
  Observers have said that in the past, governments had been 
very keen to declare their opposition to human rights abuses 
while at the same time denying that there have been any 
violations. The failure, however, to establish a human rights 
ministry, is cited as the main obstacle in proving that the 
coalition government is sincere on this issue. 
  The IHD's 1993 human rights summary listed 21 people 
suspected of being killed by police torture and 29 people who 
"disappeared" while in detention. 
  The report also said that in 1993, a total of 510 people had 
been killed in "mystery murders," a reference normally used to 
explain political assassinations in which the killers escape. 
It said six journalists, three of whom were working for the 
pro-Kurdish OZGUR GUNDEM newspaper, were killed along with eight 
newspaper distributors. 
  A total of 51 journalists were imprisoned in 1993, while in 
the 1992-1993 period 260 newspapers and magazines were seized. 
Some 33 books were banned from publication and all copies were 
confiscated. Journalists and authors were sentenced to a total 
of 231 years imprisonment and fined TL 21000 billion. The 
report noted than in 1993, four political parties had been 
closed down while cases were being prepared for the closure of 
two others. The defunct parties were identified as the 
Socialist Party (SP), the People's Labor Party (HEP), the 
Socialist Turkish Party (STP) and the Freedom and Democracy 
Party (OZDEP). The Socialist Unity Party (SBP) and the 
Democracy Party (DEP) now face the threat of closure. A total 
of 48 associations were closed down in 1993. 
  The report said that during security operations in 
southeastern Turkey, security forces had evacuated a total of 
874 villages and hamlets, of which some were torched to prevent 
them from being used again by the villages. It also said the 
situation in the region was deteriorating. 
  The IHD is an independent organization whose main function 
is 
to monitor Turkish human rights violations. The Human Rights 
Foundation (TIHV) which is more institutionalized, concentrates 
mainly on the rehabilitation and treatment of torture victims 
and publishes its own annual reports. In 1993, a total of 323 
people applied to the TIHV for medical treatment and to 
participate in rehabilitation programs for torture victims. Of 
these, 115 applied in Ankara, 107 in Izmir and 101 in Istanbul. 

