BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Peter Grolig and Gerald Reischl: "The Red </F>
Godfathers Are Reaching Out to the West"] 
  [Excerpts] He called himself Yuriy Chekin a.k.a. Marek 
Lipskiy a.k.a Dmitriy Beretsine and lived in Vienna's 
Erdbergstrasse -- as did his five Russian compatriots, who used 
a total of 11 different names. Just when they came to Austria 
is unclear. In April 1994 they were arrested during an 
attempted break-in. When their apartment was searched, police 
found a heap of passports and 260,000 tear-gas sprays. The 
officials saw this as an indication that the eastern mafia is 
behind this gang. The leaders are unknown. 
  The lawyer was paid by "friends" -- business partners and 
relatives, who have been in Austria for some time. "The 
background is unclear," says a Viennese lawyer who wants to 
remain anonymous. "I must remain anonymous out of caution. One 
never knows who might be behind them." In 1993 he involuntarily 
became an expert on the "Russian mafia." "A CIS citizen 
recommended me when he was in detention awaiting trial. Now I 
get many such cases." Over the past months he has had 10 of 
them. Have they been won? "So far I have not had a trial." 
  Austria has become the hub of the eastern mafia: Drug 
dealers from Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan, car thieves from Poland 
and Ukraine, blackmailers --demanding protection money--from 
Moscow and Turkey, and money launderers from China. In 1993 
125,000 crimes were credited to criminals from mafia circles. 
The Interior Ministry avoids the term mafia and speaks of 
"organized crime." 
  "We do not have any concrete figures," Michael Sika, 
director 
general of public security, admits. "We assume that the 
proportion of organized crime is 25 to 30 percent of all 
crimes." Three years ago estimates were at 20 percent. 
According to forecasts by experts, by the end of the century one 
out of two crimes will be committed by a gang member. The 
majority are car thefts. In 1993, 2,998 cars were stolen. Most 
of them disappear to East Europe. 
  The mafia is marching toward Austria -- above all from the 
former USSR. Freedom of travel has opened up previously 
unimaginable opportunities. In the former Soviet Union there 
are 5,000 gangs with a total of about 3 million members. In 
1991 alone 225,000 state employees were sentenced for 
embezzlement there. A total of 20,000 policemen were proved to 
be cooperating with the mafia -- the mafia which is now reaching 
out toward the West. 
  The Austrian Embassy in Moscow approves 400 to 500 
applications for visas per day. "Two-thirds are businessmen," 
Consul Vjekoslav Freisitzer says. In order to be permitted to 
travel to Austria, one needs the invitation of a company 
operating in Austria. "These are often invitations issued as a 
favor. In the case of many companies one does not know who is 
behind them," Freisitzer says. There are strict checks. 
Between 10 and 30 CIS citizens per month are found to have 
forged invitations. 
  By the end of May 1994 the Interior Ministry had issued 
1,008 
work permits for CIS citizens; in total, about 7,500 people from 
the former USSR currently live in Austria. "So far this year, 
2,000 residence permits have been issued," Peter Wiedermann, 
head of the immigration police, says. However, there are hardly 
any problems with CIS citizens. Only 59 have applied for asylum 
this year. 
  Nevertheless, Michael Sika assumes that eight to 10 
companies 
per month are founded under the patronage of the "red 
godfathers" in Austria. Rumors that the Naschmarkt [large, 
open-air market in Vienna] in Vienna is also controlled by the 
Russian mafia have not been confirmed. Last year the profile of 
its stand owners was studied: The 167 stands belong to 
Russians, Turks, and Kurds, some of whom have been nationalized. 
They could be blackmailed by former compatriots. 
  The Federal Office of Criminal Investigations [BKA] in 
Wiesbaden has studied organized crime in East Europe. Since 1 
September 1991 a project has been under way to evaluate all 
information about groups of criminals from the former USSR. 
"Four gangs are active in Germany," BKA spokesman Thomas 
Rindsfuesser says. In Austria the situation is similar, he 
notes. 
  The first group, the exile Russians, are active in the 
sphere 
of economic crime. "Enormous amounts of goods are transferred 
via joint ventures, some of them illegally," Rindsfuesser says. 
"Thus, new routes for the delivery of drugs have also been 
developed." However, exile Russians are also often victims of 
blackmail. 
  The second group are criminals from the former autonomous 
Chechen-Ingush republic, hierarchically organized gangs. 
Rindsfuesser: "A council of elders, which consists of the gang 
leaders, divides the areas and makes sure that conflicts among 
groups are avoided." The Chechens' main source of revenues is 
protection money. 
  The Dolgoprudnenskaya come from the boxing world. "This gang 
could organize the red-light scene in the future," Rindsfuesser 
says. 
  These mafiosi, who offer protection to the expatriate 
Russians, come from Georgia. 
  [passage omitted] "Austria is used by the Russian mafia for 
financial operations. It is also used by the Georgians, and by 
the Chechens. So far, there have been no excesses and 
attempts to take over by force, as there have been in Budapest, 
Prague, and Berlin," Josef Dick, an Interior Ministry official, 
stresses. Austria is the starting point for financial 
transactions and large-scale property crimes. 
  On the occasion of a meeting in Vienna, the United States 
estimates the global turnover of illegal financial operationa at 
$1 billion per day. The majority of the money comes from the 
former USSR. "An unimaginable hotbed of crisis," says Walter 
Pretzner, head of the "Task Force for Combating Organized Crime" 
(EDOK) in the Interior Ministry. The madness: Billions are 
taken out of the country by the "red godfathers" and invested in 
West European industries. At the same time, Western countries 
are spending large amounts on aid for the East. After all, the 
hotbed of unrest is nuclear power. At the moment, the security 
authorities cannot yet reach those who are benefiting from this. 
However: "The time will come," the EDOK head says with 
optimism. "We are only just beginning our counterstrategies." 
There are already special antimafia groups in the eight 
criminal departments of the provincial police. Soon special 
units are to be established also in all 14 federal police 
directorates -- a total of 23 such units. 
  There hass already been some success: This year the EDOK 
registration office, to which monetary transactions involving 
more than 200,000 schillings must be reported, has already 
examined 149 cases in which money laundering was suspected. A 
total of 215 million schillings were "frozen" at the order of 
the judiciary. 

