Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Nursultan Nazarbayev, president of </F>
Kazakhstan, by Otto Latsis, in Almaty, date not given: 
"Nursultan Nazarbayev: There Is no Union, All Are Free but 
They Have no Option but To Resolve Everything Together"] 
  [Text] [Latsis] Nursultan Abishevich, you are constantly 
putting forward proposals on the development of bilateral 
relations between Kazakhstan and Russia and multilateral 
relations within the CIS framework. Behind your initiative one 
senses a certain notion of the nature of and prospects for our 
mutual relations. We are going through a time of agonizing 
transformation after the collapse of the USSR, the state form in 
which our unity used to be expressed. The old, imperial form 
could not exist any longer. But what exists on the territory of 
the former USSR is essentially a single economy, an aggregate of 
common geopolitical interests, and most importantly, a human 
unity, an aggregate of personal ties, a community of culture, 
and a community of historical destiny. To realize this unity, 
which is an objective fact, it is necessary to elaborate a new 
system of state relations or, nowadays, interstate relations. 
What do you think about that? 
  [Nazarbayev] The situation in the CIS and in Russia itself 
now is such that no politician can entirely predict what is 
going to happen tomorrow. Concrete ideas change but it is 
possible to show what we are constantly striving towards. I 
would like to return to the time when it was still possible to 
do everything differently, back to 1990. During the routine 
Congress of USSR People's Deputies the leaders of Russia, 
Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan met at my residence in Moscow. 
By the end of 1990 it was obvious that the ship of state was 
moving without a rudder or a sail. We wanted to try to save the 
unity with states which felt the same way. At that time only 
four states were ready to create a new union on the basis of 
sovereignty. The corresponding document was drawn up and we all 
signed it. Russia was represented by Boris Nikolayevich 
Yeltsin. We could see that the Baltic region was leaving, 
Armenia and Azerbaijan were at loggerheads, and Georgia was 
still under the influence of the April events in Tbilisi -- 
everything was heading toward disintegration. The next day I 
asked Gorbachev whether he would agree to head our undertaking 
if we created the appropriate nucleus and then waited to see who 
else would join in. I believe that the attitude of the rest 
would have been far more favorable. But he categorically 
refused, he was convinced that he would hold on to them all and 
that even the Baltic would reconsider. Then he began the 
well-known Novo-Ogarevo process in which he included all the 
Russian autonomous formations, there were 50 of us sitting 
there, it was a shambles. We could not reach a single decision, 
everyone defended his own corner. 
  I took part in all of this simply because I realized what 
the 
result of a breakdown of ties would be if we started ripping a 
living organism to shreds. That is what we are going through 
now. There is no Union, everyone is free, but those who, by 
their actions, prompted this disintegration did not foresee the 
consequences of it. Possession of the outer trappings of 
independence does not mean that each country is capable of 
pursuing a sovereign foreign policy and of ensuring national 
security -- national not in the sense of ethnic but in the sense 
generally accepted in the world: not just state security but 
also stability in the economy and in all spheres of life. 
  Then the Belovezhskaya accords were signed. They could 
have been prepared differently, the stages could have been 
thought through differently, but by that time there was no 
single, manageable state left. In other words, we were 
inevitably moving toward the conditions that we have now. 
  [Latsis] Surely it may now be said that all the inevitable 
defects of the Belovezhskaya accords were the price to be paid 
for the rejection of the proposals of your group of four a year 
earlier. The logic of the accords was ultimately what you 
thought it would be: If all the republics were not ready at a 
given moment to take the new path together it was necessary to 
create a nucleus of those which were ready. But by December 
1991 only Russia constituted such a nucleus because Ukraine was 
increasingly a victim of certain delusions. 
  [Nazarbayev] Perhaps I will be criticized for being a victim 
of my upbringing -- I grew up in a single state where we did 
everything together -- but there are nevertheless certain 
pragmatic considerations here. When such scientific and 
technical progress and such a struggle for market territory are 
going on, the only way to survive is through unification. The 
countries of Western Europe, with their 1,000 years of 
statehood, are moving toward unification -- Mitterrand has even 
begun talking about a confederation. Because they understand 
that several poles of tremendous competition are developing in 
the world. There is North America, the Far East from Japan to 
the new "tiger" states, and the Asian continent, which is being 
revitalized. 
  [Latsis] I would find it difficult to determine on the spur 
of the moment just where Kazakhstan would fit into that 
geography. 
  [Nazarbayev] That is the whole question. It is our fate, 
the fate of the former Union republics, that we have the ability 
and need to resolve and do many things together. There are 
forms and mechanisms of ties and management and a mentality that 
are only characteristic of this area, the former USSR. Now the 
crisis of the social system is being aggravated by the crisis of 
the breakdown of state unity and all this contributes elements 
of social confusion which intensify the political crises and 
conflicts. We want to minimize the economic and social 
consequences of the destruction of the Union. 
  Of course, there is no need to revive the empire, which 
denationalized the republics, and no one wants to do that. But 
the demands of the economy are objective and do not depend on 
national borders. Unfortunately, our practical attempts to 
settle things have been running into some incomprehensible 
suspicions. The prime minister of Kazakhstan has just recently 
put forward proposals on an Interstate Economic Council and 
immediately people begin asking: What is this -- a new USSR 
Council of Ministers? But there are such things as the European 
Parliament, the Commission of the European Union, and common 
interstate organs. 
  [Latsis] But they did not begin with the European 
Parliament. They began even before the creation of the "Common 
Market" with the European Coal and Steel Community. 
  [Nazarbayev] That is what I propose. I invited all the CIS 
industry ministers to Karaganda last year and proposed such an 
association. Incidentally, at a meeting of CIS leaders an 
agreement on a coal and steel trust was signed. But we are not 
in the same position as Western Europe. Why should we take 30 
years to travel that road when we have had far closer unity for 
a long time already? The Economic Union, the draft for which 
was elaborated in Kazakhstan, envisages the conclusion of a 
customs union and a currency union, the creation of a common 
economic area, and the coordination of foreign economic policy. 
  [Latsis] The currency union question causes alarm in Russia. 
When we tried to preserve the single ruble zone Russia often 
footed the bill for its neighbors' money emission. 
  [Nazarbayev] Now that the national currency has been 
introduced we can see that Kazakhstan can stand on its own two 
feet, just like Russia. But is isolation beneficial to us? Our 
Ekibastuz sends a large part of its coal to Russia. Unless 
Russia invests money in its development we will simply not be 
able to maintain it, it is geared toward the whole Union. There 
is coal in Russia, it could be used in place of our supplies, 
but how many trillions will it cost to produce it? In addition, 
the Sokolovsko-Sarbayskiy combine fully supplies Magnitka and 
other plants in the Urals with ore. We can sell that ore to 
other countries but how much time and money will it cost Russia 
to get its ore elsewhere? Russia can also us its own oil to 
replace Kazakhstan's oil, which keeps refineries in the Volga 
region working, but that, too, will involve great expense. On 
the other hand, if we lose our supplies from Russia we will have 
to build enormous machine building plants of our own. We do not 
want to do that but we have to take our own interests into 
account, too. The virgin lands needs Kirov tractors, but they 
already cost more than the world price and for the world price 
we can buy better tractors elsewhere. 
  Take our ties with Ukraine. Two years ago the Ukrainians 
cut off their supply of pipes to us, pipes which we have always 
received in exchange for metal bars from Karaganda. They told 
us -- we will sell it all to the West and give you nothing. We 
said: fine. Within a year a pipe manufacturing machine was 
installed at the Karaganda combine -- with the Russians' help. 
We were denied construction metal -- again we installed a 
machine. Buses from Lvov, refrigerators, we will sell the whole 
lot over there, they said, and give you nothing more. This year 
they are saying: Take whatever you need: pipes, refrigerators, 
buses, sugar. But we are saying: We have already bought all 
these things and have begun making some of them ourselves. 
  A single economic area must be created. So far, after two 
and one-half years, there isn't a single effective coordinating 
organ to simply monitor what work is being done to fulfill the 
agreements and report back to the presidents. It is necessary 
to harmonize legislation -- customs, currency, and taxation 
legislation. Incidentally, in 1991 after the putsch we created 
the State Council and the Interstate Economic Committee, 
Yavlinskiy and others were appointed there, and 26 relevant 
coordinated documents were prepared. On 11 October 11 states 
met here in Almaty and signed the economic agreement which was 
ratified a few days later in Moscow. 
  [Latsis] The day before the State Council session where all 
this was decided Yavlinskiy came to our editorial office to ask 
for support and I was instructed to write an article for the 
next day. We supported all this with great enthusiasm but we 
could see that the chances of achieving a common accord were not 
great. Ukraine, and not just Ukraine, could not see what lay 
ahead if we did not go down the road of reforms together. 
  [Nazarbayev] Yes, here in Almaty Fokin signed the document 
but in Moscow he merely attended the signing, only seven or 
eight states signed. Yavlinskiy's group worked very 
conscientiously then and prepared some excellent documents but 
clearly you learn some things only from bitter experience. 
After all, in those days, when there was no market plan, each 
one believed that the rest were living off him. Turkmenia 
believed that the others were getting rich from its gas. In 
Russia's case, from its oil. Kazakhstan also believed that it 
was being ripped off, and so on. 
  But even then I believed and still do believe that we need 
integration and that under certain conditions Russia could be 
the core of it. But what we want is Russia to make up its own 
mind what kind of state it is building. If it wants to continue 
following the course of its thousand-year old historical pattern 
as the ultimate foundation of the building of a superstate, that 
is one thing, if we are friendly neighbors to one another, that 
is a different matter. But some Russian leaders suffer from 
euphoric notions about the possibility of full integration into 
the Western world, then they suddenly turn toward Asia and there 
are statements from state figures about Russia's special rights 
and duties on the territory of the former Union, which cause 
great uproar throughout the world. Of course a new state needs 
time to determine its interests and establish its own policy and 
we for our part are ready to regard these inevitable quests with 
understanding and patience. But when people talk about the 
possible division of Kazakhstan, about claims to its territory, 
and about threats to Russia emanating from the territory of the 
former USSR, my first question is this: When did Kazakhstan cut 
itself off from Russia? What grounds are there for suspicions? 
People often ask me: You are constantly calling for the 
strengthening of relations with Russia and you speak about all 
Russians, ethnic and otherwise, with great respect. Why do we 
not hear the same kind of thing from Russia's leaders about all 
the Kazakhs, ethnic and otherwise? 
  The question of the migration of the Russians from 
Kazakhstan 
is being raised and in that connection it is being suggested to 
us that we introduce dual citizenship to guarantee their rights. 
However, that will not lead to equality of rights, on the 
contrary, it will bestow on the Russian citizens of our state 
dual rights and thus dual obligations. Then the Kazakhs -- 
whether I want it or not -- will begin having doubts about the 
loyalty of their Russian fellow citizens who are simultaneously 
citizens of another state. 
  [Latsis] Fortunately there is no need to insist on that 
option. But people must be reassured somehow. You can promise 
whatever you like but people have lost faith after what happened 
in Tajikistan, Fergana, and Osh. They may believe your 
government when it says that it has no evil designs but will the 
government be able to protect them if anything happens? 
  [Nazarbayev] I put forward a proposal on how to resolve 
this problem and Kozyrev agreed with me. Lat us work to ensure 
that the border between our states is always transparent. Let us 
make mutual commitments toward the citizens of our states just 
in case any of them ever want to change citizenship. If someone 
moves from Kazakhstan to Russia, give him citizenship there. If 
a German moves away from here he receives a German passport and 
thus becomes a German citizen. Why should we not do that? 
Kazakhstan for its part makes the commitment that if a person 
decides, during the course of a year, for example, that he 
cannot settle down somewhere else and wants to return he will 
get citizenship of Kazakhstan back again. 
  Meanwhile, the migration statistics do not always reveal the 
real processes. The exodus of Russians from Kazakhstan is far 
from always due to problems of interethnic relations, 
citizenship, and the like. Take Kurchatov, a city which for a 
long time did not appear on the map. This is the Semipalatinsk 
test range. Some 27,000 people have moved away from there. But 
these are exclusively military people or people connected with 
military nuclear research. They were never citizens, they were 
always seconded here from Russia and now there is no work for 
them any more. There is also Priozersk on the shores of Lake 
Balkhash, a city which is not shown on the maps -- it is a test 
range pure and simple. Some 25,000 people have left that place. 
In West Kazakhstan there is the city of Emba, it is not on the 
maps, they used to carry out rocket launches there -- people 
have left it, too. And the whole of Leninsk which they have now 
begun to mention by name -- previously they only talked about 
Baykonur -- is also leaving as the programs are being scaled 
down. How can we hold onto them? 
  We would like treaties with Russia on all these questions: 
on military cooperation, including the extension of the work of 
our 50 defense enterprises to Russia, and on the terms of the 
lease and use of the Baykonur cosmodrome -- this is in both 
sides' interests. Russia cannot contemplate the cost of 
building another comsodrome right now and we do not want the 
center to fade away. 
  All these questions will be examined at the forthcoming 
meeting with the Russian President. But the main thing -- which 
applies not just to this meeting -- is that we need 
understanding and full trust between our countries. Not to 
mention the various fabrications about Kazakhstan's position on 
various questions which constantly crop up in the press and in 
speeches by individual politicians. But the main problem is not 
one of fabrications or gossip. In the activity of some Russian 
politicians you sometimes hear echoes of familiar Soviet ideas: 
Moscow's interests are paramount, the rest must adapt to them. 
I proceed from the premise that Kazakhstan has its own 
legitimate interests but so do our partners. 
  [Latsis] It is of course perfectly normal for a country to 
have interests of its own. But if you disregard the speculation 
and simple misunderstandings you will see that Russia is looking 
after its own interests, too. I, for example, understand the 
reasons why Shokhin insisted on very tough conditions for the 
continued functioning of the common ruble zone -- it is a 
different matter that I do not understand why such 
principledness has not been shown in regard to Belarus. But 
perhaps agreement would have been reached with Kazakhstan, too, 
if you had observed the same tough restrictions on emission as, 
for example, Latvia did. Admittedly, Russia itself did not 
observe the same kind of financial rigor either. 
  [Nazarbayev] We had our reasons for easing off, we were 
trying to lighten the social problems of people cut off from the 
former common state. However, the Russian side's strict demands 
on the financial question are understandable. The only thing 
that I cannot understand is why they did not tell us this before 
and, what is more, I cannot understand the exchange of banknotes 
operation after which money no longer valid in Russia was dumped 
on Kazakhstan for three months through every available channel. 
  [Latsis] That action by Gerashchenko was bound to cause 
nothing but indignation. We at IZVESTIYA wrote that it was 
blatantly aimed against the former republics of the USSR and 
furthermore that it would do Russia itself no good. But many 
things in what Russia actually does and even more so in the 
things it fails to do are due not to malice but to the fact that 
it cannot do everything. Until September-October last year, 
furthermore, there was a power struggle going in Russia and as 
far as some politicians were concerned relations with the former 
Soviet republics were simply fodder for that struggle. 
  [Nazarbayev] That is precisely what I want to avoid in the 
future. Russia and Kazakhstan are linked by deep and permanent 
mutual interests which exist objectively regardless of any 
short-term considerations, intrigues, or misunderstandings. It 
is this real interest in cooperation and the community of our 
interests which must determine our actions. 

