Language: <F P=105> Swedish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lars Eriksson: ``Radioactive Scrap Reclaimed </F>
With New Swedish Method''--first two paragraphs are NY TEKNIK 
introduction] 
  [Text] In the fall Framatome, the French nuclear technology 
firm, will test a new Swedish method to clean and recycle 
radioactive steam generators from nuclear power plants. 
  The method has already been tested on steam generators from 
the closed nuclear reactor in Agesta outside Stockholm. 
  The method for cleaning and recycling steam generators was 
developed by Sweden's Studsvik RadWaste. The Swedish State Power 
Board, a number of Japanese companies via Mitsubishi, the French 
power company EDF and the French nuclear technology firm 
Framatome have supported the development. 
  Framatome has acquired a license to use the method in the 
French market. The method will now be tested on a replaced steam 
generator from the nuclear power plant in Dampierre. If all goes 
well there are more steam generators to take care of. France has 
the highest concentration of nuclear power in Europe. 
  ``This method has two advantages. For one thing we recover 
valuable metals that can be reused and for another we reduce the 
volume of radioactive waste,'' said Olof Andersson, president of 
Studsvik RadWaste. 
  Steam generators consist of a very extensive pipe system. 
The 
total tube length in an average steam generator is approximately 
nine miles. It is in the tubes that most of the radioactivity is 
located. 
  The tubes are rinsed with a liquid called SODP (Strong Ozone 
Decontamination Process). It consists of ozone dissolved in 
nitric acid with cerium nitrate as a catalyst. With the help of 
the solution about five micrometers of oxide deposit are 
removed. It is there the radioactivity is located. The process 
takes 72 hours. 
  ``This type of liquid is sometimes used for cleaning inside 
reactors. But few people believed in our idea that it could be 
used to reclaim steam generators,'' Andersson said. 
<H5>  Metals Separated </H5>
  After it is cleaned the steam generator is melted down and 
the various metals are separated. 
  The method has been successfully tested on two steam 
generators from the closed nuclear power plant in Agesta. The 
radioactivity in the generators fell from 10,000 bequerels per 
gram to at best 1 bequerel per gram as a result of the process. 
  It is somewhat unclear which maximum value applies for a 
free 
classification of radioactive material. At present it is 1 
bequerel per gram in Sweden, according to the SSI [National 
Institute of Radiation Protection] standard, but international 
discussions are under way on this. 
  The solvent contains most of the radioactivity after 
processing. The volume is reduced by evaporating the solution 
(``boiling it down'') and encasing it in cement. This waste 
residue is then shipped for final storage in the storage 
facility for low- and medium-active waste, SFR in Forsmark. 
<H5>  Much Larger </H5>
  Three steam generators were replaced in reactor 2 at the 
Ringhals plant several years ago. Studsvik RadWaste and the 
Ringhals management are currently discussing whether to use the 
new method on them. 
  The Ringhals steam generators are considerably larger than 
the Agesta generators; 300 tons apiece compared with 25 tons. 
The volume is 17 times greater. 
  The radioactivity is 10 times higher. The reason is that the 
Agesta generators have cooled down for about 20 years. The 
reactor was in operation from 1964 to 1974. 
  After a Ringhals steam generator is processed there will be 
50 tons of nickel and chromium and 200 tons of iron left that 
can be recycled. The iron can be used for manufacturing concrete 
reinforcement rods and radiators, among other things. The nickel 
and chromium that is recovered can be used for manufacturing new 
steam generators. 
  That leaves 22 cubic meters of encased radioactive solution, 
four cubic meters of slag from the smelting process and 15 cubic 
meters of massive steel (a tube plate that is considered hard to 
clean). 
  Melting down radioactive material is nothing new in itself. 
In the last 10 years around 1,300 tons of radioactive steel from 
various reactor components and tools have been melted down at 
Studsvik. Some 200 tons of material has been classified as 
radiation-free. The remaining 1,100 tons are being stored at 
Studsvik for final disposal later. 
<H5>  Around 150 Replacements </H5>
  In the next 10 years around 150 steam generators will need 
to 
be replaced worldwide. So Studsvik RadWaste, which holds the 
world patent, hopes that this method will give them a lot of 
good business in the future. 

