BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 14 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Premier Li 
Peng met separately with U.S. and German businessmen here this 
afternoon. 
  In meeting with John Hennessey, chairman and chief executive 
of CS First Boston Group Inc., of the U.S.A, Li said he had 
recently met with executives of several major U.S. securities 
companies, whose China visits indicated that U.S. entrepreneurs 
are very interested in expanding cooperation with China, and new 
content has been added to Sino-U.S. economic links. 
  He said that it is a success that China entrusted U.S. 
securities companies to issue bonds and stocks. 
  Li noted China's stock market, still in its experimental 
stage, is very young. "We will do the work well according to 
China's own conditions and reform plans, as well as drawing 
lessons from successful experience of other countries", he added. 
  He pointed out that China's market is open to all American 
entrepreneurs who are willing to conduct mutually beneficial 
cooperation with China. China hopes to improve and develop 
Sino- U.S. ties in every aspect, he said. 
  The Chinese premier hoped that U.S. entrepreneurs would not 
let the opportune moment slip out of their fingers. 
  Li continued that China's economy has kept a developing 
momentum but communications, transportation, energy and 
infrustructure facilities still lag behind in the country's 
national economy, adding that these fields, in which lie broad 
prospects for Sino- foreign cooperation, will be focused on in 
the country's development drive. 
  Li also briefed the guests on China's financial and tax 
reforms. 
  Hennessey said that it is his firm's long-term strategy to 
cooperate with China and his company will participate in the 
construction of China's key fields. 
  In meeting with Hermann Scholl, chairman of the board of 
Germany's Robert Bosch GMbH, Li said that Bosch, whose 
techniques and products enjoy a good name in China, is a good 
cooperative partner of the country. 
  He noted that there is a long history and remarkable 
achievement for Sino-German cooperation in trade and techniques, 
adding that last year's China tour by German Chancellor Helmut 
Kohl opened new prospects for the two countries' economic and 
trade links. 
  Scholl said that the first visit he made after he took 
office 
as chairman was to China and this showed the positive desire of 
Bosch to enhance cooperation with China. 
  He noted that his firm will play a role in helping China 
develop such fields as advanced machinery manufacturing industry. 

