Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 10 (XINHUA) -- The second session of 
the Eighth National People's Congress (NPC), China's 
legislature, opened in the Great Hall of the People here this 
morning. 
  Attending today's opening ceremony are 2,808 NPC deputies 
from all over the country and the People's Liberation Army. 
Also attending as nonvoting delegates are more than 1,800 
members of the National Committee of the Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference. 
  The current NPC session is regarded as an important meeting 
being convened at a time when China is speeding up the 
establishment of a socialist market economy and accelerating its 
modernization drive. All social sectors in China place high 
hopes on the session. 
  At 9:00, Qiao Shi, chairman of the NPC Standing Committee 
and 
an executive chairman of the session presidium, declared the 
opening of the session. 
  Minutes later, Premier Li Peng began delivering a government 
work report to the session. 
  He said, "The sound development of the economy will maintain 
its growth momentum in 1994, an important year for pushing ahead 
with reforms." 
  The premier stressed the importance of correctly handling 
relations between reform, economic development and social 
stability. 
  He said, "economic development is the center of all our 
work, 
reform and opening up are the motive force of development, and 
development and reform are the foundation of long-term social 
and political stability in China; and social stability, in turn, 
is a prerequisite for economic development and smooth progress 
in reform." 
  The premier said that, to ensure a sustained, rapid and 
sound 
development of the national economy, the growth rate of China's 
gross domestic product (GDP) for 1994 has been set at nine 
percent. 
  In the wake of 13 percent increases for China's national 
economy in the last two consecutive years, the growth rate 
planned for 1994 is both "vigorous and appropriate." 
  The government work report runs about 16,000 words, 4,000 
fewer than a similar report he delivered a year ago. Li Peng 
devoted two-fifths of his report to China's economic work and 
new reform measures adopted by the government since the 
beginning of 1994. 
  The report covers seven parts: a review of government work 
in domestic affairs in 1993 and basic principles for work in 
1994; maintaining a steady, rapid and sound development of the 
national economy; speeding up the establishment of a socialist 
market economy; expanding scientific and technological 
undertakings and developing education and culture; strengthening 
socialist democracy and the legal system; promoting the peaceful 
reunification of China; and China's diplomatic work. 
  Attending today's session are leaders of the Chinese 
Communist Party and the government Jiang Zemin, Li Ruihuan, Zhu 
Rongji, Liu Huaqing, Hu Jintao and Rong Yiren. 
  In attendance are also diplomatic envoys to China. 
  About 1,000 Chinese and foreign reporters are in the Chinese 
capital to cover the session. 
  The Central Broadcasting Station, the China Central 
Television Station and China Radio International are giving the 
session live coverage. 

