Circles'   in U.S. 

<F P=102> JN0204212394 Damascus Syrian Arab Republic Radio Network in 
Arabic 2015 GMT 2 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> JN0204212394 </F>
<F P=104>  Damascus Syrian Arab Republic Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Arabic </F>
BFN 

  [Text] The Syrian Foreign Ministry has stated the 
following: 
  For many years, the Syrian authorities, in cooperation with 
the Lebanese authorities, have been exerting themselves to 
combat the growing of poppies and other narcotics, especially in 
the al-Biqa' region, long known for producing such crops. 
  We can state, on the strength of the information available 
to 
us, that these efforts have succeeded in putting an end to the 
cultivation of these illegal plants, despite the extreme 
difficulties involved in combating them, curbing their 
processing, and banning trade in them. 
  Syria is known to have passed strict anti-drug legislation 
and taken severe disciplinary measures against drug growers, 
manufacturers, smugglers, and traffickers. Syria ranks among 
the countries with the cleanest record in this area. 
Furthermore, the values and traditions of the Syrian Arab 
society in themselves constitute a natural immunity against this 
blight. 
  Syria's efforts in the area of fighting drugs have earned 
the 
satisfaction of the United Nations and the regional committee 
for the fight against drugs, which chose Damascus as the venue 
for its 30th congress in February, 1994. The committee's 
representative judged Syria's anti-drug drive to be commendable. 
  For all the above reasons, and despite the fact that the 
competent agency at the U.S. State Department recommended that 
Syria be removed from the list of nations charged with failing 
to combat drug abuse--to cite an article published in the 21 
March issue of the WASHINGTON POST--certain members of the U.S. 
Administration, many of whose stands have hindered rather than 
facilitated the peace process, have deliberately ignored these 
recommendations, and insisted on keeping Syria on the list, 
despite all the realities and facts that prove Syria's fight 
against drugs. 
  It is now clear beyond a shadow of doubt that the aim of 
placing Syria on the drug or terrorism list is to pressure Syria 
into relinquishing its stands and just causes, acknowledged by 
the international community and endorsed by UN resolutions, 
envisaging a just and comprehensive peace in the region. 
  Syria's stands and just causes cannot be bargained over. 
Syria's efforts and measures in the anti-drug campaign 
originate in a conviction in the need to wipe out the risks 
inherent in this scourge and its devastating impact on 
individuals and societies in this region and elsewhere. 
  Syria is not looking for a reward from anyone for its 
anti-drug and anti-terror efforts. Syria would not have issued 
this statement if it were not for the attempts of certain 
circles in the United States to misrepresent facts and falsify 
records to advance political pressure that will only shake the 
confidence of the region in the role of the United States as an 
honest broker in the peace process. 

