Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Paris, Jan 20 (AFP) -- Georgia President Eduard 
Shevardnadze called Thursday [20 January] for an international 
inquiry into the the death of his predecessor and rival for 
power Zviad Gamsakhurdia. 
  Shevardnadze, in Paris for a two day official visit, also 
accused members of ultra-nationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky's 
Liberal Democratic Party of backing the Abkhazian separatist 
movement in western Georgia. 
  The republics of the former Soviet Union faced a double 
danger from "aggressive separatism ... and a resurgence of 
fascism," Shevardnadze added. 
  Gamsakhurdia's family, who announced his suicide at the 
start 
of the year, has opposed an inquiry. They are currently seeking 
to have the former president's body transferred from eastern 
Georgia to Abkhazia. 
  Shevardnadze, a former Soviet foreign minister, heaped 
praise 
on Russian President Boris Yeltsin. 
  In Russia there was "no alternative" to Yeltsin who 
displayed 
heroism in crushing last October's parliamentary rebellion and 
in withstanding the August 1991 coup during the last months of 
the Soviet Union, he told a press conference. 
  New Russian friendship and troops last year helped 
Shevardnadze defeat Gamsakhurdia's rebels as they staged an 
insurgency in western Georgia in a bid to bring the ousted 
leader back to power. 
  Yeltsin is expected to seal the warmer relationship between 
Tbilisi and Moscow and discuss energy and a range of bilateral 
economic issues on a visit to Georgia next month. 
  Shevardnadze stressed that Russian help was a key to solving 
the separatist rebellion in Abkhazia. Russian interests would 
not be served by a victory for the separatists which would 
boomerang against Moscow, he added. 
  In a separate meeting with French business leaders, 
Shevardnadze said France could make a great contribution to 
exploiting his country's assets and pulling it out of a 
catastrophic recession. French investment in Georgia is 
currently almost non-existent. 
  The Georgian leader is looking to stimulate French interest 
by gaining support from French Industry Minister Edmond 
Alphandery, whom he meets Friday, in measures to overcome 
investment obstacles. 
  Georgia is in a "stabilisation phase," said Shevardnadze. 
"The threat of civil war is disappearing." 
  Economic reform would continue in spite of past errors such 
as the privatisation of land and the hasty departure from the 
rouble zone, he said. 
  Industrial production in Georgia is in free fall with an 
average decline of around 15 percent a month. Annual inflation 
stands at 1,500 percent per year and the budget deficit has 
reached around 80 per cent of gross national product. That 
figure is likely to rocket further with levels of government 
spending four times higher than receipts. 
  Industry, responsible for around 46 per cent of the 
country's 
wealth, is working at less than a third of capacity because of 
energy shortages. Georgia is heavily reliant on Russia for its 
energy needs. 

