BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, June 04, BNS -- Major General Aleksander 
Einseln, the commander-in-chief of the Estonian Defense Forces, 
stated at a press conference Saturday that all details 
pertaining to Estonian-Israeli relations must be made known to 
the public. 
  "The arms deal with Israel is like an ulcer in today's 
Estonia that threatens to poison the whole organism. Everything 
connected with the TAAS Israel Industries Ltd. has given rise 
to mistrust and intrigues. The only way to get rid of the 
abscess is to cut it open," the general said. 
  The Estonian Government concluded the controversial arms 
deal 
with TAAS in January 1993 and the parliament ratified it behind 
closed doors in December. The price of the weapons Estonia 
bought, over 49 million U.S. dollars, is to be paid in two 
parts by Feb. 1, 2000. 
  Einseln said if all particulars of the deal were made public 
there'd be "no room for reciprocal accusations and allegations 
of dishonesty and corruption." 
  "Estonian people's money has been used to buy the weapons 
and 
the government has the obligation to prove that it was done 
honestly and legally. The people have the right to demand an 
explanation," the general maintained. 
  In his opinion, an independent commission to look into the 
deal should be set up and all its findings made public. 
  Einseln asked President Lennart Meri on May 31 to accept his 
resignation. One of the reasons behind his decision, he said, 
is that Prime Minister Mart Laar didn't tell him about plans for 
cooperation with Israel in the defense sphere. 
  Einseln found out May 16 that an Estonian-Israeli working 
group had been set up to deal with, among other issues, national 
defense problems. 
  "Laar didn't reply to my inquiries, but produced halftruths 
or lies. By now it's become clear that also Ants Laaneots, the 
former chief of Defense Forces general staff, concealed 
information from me," Einseln told BNS. 
  Laar had in February a meeting with a group of Israeli 
officials led by General Dan Shomron at which Estonia's security 
and defense concept and prospects for defense cooperation 
between the two countries were discussed. Also, a joint working 
group was then set up. 
  The government press service, however, denied Einseln's 
accusations and maintained that neither the government nor 
ministries had signed any pacts or agreements without informing 
the Defense Forces general staff. 
  "Information is not kept secret in a democratic state. I 
didn't know until recently that I was being lied to and that 
information was purposely withheld from me. I don't get mixed 
up in dirty business like politics, so it's all the same to me 
who's the prime minister or who's the defense minister. I do my 
duty and deal with the Estonian Defense Forces," the general 
told reporters. 
  Einseln also said he was surprised at the role Leonid 
Apananski, a private person, has played in Estonian-Israeli 
relations. 
  "It's absurd that Apananski the private person should be 
empowered by the Foreign Ministry to handle questions of 
national defense and I know nothing about it," he said. 
  The defense forces commander declared he was disappointed 
with Estonian reporters, since they'd failed to bring to light 
the behind-the-scenes workings of Estonian-Israeli relations. 
  "In a democratic state it's the journalists who uncover such 
things," he said. "I hope you'll do your job better in the 
future and bring such deals to light." 

