CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zeljko Garmaz: "Where Are the Politicians </F>
Headed?"] 
  [Text] Leo (23 July to 22 August) -- "These persons 
of pronounced sincerity and an open character face indifference 
and internal conflicts in this period. There will be unplanned 
costs. Perhaps an unpleasant visit in the near future. Lack of 
self-confidence will be more pronounced in this period. There 
will be illness because of poor diet. Have your eyes checked. 
Advice: POSTPONE TRAVEL!" 
  This is the horoscope of this period for those born under 
the 
sign of Leo. Since no one has been able to "travel" from 
Sarajevo for a long time now, the message of Dzevad Nogic, who 
writes the horoscope in the Sarajevo paper NARODNE NOVINE, seems 
meaningless. But.... 
  SARP -- SARAJEVSKI POTROSAC is the newspaper of consumers 
and 
users of services; the Consumers Association of Sarajevo is its 
founder and publisher. As stated in the introductory material, 
"although funds were lacking and the conditions were difficult, 
it has come out five times in a printing of 5,000 copies each, 
aimed exclusively at providing the best possible information to 
consumers and the public in the besieged city and in the 
struggle for survival." 
  And the reports to the "consumers and the public" are 
written 
in the conditional tense, like the news from the B-H Electric 
Power Company: "Should 70 megawatts be available, Sarajevo will 
have power every day, reduction will be limited, provided 
inhabitants of the new parts of the city do a better job of 
guarding transformer oil!" Or again an advertisement of the 
firm Marketi: "If the blockade is lifted from the city and the 
roads are opened, this firm wants to say that it will be able to 
supply foodstuffs to all the inhabitants of Sarajevo!" 
<H5>  Privileged Journalists </H5>
  Although the introduction to SARP -- SARAJEVSKI POTROSAC 
emphasizes the publisher's intention of making this newspaper 
independent one day, a real newspaper of Sarajevo's public and 
consumers, the two advertisements chosen at random do little to 
support that. 
  There is nowhere in the world today where it is such a 
privilege to be a journalist as in Sarajevo! Writing in the 
newspapers or publishing newspapers, even altogether "small 
ones," means exemption from military conscription, but also, and 
this is still more important to people in Sarajevo, the sole 
possibility for obtaining an UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] 
press card with which it is possible to leave the city legally 
on aircraft of the UNHCR [UN High Commissioner for Refugees]. 
  Although some 30 newspapers are "coming out" in the city, it 
is impossible to speak at all seriously about the newspaper 
scene in Sarajevo. For a large number of journalists publishing 
the first issue of some new Sarajevo paper serves the sole 
purpose of obtaining a press card -- the only "exit visa" from 
surrounded Sarajevo. Most of these newspapers cease publication 
after the first or second issue, and their journalists, thanks 
to the press cards, become smugglers bringing goods every day 
from Ancona or Split to sell on the Sarajevo market.... 
  What the UNPROFOR press card is "worth in Sarajevo" is 
indicated by the fact that a large number of people are ready to 
pay even several thousand German marks for it; this is the value 
placed on it by the "black market." So the number of almost 600 
press cards issued in Sarajevo is not illogical at all in view 
of the circumstances. 
  So, "horoscopes" and "consumer advice" are not nonsensical 
at 
all: If a newspaper is to be published (and that is a condition 
for issuing a press card), it still has to be filled with some 
kind of content! 
<H5>  Paper From Humanitarian Aid </H5>
  One basic feature of all the papers being published in 
Sarajevo is the very difficult conditions for supply. "A month 
and a half ago, when we started our paper, we intended to put 
out the first serious regular political weekly in this country. 
But after we published two issues, problems arose with paper, 
and now we come out about every 10 or 12 days in a modest print 
run of a few thousand copies. The entire run is sold out the 
same day," Senad Avdic, editor in chief of the "weekly" BOSNA, 
relates. 
  "By and large there is no paper in Sarajevo, and what we 
manage to get comes mainly through humanitarian aid. 
OSLOBODJENJE, which in professional terms is the strongest 
newspaper firm in Sarajevo, has alone been able to secure a 
constant supply of newsprint through the UNHCR, and they are 
also the only ones who have managed to maintain daily 
publication," Senad Avdic explains. 
  The example of BH DANI, an occasional newspaper edited by 
Senad Pecanin, best illustrates how hard it is to keep up a 
publishing schedule when "impeding the newspapers for political 
reasons" is added to the chronic problem of the paper shortage. 
"The other day we published the issue sent to the printer's two 
months ago!" Pecanin says. The reason for that tardiness was a 
dispute over a photograph of Alija Izetbegovic taken in the 
vault of the National Bank of B-H just before going off to bed. 
The authorities also reproached us because of an article about 
"SDZ [Democratic Action Party] Democracy," which said: 
``Recently a successful young Sarajevo executive was offered the 
post of chairman of the executive committee of the assembly of 
Centar Opstina in Sarajevo. The end of the negotiations between 
the authorities and the executive went something like this: 
  `...But you would have to join.' 
  `Join what?' 
  `Well, the party.' 
  `Which party?' 
  `Is there more than one?''' 
  Such approaches by a majority of the leaders of the 
Democratic Action Party of B-H have now become a habit. Not only 
do other parties not exist for them (nor for Radio-TV B-H), but 
even government institutions, the B-H Army, the police, the 
universities, the Islamic Community, and the media, are 
beginning to be treated as support services of the SDA.... 
  Pecanin considers "his" newspaper entirely autonomous and 
independent of the government, by contrast with the papers that 
come out regularly, which he says are under the direct tutelage 
of the government, the SDA, the B-H Army, the Islamic Religious 
Community.... 
  His fellow journalists, on the other hand, say that BH DANI 
"fell from the sky and has nothing to do with reality." 
<H5>  Hairdos and Panties </H5>
  "BH DANI is more an informal magazine than a serious and 
relevant newspaper," says Senad Avdic, editor in chief of BOSNA. 
He backs up his statement with a quote from that newspaper: "At 
a time when the survival of B-H is in jeopardy, how can BH DANI 
be concerned with hairdos and panties?" 
  Senad Pecanin, however, explains that "his newspaper" only 
wants to preserve those "urban characteristics which 
distinguished Sarajevo" and he announces that the next issue 
(when it comes out) will run to 106 pages! His optimism is 
stimulated by the unceasing financial support reaching him from 
abroad. 
  LJILJAN, "the national political newspaper," is the complete 
opposite of BH DANI: 
  "We said every teravija and namaz 
[Muslim prayers], and we fasted. A miracle occurred on the 
seventh day of Koran Bajram. A stray sheep came to our door.... 
Thus we also had Korban!" The priority given to Islamic 
religious customs, the war rhetoric (headlines like "The Thunder 
of the Resistance Resounded to the Heavens" or "Punish Them, 
Almighty God" or again "I Am Proud of My Son Sehid") have 
resulted in a circulation of nearly 60,000! 
  Nevertheless, we should mention that Sarajevo is not the 
only 
place where the paper is printed and sold (Maribor, Frankfurt, 
Istanbul). Five thousand copies are distributed in the city 
itself. 
  It is of interest that LJILJAN began to come out in Zagreb, 
and then it had to move to Maribor because its distribution was 
banned. Asked why overnight they began to call the Croats 
ustashi, Nedzad Laric, one of the editors, visibly flustered, 
replied: "Well, I had to do something to force my people to wage 
war and think with their own heads!" 
  But in spite of the "normalization of Croat-Muslim relations 
in Bosnia," he "never again wants to find a place for Ante Rosa 
nor Jadranko Prlic, nor..." in his paper. 
<H5>  Opposition Papers </H5>
  Fahrudin Radoncic, at one time correspondent in Podgorica 
and 
Sarajevo for DANAS in Zagreb and the spokesman for Sefer 
Halilovic, the discharged chief of the general staff of the B-H 
Army, like most of his colleagues, wants BOSNJACKI AVAZ to take 
a solid place of its own under the sun in Sarajevo media space. 
However, even Radoncic cannot print his newspaper in Sarajevo in 
a printing larger than a few thousand copies. 
  "In my judgment," Senad Avdic, BOSNA editor, said, "this 
newspaper could sell 60,000 copies in all of B-H without any 
problem at all. But even if we found that much paper, it would 
cost us about half a million marks!" 
  That is, just like every other commodity on the Sarajevo 
market, newsprint can be obtained exclusively through 
well-established smuggling channels. 
  Until the procurement of paper is normalized, and also until 
young professional journalists in Sarajevo mature, newspaper 
publishing will come down to more or less serious attempts which 
have yet to obtain professional confirmation and confirmation 
from the market. 
  For the present, one can only suspect that OSLOBODJENJE and 
VECERNJE NOVINE, the two daily papers, and BOSNA, LJILJAN, 
BOSNJACKI AVAZ, and BH DANI, which are occasional papers or 
future weeklies, have the best chance. 
  In the meantime, the papers that are coming out today, like 
SARAJEVO TIMES, BEHAR, ABC MAGAZIN, SARP, NARODNE NOVINE, and so 
on, will serve only as a cover for the true intentions of their 
founders. And also as evidence that there is no limit to human 
resourcefulness.... 

