Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 21 Jan (XINHUA) -- The eighth session of 
the Sino-U.S. Joint Economic Committee took place in Beijing 
today. The meeting issued a joint statement here today. The 
full text follows: 
  1. At the invitation of Chinese Finance Minister Liu 
Zhongli, U.S. Treasury Secretary Bentsen paid an official visit 
to China January 19-22, 1994. During his visit, Secretary 
Bentsen and Minister Liu co- chaired the eighth session of the 
Sino-U.S. Joint Economic Committee which met on January 21, 
1994. Secretary Bentsen also met with President Jiang Zemin, 
Premier Li Peng, and Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji. The Joint Economic 
Committee [JEC], in its new formulation, is designed to provide 
an integrated framework for addressing economic issues of mutual 
interest between the United States and the People's Republic of 
China. 
  2. In a cordial and frank discussion, the two ministers 
agreed that the committee would meet annually, alternating 
between the United States and China. The discussions under this 
framework are aimed at promoting three shared objectives: 
  -- Continued growth in trade and investment ties which have 
vast potential for benefiting both economies; 
  -- China's successful implementation of market oriented 
economic reform and integration into the world economy; and 
  -- Improvement of the legal and regulatory system so as to 
increase transparency and promote deeper economic ties. 
  3. To advance the dialogue on particular issues of immediate 
interest, secretary Bentsen and minister Liu agreed to establish 
initial working groups at the sub-cabinet level in three 
important areas: 
  -- Monetary and banking issues 
  -- Exchange system reform 
  -- Investment and economic cooperation 
  The ministers agreed that the working groups should meet at 
six month intervals, or as necessary, in order to report 
progress to the annual meetings of the JEC. The co-chairs 
agreed to designate officials to coordinate the technical 
assistance being provided under the auspices of the working 
groups. 
  4. On behalf of President Clinton, Secretary Bentsen stated 
that the United States supports a strong, stable, prosperous, 
and modernizing China. Moreover, the United States commends 
China's recent decisions to move forward with market-oriented 
reforms of its monetary and banking system, tax system, and 
foreign exchange system. The secretary offered to intensify the 
program of technical support for reform, drawing on the 
expertise of U.S. Government agencies: 
  -- The Treasury Department, including: The Internal Revenue 
Service, U.S. Customs Service, the office of the Comptroller of 
the Currency, 
  -- The Securities and Exchanges Commission; and 
  -- The Federal Reserve Board. 
  Secretary Bentsen also announced that Chairman of the 
Federal 
Reserve Board Alan Greenspan has offered to travel to China this 
year to discuss monetary issues in the reform process. 
  5. Secretary Bentsen welcomed China's decision to unify its 
exchange rates and improve importers' access to foreign 
exchanges as important steps on the road to GATT accession and 
to full convertibility. The United States expressed its staunch 
support for China's achievement of contracting partner status on 
the basis of the memorandum of understanding on market access 
signed by the two countries. 
  6. Secretary Bentsen highlighted the U.S. interests in 
supporting China's efforts to develop and reform its domestic 
capital markets, including improving opportunities for the 
participation of foreign financial institutions. 
  7. Secretary Bentsen also commended recent efforts made by 
China to implement the memorandum of understanding on market 
access signed by the two countries. Secretary Bentsen welcomed 
the recent conclusion of an agreement on textile trade and 
China's agreement to start services negotiations in February. 
At the same time, secretary Bentsen noted that many barriers 
persist and stressed the importance of further liberalization of 
China's trade regime. Secretary Bentsen also emphasized the need 
for China to open its services markets and improve enforcement 
of intellectual property protection. 
  8. Minister Liu Zhongli noted that the United States is the 
most developed economy in the world in terms of its economic 
strength and technological attainments, and the healthy growth 
of its economy has a significant bearing on the overall world 
economy. Minister Liu Zhongli indicated great interest in 
President Clinton's deficit reduction package and welcomed the 
resulting improvement in the U.S. economic activity. 
  9. Minister Liu Zhongli welcomed Secretary Bentsen's offer 
to provide and expand U.S. technical assistance for China's 
reforms, and appreciated the United States' continued staunch 
support for China's attainment of GATT contracting party status. 
Minister Liu also hoped that the U.S. would remove obstacles to 
the growth in trade with China and further relax restrictions on 
high technology exports to China. 
  10. Minister Liu outlined the recent reforms in China's 
foreign exchange system, including the unification of the dual 
exchange rate system at a single exchange rate responsive to 
market forces and the elimination of the requirement for 
official approval of most foreign exchange transactions on the 
current account. Minister Liu also indicated that China 
intended to achieve, over time, convertibility of the renminbi. 
  11. Minister Liu indicated that China will, on an 
experimental basis, allow foreign financial institutions to 
engage in renminbi denominated business and will further expand 
the geographic areas open to foreign financial institutions to 
some additional major cities. 
  12. Minister Liu stated that China has made earnest efforts 
to implement the existing memoranda of understanding [MOU] 
signed by the two governments. He expressed the hope that both 
sides will continue friendly negotiations on the unresolved 
issues in the process of implementation of the MOUs. 
  13. Secretary Bentsen and Minister Liu noted the keen 
interest of both countries in regional cooperation aimed at 
promoting sustained growth, improved economic relations, and 
further economic cooperation. Secretary Bentsen invited 
Minister Liu to attend the APEC finance ministers' meetings to 
be held early this year. Minister Liu accepted the secretary's 
invitation. Both leaders indicated their strong support for 
APEC related activities and hope that the finance ministers' 
meetings will promote economic cooperation in the Asia-Pacific 
region. 

