Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Udo Bergdoll: "The Superiority of the Gentle </F>
Smile; An Astounding Self-Confidence Helps Economics Minister 
Guenter Rexrodt Avoid Being Distracted by Criticism of His 
Performance"] 
  [Text] Whatever they are saying about him--that he is 
looking for, but unable to find, a distinctive personal image 
for himself; that even after 13 months in office, he has 
remained an outsider in Bonn's political machine; that, for the 
public, he has remained an unknown--Guenter Rexrodt accepts all 
of it with the gentle smile of superiority. He does not mind if 
people, who want to make a name for themselves at his expense, 
claim that he has also remained in the shadow of his 
pre(pre-pre-pre)cursor Otto Count Lambsdorff. He is in 
fact--unlike the sequence of Bangemann, Haussmann, Moellemann--a 
true expert in his job as federal economics minister. Never mind 
that they accuse him of talking a lot of hot air, while showing 
little action; that the industrial leaders are more interested 
in Rudolf Scharping's understanding of the industrial world than 
in his. Guenter Rexroadt can apparently live with that. "I am 
very satisfied with my degree of fame," he says, getting rid of 
any doubt. "In their first years, neither Kohl nor Genscher were 
any better known." 
  Those who have failed to notice it, pay attention: This man, 
who at one point used to be Berlin's finance senator, who then 
worked as a banker and served in the Trust Agency as manager, is 
pursuing certain goals in his political life. The successor of 
Ludwig Erhard and Karl Schiller believes that he is the right 
man for the right time; somebody who has an easy understanding 
of the "revolutionary changes" Germany has undergone and who 
knows exactly what way things are going; who will know how to 
make himself heard without saying what people want to hear, 
"without any demagogy." He "only wants to tell the truth," 
regardless of how painful it is. "Even in Bonn, where I am more 
and more accepted," the minister, who in no way wants to fit in 
with the other members of Helmut Kohl's cabinet, states without 
false modesty. 
  But who is Guenter Rexrodt? Even his critics have no doubt 
that he knows what keeps the show going, that he has enough 
ideas on how to rescue the German economy from bankruptcy. 
However, is this economics minister a politician as well? Is he 
patient enough for the often cumbersome ways, that is, the only 
ways to reach specific goals? Does he have any inkling of the 
pitfalls of political maneuvering? On its campaign posters for 
the Bundestag elections, the FDP [Free Democratic Party] will 
list Rexrodt behind Klaus Kinkel. Next to the foreign minister 
and party chairman, he is the key man the Liberals can offer to 
the public. He is saddled with the thankless job of being the 
symbol of economic ability in--of all places--the trough of the 
hitherto most severe recession. He can defy managers and 
bankers. He is self-confident in his demeanor. But how will the 
public receive him? It is also a matter of winning the minority 
who wants to see the country overcome the paralysis? This is 
exactly what causes some Liberals to ask the worrisome question: 
Will he be able to deliver the people he is addressing? 
  Hannover, pedestrian zone, FDP booth with a jazz band. In 
five days, Lower Saxony is going to the polls. The pollsters 
give the Liberals plus or minus 5 percent. Voters have the 
opportunity to talk with the actual Federal Minister of 
Economics. The very fact that he is 1.90m tall makes the man in 
the elegant black cashmere overcoat tower over the group of 
passersby. "Working less for the same money, that time is gone," 
he explains to a young man in a trenchcoat. In the future, it 
must be possible, if necessary, to work less for less money. And 
those--primarily the middle class--who want to work harder must 
also get more money. The minister wants to abolish all "rigid 
regulations." The country, with its intelligent and industrious 
people, already finds itself in the center of the revolution, he 
notes. And it looks like this: No governmental labor offices, 
but small private businesses around the corner will create new 
jobs. Mature citizens will shop when and where they want. Of 
course, this cannot be accomplished without the FDP because the 
large popular parties--look at store closings and Kohl's 
caving-in to the lobby--have no longer the strength to change 
everything. But the economics minister with his modest 
abilities, whose operative influence hardly ever goes beyond a 
couple of pots of subsidies, cannot do it either. His only 
influence is if his warnings hit a nerve. 
<H5>  Everybody Has To Look Up to Him </H5>
  Most people who stop in the pedestrian zone do so because 
they want to rub shoulders with the important political bigshot. 
But with him, that is impossible. "Party of the entrepreneurs," 
a recipient receiving social security benefits is shouting. 
"When you scream, you are wrong," Rexrost replies, "You must 
talk in a low voice, very low voice." Another refers to his 
"disillusionment with politics." In a tone that seems to 
indicate that he is grateful to that person for giving him the 
cue, the minister shoots back: "This is empty talk. Get 
involved. Throw us out, but vote for Democratic 
politicians"--earlier, some of the bystanders had mentioned that 
they were Republicans. Now the minister is accused of "social 
dismantling." "Out of 1,000 billion" [as published]--Rexrodt 
repeats that figure three times--15 have been laid off, "a mere 
1.5 percent." Whoever is talking of dismantlement, is "blind." 
And when the minister, untouched, does not react to the 
accusation that his party boycotts long-term care insurance, a 
passerby blurts out: "You are quite a clever man. But not for 
the people who are standing here." This accuser as well gets a 
smile from the minister. Everybody has to look up to him. He is 
beaming down on them. Although closely crammed together, almost 
touching one another, because otherwise, the jazz band makes it 
impossible to hear each other, the minister keeps an imaginary 
distance that could be measured in kilometers. 
  Later, Guenter Rexrodt contradicts--with a smile--the 
observation that, although he might impress an audience, he 
would be unable to warm it up. He wants to know whether they had 
noticed what a good listener he really was, "This is one of my 
strengths." However, in a pedestrian zone, he notes, it is 
impossible to persuade people. That is the function of party 
conventions, Bundestag debates, congresses. There he tends to 
fire away quite differently. How can such self-confidence be 
shattered? Perhaps, by citing Lambsdorff and trying the thesis 
that, as the last Bundestag debate of the German position had 
demonstrated, the count was the better speaker. Wrong! Whenever 
he is writing his own speeches, they have a "sensational" 
effect, such as at the FDP's Three Kings convention. Rexrodt on 
the offensive. If he does not use texts prepared by his 
advisors--and that cannot be avoided in some instances because 
he lacks the time to draft them himself--but speaks 
extemporaneously, "then I am really a knockout." With such 
confessions, the reporter's note pad is getting full. 
  This economics minister does not hide his light under the 
bushel. Incidentally, a few days earlier, the East Asian Society 
in Hamburg--all of them businessmen and bankers--awarded Rexrodt 
for his speech with a "standing ovation." On the other hand, his 
relations with association presidents are not particularly warm. 
"They keep moaning and groaning into my ears, while they 
themselves have nothing to say," he told his colleagues. He 
rarely sees President Hans Peter Stihl of the Federation of 
Chambers of German Industry and Commerce. His contact with BDI 
[Federation of German Industries] President Tyll Necker is 
somewhat closer, but such in nature that the Economics Ministry 
is familiar with the sigh, "He has been sniggering behind my 
back again." 
  No, although as a politician, Guenter Rexrodt is a loner, he 
is not a man without idiosyncracies. It just has not yet gotten 
around how he feels about the "eavesdropping attack" or NATO 
expansion. In the Cabinet, he only talks about subjects related 
to his own area. And what about the FDP Presidium, to which he, 
as a minister, has access? "I intentionally am keeping a low 
profile," is how Rexrodt explains his political abstinence from 
anything that has nothing to do with economics. "I do not want 
to get into everything like Zampano." Rather he would like to 
convey the feeling, "The man knows what he is talking about." 
Not until 18 March, when he will be elected head of the Berlin 
FDP--which is known as a pool of sharks--and only after he has a 
Bundestag mandate, will he show what he is made of. 
  With whom could this Rexrodt be compared? Not with 
Hans-Dietrich Genscher. "He is essentially a populist, and that 
I am not," he defines himself. "I am different, straightforward, 
calling a spade a spade. I am always telling the truth. The time 
for populist politics is gone." His relationship with Genscher 
is not bad, Rexrodt notes in an effort to avoid 
misunderstandings. After all, his father in the GDR used to be 
Genscher's local chairman of the Liberals there. But once in a 
while, there have been some fireworks between Genscher and 
Rexrodt in the FDP Presidium. For instance, when Rexrodt 
described social security benefits as being unstable (he did so 
because, as a politician, he wants to tell the truth), calling 
those who screamed "outmoded" populist types, such as Norbert 
Bluem. Genscher sarcastically inquired in the Presidium about 
the FDP's official view on what one person had said over the 
weekend. This did not just provoke a mere crackling; sparks were 
flying. Rexrodt prefers to be compared with Lambsdorff. He noted 
that he is "just like him," an "economic liberal." And they are 
"no heartless fools," but people who know that the economy is a 
means to an end, that is, it should benefit the largest possible 
number of people. With Klaus Kinkel, Rexrodt maintains a 
nonrelationship. And foreign policy? To put it plainly: In the 
Bonn Cabinet, Rexrodt already is a minister of the Berlin 
Republic. "I am not a West European," he admits. "In terms of 
mentality, Poland and Hungary are closer to our people." 
  Rexrodt was born in Berlin. His mother died during a 
night-time bomb attack. After the war, his father--in the Weimar 
Republic, Reichs executive secretary of the Democratic 
Party--became one of the cofounders of the LDPD [Liberal 
Democratic Party of Germany], which later on turned into a 
fringe party. The son lived with relatives in Thuringia because 
his father fled to West Berlin. Shortly before the Wall was 
built, Guenter Rexrodt got out as well, enrolled as a part-time 
student of business administration at the Free University and 
made a career for himself at the Chamber of Commerce. He widened 
his horizon in New York, where he worked as a banker at Citibank 
headquarters office until he joined the board of its Frankfurt 
branch. Still, the Western orientation of the Bonn Republic 
remained alien to him. "Emotionally, my orientation is toward 
the East." He studied Russian until he graduated from high 
school and then acquired his knowledge of the Wall 
Street-American language in New York. At the Trust Agency, he 
was in charge of privatizing the construction industry, the 
textile industry, agriculture, and responsible for Special 
Assets. 
  Above his desk in Bonn, the economics minister has, in a 
frame, a black-red-gold flag, an heirloom of the Pauls-Church 
period. It explains, without saying so, that Rexrodt sees 
himself following the tradition of German liberalism, that 
"revolution" has a positive sound to him, too. The upper-class 
tradition he continues on today's barricades against 
overregulation gives this man, who is often treated with 
hostility, his astounding self-confidence. If necessary, one can 
imagine him as part of a rainbow coalition. About the Greens' 
Joschka Fischer, whom he appreciates as a discussion partner, 
Guenter Rexrodt says: "He is much more conservative than I." 

