BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on environmental issues monitored through 5 May: 
  ARGENTINA 
  The Naval Prefecture reported on 25 April that more than 
20,000 liters of diesel oil spilled into the sea after the 
Capitan Rey tug collided with the Alvamara II fishing vessel at 
the port of Ingeniero White, in Bahia Blanca. (Buenos Aires 
NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS in Spanish 1904 GMT 25 Apr 94) 
  BOLIVIA 
  The Titicaca Lake Subregional Organization has reported that 
the Peruvian city of Puno is responsible for 80 percent of the 
Titicaca Lake contamination. It stated that despite efforts, 
the pollution level continues to increase, and many species of 
birth and fish could die out. (La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 14 
Apr 94 p 6) 
  The Oruro Development Corporation will clean up the Uru-Uru 
and Poopo Lakes, which have been contaminated by mining 
activities for many years. Agronomist Jaime Ramirez Velazques, 
the Fishing Development Center deputy director, said that the 
intense mining activity has completely destroyed the flora and 
fauna through the indiscriminate dumping of chemicals into the 
lakes. (Cochabamba LOS TIEMPOS in Spanish 26 Apr 94 p A10) 
  BRAZIL 
  The first aeolic power plant will begin operation on 27 
April 
in Serra do Camelinho, in the municipality of Curvelo, Recife, 
Pernambuco State. The plant will supply the energy through the 
Minas Gerais Power Company. Researcher Everaldo Alencar Feitosa 
said Brazil has the aeolic power production technology. The 
Federal Universities of Pernambuco, Rio Grande do Sul, Parana, 
and Rio de Janeiro have conducted advanced studies on this 
alternative power source. (Rio de Janeiro O GLOBO in Portuguese 
25 Apr 94 p 14) 
  Brazilian and National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
experts detected in October that the level of gas concentration 
in the ozone layer dropped between 15 to 20 percent over Santa 
Maria, Rio Grande do Sul State. Previous studies conducted by 
the National Institute of Space Research, INPE, showed that the 
ozone layer concentration was high in Brazil. (Sao Paulo FOLHA 
DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 26 Apr 94 Third Section p 3) 
  The National Environment Council on 4 May approved a 
resolution forbidding the import and export of radioactive 
products ``of any type, under any circumstances, and for any 
purpose, including recycling.'' The resolution will become 
effective 90 days after its publication in the official gazette. 
It states that importation will be allowed only ``in extremely 
necessary cases.'' (Sao Paulo O ESTADO DE SAO PAULO in 
Portuguese 5 May 94 p A18) 
  The Brazilian Institute for the Environment and Renewable 
Natural Resources, IBAMA, has issued a resolution stating that 
large-scale shrimpers will be compelled to use the Turtle Escape 
Device as of 7 May to avoid the accidental capture of turtles. 
Offenders will be fined or will have their catch confiscated. 
(Sao Paulo GAZETA MERCANTIL in Portuguese 2 May 94 p 14) 
  CHILE 
  Brazil and Chile are promoting a regional project in the 
city 
of Punta Arenas, 2,244 km south of Santiago, to measure 
ultraviolet radiation and its effects on the ozone layer with 
the help of balloons. The Punta Arenas Regional Council is 
partly financing the project in which academic organizations and 
the INPE are also participating. The balloons will measure the 
thickness of the ozone lawyer in Punta Arenas and in a great 
area of the Antarctica. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 2017 GMT 26 Apr 
94) 
  PARAGUAY 
  On 20 April, Industry and Commerce Minister Ubaldo Scavone 
dedicated a facility at the Cimplast Company which will produce 
biodegradable plastic packing material. A local firm has 
ordered 7,000,000 PVC jars in which to export instant coffee to 
the European market. (Asuncion ABC COLOR in Spanish 21 Apr 94 p 
14) 
  PERU 
  A fracture in the Nor-Peruano oil pipeline is seriously 
contaminating a vast jungle area of the Loreto Region with 
serious consequences for the flora and fauna. Approximately 
10,000 barrels of oil per day are being spilled into the Maranon 
River, a tributary of the Amazon River. (Lima LA REPUBLICA in 
Spanish 14 Apr 94 Political Section p 5) 

