CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Daymira Barriga Velarde: "Poverty Is Ours, and </F>
It Is Widespread"; first two paragraphs are editorial 
introduction] 
  [Text] An official report states that somewhat more than 
two thirds of the total population of Bolivia live in poverty. 
  About 37 percent of Bolivian families live in extreme 
poverty, 33 percent under conditions of moderate poverty, 13 
percent are at the threshold of poverty, and barely 17 percent 
have their basic needs satisfied. This is the official picture 
of poverty in Bolivia, described in the "Mapa de la Pobreza" 
[Map of Poverty], prepared by the Unit for the Analysis of 
Social Policies (UDAPSO), the National Institute of Statistics 
(INE), the Population Policy Unit (UPP), and the Unit for the 
Analysis of Economic Policies (UDAPE). 
  Social inequalities in Bolivia are extensive, as extensive 
and dramatic as the poverty in which about 70 percent of the 
people of Bolivia live, or rather more than two thirds of the 
population. Meanwhile, more than one half million, or 640,000 
people, are on the threshold of poverty, and only 17 percent of 
the Bolivian people, somewhat more than one million, are not 
poor. 
  Bolivia is not a country of beggars, as someone once defined 
it in a disparaging way. However, these data prove that the 
majority of the population of Bolivia, or 4.5 million people, 
live at an atrocious level of poverty. This is a high figure for 
this country, whose population was estimated at 6.4 million in 
1992. 
<H5>  Details of These Numbers </H5>
  The "Map of Poverty," prepared by UDAPSO, INE, UPP, and 
UDAPE, illustrates this study on the basis of data from the 
Census of the Population and Housing, which took 1.4 million 
family households as the national total, of which 1.3 million 
live in urban areas and 577,000 live in the countryside. 
  Poverty was measured on the basis of satisfying human needs 
for housing, services and basic needs, education, and health and 
social security. The study stated that the categories of 
housing, services, and basic needs relate to the way in which 
the family carries on its life, while education, health, and 
social security are related to the conditions of physical and 
mental development of persons. 
  The study added: "Levels of poverty in Bolivia are high. In 
1992 a considerable proportion of the population, especially in 
rural areas, did not have its essential needs satisfied, as it 
did not have adequate access to such services and basic needs as 
education, health services, and housing." 
<H5>  Poor As Anyone </H5>
  In 1992, 69.8 percent of the 1.4 million families surveyed 
were poor. This represents 70.5 percent of Bolivia's population, 
that is, 4.5 million out of 6.4 million people. 
  In the rural area, poverty affected 94 percent of all homes, 
or 2.3 million people living in 542,644 families. In the urban 
area poverty affected 51 percent of all homes, or 380,886 
families -- rather more than 1.7 million people. 
  According to these data, poverty was more extensive in 
smaller cities than in departmental capitals and in El Alto. 
  The report said: "Living conditions of the Bolivian people 
are, for the most part, poor, since many of the homes lack or 
are inadequately provided with basic cleanliness, living space, 
education, health, energy resources, and household equipment." 
  It continued: "About 74 percent of the homes do not have 
adequate water and sanitation and/or facilities for the disposal 
of human wastes. About 69 percent of the people live in 
overcrowded conditions. Some 66 percent show signs of 
educational shortcomings in terms of school attendance, years of 
schooling completed, and illiteracy." 
  The report stated: "About 53 percent of the families do not 
take adequate care of their health. Some 53 percent of private 
homes do not have access to electricity and/or an adequate fuel 
to cook with, and 49 percent of the homes are constructed of 
poor quality materials." 
<H5>  Differences Between the Countryside and the Cities </H5>
  The study also brought out that poverty is more extensive 
and 
worse in the countryside, where shortages of facilities, as a 
whole, are significant, although the most immediate needs 
reflect basic standards of cleanliness. 
  About 94 percent of the homes in rural areas do not have 
adequate water and sanitation and/or proper means for the 
disposal of human wastes, as well as access to energy services. 
About 93 percent of the homes do not have access to electricity 
and/or appropriate kind of fuel to cook with. The report, 
entitled, the "Map of Poverty," referred to the fact that some 
84 percent of all rural homes are built with poor quality 
materials. 
  In urban centers the greatest problems involve housing 
space. 
About 68 percent of families live in overcrowded conditions. 
Some 58 percent of homes in urban areas do not have adequate 
provisions for water, sanitation, and/or for the disposal of 
human wastes. About 51 percent of the families show some signs 
of educational deficiency, the report added. 
<H5>  The Census of the Poorest </H5>
  The list of departments in terms of their poverty level is 
headed by Pando, Potosi, and Chuquisaca. Santa Cruz is the 
department with the least poverty, but almost 60 percent of the 
families in that department are poor. 
  The "Map of Poverty" states that in the Department of Pando 
81 percent of the families are poor, compared to 80 percent in 
Potosi, and 77 percent in Beni and Cochabamba. 
  In the rest of the departments about 70 percent of the 
families are poor, with the exception of Santa Cruz, which has 
the lowest incidence of poverty. Some 58 percent of the families 
in that department are poor. 
  Of the four poorest departments three of them -- Chuquisaca, 
Pando, and Potosi -- have a high level of poverty. The report 
adds that poor families in these departments, on the average, 
fail to meet 45 percent of their basic needs in terms of minimum 
living conditions. 
<H5>  Classification of the Poor </H5>
  The social classification of the poor shows that out of all 
Bolivian families -- 1.4 million in all -- about 37 percent live 
under conditions of extreme poverty. About 32 percent of all 
families are destitute, while 5 percent live under conditions of 
marginal poverty. 
  The report prepared by UDAPSO, INE, UDAPE, and UPP said that 
this means that 2.1 million Bolivians live under conditions of 
extreme poverty. Seventy percent of their basic needs are not 
being met in terms of minimum living levels. 
  Furthermore, a large number, or 33 percent of the total 
number of families, live in moderate poverty. That is, something 
more than 1.9 million people, on the average, cover 75 percent 
of their minimum living requirements. 
  On the threshold of poverty are 13 percent of all families, 
or 787,907 people, who satisfy the minimum level of their basic 
needs. Only 17 percent of all families, or 915,593 persons, have 
their basic needs met. These people, on the average, satisfy 55 
percent more than their basic, essential needs. 
<H5>  The Harsh Life in the Countryside </H5>
  The official report states that the majority of families in 
rural areas -- 57 percent in all or 1.4 million people -- live 
under conditions of extreme poverty. About 11 percent, or 
265,118 people, live under marginal conditions. About 26 
percent, or 633,258 people, live under conditions of moderate 
poverty. Only 6 percent, or 118,226 people, are not poor. 
  Within this latter group of people living in rural areas the 
families whose basic needs are met amount to barely 1.9 percent, 
while 4.1 percent of the total number of families are on the 
threshold of poverty. 
  In urban areas the extent of poverty is not as great, the 
study said. 
  About 34 percent of families living in urban areas, or 1.3 
million people, live in moderate poverty. About 28 percent, or 
884,107 people, are in the group whose basic needs are met. Some 
20 percent, or 701,167 persons, live on the threshold of 
poverty. About 13 percent, or 427,970 persons, live in extreme 
poverty. Some 12 percent of the total number of families are 
destitute, and 0.5 percent live on the threshold of being 
destitute. 

