Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tension is mounting between Cameroon and Nigeria 
over the disputed ownership of the Bakassi Peninsula. Nigeria, 
which asserted yesterday that there was an unusual movement of 
Cameroonian troops at the border, said it was determined to 
defend its territorial integrity. A communique from the 
government emphasized that the flexibility of Nigeria's policy 
must not be taken as an inability to defend its territorial 
integrity. This statement has not left the Cameroonian 
authorities indifferent. During a press conference held 
yesterday in Addis Ababa following discussions with the OAU body 
in charge of preventing conflicts, Cameroonian External 
Relations Minister Leopold Ferdinand Oyono said that war can 
break out at any time. 
  This topic was at the center of discussions yesterday in 
Paris between Augustin Kontchou Kouomegni, Cameroonian minister 
of state in charge of communications, and French President 
Francois Mitterrand. After the audience, Mr. Kouomegni briefed 
Mamadi Youssoufou on his visit to France. 
  [Begin recording] [Kouomegni] We have delivered to the 
French 
authorities a message from the Cameroonian head of state. We 
discussed with them the conflict between Nigeria and Cameroon. 
We also discussed the situation on the ground and efforts being 
made on the diplomatic front and together we examined the 
prospects. 
  [Youssoufou] Can you give us an idea about President 
Francois 
Mitterrand's position on this border conflict between your 
country and Nigeria? 
  [Kouomegni] France's position is simple. France is firmly on 
the side of Cameroon to ensure that the border demarcation 
between Nigeria and Cameroon is respected. France, we are told, 
is strict on ensuring respect for international law throughout 
the world. 
  [Youssoufou] Does this means that you are maintaining your 
decision to bring the case before the UN Security Council? 
  [Kouomegni] The case is not only before the UN Security 
Council, but also before the OAU and the International Court of 
Justice. We are not dropping any of these proceedings. All the 
same, we are open to any other initiatives, either bilateral or 
multilateral. The most important thing for Cameroon is that 
both of these methods should create the hope for a real 
solution. [end recording] 

