BFN 

<F P=106> [By Reporter Wang Rantong (3769 3544 1749): "The Eighth </F>
Standing Committee Meeting of the Eighth Inner Mongolia 
Autonomous Regional People's Congress Ends"] 
  [Excerpts] After six days in session, the eighth standing 
committee meeting of the eighth regional people's congress ended 
on the afternoon of 31 May. 
  Wang Qun, chairman of the regional people's congress 
standing 
committee, chaired the meeting. Forty-six people were present 
at the meeting. They were Yu Xinglong, Liu Zuohui, Yi Junhua, 
Liu Zhenyi, Cui Weiyu, Jia Cai, Liu Zhen, and Liu Xiaowang, vice 
chairmen of the regional people's congress standing committee, 
and secretary general and members of the regional people's 
congress standing committee. 
  Present at the meeting as observers were Lin Yongsan, vice 
chairman of the regional people's congress standing committee; 
Ba Shijie, president of the regional higher people's court; and 
Zhang Hesong, chief procurator of the regional people's 
procuratorate. 
  The meeting approved the "Inner Mongolia Autonomous Regional 
regulations on handing incoming letters from the masses and 
receiving visitors," "the regional regulations on management of 
cultural markets," "the regional regulations on examination of 
law enforcement by the people's congress standing committees at 
various levels," "the regulations on the work of the league work 
committees under the regional people's congress standing 
committee," and "the regional methods for implementing 'the PRC 
law on safety of mines.'" 
  The meeting approved the "Hohhot city methods for management 
of public utilities" and the "Baotou city regulations on 
management of dismantlement and movement for urban construction." 
  The meeting approved the namelists of personnel appointments 
and removals. 
  Wang Qun, chairman of the regional people's congress 
standing 
committee, made a speech at the meeting. [passage omitted] 
  Present at the meeting as observers were responsible persons 
of the organs and various committees under the regional people's 
congress standing committee, the departments and bureaus 
concerned, the people's congress standing committees of the 
cities where districts are established, and the offices of the 
league work committees under the regional people's congress 
standing committee; some National People's Congress deputies; 
responsible persons of some banner, county, and city people's 
congress standing committees; and responsible persons of some 
regional democratic parties. 

