BFN 

  [Text] Jinan, April 14 (XINHUA) -- China's economy has 
benefited greatly from its close and fruitful cooperation with 
the World Bank during the past 14 years. 
  This was made clear by information released from the 
project- 
inspection meeting jointly held by the World Bank and the 
Chinese Ministry of Finance in east China's Shandong Province. 
  Since 1980, when the country restored its membership in the 
organization, loans provided or promised by the World Bank have 
totalled 16.9 billion U.S. dollars to back 131 projects in 
agriculture, energy, industry, banking and technological 
assistance. 
  Agriculture has always been a main area using World Bank 
loans, with projects covering soil amelioration, cultivation of 
improved varieties, breeding of aquatic products, forestry, 
harnessing of rivers and construction of irrigation facilities. 
  With a 60 million U.S. dollar World Bank loan, salinization 
of soil has been greatly alleviated and flood and drought have 
been well controlled in central China's Henan and east China's 
Shandong and Anhui Provinces. 
  According to a contract on the Yellow River project, the 
World Bank is to provide 360 million U.S. dollars for use in 
projects to prevent flooding, reduce the menace of ice floes and 
silt deposits from the riverbed, as well as to generate 
electricity. 
  This project will greatly promote the economic development 
in 
the regions on the middle and lower reaches of the Yellow River. 
  China's infrastructure construction is another major area to 
absorb World Bank loans. 
  Construction of seven hydro-electric power stations, 
including two of the country's largest -- Lubuge and Ertan -- 
which has greatly improved electricity supply of China, were 
funded by World Bank loans. 
  Renovation and expansion projects of almost all the 
country's 
harbors and the electrification and improvement of signal 
systems in seven railway projects have utilized loans provided 
by the World Bank. 
  Also thanks to World Bank loans, an expressway from Beijing 
to Tanggu by way of Tianjin and another from Jinan, capital of 
Shandong Province, to Qingdao, a coastal city in the same 
province, have been completed, adding two communication arteries 
in northern China. 
  China has also cooperated actively with the World Bank in 
education, environmental protection and improvement of medical 
services, especially projects of rural drinking-water supply and 
prevention and control of infectious diseases in backward 
regions. 
  The World Bank has highly praised China's implementation of 
projects. Four inspections carried out by the World Bank have 
proved that China is among the countries which have the most 
successful project operations. 
  Nicholas C. Hope, the new director of the bank's China and 
Mongolia office, expressed his satisfaction with China's strong 
management, efficient organization and loan repayments, during 
his visit to Shandong. 
  The World Bank has also carried out research into China's 
economy in coordination with some Chinese government departments 
and has provided policy and other useful advice to the country. 
  It will soon provide technological assistance for China's 
reform of its finance and tax systems and the improvement of its 
legal system, according to officials from the World Bank. 

