Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Presidential Council member brother 'Abd-al-'Aziz 
'Abd-al-Ghani yesterday evening received an Arab League 
delegation led by Staff Major General Muhammad Sa'id Bayraqdar, 
assistant secretary general and head of the League's General 
Department for Military Affairs. This delegation is currently 
visiting our country to acquaint itself with our country's 
political developments and follow up fraternal Arab efforts to 
resolve the problems and end the differences resulting from 
these developments. 
  Staff Maj. Gen. Bayraqdar conveyed the greetings of Arab 
League Secretary General brother 'Ismat 'Abd-al-Majid for the 
political leadership in our country. He also conveyed the 
eagerness of both 'Abd-al-Majid and the Arab League to make all 
possible efforts in order to halt the repercussions of the 
current political crisis and tackle it within the framework of 
caring for Yemeni unity as an important Arab achievement 
representing Arab hopes for restoring Arab solidarity and unity, 
particularly under the current circumstances the Arab nation is 
experiencing and under which Arab solidarity is suffering from 
weakness and collapse. 
  Bayraqdar stressed that the Arab League and his delegation 
are ready to extend aid and assistance and make the efforts 
required to contribute to resolving the political crisis and 
abating its repercussions, with the aim of preserving Yemeni 
unity and avoiding these repercussions. 
  For his part, brother 'Abd-al-'Aziz 'Abd-al-Ghani expressed 
our country's gratitude and appreciation for the Arab League 
secretary general and the head and members of this delegation 
for their sincere fraternal efforts to follow up political 
developments and repercussions resulting from the political 
crisis, and for their readiness to contribute to resolving this 
crisis. He thanked the delegation members for their sincere 
fraternal sentiments and their great pan-Arab care for 
safeguarding the Yemeni unity. 
  The brother Presidential Council member and the delegation 
reviewed aspects and factors of these developments and efforts 
that continue to be made in order to resolve the political 
crisis and end its repercussions in a way that guarantees the 
preservation of Yemeni unity and its gains, and tackles issues 
that led to these repercussions, in a spirit of collective 
responsibility by all national political forces and through 
complete care for the homeland's unity, by means of complete 
commitment to implementing all articles of the document of 
pledge and accord signed in Amman on 10 Ramadan [20 February]. 
  The brother Presidential Council member said: We are ready 
for full cooperation with the Arab League's efforts and other 
sincere fraternal efforts in order to resolve the political 
crisis and remove its repercussions in a way that will safeguard 
Yemen's unity and stability. 
  The meeting was attended by Staff Brigadier General 
'Abd-al-Malik al-Sayyali, chief of the general staff; His 
Excellency Ambassador Mahyub Mahyubi, adviser to the Arab League 
secretary general and head of the General Department for Arab 
Affairs; His Excellency Dr. Amin Sa'ati, member of the League's 
General Department for Arab Affairs; and minister 
plenipotentiary Yahya 'Ali al-Shami, deputy head of the Arab 
Homeland Department at the Yemeni Foreign Ministry. 

