BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 27 (CNS) -- The Chinese Vice Premier 
and Foreign Minister Mr. Qian Qichen and other officials went to 
the U.S. Embassy here this morning to express their condolences 
on the death of former U.S. President Mr. Richard M. Nixon. The 
Chinese President Mr. Jiang Zemin, the Premier Mr. Li Peng and 
Mr. Qian as well as another vice premier Mr. Zhu Rongji sent 
wreaths there. 
  The Chinese government decided yesterday that it would 
dispatch Vice Premier Mr. Zou Jiahua who was now visiting the 
United States to attend the funeral which would be held in Yorba 
Linda, California, the hometown to the former president. 
  Several Chinese leaders including Mr. Jiang Zemin, Mr. Li 
Peng, Mr. Zhu Rongji and Mr. Qian Qichen sent condolence 
messages to mourn Mr. Nixon's death the day after the former 
president died. They paid respects to this politician for his 
important role in international politics. 
  The Chinese leaders praised Mr. Nixon for his strategic 
farsightedness and political bravery when in his capacity as 
37th U.S. President together with Chinese leaders Mao Zedong and 
Zhou Enlai he opened the era of diplomatic ties between China 
and the United States. He visited China on seven occasions 
after stepping down. The last two visits to Beijing in October, 
1989, and April, 1993 were to deal with the Chinese leadership 
on solution to problems harming bilateral relations resulting 
from the "June 4 incident" and the granting of Most Favoured 
Nation status. 
  Mr. Nixon was the first U.S. President after World War II to 
visit China 22 years ago. He appeared at a welcoming banquet on 
the evening of February 21, 1972, and delivered a speech on 
behalf of the U.S. Government and the American people. He said 
in his speech that should the people of the United States and 
China make enemies of each other, the future of the entire world 
would be very gloomy. He added that were the people of the two 
powers to find common ground for cooperation, the chances for 
peace for the entire world would increase immeasurably. Mr. 
Nixon said in his speech that the two countries were once 
enemies and they still harboured great differences. He, 
however, noted that mutual interest was the factor to help them 
join together and go beyond the differences. 

