BFN 

<F P=106> ["Political Talk" column by Shih Chun-yu (2457 0689 3768): </F>
"Kim Il-song Says DPRK Will Not Provoke a War"] 
  [Text] Words From the Heart to Sihanouk 
  According to the latest issue of the FAR EASTERN ECONOMIC 
REVIEW published in Hong Kong yesterday (16 June), DPRK 
President Kim Il- song indicated to the United States, through 
Cambodian Head of State Prince Sihanouk: The DPRK has no 
intention of provoking a war. 
  The Cambodian head of state quoted Kim's remark when 
interviewed by the journal's Beijing-based correspondent. It 
happened that when holding talks with Sihanouk on 1 June, Kim 
said: The DPRK has no intention of provoking a war, but if it 
is attacked, it will put up strong resistance. He also asked 
the Cambodian head of state to pass this message to the United 
States. 
  Sihanouk stressed to the journal's correspondent: "Judging 
from President Il-song's words, I don't detect any hostility 
toward the United States." Although Sihanouk said he had not 
passed the message to the United States, he actually had done so 
by speaking to a FAR EASTERN ECONOMIC REVIEW correspondent. 
  We should believe the veracity of Kim's words,as quoted by 
Sihanouk. First, as a Cambodian head of state openly 
interviewed by the correspondent of a foreign journal, it is 
impossible for him to make out something out of nothing. 
Second, judging by the current situation on the Korean 
peninsula, the DPRK has taken a tough stand because it feels 
humiliated by the attitudes and tones of the United States and 
the IAEA on the DPRK nuclear issue. Owing to national sentiment 
and because it considers the other party unreasonable, the DPRK 
has reacted strongly. 
<H5>  DPRK Resents Acts of Nuclear Inspection </H5>
  When talking about the IAEA forcibly entering the DPRK's 
nuclear facilities to carry out inspections, Kim reportedly told 
Sihanouk: "This is a humiliating body search." "They want us to 
take off our coat, and then our underwear, and now our trousers 
and after that we will be nude, absolutely naked." 
  Through these resentful words Kim has expressed the DPRK's 
feeling of humiliation. This makes it necessary for both the 
United States and the DPRK to listen to China's stand. China 
calls on both parties to remain calm and restrained, and make 
every effort to resume dialogue as early as possible so as to 
avoid further deterioration in the situation. At least people 
should not resort to "Cold War" brinkmanship [zhan zheng bian 
yuan de leng zhan 2069 3630 6708 4878 4104 0397 2069]. 
  Jimmy Carter's talks in Pyongyang yesterday reportedly went 
well. The DPRK promised not to expel the two IAEA personnel from 
its territories. This is what is called "restraint." If the 
DPRK forcibly expels the IAEA personnel, it certainly will be 
denounced by the United Nations and the international community. 
Once the relations deteriorate and the war of words starts 
again, the situation will become serious. 
<H5>  The United States Does Not Want To Start a War Either </H5>
  Judging from the reality in the DPRK today, it is credible 
that Kim Il-song does not want war. On the U.S. side, Clinton 
frequently has muddled things up diplomatically since taking 
office, and for this reason he has been subjected to repeated 
attacks: The deployment of U.S. troops to and their withdrawal 
from Somalia, as well as its threats to send troops against the 
Haitian military government, have been opposed, and it 
shilly-shallies toward the civil war in Bosnia-Herzegovina and 
its efforts to lift arms embargo on the Bosnian Muslims are 
opposed by Russia. Its diplomatic difficulties have piled high 
as a mountain. 
  All these incidents show that Clinton often has been unable 
to make up his mind on major diplomatic issues. In the face of 
the current crisis in Korea, so far Clinton still can be 
regarded as being restrained. As some people within the U.S. 
Government also are skeptical about whether sanctions will work, 
and as China and Russia are against economic sanctions, it is 
hard for the United States to come out with a sanctions package. 
The hesitation on U.S. part shows that the United States is not 
ready and also cannot rashly take military action. 
  The talks Carter currently is holding in Pyongyang provide 
an 
opportunity for both parties to turn hostility into a resumption 
of talks. Since both parties are unwilling and unable to go to 
war, they -- with the participation of the countries concerned 
-- should give the matter further thought and discuss it later, 
in line with the principle of resolving disputes through peace 
talks so as to ease the crisis. 

