BFN 

<F P=106> [`kl'-signed report: "Dispute in the SPD Over Drug Policy"] </F>
  [Text] Duesseldorf -- An open row has erupted inside the 
SPD [Social Democratic Party] on the subject of drug policy. On 
Wednesday [18 May], Peter Struck, federal general manager of the 
SPD Bundestag Group, criticized the SPD North Rhine-Westphalian 
government's decision to permit the possession of smaller 
quantities of drugs, even hard drugs. The North 
Rhine-Westphalian government defended its own decision. Partly 
as a reaction against sharp criticism from the federal 
government, however, the Duesseldorf government underscored the 
"provisional" nature of Justice Minister Rolf Krumsiek's drug 
guidelines, and called for uniform German rules laying down 
penalties for violating the law on intoxicating substances. 
  According to a declaration released following a cabinet 
meeting on Wednesday, the waiving of criminal proceedings for 
the possession of small quantities of hard and soft drugs as 
suggested by Krumsiek does not mean a legalization of the 
possession of drugs, nor does it mean a relaxation of the 
practice of law enforcement bodies until now. With its 
decision, North Rhine-Westphalia is merely acting within the 
limits of feasibility. 
  Interior Minister Herbert Schnoor said that the Federal 
Government was criticizing the North Rhine-Westphalian 
government's decision merely to deflect attention away from the 
failure of its own drug policy, which was geared strictly to 
prosecution rather then therapy and prevention. Evidence of the 
failure of this policy is the fact that since 1982, over 10,000 
people have died as a result of a misuse of drugs, and almost 
100,000 have consumed drugs for the first time in their lives. 
  Although Minister-President Johannes Rau also supports the 
stance of his justice minister, members of the North 
Rhine-Westphalian government consider both the timing and the 
official reason for Krumsiek's decision to be wrong. They are 
especially critical of the fact that in his guidelines, the 
minister availed himself of the ruling of the Constitutional 
Court even though the Court has said nothing about the 
possession of smaller quantities of hard drugs. 
  According to AFP, Strick called on the justice ministers of 
the SPD-led land governments to find a common line of policy. 
Strick told DEUTSCHLANDFUNK that the SPD wants no unconditional 
prosecution of drug consumers if they only consume soft drugs 
for private purposes. But Krumsiek's position goes further than 
this, he said. On the other hand, Johannes Singer, the drug 
expert of the SPD Bundestag group, defended the North 
Rhine-Westphalia government's decision. 

