Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Hefei, February 11 (XINHUA) -- Wherever you travel 
across the country, you are likely to find farmers from Anhui 
Province working on construction sites, in markets or fields, or 
serving as housekeepers. 
  Many of them came from poor and remote areas of Anhui, and 
received technical training before going out to work. 
  While guiding farmers to work outside Anhui in a planned 
way, 
this east China province has set up more than 3,000 small towns 
specially for farmers. 
  More than five million people from the pool of surplus labor 
in the province were transferred to work in the urban areas last 
year. 
  One of China's major agricultural producers, Anhui has about 
50 million farmers. 
  To deal properly with its pool of surplus rural labor, Anhui 
has focused on boosting high-yield and efficient agriculture and 
rural industrial enterprises and accelerated the development of 
small towns. 
  Its township and village enterprises generated an output 
value totalling 110 billion yuan last year, an increase of 51.2 
billion yuan over the previous year, and the production output 
of livestock, poultry and aquatic products also registered a big 
increase. 
  A local official noted that the small towns have become 
industrial, trade, political and cultural centers in rural areas. 
  At present the province has 4,126 markets and fairs, ten of 
which each have transactions topping 100 million yuan a year. 
  Local governments also keep regularly in touch with cities 
outside the province, providing information for those farmers 
who want to find jobs there. They also offer training sessions 
for those farmers. 
  According to statistics from the provincial post service, 
local farmers working outside Anhui sent back more than 100 
million yuan to their families every month last year, mostly 
from coastal cities. 
  Many farmers have become successful businessmen locally 
after 
working in cities for several years. 

