SUMMARY 
                                Divisions within the Japanese business community, disagreements 
among members of the various government panels charged with 
examining deregulation, and infighting among key government 
ministries appear to be hindering the Japanese Government's 
efforts to draw up a package of measures to deregulate the 
Japanese economy.  These problems, together with opposition to 
some of the deregulation efforts by bureaucrats in a number of 
ministries, may limit the scope of the package that Tokyo will 
ultimately be able to compile. 
                         END SUMMARY 
   The Japanese Government's plans to deregulate the Japanese 
economy appear to be encountering resistance not only from the 
Japanese bureaucracy but also from elements of several other 
groups that are playing important roles in the government's 
efforts to pull together a package of deregulation measures.  For 
example, Japan's business community appears to be sharply divided 
over some of the proposals for deregulation.  Many larger 
companies and the business organizations that represent them 
appear to support deregulation in general because they believe it 
will help them recover from the current recession.  The 
Federation of Economic Organizations of Japan (Keidanren), 
Japan's largest business organization, reportedly presented a 
196-point proposal for deregulation to Prime Minister Tsutomu 
Hata on 13 May (Kyodo, 13 May) and its chairman, Shoichiro 
Toyoda, urged Hata to support thorough-going deregulation at a 
meeting on 30 May (Nihon Keizai Shimbun, 30 May).  Another group 
representing many large corporations, the Japan Association of 
Corporate Executives (Keizai Doyukai) has also lobbied for 
deregulation with various senior government officials, and, 
according to a 13 May Kyodo report, its chairman, Masaru Hayami, 
recently told Prime Minister Hata that deregulation was "vital" 
to Japan's economic recovery from its current recession (Kyodo, 
13 May). 
   By contrast, small and medium-sized companies appear to be 
worried that some deregulation proposals may hurt their 
competitiveness.  One of the major concerns of these smaller 
companies seems to be a proposal to relax the Large-Scale Retail 
Store Law that restricts the conditions under which larger 
retailers can do business.  According to the 26 May Nihon Keizai 
Shimbun, the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry and three 
organizations representing small and medium companies issued a 
joint statement on 25 May opposing any further easing of the 
Large-Scale Retail Store Law.  On 7 June, representatives of four 
small-business organizations, led by the Japan Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry's chairman, Kosaku Inaba, reportedly 
presented a petition arguing against further relaxation of the 
law to Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata (Kyodo, 7 June). 
   The opposition of small and medium-sized businesses to a number 
of the deregulation proposals currently under consideration may 
play into the hands of bureaucrats who are resisting some of the 
same proposals.  The Ministry of International Trade and Industry 
(MITI), for example, appears to share the smaller companies' 
reservations about easing the Large-Scale Retail Store Law.  The 
28 May Yomiuri Shimbun reported that MITI did not include 
relaxation of the law on a list of recommendations for 
deregulation it recently compiled as part of the government's 
efforts to assemble a package of deregulation proposals. 
   The opposition of smaller companies may also limit the business 
community's leverage on the deregulation issue by preventing it 
from presenting a united front to the government.  For example, 
the Five-Man Committee on Administrative Reform--a group 
consisting of the leaders of five major economic organizations 
which has played a major role in pushing for deregulation--has 
been unable to convene a meeting recently because of disagreement 
within the business community over such issues as the Large-Scale 
Retail Store Law, according to the 26 May Nihon Keizai Shimbun. 
The paper quoted an unnamed Keidanren official as saying that 
Keidanren wanted to call a meeting to discuss ways to counter 
bureaucratic resistance to deregulation, but some organizations 
representing smaller businesses objected, fearing that 
deregulation may harm their interests. 
   Divisions in Reform Panels 
   Apparent divisions over the scope and pace of deregulation in the 
panels charged with drawing up deregulation proposals constitute 
another obstacle to the government's deregulation effort.  For 
example, according to the 27 May Asahi Shimbun, the panel on 
information and telecommunications under the Prime Minister's 
Administrative Reform Promotion Council--a body charged with 
drawing up the government's deregulation proposals--has been 
unable to agree on the scope of deregulation in the 
telecommunications sector.  The paper reported that some members 
of the panel favor immediate removal of as many regulations 
governing the telecommunications business as possible, arguing 
that the government should not restrict competition in the 
sector.  Other members, however, reportedly want to limit 
deregulation in the sector because they see it as a "public 
service" field to which access should be strictly controlled. 
   Ministerial Infighting 
   Infighting among government ministries also appears to be 
hindering deregulation efforts.  Japanese press reporting has 
suggested that some ministries are trying limit deregulation in 
their areas of responsibility, while pushing for greater 
deregulation in areas within the jurisdiction of other 
ministries.  For example, the 28 May Yomiuri Shimbun quoted an 
unnamed official in the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries as accusing MITI of "interfering in the affairs of 
other ministries and agencies and leaving its own affairs 
untouched by deregulation."  According to the paper, the official 
claimed that MITI recently angered a number of other ministries 
by compiling an ambitious list of recommendations for 
deregulation which reportedly encompassed only regulations under 
the jurisdiction of other ministries and none under MITI's.   The 
official also alleged that the list included proposals to change 
the current procedures for licensing liquor sales, which are 
under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Finance, but did not 
included changes in regulations like the Large-Scale Retail Store 
Law, which is under MITI's jurisdiction. 
   Outlook 
   The weak ruling coalition government may have trouble countering 
opposition to deregulation because it appears to be coming from a 
number of different quarters.  Resistance from bureaucrats and 
infighting within the bureaucracy are likely to slow progress on 
compiling the deregulation package and dilute some of the bolder 
measures.  The panels charged with drawing up proposals may be 
unable to come up with clear recommendations or may be forced to 
drop or water down those on which they cannot agree.  While the 
Japanese business community could put pressure on the bureaucracy 
and the panels to come up with more wide-ranging proposals, its 
impact will probably be limited because of its own internal 
divisions and the opposition of small and medium-sized companies 
to some aspects of deregulation. 
   (AUTHOR:  BOUNDS.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
ASIA DIVISION ANALYSIS TEAM, (703)-733-6534.) 
EAG/HEBBEL/GSP 09/2253z JUN 

