Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Pool" item] </F>
  [Text] New York, March 14 (TANJUG) -- Islamic countries are 
trying, in cooperation with the Bosnian Muslims, to provoke a 
conflict in Raska, a region stretching across both the Yugoslav 
Republics of Serbia and Montenegro, and are, thereby, 
endangering the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Yugoslav Ambassador to the U.N. 
Dragomir Djokic has said. 
  In a letter sent to the U.N. Security Council on Monday, 
Djokic set out that the Muslims in Raska had the same rights as 
all other citizens of the F.R.Y. 
  The Yugoslav ambassador said the accusations presented by 
the 
member-countries of the Organization of the Islamic Conference 
(OIC) in the letter to the U.N. Security Council of March 3, 
according to which the Muslims in Raska were victims of 
repressive measures and persecution, were false and unfounded. 
  Djokic said the OIC was not only falsifying history with the 
presented accusations, but also instigating the spreading of the 
conflict in Bosnia-Herzegovina, which its member-countries 
allegedly wanted to prevent. 
  Djokic said that what was involved was dangerous 
interference 
in the internal affairs of the F.R.Y. and undermining of its 
sovereignty and territorial integrity. He specified that the 
alleged territorial and historical individuality of the 
so-called Sandzak (Turkish name for Raska), on which Islamic 
countries insisted, reflected the territorial claims of 
extremist Muslim forces, that is, their wish to include Raska 
into Bosnia- Herzegovina. 
  The Yugoslav ambassador said the chief goal was to 
internationalize the case of "Sandzak" and have the region break 
away from the Republics of Serbia and Montenegro. 
  Djokic said individual incidents in Raska were strictly the 
doing of terrorist groups, involved in illicit arms trade, which 
he said instigated rebellion for the sake of creating an 
independent state of "Sandzak." The Yugoslav ambassador said 
the F.R.Y. would not hesitate to take all necessary measures to 
protect its constitution, territorial integrity, and legal order. 
  The leaders of the Sarajevo-based extremist Muslim 
Democratic 
Action Party (SDA) for Raska call for the secession of the 
region, where Muslims account for a half of the population, and 
its merger with a Bosnian Muslim state advocated by Bosnian 
Muslim fundamentalist leader Alija Izetbegovic. 
  Authorities in Serbia and Montenegro recently arrested 
members of a Muslim terrorist group who were plotting an armed 
rebellion in Raska. The group leader Sulejman Ugljanin is on the 
run. 

