BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Major General of Justice Leonid Ivanovich </F>
Titarov, deputy chief of the investigative unit of the Russian 
Ministry of Internal Affairs Investigative Committee, by Natalya 
Kozlova; place, date not given: ``Billions Without a 
Break-In''--first paragraph is introduction] 
  [Text] The profession of safecracker or expert in blowing 
open safes, which is highly respected in the criminal world, 
seems to have reached the end of the line. I was told this by 
Major General of Justice Leonid Ivanovich Titarov, deputy chief 
of the investigative unit of the Russian Ministry of Internal 
Affairs [MVD] Investigative Committee. 
  Kozlova: So who beat the safecracker? 
  Titarov: Time. It has become unprofitable to rob 
safes nowadays. After all, how much money can you put in a 
safe? Perhaps 5 million, 10 million, or 15 million.... It is 
impossible to fit any more in. At any rate, there are no cases 
pending involving safecrackers. Nor have there been for a long 
time. 
  Kozlova: What cases are Investigative Committee 
investigators looking into at the present time? 
  Titarov: Investigators from two departments are 
working with criminal cases--the departments for top priority 
cases and organized crime and corruption. As a rule, 
investigators from these departments undertake to deal with 
complex and time-consuming cases which are extremely diverse in 
nature. Nowadays these are basically cases involving drug 
trafficking, embezzlement within the country's banking system, 
thefts of nonferrous metals from enterprises and their 
subsequent shipment out of Russia, corruption of officials, 
including militia officials, and counterfeiters. 
  I would subdivide cases according to their importance rather 
than the interest they present. Here is an example. Our 
investigators together with operatives from the Ministry of 
Internal Affairs and the former Ministry of Security (now the 
Federal Counterintelligence Service) have been able to uncover 
an organized and very security-conscious network of synthetic 
drugs traffickers. Some of these drugs are extremely potent. 
We have halted the operation of several laboratories for 
producing these drugs in Moscow, Kazan, Ufa, and Kurgan. We 
have blocked several channels through which narcotics from 
Commonwealth countries have been entering Russia. 
  Criminal proceedings have already been instituted against 
more than 60 accused persons. Between 1990 and 1992 just one 
group of these drug dealers prepared and sold approximately 
1,760 liters of potent narcotics worth more than 3 billion 
rubles [R] in black market prices. This case also witnessed a 
seizure of the dreadful drug trimethylphentanyl in powder 
form--enough to manufacture 288.5 liters of solution suitable 
for injection. Some 40,000 ampules of the imported drug 
buprenorphine were also confiscated. Over 100 kg of plant-based 
narcotics were taken. 
  Large sums of illegally earned money in rubles and foreign 
currency were also confiscated. Several kilograms of gold and 
silver were found. The total weight turned out to be 20 kg. 
There were a number of antiques among these valuable goods. 
  In order to steal big sums these days you do not need to 
blow 
open a safe. All you need is a good banking connection.... 
  In the cases we have been investigating, we have already 
uncovered instances of embezzlement in the banking sphere worth 
more than R70 billion. And attempted embezzlement of R35 
billion. 
  Over 200 banking institutions and 2,000 commercial 
structures 
have had a hand in these shady dealings. Our investigators and 
operatives were able to prevent the misappropriation of another 
R20 billion. More than 50 people have been brought to book. 
They have been stripped of money and valuables worth billions, 
and approximately $3 million have been returned to Russia from 
foreign bank accounts. 
  Kozlova: How many cases have you wound up as a 
result of the recent amnesty? 
  Titarov: I cannot comment on the political part of 
the decree since it has no relevance to our work. But the 
economic part does concern us. We are preparing to wind up 
approximately a dozen criminal cases. 
  The law is the law, and we will implement it, but our 
attitude to it is ambiguous. From the viewpoint of juridical 
technicalities, the economic part of the decree has not been 
thought through at all. A number of provisions simply need to 
be explained. Therefore the General Prosecutor's Office and the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs have approached the State Duma and 
asked it to provide explanations, which will enable us to apply 
the decree. 
  As far as my personal attitude is concerned, I cannot 
understand why people who have embezzled state and public 
property, abused their official positions, misappropriated 
funds, and engaged in fraudulent practices should be covered by 
the amnesty. The amnesty does not apply to people who have 
stolen far smaller sums of money from their fellow citizens. 
Does the former group therefore pose less of a threat to 
society? 

