BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 19 KYODO -- North Korean President Kim 
Il-song says his country has been under U.S. sanctions since the 
end of the Korean War and wonders what further measures could be 
imposed on Pyongyang, the ASAHI SHIMBUN newspaper reported 
Thursday. 
  Kim further told a Korean-American journalist last month 
that 
China has no means to exercise influence over Pyongyang in any 
attempt to resolve concerns that North Korea may be developing 
an atomic bomb, according to the ASAHI report. 
  For more than a year, the United States has suggested 
imposing economic sanctions on Pyongyang if North Korea does not 
permit full inspections of its nuclear facilities to ensure that 
no radioactive material is diverted to a weapons program. 
  In an April 21 interview with U.S. ASIA NEWS reporter Moon 
Myong- cha, Kim again denied that North Korea is attempting to 
build a bomb and virtually dared the U.S. to impose sanctions on 
his economically beleaguered state. 
  Since the truce (ending the 1950-1953 Korean war), we have 
been under what are actually comprehensive economic sanctions by 
the economic sphere of the U.S. side, Kim said. 
  What further sanctions beyond those we have been subjected 
to 
can be imposed? I feel like saying once, go ahead and try, Kim 
reportedly said, accusing the U.S. of trying to drive North 
Korea into a corner over the nuclear issue. 
  Kim rejected the idea that China, North Korea's lone major 
ally, can play any role in resolving the nuclear stalemate, 
saying, we are not a vassal state of China. 
  The 82-year-old North Korean leader denied that his country 
was trying to build a bomb and insisted that they have no place 
to test an atomic bomb nor a target to use it against. 
  Despite Kim's insistence on the issue, Pyongyang has 
repeatedly refused to fully comply with demands by the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which monitors 
nuclear programs for the United Nations. 
  "If we show the IAEA everything they want to see, they will 
say they have doubts about other places that they want to see, 
and more places, and this attitude will continue." said Kim. 
  North Korea has rejected inspections of some facilities by 
saying they were military installations off limits to outside 
inspectors, but Kim said in the interview with Moon that 
inspections of the military sites must be carried out with 
checks of all military bases in North and South Korea. 
  Asked about North Korea's threat to turn Seoul into a "sea 
of 
flames," Kim said that Pyongyang's delegate to an inter-Korean 
meeting in March had told him the words had been uttered because 
the South Korean delegate "had gotten on his nerves." 
  Regarding the suspended talks for establishing diplomatic 
relations between Tokyo and Pyongyang, Kim said, "the door is 
always open no matter who the prime minister is." 

