Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Henri Paillard report: "Bosnia: Differences of Opinion </F>
Within the Majority"] 
  [Excerpt] By describing the United Nations as a 
"contraption" and criticizing its "military incapability" in 
Bosnia, Defense Minister Francois Leotard has prompted many 
reactions. According to persistent rumors, the most serious 
incident took place after the cabinet meeting during a meeting 
of the inner cabinet on Bosnia attended by Francois Mitterrand, 
Edouard Balladur, Alain Juppe, and Francois Leotard. 
  "A serious clash" apparently took place between the defense 
minister and the foreign minister. The Elysee [president's 
office] refused to make any comment, given that it concerned 
members of the government and the president of the Republic was 
not involved. During the cabinet meeting, the head of state 
"called to order," as the Elysee points out, those who are 
indulging in excessively strong statements. According to some 
members of the Elysee staff, however, no incident took place. 
These people merely refer to the foreign ministry's explanation. 
  The Defense Ministry stresses that, in addition to the 
general political agreement on Bosnia, there may be "differences 
of feeling and therefore differences in statements" between the 
armed forces chief and the head of diplomacy. 
  It is true that the diplomatic style is clear enough for 
those who know how to interpret it. Foreign Ministry spokesman 
Richard Duque was anxious to say that it is important not to 
"accuse the United Nations," thus reacting to the defense 
minister's rather fierce criticisms. The Quai d'Orsay [Foreign 
Ministry] spokesman also explained that "the United Nations is 
what the actions of the component states make it. There is no 
other source of legitimacy for the international community's 
operations than the United Nations." 
  He also said that the foreign minister and the UN secretary 
general had telephoned each other during the weekend. "Mr. 
Juppe reaffirmed that France wanted to work in harmony with the 
secretary general's office. France, as a permanent member of 
the Security Council, has a special responsibility," Richard 
Duque reaffirmed. 
  In view of the fact that several RPR [Rally for the 
Republic] 
deputies have called for the withdrawal of UN troops, Mr. Duque 
said that "the withdrawal of the Blue Helmets is not on the 
agenda and would raise serious problems," particularly the 
halting of humanitarian aid and a risk of the conflict 
spreading. The Quai d'Orsay said that "the deterioration in the 
situation ultimately presents the problem of how to maintain the 
UN Protection Force." 
<H5>  An "Inadequate" Position </H5>
  It is true that views differ, to say the least, among the 
many people following the affairs of the former Yugoslavia. 
Pierre Lellouche, RPR deputy for Seine-Saint-Denis and adviser 
to Jacques Chirac for political affairs, said that the UN 
soldiers should leave Bosnia "in March" if the warring sides had 
not reached agreement. 
  There is a degree of caution in the remarks regularly made 
on 
this Bosnian crisis. The deputies who are members of the 
Foreign Affairs Commission are asking questions about France's 
presence in that country rather than categorically demanding the 
withdrawal of the contingent. During recent meetings, only Jean 
de Lipowski, former secretary of state for foreign affairs, has 
asked for the withdrawal of French soldiers, holding the view 
that the UN attitude was "inadequate." The RPR deputy for 
Charente-Maritime had recently attacked the "sham" of the UN 
position. 
  At several meetings of this commission, deputies like 
Georges 
Gorse, Jacques Myard, and Didier Julia said they were "rather" 
in favor of a withdrawal. But the matter has never been 
expressed so categorically. Moreover, Robert Pandraud has had 
the opportunity to intervene on several occasions on the risks 
of the formation of a Muslim state in the corner of Europe. He 
was also very circumspect about the UN secretary general's 
attitude. Indeed, it seems that there is no clear split between 
the UDF [Union for French Democracy] and the RPR on what 
position to adopt, although in general the UDF may seem more 
favorable to the French forces remaining. [passage omitted] 

