Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Subin Khuaenkaeo in Shan State, Burma] </F>
  [Text] Drug warlord Khun Sa says he will allow the proposed 
Upper Salween Dam project, which will divert water to Thailand, 
to be implemented only if the Shan State in northern Burma is 
granted independence. 
  "Many big rivers in this area flow into the sea and that's 
not very useful. It would be better if we could make use of 
these rivers," Khun Sa, who is also the leader of Muang Tai Army 
(MTA), said. 
  But the Upper Salween-Mae Taeng project is, in his opinion, 
a 
matter between the Shan (Tai Yai) and Thai peoples who are 
"brothers". "It's not difficult for us brothers to reach an 
agreement," he said. 
  He insisted that it has nothing to do with the Burmese 
military junta. 
  The area designated for the dam site is located in the Shan 
State opposite Wiang Haeng in Chiang Dao District, Chiang Mai. 
It is widely speculated the project is to be financed by 
Japanese investors through Thai businessmen. 
  It is true the Salween River passes many towns belonging to 
Burma, he said, but the proposed dam site is in the Shan State 
which he claims is free from Burmese influence. 
  "At present, Burma fails to extend its influence over this 
area. If the Thai Government gives money to Burma for the dam, 
it's definite SLORC (the State Law and Order Restoration 
Council, Burma's ruling junta) will use the money to purchase 
more weapons to kill all Tai Yai people. I don't want that to 
happen." 
  Khun Sa spoke to the BANGKOK POST at an MTA military parade 
of newly-trained soldiers at one of his camps not far from the 
headquarters. The 4,564 young soldiers, described by the drug 
warlord as excellent fighters, will be posted at strategic areas 
along the banks of the Salween River. 
  He said some Thai businessmen had visited him to convince 
him 
of the dam project, but to no avail. 
  "I told them this is a big deal. The project will take some 
time and need many workers. I am also worried about the impact 
on natural resources, like the forest and wildlife." 
  But Khun Sa said he was ready to talk to the Japanese 
investors rather than the brokers. 
  He said he sympathised with the Thai people affected by 
drought. 
  "I wish the Thai people had a chance to use the river too. 
But they should understand that I will never allow the dam to 
materialise as long as Burma is involved and gets money to buy 
weapons. I think the Thai people will be sympathetic to us as 
well." 
  Chao Gunched, the president of the Shan State People's 
Representatives Assembly, said he also was not opposed to 
diverting water from the Salween River to Thailand. 
  "But the project will be more beneficial if the dam site is 
shifted from Sob Pad in the Shan State to Tha Sala which is 
higher. It will make it easier to channel the water to Thailand. 
I'm quite certain the Shan people will not oppose the project 
should they have direct contact with us (the Shan State 
assembly)," Chao Gunched said. 
  News about the proposed dam was released early this year 
which happened to coincide with the mobilisation of over 10,000 
Burmese soldiers into the eastern part of the Salween River, 
confronting the MTA in the west. 
  In the north, more than 5,000 Burmese soldiers are heading 
towards Muang Ton and Muang Kaen in Shan State which is not very 
far from the designated dam site in Tha Sala. It is believed 
the Burmese army targeted Muang Sanklang because of its 
strategic advantages. 
  Khun Sa said his stronghold had been surrounded by the 
Burmese army for about four months. 
  "The Burmese army reached us and stepped back because they 
dared not pull the trigger. We fired at them four or five times 
and claimed no less than 100 lives. 
  "The Burmese then sent some 200 United Wa State Army 
fighters 
to attack us but they also moved back because we are in a better 
position. 
  "The Burmese soldiers came on December 1 last year and I 
have 
kept an eye on them ever since. I think they realise that they 
will be defeated if fighting breaks out. They will lose face. 
Therefore they dare not attack us," claimed Khun Sa. 
  The drug warlord said the MTA would fight to the end. 
  "I always tell my soldiers that our camps are our lives and 
we have nowhere to escape. If we can keep the bases, we can 
keep our lives. Either the Burmese die or us." 
  The Tai Yai, the name used for Shan people of Burma, have 
fought the Burmese army for 48 years, he said. 
  "When we had rice and money the Burmese took them away. We 
just have our lives left and Burma still wants to take us and 
use us as draught animals to carry military supplies for them. 
That's why we have to fight. I have never negotiated with the 
Burmese." 
  Khun Sa said he was not certain that negotiations would ever 
be possible. 
  "I don't think there will ever be talks. Maybe they don't 
know where I will be seated. I am a drug warlord and I am 
entitled to a higher position," he said with a laugh. 
  The MTA leader said he disagreed with the plan to invite 
Burma to attend the ASEAN meeting in Thailand as a guest country. 
  "In fact, the association should invite me. Burma has no 
compassion as the SLORC kills its citizens every day. Even the 
US realises this." he said. 

