Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Talal Salman--quotation marks as published] </F>
  [Text] The watch is Swiss, the time is Arabic, and the era 
is American. The watch controls the dates and commits the two 
presidents from two different worlds and two different eras to 
succeed. Like enmity, failure does not need a summit meeting. 
It could lead to inability or to a lack of desire to reach the 
summit. Or perhaps it could lead to an attempt to unilaterally 
control the plain, the slope, the mountain, and the summit 
together. 
  At 1000 (Swiss time) of that depressing European Sunday, 16 
January 1993, they stood at two of the three doors of the UN 
hall that had so often witnessed meetings between adversaries 
seeking an unavoidable agreement. U.S. President Bill Clinton 
stood at "his door" for a minute or two, awaiting his "partner" 
in the meeting, his eyes full of curiosity to finally see the 
"shrewd" man about whom he had heard and read a lot. 
  Who would make the first step and move toward the other? 
Formalities seem basic in some cases. However, the "symbol of 
change" in this "American century"--a term used by his 
predecessor George Bush, who won wars and lost the 
presidency--did not stop for long at this point of etiquette. 
When he started to walk, he noticed that the "shrewd" man was 
ahead of him in the first step toward the "third era" and the 
world of the common language. They moved forward with a bit of 
caution. They met, according to protocol, in the middle of the 
space, the middle of the hall, the middle of the road between 
reality and hope, between today and tomorrow in its assumed 
image. They shook hands, each one pressing the right hand of 
the other. The handshake took a long time, to enable those who 
could not see well to see and those who wanted to adjust the 
lenses of their cameras to photograph the event. They were also 
trying to break the ice of the first meeting between those 
coming to it from equal distances. 
  In matters of courtesy, the man from the "East" always 
excels. Thus, Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad asked the first 
question that deviated from the prepared text. The question was 
about Clinton's long, multi-segmented journey to the world of 
the old enemy, namely the "socialist camp under the great Soviet 
Union." 
  This was the proper prelude to starting the "original" talk 
after the photographers, journalists, and the members of the two 
delegations had left, surrounded by multinational, multilingual, 
and multi-labelled security men and those whose curiosity 
overwhelmed their self-respect and who sought to see "that 
moment" even though they were not among the invitees. 
  On the two sides of the old wooden table in the big hall, 
only six men remained: the President, his secretary of state, 
his adviser for national security, and two interpreters in the 
background. [sentence as published] 
  From what point could the trip begin, and how could it end 
when its map had no points of reference? 
  From international to regional to bilateral topics and back 
again. It was as if the talk were taking place inside 
cylinders, where borders could not be drawn between topics that 
intertwine and intermix so that it was impossible to 
differentiate between topics on the basis of their priority. 
There was no "secondary" topic in such a meeting, the topic of 
which was the Arab-Israeli conflict. The region, which was Arab, 
will remain Arab even if its name is changed and the 
geographical term of the others is used instead of the identity 
of its Arab people. Such a name change is also used by those 
who have supposedly absolved themselves of this region and 
joined the future--the new world order. 
  There is no common ground, either in geography or in 
history. Where then would you put the other man; compare him to 
the color of your eyes or the darkness of your complexion? 
  The battle for existence is infinite. Peace is just another 
stop or a new page. But "the book" is too big to be summed up 
or abridged. It is harder still to write the ending. 
  The Arab region has no "localities;" it is at the core of 
the 
world. For centuries it was the heart of the world. It might 
not be its head anymore, but it still occupies its heart. It is 
"the small celestial body that contains the greater world in its 
folds." 
  How can the inheritor of the land of all religions, 
messages, 
and prophets forget its name, descent, and the heritage the 
earth has kept: Is there a single location, city, mountain, or 
river that has not forced itself into one of the three holy 
books and taken a place of prominence? 
  Where does Washington stand compared to Damascus, Jerusalem, 
Nazareth, Bethlehem, Mecca, Medina, or Baghdad? That is, if we 
forget Tyre, Sidon, Jubayl, Ugarit, Ra's Shamrah, and Babylon 
and Nineveh and Thebes before them or with them. 
  We have to admit that the Arab region is no longer "the 
world" or the "center of the world." However, we cannot forget 
that throughout its history it was the heart of the world, the 
ambition of the world, or the one-way road between "the center" 
and the world. Not only did it give the world its three holy 
religions, but it also made some of its empires, many of its 
civilizations, and the memories that the computer is now 
swallowing and almost wiping out. 
  But the world cannot live without memories, particularly in 
a 
region blazing with a conflict, most of whose roots go back, 
whether truly or falsely, in history. The old religious legend 
is being employed in the service of the newly made political 
interests. 
  Had Bill Clinton been "an ordinary American," Hafiz 
al-Asad's 
task would have been much harder: What is the common ground 
between a born "politician" and "ideologist"--in whose memory 
history lies, provides his dreams and hopes, and controls much 
of the shape, objectives, and slogans of his policies--and that 
smart-looking young American man who is fond of playing the 
saxophone? 
  But Bill Clinton is a graduate of Oxford. Europe inherited 
the world from the Arabs through the Turks. In Europe in the 
1970's, Clinton became "a politician" and was infected with the 
germ of history. Politics lies in history; it begins and ends 
in history and, drawing strength from it, rejuvenates both 
itself and history. 
  How seemingly far apart are these two men, who sit opposite 
each other now to reach an agreement? Each comes from a past so 
different from the other that they contradict. One was forced 
to take up war as a profession to protect his land, people, and 
role, while the other resisted war and demonstrated against it 
to attain similar goals in his country. 
  The war veteran is now facing the former fighter against 
war. 
  The first fought for survival and the second fought against 
war to survive. 
  The first went to wars that were imposed on him many times 
and where he had no choice in the matter, except once, and no 
freedom to specify the place, time, or weapons used, even though 
other parties controlled the results of these wars in 
anticipation of another unjust war that was going to be imposed 
on him. 
  The second one took it upon himself to prevent an unjust war 
his country was waging against others under the pretext of 
national security and providing progress and security for 
humanity. The results of this war backfired. Now, from his 
position as president, he is trying to present an image of the 
beautiful American as an alternative to the disgusting picture 
of the ugly American that has mobilized all peoples against the 
strong heir--teeming with righteousness and potential--of the 
old and worn out colonizer who has retired and become obsolete. 
  The wound does not need any rhetoric, but the wounded man is 
not silent. He voices his pain. Thus, President al-Asad did 
not disappoint Clinton's expectations. He had to review the 
bloody chapters of the history of the Arab-Israeli conflict. He 
also paused a long time before the bitter experiences of the 
attempt to re-establish an equal relationship with the United 
States throughout the past quarter of a century. 
  He had to say everything all at once. He had to review the 
nature of the struggle and its history, while concentrating on 
and always reiterating the role this conflict has had in the 
relationship of the Arabs with the West in general, and the 
United States in particular. However, at certain times, he had 
to speak in professorial tones and to explain and recount the 
facts in great detail while relying heavily on many things he 
had heard from Clinton's predecessors, Nixon, Carter, and Bush 
(with talk in the third person about Ronald Reagan, whom he did 
not know personally, although he knew a great deal about him and 
heard from him expressions conveyed by a series of 
envoys--expressions that neither please nor ease the mind). 
  Clinton learned from al-Asad what he did not know and what 
he 
did not intend to happen. This is why he not only asked not to 
be judged according to the mistakes of other U.S. officials, in 
particular Henry Kissinger, Philip Habib, George Schultz, and 
before him Alexander Haig. He admitted publicly that "he 
learned and understood the meaning of peace as President al-Asad 
wants it." He began to understand the sensitivity in the 
relations between the Arabs, who have entered the struggle with 
Israel, and Israel, regardless of the political differences 
between their regimes which create borders between their 
"states" and "public" stances. 
  [Al-Asad] "I make no distinction between the Golan Heights 
and southern Lebanon, and between the occupied parts of 
Palestine or Jordan. The issue is not like a man who has 
preferences, and prefers one of his many wives over the others. 
To me, it is one Arab land and no part of it is more valuable 
than the other. What I demand for one part, I demand for all 
parts. This is essential. It is all one territory for one 
nation. This fact reveals the secret behind the inability of 
unilateral solutions or peace treaties to terminate the historic 
struggle between the Israelis and the Arabs. This is why we 
insist on just, comprehensive, and permanent peace. Peace is not 
peace unless it is comprehensive. Before you, there have been 
three experiments that did not succeed in making peace and did 
not end the struggle: Camp David 1978 with Egypt under 
al-Sadat; 17 May 1983 with Lebanon under Amin al-Jumayyil; and 
the Gaza-Jericho agreement with Yasir 'Arafat on 13 September 
1993. 
  "This is enough to show that separate solutions, no matter 
how many there are, cannot make peace. It could be in Israel's 
interest to exploit moments of weakness by some Arab officials 
to grab their signatures on agreements that might never see the 
light of day. But what interest does a great country like yours 
have in being biased and being a party to this conflict, knowing 
that this would make your country lose its role as an 
international authority, honest broker, and a full partner in 
the making of peace? 
  "It would not be peace if it were imposed through coercion 
and force. It would only be a humiliating agreement if it is 
dictated by an occupier who is proud of his victory which cannot 
last forever. Likewise, the defeat of the vanquished cannot 
last forever, particularly since he is the owner of the land. 
He was born on this land and was not brought to it from abroad. 
His connection with this land is permanent and firm. He does 
not forget this land and he will never be forgotten by it. It 
belongs to him and he belongs to it. There is no other 
alternative. He was not brought to this land from another 
history or from other places. He was born on this land and he 
will continue to adhere to it. He got his name from his land 
and the land got its name from the Arabs." 
  Perhaps this prompted Clinton to say in his statement and 
then in his answers to the numerous journalists' questions that 
he "had learned from President al-Asad." He humbly backed down 
on the old "golden" description of the Jericho agreement, which 
is only "a first step for laying the foundation for solving the 
problem." 
  Therefore, it is not possible to have separate solutions or 
to use the Gaza-Jericho accord as if it were the happy ending of 
a movie with many actors and full of battlefields like the 
Arab-Israeli conflict. 
  It was the conflict that opened the road for the Soviet 
Union. Washington was the hope, but it withdrew from its role. 
The Soviets seized the opportunity and departed from their 
position, which initially supported the creation of Israel, and 
drew closer to the Arabs to the extent of participating with 
them in confronting the alliance that had been forged between 
Tel Aviv, which believes in the Torah, and secular Washington, 
which defends democracy and human rights. 
  Realizing this fact must yield fruits so that it will be 
possible to establish new relations between Syria's al-Asad and 
the United States in "the new era," the era of changes and a 
quest for certainty, the era of the one power and its new world 
order, the era of Bill Clinton. 
  But rectification is necessary to avoid the recurrence of 
the 
historical mistakes: 
  "We want to have good relations with you. But this cannot be 
started if the desire and decision is made by one side. Such 
good relations can only be made by a joint decision from the two 
sides. We do not try to sell to you or buy from you a used car 
that becomes idle and obstinate rather than moving forward. We 
want good relations that are not governed by accusations over 
suspicions, or by those who want our misunderstandings to 
continue to influence your decision. Accusing us of sponsoring 
terrorism and putting our name on the list of terrorist states 
is only an attempt to terrorize you and govern your foreign 
relations. We are absolutely not your enemies, and we want you 
not to look at us as your enemies. Our behavior toward you has 
been governed by our reaction to the decisions made by your 
previous administrations. 
  "As much as the Americans are optimistic about your 
commitment to change, we hope that the change will include your 
stand on the Arab-Israeli conflict in general, and on us in 
particular. You seek peace, which is what we demand. Anyone who 
has suffered the bitterness of war and the agony of sacrifice 
appreciates the value of peace, but peace requires two parties. 
  We went to Madrid with your guarantee and under your 
sponsorship, together with the Soviets who later became 
Russians, with the hope that the Israelis would respond to this 
call for the peace of the brave. But peace did not materialize 
and Shamir tried to wreck the process by adopting extremism, 
which undermined the conference. Here Rabin is trying to abort 
the attempt to establish a comprehensive and just peace by 
luring the PLO leadership into a vague agreement, which, in our 
view, compromises and stalls the peace process. A sound 
solution cannot be achieved in secret with the exclusion and at 
the expense of other parties. 
  There can be no peace in Palestine or peace for the Israelis 
if Israelis continue to occupy part of Syrian national soil, 
part of Lebanese national soil, and part of Jordanian national 
soil, not to mention the Palestinian land they occupy. 
  "The role of the United States as a full partner and 
impartial mediator is fundamental and dominant, but a separate 
agreement annuls this role. You ascertained by yourselves that 
the dazzling ceremony, in which everyone was requested to 
participate, does not end a conflict that filled pages in the 
past and does not guarantee a future that provides new 
generations with hope for a better tomorrow. 
  "What is the problem between Syria and you? "We often hear 
the Americans talk about the links of Arabs, in general, and 
Syria, in particular, to terrorism or to terrorist groups. Who 
said the work to liberate the occupied land can be called 
terrorism? If this were true, the American Revolution could be 
regarded as terrorism. Didn't you fight those you considered 
occupiers and colonialists? Were George Washington and his 
comrades terrorists? 
  "Frankly, we can say that much of our behavior was a 
reaction. We suffered occupation and aggression and our dignity 
was humiliated, and we reacted. Why then should the cause be 
ignored and the outcome be put on trial? 
  "Do you want the peace process to succeed? Peace is our 
demand but are the Israelis ready? You know the answer better 
than we do. What we know and feel and what is happening on the 
ground is not reassuring. Your role is necessary as a guarantee 
for us and for them. You must assert your commitment to this 
role, which made us go to Madrid. We then were surprised by the 
Israelis carving their way to Oslo behind our backs. But where 
is Washington? 
  There is nothing wrong with citing incidents from personal 
history to deduce points that could strengthen the principled 
stand. 
  It is an opportunity to drop that accusation that has stuck 
to the name and almost become a part of it. 
  "I believe we can reach some agreement on defining and 
describing terrorism. Your starting point at the summit stems 
from your known position on the Vietnam war. You rejected 
'military service' and dodged the draft. You then marched in 
demonstrations against the U.S. role in Vietnam. You reached 
the climax in defying your government and traveled to Moscow, 
the capital of the evil empire, as it was called later by U.S. 
President Ronald Reagan. In Moscow, you publicized your 
position with no thought as to the repercussions. 
  It is a glorious position and you deserve to be saluted for 
it. 
  However, let me ask you the following: Did you, at that 
time, consider the Vietcong fighters terrorists? Not at all. 
You used to view what the U.S. Army was doing as an unjust war, 
if we wish to avoid the word terrorism. 
  "By the same logic, how could the Palestinian youth fighting 
against the Israeli occupation army to liberate his land be 
described as a terrorist? He is a fighter and not a terrorist. 
Who has the guts to accuse the youth who is fighting the 
Israeli occupier to defend his house and life in southern 
Lebanon, whether he belongs to Hizballah or any other Lebanese 
resistance organizations, of being a terrorist. Whoever resists 
the occupier in his land, whether Syrian or Jordanian, is a 
fighter against terrorism and cannot be categorized as a 
terrorist. Whoever helps these people cannot accept being 
accused of harboring terrorism. In fact, we need to raise the 
question why international legitimacy and the superpowers, who 
have a special responsibility toward peace in the world, do not 
intervene to stop the oppressors in their tracks. 
  "We are victims of terrorism, and it is natural for victims 
to unite so long as the terrorism of the strong continues." 
  It is not important whether the young President was 
convinced 
or not. What is important is to pinpoint the situation and 
present the real picture. 
  In one of his answers to questions by journalists after the 
meeting, the young President referred to the issue that was a 
point of dispute. He said discussions over this issue lasted 
about an hour "without our attempting to solve it now." Thus, 
they left this issue up to the deliberations of the joint 
committee that was formed comprising the foreign ministers of 
the two countries, as part of other issues that need to be 
looked into and agreed upon. Otherwise, each side would have to 
accept the stand of the other without blackmail, sanctions, or 
international slander. 
  Authorization with regard to the Lebanese issue is absolute 
on both the official and realistic levels. However, Hafiz 
al-Asad is accurate and reserved in his use of this direct 
authorization. National logic helps here as in any other 
proposed topic. Facts, in their entirety, are results of the 
original struggle, including Resolution 425. This is why he 
listed it directly after the other two--Resolutions 242 and 
338--which have to do with the Israeli occupation of other Arab 
territories. He linked them all to the land-for-peace and 
Madrid formulas to reach an acceptable settlement. 
  The strength of the presentation by President al-Asad was 
apparent in the conclusion the U.S. President reached after he 
made a naive response to a question about Lebanon. Clinton cut 
short his response to another question and said that one of his 
aides had drawn his attention to the ambiguity of his response 
to a previous question on Lebanon, a response that could have 
insulted the Syrian president. He then went on to explain that 
response. 
  The subject of Lebanon was prominent in the talks, it was 
discussed as a full party in the peace process and as a state 
with sovereignty, independence, and a political formula, which 
was developed during the al-Ta'if conference. The subject of 
Lebanon was prominent when they discussed the resistance and a 
just, comprehensive, and permanent peace. 
  President al-Asad introduced the subject of Lebanon by 
explaining the nature of the relations between the "one people 
in two states" and how they share a joint fate, which is 
apparent in the Brotherhood, Coordination, and Cooperation 
Treaty. This is a treaty that ensures the joint interests and 
benefits of the two countries through their two "states." It 
does not have anything to do with emotions or the desire to 
impose hegemony and control. 
  The subject of Lebanon had to be prominent when the 
discussion turned to the "fiery introduction" to the 
Gaza-Jericho agreement, namely Israel's "invasion with fire" 
waged against south Lebanon. Later on it was learned that this 
invasion was carried out to divert attention from what was 
happening in Washington. 
  That was an excellent opportunity to confirm that anything 
but a unilateral solution would be at the expense of the other 
parties in the struggle. The results of this struggle have 
affected everyone and everyone needs to participate in 
formulating an acceptable political settlement. 
  Note: Before the joint news conference, U.S. Ambassador to 
Damascus Christopher Ross approached me and inspected the 
journalists' identity card pinned on my chest. The card 
informed everyone that I was a member of the Syrian delegation. 
He read my name in a tone of someone who had just discovered a 
military secret. He then tried to play down the whole issue with 
a personal joke, but my answer was natural: But your president 
is in there talking about all of Lebanon, present and future, 
with President al-Asad. 
  The veteran diplomat said: Do not misunderstand me. I am 
not protesting. I am merely trying to link the concept to the 
actual picture. 
  During the news conference, and after the numerous 
references 
in the U.S. President's answers to Lebanon and Syria's role 
there--in fact, his references to Syria's key role in the region 
and its peace--I turned around looking for Ambassador Ross. He 
met my eye with a wide smile and a nod of the head indicating 
agreement on what we had not disagreed about in the first place. 
  President al-Asad did not waste the opportunity. Washington 
is an essential party and the objective is to receive guarantees 
that its President is unbiased. There are no delusions that 
Clinton will be biased toward us. The important thing is for 
Arab logic to be heard fully, clearly, frankly, and directly. 
The important thing is for us to shake his former confidence 
and to force him to search for a balance that clears him from 
absolute bias toward Israeli logic, which imposes its hegemony 
on the area around it. 
  It is Hafiz al-Asad's school of political strategy. You 
should know the person you are talking to very well and let him 
know you. In order to let him to know you, it is not wrong for 
you to explain your stance using history, personal accounts, 
experiences of others, and your experiences with others. 
  Hafiz al-Asad knows how to present himself; not as a master 
but as a highly experienced adviser. He managed to use language 
that a man like Bill Clinton understands. The impact was clear 
from the young president's conduct and statements when both men 
addressed journalists. Clinton used phrases that he had just 
heard from the "wise man" who extended a hand of friendship from 
the world's oldest capital. 
  Bill Clinton is preparing himself to be the image of the 
future: He is handsome, tall, young, and has a vision and an 
ambition to make history. And history's widest door is in the 
east, and the strongest and most prominent man holding the keys 
to the east is Hafiz al-Asad, the man with whom the U.S. 
President sat for four hours and 20 minutes and still wanted 
more. They sat again for an hour or more, upsetting the travel 
schedule and increasing tension in the worried city of Tel Aviv. 
  Bill Clinton was an embodiment of the new land. But, he 
found out that his interlocutor is not in the past, he is in the 
present. The Israelis cannot be in the past, present, and future 
at the same time. 
  No one, alone, can be the world. 
  Hafiz al-Asad succeeded in bringing Damascus closer to 
Washington and vice versa, and in making Clinton's ambition the 
driving force in the peace talks with Israel. He removed most 
of the mines on the road between the two capitals and wrested 
recognition of his decisive future role. He is not like the 
others, and none of those who signed or were invited to sign 
tomorrow is like him. He is the closest to the image of the 
true "Arab." Leaning on this strong position, he speaks, 
changes contexts, and helps set priorities straight. 
  From now on, it is going to be Clinton's battle with the 
Israelis. The battle actually started in the plane that flew 
Clinton back to Washington, as we were told by some White House 
journalists. But the actual battleground will be in Israel 
itself. What happened in Geneva is too serious for Israel to 
accept and too solid for it to reject or cancel. 
  The next few days will show the seriousness of what happened 
in the too quiet Swiss city. Geneva's history may record that 
the city witnessed the most important step on the road toward a 
settlement of the long, bloody conflict between the Arabs and 
the Israelis, and that Hafiz al-Asad succeeded in shaking 
Israel's constants, which had overwhelmed Bill Clinton's memory 
and had guided his political movement. 
  This is another long and bitter battle, but it is not 
"against" the Israelis and Americans at the same time. It is 
being launched to clarify the border between the two so that 
peace can be established in the "taboo land," which might have 
room for the Arabs in the future. 
  When my Syrian colleagues at the press conference gave me 
the opportunity to ask my question, which was filled with 
criticism of the U.S. President, I knew that I would not get a 
serious answer. But the important thing was to pose the 
question: 
  "The United States says that it supports a comprehensive 
solution and a just peace. But its policy on the issue of the 
Arab-Israeli conflict has been at times ambiguous and almost 
biased. It has sponsored and is sponsoring all the unilateral 
agreements, the last of which was the Gaza-Jericho agreement, 
which you personally sponsored at an international celebration 
held at the White House. 
  "Before that, there was the bitter experience of Lebanon in 
the 17 May (1983) agreement. 
  "The United States used force in the war against Iraq but 
has 
refrained from extending enough support for the international 
resolutions that concern the Arabs, including Resolution 425 on 
the Israeli occupation of some Lebanese territories, the 
resolution on the [Palestinian] deportees, and all the other 
resolutions on Palestine. 
  "In light of the summit talks, how can you explain all 
this?" 
  President Clinton overlooked the substance of the question 
and was content with a general and ambiguous answer. But his 
answer included a clear signal, when he said: "I believe that 
all the parties in this process recognize that peace cannot be 
achieved unless we can bring all the tracks together and make 
them successful. President al-Asad spoke very skillfully today 
during our meeting. He spoke about the situation in Lebanon and 
Jordan. He said that even if the problems with Israel are 
resolved separately, this should still be part of a 
comprehensive solution and all the problems between Israel and 
its neighbors--Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria--must be solved." 
  Of course, I was not expecting Clinton to criticize the 
overall U.S. policy toward the Arabs or to point out the fact 
that the U.S. Administration has double standards when it comes 
to justice and to the implementation of international 
resolutions and that it does not always fulfill its pledges. 
  I thank those in Geneva who gave me some of their time 
(since 
each press delegation could only ask three questions). I also 
thank those in Beirut who have said that we do not belong to 
Lebanon and that our media do not belong to the Arabs with Syria 
at their heart. 

