Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on seizures and arrests related to drug trafficking 
monitored through 20 January. 
<H5>  Argentina </H5>
  In two separate operations last night, the Buenos Aires 
police arrested nine people and seized 1.1 kg of cocaine. The 
first operation was conducted at 1050 Besares Street in San 
Fernando, where the police seized 1 kg of cocaine and arrested 
Pilar Celli, Carlos Ibanez, Carlos Britos, Luis Silva, Walter 
Villalba, and Gabriel Lopez. The second operation took place at 
122 Haedo Street in Villa Martelli, where the police seized 100 
grams of cocaine. (Buenos Aires NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS in Spanish 
1314 20 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Bolivia </H5>
  During a surprise operation at the Santa Barbara checkpoint, 
12 km from Tarija, Special Antinarcotic Force agents found 10 kg 
of cocaine inside two briefcases in a bus coming from Potosi. 
(La Paz TV Boliviana Network in Spanish 0100 GMT 18 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Brazil </H5>
  Sao Paulo police agents last night arrested Bolivian citizen 
Editha Enelda Lobo de Ruiz who was carrying a suitcase 
containing cocaine while trying to board an airplane for 
Switzerland from the Guarulhos International Airport in Sao 
Paulo. She passed the control but police agents were suspicious 
of the suitcase which was too heavy. The suitcase was made of a 
strange material and a test was run in the airport. It was 
found to be made of a mixture of cocaine, resin, and glue. The 
woman said the suitcase was a present from a friend. The police 
estimate that 2 or 3 kg of cocaine was in the suitcase. (Rio de 
Janeiro Rede Globo Television in Portuguese 1500 GMT 17 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Chile </H5>
  Anti-narcotics police agents confiscated 34 kg of cocaine 
paste and 1 kg of cocaine hydrochloride during an operation in 
Iquique. Chilean citizen Edgar Mamani and Bolivian citizen David 
Mamani were arrested. The drug came from Oruro, Bolivia, and 
was taken to La Tirana zone. (Santiago Radio Cooperativa Network 
in Spanish 1000 GMT 14 Jan 94) 
  Carabineros agents have seized more than 17 kg of cocaine in 
Arica. Bolivian citizen Silverio Condori, 28, and Chilean 
citizen Ilva Shambe, 38, were arrested. (Santiago Television 
Nacional de Chile Imagen International in Spanish 0000 GMT 18 
Jan 94) 
<H5>  Paraguay </H5>
  National Narcotics Directorate, DINAR, officials yesterday 
arrested Carlos Alcides Rojas Gonzalez and Efren Guerrero 
Caballero who were carrying 5 kg of cocaine. The arrest 
occurred after a shootout on an Asuncion street. They also 
raided two houses in the towns of Mariano Roque Alonso and Loma 
Pyta but no drugs were found. DINAR officials followed DEA 
reports which stated that the cocaine, worth about $30,000 would 
pass through Asuncion en route to Zurich. The route used by the 
drug traffickers is; Sao Paulo, Foz de Yguazu, Ciudad del Este, 
Asuncion, Rio de Janeiro (by air), Frankfurt, Berlin and Zurich. 
(Asuncion ULTIMA HORA Spanish 19 Jan 94 p 65) 

