While     reiterating his desire for a negotiated settlement with 
Syria, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin continues to evince 
skepticism that Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad's statement 
following his meeting with President Clinton in Geneva on 16 
January signals an easing of Syria's position on a peace 
agreement with Israel.  In a statement broadcast by Israel's Qol 
Yisra'el radio on 24 January, Rabin said that 1994 "will decide 
which direction developments take in the longer run--especially 
with Syria," specifically, "whether there will be peace or 
deadlock and tension."  While the radio quoted Rabin as saying 
that "circumstances give peace a chance," it also reported that 
he told the Knesset Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee that 
Syria's terms for an agreement with Israel had not changed "one 
iota." 

   In a speech in Tel Aviv on 19 January, Rabin similarly declared 
that Syria had not eased it conditions for peace enough to 
satisfy Israel.  While stressing that he believed his government 
has a mandate to negotiate a "territorial compromise" with Syria, 
Rabin added that he "will make absolutely every possible effort" 
to avoid "the price we paid for peace with Egypt," an allusion to 
Syria's demand for full Israeli withdrawal from the Golan 
Heights.  Moreover, he added that he has still "not received any 
definite sign that Syria accepts our definition of peace" and 
that Israel is "far from accepting the full and painful price 
[Syria] is demanding in exchange for peace" (IDF radio). 

   The Israeli Government's pledge on 17 January that an agreement 
with Syria involving significant territorial concessions would be 
submitted to a national referendum (IDF radio) also appeared 
intended in part to signal that Israel has not yet received 
sufficient assurances of Syrian good intentions.  In a statement 
broadcast by Qol Yisra'el on the 18th, Rabin acknowledged that a 
settlement with Syria will require "a painful price from us, 
perhaps even more painful than the Israeli public expects," and 
reportedly added that in such an event it would be necessary to 
"ask the public whether it is willing to pay the price."  He was 
noticeably reserved in commenting on al-Asad's statement in 
Geneva, saying that he "expected more" but is "willing to settle 
for what was publicly said and with what we were briefed on [by 
U.S. officials]" for the sake of "continuing the negotiations." 

(AUTHOR:  MORTON.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH (703) 733-6094.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/CL 28/0031Z JAN 

