Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by Estonian Foreign Affairs Minister Juri Luik at </F>
the Swedish Institute of International Affairs in Stockholm on 2 
March] 
  [Text] Ladies and Gentlemen: It is a pleasure to be able 
to speak to this distinguished forum on a topic of concern to 
all of us, namely cooperation and security in the Baltic Sea 
region. However, we in Estonia believe that security in our 
corner of the world is integral to European security in a wider 
sense. We are at the frontier of democratic and free-market 
thinking prevalent among our closest neighbours, with whom we 
share a shoreline. At the same time we share a border with a 
very unstable giant to the east. The well-known Russian 
democrat Yuriy Afanasyev expressed his doubts about the giant's 
future in yesterday's "Herald Tribune" when he wrote that 
"today, a struggle for power is under way. One order is leaving 
and the other has yet to arrive. The noise of the times again 
resounds as it did in 1917". 
  In this context Sweden's Prime Minister Carl Bildt 
eloquently 
expressed the need for added security in this -- our -- region 
in his address to this forum last November when he said, and I 
quote, "It should be obvious that a pattern of development in 
which all the Nordic countries become part of an emergent 
European Union [EU], thus making the three Baltic States part of 
its `Near Abroad' also in a purely geographic sense, will 
strengthen security throughout the Baltic and North European 
area" (end of quote). 
  I could not agree more, and would go a step further by 
submitting to you that security in the Baltic Sea region is a 
prerequisite both for stability and for extended prosperity in 
the whole of Europe. In making this argument, I will highlight 
three areas of particular interest: first, our security 
concerns at home; second, recent domestic and foreign policy 
developments in Russia; third, the role of the Baltic Sea region 
in a transforming Europe; and fourth, the ongoing transformation 
of Western economic, political and security structures. 
  In Estonia, the highlight of the summer is usually St. 
John's 
Eve on the 24 of June, a holiday which the Teutonic Knights 
borrowed and Christianized but which is actually derived from 
the pagan celebration of the summer solstice. This year, 
however, the highlight of the summer is likely to fall on 31 
August, when the last occupying soldier is due to leave Estonian 
soil. We have reason to believe that this will, in fact, 
happen. Despite Russia's failure thus far to hand over a 
timetable for the withdrawal of the remaining 2,700 troops, the 
withdrawal, albeit reluctantly, is continuing, slowly but 
surely, and people all over Estonia are marking the days 
remaining on their calendars. I do hope that despite the 
unreasonable and irrational stance adopted by the Russian 
delegation at the present round of negotiations Russia will 
abide by its international commitment to withdraw its troops. 
When that happy day arrives, we believe our security will be 
greatly enhanced. 
  However, even after the last active service soldier and 
officer has left, we will still have plenty of reason to be 
vigilant. One primary reason is the presence in Estonia of some 
10,000 retired and reserve former Soviet officers who were 
demobilized before August 20, 1991. This number is roughly five 
times the size of our own fledgling defense forces, and these 
persons tend to be generally young and vital men, as they did 
not retire because they were too old but because they were 
demobilized with perhaps a prospect of future active duty. We 
have 50, 40, and even 35 year-old military "pensioners" in 
Estonia. Some of them served in special units and were trained 
to "take care" of Swedish leaders should a war break out. 
  Because we are not assured of their loyalty to Estonia their 
presence represents a substantial domestic security concern. 
For this reason, my government has taken a humane but firm 
stand on the issue. We have made substantial concessions by 
allowing all those demobilized before the reinstatement of 
independence in 1991 to apply for residence permits. A special 
interministerial commission will consider these applications on 
a case-by-case basis. Needless to say, those who were 
demobilized after August 1991 will not be permitted to apply for 
residence permits -- otherwise every single uniformed Russian 
officer in Estonia could take off his uniform and "retire" -- 
without leaving the country. Germany, for instance, would 
hardly tolerate the continued presence in its eastern part of 
"retired" former Soviet soldiers. 
  One other worry as far as domestic security is concerned is 
our border with Russia. The arguments over whether the 1920 
Tartu Peace Treaty remains in force are well known. Russia 
continues to control territory that, by the terms of that 
treaty, actually belong to Estonia. Any suggestion by Russia 
that Estonia is the one claiming territory is patently false and 
demonstrates a weak understanding both of history and of 
international law. I will speak later of our hopes for 
international mediation in this question. In the meantime, 
however, the Russian Federation has in recent weeks unilaterally 
begun demarcating the administrative control line that runs 
between Russia and Estonia, putting up barbed wire fences and 
stationing sentinels at the line -- when nobody really quite 
knows where this line runs. This we cannot accept. It 
represents a unilateral action that is in direct violation of 
the obligations undertaken by CSCE member states that allow for 
border changes only as a result of bilaterally negotiated 
solutions. We are asking Russia for an explanation of this 
action within the CSCE context. 
  But I wish to speak of purely practical border matters as 
well. The line running between Estonia and Russia continues to 
be altogether too porous, allowing the illegal transfer into 
Estonia, among other goods, of drugs, radioactive metals and 
weapons, not to mention refugees. These contraband goods and 
refugees are generally destined for further transport to points 
West. We are grateful to Sweden for having already helped us 
beef up our border regime, but clearly much more needs to be 
done. We especially need to improve coordination between the 
agencies in Estonia and Sweden that deal with these problems. 
Because as we all know, supply stems from demand and we have to 
tackle the demand end as well. 
  I turn now to my second point, that is developments in 
Russia, and how this affects our security. 
  During the last two months, the campaign of accusations and 
outright threats from Russia has spiralled dramatically. To 
name just a few, let us remember Russian President Boris 
Yeltsin's New Year's greeting to his people, in which he said 
that in the new year, Russia would begin paying special 
attention to compatriots living abroad. Then came Foreign 
Minister Andrey Kozyrev's address to CIS ambassadors in Moscow, 
implying that the Baltic states were part of the "Near Abroad", 
followed by several bellicose statements by Defense Minister 
Pavel Grachev about how Russia would not withdraw its troops. 
  On Monday [28 February] evening, on the eve of our current 
round of talks with Russia, with the Russian delegation already 
in Tallinn and our own negotiating team driving through the 
snowy countryside to where the talks would be held, the latest 
attempt at intimidation was filed with press agencies. This was 
a Russian Foreign Ministry official's statement that Russia 
would not keep to the final withdrawal date already agreed upon. 
The exact wording of this statement was telling. It said, and 
I quote, that "the allegations that Russia has pledged to 
withdraw its troops from Estonia before August 31st this year 
are unfounded" (end of quote). As you can imagine, this latest 
statement did not help start the current round of talks on a 
constructive note, not to mention that it represents yet another 
setback in the withdrawal process. Neither does the continued 
refusal of Russian officials to acknowledge Estonia's occupation 
in 1940 help to create an atmosphere of trust between our 
countries and peoples. 
  A new Russian Foreign Ministry draft program introduced 
early 
last month by Russian Foreign Ministry deputy spokesman Mikhail 
Demurin may explain some of these actions. This detailed draft 
program appears to be a comprehensive plan to reinforce Russia's 
stated primary foreign policy goal of protecting the interests 
of ethnic Russians abroad. To this end, the draft program 
foresees the use of various political, economic and 
sociocultural means, including import benefits and banking 
assistance for businesses outside Russia that are run or 
dominated by ethnic Russians, and the establishment of a 
powerful broadcasting network to spread Moscow's word. In 
introducing the program, Demurin told reporters that the plan 
was devised because, and I quote, "diplomatic measures are not 
enough" (end of quote). 
  It seems to us that the draft program has been compiled in 
a hurry by a number of state agencies and ministries with very 
differing mandates, because the draft is uneven and, at times, 
even internally contradictory in its approach. For instance, we 
all understand that any state has the right and duty to protect 
the interests of its citizens living abroad, but the Russian 
Foreign Ministry draft speaks of protecting its ethnic 
compatriots, not citizens. This policy of differentiating 
people by ethnicity is a stance which Estonia does not accept as 
civilized behaviour, but which, paradoxically, is a position 
that Russian officials often accuse Estonia of assuming. 
  This represents a danger to Estonia, it represents a danger 
to Sweden and it represents a danger to Europe. The Baltic Sea 
region has attained a far greater significance than it had for 
the past 70 years or indeed since the Hanseatic period. We are 
again a major trading area, a vital part of a new Europe. 
Russia is again an open market, trade is again flowing through 
the Baltic states to Russia and from Russia to the world. 
Transit to this great market is of vital importance to us and 
Estonia as a trading nation wants to do everything in its power 
to improve on all our economic prospects. The Baltic Sea has the 
potential of regaining its role as a major free trade area that 
it occupied during the Hansa. 
  The Council of Baltic Sea States was called into being to 
respond to a new need for cooperation in our area and I can tell 
you that it has proven a great success. Only last week did our 
region's transport ministers meet in Kaliningrad, with the 
participation of that vital -- overmilitarized -- region's 
officials, to discuss the improvement of transport networks in 
the Baltic Sea area. 
  But this new activity again changes our security 
environment. 
For trade can only prosper in an atmosphere of mutual trust, of 
mutual respect. We have to reconcile all our conflicting 
interests to together become an essential, an integral part of 
the prosperous European family. For this to happen, however, 
all European countries have to accept European rules. And that 
includes Russia. 
  When the Council of Europe was founded following the Second 
World War its founders had a vision of a Europe where everyone, 
great and small, was equal, for only so could a safe future be 
guaranteed for our continent. We cannot allow for these 
principles to be discarded now. No country can assume that it 
has the right to bully others, to force others to do its 
bidding. President Yeltsin's recent speech in the Russian 
Parliament is worrying because it does not accept these 
principles. To quote Yuriy Afanasyev again: "Military pressure 
has forced Yeltsin to reverse himself on acquiescing to Central 
and Eastern European countries seeking NATO membership. The new 
military doctrine of asserting interests in the `near abroad' is 
fuelling more blatant attempts to subordinate former Soviet 
republics...Under the guise of protecting Russian-speaking 
peoples, Russia is supporting 'national liberation' movements in 
countries that seek independence. Sometimes the direct 
participation of Russian troops is camouflaged and presented to 
the world as a peacekeeping mission in an interethnic conflict." 
  If we are to allow that kind of behaviour, we will denounce 
the actions of those that founded the Council of Europe. If we 
are to allow Russian-style peacekeeping missions we will surely 
doom many nations and we will jeopardize the great future which 
our united Europe and our united Baltic Sea region could look 
towards. 
  A united Europe, a democratic Europe, ladies and gentlemen, 
cannot allow any compromises to be made -- be they in the 
requirements for accession to the Council of Europe or in the 
description of peace-keeping missions with which Sweden has had 
ample experience. Democracy is democracy is democracy, and no 
compromises can be made. 
  However, while we wait and hope for Russian leaders to 
accept 
the rules of the Council of Europe we cannot sit idle. In 
difficult times friends and partners are needed and I would like 
to mention the strong support we have received in bilateral 
relations with our closest neighbours in the confused period 
following Russia's parliamentary elections. Sweden has taken 
the lead in trying to exert a moderating influence on Russia, at 
the same time reassuring us that we will not be left alone. 
This present situation reaffirms the necessity of nation-states 
and regional leaders acting and adopting responsibilities when 
global and European structures fail to do so. The Swedish 
leadership has found the courage to be an active and leading 
player in the "Baltic game" when multinational organizations 
have not been brave or focused enough to do so. 
  This continued support has not been only bilateral in 
nature, however. Our neighbours have also pushed hard to 
accelerate our integration into those Western structures that 
may -- provided there is the will -- help to counterbalance the 
crisis in the East. As you know, we have been strong advocates 
of establishing regional security tables within the CSCE 
framework, and would like to inject an element of security 
policy into the activities of the Council of Baltic Sea States. 
  Further afield, we have signed the Partnership for Peace 
[PfP] framework document and regard this as a first step toward 
eventual NATO membership. We are especially interested in 
advancing the cause of true peacekeeping activities within the 
PfP context, and to that end are in the process of establishing 
a joint peacekeeping battalion with our Baltic neighbours. I 
would take this opportunity to express our sincere gratitude to 
Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Finland and the United Kingdom for 
offering to help train this fledgling battalion while expressing 
the hope that Sweden and Finland will also join the PfP to 
strengthen the "Nordic axis" and to move towards an all-European 
security system. 
  Another expression of our growing integration with Europe 
are 
our ongoing free-trade negotiations with the European Union. We 
hope to have a free-trade agreement eliminating all trade 
barriers and tariffs in force on January 1, 1995. And I am very 
happy to note that the European Council sees us as Associate 
Members of the Union in the near future. In this connection I 
would mention that we strongly support and welcome Sweden's 
membership in the EU. Not only will membership bolster the 
Swedish economy, but it will further strengthen Stockholm's 
already strong role in the international arena. We hope to join 
Sweden as a full member of the European Union at the end of this 
century. 
  However, when earlier speaking about the problems 
international structures face I had one particular process in 
mind -- the European Stability Pact. While the idea conceived 
by French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur has great merit, in 
the framework of the European Union it has become stagnant. The 
deliberations around the pact prove that there is not yet very 
much force behind the Common Foreign Policy of the Union and I 
am quite frankly concerned about the effect a failure or 
non-success of the Pact will have on the image of a strong and 
united Europe. 
  Nonetheless, we are determined to do our utmost to help make 
this undertaking a success, because through this Pact, we hope 
both to resolve open questions regarding our border with the 
Russian Federation as well as to give our efforts to integrate 
aliens into Estonian society a much needed shot in the arm. I 
do hope, however, that the European Union will accept the nine 
Central and Eastern European States as true, equal, partners in 
this undertaking, for only so can we -- together -- achieve 
success. 
  I would wrap up this final point by stating the obvious. 
Much has changed in the international security environment 
since my prime minister spoke at this forum one year and 11 days 
ago, but some things remain the same. Last year, Prime Minister 
Mart Laar told you, and I quote, that "It is imperative to 
realize that Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania cannot be abandoned, 
not only for their own sake, but for the precedent that 
deserting our countries would set. We are willing to help in the 
struggle for democracy; we hope that you will be willing to help 
us too" (end of quote). 
  Ladies and Gentlemen: I would conclude my remarks today with 
a maxim set down in the first century B.C. by Greek philosopher 
Publius Syrus, who said (and I quote) that "anyone can hold the 
helm when the sea is calm" (end of quote). My friends, the 
Baltic Sea is a relatively shallow body of water, and this 
shallowness can lend a deceptive sense of safety. As any sailor 
knows, however, storms have a greater effect in shallow than in 
deep waters. We live in politically tempestuous times; the sea 
is not yet calm. But I remain convinced that with continued and 
increased cooperation, with a little diplomatic skill and a 
touch of luck, we can together hold the helm even in troubled 
waters and safely reach shore. 
  Thank you. 

