BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Strategic Affairs Secretary Mario Cesar </F>
Flores by correspondent Eliana Simonetti at the old National 
Intelligence Service, SNI, office in Sao Paulo; date not given] 
  [Text] [Simonetti] Why are the military so sensitive over 
their salaries, as we could see during the crisis over the last 
few days? 
  [Flores] Since the Constitution was promulgated in 1988 
there 
has been a process of dissatisfaction going on. At the time of 
the promulgation, the judicial and legislative branches adjusted 
their salaries high above those of the executive branch. Since 
then the difference has been increasing as a result of 
mini-adjustments and bonuses. It is not reasonable to see a 
four-star general receive a salary that is half the amount 
received by a congressional adviser, particularly as they are 
both paid by the same Treasury, i.e., by the taxes collected 
from the same persons. 
  [Simonetti] Why is this dissatisfaction more evident among 
the military? 
  [Flores] The civilian public employees' unions try to make 
themselves heard through inexpressive demonstrations staged at 
the Tres Poderes Square and at the Candelaria Square in Rio de 
Janeiro, and these demonstrations are quite disagreeable to the 
public in general. They also try to make themselves heard 
through strikes, which are normally unsuccessful. They have no 
power. The Armed Forces, however, draw the public's attention 
because of their hierarchical organization and by the impact of 
the traditional military presence in Brazilian politics. 
  [Simonetti] But are salaries the only problem? 
  [Flores] No. The federal government practically went 
bankrupt after 1988. We cannot build highways or ports, and we 
have no funds to make the public health system function. For 
the Armed Forces, the consequences of this bankruptcy are 
translated into excessive slowness in equipping and training the 
contingents. Only 2.5 percent of the 1993 national budget was 
allocated to the three branches of the Armed Forces. This 2.5 
percent represented less than 0.5 percent of the gross domestic 
product. From an international point of view this is an 
extremely low figure -- particularly if we consider that with 
these funds we have to maintain a structure that has more than 
300,000 men. From the professional point of view, all these 
people are living beyond their means. Nowadays the number of 
people choosing the Armed Forces as a professional alternative 
is decreasing. The middle class, which has always been the 
greatest source of military officers, has ceased to be so. 
  [Simonetti] Couldn't the professionalization of the Armed 
Forces be a solution? 
  [Flores] There is a justifiable controversy between 
compulsory military service and a professional Armed Forces in 
Brazil and in other countries. As the Armed Forces become 
technically more complex, soldiers and officers must be better 
trained. This is more difficult with the compulsory military 
service. Brazil has a low educational level, and the compulsory 
military service brings that low level into the barracks. The 
Armed Forces are becoming more professional all over the world. 
This is also happening in Brazil. Yet I believe it would be 
premature to eliminate the compulsory military service. It is 
better to keep it within the legal structure and to gradually 
reduce the number of recruits, simultaneously increasing the 
number of those who voluntarily join it. 
  [Simonetti] How is it possible to solve this increasingly 
generalized deterioration of public service which has affected 
the military and health sectors and the bureaucracy? 
  [Flores] The situation has become so serious that it is 
already affecting the country. Public services do not meet 
national needs. Fixing things will take time. We will first 
have to encourage qualified people to join and stay within the 
public sector. This can be accomplished only through 
appropriate salaries and conditions for productive and for 
professionally and operationally rewarding work. The solution 
calls for a restoration of the Union's financial health, and 
this depends on the reform of the Constitution. I don't believe 
it will be possible to restore good quality public service, like 
the one we had in the past, in less than five to 10 years. Yet 
we have to do something. 
  [Simonetti] Is money the only solution? 
  [Flores] No. It is also necessary to review the single legal 
system law. This law has increased the existing degradation, 
because public servants stopped being encouraged. All of them 
now have full retirement, job stability, and social benefits. 
This law, like the Constitution, is a set of benefits with just 
a few obligations. 
  [Simonetti] You don't speak the way military men usually 
speak. What do you think of the privatization of state 
enterprises? 
  [Flores] Many military men agree with me. My generation came 
after the generation of military men who radically support 
nationalization. That generation was in command in the sixties 
and seventies. I am for privatization. For example, I do not 
agree that the oil sector should be untouchable. It is the 
Union's monopoly -- not an enterprise's monopoly -- which has to 
be maintained. The gas pipeline from Bolivia to Sao Paulo 
proves that we have to introduce changes. It is obvious that 
Petrobras [Brazilian Petroleum Corporation] does not have the 
funds to finance the project. Neither does the Union. The gas 
pipeline depends on the private sector's money, and the World 
Bank will cooperate only if the project is under private sector 
control. And why shouldn't it be under private control? The 
same reasoning applies to the telecommunications and nuclear 
sectors. 
  [Simonetti] Do you think the private sector should also 
exploit the nuclear field? 
  [Flores] I think the government should exert a direct 
monopoly over the fuel cycle linked with nuclear weapons. But 
why not allow private companies to exploit the mineral and 
enrich it, under government franchise? There is nothing wrong 
with that. 
  [Simonetti] Don't you think that national security could be 
placed at a risk? 
  [Flores] No. What places national security at risk is 
inefficiency, not privatization. That is very clear in the area 
of ports. Those who want to maintain the ports under state 
control allege that they are important for national security. 
But national security is not at risk when a port is private and 
efficient. It is at risk when the port is inefficient. 
  [Simonetti] Congress is controlled by corporations like 
Petrobras [Brazilian Petroleum Corporation], Telebras [Brazilian 
Telecommunications, Inc.], and others. How can changes be 
implemented to solve these problems? 
  [Flores] The influence of these corporations exists. The 
corporations exert pressure on the national Congress. But there 
are people in Congress with different ideas, and some studies 
demonstrate that many congressmen favor the current 
constitutional revision. Many of them, perhaps most of them, 
favor maintaining the state, and not Petrobras, monopoly on oil. 
I think it is possible to make changes. We must not confuse 
the number of voters with the noises made by corporations that 
have a great capacity for shouting. It is funny to observe that 
nowadays, the political circles that opposed the military regime 
now defend the work done by the military regime and the state 
companies. They are political circles well represented in the 
PDT [Democratic Labor Party], the PC do B [Communist Party of 
Brazil], and part of the PT [Workers Party]. 
  [Simonetti] They won all that in the 1988 Constitution. 
  [Flores] In 1988 the labor unions were very strong, in 
reaction to the previous regime, when they were very much 
controlled. That was reflected faithfully in the Constituent 
Assembly, when the cold war atmosphere still prevailed and 
ideologies were still important. Today it is only those who 
don't want to who can't see that the world economy is becoming 
global. Either we join the trend and build a competitive 
economy in global terms, or we remain behind. Those who will pay 
the price of our backwardness will be our people, who will 
remain poor. 
  [Simonetti] Do you consider the constitutional revision a 
strategic matter? 
  [Flores] Yes. The revision is essential to allow Brazil to 
overcome its difficulties, to make progress and give the people 
a better standard of living. If the issues that are essential 
for helping the country are not revised we will continue to be 
stuck in the same place; we will continue to lag behind the rest 
of the world, with a poor people depending on welfare programs. 
That is not good for a country with 150 million inhabitants. I 
do not want to think what could happen tomorrow, or the day 
after tomorrow, but some day the problem will explode. It is 
better to straighten out the legal, economic, and social issues 
now than in the future through a social explosion. 
  [Simonetti] What about the Calha Norte project? 
  [Flores] This project will increase the state presence in 
the 
northern border area. That presence includes not only the Armed 
Forces, but also the Federal Police, Ibama [Brazilian Institute 
for the Environment], Funai [National Indian Foundation], the 
Revenue Office, health facilities, and others. A border post 
has a landing strip, an Army unit, a health unit for the local 
inhabitants, a Funai post, and so on. 
  [Simonetti] And what about the Amazon Surveillance System? 
  [Flores] There is a concealed accusation that it is a 
military project, but that is the least of what it is. It is a 
modern, high technology project to control and administer the 
region. It will allow the control of natural resources and of 
invasions of Indian reserves. It will also serve to repress 
smuggling and drug trafficking. 
  [Simonetti] In your opinion, is Brazil a vulnerable country? 
  [Flores] The Amazon region is vulnerable. Not so much from 
the point of view of a military threat, which is not probable, 
but from the point of view of illegal activities. The Amazon 
region represents a vacuum of power, of human presence, a 
disorder that must come under control. We are heading toward a 
new world in which borders are losing their traditional values. 
In order to control the Amazon region, Brazil must learn to use 
it. To use it implies controlling it. The most spoken about 
part of this project is the control of the air space, and there 
is a justification for this: In the Amazon, crime flies. 
Without control of the air space there is no way to control the 
Amazon region. Even the environmental matter depends on this. 
  [Simonetti] How is the Information Service doing now? 
  [Flores] The information service, today called intelligence, 
is being restructured without the vices that harmed the SNI. 
The information service is necessary; all organized countries 
have one. Ours, which was created in 1964 during the Castello 
Branco administration, began well, but with time its functions 
began to be distorted. There are many examples of this 
distortion, such as the interference in Serra Pelada [gold 
mine], which reached the point of being administered by Colonel 
Curio, a SNI officer. This kind of thing should no longer take 
place. 
  [Simonetti] How should an intelligence service operate? 
  [Flores] The intelligence service should be limited to 
gathering, analyzing, and disseminating information. It should 
not operate unless it does so for the purpose of gathering 
information. For example, when there is a meeting it is 
necessary to send intelligence personnel to see what is 
happening. This is absolutely legal. The service is being 
restructured to give the state a safe, modern intelligence 
service. Part of the work by the intelligence service is 
obviously secret. No intelligence agent -- anywhere in the 
world -- wears an identification card. There must be some 
secrecy in his work, but it should not be dubiously legal. 
  [Simonetti] The way your are speaking -- you are using the 
future tense -- it seems that the intelligence service is not 
operating now. 
  [Flores] It is working. It is working well. Almost every 
day I receive reports confirming facts, analyses of what is 
happening, and the press' and people's reaction to developments. 
We send our people to the meetings in which entrepreneurial 
organizations analyze the economic plan. There is nothing wrong 
with that. It is natural to do something like that. 
Information is then gathered, and we analyze it. We have 
competent analysts. 
  [Simonetti] Are they ex-SNI personnel? 
  [Flores] The majority of the analysts are. The operational 
area was heavily reduced in the fields that could be mistaken 
for police activity. In 1990, when former President Fernando 
Collor took power, the SNI had some 3,500 employees. Today the 
Intelligence Undersecretariat has 1,200 employees, all over 
Brazil. 
  [Simonetti] Are there agents outside Brazil? 
  [Flores] No. There were, in the past, but not now. 
  [Simonetti] What do you think of the creation of a ministry 
of defense, headed by a civilian minister? 
  [Flores] I believe that sooner or later there will be a 
ministry of defense, as most countries around the world with 
well-structured armed forces do have defense ministries. It is 
a matter of time; there is no rush. It is necessary to make a 
plan, as it is not simply a matter of saying that there is a 
ministry that is common to the three forces, but to achieve 
integration among the three forces. 
  [Simonetti] Isn't the presence of military men in political 
posts today a source of further complication for the country? 
  [Flores] I see no complication. Over the past 10 years, 
military ministers have carefully avoided meddling in political 
affairs. They are not a factor of complication for the 
political situation. 
  [Simonetti] Are conditions ripe for a coup today? Are there 
sectors that would like a coup? 
  [Flores] I am not aware of any. A coup is not carried out 
just because someone wants it. There must be a breeding ground 
for a coup, and there is no breeding ground in Brazil. The 
coups that had serious repercussions occurred under very special 
circumstances, which do not prevail now. For example, in 1964 
there was a cold war atmosphere in which national security 
played a very important role. There was the problem of the 
masses joining the national political life, and this shocked the 
foundations of Brazilian tradition. There were also hierarchy 
and discipline violations within the Armed Forces. Furthermore, 
we should recall that people were on the streets, demanding a 
break, and this is not happening today. 
  [Simonetti] Will we have elections this year? 
  [Flores] Yes, beyond all doubt. Brazil assimilates, digests, 
and resolves its problems. 
  [Simonetti] Why did you stay in the government after the 
fall 
of President Collor? 
  [Flores] Ask President Itamar Franco. I am a servant of the 
state, and while I am healthy I will try to do a good job. Who 
the president might be is not very relevant to me. 

