Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed commentary: "President Aliyev's Visit to </F>
Turkey"] 
  [Text] President Geydar Aliyev headed a high-ranking 
delegation to Ankara yesterday. His visit was the first to that 
country after he was elected president. Drawing attention to 
the not-so-warm relations between Aliyev and Ankara during the 
past year, political commentators have assessed his visit as 
rather important. According to the commentators, Baku wishes to 
improve its relations with the regional countries, establish a 
balance in its relations with Azerbaijan's neighbors, and 
benefit from Turkey's economic resources. 
  However, it will be recalled that the Turkish Government 
maintained its support for former President Elchibey in 
Azerbaijan even after he was ousted. In view of that, several 
observers are convinced that Geydar Aliyev is trying to 
strengthen his position by using the existing opportunities in 
the region to promote the interests of his country, which is in 
a state of war. So considering the long-standing hostilities 
between Turkey and Armenia, Ankara's support for Aliyev is of 
special importance. 
  Meanwhile, the ousting of Turkey's ally in Azerbaijan, that 
is, the removal of Abulfaz Elchibey from power, inflicted a blow 
to Ankara's policy on the Caucasus. Obviously, Turkey wishes to 
increase its influence in the region through intensive 
diplomatic initiatives. In view of that, Ankara has hinted that 
it is inclined to melt the ice between Turkey and Azerbaijan by 
adopting an understanding approach to Baku's requests in various 
fields. 
  Furthermore, the political commentators believe that Turkey 
is worried by the success the nationalists achieved in the 
elections in Russia and is convinced that the Caucasus may be a 
source of threat to its security in the future. In view of 
that, it wishes to strengthen its relations with Azerbaijan in 
order to safeguard its long-term interests. However, 
considering the possibility that Russia, which regards the 
Caucasus as a strategic region, may seriously react to Turkey's 
increasing influence, Ankara wishes to achieve its objective 
through economic and cultural exchanges and not through 
political and military initiatives. 
  Meanwhile, Moscow, which adopted a sensitive approach on 
Turkey's influence in Azerbaijan and the support it gave to 
Abulfaz Elchibey in the past, is seriously watching the progress 
of the relations between Ankara and Baku with a view to 
safeguarding its interests in the region. 
  Considering all that, President Aliyev's visit to Ankara is 
very important, as assessed by President Suleyman Demirel, Prime 
Minister Tansu Ciller, and Speaker of the Turkish National 
Assembly Husamettin Cindoruk. In fact, it is regarded as a new 
landmark in the relations between Turkey and Azerbaijan. 

