CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dmitriy Vydrin, director of the International </F>
Institute for Global and Regional Security, Kiev, under the 
rubric "Expert Review": "The Russian Bear and the Ukrainian Fox"] 
  [Text] As early as 1992 the Ukrainian prime minister 
said that Russia was waging a "cold economic war" on Ukraine. 
The economic and sociopsychological situation in Ukraine is 
indeed largely reminiscent of wartime. 
  The rate of inflation in the country has reached 70 percent 
per month, which comes close to the "world record" held by 
Serbia, which is at war. The average wage of about $10 is the 
equivalent of monthly earnings in the besieged Sarajevo. The 
20-30 percent a year fall in production is greater than in 
Azerbaijan. The vocabulary of many Ukrainian politicians and the 
mass media is close to that of the military. 
  Any war raises two main issues: "Who is the main culprit?" 
and "Who will win?" It is hard to answer these questions 
unequivocally. However, much can be understood and foreseen by 
comparing the complaints and mutual accusations of the parties 
to the conflict. 
  [Boxed item] 
<H5>  Ukraine's Key Economic Complaints About Russia: </H5>
  --it sells fuel and raw materials to Ukraine at prices that 
are destroying the Ukrainian economy, 
  --it has taken over the lion's share of the all-Union wealth 
(gold and diamond reserves, property abroad, and so on), 
  --it steals away the best skilled personnel--research, 
engineering, and technical--from key production sectors: the 
nuclear power industry, transportation, and so on, 
  --it buys up property on the territory of Ukraine in order 
to 
make the latter first economically and then politically 
dependent, 
  --it is neither punctual nor honest as far as payments for 
Ukrainian deliveries are concerned, and is indebted to Ukrainian 
enterprises. [End boxed item] 
  [Boxed item] 
<H5>  Russia's Key Economic Complaints About Ukraine: </H5>
  --it resells inexpensive Russian resources to other 
countries, 
  --it fails to coordinate its export policy with Russia and 
drives down prices for important Russian goods (metals, weapons, 
chemical products), 
  --it pursues an isolationist policy and hampers the natural 
processes of reintegration and the establishment of joint 
ventures, companies, and financial-industrial groups, 
  --it is neither punctual nor honest as far as payments and 
deliveries are concerned; its debt to Russian enterprises is 
immense. [End boxed item] 
  It cannot be determined who is right and who is wrong: The 
pitch of mutual reproaches is too high, the politicians and 
experts of the two sides too prejudiced and incompetent. Most 
probably, both parties are guilty to some degree. The 
politicians of Kiev are guilty of attempting to foist on Moscow 
a naively sly, unacceptable model of relations: Ukraine is 
completely independent of Russia politically, but receives raw 
materials and resources from the latter at domestic Russian 
prices. Russian politicians are guilty of failing to perceive 
Ukrainian independence for a long time and trying to foist on it 
the "suzerain-vassal" model of relations. However, practice has 
indicated that there is a natural limit to the deterioration of 
economic relations between the two countries. It turned out that 
neither country is capable of dealing to the economy of its 
neighbor a blow of such a force as to make the "cold economic 
war" grow into "hot" economic skirmishes. Apparently, 
politicians on both sides were mistaken in evaluating their 
forces. 
<H5>  The Mistakes of Ukrainian Policy </H5>
  In their calculations and plans, Ukrainian politicians have 
overstated the opportunity to strike retaliatory blows at the 
Russian economy. In the corridors of power and public opinion it 
was believed for a long time that Kiev is capable of coming up 
with a powerful "mirror-image" response to each of the punitive 
economic actions of Russia, in particular by waging a "guerrilla 
war" against enemy communications. It was expected that the 
threat of shutting off energy and transportation systems that 
pass through the territory of Ukraine and connect Russia to 
Europe would prompt Moscow to be more tractable. 
  This was a very dangerous concept from the outset. It posed 
the threat of an unavoidable escalation of economic, political, 
and military confrontation. First, the ambitious Russian 
leadership and public opinion, which were accustomed to the 
superpower position, are poorly equipped for a quiet search for 
a compromise. Second, Russian politics is markedly extrovert in 
nature and responds very sensitively to any attempt to isolate 
the country. The Russian establishment is prepared to pay any 
price and make any sacrifices in order to punish those who 
encroach on Russia's connections to the outside world. 
  The Russian bear would rather die than allow itself to be 
locked up in the Asian lair. However, fortunately for Ukraine 
and the entire world, Russia quickly found a way out. Kiev did 
not succeed in creating a Baltic Sea-Black Sea "buffer" or 
"exclusionary" zone: The Belarusian corridor was found in this 
space. Russia will attempt to shift its trans-European 
communications there, taking advantage of the pro-Russian 
sentiment that exists there, reinforcing it, and connecting the 
Belarusian economy to its own more closely. This is precisely 
why Russia is proceeding to create a unified ruble zone which is 
economically disadvantageous for it. Besides, Russian 
specialists quickly groped around for a new model of 
transactions with European partners. Now it is these countries 
rather than Russia that have conflicts with Kiev over blocking 
Russian-European communications. 
  As a result, by 1994 Moscow ceased to fear the threat of 
direct isolation from Europe, and therefore threats by certain 
Ukrainian politicians are hardly able to provoke the Moscow 
authorities to commit acts that are dangerous to the world 
anymore. 
<H5>  The Mistakes of Russian Policy </H5>
  Russia has overestimated its potential for economic pressure 
on Ukraine. First, Russian officials have already lost the 
monopoly on resource deliveries. The former state sector has 
rapidly converted to the commercial mode; for this reason, an 
ever increasing volume of refinery products is delivered through 
private channels which the government controls with difficulty. 
The government cannot manipulate prices, either: Despite the 
threats, many types of raw materials, including refinery 
products, are delivered de facto to Ukraine at prices below 
world market. It has turned out that Russia is incapable of 
quickly switching to other markets. The prediction that an 
abrupt deterioration of the economic situation in Ukraine would 
bring about a social explosion and a sharply stronger sentiment 
for reintegration did not come true, either. 
  The economic situation is truly as bad as it gets, but 
neither a powerful social explosion nor a tumultuous renaissance 
of the processes of integration has occurred. Why? Western 
Ukraine, for which the independence and sovereignty of the 
country have self-contained if not semi-religious significance, 
is prepared for any hardship. In turn, Eastern Ukraine lacks the 
full-fledged institutions of a civic society (with the exception 
of strike committees) due to which dissatisfaction with the 
economic decay is reflected in political demands only very 
slowly. No matter how bad the situation becomes, the likelihood 
of this resulting in a universal striving to reintegrate is low. 
Most likely, Ukrainian society will become differentiated into 
confrontational social strata and regions. Some will see 
excessively close economic links to Russia and its perfidy as 
the root of all evil, others, on the contrary, will see the 
severance of these relations as being just that. 
  The economic situation will continue to deteriorate, and 
differentiation in society will deepen along with this. However, 
as time goes by, the heat of accusations leveled against Russia 
by Ukrainian public opinion and political consciousness will 
diminish. Even extreme Russophobes are beginning to understand 
this: The main reason for the economic troubles is found in the 
sluggish leadership of the country lacking the determination to 
proceed with radical and rapid reforms. 
  Incidentally, paradoxical as it might be, I believe that had 
Russia switched to world market prices in mutual settlements 
with Ukraine right away, there would have been less Russophobic 
sentiment in Ukraine for a long time now, and the reforms would 
have also proceeded faster. This would have made the 
relationship pragmatic, reduced the field of mutual suspicions, 
and prompted Ukrainian leaders to look for effective economic 
solutions. This state of affairs would have removed suspicions 
concerning Russia's desire of to interfere in Ukraine's internal 
affairs. 
  Russian politics is extroverted, whereas Ukrainian politics 
is utterly introverted. The Ukrainian fox will not allow anyone 
to steal into his burrow. However, even Russian expansionists 
have almost grasped by now that the harshest economic pressure 
bears little fruit in the contemporary world. It may win a 
victory in a totalitarian political space. However, even the 
smallest liberalization immediately reduces the potential for 
economic blackmail. The time of the economic cold war is most 
likely coming to an end because its effect boomerangs. 
  [Boxed item] 
<H5>  How Will Changes in the Economic Situation in Ukraine and </H5>
Russia Influence Their Mutual Relations? 
  Scenario 1. The economic crisis in Ukraine worsens 
catastrophically, whereas Russia succeeds in overcoming it. 
Under such conditions the eastern and southern regions would 
gravitate toward Russia still more strongly--up to the demand to 
join it. This course of events would almost unavoidably bring 
about a civil war, because western regions would not proceed to 
unify with the neighbor to the north under any conditions. The 
aggravation of the situation poses the threat of many millions 
emigrating, which may bring about the onset of chaos in the 
Russian economy. 
  Scenario 2. Ukraine finds a way to overcome difficulties, 
whereas the reforms in Russia end in failure. The harshest 
possible economic and political isolation of Ukraine from Russia 
would cause an expansion of emigrants from the north (there are 
about 7 million Ukrainians in Russia), which would crush the 
Ukrainian economy. 
  Scenario 3. Equalization of the progress of reforms brings 
about a normalization of political relations. Representatives of 
private capital from the two sides would act as lobbyists for 
this scenario. A great number of joint companies, corporations, 
and financial groups would appear. 
  Contrary to the opinion of various political forces, neither 
Ukraine nor Russia are objectively interested in the destruction 
of each other's economies. However, even with the most favorable 
outcome (Scenario 3) the countries will keenly compete against 
each other in raw materials, sales, and labor markets and fight 
for the favor of foreign partners. [End of boxed item] 

