CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Trade With Russia Awaits Better </F>
Times"] 
  [Text] 1993 proved to be a difficult year for 
Russian-Pakistani economic relations. The volume of mutual trade 
between the two countries declined by about 40 percent for the 
year, and comprised only $40 million. 
  The main reason for the decline was the refusal of the 
Pakistani side to deliver goods to be credited toward the 
repayment of long-term state credits. The former Soviet Union 
granted these credits for the purchase of Soviet equipment for 
the metallurgical plant which was built with the technical 
assistance of the USSR on the shore of the Indian Ocean near 
Karachi. 
  A dispute arose over parity between the Russian ruble and 
the 
Pakistani rupee. Pakistan demanded--and, we might add, quite 
unexpectedly--that it be reviewed in the direction of increasing 
the "price" of the rupee. In fact this means a significant 
reduction in the debt obligations. In 1993, Pakistan should have 
delivered approximately $40 million worth of goods to Russia. 
However, it did not do so, and a foreign debt liability was 
formed for the first time. However, Russian economic experts 
working in the trade representation in Islamabad are not losing 
optimism. In their words, the problem of parity of currencies 
will be resolved and the indebtedness repaid in the nearest 
time, especially since the contracts for delivery of Pakistani 
goods for this sum have already been concluded. 
  Russia supplies a considerable amount of machine building 
products to Pakistan. These include textile looms, tractor 
assemblies, universal machine tools and instruments, electric 
motors, transformers, automatic machines, sheet metal, as well 
as cotton fabrics. Russia imports large quantities of ready-made 
clothing, tricot goods and linen from Pakistan, including men's 
shirts, shoes and sporting goods of various assortment. 
Pakistani sugar may also be of interest to us. 
  Russian and Pakistani experts believe that, despite the 
reduction in commodity exchange between the two countries, the 
prospects for economic cooperation of the two countries remain 
rather favorable. We are speaking primarily of the expansion of 
the metallurgical plant near Karachi from a capacity of 1.1 
million tonnes to 3 million tonnes. Russia has agreed to grant 
Pakistan a credit in the amount of $100 million. 
  The crowning touch in the successful cooperation of power 
producers may be the construction of a nuclear power plant. 
Islamabad has already appealed to Moscow with a request 
regarding its construction. However, as yet there has been no 
reply. At the same time, so as not to evoke the suspicions of 
the international community, Pakistan is preparing to place the 
future nuclear power plant under the control of the IAEA 
[International Atomic Energy Agency]. 
  Pakistan is also interested in acquiring Russian weapons. 
Experts cite primarily the MIG-29 and Su-27 combat aircraft, as 
well as tanks. There is talk of buying 300 tanks, with the 
subsequent development of tank-building capacities in the 
country. There is interest also in artillery weapons and 
submarines. However, many political and financial questions 
still remain unresolved up until the present time. Moreover, 
there is an actively operating pro-French and pro-Chinese lobby 
in Islamabad. The former is "pushing" primarily combat planes 
for Pakistan, and the latter--tanks. Russia has unexpectedly 
encountered competition in the Pakistani military market from 
the former Warsaw Pact member countries, and even from Ukraine. 
  The Russian trade representation in Islamabad sees a reserve 
for expanded economic cooperation with Pakistan and for the 
renewal of shipping of Pakistani cargo on vessels bearing the 
Russian flag. Previously, the USSR transported $70-80 million 
worth of cargo annually from Pakistan to Europe and back. Now 
Russian vessels are rare guests in the Pakistani ports. 

