BFN 

<F P=106> [Speeches by Prime Minister Dr. 'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali and </F>
Egyptian Prime Minister Dr. 'Atif Sidqi during the meetings of 
the Joint Jordanian-Egyptian Higher Committee in Amman on 5 May 
-- recorded] 
  [Text] [Al-Majali] In the name of God, the compassionate, 
the merciful. 
  Your Excellency brother 'Atif Sidqi, prime minister of 
fraternal Egypt. Your Excellencies the ministers. It is my 
pleasure to welcome Your Excellency and the accompanying 
delegation in their second country, Jordan, to take part in the 
meetings of the Joint Jordanian-Egyptian Higher Committee. 
These meetings are taking place within the context of 
intra-Arab cooperation and coordination, which we set in motion 
years ago in order to lay down the foundations for developing 
relations between our two fraternal countries in all fields. 
  The close relationship between His Majesty King Husayn and 
his brother His Excellency President Husni Mubarak, as well as 
our relentless work in the best interests of our two countries 
and the Arab nation, serve to advance understanding and common 
action for the good of our two countries and people. Jordan 
believes that sisterly Egypt is a key player regionally and 
globally and is shouldering real responsibilities and facing 
challenges. We are confident that the wisdom and enlightenment 
of the Egyptian leadership will help secure all the requirements 
for the advancement, success, and prosperity of the brotherly 
people of Egypt and surmount all the hurdles that impede their 
development and advancement. 
  For our part, let me assure you that we share your anxieties 
and concerns over the challenges and risks the region is facing 
and the divisions and differences besetting its countries and 
leaders which lay them open to outside interference and designs. 
Brotherly Egypt has in the past borne many burdens, and 
together we shouldered onerous responsibilities, and we stood 
side by side in the face of the danger and aggression that 
targeted our Arab nation. We are meeting today to engage in 
joint constructive work and an exchange of views and 
consultations. 
  Mr. prime minister, in light of the painful Arab situation 
and proceeding from the fact that we were the closest in terms 
of defending the nation's interest and the first to offer 
sacrifices for it, we, in Egypt and Jordan, must exert ourselves 
to revitalize Arab solidarity and disperse the disarray and 
weakness that have cast a shadow over Arab ties. 
  This is not to say that we mean to turn the status quo 
upside 
down or overlook facts or try the impossible. Against the 
background of the changes taking place around us, a combination 
of the state of Jordan's relations with other Arab states, our 
long experience, and our appreciation of the sensibilities of 
the political and economic dimensions of the current stage, puts 
us in a position to propose an objective approach to lift the 
Arabs from the gloom engulfing them to a new state where logic 
and reason are the norm. 
  To attain this and resolve Arab differences, let us adopt a 
step-by-step approach where common interests take precedence 
over regional and narrow concerns. It should thus be possible 
for us to overcome many obstacles and sensibilities and minor 
disagreements, and these are bound to disappear with the passage 
of time. Alternatively, we can boost Arab ties on a bilateral 
basis and, in effect, produce further Arab cooperation and 
rapprochement that may clear the way for normalized Arab ties. 
  Mr. Prime Minister, we realize the gravity of the situation 
and the sensitivity of the stage. We must act before it is too 
late. This can take place only if we freeze Arab differences 
and postpone them until we overcome this difficult and 
complicated era in our history, pinpoint the faults and 
weaknesses, benefit from the lessons we learned in the present 
stage, discard the solutions and rules that will be imposed on 
us without our being a party in formulating them, proceed with 
dexterity and loyalty to defend the nation's objectives and 
interests, end this painful state of affairs and enter into 
happier stages where sincere cooperation and constructive 
understanding will prevail. 
  Mr. Prime Minister, the tough circumstances our nation is 
experiencing makes it all the more urgent that we overcome these 
differences and put the past behind us. This is essential if we 
are to achieve solidarity and intra-Arab cohesion in the 
interest of Arab security. 
  From this perspective, and in response to the wish of the 
brothers in Yemen, Jordan exerted efforts to help pave the way 
for the appropriate atmosphere that made the parties to the 
political dialogue in Yemen reach the pledge and accord document 
that was signed under his majesty King Husayn's auspices in 
Amman on 20 February 1994. This document reflected a concensus 
to pursue building the unified Yemeni state. In this context, 
we sincerely wish the Yemeni brothers success in implementing 
this accord. 
  It pains us to hear today the reports about the military 
confrontations among them. We ask God to protect them from 
internecine fighting. He is the one who responds to wishes. 
  The painful state of affairs the fraternal Iraqi people are 
experiencing deserves from us every attention and serious 
thinking to support their salvation. 
  Mr. Prime Minister, you know that Jordan shares with 
fraternal Egypt the commitment and work for reaching a just, and 
lasting peace in accordance with UN Security Council Resolutions 
242 and 338, the principles of international legitimacy, and the 
Madrid terms of reference on the return of the land in exchange 
for peace. Our participation also stems from a constant 
strategy and a deep conviction, and a genuine approach to attain 
a comprehensive, just, and lasting solution on all tracks; a 
peace that future generations will approve and that achieves 
stability, and secures the return of all the Arab rights and 
that will provide them with a free and dignified life, and avert 
the region conflicts and calamities. 
  Mr. Prime Minister, you know well what Jordan and His 
Majesty 
King Husayn have offered since the launching of the peace 
process in Madrid in terms of constructive and positive efforts 
and contributions to push the peace process ahead, to highlight 
the independent Palestinian identity, and enable the Palestinian 
command, the Palestinian people's legitimate and sole 
representative, to exercise its role in the peace process by 
providing the umbrella that made it possible for them to 
overcome the difficulties that obstructed the peace process, and 
allowed the Palestinian party to participate in the Madrid 
conference on an equal footing with the other parties. Out of 
its belief that the Palestinian cause is the core of the 
dispute, Jordan did not ratify the working agenda with the 
Israeli side, making it dependent on the attainment of real 
progress on the Palestinian track. When this progress was 
achieved through the independent decision and option embodied in 
the signing of the Palestinian-Israeli Declaration of Principles 
Jordan supported this agreement and ratified the joint 
Jordanian-Israeli agenda. Jordan has also alloted special 
importance to coordination among the Arab parties that are 
involved in the peace process and worked for enhancing it and 
institutionalizing it, hoping this will bolster the Arab stand 
of negotiation in a manner that will achieve the supreme 
interests of all the Arab parties through constant consultations 
and the exchange of views and the coordination of stands on the 
peace process and its developments. However, and with great 
regret, coordination did not rise to the aspired level and was 
governed by whims and seasonal stands. 
  Mr. Prime Minister, despite Jordan's constructive and 
positive role in the peace process, both the bilateral and 
multilateral parts of it, this role did not receive the support 
and appreciation it deserves. Pressures increased on Jordan by 
tightening the noose around the Gulf of Aqaba, Jordan's lungs 
and its economic outlet despite Jordan's commitment to the 
implementation of the resolutions of the international 
legitimacy; something which made us insist on the need to end 
this tribulation and the losses our economy is sustaining. 
  In light of the recent meeting between His Majesty King 
Husayn and U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, the 
positive signs that there is an understanding of the situation, 
and of the Jordanian request, and the possibility of reaching 
arrangements that would end this tribulation, we hope that this 
meeting will produce positive results, the blockade will be 
lifted, and a definitive solution to this problem found so 
Jordan can pursue its positive course toward the peace process. 
  Mr. Prime Minister: The changes on the international level, 
the emergence of the new world order, and the world's moving 
toward the formation of influential regional economic blocs and 
the development projects and programs the region could witness 
in the post-peace era makes us dutybound to review the Arab 
state of affairs from all its political, security, and economic 
aspects. The economic challenges that we could face soon calls 
on us to prepare ourselves to deal with them on sound and 
studied bases. Within this framework, there is a need to 
upgrade consultations, coordination, and the exchange of views 
in a manner that would secure the economic interests of our 
people and countries. 
  Our meeting today, and Your Excellency's visit to your 
second 
country embodies these objectives and expresses the fraternal 
relationship which binds us. This visit will give us the 
opportunity to review all that is important to us, whether in 
the field of enhancing bilateral relations, or tackling Arab and 
regional causes of mutual interest by placing them within the 
proper framework that serves the interests of the two fraternal 
peoples and achieve their aspirations and objectives. 
  I hope that their excellencies the brother ministers on both 
sides will meet, hold consultations, and work together. I am 
certain that their meetings will be permeated by an atmosphere 
of brotherhood. I have no doubt that we will emerge with 
positive results. 
  We support the PLO and consider it the sole legitimate 
representative [of the Palestinian people]. We will always 
stand on its side. Thank you. 
  [Sidqi] I cannot find words to express our thanks and 
appreciation for the warm hospitality my colleagues and I have 
received since our arrival yesterday. Jordan's warm hospitality 
and generosity is well known. Thank you, very much. 
  Thank you, Your Excellency, for the kind statements you just 
made about Egypt and the entire Arab nation, and for your good 
hopes about the future of intra-Arab cooperation. 
  Mr. Prime Minister, allow me to completely second everything 
you just said in this regard. Any objective observer of the 
Arab nation's situation following the Gulf war will totally 
agree with your analysis of this issue. Thanks to God, we have 
begun to overcome this stage, which I do not want describe 
because this is not something for the listeners' ears. 
  Mr. Prime Minister, allow me to say that I, as well as all 
of Egypt, second every word you have said about this broad field 
concerning our hopes for the Arab nation, which go far beyond 
what currently exists on the ground. True, there are some 
efforts being exerted in this area. These attempts, however, 
cannot deal with the difficult situation the Arab nation now 
faces. 
  Your Excellency, allow me to add that we carry our 
appreciation and love to fraternal Jordan. We bring all our 
pride in and recognition of Jordan's serious and effective role 
in events in the Arab arena. If we recall the history of the 
Arab nation, at least in recent times, or what we can call the 
contemporary period, we find that Jordan has played, and is 
still playing, a principle and basic role in all the events 
facing this nation. 
  That is not all. Jordan plays a role that extends beyond the 
Arab arena in to the international arena, due to His Majesty 
King Husayn's wisdom and ability to hold contacts and dialogues 
that serve the interests of the generous Arab nation, which Your 
Excellency spoke about at length. 
  We came to convey this message. We came to say that through 
this meeting we, as Your Excellency said, truly want to overcome 
a stage and period that was really a painful period. I second 
Your Excellency's statement that it is our duty to look toward 
the future. In terms of dealing with the past, Jordan and Egypt 
together can play a basic role in achieving the reconciliation 
that is needed between Arab countries. I say necessary 
reconciliation because the Arab nation will not be able to face 
what is currently taking place around it and, indeed, what will 
soon take place inside it, if it has not already begun to do 
that in terms of events and challenges which no one Arab country 
can face on its own. We did well. I say frankly that this is 
due to your initiative and His Majesty King Husayn's initiative 
to bring Jordan and Egypt closer again. We all hope to achieve 
this. 
  Your Excellency, you have touched on a very important and 
serious issue that, I believe, is known by everyone in Jordan 
and Egypt. I do not think anyone in either country can belittle 
the grave and momentous challenges we face. 
  Let us leave the Arab nation and take a look at what is 
taking place in the world. As Your Excellency said, the world 
is heading toward a new situation. I must stress that none of 
us can face this situation alone. 
  Yesterday, I talked with some of the brother members of the 
fraternal Jordanian delegation. In fact, at least in the field 
of economic coordination, cooperation, and integration, the Arab 
Common Market was signed in March or April 1957 before the 
signing of the European Common Market [ECM]. As you are aware, 
the ECM was signed in May 1957, one or two months after us. 
They have now arrived at semi-unity, not only economic unity 
but economic and political unity, and will have full unity by 
the end of the century. We are still talking about the 
importance of this matter and this necessary thing. Points of 
similarity and identity among Arab nations are greater than 
those in Western Europe. 
  How can we deal with these blocs when we are separated, each 
on his own, and when we are unable to complete the coordination 
reached in the past?. This coordination was cut. We want to 
resume it, and we cannot do this. As Your Excellency is aware, 
and as I and all the brothers present here, Jordanian or 
Egyptian, are aware, there are difficulties and things that 
prevent the completion of this agreement, or coordination. Why? 
I do not know. 
  Today -- and we have all heard about it, nothing can hide in 
the modern world -- how can we face contemporary developments in 
the region, the approach toward peace. This course cannot be 
reversed. Neither in regard to the Palestinian brothers -- and 
Your Excellency referred to this very accurately and clearly. 
[sentence as heard]. Jordan and Syria are proceeding on the same 
path. Lebanon is the same. After a short while, everything ... 
[pauses] I mean this thing is inevitable. Even if there are 
snags or differences between the Arab and Israelis sides. The 
Arab side is represented by Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, and even 
Palestine. Until yesterday there were differences that had to 
be agreed on. This is not the end, this is the beginning of a 
phase that brings numerous challenges to all of us. 
  I would like to note one point, namely, what we hear -- and 
I 
have just said nothing remains secret -- of preparations for the 
so- called Middle Eastern market. Will Jordan, Egypt, Syria, 
Lebanon, or any Gulf state enter this market alone? I do not 
think so. A kind of full cooperation and coordination among all 
of us is necessary. What Jordan produces, Egypt does not, and 
what Egypt produces, Jordan does not. Thus, cooperation and 
integration in the sense we all know will be realized. 
  The challenges are great. The most dangerous is this latest 
challenge that deals with the possibility of establishing a 
Middle Eastern market. This is just an idea that has not 
materialized yet. But I think the significance of this is that 
there can be only cooperation between the states in the region. 
The peace is being made to pave the way for this. This is my 
view. All the peace arrangements are designed in order to have 
a sort of economic coordination and the establishment of a 
Middle East market in which Israel plays a basic role. This is 
no secret to you or to us or to anyone on the Arab nation. All 
these preparations are being done to establish this Middle 
Eastern market. The question is very serious. We we cannot face 
it in silence. I have proposed to Your Excellency in passing 
during our talks yesterday that these dangers and challenges 
require us to sit together, think together, and cooperate and 
then integrate in order to enter as one front in this market, if 
possible. This is possible, there is nothing impossible. We 
can now realize that differences occur even among friends but 
these are settled in the end. 
  When differences occurred on the GATT between the United 
States on the one hand and Western Europe, especially France, on 
the other, they settled these differences. They did not leave 
each other and remain in their own countries, discussing issues 
in confusion. They sat down and settled their differences. We 
must do the same regardless of the differences among us and 
regardless of the variance in interests. I am fully in 
agreement with Your Excellency on joint issues, joint interests. 
The subjective issues and issues that deal with each state 
alone can be done by each state alone as far as is possible. If 
it needs cooperation from others, well and good, as you have 
done with our brothers in Yemen and as we have also tried to do 
with them. Regrettably, you are aware that the news from Yemen 
is absolutely worrisome. 
  The coming challenges are very great. They require all of 
us, not only Jordan and Egypt, to forget and bypass -- as Your 
Excellency said -- the differences that exist now. If we sit 
down together all these differences will be liquidated. I am 
aware that many sides, especially the Arab League, are exerting 
efforts to realize this objective and support this. I pray God 
will speed their efforts. 
  Please allow me to say something about Egypt's cares and 
problems, which you hear about in Egyptian press and other 
media. There is an unlimited exaggeration of the problem of 
terrorism in Egypt. In fact, we in Egypt do not feel it as do 
others who look toward Egypt, like the foreign press, radios, 
television and other channels. Advances in television are such 
that today in Amman you can see America and Asia. There are 
exaggerations about some terrorist incidents in Egypt. I do not 
know the reason for these exaggerations. I say there are some 
sporadic incidents. 
  Another subject, which I will briefly mention because it is 
a 
wide subject. We are all in the same boat regarding it, namely, 
the process of contacting international bodies, the IMF or the 
World Bank. I am aware that Jordan has contacts with these two 
international bodies. Egypt has been having continuous contacts 
with them. This is because we needed them in the process of 
rescheduling the debts that accumulated. We are embarking on an 
economic reform program which is characterized by encouraging 
private economic activities and the privitization of part of the 
public sector. 
  There is also the rectification of disorder in various 
structures, be it the balance of payment ... [pauses] now we 
have a surplus. The general budget's deficit is disappearing. 
This year it will only be 2 percent. The inflation rates have 
dropped. in 1986, the inflation was 25-26 percent. Some say it 
was 30 and 35 percent. Today, by all estimations, inflation 
does not exceed 7.3 percent. This demonstrates that economic 
reform is proceeding at a good rate. We are continuing, with 
the IMF and the bank, or without them. We will complete the 
program of the economic reform. I am aware that Jordan is 
proceeding in the same direction and it has had good results in 
the economic reform program. 
  On the issue of the problem [words indistinct] Germany, 
Italy. All these states are exposed [pauses] Turkey, which is a 
neighboring state and we are aware of its news. What is 
happening in Egypt is very little, God be praised. It has not 
affected the course of the Egyptian economy as these people 
wanted. It affected tourism but did not affect the other 
various economic sectors. The investment sector is good. There 
is a great rate of investment which is increasing month by 
month, both Arab and foreign investments received in Egypt. 
This is a sign of trust in Egypt and its economy. 
  Concerning terrorism, I really wanted to place before the 
eyes of Your Excellency and the brother members of the Jordanian 
delegation, that it is not as serious as it seems in some papers 
and radio and television broadcasts--CNN and others. Now they 
are retreating from this method because they found that it is no 
use. However, I wanted to place this picture before Your 
Excellency so that you may be reassured about Egypt. It is now 
in good shape and will always remain in good shape in the 
service of the Arab nation. 
  We are coming with an open heart and open minds and we 
expect 
good results from this meeting of the Joint Egyptian-Jordanian 
Higher Committee after a period of leave that extended for about 
four years. However, we are returning with complete 
understanding of the nature of the current phase and the need to 
realize what Your Excellency proposed. This is because no Arab 
country can live alone in this contemporary world with all its 
huge challenges. If these challenges are not faced with unity 
and integration, their negative results on the Arab states will 
be greater than anyone can imagine. Only God knows the extent of 
this negative side. 
  In conclusion, I hope that you will accept from me and my 
colleague our thanks and appreciation for the very cordial 
hospitality you accorded us since we arrived in fraternal Jordan 
last night. I hope that Egyptian-Jordanian relations will 
witness progress, success, and expansion in all fields, and I 
wish all of you health and success. I hope the meeting of this 
committee will realize what we all are aspiring to realize. God 
willing, this meeting will be followed by other meeting and we 
hope they will be held in Cairo next time. On this occasion, I 
extend an invitation for Your Excellency and your minister 
colleagues at a time which we will agree on at the end of this 
round. 
  I wish Jordan and its beloved king happiness, health, and 
success, God willing. 
  Peace and blessings of God be upon you. 

