Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS correspondent Lyudmila Yermakova] </F>
  [Text] Moscow 28 Mar, TASS -- "Legislative and Executive 
Branches of power in the subjects of the federation are being 
balanced off," according to Sergey Samoylov, acting head of the 
Department for Work with Regions in the President Boris 
Yeltsin's administration. 
  In an interview with ITAR-TASS on Monday, Samoylov said that 
the election campaign has entered its final stage in Russian 
regions. Between December 1993 and last Sunday elections were 
held in 69 regions. In 59 of them they were considered good and 
valid. Their legislative bodies are formed by two-thirds and 
can begin operation. 
  Despite gloomy forecasts, elections this past weekend showed 
that "the activity of the electorate on the whole increased and 
reached about 40 per cent on the average," Samoylov said. They 
were held in 27 regions because North Ossetia, the Maritime 
region and two other regions have postponed them until a later 
date. Elections were good in 24 regions and failed, according 
to preliminary reports, in the Samara, Magadan and Ryazan 
regions. In some regions, local bodies of power are 100 per 
cent staffed. For example, in the Irkutsk region, in all 45 
constituencies more than 40 per cent of voters cast their 
ballots. 
  The failure was also reported in the cities of Voronezh, 
Nizhny Novgorod, Novosibirsk and Samara. 
  Samoylov pointed to the "unpleasant tendency" when former 
heads of regional soviets can regain power, for example in the 
Kemerovo, Kurgan and other Russian regions. The winners include 
many heads of regional administrations, directors of industrial 
enterprises. The party elite, both right and left, kept low 
profile. 
  Explaining the increase in the activity at the final stage, 
Samoylov noted that the administrations which held these 
elections had drawn on the experience of their neighbours. They 
had more time to prepare for the elections, explain their idea 
to the population and engage the local mass media. However the 
situation was also affected by the lingering "syndrome of 
elections to the State Duma," Samoylov explained. People see 
that it has not adopted a single law yet. This makes them draw 
parallels with their local councils. "The Zhirinovskiy 
phenomenon is also scary," he added. 
  The voting proceeded more actively in rural areas. Experts 
are tending to explain it by the more tight discipline in rural 
communities and their greater dependence on local bodies of 
power. 
  Ten regions will hold by-elections, but "we already have 59 
formed bodies of power," Samoylov said. This is very important 
because "the Executive Branch should not be left alone for too 
long," he added. He believes that confrontation between 
branches of power may be expected only in a small number of 
regions. 
  In more than 10 regions local councils have already begun 
their operation. In some regions elections will be held with 
consent of the Central Electoral Commission by June, in others 
this coming autumn. 
  Samoylov stressed that federal bodies of power "are trying 
to 
assess the results of the elections realistically. Bad or good 
new bodies of power are, we have to work with them." "The 
experience of their work will be used in drawing up new laws on 
the basic principles of local self-government, on basic 
functions of the bodies of power in the subjects of the 
federation and on guarantees of the voters' rights," he said. 

