Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel Yu. Timchenko, deputy chief of the LP </F>
[Flight Accidents] Investigation Directorate of the RF Armed 
Forces SBP [Flight Safety Service], under the rubric "Flight 
Safety: Special Situation": "Thirty Seconds in a Takeoff..."] 
  [Text] Many years of accident statistics demonstrate 
that the takeoff is one of the most unsafe stages of a flight. 
Gross errors in piloting and failures in aircraft hardware 
during it lead, as a rule, to grave flight accidents with the 
death of people. 
  The weather that day, as they say, was gorgeous. The crew of 
an Su-24--Senior Lieutenants I. Chizhenko and S. Dzhololov--were 
preparing to make a performance-graded flight as part of a pair. 
  Forty seconds after takeoff of the lead aircraft, the pilot 
brought the engine RPM to maximum, set the RUDs [engine control 
levers] to "Full Afterburner" and released the brake. A turning 
moment arose in the direction of the left engine during the 
takeoff run, which the pilot attempted to counter by deflecting 
the right pedal and using the brakes. He accomplished separation 
of the nose wheel at a speed of 180 km/hr. The angle of attack 
reached 15 therein (instead of the recommended 
10--12), while the deviation of the aircraft from the 
takeoff heading was 3 to the left. 
  The attempt of Chizhenko to kept the aircraft on the runway 
by deflecting the pedal and the stick by 2/3 of their full range 
was not successful. The deviation from the takeoff heading 
reached 13 before the separation of the aircraft, and the 
threat arose of its running off the runway. The pilot, seeing 
the inevitability of continuing the further run off of the 
artificial surface, set the pedal in a position that was close 
to neutral. 
  In the 20th second of the flight, after crossing the side 
safety strip, the aircraft separated at a speed of 290 km/hr 
with a left bank and angle of attack of 20.3. A second 
later the flight control officer and his assistant gave the 
command to the pilot to reduce the climb angle. As a consequence 
of the Su-24 entering a mode of neutral G-forces, the presence 
of slip, a sharp reduction in the effectiveness of the controls 
and the inaction of the pilot, there occurred a further increase 
in the angle of attack (more than 33) and left roll at an 
angular velocity of 10/second. 
  The flight operations officer [RP] twice gave the command to 
the crew to eject in the 25th second of the flight of the 
aircraft, at an altitude of 15 meters and a roll of 50. The 
aircraft hit the ground a distance of 400 meters from the runway 
axis in the 30th second with a left roll of 90, and the 
crew was killed... 
  What dangerous factors led to the appearance and development 
of this catastrophic situation? 
  The complication of the flight conditions occurred owing to 
the failure of the left engine afterburner to ignite, caused by 
a failure of the spark gap and gas rectifier of the ignition 
system. The crew, in order to keep the situation from 
disintegrating into an emergency, should have performed 
functional duties to monitor the operating mode of the power 
plant before the takeoff--and in this case turn off the 
afterburner mode of both engines, report the curtailment of 
takeoff to the RP and taxi to the hardstand. 
  Unfortunately, neither the pilot nor the navigator seems to 
have followed these rudimentary recommendations. The takeoff was 
continued, and the dangerous factor was not localized. 
  The pilot could have averted the disintegration of the 
situation into an emergency by fulfilling one of the following 
alternative conditions: 
  --the making of a timely decision to curtail the takeoff 
(there were four seconds of time reserve to assess the situation 
and make a decision, with the length of the takeoff run not 
exceeding 630 meters); 
  --the continuation of the takeoff with the maximum use of 
the 
controls to keep the aircraft on the runway, and error-free 
piloting with regard to the angle of attack. 
  The difference in thrust between the two engines when the 
afterburner on one of them was not operating was 4,700 kgf. 
Calculations and the results of flight testing have shown that 
it can be countered by the maximum deflection of the rudder. The 
reserve of flight mass at which gain in altitude in possible 
with one engine operating in full afterburner mode was 8,000 kg 
under the actual conditions of this takeoff. 
  There was also no help for the crew, when the deviations, 
arose on the part of the GRP [flight operations command and 
control group] specialists, since their capabilities for the 
continuous monitoring of the aircraft in the takeoff run are 
extremely limited owing to the positioning of the workstations 
at the command and control post; the command to reduce the angle 
of attack in takeoff was issued too late. 
  The emergency situation ensued at the moment of separation 
of 
the aircraft and its reaching of supercritical angles of attack, 
when it was now no longer possible to avert stalling by vigorous 
pushing of the stick. The sole correct decision of the crew 
under these conditions would have been to abandon the aircraft 
immediately. 
  The safe ejection zone, calculations have shown, was at the 
interval of 12--22 seconds. The emergency ejection gear could 
not save the crew starting at second 23--at a roll of 35 or 
more and a speed of 300 km/hour, the parachutes would have 
opened only at an altitude of 15 meters, which would not make it 
possible to lessen the speed of the "man--parachute" system to a 
speed that would be safe for survival. The crew's decision to 
eject was eight seconds late. 
  Statistics show that the reliability of engines in 
afterburner ignition is not adequate. There have been eleven 
such instances recorded in units where this flight accident has 
occurred over the last three years alone. 
  The unreliability of the pilot, which depends on more than 
his level of training alone, is the chief danger factor under 
conditions of a sharp reduction in flying time. A knowledge of 
the aerodynamic properties of the hardware being operated, a 
well thought-out and effective system of conducting training 
sessions with the practicing of skills for averting special 
cases in flight and, finally, personal monitoring both on the 
ground and in the air--these are the conditions for ensuring the 
personal safety of the pilot. 
  The short duration of the takeoff of a modern aircraft does 
not leave time for the assessment of the situation and the 
making of decisions; it requires immediate and competent 
actions. Therefore, increase attention toward the takeoff! 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 


