Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Tokyo Asahi Television Network in 
Japanese at 0107 GMT on 30 January, as part of its 100-minute 
political magazine program, "Sunday Project," which begins at 
0100 GMT, carries a 39-minute live interview with Foreign 
Minister Tsutomu Hata, by commentator Soichiro Tawara at the 
Asahi Television studio in Tokyo. 
  The political reform bills passed by the Diet on 29 January 
are the first topic, and Tawara asks Hata, who also heads 
Shinseito (Japan Renewal Party), whether he had expected the 
Diet to eventually pass the reform bills. Hata says that there 
was an atmosphere in the Diet and among the public that 
political reforms cannot be put off anymore, and adds that he 
had felt if the lower house speaker requested top leaders of the 
coalition and the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) to meet, 
"dialogue (to pass the bills) would start therefrom." 
  Hata says even after the House of Councillors defeated the 
government-proposed bills earlier in the week, he felt confident 
that if the bills were referred to the House of Representatives, 
they could be passed by more than a two-thirds vote. He 
insists, "There was a big current of the times toward that." 
  Tawara asks Hata, "Do you think the heiritsu-sei (combining 
the single-seat district and proportional representation 
systems) is a process of going toward a complete single-seat 
district system or is it the ideal system which should take 
roots?" Hata says the heiritsu-sei can better reflect the 
popular will than a pure single- seat district system. 
  Asked if a general election will be held under the new 
election system by the end of this year, Hata says, "I do not 
think we need to wait until the end of the year," but also 
cautions against being hasty. "The Diet has various problems to 
take care of. On the other hand, political parties need time to 
turn into new parties which will be fitting to the new political 
system," he explains. 
  After some discussions on general economic issues with Hata 
and economists who are present as guests, Tawara brings up the 
Japan- U.S. economic consultations as the next topic. He notes 
the U.S. Government is unhappy about the "bureaucrat-led" 
government of Japan, and cites a senior State Department 
official as saying, "Cannot Hosokawa fire Saito (administrative 
vice minister of finance)?" 
  Hata responds: "America, or Washington, is a small place. If 
someone puts out some information, this spreads to every corner 
quickly. I was recently told the same story by an American who 
was in a very high position. I told him, 'If you start saying 
that sort of thing, let me say this: You have the U.S. Trade 
Representative's Office, the State Department, the Treasury 
Department, the Commerce Department, the Agriculture Department, 
and so forth. The people there all say different things -- they 
speak as they please. Why cannot the people there keep in 
contact with each other better?'" 
  The foreign minister continues: "In the United States, when 
the government changes hands, the people of a new government say 
things which are completely different from what the people of a 
preceding government said." 
  Asked about the numerical targets question, which the U.S. 
Government wants to be set as a way of measuring the progress of 
market liberalization, Hata says he will continue to object to 
that concept, insisting: "I think we must object to it. Let us 
look back on the experience with respect to semiconductors and 
auto parts. No doubt, these products were contributing to the 
trade surplus. So we told the people of those industries that 
it was no time to begin buying other countries' products, and we 
informed the U.S. officials about this. And the officials were 
happy about it. But this was nothing but targets toward which 
efforts would be made." 
  Moderator Tawara says Japan has always been passive in the 
Japan-U.S. economic talks, and asks Hata if the Japanese 
Government will not make any proposals from its side in the 
ongoing talks. Hata replies that Japan has made proposals to 
the U.S. Government already, and says the government told the 
U.S. it should earnestly take on the financial budget deficit 
problem and the country's industries must learn to become more 
competitive. 
  The interview ends at 0146 GMT. 

