Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, March 29 (CTK) -- Slovak Privatization 
Minister Milan Janicina does not want to prevent further 
privatization, and, if no complications arise, he will ask the 
finance minister to unblock the account of the National Property 
Fund (FNM), Janicina said at a press conference today. 
  Finance Minister Rudolf Filkus blocked the FNM account at 
Janicina's request, so that the actions of the previous 
government in transferring property could be examined. 
  Forty-five privatization projects, approved in an 
uncontrolled privatization activity by the government of 
Vladimir Meciar after February 14, were examined, Janicina said. 
Legal and other shortcomings were found in 13 of them, and thus 
these projects, approved by Meciar's cabinet, were canceled. 
  The privatization projects canceled by the decision of the 
new government include the privatization of the Piestany spa, 
the Tatran Bratislava publishing house, the Pohronsky Ruskov 
mill, the Humenne meat processing factory, and others. The 
projects will be examined by the Prosecutor's Office. Five of 
them might result in prosecution, Janicina said. 
  Deputy Premier Ivan Simko said that the cabinet had not 
looked at who were finally to acquire the privatized property, 
or whether any deputies from the former government coalition or 
their relatives stood behind the projects. However, Janicina 
added that next week he would have the information at his 
disposal on "which deputy lobbied for whose wife," including the 
enumeration of the property in individual cases. 
  Janicina also said he knew about a privatization project 
approved without all the property being included, and did not 
rule out the existence of further such cases. He therefore 
turned to the interior minister and Prosecutor General, asking 
them to establish a joint commission to continue examining the 
unclear privatization projects approved by Meciar's government. 
  Janicina said he was convinced that the abolition of the 
privatization projects could not damage Slovakia's image abroad. 
On the contrary, a privatization process which was pure from 
the legal point of view, should strengthen the confidence of 
foreign investors, he stressed. 

