BFN 

  [Text] Today, 26 May, the newspaper GRANMA published an 
article entitled "Pharisaism," which points out that 20 May was 
the 92d anniversary of the (eunuch government) installed through 
U.S. military intervention in Cuba. The article reports that for 
the Cuban people, this date was an ill-fated moment in our 
history. 
  The article adds that President William Clinton, who is not 
Cuban and need not be, had decided to commemorate that 
castration with a 400-word message aired by anti-Cuban radio and 
television. Four miserly paragraphs are what this arrogant 
superpower produced to make pronouncements on today's Cuba and 
spread the unsolicited opinions of the U.S. Government. They did 
not have to deliver that message, but Clinton decided to do so, 
adhering to the old idea of annexation that today still 
manifests itself with insistence upon its desire to annex us to 
their new world order. 
  The crudeness of the U.S. President's communique suggests an 
electoral message directed more toward Miami than toward Cuba. 
GRANMA clarifies that in November, Floridians will vote and that 
several interests are at stake in that election. Perhaps this is 
why in the first of his four paragraphs, William Clinton 
describes the 35 years of the Cuban Revolution as an inhumane 
dictatorship, saying that he has a profound desire for Cuban 
people to live in liberty. 
  The Yankee president wants to believe that we Cubans are 
gullible sheep, that we will identify that inhumane dictatorship 
with the regime that preserved human dignity for the first time, 
and accustomed all Cubans to food and clothing and employment, 
something that the capitalist regime, prior to the Revolution, 
offered to only one-third of the work force. 
  GRANMA's article notes that if living in freedom means the 
Cuban people must return to 31 percent of the population having 
no education, 24 percent illiteracy among the adult population 
and 66 percent among children up to 10 years of age; a 
49-percent unemployment rate; 32 percent of the homes having 
dirt floors and thatch roofs, 65 percent of these houses without 
running water, 72 percent without sanitary systems; 36 percent 
of the peasants infected with parasites, 31 percent of them 
suffering from malaria, and 14 percent of them suffering 
tuberculosis -- just to quote a few indicators -- then we really 
are not interested in that liberty, which is truly inhumane 
because it is the philosophy of every-man-for-himself. 
  In another part of his message, U.S. President William 
Clinton says the observance of democracy, human rights, and a 
government that reports to the people are the cornerstones 
considered in relations between the United States and Latin 
America, and Cuba does not comply with these requirements. 
Clinton made such comments about the only government in this 
hemisphere, including the United States, that not only reports 
to its people, but in a supremely democratic procedure including 
millions of people, the only one of its kind, opens political 
issues such as Cuba's economic situation to public debate. 
  GRANMA asks: Where does the average American express his 
opinion on taxes or on the economic policies of Washington, 
either to support or to oppose the decisions of government, 
which are a select group of corporate plutocrats? 
  GRANMA points out that in his message, President William 
Clinton says he wants the same for us as for all the people of 
America. He then specifies what those wishes are: freedom of the 
press, freedom of speech, protection against arbitrary 
imprisonment, respect for a legitimate legal process, and a 
state of law. 
  GRANMA says that Clinton's message makes no reference to 
Cuba's nor to any of its Latin American neighbors' right to 
live, work, receive education, food, health care, and housing. 
There is no reference whatsoever to the elimination of poverty, 
which implies balanced economic development and better 
distribution of wealth. 
  All this stems from the old and well-known individual civil 
rights, which mean little or nothing to the deprived majority. 
It is just the same rhetoric as usual. 

