BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with President Geydar Aliyev by unidentified </F>
INTERFAX correspondent -- place and date not given; "Exclusive" 
report No. 24] 
  [Text] INTERFAX: The first question is about the political 
situation in Azerbaijan. The removal of two leaders of the 
Popular Front from the National Assembly has been regarded by 
the opposition as the president's blow against democracy. How 
true is that? 
  Aliyev: Not at all. There is no threat to democracy in 
Azerbaijan. The country has 43 registered political parties. 
It publishes scores of newspapers and only one of them 
"AZERBAIJAN" is official, it is a newspaper of the parliament 
and carries official documents. 
  Even the Popular Front functions normally despite all the 
unlawful, anti-government actions of some of its members. When 
it launches a campaign based on mildly speaking unconfirmed 
facts, official bodies only warn it. 
  That is what happened when the Popular Front attacked the 
Bishkek protocol. (The protocol signed in Kyrgyzstan on the 
separation of forces in Nagorno-Karabakh with the help of an 
international force. - IF) Supporters of the Popular Front are 
invited to settle all their problems in parliament. I must say 
that they do not always heed such suggestions. 
  As for the dropping of two Front members from parliament, it 
is quite normal. At the end of 1990 Azerbaijan elected a 350 
seat parliament. Later when the Popular Front fought against 
the Communist leadership it forced Communists to make 
concessions and set up a 50 member National Assembly in which 25 
members represented the Popular Front and the rest were 
Communists. 
  When Ayaz Mutalibov (the Azeri Communist leader -IF) was 
removed from power and the Popular Front governed the country, 
it denied all deputies not belonging to the National Assembly 
the possibility to perform their duties. Some tried to collect 
signatures under protest petitions, but the Popular Front 
stopped these efforts even though that was a crying violation of 
the rights of deputies. When the National Assembly was formed, 
the rotation of its members was implied. Now this right was 
exercised: two members were dropped from the National Assembly 
and replaced by two other deputies. Still like others they 
remain full-fledged deputies. 
  INTERFAX: But they have no rights. 
  Aliyev: That is not quite so. They did not have any rights. 
But when I was elected the chairman of the Supreme Soviet, I 
announced that all deputies have the right to attend sessions of 
the National Assembly. Earlier they were not allowed to do that. 
  INTERFAX: The restrictions on the freedom of speech and the 
press in Azerbaijan are often criticized by the media in CIS 
countries. 
  Aliyev: Newspapers in Azerbaijan are published regularly. As 
I said "AZERBAIJAN" carrying official documents is the only 
government newspaper. Such newspapers as "BAKINSKIY RABOCHY" 
which used to be a newspaper of the Central Committee of the 
Communist Party, "KOMMUNIST" now called "VYSHKA" and "BAKU" are 
now independent. I want to emphasize that the State Council 
does not try impose its ideas on journalists. 
  INTERFAX: You said the deputies dismissed from the National 
Assembly keep their rights, is that true? 
  Aliyev: Yes, they do. When I was elected the chairman of the 
Supreme Soviet I announced that all deputies have the right to 
attend sessions of the National Assembly, but I failed to cancel 
an earlier decision denying them the right to vote. 
  Later I started inviting uninvolved deputies to 
parliamentary 
committees. A normal parliament should have at least ten or 
twelve committees, but if there are only 50 persons and some of 
them might fall ill, committees would consists of three or four 
people. Could they be called parliamentary committees? 
  Thus I think I managed to somewhat raise the standard of 
democracy in the country. Therefore I think that the 
replacement of two deputies by way of rotation is quite normal. 
Besides, I see no reason why such matters should be linked with 
my name -- it is a parliamentary affair. 
  INTERFAX: In other words you want to say you have nothing to 
do with the change of the deputies? 
  Aliyev: Absolutely nothing. By the way, I learned about it 
only at the end of the day and was quite surprised. I think the 
racket around my name in this context is necessary only for 
opposition parties as a pretext for aggravating the situation. 
  INTERFAX: Azerbaijan now has a Supreme Soviet and the 
National Assembly. This two-tier system of elected bodies 
resembles the last years of the USSR: the Congress of People's 
Deputies, the Supreme Soviet. Don't you think Azerbaijan needs 
new parliamentary elections? 
  Aliyev: I do. Firstly, because the parliament was elected 
under the Communist regime. You know my attitude to the 
Communist Party: I officially left it. Secondly, the Supreme 
Soviet was artificially squeezed by an arbitrary decision of the 
Popular Front that was working toward its own goals. By the 
way, there is no clause in our constitution allowing such 
decisions. Neither is there such a provision in other former 
Soviet republics. Still from the legal viewpoint there is a 
year left till the next elections. 
  It should also be remembered that 20 percent of Azeri 
territory is occupied (by the armed forces of Nagorno-Karabakh 
and Armenia, according to Baku's interpretation - IF). There 
are about one million refugees in the country. There is a war. 
Thank God, we have brought about a cease-fire, but minor 
exchanges of fire continue. In these conditions, I think, 
elections must not be held. 
  However, as president I am convinced that the country needs 
a 
new parliament democratically elected by the people. It is not 
so important whether it will have 100 or 200 members. The main 
thing is that it should be professional and permanently 
functioning. 
  INTERFAX: Do you think elections are possible only after 
the restoration of peace and with the participation of Karabakh? 
  Aliyev: Karabakh is part of Azerbaijan, therefore its 
participation in the elections is necessary. In reality, 
though, it is difficult to expect people of Nagorno-Karabakh to 
be able to cast their ballots in the near future, even though 
the election law has been worked out. 
  INTERFAX: There is an opinion that now that the war is under 
way, the parliament is blocking the transition to presidential 
rule which would make the country more controllable. What do 
you think of that? 
  Aliyev: I must say that I have heard such proposals from the 
public. It was suggested, for example, that the president 
declare martial law, introduce a curfew in certain regions. But 
I did not agree to that because such steps would restrict 
certain democratic rights and orders proclaimed by me. My main 
objective is to strengthen democracy in Azerbaijan. 
  INTERFAX: Another question in this context: a coalition 
government and the approval of a new constitution. There is 
much talk on the subject now in Azerbaijan. 
  Aliyev: The two matters are interconnected. Can the present 
parliament which is actually crippled adopt a new constitution? 
I think a new constitution is necessary. As president I could 
suggest my own version of the fundamental law and submit it for 
a nationwide debate and have it approved through a referendum. 
But that would also require a parliament. 
  Besides, ill-wishers would interpret that as an attempt by 
Aliyev to grab all power. Still I believe the adoption of the 
constitution is a prerogative of parliament while the president 
can only submit proposals and drafts. 
  I would want to repeat, though, that the country needs a new 
constitution as we now live according to a constitution approved 
in 1978 by the Soviet Socialist Republic of Azerbaijan, not an 
independent state. 
  As for a coalition government, it is out of the question. 
What right do the Popular Front and other opposition groups 
have to join the cabinet? The country has a popularly elected 
president who in keeping with the law appoints ministers. 
  INTERFAX: Do you as president feel that your orders are 
being 
carried out, that you are in control unlike your predecessors? 
  Aliyev: There are no doubts that I have the power and it is 
also clear that I can use it. 
  There is another thing I would want to say. When in June 
1991 in Moscow I announced my resignation from the Communist 
Party and returned to Baku, life there was made unbearable for 
me: the local authorities ostracized me. A commission was set 
up to look into my past activities etc. 
  Then I went to Nakhichevan where the situation changed after 
the August coup attempt in Moscow: the regional party committee 
was closed. I was a member of the local parliament then. It 
was in session for two days to elect a new chairman. Over 
60,000 people rallied in the town and did not disperse for two 
days demanding that I come to parliament and lead it. I assumed 
the responsibility. 
  In those days Mutalibov still worked in Baku and he set the 
date for presidential elections for September 8. I said in 
parliament that the elections should be postponed because 
Mutalibov is not worthy of the post and is responsible for the 
developments in January 1990 and supported the coup leaders in 
Moscow. Besides, he was the only candidate. Mutalibov sent 
troops to Nakhichevan, but the people supported me. 
  After Mutalibov's resignation the public demanded my return 
to Baku: I was nominated candidate to the post of speaker of 
parliament. However, I turned the proposal down. A member of 
the Popular Front was elected speaker and Abulfaz Elchibei 
president. 
  After a time these persons started pressuring me, but the 
people saved me again. However, in Nakhichevan I remained in 
isolation. 
  Finally after the tragic developments last June when the 
country was practically in the state of civil war the speaker of 
parliament, prime-minister and president persuaded me to come to 
Baku. I refused for a long time, but finally agreed. I want to 
say that I returned not because I wanted that -- I did not fight 
for power at all -- the course of developments brought me to 
presidency. 
  Besides, after becoming the head of state I left old 
officials in my office, members of the Popular Front, even 
though some of them sabotage my decisions. This is a fact. 
  Nevertheless I believe that my power is so strong that I can 
bear all that for the sake of keeping the principles of 
democracy. 
  INTERFAX: Now let us switch to the complicated question of 
Karabakh. Negotiations now continue with the mediation of a 
special envoy of the Russian president V.Kazimirov. Has there 
been any progress? 
  Aliyev: I would not want to disclose the matter yet. In 
general terms I can say that I want an end to war and a peaceful 
settlement of the Karabakh question. The war will not be 
victorious for either Armenia, or Azerbaijan. 
  But the question should be settled on a fair basis, on the 
basis of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and 
inviolability of Azerbaijan. 
  In this context I would want to say that the CSCE Minsk 
group 
for Karabakh has done little to settle the conflict, even though 
I find the involvement of the international organizations in the 
process necessary. Russia is a member of the Minsk group but it 
also makes its own efforts to stop the war. 
  INTERFAX: What is your attitude to the sending of a 
separating force to the conflict zone? 
  Aliyev: We cannot do without it, but it should act under the 
auspices of the CSCE. 
  INTERFAX: But can Russian troops be its part? 
  Aliyev: They can, but with a mandate of the CSCE, not as a 
purely Russian army. 
  INTERFAX: Wouldn't you want to invite for talks the leaders 
of Karabakh regardless of Armenia? In that way it would 
probably be easier to agree... 
  Aliyev: I have many plans to this end. Probably, some of 
them will materialize. 
  INTERFAX: There is an opinion that the problem of Karabakh 
could be resolved through an exchange of territories with 
Armenia. How realistic would that be? 
  Aliyev: That is not a new idea, it is very old. In the past 
the late Andrey Sakharov came out with it. I was outside of 
political life then. It is hard to tell now how suitable the 
idea is. If the question arises again, it can be discussed. 
  INTERFAX: Our readers are quite interested in your attitude 
to relations with Russia. 
  Aliyev: I have nothing to complain about. For a time 
relations between Azerbaijan and Russia were quite cold and Baku 
was to blame for that. I felt that when I worked in 
Nakhichevan. My attitude to such a stance of the Azeri 
leadership was generally negative. Therefore when I was elected 
the chairman of the Supreme Soviet, in my very first speech I 
declared that the improvement of relations with Russia is one of 
the key tasks. 
  However, it was not easy for me to reach this aim. Once the 
Azeri parliament even blocked the question of the country's 
membership in the CIS. 
  I cannot say that the CIS is an organization that fully 
stands for its name: I felt that having attended three summits 
of the Commonwealth. Can it be normal that countries belonging 
to one association are in a state of war like Azerbaijan and 
Armenia? I suggested discussing the matter separately at a 
conference of CIS members, however, others evaded the matter. 
Therefore I cannot describe the efforts of the Commonwealth as 
satisfactory, still I am convinced that the organization is 
necessary. 
  INTERFAX: What are the priorities of Azerbaijan in foreign 
policy? 
  Aliyev: I am convinced that Azerbaijan should have equal, 
mutually-beneficial relations with all countries, primarily with 
its neighbors, of course. In the recent past Baku, and that is 
because of the country's leadership, had strained relations with 
our southern neighbor Iran with which we have a long frontier. 
Besides, many Azeris live there. I took steps to correct the 
mistake. Now relations between Azerbaijan and Iran are 
developing normally. 
  Speaking of relations with the West I want to say that I 
find 
them very important too. That is why I visited the NATO 
headquarters in Brussels and on April 4 signed the Partnership 
for Peace program. Firstly, it brings Azerbaijan closer to the 
Western world. Secondly, it creates conditions for more 
successful economic cooperation with countries of the North 
Atlantic Treaty. 
  INTERFAX: And the last question: how do you feel? 
  Aliyev: Very well. People surrounding me are much younger, 
but they find it hard to keep up with the pace of my work. That 
is what I can say. 

