Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Xiaohong: "Problems in the Procurement of </F>
Agricultural Products Are Prominent"] 
  [Text] The series of policy measures adopted by the CPC 
Central Committee and the State Council this year to support 
agricultural production and protect the peasants' interests have 
produced preliminary good effects. But there still exist some 
problems unhelpful to the sustained and steady development of 
agriculture in the functioning of the rural economy. The 
prominent manifestations of those problems are: 
  The situation regarding the implementation of preferential 
agricultural policies is not totally satisfactory. In order to 
effectively protect the peasants' interests, the state decided 
to enhance the regulation of prices for agricultural production 
materials, imposing ceilings on the prices of some major 
products. But some places have seen widespread phenomena of 
carrying out unauthorized business operations and conducting 
business operations without proper permits. According to the 
data provided by the supply and marketing cooperative of Hubei 
Province, in Tianmen City of that province there are 1,469 
establishments buying and selling agricultural production 
materials in violation of the state's regulations; 1,043 of 
those are individual business operators, and there are 42 other 
fixed establishments carrying out unauthorized business 
operations. Thus, naturally, price ceilings cannot be 
maintained. The Putuan cooperative in Huarong District, Ezhou 
City, distributed the entire township's 600,000 yuan 
agricultural credit funds through substituting fertilizer for 
loans. Fertilizer, substituting for loans, was issued to 
peasants who demanded loans whether the peasants intended to buy 
farm cattle or farm implements, resulting in a great deal of 
complaints from the peasants. In order to resolve the problem of 
the peasants' fund shortages, the state decided to make advance 
payments for forward procurement early this year. But according 
to an investigation in Hunan Province, most farm households did 
not receive advance payments for forward procurement. For 
instance, according to people in Linfeng County, peasants of 
approximately 60 percent of the 80 farm households subjected to 
a sample survey in that county did not receive advance payments 
for forward procurement, and a small number of farm households 
did not fully receive the advance payments. After the urgent 
circular on reducing the burdens on the peasants was issued in 
March, governments at various levels and the organizations 
concerned adopted a series of active measures. In the first half 
of the year the peasant's burdens were reduced to some extent, 
but some regions still saw increases. For instance, Inner 
Mongolia saw a per capita increase of 5.57 yuan; Liaoning saw an 
increase of 3.57 yuan; and Fujian saw an increase of 2.68 yuan. 
The increase in each of those cases was more than 35 percent; 
and in some cases the increases ware faster than the increases 
in cash income. 
  The problem of fund shortages remains prominent. Because of 
the diverting effects of the excessive scale of fund gathering 
in society and the practice of various organizations all 
engaging in financial operations, there is still a shortage of 
funds for the procurement of agricultural products this year 
despite the tremendous efforts made by the center to resolve 
fund problems. According to the calculations made by the 
organizations concerned, the procurement of this summer's 
agricultural products will require 38.5 billion yuan, and most 
provinces have indicated that they may each experience a 
shortage of around one-third. The third and fourth quarters are 
the busy season for the procurement of agricultural products, 
and may see even more prominent problems of shortages of 
procurement funds. For instance, Jiangxi needs 1.33 billion yuan 
in fund for cotton procurement, but has a shortage of as much as 
910 million yuan; Gansu has a 45 percent shortage of funds for 
cotton procurement. According to Henan Province, since the 
beginning of August, it has been very difficult to gather funds 
for grain and cotton procurement; by 20 September, the grain 
systems of 17 prefectures and cities had only accomplished 5.4 
percent of the fund-gathering task, and only a 2.2 billion jin 
part of the task of the negotiated-price procurement of 4.8 
billion jin of wheat had been completed. This autumn the 
province's planned procurement of grain, oil crops, cotton, 
hemp, and tobacco will require 9.706 billion yuan in funds, but 
by 20 September the grain, supply and marketing, tobacco, and 
agricultural bank systems had altogether gathered 3.218 billion 
yuan, representing only 33.2 percent of the planned amount. 
  Prices for agricultural production materials have risen too 
rapidly. Since early this year, prices for agricultural 
production materials have risen on a monthly basis. Although the 
state adopted the policy of imposing limits on prices for 
agricultural production materials, the first half of the year 
still saw a 12 percent increase over the same period last year. 
In the first three quarters the cumulative increase in the 
prices for agricultural production materials over the same 
period last year was 13.8 percent. On the one hand the 
excessively rapid increase in the prices for agricultural 
production materials has suppressed the peasants' input in 
agricultural production; In January-August, nationwide the total 
cumulative sales of agricultural production materials, if 
adjusted for inflation, decreased by 10 percent in real terms. 
On the other hand, the increase in the prices for agricultural 
production materials has also reduced the peasants' income; this 
year the peasants' cash income is expected to increase by around 
10 percent over last year, and will, if adjusted for inflation, 
represent the maintaining of the same level or a slight 
increase. In this way the peasants' are trapped in a vicious 
"small income-small input" cycle. This situation is certain to 
adversely affect the peasants' enthusiasm for production, and 
constrain the steady development of agriculture. 

