Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "British Side Has Gone Further on </F>
`Three-Violation' Path"] 
  [Text] Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten's partial political 
reform bill was endorsed by the Legislative Council yesterday 
evening. The British Hong Kong authorities prepared to make 
public its version of the details of Sino-British talks on the 
political system today, and will subsequently table the 
remaining portion of Patten's political reform bill to the 
Legislative Council. This series of actions indicates that the 
British side has resolved to abandon the Sino-British 
cooperation and will stubbornly go further and further along the 
erroneous road of the "three violations." 
  The Legislative Council before 1997 is an organization set 
up 
by the British. In this council, there are official and 
appointed members designated by the British side, and there are 
also members of pro-British elements who have been fostered by 
it for a long time. Hence, it is without doubt that the 
political reform bill was approved by the Council. In spite of 
all this, Elsie Tu, chairman of the Council's Internal Affairs 
Committee, who has strived for democracy for Hong Kong outside 
the Council for many years, continued to express her views in a 
clear-cut stance and called on the Council to block the bill by 
laying bare the "constitutional package" put forward by the 
British side for the purpose of disrupting Sino-British 
cooperation rather than offering democracy to Hong Kong people. 
  In general, Hong Kong people do not want to see the dispute 
between China and Britain, and the Chinese side has always 
expressed its hope to avoid this political controversy and 
willingness to seek an agreement through talks. However, the 
British side unilaterally terminated the talks and took further 
actions to completely eliminate any possibility of resuming 
talks. Under these circumstances, the Chinese side has 
explicitly indicated that it will not recognize any decision 
unilaterally made by the British side on the three-tier 
structure for Hong Kong. Similar to other pertinent decisions 
made by the British Hong Kong authorities, the vote the 
Legislative Council made last night will automatically cease to 
be in force on 30 June 1997, along with the termination of 
British rule in Hong Kong. The result of the "marathon" debate 
before the voting last night will prove to be a very short-lived 
one. 
  After 1997, the structure of councils in Hong Kong will be 
reorganized in accordance with the relevant provisions of the 
Basic Law. Sir Percy Cradock, former British foreign affairs 
adviser to the prime minister, also pointed out: The British 
change of policies and the perverse acts of Patten will only 
lead Britain to a situation in which it is unable to put in a 
word on the arrangements in Hong Kong after 1997. 
  The development of events has enabled Hong Kong people to 
see 
even more clearly that since Patten put forth his constitutional 
package, the British side has deviated from the Sino-British 
Joint Declaration and the Basic Law, abandoned the 
understandings already reached between the two countries, and 
acted willfully and unilaterally to make its own set of 
political arrangements for Hong Kong. The 17 rounds of talks 
which began last summer were only British tricks to disguise its 
disruption of Sino-British cooperation. According to the 
original agreement reached between China and Britain, the talks 
on the 1994-95 electoral arrangements for Hong Kong should be 
conducted on the basis of the "three conformities," but from 
beginning to end the British side stubbornly persisted in the 
"three violations." The course of the 17 rounds of talks is a 
precise reflection of the British side breaking faith, playing 
tricks, and repeatedly going back on its words. Releasing the 
process of talks and disclosing the actual facts will certainly 
help the Hong Kong people see clearly the true color of the 
inglorious colonial hard-liners. It is precisely because the 
Sino- British talks were consultations at the diplomatic level, 
which both sides agreed to keep secret before the talks began, 
and because some Hong Kong people still cherished the hope of 
resuming talks that the Chinese side has refrained from 
releasing the details of the talks. Now the British side wanted 
to be the first to publicize the contents of talks. The British 
Hong Kong authorities are not at all qualified to decide on the 
disclosure of Sino-British talks at the diplomatic level. This 
one-sided decision is another act of breaking promises. The 
hurried release of the British Hong Kong authorities' own 
version of negotiations was simply aimed at producing an effect 
of prejudicing people by preconceived ideas and at continuing to 
fool the masses and deceive the world. However, the facts are 
laid before us, and people understand very clearly whether the 
British side has clung to Patten's bill or has sincerely sought 
an agreement with the Chinese side, and who has taken action to 
close the door of negotiations. The British side is removing 
the cover of secrecy and will only expose its own ugliness. 
  The British side has obstinately taken the "three-violation" 
path to disrupt Sino-British cooperation and has infringed upon 
the interests of Hong Kong people. The failure of convergence 
before and after 1997 will certainly bring about an onslaught on 
the smooth transfer of state power. The size of the onslaught 
will hinge on how various preparatory tasks for the takeover are 
being conducted by the Chinese Government and the Hong Kong 
people. It is gratifying to see that the Preliminary Working 
Committee for the Preparatory Committee of the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region has accelerated its work, and 
personalities from various strata in Hong Kong are more 
concerned about various kinds of preparations to welcome the 
arrival of "one country, two systems" and "Hong Kong being ruled 
by Hong Kong people." By 1997 the political structure of 
three-tier councils set up by the British side will be dissolved 
and reorganized, the state power of "Hong Kong being ruled by 
the Hong Kong people" will really be established under Chinese 
sovereignty, and the pro-British state power left over and 
arranged by the British side to foment splits and engage in 
independence or semi-independence will be overthrown. This is a 
serious political mission, and the Chinese people will 
conscientiously cope with it in this trial of strength. Just as 
Sir Percy Cradock pointed out: The difference in strength is 
significant. We are not strong but pretend to be otherwise. 

