Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Simon Beck] </F>
  [Text] As the United States continues the Himalayan task 
of closing its ideological gap with China this weekend, the 
world's cameras are focused on one man. Secretary of State 
Warren Christopher is the central figure in the U.S. 
administration's drive to extract just the smallest of 
compromises from Beijing on human rights, trade and security 
matters. 
  But as most attention, grabbed by the reawakening of the 
dissident movement's sense of defiance, is locked into Mr. 
Christopher's talks, a whole other series of negotiations is 
taking place quietly, behind the scenes. 
  The official in charge of those discussions, Under Secretary 
of Defence Frank Wisner, is the most senior military man to 
visit China since the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown. And although 
his itinerary is not being afforded the same publicity as that 
of Mr. Christopher, what he achieves on this visit may have as 
deep, if not deeper, ramifications for the future security of 
the Pacific Rim. 
  Mr. Wisner's task is to begin putting into place a plan 
hatched only recently in the highest echelons of U.S. foreign 
policy-making: to re-engage China in military cooperation, 
bringing to an end a period of silence and mutual suspicion. 
  In bald terms, what he will try to agree with defence and 
People's Liberation Army (PLA) officials is a dual programme. 
First, to start regular high-level military exchanges, resulting 
in a limited U.S.-Sino peacekeeping and disaster relief force, 
and second, to establish a Joint Commission on Defence 
Conversion -- exchanging knowhow on putting old defence 
technology to use in the commercial sector. 
  Both programmes carry the greatest of risks, as well as the 
highest of rewards, and American thinking is that it can no 
longer stand by while China modernises its military in a 
political cocoon. 
  Assistant Secretary of Defence Charles Freeman, who visited 
China last year, could have been a trifle casual when he said in 
a recent speech in Washington: "We in the Department of Defence 
don't spend a lot of time worrying about China. We don't see it 
as a threat particularly...we see it as an opportunity." 
  There is no doubt, however, that Mr. Freeman knows full well 
Beijing is the cornerstone upon which the peace of East Asia 
stands or falls. According to Barbara Opall, a China specialist 
on Defence News magazine, the U.S. is keener to do business than 
Mr. Freeman suggests. 
  "They have nothing to lose and everything to gain from 
constant engagement with the Chinese. They don't know much 
about what China is doing, have no real details about its 
military modernisation plans or its intentions. 
  "It's a win-win situation if the PLA sits down and talks to 
them." 
  Since the 1989 Tiananmen massacre brought about a ban on all 
important military and technological exchanges with China, the 
U.S. intelligence community's ability to penetrate the PLA's 
activities has been severely limited. It is not clear whether 
even its spending budget is known. 
  But one thing is clear: none of America's allies in 
Southeast Asia take at face value China's contentions that its 
military modernisation is for peaceful purposes only. Partly 
due to continued tensions with China over the South China Sea 
territory disputes, all six members of the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) are busy modernising their 
forces, and expect to spend some U.S.$2 billion (HK$15.5 
billion) this year on military equipment. 
  Recognising China as the dominant force in the region, the 
U.S. has decided it is time to bring it into the fold. The idea 
of regular military discussions, limited joint training and 
joint peacekeeping may be largely cosmetic, but it is seen as a 
vital first step to keeping tabs on China's expansion. 
  Another spin-off is in controlling Beijing's proliferation 
activities, a continual thorn in the side of U.S.-Sino 
relations. One of Mr. Wisner's tasks this weekend is to get a 
firm pledge from China on sticking to the terms of the Missile 
Technology Control Regime (MTCR). It was China's alleged 
violations of the MTCR -- in selling M-11 missile parts to 
Pakistan -- that earned it the two- year ban on satellite 
technology transfers. 
  But according to the latest issue of Defence News, Pentagon 
insiders say China is still smarting over Washington's decision 
to sell 150 F-16 fighter jets to Taiwan, and is insisting on a 
reversal of the sale in return for its cooperation on 
proliferation. Although the U.S. is adamant it will not go back 
on the deal, with the F-16 deliveries not due to begin until 
1997 there may be some room for a compromise. 
  Beijing is also insisting it be included in the core 
countries that discuss the constantly-changing terms of treaties 
like the MTCR. But while the Pentagon likes the idea in 
principle, that will mean providing Beijing with sensitive data 
on the West's missile programmes. 
  Keeping technological intelligence out of China's nimble 
fingers is also a problem at the core of the other initiative, 
the Defence Conversion Commission. It has already been decided 
the commission will begin meeting later this year. 
  A Pentagon spokesman said the U.S. hoped to learn a lot from 
China, which he described as being "15 years ahead" in the field 
of converting military technology to industrial use. 
  There is no doubt defence conversion has to be expanded in 
the U.S., especially in California, which has been decimated by 
military downsizing. Officials are anxious to exploit the huge 
brain power at establishments like the Lawrence Livermore 
National Laboratory, near San Francisco. 
  Now that its 8,000 employees have less work to do in the 
military sphere, the U.S. Government wants to find out how much 
of their expertise can be funnelled into designing, say, cars 
for General Motors. 
  But at what risk? Livermore knows all too well, as it was at 
this very laboratory in the mid-1980s that a scandal erupted 
after a visiting Chinese delegation took advantage of lax 
security to gather secrets on America's neutron bomb -- possibly 
by bribing an employee. Not long after, it had perfected its 
own version. 
  "The Livermore incident was devastating. It changed the 
balance of power in the region. They didn't just get a bomb, 
but all that goes with it," a defence intelligence official said. 
  Nevertheless, as ties reopen, Livermore and two other 
national laboratories are to receive a high-ranking delegation 
of Chinese scientists in the near future. 
  Washington is perhaps now coming to the conclusion that it 
has little power over how, when and where Beijing chooses to 
detain its dissidents. But it yet may come to have more 
influence over how China defends its territory and that is 
surely a goal worth discussing. 

