CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Carlos Subero] </F>
  [Excerpts] The Chamber of Deputies yesterday unanimously 
agreed to open an investigation into the financing of the 
election campaigns of congressmen and parties and, in general, 
the financing of political leaders by any financial institution. 
  The motion was one of four passed yesterday as the climax to 
a heated debate that the COPEI [Social Christian Party] bloc had 
begun in connection with Pablo Medina's charges against Oswaldo 
Perez Paz, Leonardo Ferrer (former speakers of the house) and 
Luis Carlos Serra Carmona (Democratic Action [AD]-Zulia-elected 
by party slate). 
  The investigation will be conducted by an ad hoc committee 
that may commission the appropriate legal bodies to furnish 
pertinent evidence. The motion was made by MAS [Movement Toward 
Socialism], one of whose members recalled operation "Clean 
Hands" in Italy, saying that this could be done in Venezuela as 
well. In light of the motion, the deputies seem willing to 
investigate themselves. 
  The COPEI and AD blocs demanded that Medina submit evidence 
to back his assertions that these three political leaders carry 
"free" credit cards from the Banco Latino. In speeches by 
several Cause R congressmen, the party rejected the AD and COPEI 
demands and accused these parties of being financed by the Banco 
Latino. Similar charges were leveled at Cause R, which was said 
to have been financed by a banker who is suspected of money 
laundering. These and other general and personal charges 
abounded during the debate between AD, COPEI, and Cause R, while 
the ruling coalition of Convergence-MAS stayed on the sidelines. 
[passage omitted] 
  This was the atmosphere during the debate, in which MAS and 
Convergence tried merely to reconcile the feuding parties, by 
the way. After it was over, the speaker of the chamber, Carmelo 
Lauria (AD-Miranda-elected by party list), said that it was the 
saddest debate that he had ever witnessed. 
<H5>  Turning the Tables </H5>
  The debate seemed to be heading towards a summons for Pablo 
Medina when a speech by the head of the MAS bloc, Segundo 
Melendez (Lara-elected by name), gave it a new turn. Melendez 
spoke of Congress's battered image and also about the 
irresponsible charges that are being made as pure pretexts. He 
added, though, that the substance of Medina's assertions cannot 
be resolved merely by summoning him to testify; rather, the 
financing of parties and campaigns through the Banco Latino has 
to be investigated. 
  His motion turned the debate around, and Ramos Allup 
(AD-Carabobo-elected by party slate) rounded out his suggestion 
by calling for the investigation to be extended to the 
relationship between politicians and any financial institution, 
not just the Banco Latino. 
<H5>  Italy's Democracy Withstood It </H5>
  Another of the political speeches that stood out was 
delivered by Deputy Julio Montoya (MAS-Zulia-elected by party 
slate), who said that Congress has to dispel the idea that its 
members are a bunch of loafers. He announced that Convergence 
and MAS, after the debate on the floor, had agreed to support 
the investigation into all politicians and their ties to banks. 
"Italy's democracy withstood it," the MAS deputy said, bringing 
applause from Jose Rodriguez Iturbe (COPEI-Zulia-elected by 
name). 
  The purpose of immunity is for deputies to defend citizens, 
nothing else. The corrupt are the ones who should be afraid, 
said Montoya, who in passing expressed his view that Caldera is 
the country's leading democrat and is not thinking about a 
Fujimori-style coup. He went on to say that there ought to be a 
judge in the investigation because "the country will not believe 
it if a committee of deputies exonerates a fellow deputy." 
  The momentous motion to investigate the financing of parties 
and politicians passed unanimously in the end, as did a motion 
by Perez Vivas to have the speaker of the chamber urgently ask 
the board overseeing the Banco Latino to submit a report 
indicating whether there is a list of people who own free credit 
cards and who they are. Also passing unanimously was a motion by 
Vladimir Villegas (Cause R-Federal District-elected by name) 
whereby the chamber would ask the Bicameral Committee for a 
report on the charges by Pablo Medina and on details of the 
relationship between, on the one hand, political parties and 
members of the previous legislature and, on the other, the Banco 
Latino. 
  Finally, the AD and COPEI blocs agreed to summon Medina to 
submit evidence in support of his charges against Alvarez Paz, 
Ferrer, and Serra. Cause R, Convergence, and MAS abstained. 
  The deputy who brought all this on was not on the floor. 
Pablo Medina was waiting in his congressional office for newsmen 
so that he could level another charge at Alvarez Paz, Ferrer, 
and the political leadership of AD and COPEI. Questioned about 
the evidence that he is being called on to submit, he replied: 
"It will come out." He talked about Ferrer's debts to the Banco 
Latino: promissory note 64422 for 22.85 million bolivars, which 
fell due on 10 September 1993, with an overdraft of 3,586,446.55 
bolivars. 

