Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Ivan Ivanov] </F>
  [Text] Moscow January 10 TASs -- The presidential decree 
"on the structure of federal authorities of the executive 
branch," which both journalists and many members of the 
government were so eager to see, was signed by Boris Yeltsin 
today. While the decree was being drafted, both the president 
and the prime minister pointed out that it was aimed, in the 
first place, at improving the efficiency of the government's 
work, the reduction of its staff and of the number of ministries 
and agencies. 
  As was expected, only cosmetic changes were made in the 
government structure: The number of ministries was reduced from 
about 30 to 23, a number of state committees were merged with 
others or transformed into ministries and federal services. 
From now on, the government will include 24 state committees 
and 20 federal services and departments. 
  It is noteworthy that, according to the decree, some federal 
agencies, specifically the Defence Ministry, the Interior 
Ministry, the Foreign Ministry, the external intelligence and 
counter- intelligence services, the main guards department, the 
government communication and information agency, the archive 
service, the TV and radio broadcasting service are subordinated 
to the president. 
  The decree leaves open the question of who will be 
second-in- 
command in the government. The only thing the decree says is 
that there will be four deputy prime ministers instead of nine. 
Two of them will be first deputy prime ministers. The decree 
suggests that "the chairman of the Russian Government shall 
nominate within a week candidates for first deputy chairmen and 
deputy chairmen of the Russian Government, as well as federal 
ministers." 
  Oleg Soskovets and Yegor Gaydar now have the greatest 
chances 
of becoming first deputy prime ministers, ITAR-TASS learned from 
reliable government sources. So far as the remaining two 
candidates are concerned, the situation is not clear. Aleksandr 
Zaveryukha, now in charge of the agricultural sector of the 
national economy, may become one of them. According to the 
sources, it is quite probable that Boris Fedorov, now deputy 
prime minister and minister of finance, will become the fourth 
deputy prime minister. His chances are fifty-fifty. Fedorov 
gained the reputation of a skillful politician thanks to his 
open polemics with Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandr Shokhin and 
the chairman of the Central Bank. 
  And still, this forecast of the government official about 
Fedorov may be wrong, because it is doubtful that the minister 
of finance will be able to find a common language with Chairman 
of the Central Bank Viktor Gerashchenko, who enjoys the support 
of Viktor Chernomyrdin and shows no intention of leaving his 
post. 
  Those who are now deputy prime ministers will hardly be left 
without high posts, this time in the Federal Assembly. Most 
probably, this will happen to Vladimir Shumeyko and Sergey 
Shakhray. As for Anatoliy Chubays, the Russian privatization 
supremo, he is expected to retain only the post of chairman of 
the State Property Committee. 
  The fact that Yeltsin signed the decree on the 
reorganisation 
of the government today, of all days, is important for one more 
reason: Contrary to all forecasts, he did it before the 
beginning of the work of the Federal Assembly. Instead of 
gaining some political advantages by signing the document after 
the parliament starts working, Yeltsin decided to take this step 
today. This shows that the president is set to maintain 
"tough-constructive" relations between the executive branch and 
the lawmakers, and is going to build relations with the new 
parliament, proceeding, in the first place, from the broad 
powers given to him by the new constitution. 

