BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed commentary: "The Communist Vietnamese Are </F>
Again Showing Their Black Fangs To Threaten Cambodia"] 
  [Text] In a recent statement issued by their Foreign 
Ministry, the communist Vietnamese have again bared their fangs 
to threaten Cambodia and show that they are in charge as before. 
  In a statement issued by their Foreign Ministry in Hanoi, 
the 
communist Vietnamese expressed regret that the Cambodian masses 
held demonstrations in Phnom Penh to demand the expulsion of the 
nearly four million Vietnamese from Cambodia. In the same 
statement, the communist Vietnamese criticized the Cambodian 
king for saying in an interview that Vietnam has moved the 
border markers deeper into Cambodian territory. 
  Through this statement of their Foreign Ministry spokesman, 
the communist Vietnamese are baring their black fangs to coerce 
anyone in fear of them into remembering that they are the boss. 
As a result, they are able to send huge numbers of Vietnamese 
nationals into Cambodia and annex Cambodian territory, both sea 
and land, at will without any hindrance -- whether it be 
demonstrations against them or the Cambodian king [words 
indistinct]. 
  This statement also asks the Vietnamese lackeys in Phnom 
Penh 
why they have allowed the Cambodian people to hold 
demonstrations to demand the expulsion of the Vitnamese men and 
women from Cambodia and permitted the Cambodian king to give an 
interview, in which they are accused of nibbling Cambodian 
territory. It also warns them to suppress the demonstrators and 
to silence the Cambodian king. 
  You communist Vietnamese can never cow the Cambodian people. 
The Cambodian people both in the countryside and in Phnom Penh 
are rising up to deal heavy blows to your puppets and those 
puppets of the western alliance who have joined hands with you 
in killing the Cambodian nation and people. The Cambodian 
people will not stand still to let you kill them at will. For 
more than 15 years now, you black-teeth communists have invaded 
and occupied Cambodia and sowed untold destruction for the 
Cambodian nation and people. Now you are colluding with the 
western alliance in continuing to kindle the war through your 
two categories of puppets so that you can send Vietnamese men 
and women to plunder the Cambodian nation and people at will, 
thus causing untold misery to the Cambodian people. 
  The Cambodian people can no longer tolerate you. 
Accordingly, 
they will definitely not allow you to continue kindling the war 
to destroy the Cambodian nation and people. The Cambodian 
people will continue to hit you and your puppets and struggle on 
until national reconciliation and peace is achieved and every 
Cambodian can live and earn his living peacefully. 
  You call only for war, war, war; and fight, fight, fight! 
  The Cambodian people therefore have the right to hold 
demonstrations to call for peace, peace, peace and an end to 
war; and to reject the warmongers. 

