BFN 

<F P=106> [Report from Washington by correspondent Murid Hammad -- </F>
recorded; italicized passages in English] 
  [Text] His Majesty King Husayn began the third and final 
day of a state visit to the United States by meeting with U.S. 
President Bill Clinton. The U.S. President was on hand to 
welcome his majesty on his arrival at the White House. 
  The U.S. President emphasized his country's support for 
Jordan. 
  [Begin recording] [Hammad] [words indistinct] 
Jordan's [word indistinct] peace in the Middle East, and 
[word indistinct] people back home [words indistinct] in this 
regard, and what are (?the words) you would have for the 
Jordanian people? 
  [Clinton] The United States is prepared to do a lot to 
try to make peace a success, both from the security point of 
view and from an economic point of view. My message to the 
Jordanian people is that they should support the work the king 
is doing now. He is clearly working to protect the long-term 
interests of the people of Jordan and is being very careful and 
forthright and still courageous in this peace process. And that 
the United States will support the friends of peace not just in 
the aftermath of the peace agreement, if one can be achieved, 
but over the very long run. We believe that our interests are 
very much bound up with the success of Jordan and Israel and 
Syria and Lebanon and all the other parties in the Middle East. 
We think it's a very important part of our future. And we 
intend to be there in a very strong way. 
  [Hammad] Does that include also helping Jordan 
(?economically?) 
  [Clinton] Absolutely. [end recording] 
  The Jordanian and American sides began an expanded session 
attended on the Jordanian side by the prime minister; the Royal 
Court chief; his majesty's political adviser; Prince Talal Bin- 
Muhammad, his majesty the king's military secretary; and the 
Jordanian ambassador in Washington. There will be a closed 
session between his majesty the king and the U.S. President and 
a special luncheon attended by his majesty the king and Her 
Majesty Queen Nur and Bill Clinton and the first lady, Hillary 
Rodham Clinton. 
  Yesterday, the king visited the U.S. Congress where he 
conferred with House Speaker Thomas Foley and then the chairman 
and members of the House Foreign Relations Committee. The 
meeting was held at the committee's initiative for an update on 
Middle East developments, and the peace process in particular. 
His majesty the king said Jordan approached the Jordanian track 
from the perspective of the implementation of the joint agenda, 
Jordan's sovereignty and Arab coordination. Jordan, his majesty 
added, will not initiate a separate solution and that, in that 
regard, other Arab parties had gone ahead of Jordan. His majesty 
said that how fast Jordan reaches a settlement with Israel 
largely depends on Israel's accommodation of the requirements of 
peace. 
  Asked about lifting the boycott of Israel, his majesty said 
that depends primarily on the Israeli position on banning 
Jordanian goods bound for Palestinian territory and whether 
Israel will reconsider its protectionist posture on trade. 
  Jordan will extend what support it can for the Palestinian 
brothers to enable them to administer the self-rule areas on a 
case-by-case basis and whenever the Palestinians request 
assistance as needs arise. 
  Asked about fundamentalist movements that raise anti-Western 
slogans, his majesty said extremism was not exclusive to Islam 
and that extremism feeds on extremism. His majesty asserted 
that Islam is a religion of moderation and that he was proud to 
be a Muslim. 
  The House Foreign Relations Committee showed understanding 
for the problems Jordan is facing. Committee members said they 
will support Jordan due its positive approach to the peace 
process and the democratic climate prevailing in the country. 
They also displayed understanding of Jordan's requirements for 
development and defense. The representatives applauded Jordan's 
experiment and hoped it would serve as a model for the region. 
  Later this evening, his majesty will conclude a three-day 
official visit to the United States by meeting with the chairman 
and members of the House Foreign Relations Committee. 

