Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] BMFT [Federal Ministry of Research and Technology] 
funding of research on infectious diseases to date has shown 
that basic research has attained world level, whereas there is 
still ground to be made up in, primarily, applied, 
patient-oriented research. The new "Infection Research" funding 
scheme, which is being launched under the "Health Research 2000" 
program, will take account of this experience. It will bring 
together and continue existing BMFT funding measures on AIDS, 
tropical medicine, and other infectious diseases. In future, 
priority will be given to funding projects with particular 
potential for enhancing clinical research structures in this 
area. It is initially intended to fund the scheme with 
approximately 35 million German marks [DM] a year. The following 
individual topics will be covered: 
  -- The AIDS pandemic has made everyone aware of the health 
hazard to the population posed when new pathogens appear. With 
an estimated 60,000 to 70,000 patients infected in Germany alone 
since the outbreak of the pandemic, AIDS-related topics will 
continue to require an enormous amount of work. However, topics 
such as infection via tick bites (Lyme's borreliosis) and the 
much-debated possibility of the transfer to humans of what is 
popularly known as "mad cow disease" are also worth mentioning 
in this connection. These examples illustrate the need to create 
sufficient research capability to meet new challenges 
effectively. 
  -- The rapid increase in salmonella cases in recent times 
has 
shown how known pathogens spread: The number of new infections 
has doubled in only 10 years to over 90,000 cases a year. The 
constant rise in the number of infections contracted in 
hospital, which constitutes a growing problem for our health 
system, is also a major issue here. 
  -- The phenomenon of resistance to antibiotics has been 
known 
for a long time but has recently become a greater hazard with 
the advent of multiresistances in tuberculosis pathogens and the 
progressive development of resistance in the malaria tropica 
pathogen. 
  The transition of findings from research into practice is 
still being hindered by a lack of cooperation between basic 
research and clinicians. One of the reasons why this is so in 
Germany is that infectious diseases have low priority as a 
clinical specialization, which, indeed, is absent from most 
university clinics. Three funding channels designed 
specifically to remedy these shortcomings will therefore be used 
to continue existing BMFT funding of research into infectious 
diseases: 
  -- The funding of joint research is intended to foster 
local, 
regional, and national interdisciplinary cooperation. The 
funding authority specifies no particular topics, so all areas 
of applied research into infection are eligible. 
  -- In order to place the study of infectious diseases on a 
firmer institutional footing, structural aid for university 
research facilities and funds for redirecting existing 
facilities will be granted. This offer of financial priming 
over a limited period is designed primarily to stimulate and 
support research work in faculties of medicine, which has 
largely had to give way to routine health care work over recent 
decades. 
  -- A grants scheme will be available to attract trainee 
scientists to this field. This scheme follows on from the 
established AIDS grant scheme, which will cease to be exclusive 
to work on AIDS in the future. As a rule, funding will be 
provided for a two-year term spent at a research facility of 
international renown followed by a post at a German institute 
for a maximum of three years. 
  The BMFT is currently funding infectious disease research 
under four main headings: 
  -- AIDS: Shortly after the first cases of the disease were 
reported in Germany, the BMFT issued an initial annoucement on 
research funding at the end of 1983. 1984 saw the beginning of 
the first projects financed by the BMFT. Since then, 138 
medical and natural science research projects, 34 social science 
research projects, and nine clinical research consortia (in 
Berlin, Frankfurt (2), Hamburg, Hannover, Heidelberg, Munich 
(2), and Wuerzburg) have been funded and 58 grants awarded. 
Overall, approximately DM165 million have been spent to date on 
AIDS research. In the initial stages it was necessary to fund 
AIDS research under a single program to react rapidly to a new 
health policy challenge. German AIDS research has attained a 
high standard, although a solution to the AIDS problem cannot be 
expected in the short term. The topic will therefore remain a 
major area for funding. 
  -- Tropical medicine: The BMFT intended this program to 
provide targeted funding for research on tropical medicine in 
areas where the funding could be expected to promote long-term 
structural improvements. The first measure introduced was the 
comprehensive restructuring and reorientation of the Bernhard 
Nocht Institute of Tropical Medicine in Hamburg, on which DM8.7 
million have been spent since 1992. 
  -- Diagnostics of infectious diseases: The primary goal here 
was to improve and extend the available range of methods for 
detecting pathogens or pathogen components and antibodies in 
viral, bacterial, fungal, and parasite infections. Grants 
totaling about DM17 million were awarded to 46 projects between 
1981 and 1991. 
  -- Infectious diseases: This heading covered the whole range 
of research from fundamental principles to diagnostic and 
therapeutic advances and vaccine development. Between 1987 and 
1992, a total of 54 individual projects, 10 consortia, and one 
case of structural aid (for Wuerzburg University's Infectious 
Disease Research Center) were funded for an approximate total of 
DM67 million. 
  Further information on the Infection Researh funding scheme 
may be obtained from the BMFT's Health-Related Research Project 
Manager, German Aerospace Research Institute, Suedstr. 125, 
D-53175 Bonn, tel. 0228/3821-210. 

