BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 12 (AFP)--Bao Tong, the most senior 
Chinese official arrested after the 1989 pro-democracy 
demonstrations in Tiananmen Square, has been hospitalised, his 
daughter Bai Jian said Thursday. 
  "I saw my father two days ago and his health is very bad. He 
is in considerable pain and his face is badly swollen and he has 
difficulty speaking," she said by telephone, adding he had been 
transferred to a hospital in the capital from Qincheng prison 
here just over a month ago. 
  Bao, 62, an economist and former top aide to disgraced 
Communist Party chief Zhao Ziyang, is serving a seven-year 
sentence imposed in 1992 for "counter-revolutionary propaganda 
and incitement" and "leaking important state secrets" during the 
1989 demonstrations. 
  "We don't know exactly what is wrong with him," she said, 
adding "he complains of pain in the throat and stomach because 
of inflammation of the thyroid, salivary glands and lymph nodes." 
  He has already undergone six operations for polyps in his 
intestines and colon and his swollen lymph nodes, according to 
specialists, indicate that cancer -- if present in the 17 polyps 
removed -- could have spread. 
  She said he was still being kept in solitary confinment and 
saw only his doctors. 
  "He is allowed to read, but cannot listen to the radio, or 
watch television. We are allowed to visit him once a month, up 
to a maximum of four people, and bring him books or food," she 
said. 
  She said she had no reason to suppose her father would 
benefit from the same clemency shown to dissident Wang Juntao 
who was released from prison last month and allowed to travel to 
America for medical treatment. 
  Wang was sentenced to 13 years in prison for his involvement 
in the 1989 pro-democracy movement. 
  Speaking in Washington Wednesday, Wang said his release was 
a 
"cosmetic gesture" to help China win renewal of its 
Most-Favored-Nation (MFN) trading status. 
  U.S. President Bill Clinton has called on China to improve 
its human rights prior to renewal of MFN and Bao is on a list of 
dissidents Washington wants to see released. 
  Bao Jian said neither she nor her brother, Bao Pu, 28, nor 
mother, Jiang Zongcao, were being harassed by the authorities. 

