Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Julian Rios Rojas: "Second Round Against </F>
Cartels"] 
  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota--The death of the drug trafficker 
Pablo Escobar Gaviria marked the beginning of a new battle in 
Colombia: putting an end to the Cali Cartel. 
  According to the international police forces, the proof that 
the organization started coming under attack this year is shown 
in the results of recent operations that have made it possible 
to seize abroad gigantic cocaine shipments originating with the 
Cali Cartel. 
  In Colombia, the Counternarcotics Police and the state's 
intelligence and security agencies also have set out to battle 
that group head-on, because, according to a high-ranking 
official of the institution, "Now, there will be more time to 
fight it." 
  The authorities prepared a study on the organization's 
modus operandi, in order to learn the systems for 
trafficking with the alkaloid, as well as its production and the 
processing sites. 
  EL ESPECTADOR had access to several intelligence analyses 
that, surprisingly, reveal that the Cali drug traffickers 
control 80 percent of the cocaine shipped abroad. 
  The reports demonstrate that the Cali Cartel specializes in 
coca growing and production, and, finally, its crystallization. 
According to the documents, that cartel was formerly purchasing 
basic cocaine paste in Peru and Bolivia but, for the past 
several years, has been producing its own coca. 
  These reports reveal that, in view of the offensive 
conducted 
by the Counternarcotics Police against the drug trafficking 
ring, the latter decided to transfer its laboratories and some 
of its members to Ecuador, Venezuela, and Brazil. 
  The police official queried claimed: "Ecuador has become a 
bridge for the Cali Cartel. Impressive amounts of the drugs 
confiscated have come from that country." 
  This statement corroborates the results of some operations 
against the international rings in which cocaine shipments 
loaded in Ecuadoran ports have been seized. 
  This year the most severe blow dealt to the Cali Cartel by 
the police forces of Colombia, Italy, and the United Kingdom was 
operation "Angelo II." In this operation, after extensive 
intelligence work lasting over four months, a cocaine shipment 
that had departed from Ecuador was discovered. 
  Ten persons were captured, including some of the principal 
liaisons in Colombia and abroad. The Counternarcotics Police 
director, Colonel Teodoro Campo Gomez, returned from Italy this 
weekend, and will submit a detailed report on the operation. 
<H5>  In Venezuela as Well </H5>
  Moreover, the drug traffickers have crossed the 
Colombian-Venezuelan border, engaging in their illicit 
activities from several of that country's jungle sites. 
  One of those Venezuelan locales discovered by the Colombian 
police is the site known as Puerto Ayacucho, where the Cali 
cartel is growing and processing coca for subsequent shipment to 
Europe. 
  The police reports indicate that Brazil has become another 
strategic point for the Cali Cartel. Its members are producing 
large volumes of cocaine there also. 
  Insofar as Colombia is concerned, only 5 percent of that 
drug 
is produced in Valle del Cauca; while 75 percent comes from the 
departments of Guaviare, Vichada, Vaupes, Meta, Casanare, Huila, 
Putumayo, Arauca, and Amazonas. Another large percentage is 
produced in Ecuador, Venezuela, and Brazil. 
  The reports note that, simultaneously with its cocaine 
trafficking, the Cali Cartel is laundering money in Argentina, 
Chile, and Panama. In this latter country, two business firms 
located in the Colon free trade zone are being investigated for 
laundering dollars on behalf of the Cali Cartel. 
  The investigators believe that, this year, the Cali Cartel 
will not be able to produce more than 20 percent of the cocaine. 
They claim that the operations being conducted are causing the 
members of that organization to tremble. 

