BFN 

  [Text] The finance minister, Dr Manmohan Singh, has said 
that India's differences with the U.S. on Super 301 can be 
resolved through the World Trade Organisation (WTO). 
  Dr Singh said the GATT disputes redressal mechanism was 
available to seek settlements with any country, including the 
U.S. But the U.S. had a right to have its own legislation, as 
India had a right to its own, he said. 
  He was responding to questions from journalists during his 
visit to London, on his way back to New Delhi from the U.S. He 
met the chancellor of the exchequer, Mr Kenneth Clarke, here. 
  Dr Singh asserted that India's economic reforms programme 
and 
the broad strategy of integrating Indian economy with the global 
economy were fully endorsed by the U.S. government and the 
captains of U.S. trade and industry. 
  There was a lot of enthusiasm in the U.S., both in the 
government and among the American businessmen, about India's 
prospects as a large and emerging market offering great 
opportunities for U.S. investments, he said. 
  Dr Singh said: "There is no weakening of interest in India." 
The demand for global deposit receipts (GDRs) and commercial 
paper continues to be strong, he said. "There is no crisis of 
confidence in India," he added. 
  On his visit to the U.S., he said, he found a lot of 
interest 
in investment in India. It was a "fully successful visit", he 
said. Asked if it was necessary for Prime Minister Narasimha 
Rao to have gone to the U.S., he said that "it was a good time 
to go". 
  Asked about reservations of multinational companies about 
Indian labour laws, Dr Singh said, "The companies do not find 
the labour laws insuperable barriers". But, he said, "we do 
recognise there is a need for flexibility". 
  He said: "At the same time, there must be a proper 
psychological environment." In a fast-changing world, "we are 
willing to look at all mechanisms", he said. 
  On the contentious issues like the U.S. trade embargo, the 
finance minister said these issues were discussed but no final 
conclusions were reached. 
  Asked particularly about rising inflation, Dr Singh said 
inflation in India was not an indication of excess demand in 
classic terms. He said the balance of payments position was 
improving. The deficit in the current and trade accounts was 
down. 
  The inflation was a reflection of a rise in administrative 
prices, he said. The cotton crop had been bad, sugar prices had 
risen, but these were a part of world trends, he added. 
  Asked to comment on the "collapse" of the VSNL [expansion 
unknown] issue, Dr Singh said: "There was no collapse. There 
was ample response. The question was at what price we want to 
sell. We thought if we wait two months or so, we can get a 
better deal." 
  In response to a question as to why the government was 
legislating the GDR market, he said: "It would be premature to 
have excessive liberalisation on the capital account." Flows in 
and out had to be controlled and external liabilities could not 
be allowed to be piled up on a large scale, he said. 
  Dr Singh was told of several problems with the Indian 
bureaucracy by some NRIs [non-resident Indians] at the meeting. 
He said liberalisation was not a one-off attempt. It involved 
"changing the mind-set of our bureaucracy", he said. He 
admitted that "in some states, things may not be moving as fast 
as they should" . 
  There would be no going back on liberalisation, he said, 
when 
asked to comment on opposition to it. "You should judge people 
not by what they say but by what they do," he said. 
  The CPM [Communist Party-Marxist] government in West Bengal 
was, for instance, tying up with multinational companies to 
launch joint ventures. "We have to integrate into the world 
economy. Liberalisation is in the interest of our people", he 
said. "Some old habits die hard, but opposition to the changes 
is melting," he said. 
  Asked to comment on new facilities for NRIs announced in the 
U.S., Dr Singh said cards for NRIs would do away with visa needs 
and provide them other facilities. Details had yet to be worked 
out he said. "First we recognise that we need to find credible 
institutions to strengthen bonds with NRIs," he said. 
  Replying to a question on entry of foreign newspapers, he 
said a debate over the future policy on print media was 
currently on. At present, the Cabinet decision of 1956 barred 
entry of foreign newspapers into India and this was applicable 
to all categories of foreigners, he said. 
  The high commissioner, Mr L M Singhvi, said the 
announcements 
in the U.S. meant, in effect, giving NRIs "a form of dual 
nationality but not dual citizenship". Very substantial 
progress had been made in recognising these links, he said. 

