Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From "News Bulletin" No. 61/94] </F>
  [Text] The Russian Committee of Customs has introduced new 
higher customs tariffs on trade with the Baltic states. The new 
tariffs are twice as high as those on other states and are 
likely to result in a sharp decrease of the eastern trade of the 
Baltic states. 
  Prime Minister Mart Laar was of the opinion that Russia 
attempted to exert pressure on the Baltic states, but harmed 
itself to an equal degree. This decision proves the correctness 
of the decision of the Estonian Government to reorient its 
economy towards the West. "Estonia is not dependent on Russia 
and we have nothing to fear," he said. 
  Chairman of the Riigikogu [parliament] economic commission 
Ivar Raig described the move as a discrimination against the 
Baltic states. It may result in a growing pressure on the 
kroon, an increased inflation and unemployment, he warned, 
recommending to appeal to the Western powers to link the most 
favoured status in trade with the abolition of discriminatory 
customs tariffs towards the Baltic states. 
  Academician Endel Lippmaa was also convinced that "it is a 
clearly repressive measure which also violates the 
Estonian-Russian agreement." Lippmaa was concerned with the 
influence on Latvia and Lithuania and recommended to impose 
similar high tariffs on the Russian transit trade in order to 
have something to bargain with later. 
  Foreign Ministry advisor Urve Ndu commented the Russian move 
as a violation of the European trading traditions, adding that 
restrictions may be introduced only because of threat to public 
health or environment, according to the GATT requirements. 
  Minister of Agriculture Jaan Leetsar was the most 
pessimistic. The introduction of the new tariffs may have the 
same effect on the export of agricultural products as the 
monetary reform of 1992 -- impossibility of export resulting in 
a stockpiling of products. This further caused a chain of 
indebtedness between the producers and food processing firms. 
The customs tariffs on potatoes reach 50 percent, on meat, milk 
and butter to 30 percent, which make export to Russia 
impossible. There are two alternatives -- to find a new market 
or to further reduce the livestock, Leetsar said. But he added 
that the ministry had foreseen the Russian move and had also 
prepared corresponding recommendations for the protection of the 
Estonian market. 
  Estonian Ambassador to Russia Juri Kahn pointed out that the 
move may have been caused by Russia's domestic factors. "The 
shops are filled with goods but only 5-15 percent of the 
population can afford them, since the prices are twice as high 
as in Finland," the Ambassador said. He also linked the move 
with the success of the agrarian party at the recent elections. 

