Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Dissident Colorado Deputy Walter Bower yesterday 
harshly criticized President Juan Carlos Wasmosy, and warned 
that it would be "a crime against the fatherland" for us to 
reject "this type of aid, in a country like ours, which is in 
dire need of everything" (alluding to the offer for U.S. 
military engineers to build schools, roads, and a clinic in San 
Pedro). 
  Bower was thus criticizing Wasmosy for planning to reject 
the 
offer made by the United States, which in turn has asked to be 
allowed to stage long-range military deployment exercises in our 
country. 
  Bower said: "In a country in dire need of everything, where 
the people lack basic standards of living and where any handout 
can bring relief, it would be absurd and extremely foolish for 
us to pointlessly indulge in the luxury of turning down this 
type of aid." 
  Bower added: "Formal topics (regarding the Paraguayan-U.S. 
draft agreement) may be resolved, and questions may be addressed 
to the U.S. Embassy. We cannot, however, deprive our people of 
$12 million in aid, which would bring education, water, and 
health to them." 
  "It would be a crime against the fatherland to reject this 
aid from the American people. Congress has the moral obligation 
to make this aid possible, because it would bring relief to 
those fellow countrymen who are living under inhuman conditions." 
  Deputy Bower is a notary public who is a member of the Luis 
Maria Argana-led Colorado faction. He dismissed rumors that 
either alleged intelligence work or a drug enforcement operation 
would be surreptitiously conducted during the deployment of the 
U.S. forces. 
  Bower said: "There is nothing behind this. What could 600 
men do there, except work? If some people are afraid of the 
U.S. presence here, it is perhaps because they have something to 
hide." 
  Bower also reported that he and other lawmakers had talked 
to 
some senior officers who conveyed their support for Washington's 
request. 
  Boser said: "We have talked to several senior officers who 
fully endorse this operation. In this case we cannot even raise 
the issue of violation of sovereignty, because we are not at war 
with the United States." 
  He added: "And if they want to snoop around for drugs, let 
them do so. We are tired of wearing the label of drug 
traffickers only because of two or three criminals who act as 
though they own this country." 

