BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 27 Apr (EFE) -- Manuel Mondino, 
president of the National Commission for Atomic Energy (CNEA), 
has said that Argentina wants to consolidate its position as a 
nuclear technology exporting country, adding that the agency 
exported for a total of $300 million between 1977 and 1993. 
  Mondino told EFE: "Over the past two decades the country has 
won a place in the competitive international market, thanks to 
the quality of its exports and the degree of technology 
transfer." 
  The CNEA is a state organization, associated with private 
capital to design and develop projects and conduct research in 
the areas of nuclear power plants, fuel cycles, radioisotopes, 
radiation, and technology services. 
  Argentina has signed several agreements for the peaceful use 
of nuclear energy, and is a member of various safeguard 
agreements. Nuclear agency representatives exhibited the results 
of their latest research efforts during a recent American 
continent experts' meeting in southern Argentina. 
  "On that occasion we explained that the CNEA provided 16 
percent of the electricity consumed by the country through its 
two nuclear plants, which places us in first place as an energy 
producer," Mondino said. 
  The CNEA president said that on the occasion there were also 
lectures on the application of radioisotopes, which is a vital 
product for the early diagnosis of several diseases, in nuclear 
medicine. 
  In the area of exports, the most important deals were the 
export of reactors to Peru, Algeria, and Egypt, the sale of 
uranium dioxide to Germany, and a plant for the production of 
radio-medicines to Cuba. The CNEA also closed deals with 
Canada, Iran, Rumania, and Turkey. 
  Argentina produces 8 percent of the total world cobalt 60 
production. Cobalt 60 is used in nuclear medicine, the 
preservation of food, the elimination of pests that attack crops 
and livestock, and to improve industrial yields. The 
radioactive material is produced in the Embalse Nuclear Plant, 
and the surplus is exported to the United States, France, Chile, 
Colombia, Mexico, and Belgium, Manuel Mondino said. 
  Regarding Argentina's development of nuclear projects for 
peaceful use, as compared with the rest of Latin America, 
Mondino said that his country and Brazil "have the most advanced 
projects, closely followed by Mexico." 
  Mondino expressed enthusiasm for the plant to irradiate 
waste 
that is being developed by CNEA scientists, stressing that Chile 
has shown interest in the project because it is redesigning its 
own sewage disposal network. 
  The CNEA has 5,682 agents throughout the country. Among its 
most important installations are two operating nuclear plants, 
one nuclear plant in an advanced state of construction, three 
atomic centers, one reactor for the production of radioisotopes, 
and one plant for food irradiation. 
  The agency also has a cell for the production of sealed 
cobalt 60 sources, two heavy water plants -- one experimental 
and one industrial -- one uranium enrichment plant, one Nuclear 
Medicine School, and one Physics and Nuclear Energy Institute, 
which is considered one of the most important in Latin America. 

