Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] When the 1947 Military Bases Agreement ended in 
1991, the Mutual Defense Treaty (MDT) became the avenue for 
continuing security relations between the Philippines and the 
United States. 
  How effective and fair is the MDT to either side? Like the 
other treaties between the two countries, the MDT favors the 
United States and is disadvantageous to the Philippines. 
  Negotiated at the height of the Cold War, the MDT was signed 
in 1951, a time when the Philippines was at its weakest, as it 
was then recovering from the effects of the last world war. The 
United States was at its mightiest, after emerging fairly 
unscathed in the battle of major powers. 
  The Philippines had no choice because it badly needed U.S. 
support to rebuild its war-ravaged economy. 
  Although the MDT was anchored on the two countries' common 
determination for defense against external attack and for strong 
efforts for collective defense to preserve peace and security in 
the Pacific area it contains two main provisions deemed 
disadvantageous to the Philippines. 
  The first is the issue of automatic response; the second, 
the 
scope of "metropolitan area." 
  The MDT's Article IV states: "Each party recognizes that an 
armed attack in the Pacific area on either of the parties is 
dangerous to its peace and safety and declared that it would act 
to meet the common dangers in accordance with its constitutional 
processes." 
  Critics of the treaty admit that the issue of automatic 
response in case of an attack in Philippine territory is not 
guaranteed in the Article, as the phrase "in accordance with 
constitutional processes" signifies. 
  Filipino military officials regard the absence of automatic 
response in case of an aggression on the Philippines as 
psychologically disadvantageous since similar treaties which the 
United States has entered into with South Korea and North 
American Treaty Organization (NATO) countries guarantees such 
automatic response. 
  Article V states: "An armed attack on either of the parties 
is deemed to include an armed attack on the metropolitan 
territory of either of the parties, or the island territories 
under its jurisdiction in the Pacific Ocean, its armed forces, 
public vessels or aircraft in the Pacific." 
  According to critics, this provision assures U.S. military 
action only on attacks of Philippine territory. But it excludes 
other areas, particularly part of the Spratlys, of which the 
Philippines exercises historic or legal right. 
  Since the Spratlys are now a potential "flashpoint" in Asia, 
mainly because of the territorial claims of several other 
nations, this provision means that the Philippines could not 
expect anything from the United States in case any of the 
claimant-nations uses military action in annexing the Spratlys 
portion, which it regards as part of Philippine territory. 
  Critics said President Fidel Ramos should have sought a 
clarification from U.S. President Bill Clinton about these two 
particular provisions in their one-on-one meeting at the White 
House in Washington. 

