Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] A piece of iron hovers in the air... The Kanagawa 
Academy of Science and Technology (KAST), established by 
Kanagawa Prefecture, has discovered a new magnetic levitating 
phenomenon that uses high-temperature superconductors, and 
confirmed that practical uses are possible. Previously, it was 
impossible to levitate something unless a permanent magnet was 
used together with a superconductor. However, this new 
phenomenon has overthrown the beliefs of the past. The new 
technique can keep a piece of iron in the air as if it were 
hanging from something above. Iron is stronger and less 
expensive than permanent magnets, therefore it will be much 
easier than before to find applications for this magnetic 
levitating technique, which uses a superconductor. The KAST and 
a superconductive research institute invested in by the 
government and the private sector, will start a joint project to 
develop magnetic bearings by applying this new phenomenon. 
  The researchers who discovered this new phenomenon are 
Toshiro Toiguchi -- who is Tokyo University Engineering 
Department professor and leader of the Toiguchi project for 
"ultimate mechatronics" [a word made by combining the words 
mechanics and electronics, according to a Japanese dictionary 
issued by Kodansha] -- and Yukio Tsutsui, a researcher with 
Yasukawa Electric Manufacturing Company. 
  The new phenomenon uses a permanent magnet only at the 
initial preparation stage but the permanent magnet is not used 
after the state of superconductivity is reached. To start with, 
a permanent magnet is placed near -- but not in contact with -- 
a high-temperature superconductor as in the conventional method. 
The high-temperature superconductor, when cooled, memorizes the 
magnetic forces emitted by the permanent magnet. Because of 
this, the superconductor and the magnet maintain a certain 
distance without touching each other. The superconductor 
continues to emit magnetic forces even after the permanent 
magnet is removed. 
  After this, the magnet is replaced with a strong 
ferromagnetic substance, such as iron, in this new method. This 
is where it differs from the conventional method -- which 
levitates objects using a permanent magnet, or levitates and 
moves objects along a rail made by placing magnets side by side. 
It is necessary to make the cross section of the iron near the 
superconductor smaller than that of the removed permanent magnet. 
  By doing this, the drawing force -- which is determined by 
the ratio of this cross section, gross weight of iron, and 
magnetic flux density -- becomes stable. It was thought in the 
past that iron would be drawn to the superconductor or fall due 
to its weight. Using the new method, however, it is possible to 
make the iron hover in the air some distance from the 
superconductor. The new method can also prevent the iron from 
sliding sideways. 
  The new technology discovered by KAST can be categorized as 
a 
hanging type. Its drawing force keeps the iron in the air as if 
it were hanging from the superconductor. It may not be called 
levitation. However, it is levitation as far as its practical 
applications are concerned. During the experiment, the 
researchers succeeded in hanging a 79-gram piece of iron, whose 
cross section was 8 mm in diameter, maintaining a distance of 
between 0.5 to 1.0 mm from the superconductor. The levitating 
forces were one-fifth those using a permanent magnet. However, 
it is by no means inferior to levitating forces obtained by 
using a permanent magnet as far as its possible applications are 
concerned. 

