Language: <F P=105>French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nicole Beauclair: "N-Star's First Giant </F>
Reflector Has Left Mureaux"] 
  [Text] Under a contract signed with its associate 
Space Systems/Loral [SS/Loral], Aerospatiale Espace &amp; Defense 
[Aerospatiale E &amp; D] has produced one of the Japanese N-Star 
satellite's major pieces of equipment: the Ku/S [shaped-beam] 
antenna's 4.5 m X 2.6 m reflector. 
  "We had never before gone this far in the fabrication of 
antenna shaped-profile reflectors," says Alain Noir, head of the 
N-Star operational group in Aerospatiale Espace &amp; Defense's 
Mureaux plant. The largest "shaped-surface" reflector 
Aerospatiale E &amp; D had ever produced heretofore had not 
exceeded 
2.2m in diameter. The actual size of the reflector for the 
N-Star satellite's Ku and S frequency bands antenna measures 
4.5m by 2.6m, for a design objective of 3.5m by 2.6m. 
  In addition to this reflector for the Ku/S antenna, the 
terms 
of the contract signed in May 1992 (see AIR &amp; COSMOS no. 
1375, 
p. 44) also call for Aerospatiale E &amp; D to design and build 
the 
reflector for the C and S frequency bands antenna. The 
design-objective size of the opening of the latter reflector is 
3.25m by 2.6m. It is a parabolic reflector, the first unit of 
which is to be delivered at the same time as the shaped-profile 
reflector. The contract calls for six reflectors in all, 
including four flight models for Japan's two N-Star satellites A 
and B, ordered by NTT from SS/Loral. These two satellites are to 
be launched by Ariane in April and Oct 1995. 
  The N-Star satellite is of the 4-4.5 metric ton class. 
Designed to cover Japan's complex communications needs, it had 
to have an optimized zone of coverage. It was therefore decided 
to substitute a single-source for a multiple-source approach, 
and to develop a shaped-beam antenna that would provide ground 
coverage in the form of a string bean, covering the entire and 
only the entire Japanese archipelago. Practically speaking, the 
satellite thus beams down solely on Japan and concentrates its 
entire power on its targets. 
  To obtain this optimal coverage, the surface of the Ku and S 
bands reflector cannot be uniform as in the case of parabolic 
antenna reflectors. Its surface is a complex of hills and 
valleys. With reference to a paraboloid as a base, its hills 
(bumps) may swell to heights up to +20.3 mm, and its valleys 
(hollows) descend to depths of -40.64 mm. This configuration 
also greatly simplifies the electronics of the satellite's 
antenna. 
  Aerospatiale at Mureaux designed and developed the reflector 
on the basis of SS/Loral's specifications, with due attention to 
all criteria: dimensioning of the reflector by modeling; 
computation by the finite-element method; thermal constraints 
(the reflector must retain its exact shape--between -185C 
and +134C--throughout the life of the satellite); etc. 
  Given the above-mentioned criteria and weight requirements, 
the choice of materials had to be made from the outset, 
  The shell of the reflector consists of a thin reflecting 
skin, 6.35 mm thick, a honeycomb weave of Kevlar (beehive), and 
a second skin made of carbon. Stiffeners arranged in a 
crisscross pattern serve to strengthen the assembly. These 
stiffeners also consist of a sandwiched structure of thin layers 
of carbon and artificial fiber in a honeycomb weave. The 
reflector is consolidated by an autoclave curing process. 
  It might have been thought that the shaped profile of this 
reflector is obtained by molding the reflecting layer over an 
evolutional profile of the honeycomb weave. This is by no means 
the case. Not wishing to divulge too many of the technological 
elements of Aerospatiale E &amp; D's know-how in the field of 
reflectors, Alain Flechais, head of the Technical Directorate's 
Space Products Department, emphasized the production cost gains 
resulting largely from the method adopted. The differences in 
surface levels are obtained by molding the carbon layers, and 
placing the honeycomb weave directly over a mold having the 
shape of the reflector. This tooling, a shaped mold made of 
Invar, was designed by Aerospatiale E &amp; D. Given the size of 
the 
reflector, Aerospatiale E &amp; D chose to have it fabricated by 
Framatome. 
  Prior to its delivery to SS/Loral, scheduled for Monday 29 
November, the Ku and S bands reflector underwent numerous tests: 
weight of 25 kg; three-dimensional check; verification of shape, 
whose precision attained a quadratic mean value of 0.25 mm; 
stiffness; frequency of the primary mode of 33 Hz; thermal 
specifications; etc. These tests were conducted at the Mureaux 
Plant as well as at the Cannes Division. But this reflector, the 
first flight model to be delivered to SS/Loral, has already made 
a round trip for its initial tests by the prime contractor for 
the satellite. The delivery of this first flight model, the size 
of which is still unequalled elsewhere, attests meaningfully to 
Aerospatiale E and D's qualifications as a space equipment 
manufacturer. Delivery of the second flight-model unit is 
already being programmed for May 1994. 

