BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "We Admire President Suharto's Open Criticism </F>
Against the Indonesian Press"] 
  [Text] When announcing the official construction of the 
Indonesian Navy's port at Teluk Ratai in Lampung last Thursday, 
President Suharto delivered his address without text. His 
address became a public topic for discussion. 
  First, the president's address without a prepared text was 
considered very interesting. As such, his reproach was more 
effective. A dialogue ensues every time the head of state 
delivers an impromptu address. 
  Second, the president issued a reminder to the press during 
his address at Teluk Ratai, Lampung. The newspapers, which had 
only limited access to the report on the purchase of 39 ex-East 
German warships, underscored the issue. The subsequent reports 
by the press resulted in creating an unclear situation, 
suspicion, and dissension. 
  The president stated that if such actions by the press were 
permitted to perpetuate, then this trend in reporting will 
disrupt the nation's stability and its political stability. 
National stability is an ingredient of the Trilogy of 
Development, which is made up of stability, development, and 
equal distribution. Therefore, we should put things right. 
Action should be taken against the press if it does not adhere 
to reminders. 
  The president's criticism was very clear and methodical. The 
public could react through diverse considerations in connection 
with the president's criticism and reminder. It would probably 
be wise for the public to react with care and wisdom when 
considering the president's criticism and reminder. 
  The president's remarks, which he made in Lampung, were 
neither God-sent nor without prior consideration. We are of the 
opinion that his criticisms came in the midst of the most recent 
developments. 
  There must have been at least two incidents when Information 
Minister Harmoko admonished the press, magazines, and electronic 
mass media officials in Jakarta and at district levels about 
being discreet and responsible in their reporting. He also 
reminded them to refrain from conducting a trial by the press 
[preceding three words in English], giving misinformation, and 
creating disunity. 
  Questions arose from the reports about the purchase of the 
39 
ex-East German warships. These reports from the mass media, 
both print and electronic media, are part of the effort to 
become more transparent and more open. The reports, however, 
were observed as being inconsistent, unjust, and unilateral. 
This could leave a negative impact on certain people. 
  The Indonesian mass media's varying methods and trends in 
reporting, whether by the print or electronic media, was 
observed to be more open in issues such as the Nipah Dam, the 
murder of labor activist Marsinah, and the Bapindo bank scam. 
  The mass media lie low every time an official issues a 
reminder, warning, or criticism in connection with their 
reporting. They only return to their previous trends after some 
time. Whatever credibility or background they possess, we have 
witnessed such occurrences before. 
  The media went to the extreme by reporting on the purchase 
of 
the former East German warships until President Suharto made a 
direct, clear, and in-depth criticism. 
  The president's criticism of the mass media received 
attention. Press circles have become more careful and discreet. 
This is observed in that Indonesian media reports and 
commentaries recently made thorough observations and sentiments 
were of a positive nature. 
  The developments taking place within the press are connected 
to those occurring within society which, for example, are 
directed toward openness. Openness is facilitated by the 
government in alignment with progress. Openness is actually a 
form of dynamism that thrives within society. It encourages the 
people's participation in development and political processes. 
  The exposure of the Bapindo bank scam caused by ET [Eddy 
Tansil -- the first accused in the Bapindo bank scam] and the 
subsequent legal process and press reports were evaluated as a 
constructive asset coming from the openness process. 
  In this regard, based on the importance of national 
development and people's interest, the issues of the Bapindo 
bank scam and the purchase of the former East German warships 
are considered similarly important. 
  Therefore, the authorities should place a caveat [preceding 
word in English] on openness as people become increasingly aware 
of the effects of openness and when this openness is similarly 
expressed through the mass media, the press, or even considered 
stronger within the government service sector. The government 
should also issue a reminder to the mass media to refrain from 
being too belligerent, embarking on trials by the press, being 
excessively primordial, and to totally abstain from inciting our 
multi-racial society. 
  It is most likely that encouragement exists everywhere for 
more dynamic competition. There is also a possibility of a 
subjective and partisan political motive. It is also probable 
that the issue was more concentrated on the effort toward 
reactivating the past format [format yang pas] of extremes. A 
unilateral form of openness can only support and channel the 
people's aspirations. Another form of openness can bring about 
excesses. 
  Both of these forms are sensitive. If there are people 
within society who are suppressed and their cries go unheeded 
and no constructive or corrective measures are undertaken to 
rectify the situation, then conditions will gradually grow into 
an explosive situation. On the other hand, there will be 
excesses if people do not fully assimilate openness in a 
positive manner. 
  Such was the president's candid criticism of the mass media 
when he urged them to correct their ways and to be more 
discreet. Meanwhile, the mass media should conscientiously heed 
the president's reproach when making their reports -- 
irrespective of the facts, figures, and other aspects they have 
to abide by. 
  This means that the president's aides should not only 
function as advisers for major issues but also function as 
coordinating agents to overcome disparity among the members of 
the community. 
  Finally, national and political stability can be breached 
not 
only through the issues and conditions brought to the fore by 
the mass media but through the existence of bona fide problems 
and conditions. Therefore, all parties should be more critical, 
constructive, and sincere in accepting the president's 
criticisms and advice. 

