BFN 

<F P=106> [By Walfredo Angulo] </F>
  [Text] Havana, 15 Apr (PL) -- The educational achievements 
of Cuba will permit it to move forward, Colombian Deputy 
Education Minister Antonio Jose Lizarazo said today after 
stating that the Colombian people and government want greater 
cooperation with the island. 
  Lizarazo is a member of a Colombian delegation visiting Cuba 
to reach agreements for increased cooperation in the 
educational, cultural, sports, technical-scientific, and tourist 
fields. 
  Cubans have achieved a level of coordination in the 
educational sector that allows them to speak of a wholly 
organized, coordinated, and balanced system that has achieved 
great success, Lizarazo said in an interview with PRENSA LATINA. 
  This was all conceived in keeping with the country's need 
for 
professionals and skilled labor, as well as to form citizens 
actively committed to a cause, he added. 
  Asked about possible repercussions in his country due to the 
signing of protocols for educational, sports, and cultural 
collaboration and the agreements signed by the mixed commission 
last night, Lizarazo sustained that the majority of the 
Colombian people and government want to strengthen ties of 
friendship with Cuba. 
  These unprecedented multiple cooperation agreements include 
approximately 80 projects submitted by Cuba, such as options for 
investments in tourism, mining, communications, aeronautics, 
textiles, and fishing, among other fields. 
  To Lizarazo, these agreements form part of his country's 
policy to promote integration with neighboring countries, with 
the Caribbean countries and with Latin American countries. He 
pointed out that the new Colombian constitution approved in 1991 
establishes these foreign affairs priorities. 
  There will always be those who oppose and misinterpret the 
incumbent government's actions in this direction, he said, 
commenting on reaction that surfaced a few weeks ago following 
negotiations on the possible sale of Colombian oil to Cuba. 
  Lizarazo recalled that relations have always been maintained 
in the sports and cultural fields by contracting with Cuban 
trainers and athletes and by exchanges and visits by artists and 
said that this will be more frequent from now on. 
  He regarded the signing of a protocol with the Cuban 
Education Ministry and other agreements signed in this capital 
as "a more precise evaluation of the general subjects which make 
up bilateral collaboration." 
  With them we intend to improve the quality of Colombia's 
educational services as part of reforms being developed in this 
area by the ruling government, he added. 
  Referring to conversations with Cuban authorities, Lizarazo 
said he appreciated the honesty shown in admitting and 
correcting past errors and, he added, the will to push forward 
and continue along paths Cuba believes are correct. 
  He expressed admiration for the way they the Cuban 
authorities were facing current challenges and said they will 
succeed because there is optimism and confidence and because it 
is the will of all Cubans to succeed. 
  Only 37 years old, the Colombian deputy minister has been in 
this office -- which also attends to sports and culture -- for 
one year. Previously he was a presidential aide in charge of a 
social investment program and before that he was the governor of 
the Norte de Santander Department, on the border with Venezuela. 
  The Colombian delegation to the mixed commission is led by 
Andelfo Garcia, deputy foreign minister for Latin America, and 
includes the communications and the environment deputy 
ministers, Jaime Uribe and Eduardo Uribe, respectively, along 
with a dozen other officials. 

