CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gao Tao: ``Information Sector Thrives''] </F>
  [Text] China's booming telecommunications industry is 
rapidly developing a modern nationwide information network. The 
immediate task is focusing on expanding and upgrading the 
[Chinapac] packet-switched public data network to meet the 
growing demands for non-voice telecommunications across the 
country and with the world, said an official from the Ministry 
of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT). 
  The network includes two levels--the backbone network 
(primary switching centres) and regional networks in each 
province, autonomous region and municipality (secondary 
switching centres). The trunk network, containing 5,500 ports, 
has been finished and put into operation. The network includes 
696 trunk ports, two international gateways, and one gateway for 
Hong Kong and Macao. Data transmission is realized through the 
public telecommunications system, including fibre-optic cables, 
microwave and satellite communications. Through the network, 
computer owners across the country who join Chinapac can 
exchange information and contact with other computer users at 
home and abroad. 
  By the end of this year, the network will cover 500 Chinese 
cities as local telecommunications administrations are building 
14 provincial networks. Another 15 provincial networks have 
already been established. It is expected that the network will 
cover all counties in East, South and Central China and some 
counties in West China by 1995. MPT expects that the number of 
users of the network will reach 8,000 this year and grow to 
20,000 by 1995. At present, most of the users are financial 
organizations, banks, stock exchanges, large enterprises and 
government departments. The official stressed that it is 
important to constantly upgrade the network's technology and 
facilities to meet the growing demands of the customers. It is 
the trend and the plan of the ministry to link up all databases 
in the country through the network, making it possible for all 
to share the information. Methods of dividing the profits 
between databases and telecommunications departments will be 
worked out. 
  The non-voice telecommunications service sector, otherwise 
called value-added service communications, is expected to grow 
by 50 percent this year and the next. Beyond the next couple of 
years, services are charted to grow at an annual rate of 30 
percent between 1996 and 2000. With the further upgrading and 
expansion of China's public telecommunications network, more and 
more data communications will become possible, such as videotex, 
E-mail, EDI [Electronic Data Interchange] and other services. 
Videotex integrates data transmission and data processing and 
displays the information or image on a computer terminal. The 
service is now available in Shanghai and will be expanded to 
Shenzhen, Guangzhou, Beijing and other big cities. Most 
equipment for the service is imported from France and Germany 
while the rest is domestically made. It is expected that the 
number of videotex users will grow to 5,000 by the end of next 
year and to 30,000 by 2000. 
  The E-mail service provides computer networking that 
facilitates the transfer of text, messages, and other 
information among the subscribers. Six such systems have been 
installed in Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Jiangmen, Shenzhen 
and Qingdao, and each allows 3,000 mailboxes. The average 
capacity of each mailbox is 100,000 bytes. In order to promote 
wide application of the system, research institutes in China 
have developed technical specifications and requirements for 
E-mail service. The wide application of E-mail will greatly 
increase the demand for the packet-switched public data network 
in China. 
  Electronic data interchange (EDI) is a system allowing 
traders to do business using electronic telecommunications 
rather than papers. It ensures rapid transactions and reduces 
human error. Several Chinese departments and ministries, such 
as telecommunications departments, the electronics industry, 
banks, foreign trade and customs, are jointly working to 
establish a national EDI system. It is planned that a 
nationwide EDI system will be formed by 2000 and connected with 
the international network. It is also believed that China will 
lose a competitive edge in foreign trade if the development of 
the EDI system is delayed. EDI systems have been adopted by 
many countries. Customs clearance among most European countries 
and the United States are done by using EDI. It was reported 
that 95 percent of foreign trade in Singapore is conducted 
through EDI. 
  The ministry plans to expand and link up all public 
telephone 
directory inquiry systems and information services databases 
across the country operated by themselves. The information 
services databases, the 168 access code on the public phone 
network, will be one of the main targets for development in the 
future. Whenever the customer needs information, if they just 
dial 168 they will get all they need. 

