Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by R. Winkel, in Sissi; date not given: "European </F>
Transport Ministers Tread Lightly"] 
  [Text] Sissi (Crete) -- Really it should not be given too 
much emphasis, but after extensive negotiations with the 
countries involved, the European Commission [EC] has mapped out 
improvements deemed necessary in the East European road and 
train network. Ministers from nearly 50 European countries, 
joined by representatives from the banking institutions, 
yesterday saw the plans for the first time at the second 
Pan-European Transport Conference on the Greek island of Crete. 
  It is a follow-up conference to the one held in autumn 1991 
in Prague. It was virtually self-evident that Minister Maij, 
then EC president, should choose the Czech capital. The Wall 
had just fallen and the euphoria about the newly gained freedom 
and the new market at the feet of a saturated West Europe knew 
no bounds. 
  Since then the enthusiasm has diminished considerably. 
Europe is in the grip of despondency. Since 1991 the number of 
borders has only increased. As subtle reminder to his 
colleagues that there are still regions within the EC which are 
difficult to access, the Greek minister moved the follow-up 
conference to distant Crete. The theme was the development of a 
pan-European transport policy, in particular in view of 
construction and financing of infrastructure. 
  That is easier said than done. At first view the interests 
of the East and West seem fairly related. The need for trade is 
mutual and the development of reliable transport networks is 
therefore regarded as a mutual interest. But then the problems 
start. Which roads or means of transport have priority, and who 
decides that? Who invests? And how will competition issues be 
dealt with. 
  Prague is a good deal closer to Germany than Budapest and of 
course the Czech people want to keep it that way. As a whole, 
the Central and East European countries have no desire to have 
their future transport infrastructure outlined by a couple of 
bureaucrats in Brussels, and they do not want to have the law 
spelled out for them. They often have very different commercial 
priorities. 
  For example Czech Minister Strasky said yesterday that 
transit transport between southeast and northwest Europe already 
represented 40 percent of all goods traffic in his country, 
which puts a lot of pressure on traffic and on the environment. 
Transit traffic has been made easier, but nothing has come of 
the promise to help construct the infrastructure, Strasky 
complained. He did not spell it out, but if the EC does not pay 
attention, there will soon be a third candidate after Austria 
and Switzerland for a transit treaty. 
  Nor is everything going smoothly within the EC. A member 
state like the United Kingdom has no objection to an excellent 
road network being built on the continent, but grumbles at the 
thought of public funding paying for it. That applies to the EC 
itself and just as much to the rest of Europe. France sees the 
conference as a good opportunity to call to order East European 
countries which, in its opinion, have already gone too far down 
the capitalist road. "No protectionism, but also no 
uncontrolled freedom of competition," Minister Bosson told his 
colleagues. 
  Low wages and safety standards in East Europe are causing 
unwelcome competition in goods transport in particular, and also 
leading to a shift to road transport (no longer politically 
correct), the West German Social Democrat Luttge said. He 
prepared the conference in the name of the European Parliament. 
Referring to concepts like the "social market economy," "free 
but fair competition" and "the gradual liberalization of market 
access in accordance with the harmonization of competitive 
conditions," the final declaration drawn up by him sailed neatly 
around all the obstacles. 
  As with the energy sector, it remains necessary to tread 
lightly in talks with East Europe and there seems to be a strong 
need for some security in the form of a treaty or charter. 
There is a reason why today the ministers will commit 
themselves to drawing up a "system of agreed principles for 
transport policies" at the next conference. 
  Minister Maij became impatient ("We have studied the 
problems 
long enough now, it is time for us to make some definitive 
agreements," she said). In this context she found it simply 
part of the bargain that at Sissi EC Commissioner Matutes should 
openly table plans for nine main traffic arteries through East 
Europe. For outside financiers, like the World Bank and the East 
European Bank, these huge projects are given a little more 
political weight this way. 

