BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "C.G.": "Concerned About Ukraine"] </F>
  [Text] At a Bonn conference of German ambassadors to the 
CIS countries on the territory of the former Soviet Union, 
considerable concern was expressed over developments in Ukraine. 
Speaking at the close of the conference, Foreign Minister 
Kinkel said that the situation on the Crimea peninsula gave rise 
to anxiety. "It must be clear to everyone that the parties 
concerned must find a solution based on negotiations, a solution 
that will take into account the desire for Crimean autonomy and 
prevent a violent escalation." 
  Kinkel warned Russia: "The territorial integrity of Ukraine 
is an absolute necessity for us and our partners in the European 
Union [EU]." There are doubts in Bonn about whether the 
reformers will succeed in the upcoming presidential elections in 
Kiev. Western states are prepared to provide Ukraine with 
extensive support. However, an impetus for reform must be 
present there. Kinkel described a plan for overhauling the 
nuclear powers plants in Ukraine as "the most pressing problem 
at the present time." It is not, however, certain that the 
European Council meeting on Corfu during the weekend and the G-7 
summit in Naples in July will implement the proposals made by 
Chancellor Kohl and President Mitterrand. The international 
community must recognize that the growing danger stemming from 
Chernobyl and similar reactors constitutes an exceptional 
threat. Kinkel described contributions to saving the environment 
on the territory of the former Soviet Union as "a key concern in 
German foreign policy." Extensive tracts of land have been 
polluted with radioactivity. There is a danger of natural 
catastrophes that could change the climate in entire regions. 
Kinkel called on German industry to use its technology to 
contribute to preserving the environment. Germany will 
particularly strengthen relations with Russia and Ukraine during 
the German EU presidency. Developments among the states that 
have succeeded the Soviet Union should not become synonymous 
with numerous hotbeds of tension. 
  Kinkel reiterated his rejection of Russia's wish to raise 
the 
status of the CSCE by transforming it into a coordinating agency 
with respect to NATO, the WEU, and the CIS. There is no 
question of subordinating NATO to the CSCE in this form. The 
CSCE has its own important role in promoting democracy and human 
rights, preventing conflicts and providing an early warning 
function, as well as monitoring the implementation of measures 
designed to preserve peace. "It covers a different spectrum 
from NATO and the WEU, but is no less important for the 
preservation of peace and security." Kinkel expressed the hope 
that there would be a growing willingness to reach compromises 
in the relationship between Yeltsin and the Russian Duma. 

