BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ferdos Forudastan: "Special Prison for Kurds?"] </F>
  [Text] Bonn, 29 Mar -- Interior Minister Manfred Kanther 
(Christian Democratic Union) seems to be considering concluding 
an agreement with Turkey under which deported Kurds would be 
detained in special prisons to which human rights organizations 
would have regular access, FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU has been told 
by government circles. With this measure, Kanther wants to 
remove obstacles to deporting Kurds that participated in the 
recent riots. Since these people are threatened with being 
tortured or sentenced to death in Turkey, deporting them is 
legally difficult, if not impossible. 
  This idea met with skepticism by part of the government. The 
idea of a "transparent model human rights prison" in Turkey is 
"not very convincing" and not very realistic, they said. 
  On Tuesday [29 March], the interior minister's suggestion 
was 
also discussed by representatives of his own ministry, and the 
Foreign and Justice Ministries. Officials wanted to have a 
general discussion on the chances of an agreement with Turkey. 
After the talks, the Foreign Ministry said that a special 
agreement with Turkey is "not considered appropriate" as Turkey 
is bound by international agreements against torture in any 
case. Nevertheless, all possibilities should be investigated. 
  Turkey has shown an interest in a deportation agreement for 
Kurdish rioters. Oezdem Sanberk, state secretary in the Foreign 
Ministry, said on Tuesday that it is important that such an 
agreement does not "violate the law in Turkey or Germany." 
  Hartmut Baeumer (Greens), president of the Giessen regional 
administration, does not share the view of Hesse Interior 
Minister Herbert Guenther (Social Democratic Party of Germany). 
Baeumer told FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU that he does "not consider" 
deportations "to be the right solution." Deportations might be 
held up for six months. In order to protect the "real victims" 
of the civil war in Turkey, German politicians must now "have 
backbone, even if it is difficult," Baeumer said. 

