BFN 

  [Text] Munich (DPA) -- The Republikaner are for the first 
time cited in the constitutional protection report on political 
extremism in Bavaria. However, Franz Schoenhuber's party is 
just mentioned as an "object for observation." At the 
presentation of the report for 1993 in Munich on Monday [16 May] 
Interior Minister Guenter Beckstein (Christian Social Union) 
said that so far the investigations as to whether the party is 
to be classified as right- wing extremist in Bavaria have not 
yet been concluded. 
  In Bavaria -- as in seven other laender -- the Republikaner 
have been watched with intelligence service means since the end 
of 1992. So far, the party has been classified as right-wing 
radical and not as right-wing extremist in Bavaria. Therefore, 
the party was not mentioned in the constitutional protection 
reports. Baden-Wuerttemberg has already classified 
Schoenhuber's party as "right-wing extremist." At its latest 
meeting at the beginning of May, the interior ministers' 
conference also spoke of "right-wing extremist intentions." 
  According to Beckstein, Bavaria's internal security is still 
"massively" threatened by politically motivated violence. 
Right-wing extremism is in the foreground in this connection. 
Thus, xenophobic crimes such as graffiti, threats, and coercion 
rose from 390 to about 460 cases last year (plus 18 percent). 
Antisemitic and racist incidents even increased by 44 percent 
to almost 700. The number of acts of violence -- such as massive 
physical attacks -- remained constant at 110. 
  With a view to the highway blockade by Kurds near Augsburg 
in 
mid-March, Beckstein announced a Bavarian initiative in the 
Bundesrat. According to this initiative, offenses against the 
laws relating to civil disorders and rioting are to become a 
"compulsory reason for expulsion." So far, the regulation in 
the law was optional. It remains an "ambitious goal" to deport 
foreign violent criminals after examining each individual case. 
Politically motivated violence by foreigners has reached an 
"unbearable degree." All over the FRG 195 such deeds were 
registered last year; in 1992 there were only 141. 
  Concerning the classification of the Republikaner, Beckstein 
demanded a nationwide coordinated action by the conference of 
the interior ministers of the laender. Bavaria has included the 
party in the constitutional protection report for the first 
time, because there are "considerable clues" pointing to goals 
that are hostile to the constitution. Beckstein rejected an 
action alliance against the Republikaner, which the Social 
Democratic Party of Germany has demanded. Real democrats cannot 
be onesidedly "antifascist," but must defend themselves against 
extremism from both the right and the left. In total, 
right-wing extremism in Bavaria has almost 5,000 followers, thus 
being considerably stronger than left-wing extremism with about 
3,500 followers, the Christian Social Union politician said. 
  For the Party of Democratic Socialism [PDS] Beckstein 
demanded observation with intelligence service means. He will 
continue to urge a nationwide classification of the PDS as a 
party hostile to the constitution, the minister said. In the 
160-page Bavarian report the PDS is again classified as 
left-wing extremist. According to the interior minister, it is 
watched with intelligence service means. 

