Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" interview with Santiago del Estero trustee Juan </F>
Schiaretti by Maria Ines Espeche in Santiago; date not given] 
  [Text] [Espeche] Your intervention began 10 days ago. What 
is the situation in Santiago? 
  [Schiaretti] The social climate is one of absolute calm and 
tranquility, so much so that yesterday Border Police officers 
withdrew and the provincial police resumed the supervision of 
law and order in town. The population has great expectations 
that the intervention will solve the crisis. People receive us 
warmly and happily wherever we go. Santiago will have to 
reconstruct everything anew because the government and the 
economy collapsed. 
  [Espeche] Do you think 150 days will be enough to straighten 
things out? Could this period be extended? 
  [Schiaretti] I will strictly comply with the congressional 
law establishing that we must call for new elections within 150 
days. Those are the instructions I received from the president 
of the Republic. 
  [Espeche] Why did things get so far out of hand as to need 
an 
intervention? 
  [Schiaretti] The national government and all the forces that 
coexist in Congress have always preferred solutions proposed by 
the provinces. Here the two main political forces, Santiago's 
two largest political parties, wanted a solution worked out 
among themselves without federal intervention. The proposal was 
made in a climate of obvious political stress amid a gross 
mishandling of the public administration. Regrettably, local 
leaders were unable to find a solution and this provoked the 
social outburst. 
  [Espeche] Various provinces are experiencing delicate 
situations. Is that also due to mismanagement or is it because 
Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo overlooked the provinces in the 
economic plan?. 
  [Schiaretti] We cannot say that the economic plan overlooked 
the provinces because Santiago del Estero, for instance, 
received twice as much in coparticipation funds this year as it 
did two years ago. The province used to receive a little less 
than 20 million pesos per month and now receives nearly 40 
million pesos per month. Therefore, we cannot speak about 
anybody overlooking anything. The province had a balanced 
situation before. 
  [Espeche] But it has been badly administered for the past 10 
years? Was that not known at a national level? 
  [Schiaretti] Yes, but we have a representative, republican, 
and federal system. The people in the provinces elect their own 
authorities and our Constitution establishes how the federal 
government should act. The Constitution establishes federal and 
provincial government attributions. The people in each province 
must elect their governments and then decide with their votes if 
that government was good or bad. 
  [Espeche] Do you think the situation in Santiago and other 
provinces has nothing to do with the adjustment proposed by the 
federal government? 
  [Schiaretti] You cannot speak about adjustment when the 
amount of federal coparticipation has doubled. Besides, the 
situation was provoked by mismanagement. The province had a 
balance financial situation just a year ago, but then 
legislators were granted monthly salaries of 17,000 pesos, 
judges and employees received 15,000 pesos, advisers earned 
8,000 pesos; public servants were selected for their political 
affiliation; councilmen received salaries of 6,000 pesos; and 
new municipal councils were created at the same time health 
centers were being closed. The population saw that many people 
were doing well while the mismanagement was bringing misery to 
the population. These were the reasons behind the people's 
indignation. The usual agitators and subversives took 
advantage of the situation to loot and destroy. 
  [Espeche] The people demand justice in Santiago, that is, 
the 
punishment of those involved in corruption. Will the 
intervention answer this popular petition? 
  [Schiaretti] The justice department will investigate all 
reports. No one will be excluded. The state attorney general 
was instructed to report on all cases of corruption in the 
province. The court will act from there. We are already working 
on some cases and we will report what we find as soon as we have 
something. 
  [Espeche] It is obvious that Cavallo's plan is going through 
a trial by fire considering what is happening in the provinces. 
Do you think President Carlos Menem might stop supporting 
Cavallo if his reelection is in danger? 
  [Schiaretti] I do not think so because the economic plan is 
President Menem's plan. Minister Cavallo is carrying out the 
economic policy that the president chose for Argentina. 
Besides, the social outburst in Santiago has never been against 
the national government but against the administration of local 
leaders. 

