Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] RUNDU: Friday, March 11--A massive Antonov-124 
freighter, the world's second largest cargo plane, is still 
detained at Rundu airfield, where the four engine 
intercontinental aircraft is guarded by the police with no one 
allowed to board her. She arrived at Rundu airfield on Tuesday 
afternoon after loading a consignment of goods in Windhoek. 
More goods were taken into her huge cargo holds at Rundu 
airfield, and shortly afterwards police and custom officials 
arrived. Since then the huge jet has been grounded, seized by 
the Namibian police until clearance is received from Luanda that 
she can proceed. 
  Luanda though will in all likelihood not provide the 
necessary clearance because the government there knows nothing 
about the jet, which is painted snow white and bears no markings 
other than the number 26023. 
  The inspector general of Police, General Andima, confirmed 
this afternoon that Luanda's embassy in Windhoek has officially 
denied a statement by the commander of the Antonov that she was 
outbound for Luanda. The Luanda authorities know nothing about 
the aircraft, and General Andima said that unless the commander 
of the aircraft could now prove that what he had told the 
Namibian police was true, the aircraft would be kept grounded. 
  General Andima was kind enough to give some details about 
the 
mystery at Rundu. He said that on Tuesday, March 9, the huge 
jet landed at Windhoek International. There she took in 
supplies, a cargo which had to be supplemented at Rundu 
airfield. After taking off from Windhoek the aircraft did land 
at Rundu airfield where more goods were loaded. Her holds, 
which can take 90 tons of cargo, are filled. 
  General Andima said that he could confirm officially that 
masses of medicines were included in the cargo, but he would not 
elaborate further. The commander was asked to produce 
documentary proof of his flight instructions, and he did in fact 
hand over to the police and customs officials at Rundu airfield 
a document, which soon proved to be without any value. 
  Investigation and communication with the Angolan 
authoritities revealed that this document was not a legitimate 
one and not issued by Luanda. 
  "You are aware of the restrictions the Angolan authorities 
had placed on their airspace and that no air movements were 
allowed other than those authorised by them. In view of that we 
can not allow the Antonov to take off from Rundu," General 
Andima said. 
  The general did not elaborate on the nature of all the cargo 
on board, and rumours were rife that the aircraft was outbound 
not for Luanda, but Jamba, which has an unsurfaced but very 
high-standard airfield, for only quite recently the ADVERTISER'S 
reporter-in-chief landed there. [passage omitted] 

