BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
articles published in Seoul vernacular newspapers on 14 June on 
North Korea's withdrawal from the International Atomic Energy 
Agency, IAEA. 
  The moderate CHUNGANG ILBO carries on page 1 a 1,600-word 
report on the movement of the ROK Government, the United States, 
the IAEA, and China in the face of North Korea's withdrawal from 
the IAEA, writing they are all agonizing over mapping out 
countermeasures. The report notes that the North Korean nuclear 
issue is at the edge of a cliff, while noting that the ROK 
Government confirmed again its stance of pushing for UN 
imposition of sanctions against North Korea by convening an 
emergency meeting of the Unification-National Security 
Coordination Council on 14 June. The report continues: "Because 
North Korea has not withdrawn from the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty, NPT, a mother law of the IAEA, it still has a legal duty 
to undergo inspections of its nuclear facilities. In case North 
Korea should reject the inspections and order inspectors to 
leave, a process for international inspection of North Korea's 
nuclear activities will completely disappear, thereby greatly 
shocking the international community. North Korea's nuclear 
issue will surely bring about long-term consequences, depending 
upon the international community's response." 
  The report quotes Yi Hong-ku, deputy prime minister and 
minister of the National Unification Board, as saying after the 
14 June Unification-National Security Coordination Council 
meeting that North Korea's breaking away from all safety devices 
guaranteeing the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula is 
decisively running counter to the peaceful solution of the 
nuclear issue, while urging North Korea to cooperate to secure 
all safety measures as required by the NPT system. The report 
further quotes Minister Yi as stressing that there is no 
peculiar military activity on North Korea's part, while noting 
the government will continue to make solid and consistent 
efforts for the peaceful solution of the North Korean nuclear 
issue. 
  CHUNGANG ILBO also carries on page 3 a 1,200-word article on 
the reaction of the ROK Government. The article quotes 
participants in the 14 June Unification-National Security 
Coordination Council meeting as analyzing that North Korea's 
withdrawal from the IAEA was carried out to emphasize its 
threats that if the IAEA imposes sanctions, it will withdraw 
from the NPT; and if the UN Security Council decides on 
sanctions, it will regard this as a declaration of war. 
Government officials concerned are quoted as saying that North 
Korea's withdrawal from the IAEA is a low-level measure--one 
step lower than withdrawal from the NPT--to secure as many 
bargaining chips as possible; not to abruptly escalate the 
intensity of confrontation; not to yield to the pressure of 
sanctions; and to hold in check sanctions by the UN Security 
Council. The article comments: Considering that North Korea's 
latest move is aimed at testing our government's will, the ROK 
Government has decided to react strongly. 
  The article reports that it will be easier for the ROK 
Government and the United States to persuade China and other 
neighboring nations to deal with North Korea's nuclear issue, 
predicting that China and Russia will be able to exercise 
stronger influence and North Korea's nuclear issue will be 
discussed at a forum other than the United Nations. The article 
concludes that the government is concentrating its efforts on 
mapping out security countermeasures against North Korea's 
possible provocations. 
  CHUNGANG ILBO also carries on page 3 a 1,000-word editorial 
on the dangerous nature of North Korea's withdrawal from the 
IAEA, noting that North Korea's diplomacy is moving toward an 
extremely dangerous all-or-nothing stage. The editorial 
comments that North Korea has two goals: One, North Korea will 
deal only with the United States to the exclusion of the IAEA; 
two, North Korea is trying to drive a wedge in the international 
community's discussion of the imposition of sanctions. The 
editorial concludes that North Korea is trying to achieve a 
dramatic effect with the approach of the upcoming visit by 
former U.S. President Carter and urges North Korea to understand 
that the United States is not so easy and that if its excessive 
strategy fails, there will be a larger danger. 
  The moderate, culturally oriented MUNHWA ILBO carries on 
page 
1 an article on ROK and U.S. reactions. The article predicts 
that as a result of the increasing mistrust of North Korea, 
discussion at the UN Security Council will proceed more quickly, 
while noting the ROK and the United States have reaffirmed their 
position to push for the UN Security Council's imposition of 
phased sanctions on North Korea. 
  MUNHWA ILBO also carries on page 1 an article on Pyongyang's 
ulterior motives. The article reports that Pyongyang is trying 
to realize direct negotiations with the United States, while 
noting that in the eyes of North Korea, the IAEA is nothing but 
an obstacle to its negotiations with the United States. The 
article continues that North Korea did not withdraw from the 
NPT, reporting this means that North Korea is not preparing for 
a face-to-face confrontation with the United States, but shows 
that it has not given up its nuclear diplomacy through 
negotiations. 

