Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Daniel Kwan] </F>
  [Text] Beijing is to launch a campaign to clear the 
notorious "triangular debts" problem, senior government 
officials revealed yesterday. Attending the NPC session in 
Beijing, the officials admitted that triangular debts -- debts 
enterprises owe each other -- have again snowballed to unhealthy 
levels. 
  In a discussion with NPC delegates from Liaoning province, 
Vice- Premier Zou Jiahua disclosed that the State Council would 
launch the campaign soon and the coal industry in northeast 
China was likely to be its first target. In his meeting with 
delegates from Hubei, premier Li Peng agreed that the triangular 
debts problem had become serious again and he called for urgent 
action. 
  The China News Service reported that triangular debts in 
Liaoning, where the majority of China's mammoth state-owned 
industry was situated, have grown from 32 billion yuan (HK$28.42 
billion) three years ago to 47 billion yuan. The Anshan Iron 
and Steel Company in Liaoning -- known to be a pillar of China's 
steel industry -- was one of the victims, CNS said. According 
to Liaoning Governor Yue Oilfeng, the company owed other 
enterprises more than six billion yuan but had difficulties in 
collecting eight billion yuan in sales from other firms. 
  The problem was equally serious in remote Inner Mongolia. 
The Communist Party Secretary there, Wang Qun, said triangular 
debts had spilled over into other areas of the economy. The 
secretary disclosed that in Inner Mongolia, government 
departments and enterprises had boycotted each other by holding 
off "coal and electricity". Some "very bad incidents" had 
occurred, he said. Although the secretary did not give details, 
analysts pointed out that there had been reports of "armed 
conflicts" between enterprises. 
  The economic tsar, Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji, admitted that 
the 
problem had resurfaced but did not offer a solution, according 
to CNS. However, the agency quoted an official of the State 
Economic and Trade Commission as saying that the problem arose 
because of an over-expansion of capital construction projects, 
coupled with a shortage of circulation capital. The 
unidentified official said enterprises had exhausted their 
circulating fund in expanding their fixed assets. 

