Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["International Commentary" by Xu Boyuan (6079 0590 3220): </F>
"Maintain Independence and Keep the Initiative in Our Own Hands 
Is Our Standpoint"] 
  [Text] The international and domestic situation today is 
much different from that in the days of Comrade Mao Zedong; 
nevertheless, recalling and reviewing his diplomatic thinking 
and strategy, we find that it remains very significant in 
guiding our work today. 
  Comrade Mao Zedong's diplomatic strategy had a different 
focus in different periods based on the different situations and 
conditions; however, the basics were persistent and the most 
conspicuous point was: "Maintain independence, take the 
initiative in our own hands, and rely on our own efforts." If 
overthrowing imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic capitalism 
and founding the PRC were Comrade Mao Zedong's immortal 
historical feats, then maintaining state sovereignty and 
territorial integrity in the wake of the PRC's founding, while 
adhering to maintaining independence under whatever 
circumstances, was another of his brilliant accomplishments. 
  When the People's Liberation Army crossed the Chang Jiang, 
he 
resolutely issued an order to fire at a naval vessel flying a 
foreign flag, which had attempted to make trouble. In the early 
days of the PRC founding, the U.S. Army started a war at China's 
gates; at that time, China's economic strength was very weak as 
all tasks which had been neglected were being undertaken. 
However, he vigorously advocated sending volunteers to Korea 
and defeated the aggressors through joint efforts with the 
Korean People's Army, safeguarding our national security. 
Later, with indomitable spirit, he led the Chinese people to 
withstand the imperialist economic blockade for 20 years. 
Because of chauvinism in the international communist movement, 
Comrade Mao Zedong thoroughly resisted any attempt to injure 
China's sovereignty and territorial integrity, was before or 
after the PRC's founding. Especially during the three years of 
natural calamities, he was bold enough to refute in stern 
speeches the unreasonable demands of the Soviet leader at that 
time. We cannot help but admire him when we recall things past. 
  Under the new historical conditions, how should we view and 
grasp the principle to "maintain independence, take the 
initiative in our own hands, and rely on our own efforts?" To 
answer this, it is imperative to understand the characteristics 
of the world today. The world is precisely as it is and actually 
exists. However, observed from different angles, people will 
obtain different impressions and draw different conclusions. 
Should we view the world from the angle of North-South 
relations, we can have a clear picture of the attempts and 
momentum of the North manipulating the South. Western developed 
countries always try to transform the world in the shape of 
their own features, while attempting to unify and standardize 
the world population of 5 billion using their own value 
concepts. In recent years, the G-7 Summits have discussed not 
only their own economic relations but have also increasingly 
issued orders, right and left, regarding world affairs. 
Economic sanctions have become a magic wand in their hands, 
which they often use to attack others. This is a new condition 
which has surfaced in the wake of the termination of the bipolar 
pattern. 
  On the issue of sovereignty, Comrade Deng Xiaoping has 
always 
been rock solid saying: "Maintain independence, take the 
initiative in our own hands, and rely on our own efforts has 
always been, and will continue to be, our standpoint." He also 
said: "All foreign countries should stop expecting China to 
become their vassal state and stop expecting China to swallow 
any bitter fruit that injures China's interests." He made these 
remarks 11 years ago and they still remind us of Comrade Mao 
Zedong's boldness of vision. Today, Western countries have not 
stopped their efforts to "change" us, nor have they stopped 
their activities in trying to disintegrate China. A new "theory" 
has surfaced in the West which says that the world has now 
become a global village; some issues, such as human rights and 
the environment, have transcended national boundaries and 
sovereignty. Such argument has failed to gain prominence and 
has been forced to retreat somewhat because of resistance from 
China and other Third World countries. It has been reported 
that Locher [luo shi 5012 0087], U.S. assistant secretary of 
defense, recently stated that the Clinton administration would 
be pleased to see a "powerful, unified, and prosperous" China. 
We would certainly welcome such a statement should they really 
mean it. However, we have always advocated not just hearing 
people's words but also seeing people's actions. Until they 
make a substantial move along this line, we should never relax 
our vigilance. 
  Vigilance and precautions are indispensable; more 
importantly, however, we should develop our productive forces. 
Last summer, the United States unreasonably checked the cargo 
hold of our freighter Yinghe but found nothing; this only 
revealed its true hegemonistic face to the world's people. If 
we had mighty comprehensive national strength, would it have 
dared to conduct the check? Could it have gotten away as it did 
without feeling any shame? Realities in the world have also 
shown us that if a country has not developed, or has been slow 
in developing, its productive forces for a long time, while 
failing to improve its people's material and cultural lives, its 
very advanced weaponry and mighty security and intelligence 
network will not help; it is impossible to maintain its position 
of independence and taking the initiative in its own hand, while 
finding it difficult to maintain its subsistence. That being 
the case, Comrade Deng Xiaoping said: "Development is the last 
word." [fa zhan cai shi ying dao li 4099 1455 2088 2508 4289 
6670 3810] 
  As a political power, China's position in the world and its 
role in world affairs are not to be neglected. Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping said that we must "accomplish something," by which he 
precisely means to oppose hegemonism and power policies, uphold 
justice, and safeguard world peace. To accomplish something, a 
firm stand is called for and a material base. When China 
develops its productive forces in future, becoming not only a 
political power but also an economic power, we will have a 
greater say in the world arena. 
  China's reform and opening up are developing in depth and 
our 
gate will open still wider; nongovernment ties of various kinds 
with the outside world are increasing. In nongovernment ties, 
we should never forget the principle of "maintaining 
independence, taking the initiative in our own hands, and 
relying on our own efforts," which Chairman Mao Zedong 
persistently advocated and Comrade Deng Xiaoping has always 
adhered to. The speech and behavior characterized by blind 
worship of anything foreign and loss of national character and 
personality in diplomatic exchanges should be rejected. The 
world situation is like the weather; there are stormy days and 
sunny ones. No matter what situation we meet, we shall always 
firmly grasp one point: Maintaining independence, taking the 
initiative in our own hands, and relying on our own efforts has 
been, is, and will always be our standpoint. 

