Language: <F P=105> Georgian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Academician Giorgi Kvesitadze, Georgian Republic </F>
Minister of Agriculture and Food Industry: "How To Solve the 
Crisis? Activity, Problems, and Prospects of the Agroindustrial 
Complex"] 
  [Text] It has always been this way: at the end of each year 
a man takes a critical look at what he has done. He analyzes his 
successes and failures and ponders measures which he thinks will 
guarantee a better future. Last year was a terrible one for 
Georgia. The political, economic, and social crisis caused by 
the civil war and patriotic war, the grave crime situation, the 
break-up of established economic ties, hyperinflation, the 
drastic decline in production, the grave shortage of energy 
resources, the chronic paralysis of transportation, the 
breakdown of discipline, people's general loss of the sense of 
responsibility, lawlessness, and so on--these are just a few of 
the problems that have brought our country and people to the 
brink of catastrophe. 
  I will briefly analyze the causes of the crisis in Georgia's 
agriculture and food industry and propose ideas which, I am 
convinced, will at least partially bring the sector out of its 
crisis. In this article, of course, I will purposefully ignore 
the few successes which we had last year in spite of everything. 
  Georgia's agriculture and food industry play a crucial role 
in the republic's multi-sectorial economy. Suffice it to say 
that the average yearly amount of its output accounted for 45 
percent of the republic's total volume at last year's prices. 
  Our political and economic independence, which are now a 
reality, has mandated an unprecedented qualitative 
transformation of the sector. It is nonsense to claim that 
Georgia does not have the ability to be economically 
independent. First of all, economic sovereignty does not entail 
isolation or the necessity of living on our own resources alone. 
Second, there are about 90 countries in the world which are 
smaller than Georgia and have far fewer natural resources but 
are at the same time more economically developed and have a much 
higher standard of living. Of course, this does not rule out the 
kinds of difficulties that inevitably arise in the initial 
stages of independence. 
  The first thing to keep in mind is that during the Soviet 
1970s, Georgia's economy took shape not on the basis of its own 
interests but those of the whole USSR. As a result, agriculture 
and the food industry were structured such that priority went to 
the development of tea, citrus, tobacco, grapes, fruit, and 
other subtropical and industrial crops and the processing 
thereof. Meanwhile, the people's supplies of meat and meat 
products, milk and dairy products, vegetable oil, and other food 
items were supplied basically by bringing them into Georgia from 
outside. In that regard, the following statistics are of some 
interest: in the Soviet period, 10 percent of the tea produced 
in Georgia, 25 percent of its citrus, and 20 percent of its wine 
industry output went to meet our own needs; the rest went out of 
the republic. Meanwhile, we were importing 98 percent of the 
grain we needed, 95 percent of the sugar, 70 percent of the 
milk, 50 percent of the meat, and 90 percent of the vegetable 
oil. 
  It needs to be said frankly that last year was the worst one 
in our agroindustrial sector's history. Preliminary statistics 
show that crop yields and livestock productivity fell, not one 
kind of product output forecast [prognozi] was fulfilled, and 
processing and delivery contract obligations were not met. We 
couldn't even make a minimum contribution to the state's food 
resources, although it should be pointed out that goods produced 
in the private sector which, as a result of privatization, has 
been given large amounts of agricultural lands that used to 
belong to collective farms, have not been reported. 
  Here are a number of figures characterizing the main 
sectors. 
  Forecasts called for the procurement of 300,000 tonnes of 
green tea leaf. In actuality, 132,000 tonnes were picked--only 
44 percent of the target. The forecast was fulfilled by only 30 
percent in Mingrelia and 13 percent in Abkhazia. Things were 
made worse by the fact that private tea-processing plants have 
proliferated the last while--so-called family factories, so that 
a great deal of tea leaf disappears, and there is as yet no 
normative act to regulate things. 
  Besides the fact that factories like these grossly violate 
technological parameters and sanitation norms, sales of the 
finished product go on without any accounting and reporting, 
totally ignoring the state's interests. 
  Things are also bad in regard to citrus procurement--the 
snow 
that fell in late November, and early frosts, hurt us badly. 
  It's hard to imagine, but we won't be able to procure more 
than 4,000 or 5,000 tonnes of fruit this year. It has got so bad 
that in Gori Rayon, which used to procure an average of 100,000 
tonnes, only about 600 tonnes have been bought by the state 
sector to date, and in Kaspi and Khashuri rayons no fruit has 
been procured at all. 
  Things are no better in the grape industry. Only 72,600 
tonnes of grapes have been procured--only 20 percent of the 
planned 365,000 tonnes. Kakhetia, famed for its vineyards and 
wine making, has only procured 64,000 tonnes; western Georgia 
has only procured 6,000 tonnes. 
  Of course, we have to take note of the damage caused by 
several hail storms; nevertheless, the situation is practically 
unprecedented in the past 10 years. 
  A total of 380,000 tonnes of grain have been procured on all 
categories of farms--57 percent of the forecast. Cereals account 
for 45 percent of all grain procurements. 
  A total of 25,700 tonnes of vegetables (12 percent of the 
forecast) have been procured and sold in the social sector; the 
figure is 3,000 (10 percent) for early potatoes and 17,000 (20 
percent) for late potatoes. The situation is also very bad in 
livestock farming, especially in the social sector. 
  All types of livestock and poultry populations have 
virtually 
disappeared on kolkhozes and sovkhozes. As of 1 December the 
social-sector farms had produced 14,300 tonnes of meat and 
38,900 tonnes of milk; average annual milk yields per cow stood 
at 555 kilograms. 
  One bright spot in the overall decline of livestock farming 
can be seen in the Prinvelmretsvi [Russian Ptitseprom] system, 
which has also suffered, but the sector does show signs of 
revival. 
  There are now 2.2 million birds in the industrial poultry 
system--about 350,000 more than at the beginning of the year. 
  Agriculture's lag has drastically reduced industrial output, 
where forecasts are also failing to be met. 
  A total of 300 million standard containers of fruit and 
vegetable preserves were supposed to be produced; actually, only 
29.3 million containers were--46.7 percent of the figure for the 
same period last year. Instead of 20 million standard containers 
of baby food, only 2 million containers were produced. 
  A total of 3.25 billion cigarettes were produced--only 46.4 
percent of the year's target. 
  Our once-proud mineral water production has also declined: 
26.7 million bottles were produced in 11 months--27 percent of 
the forecast. 
  The year's forecast was not even half fulfilled by 
enterprises manufacturing wine, brandy, and champagne bottles, 
glass jars, and certain other kinds. 
  We also failed to meet inter-governmental contract 
obligations on deliveries of industrial goods. Still, people 
ought to know that goods worth the following amounts were 
shipped in accordance with inter-governmental contracts (prices 
are in accordance with trade clearing rates stipulated by our 
inter-governmental contract with Turkmenistan): 35.8 million 
dollars to Turkmenistan, 24.4 million to Kazakhstan, 0.6 million 
to Azerbaijan, 1.6 million to Ukraine, 0.5 million to 
Kyrgyzstan, and 0.3 million to Armenia; in exchange, we got 
natural gas, wheat and other foodstuffs. 
  These figures clearly demonstrate the grave situation in the 
agroindustrial complex, and no commentary is needed. It is 
better to explore the causes of this deep crisis and speak 
frankly about measures to solve them--measures which, the 
ministry thinks, should serve to stop the deepening crisis and 
then stabilize and revive the sector. 
  Readers will agree that hasty privatization has brought it 
about that the process of changing forms of property ownership 
has run ahead of the shaping of the right kind of entrepreneur. 
  As entrepreneurs, kolkhozes and sovkhozes have now lost 
their 
own organizational and management character, but a new type of 
farm has yet to take shape. 
  People in the country, unfortunately, have taken free 
enterprise and democracy to mean that anything goes, and this 
has fostered the mass theft of socially-owned property. A huge 
percentage of the vehicles, tractors, farm implements, tools and 
pieces of equipment, livestock, funds, products, and other 
assets have disappeared. In many places, it is the officials of 
kolkhozes and state farms who are the ringleaders in the 
thievery--even acting in broad daylight, in front of local 
authorities and often with their support. The situation is such 
that we no longer have an organized entrepreneur in the 
countryside, we no longer have organized production. 
  So far, privatization of the land has not produced the 
desired results; it has also been accompanied by violence, 
high-handedness, and violation of the law. Even worse, far from 
being used effectively, privatized lands are often left idle. 
Especially heartbreaking is the fact that perennial plantings 
(grapevines, fruit trees) are being uprooted. Land privatization 
has been slowed and people have been set against one another by 
the fact that, from the start, the whole system of management of 
the agroindustrial complex was left out of the process, 
including local authorities and farm officials. Often, this is 
why big plantations of perennial plantings have been broken up, 
and, as a rule, crop yields have declined greatly. 
  Agricultural reform requires a balance of land 
privatization, 
the adoption of various forms of management, the shaping of free 
entrepreneurs, and the establishment of relations with them that 
are characteristic of a market economy. 
  We believe that reforms ought to be carried out in a 
comprehensive manner. One-sidedness is the reason why the 
household-farm sector has been given large amounts of 
agricultural lands which should not have been privatized. It is 
especially annoying that this big mistake was recently made 
legal again by the Cabinet of Ministers, which ignored the 
agricultural organs' role in the matter. The sector's lengthy 
paralysis is also largely due to the war and the grave crime 
situation. In this regard, there have been more than 3,000 cases 
of assault in the agroindustrial complex, resulting in damages 
costing tens of billions of coupons. Yet the republic's law 
enforcement organs don't have time for the woes of the 
countryside. The criminal world senses the fact that the peasant 
is left unprotected and has been robbing him freely in the 
fields, in his home, on the road and in the market. The same 
processes are having a negative impact on efforts to establish 
relations with foreign firms and investors. Foreign businessmen 
are obviously interested in Georgia but they hesitate to 
establish relations because of the risk. 
  We are also being hurt by the fact that we have not yet 
mastered the style and methods of operating in the new 
conditions, either in management or production. In the 
countryside, people think that free enterprise means you are not 
obligated to anybody for anything and nobody can make you 
responsible. Entrepreneurs, local authorities, our own ministry, 
and others are doing the wrong thing by trying to manage the 
sector by the old dictatorial methods. We have yet to create the 
necessary mechanisms for the state's relations with 
agro-entrepreneurs--mechanisms such as tax and financial-credit 
service systems, a free market for material-technical supplies, 
protectionism toward the sector's development, and other things 
which would foster the population's interest in developing 
agriculture. 
  The sector has been badly damaged by the break-up of 
traditional ties and structures, so that agriculture has been 
left without essential items such as toxic chemicals, veterinary 
medicines, mineral fertilizers, fuel, lubricants, equipment, and 
other materials which agricultural production cannot do without. 
  People also need to know that agriculture last year received 
only 3.9 percent of the amount of gasoline allocated in 1990, 
16.8 percent of the diesel fuel, and 0.3 percent of the 
tractors. As for cars and trucks, agricultural machinery and 
implements, and chemicals and veterinary medicines, it has been 
three years since any came into the republic. 
  In order to bring the agroindustrial complex--especially 
agriculture, its main sector--out of the crisis, we have to 
start by eliminating the causes. First, and as quickly as 
possible, we need to lay down the legal foundations for reform 
and make it specific and efficient. We must not forget that 
there are as many different characteristics as there are 
villages, enterprises, and labor collectives. They all have to 
be dealt with, of course, in a legislative framework while 
taking account of particular and specific conditions. 
  Despite all our troubles, I am convinced that what our 
agriculture needs is not revolutionary reforms but systematic 
and well-thought-out evolutionary reforms. They will require the 
support of our legislative and executive branches and help from 
our law enforcement, financial, banking, and other organs. They 
will require stability and measures to revive the sector. 
  As for the future which we must create for Georgia's 
agriculture, I see it this way: 
  Forms of entrepreneurship characteristic of market relations 
will be broadly developed in the countryside, including 
agricultural cooperatives, household and peasant farms, state 
farms, joint-stock companies, firms, production combines, 
associations, and other types of business structures. 
  Unlike Soviet-type kolkhozes and sovkhozes, on which 
everything belonged to everybody but in fact nothing belonged to 
anybody, the new type of entrepreneurs will be full-fledged 
masters of the land that has been turned over to them, the goods 
they produce, and all their property; they will manage things 
and sell their goods as they see fit; 
  --direct horizontal links will develop between entrepreneurs 
and consumers, entrepreneurs and service organizations--without 
interference or dictation from outside; 
  --in the transition period, great importance must be 
accorded 
contract relations designed to regulate the efficient exchange 
of goods and services between the republic and individual 
regions. 
  Because of Georgia's natural conditions, our agriculture 
will 
remain multi-sectorial. Market relations will deploy production 
sectors in such a manner as to gain the most payback from every 
hectare of agricultural land. 
  Traditional forms of management will be replaced by 
economic-management partnership, which will totally eliminate 
coercion and interference in entrepreneurs' internal business 
affairs. 
  The state's relations with enterprises of the agroindustrial 
complex will be conducted on the basis of a tax system which 
should foster the formation of independent and free 
entrepreneurs. 
  In conclusion, let me say this: 
  Last year we failed to alleviate the crisis and achieve the 
things called for in the Cabinet of Ministers' 5 March 1993 
Decree "On Solving the Crisis of the Georgian Republic's 
Agroindustrial Complex in 1993-1995." We failed because we were 
unable even to stop the causes of the crisis, let alone 
eliminate them. 
  I am convinced, nevertheless, that 1994 will be a turnaround 
year, that our free fall will end and real rebuilding will 
begin. It is certain that the past year has made not only the 
republic's leaders but also the people see many things and draw 
the necessary conclusions. 
  As far as the Agriculture and Food Industry Ministry is 
concerned, it fully understands its own role and responsibility 
in these processes and will make every effort to bring the 
sector out of its crisis. 

