BFN 

  [Excerpt] Bujumbura, 22 Jun (PANA) -- In a statement on 
state television in Bujumbura yesterday evening, Burundian 
Foreign Minister Jean-Marie Ngendahayo dismissed any possibility 
of transit on Burundian territory "for French troops and 
weapons." 
  This has been the first official reaction from Bujumbura 
since France announced its intention to send troops to Rwanda on 
a "humanitarian action." 
  In the view of the Tutsi community -- the minority 
opposition 
group both in Rwanda and Burundi -- this action is not a 
humanitarian one and it shows that France is continuing its old 
policy of military cooperation with the Rwandan Presidential 
Guard, who are now accused of committing genocide in the country. 
  When interviewed on the huge successive street 
demonstrations 
and marches in Bujumbura in the past two days, marking 
opposition to the French initiative, the Burundian minister 
simply said that "Burundi's international policy is not carried 
out on the streets." 
  It may be recalled that in addition to students, the 
opposition coalition urged the Burundians to show their 
opposition to the French intervention in Rwanda. This 
initiative mobilized a crowd of demonstrators of about 20,000 
according to the organizers, and 10,000 according to Burundian 
police sources in Bujumbura yesterday afternoon. 
  The demonstrators brandished slogans denouncing "France's 
cynicism" and urged African countries not to "back France in the 
execution of its sinister plan for the extermination of an 
entire nation." 
  The various party leaders who spoke at the end of the march 
to emphasize its importance expressed fears, which may be real 
or imagined, that the "French Army's next move could be Burundi." 
  According to a Bujumbura parliamentarian, Francois Ngeze, 
"irresponsibility on the part of a certain class of politicians 
could in the future offer the same excuse of internal disorder 
to bring in and justify foreign intervention in Burundi." 
  The parliamentarian who was recently released from the house 
arrest he was placed under following the bloody October 1993 
coup does not think that the real problem in the Great Lake 
Region is an ethnic one "as the outside world very often has the 
tendency of portraying it." Mr. Ngeze stated vehemently that it 
is "not an ethnic problem but rather one linked to politicians' 
amateurism. 
  He, however, did not deny the "Burundian opposition's 
unconditional support for the Rwandan Patriotic Front's struggle 
for democracy and lasting peace in Rwanda and in the region." 
  In the same vein, Mr. Ngeze stated that the Burundian 
opposition coalition was determined to "install a president of 
its choice if the Burundian ruling party enforced such a 
decision without the consent of all the moral and political 
forces in the country." 
  Several observers think that the parliamentarian's 
statements 
is another source of concern in Burundi. [passage omitted] 

