Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Revolutionary Nuclear Reactor Proposed by CERN </F>
Director"] 
  [Text] Geneva--Nuclear generating plants powered by an 
inexhaustible energy source that is also virtually risk-free and 
poses no military proliferation threat: This is the 
revolutionary project unveiled on 24 November in Geneva to some 
500 physicists from all over the world by Professor Carlo 
Rubbia, director of the European Particle Physics Laboratory 
(CERN). 
  Speaking in CERN's crowded amphitheater, the Nobel 
Prize-winning physicist explained that ecological concerns had 
motivated his conception of this project, which builds on 
earlier work and consists essentially of an "energy amplifier" 
driven by a heat-producing particle accelerator. In other words, 
the project consists of "extracting energy from heavy nuclei 
with the help of nuclear cascades induced by an accelerator." 
One might even go so far as to envision an "upsurge in global 
demand for nuclear energy to replace fossil fuels" such as 
hydrocarbons that engender so-called "greenhouse gases" and 
contribute to warming of the earth's atmosphere. 
  According to Mr. Rubbia, the particle amplifier, which would 
use thorium (abundantly available) rather than uranium as fuel, 
represents a safer solution because the reactor would be 
"subcritical" and there would be no danger of chain reaction. 
  Mr. Rubbia noted the general public's misgivings about 
traditional nuclear reactors in light of accidents such as Three 
Mile Island and Chernobyl and the need to bury highly 
radioactive waste products for very long periods of time. Use of 
thorium in this way would offer the advantages of "being simple, 
safe, cleaner, not posing any important technological hurdles, 
nonproliferating, and inexhaustible," Professor Rubbia said. 
Small plants would produce virtually no plutonium, and "no one 
could make a bomb with it." But Professor Rubbia concluded on a 
warning note: The project is still at the stage of "virtual 
reality, and experimental verification will be required," along 
with very complex calculations, before the idea is implemented. 
  According to CERN spokesman Neil Calder, Mr. Rubbia has 
computer-tested his theory and plans to begin experimental work 
on it next year at CERN. Most of the physicists reacted 
positively to the proposal, Mr. Calder said. 
  In his presentation, the Nobel Prize-winner said his work 
was 
based on research done in the 1950s by W. Lewis (Canada) and 
more recently by Professor C. Bowman's team at Los Alamos (New 
Mexico). At the end of December, Mr. Rubbia will step down as 
director of CERN, which he has headed for the last 5 years, and 
will be replaced by Christopher Llewellyn Smith. He will then 
devote himself entirely to his energy project. 

