BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Choe In-tok, vice marshal of the Korean People's </F>
Army, KPA: "Loyalty to the Supreme Comrade Commander Is a Noble 
Ideological and Spiritual Ethos of the People's Army"] 
  [Text] Our People's Army is the army of the leader 
[suryong], the party, and the revolution. Its basic mission is 
to defend by force of arms the cause of the party and the cause 
of the leader [suryong], who pioneered the road of the 
revolution. This is our revolutionary armed forces' traditional 
and revolutionary character which has been purely and constantly 
handed down to us in the whole course of history from the days 
the first gun shot was heard at the forest of Mt. Paektu to date. 
  Loyalty to the leader [suryong] is the most basic 
ideological 
and spiritual characteristic that defines the true revolutionary 
character of our People's Army. Loyalty to the leader [suryong] 
fully displayed by our People's Army in the course of stern 
revolutionary wars, as well as in the flame of sharp class 
struggles, has attained an unprecedented, noble point today. 
  Our People's Army overflows with the firm and solid faith 
and 
wiof our party to have the People's Army, which will resolutely 
safeguard and defend the party and the leader [suryong] and will 
go through fire and water to endlessly execute an order if it is 
issued by the party. 
  The loyalty of our People's Army to thll to resolutely 
safeguard and uphold the supreme commander general Kim Chong-il 
by sharing forever its fate with him and by regarding loyalty to 
him as its life. 
  The dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il has indicated: It is 
the greatest glory and pride e supreme comrade commander is very 
clear and fresh and is hotter than fire. Therefore, it can be 
characterized as the most sacred and true loyalty that can never 
change under any circumstance. This has been inspired by the 
great leader [suryong] and is the noble ideological and 
spiritual ethos that can only be cherished by our People's Army 
which is being further strengthened and developed with each 
passing day by the warm solicitude of the outstanding leadership 
that has been inherited generation after generation. 
  Since the first day of its foundation, our People's Army has 
glorified the tradition of loyalty to absolutely and 
unconditionally uphold the ideology and leadership of the leader 
[suryong] by upholding its leader [suryong] as the center of the 
leadership and as its commander, by totally entrusting its fate 
to him, and by politically and ideologically safeguarding and 
defending him at the risk of its lives. 
  The proud tradition of the People's Army prepared by the 
great leader Comrade Kim Il-song, who founded our revolutionary 
armed force, has been more nobly and brilliantly inherited in 
the course of upholding the supreme commander General Kim 
Chong-il. The absolute and unconditional loyalty to the supreme 
commander General Kim Chong-il is a noble ideological and 
spiritual ethos of our People's Army. 
  Above all, the true loyalty of our People's Army to the 
supreme comrade commander has been vigorously displayed by a 
firm faith and will of the entire army, which resolutely 
safeguards the great general Kim Chong-il. 
  Today, the entire army wants to become the rifle and bomb 
that can safeguard our supreme comrade commander. This is a 
resolute determination of our People's Army ranks, as well as a 
slogan of faith and will highly raised by all of our officers 
and men of the People's Army. 
  The determination of loyalty vigorously forged in the hearts 
of the officers and men of the People's Army is based on a 
thorough revolutionary awareness and an absolute worship 
indicating that the supreme commander General Kim Chong-il is 
the destiny of our party and revolution, the fatherland and 
people, and the Army, the banner of victory, and is all [chonbu] 
of the bright future. 
  There is no fatherland, people, or army without the supreme 
comrade commander. This is the unshakable creed of soldiers and 
men of our People's Army. The noble and firm creed is a noble 
ideological sentiment that our People's Army soldiers have 
firmly cherished deep into their hearts during the days they 
receive the leadership from the dear comrade leader for a long 
time. This noble ideological sentiment firmly cherished by the 
officers and men of the People's Army has been further 
consolidated as they face stern difficulties and trials in the 
road of the revolution. 
  Taking advantage of the recent collapse of socialism and 
the resurrection of capitalism in some countries, offensives 
hurled by the imperialists and reactionaries against our 
Republic, the fortress of socialism, are reaching to extremes. 
As the result, our people's socialist cause has met with grave 
challenges. However, the stern trial of the history has been 
resolutely overcome, and our people and army are achieving 
victory after victory in the standoff with enemies without 
gunshots thanks to Comrade Kim Chong-il -- the great leader 
[yongdoja] of revolution with both literary and military 
accomplishments, the ever-victorious iron-willed commander, and 
the greatest general in the world [chonhajeil changun]. 
  In today's grandiose reality which has won worldwide 
admiration, our officers and men of the People's Army are 
cherishing deep in their hearts the truth that our people and 
army are courageous, that our socialist cause remains unmoved, 
and that our republic remains strong because the comrade supreme 
commander stands at the head of our party and revolution, and 
the state and the army. 
  Numerous officers and men of the People's Army have sent 
letters of loyalty carrying their resolute pledge to the comrade 
supreme commander and are striving to implement their pledge. 
Among them are eight brothers of officers who resolved to 
become eight stands of rifles and eight bombs defending the 
comrade supreme commander; eight brothers of officers who were 
determined to become six swords and shields guarding the comrade 
supreme commander; and the eight brothers and sisters of KPA 
officer Yi Chang-ung who promised to become true loyalists and 
dutiful sons and daughters safeguarding General Kim Chong-il at 
the very front with rifles by becoming eight Yi In-mo's. 
  There are many deeds of numerous heroes, whether they are 
famous or not, devoting their youth for the party and the leader 
-- such as in the case of Hero Han Yong-cho who covered an 
exploding hand-grenade with his body to save the portraits of 
the great leader and dear leader Comrades in an accidental 
touch-and-go moment -- are examples that prove their vows. 
  Such determinations, resolutions, and courageous conducts to 
resolutely defend the comrade supreme commander are lofty 
ideological, mental features that can only be cherished by our 
People's Army who were brought up by the hands of the great 
General Kim Chong-il. 
  The People's Army's true sense of loyalty toward the comrade 
supreme commander can also be clearly demonstrated on the road 
of unconditionally implementing great General Kim Chong-il's 
idea and leadership. 
  The idea and leadership of the Supreme Commander General Kim 
Chong-il are a decisive guarantee that triumphantly consummates 
the cause of chuche-oriented military construction. Thanks to 
the comrade supreme commander's idea and leadership, our 
People's Army has been strengthened and developed into today's 
one-a-match-for-hundred revolutionary armed forces firmly 
prepared in political, ideological, military, and technological 
aspects, and is fulfilling its noble mission as defenders of the 
party and revolution, and the fatherland and people. 
  Our officers and men of the People's Army, through their 
actual life experiences, have learned the comrade supreme 
commander's superior idea on military construction and his 
extraordinary leadership, and have kept in their hearts a firm 
creed that victory and glory can only be found on the road to 
upholding the idea and leadership of great General Kim Chong-il. 
  This has become the foundation of our soldiers of the 
People's Army who regard the comrade supreme commander's idea 
and intention as the invaluable demand of life and the greatest 
glory and happiness and who wish to demonstrate exploits by 
sacrificing themselves for the struggle to implement them. The 
comrade supreme commander's chuche-oriented military 
construction and his revolutionary lines have become the one and 
only guide in the military, political activities of our People's 
Army and all other sectors. Likewise, the revolutionary 
military ethos in which everyone works as one under the 
leadership of the comrade supreme commander are overflowing 
inside the entire ranks. 
  Holding firm the party's line on converting the entire army 
into a cadre, the entire officers and men of the People's Army 
are reliably improving their political and ideological, and 
military and technological preparations so as to fulfill their 
mission on a higher stage. In the struggle to realize the 
party's line on converting the entire army into a cadre, they 
have acquired knowledge in weapons, combat material and 
technical equipment as well as in the chuche-oriented strategic 
tactics and war method in accordance with the requirements of 
modern warfare weapons and our country's specific situation. 
Every military position of the entire country's defense lines 
has been built up impregnably. All these have been accomplished 
during the course of thoroughly implementing and absolutely 
upholding the comrade supreme commander's idea, leadership, 
orders, and instructions. 
  "When the comrade supreme commander decides, we will do!," 
the slogan of loyalty which is in high spirit among the entire 
army vividly shows up the strength and firmness of the spirit of 
absoluteness and unconditionality, and faith and will of our 
officers and men of the People's Army who are marching forward 
by upholding great General Kim Chong-il's idea and leadership. 
  In the rewarding struggle of faithfully upholding the 
comrade 
supreme commander's idea and leadership, the party's program on 
imbuing the entire army with the chuche idea has become a 
brilliant reality. 
  The party's system of leadership has been firmly established 
among the People's Army, a fundamental change has taken place in 
the ideological, mental features of officers and men, the 
lineage of chuche, the heritage of single-hearted unity and 
loyalty have been brilliantly inherited in every sector of 
military construction. 
  Guided by the idea of chuche-oriented military construction, 
the People's Army has been brought up as an invincible 
revolutionary armed forces equipped with modern offensive and 
defensive means, and reliable command capacity which can easily 
organize and carry out any operation or combat. What is more, 
soldiers have been firmly prepared as all-around men of 
combative spirit who can brilliantly fulfill its military 
mission under any circumstances, armed with the war method of 
our own style and the immortal chuche idea. 
  Under the leadership of the party, combat capacity has been 
incomparably strengthened not only among the People's Army, but 
also among the Working Red Guards and the Red Youth Vanguards, 
and all people have armed themselves, and the entire country has 
been consolidated as an impregnable fortress. 
  Loyalty of our People's Army -- who are upholding the 
comrade 
supreme commander's idea and leadership -- has not only been 
fully displayed in fulfilling its mission as defender of the 
fatherland but also in implementing its glorious mission as 
creators of the people's happiness. 
  In wholehearted response to the great General Kim Chong-il's 
grandiose plan on socialist construction, the officers and men 
of the People's Army are devoting their sweat of loyalty in the 
worthwhile combat ground of creation and construction. Heroic 
exploits performed by the soldiers of the People's Army are 
inscribed on every monumental creation that has glorified the 
era of the Workers Party of Korea -- including the 
world-renowned Sohae Lockgate, other various Lockgates at 
Taedong River and the construction of Pyongyang-Kaesong Highway. 
  Wisdom, courageousness, unequalled patriotic devotions, and 
mass heroism displayed by our officers and men of the People's 
Army -- who are determined to carry out the work of defending 
the fatherland and building socialism -- are all the more 
demonstrated proudly with each passing day along with the 
progress of our revolution. 
  On the road to upholding the comrade supreme commander's 
idea 
and leadership, our People's Army has brought the traditional 
blood ties with the people into a full bloom onto a more noble 
stage. Herein lies a firm guarantee enabling the army and the 
people to be united around the great general Kim Chong-il and to 
become a body of purity [sungyolche] united in one ideology and 
purpose and in moral obligation which can never be broken. 
  Truly, our People's Army's loyalty toward the Supreme 
Commander General Kim Chong-il sheds its ray as the most noble 
and lofty one as well as and the warmest, strongest, and 
invincible one which is unprecedented in the history of military 
construction. 
  Today, our revolutionary situation is very tense and the 
challenges of enemies are getting extreme with each passing day. 
However, as long as powerful one-a-match-for-a-hundred militant 
ranks of loyalty, the heroic People's Army, exists under the 
wise leadership of the comrade supreme commander, no stern 
crisis can ever check our march or dare touch us. 
  Our People's Army, as in the past, will be forever loyal to 
Supreme Commander General Kim Chong-il. In doing so, it will 
brilliantly fulfill its glorious mission as the leader's army, 
the party's army, and the revolutionary army in consummating the 
chuche revolutionary cause; will achieve the fatherland 
reunification at the earliest possible date; and will glorify 
and determinedly defend the popular masses-centered socialism of 
our own style. 

