BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Javier Rodriguez] </F>
  [Text] The Institute for Studies on the Democratic 
Revolution [IERD] of the PRD [Party of the Democratic 
Revolution] has opened a forum to analyze the party's economic 
proposals. At the opening session, Porfirio Munoz Ledo 
criticized the economic program of Ernesto Zedillo and the 
proposals of the PRI [Institutional Revolutionary Party] leader 
to "eradicate poverty" in the country. 
  IERD Director Efigenia Martinez also harshly criticized 
Zedillo's proposals and described as demagogic the plan to 
eradicate poverty with "programs against poverty" when 
investment, employment, good salaries, and a fair social policy 
offering equal opportunities are those things that are needed to 
achieve this goal. 
  Munoz Ledo accused Zedillo of drafting one of the most 
deceitful government programs ever seen in Mexico. This 
program, he added, was drafted at a time when the current PRI 
presidential candidate headed the now-defunct Secretariat of 
Programming and Budget. 
  The PRD national leader noted that in Zedillo's growth 
program for the country, Zedillo "did not offer a 6-percent GNP 
growth rate for this year, a splendid macroeconomy, higher 
employment, and, of course, a system to finance development that 
does not exist in our country." [sentence as published] 
  The PRD economic proposal, the party leader said, wants to 
become a historic program because it is designed to transform a 
political and economic system that will only have true meaning 
if the country's political system is changed through a new 
alignment of forces. 
  There is no economic model in history that is not based on a 
new alignment of political forces because "a true political 
program calls for change and a renewal of a thesis and a plan 
based on emerging political forces." 
  Munoz Ledo added that the PRD program calls for the 
abolition 
of the authoritarian system, a return of power to the citizens, 
the implementation of a true federalist system, a division of 
power, and control by the people's representatives of the 
leaders and of public spending. 
  It also calls for the establishment of municipal autonomy; 
dissolution of the corporate system; freedom for economic 
players; and the elimination of pacts, authoritarianism, 
centralism, and the system based on large estates 
[patrimonialismo]. "This is a political program to eliminate 
the state party system," he added. 
  The forum is intended to fine-tune and enrich the party's 
economic proposal. There will be two sessions. One took place 
yesterday and the other will be held on 20 June. About 20 PRD 
economists and others who have ties to the party will 
participate. 
  Among the issues mentioned in the economic proposal are 
industrial development, foreign trade, social policies to create 
jobs and raise salaries, and a broad industrialization strategy 
that calls for restructuring fiscal policy to encourage 
investments and reduce inflation through increased production of 
goods and services to achieve a more equitable distribution of 
wealth. 
  A primary element of this strategy is the promotion of a 
clear-cut renegotiation of the foreign debt with the 
international financial community and the struggle against the 
country's foreign debt. 
  Another major element is the renegotiation of all clauses in 
the NAFTA accord that affect national development, while 
immediately exempting basic grains from this agreement and 
maintaining the state's autonomous power to establish tariffs, 
issue import permits, subsidies, and development policies to 
achieve self-sufficiency in food. The pact also needs to be 
renegotiated to neutralize the control the United States has 
over Mexican agricultural markets. 
  The program also calls for an adjustment of subsidies on 
exports for national agricultural producers to match those in 
the United States, as well as the including in NAFTA the issue 
of labor mobility to balance out differences in labor conditions 
and thereby stop the export of underpriced labor from Mexico. 
  It does not abandon the original PRD proposal to promote a 
Continental Agreement for Development, Employment, and Trade 
that recognizes differences between the countries in Latin 
America and the Caribbean and those in North America. 
  The program stresses the need to hold national discussions 
on 
important international agreements through referendums prior to 
their approval or rejection by Congress. 
  The PRD program seeks to hike minimum wages to guarantee 
goods, health, and housing to workers, and with this in mind, it 
proposes the elimination of the National Commission on Minimum 
Wages to allow the Congress of the Union to determine, in 
agreement with unions and employers, bases for and means of 
establishing minimum wages. This implies "eliminating arbitrary 
government meddling in salaries established by contract." 
  It proposes a review of the effects of the tax structure on 
small businesses, medium-size companies, and on middle and 
low-income classes, as well as a review of the distribution of 
fiscal obligations among federal, state, and municipal 
authorities in an effort to devise a fair tax system. 
  The PRD proposal also calls for the elimination of the 
2-percent tax on company assets. It calls for a tax policy 
based on the principles of equity and the promotion of 
productive activities. In this regard, it calls for the 
presentation of a multiannual budget of public revenues and 
expenditures and the elimination of the uncertainty created by 
the so-called miscellaneous tax matter category. 
  It also proposes the gradual reduction of taxes levied on 
the 
large profits of Mexican Petroleum and the rechannelling of such 
funds mainly into the development of the national petrochemical 
industry. 

