CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with M. Ya. Lemeshev, chairman of the </F>
Environmental Committee of the State Duma of the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly, by V. Mikhaylov; place and date not 
given: "Health of the People Is of Paramount Importance"] 
  [Text] 
  Mikhaylov: Mikhail Yakovlevich, first of all I 
would like to congratulate you with assumption of your new post 
and your selection as chairman of the State Duma Environmental 
Committee. Even though many currently believe that environmental 
issues are not of the greatest importance in today's life, that 
there certainly are more important matters. Do you agree with 
that? 
  Lemeshev: I am firmly convinced that revival of 
Russia and of the Russian people, which is talked about by one 
and all today, is impossible without resolution of ecological 
problems. This is determined by the fact that in itself the 
ecological situation in the country is simply catastrophic, 
which is understood by all and which requires no explanation. 
Today, in fact, we are talking about survival. Look at the 
demographic aspect. There exists an absolutely despondent 
situation--in essence ethnic Russians are dying out. Scientific 
research conducted by authoritative scientists, including 
American and Japanese scientists, indicates that now 40 percent 
of the children are born already sick. What will happen to them 
in adult life? Two-thirds of all the diseases today are 
associated with the unfavorable state of the environment. In 
Russia this is more pronounced than in the West. 
  First of all pollution of the environment in cities with 
populations of over one million is alarming. Water quality 
there, as a rule, is poor (it is generally poor everywhere in 
our country), food contains pesticides, nitrites, and various 
biological additives. At the same time, what is of interest is 
that this applies not so much to domestically produced goods as 
to those that are imported. Advertising, propaganda, and 
attractive packaging, and we are still susceptible to all of 
that, do their job. Developed countries frequently sell us 
whatever is not in demand at home. By the way, many of the 
western countries have rigid environmental protection laws. 
  In my opinion we must concentrate specifically on improving 
the health of our people. That is a priority task. Yes, 
biodiversity, problems of protected territories--that is 
important, that is good, but the most important factor is the 
health of the people. 
  Mikhaylov: But all this requires money and, I am 
assuming, quite a lot of it. Where is it coming from? At whose 
expense? There is so much talk about the poverty of the state 
treasury and the incredible deficit of the state budget. You, as 
a member of the State Duma, must take into account the 
conditions of our reality. Is all that you talk about so 
convincingly realistic from the financial viewpoint? 
  Lemeshev: As an economist, I am quite distrubed by 
the currently widespread view that since the economy is in a 
state of crisis, it is impossible to deal with environmental 
problems in the given period. After it improves, then we will 
concern ourselves with ecology to the fullest extent. What is 
most lamentable is that this, in my opinion, harmful concept is 
finding a response among the people. That is understandable: the 
people are barely surviving and, as it is said, never mind the 
butter when survival is at stake. That is basically wrong. 
Without the resolution of environmental problems we will never 
improve the economy--that is my profound conviction. 
  Here is a vivid example. Under conditions involving 
environmental pollution people become ill more seriously and 
frequently which, in turn, affects the efficiency of production. 
Does that affect the national economy or not? Colossal sums are 
needed for treatment, purchase of medications and building of 
hospitals--doesn't that place a burden on the economy? Only 
totally myopic people are failing to see this. 
  All right, let us take the production of fabrics as an 
example. Not just water but pure water is needed in order for 
the fabric to be of good quality. Would it not be cheaper to 
avoid polluting the water to start with rather than spend huge 
amounts of money later on its purification? Understand that it 
is impossible to separate economy and ecology--it is a single 
metasystem. I would like to mention something else: there are no 
ecological problems of one or another country and the resolution 
of ecological problems is impossible within the framework of a 
single country. Let us say, the Scandinavian countries have made 
considerable progress in the resolution of environmental 
problems, but 90 percent of the environmental pollutants come to 
them from other countries. 
  Mikhaylov: That is only a general overview of the 
task. In your opinion how and with what practical steps should 
your committee start its work? Which draft laws do you believe 
are of primary importance in the sphere of environmental 
protection? 
  Lemeshev: I do not want to start complaining about 
the lack of facilities right off but at present 15 deputies and 
as many office workers have only two small rooms, there are no 
typewriters, computers, or technical means and equipment for 
accounting, planning, and analysis of operations. I do not know 
how we will be able to work. 
  As far as legislative work of the committee is concerned I 
believe that preparation of a draft law on ecological disaster 
zones is a matter of overriding importance. True, it is today 
possible to designate all of Russia as an ecological disaster 
zone, but there are some areas that are worse off such as, for 
instance, the Chernobyl disaster zone, regions with a 
concentration of chemical and petrochemical production and 
places where hydrocarbon raw materials are extracted in the 
northern part of Russia which constitutes a severe blow to areas 
inhabited by minority people. A law dealing with ecological 
studies by experts, not at the agency level as it is now, but at 
the federal state level, with widespread participation of the 
public, is highly necessary. Only then will we be able to bar 
projects which destroy nature and man himself. 
  Is legislation on drinking water not important, is it not 
necessary to create supplements to the Criminal Code dealing 
with responsibility for ecological crimes? So there is a whole 
lot of work to be done. 
  Mikhaylov: Mikhail Yakovlevich, looking through 
the list of the members of your committee I noticed its 
considerable diversity: it includes members from the Russian 
Choice, communists, DPR [Democratic Party of Russia] members, 
and you yourself represent the LDPR [Liberal Democratic Party of 
Russia]. Does it seem to you that such political discord can 
interfere with the normal lawmaking acctivities of the 
committee? Moreover it is necessary to establish constructive 
relations with the Russian Federation Ministry of Environmental 
Protection and Natural Resources. 
  Lemeshev: As far as the latter is concerned I feel 
rather optimistically inasmuch as the minister himself, Viktor 
Ivanovich Danilov-Danilyan, is a member of our committee and, at 
least for the present, we have a mutual understanding with 
respect to all of the issues. Even though I am familiar by 
hearsay with an impartial polemic between Danilov-Danilyan and 
Aleksey Vladimirovich Yablokov, chairman of the Russian 
Federation Interagency Commission on Environmental Safety, which 
developed on the pages of NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA, I feel 
uncomfortable when disputes develop between such highly 
respected people. It is simply the scourge of our Russian 
intelligentsia. We must reject agency, political, and 
professional ambitions where the common good is concerned. We 
must alter our psychology. I view the work of our committee with 
hope because I feel convinced that the task concerning 
preservation of the environment is capable of unifying people 
with highly divergent political views. 
<H5>  Note from SPASENIYE </H5>
  Mikhail Yakovlevich Lemeshev was born in 1927. He is Russian 
and a doctor of economic sciences. He is also an academician of 
the Academy of Economic Sciences of Russia where he heads the 
Department of Ecology. He authored 12 monographs two of which, 
"The Ecological Catastrophe in the USSR," and "Power of the 
Agencies--Ecological Collapse," were published abroad but have 
not yet been printed in our country. In the State Duma he 
belongs to the LDPR faction. 

