BFN 

  [Text] Amman--When the government-owned Telecommunications 
Corporation (TCC) last week accepted bids for a licence to 
install and operate a multi-million dollar cellular telephone 
network in the Kingdom, it implicitly broke the Arab boycott of 
Israel. 
  The TCC accepted the bid from a Jordanian firm in 
partnership 
with an American company included on the Arab League's boycott 
list--Motorola. 
  Motorola, which operates Israel's cellular network and 
maintains manufacturing facilities there, bid in partnership 
with the Jordan Mobile Telephone Services Company. 
  The tender for the project, which is expected to be 
operational in one year, was open to only Jordanian companies, 
as stipulated by a new law passed by Parliament last year that 
allowed local private- sector participation in the provision of 
telecommunication services. 
  The tender, however, requires local firms to be associated 
with foreign companies with proven experience in the field. The 
qualification and expertise of the foreign operators in running 
the Global System for Mobiles (GSM) network will be one of the 
main considerations of the TCC while granting the project. (The 
local company must enter into a contract with the foreign 
operator to manage the venture). 
  "Officially we are only dealing with Jordanian companies, 
Motorola is not on the table," said Minister of 
Telecommunications Tariq Suhaymat. "To be fair, we have to look 
at all the companies and their bids and go through a long 
evaluation process, there may be other companies on the boycott 
list," said the minister, who stressed that it was "premature" 
to discuss the issue since the evaluation process had not 
reached that stage. 
  Foreign companies participating in the eight bids, which 
were 
unsealed last Tuesday, also included Cable and Wireless of 
Britain, Telecom Finland, SFR of France and Millicom, Vega and 
Nynex of the United States. 
  Motorola, whose local partners include the Housing Bank, the 
Arab Banking Corporation (ABC) the Union Bank for Investments 
and Mid investment, came first in the bids. 
  The group's offer was JD 38 million, almost twice that of 
the 
second highest bidder. But an extensive evaluation process is 
carried out before a contract is finally awarded. 
  "Motorola may not be awarded the project, but the fact that 
it was allowed to bid means Jordan ignored the Arab boycott at 
least for this project," said a competitor. "Motorola's high 
offer may be an attempt to whet the appetite of the government 
to overlook the boycott." 
  Companies must pay a licence fee of JD 7 million to the TCC, 
plus compensation for scrapping the existing mobile telephone 
system and a minimum 20 per cent annual royalty to the 
state-owned corporation. 
  Mr. Suhaymat said: "We have to be very careful and look out 
for the national interest. We want the best for the country and 
we want this project. It is a political decision, and a 
complicated issue." 
  A Department of Customs clearance is required for all 
companies that do business in Jordan, including, among other 
things, a check on whether it is on the boycott list. Motorola 
appears in the blacklist of the department. 
  Local private companies dealing with firms on the blacklist 
are in violation of the Arab League boycott regulations. 
  In a pre-bid conference with prospective investors, the TCC 
made it clear, according to one of the participants, the foreign 
operators involved in the bids should not be on the boycott list. 
  Jordan insists on maintaining the 43-year-old boycott until 
a 
just, lasting and comprehensive peace is achieved. Jordan's 
official position was again reaffirmed at a March 26 Arab League 
meeting which ignored American and European pressure to ease the 
boycott. 
  Since the Arab League imposed the boycott, any lifting of 
the 
embargo should also come through a resolution from the league. 
  His Royal Highness Crown Prince Hassan has said that lifting 
the boycott of Israel "prematurely" would be "tantamount to 
economic suicide" for Jordan. 
  The GSM project is one of the country's largest ventures, 
and 
the second to allow the private sector to enter the 
telecommunications sector after a radio paging concession 
granted four years ago. The GSM is seen as essential for Jordan 
in competing with other countries in the region, especially now 
that a peace settlement is expected to open borders between the 
Arab World and Israel. 
  Motorola, a leading supplier of cellular equipment, recently 
won a $32 million contract for a 30,000-subscriber GSM system in 
Kuwait, which relaxed restrictions on blacklisted firms after 
the Gulf war. 
  U.S. Commerce Secretary Ron Brown, in a visit to the region 
in January, said fresh American investment in Jordan depended on 
removal of trade barriers and the lifting of the secondary 
boycott that primarily affects U.S. companies. Motorola, one of 
the largest American companies, was mentioned in this context, 
according to Amman-based diplomats. 
  The U.S. Senate earlier this year passed legislation barring 
U.S. military sales to countries that try to persuade American 
firms to comply with the Arab boycott against Israel. 
  The legislation aims at the so-called secondary and tertiary 
boycott against U.S. firms doing business with Israel. It is 
illegal for American firms to observe the boycott by providing 
related documents required by the governments of the importing 
countries. 
  The Arab boycott covers three areas in commercial 
activity--the primary boycott bars the 22 members of the Arab 
League from direct commercial activity with Israel. Egypt has 
been exempted since it signed a peace treaty with Israel in 1979. 
  The secondary boycott, which includes about 10,000 firms, 
blacklists companies which have a branch, factory or investment 
in Israel. Firms are regularly put on or struck off the list by 
the Damascus-based Arab Boycott of Israel Office. 
  The tertiary boycott targets companies which do business 
with 
blacklisted firms in order to avoid being blacklisted themselves. 
  Officials and diplomats said in private after Mr. Brown's 
visit that Jordan, coming under U.S. pressure, was adopting 
case-by-case approach to the secondary and tertiary boycott. 

