Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ahmad Muwaffaq Zaydan in Peshawar on "text" of </F>
interview with unidentified head of the al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah 
al-Musallahah Political and Sharia Committee by unidentified 
AL-WASAT reporter -- place and date not given] 
  [Excerpts] 
The al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah al-Musallahah [AIG] in Algeria has 
disclosed its political, military, and religious objectives, in 
the first press statements since it launched its armed 
operations in November, 1991, in which it claimed responsibility 
for most of the operations in Algeria, including assassinations 
and advising foreigners to leave the country. 
  The head of the political and sharia committee spoke to 
AL-WASAT, having been authorized by "the amir of the jama'ah" 
[the prince of the group] Sayfallah Ja'far about the ideology, 
plans, and relations of the group. He explained that it has 
supporters in 39 out of Algeria's 48 governorates, and that the 
jama'ah is held to be "an extension of the jihad of Shaykh 
Mustafa Buway'ali". He emphasized that the jihad will be 
sustained, since "we do not recognize the secular separation of 
the military and political action". He considered the presence 
of foreigners in his country to be "part of a colonialist 
infidel scheme", who, he said, represent the throbbing heart of 
every occupation and are spies for the infidel in the land of 
Islam". He criticized the Islamic Salvation Front [FIS] . He 
commended the Afghan jihad, indicating that "we are in their 
debt", noting that many of the Algerians who fought in 
Afghanistan had joined the AIG. 
  It is to be recalled that the AIG recently decided to unite 
the armed groups in Algeria, leaving out the FIS, whose present 
leaders "sold out on the cause". A few days ago, it distributed 
a statement in Peshawar, in which it pointed out that the "unity 
meeting" among the military factions decided to merge there 
groups under the designation of "the Armed Islamic Group". 
These are Abu-'Adlan 'Abd-al-Haqq al-'Ayayidah, Dr. Abu-Ahmad 
and his group, and Abu- 'Abd-al-Rahman Sayyid Tarrani and his 
delegation representing Shaykh al-Malyani. Sayfallah Ja'far was 
assigned the leadership. The conferees formed a leading council 
comprising military, shura, political, and media bodies and 
decided on the following: 
  1. The formulation of a comprehensive, national strategy in 
the area of military operations. 
  2. The formulation of an accurate informational plan to 
surmount the barrier of an internal and external news blackout. 
  3. The organization of the masses to the greatest possible 
effectiveness. 
  4. Streamlining the arms procurement networks and 
instituting new networks. 
  5. Instituting fund raising and spending networks. 
  6. Conducting a survey of the number of martyrs, mujahidin, 
prisoners, with a view to looking after their families and their 
needs. 
  7. Breaking the siege of the central governorates by 
widening the base of operations so as to encompass the entire 
country. 
  8. Keeping track of and killing traitors of the movement 
[al-khawanah al-harakiyin], and sellers (hypocrites and spies). 
  9. Keeping the AIG under control, using shura laws, and 
spreading the shari'ah in the ranks of the mujahidin. 
  It is known that a number of the AIG members, who fell, or 
those who are still fighting, have participated in the Afghan 
jihad. The AIG issues a weekly publication in Peshawar called 
"AL-ANSAR" although it does not say that it speaks for the AIG. 
It is printed abroad and distributed in Peshawar to Arabs who 
fought in Afghanistan. 
  The following is the text of the interview with AL-WASAT, 
which is the first press interview with one of the AIG leaders, 
who received the AL-WASAT questions in Peshawar and sent them 
abroad to receive answers to them. All this has taken place in 
secrecy for security reasons: 
  [AL-WASAT] When the AIG was established? 
  [Unidentified AIG Leader] In previous interviews, we said 
that the AIG is not a newborn, but it has deep roots in the 
world of Islamic jihad. In other words, the AIG is an extension 
to the jihad of Shaykh Mustafa Buway'ali, may God have mercy on 
his soul. Above all, the AIG is an extension to the first major 
battle which took place between the believers and the infidels; 
namely, the Badr Battle, which took place between the prophet, 
may God peace and blessing be upon him, and the infidels of 
Quraysh. 
  From an organizational, practical, and combat viewpoint, it 
began in 1989, following the release of Shaykh Mustafa's aides 
from prison, particularly Shaykh al-Malyani, may God have mercy 
on his soul. Contacts then began within the ranks of those who 
believe that jihad is a must when Islam is not implemented, when 
the Muslims' land is usurped, when Muslim women are taken 
captives, or when Muslim men are captured. As we expected, many 
youths have joined Shaykh al-Malyani. Other cells from villages 
and quarters, which were also preparing themselves for armed 
jihad, have also joined Shaykh al-Malyani. In addition to this, 
the youths who fought in Afghanistan have also joined the 
shaykh. This is how the AIG was established. It later issued a 
statement called "the unity statement" in which they explained 
some of the main points of the the program of action. 
  Direct military action began on 18 November 1991, 
approximately two years after it was established and after 
recruiting the cadres on which jihad depends pursuant to God's 
order: Against them make ready your strength to the utmost of 
your power, including steeds of war, to strike terror into the 
hearts of the enemies of God and your enemies. [koranic verse] 
  Decisionmaking is based on shari'ah and the counselors' 
opinions. This means that the AIG is based on a set of rules 
that are already defined in books of jurisprudence and Islamic 
politics of the pious predecessors, ulema, and reliable imams, 
may God have mercy on their souls. 
  Concerning its military weight, it is responsible for most 
of 
the operations that are carried out in the country, foremost of 
which are assassinations and the deportation of the foreigners, 
crusaders, and Jews. It exists in approximately 39 governorates 
out of the country's 48 governorates. 
  [AL-WASAT] Was the AIG affected by the Afghan jihad? 
  [AIG Leader] The blessed Afghan jihad has affected many 
Muslims in the whole world. It has many advantages which can 
only be denied by the unjust ones. 
  [AL-WASAT] Do you believe in change brought about by 
political action, or, to put it concisely, by violence? 
  [AIG Leader] Your question prompts us to raise another 
important question. What do you mean by "political action"? 
If, by political action, you mean joining suspect parliaments 
and alliances, holding dialogue with tyrants, accepting the 
judgment of infidelity rather than Islam, and having recourse to 
international laws, such as the United Nations, the 
International Court of Justice, and other Judeo-Christian 
organizations, then it is the duty of every Muslim to disown and 
repudiate such organizations. The mere thought of having 
recourse to these organizations is against God's orders, let 
alone joining them. 
  If, however, you mean by political action following Islamic 
policy as agreed upon by the ulema of this nation, which 
includes jihad and the promotion of virtue and suppression of 
vice, then this is at the heart of our religion, indeed the peak 
of it. Taking such a course of action is a collective duty, 
which later becomes an individual duty. As for what you term 
violence, this is a misrepresentation of God's words and is 
meant to deceive the people. How can we consider "jihad for the 
cause of God" as violence? Can any Muslim allow himself to say 
this about God's words, unless he is a believer in the laws of 
the East and the West, which serve their own interests? We do 
not recognize the secular separation between military and 
political action. 
  [AL-WASAT] Why have you attacked foreigners, and what is the 
message you want to deliver? 
  [AIG Leader] We attacked foreigners (Jews, Christians, and 
polytheists) because they are part of an infidel, colonialist, 
scheme. They represent a living artery and throbbing heart of 
every occupation, be it external or domestic, explicit or 
implicit. Also, those foreigners are spies for the infidels in 
the Islamic world. In addition, those foreigners represent a 
mainstay of the economy. If they live in peace, then this means 
that the country is leading a normal life. However, killing and 
fighting them is practical evidence of the weakness of the 
infidel regime and the return of Islam as prophesied by the 
prophet, may God's peace be upon him. [passage omitted] 
  [AL-WASAT] There are reports about Iranian aid and 
facilities from other neighboring states. How true is this? Do 
you receive foreign support and how do you finance your military 
operations? 
  [AIG Leader] Iran is a Shiite state, and so we cannot 
receive aid from it. God Almighty has saved us the trouble. 
But to God belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth, 
but the hypocrites understand not. [Koranic verse] 
  [AL-WASAT] What are the goals that you aspire to achieve by 
armed action? 
  [AIG Leader] It is a jihad for the cause of God, and not 
armed action. Our only objective is to see God's law prevail, 
make people worship God, end injustice and debauchery, and 
achieve justice as the Koran orders us to do. By doing this, we 
seek only to win God's satisfaction, and nothing else. 
  [AL-WASAT] What is the nature of your relationship with the 
Salvation Front, and can you ignore it? Suppose a change takes 
place, are you qualified to fill the vacuum in terms of the 
cadres, the army, police, security, etc? 
  [AIG Leader] What front do you mean? There are many fronts, 
many branches, and many spokesmen. Be more specific so that we 
can give you an answer. [passage omitted] 
  [AL-WASAT] Several names in the Algerian arena adopt 
violence. What are the major groups in terms of strength and 
presence in the arena of military action? 
  [AIG Leader] There is a great clamor regarding this. Those 
who read local and international press believe that the number 
of the armed group exceeds 600 or 1,000 sometimes. This is 
incredible; it is a legendary figure. The objective and purpose 
of this are well known. The media wants to show the world that 
there is conflict in order to frustrate the Muslims and create 
confusion in their ranks. God willing, events will prove that 
certain people only are burdening themselves with the blessed 
jihad. 
  [AL-WASAT] The FIS has formed an army. Are you ready to join 
it or cooperate with it? 
  [AIG Leader] We would like to ask: Which front are you 
talking about and which army do you mean. Many statements have 
been made regarding this army now that capitulatory peaceful 
solutions have become imminent. The AIG is carrying the banner 
of "There Is No God but Allah" in the battlefield. We have not 
heard about this army nor sensed its reality. He who has 
anything else to say should prove it inside, in the land of fire 
and dust, not in the Intercontinental, Holiday Inn, or Hilton 
Hotels. 
  [AL-WASAT] If the FIS reaches a compromise with the Algerian 
regime, what will be your response? 
  [AIG Leader] The Mujahidin Shura Council and the Islamic 
Courts will decide what should be done if such a thing takes 
place. 
  [AL-WASAT] Do your attacks on Rabeh Kebir and Abdallah Anas 
represent your opposition to them personally or to the FIS? 
  [AIG Leader] We oppose policies, not persons; we oppose 
actions, not faces. In the end, we oppose all those who leave 
the battlefield and escape the tremor. Previous experiments 
alone are not criteria to judge people. The pretext that they 
participated in the fighting in the past but they have abandoned 
it now is not accepted. What counts is the end, not the 
beginning. You can judge all those who are in your mind in 
accordance with this rule. 
  [AL-WASAT] What is the next strategy of the military action? 
Do you believe that the previous operations or strategy will be 
followed? 
  [AIG Leader] We cannot now define a specific strategy. 
Continuing or changing the strategy depends on many tactical, 
geographical, social, and military factors. Therefore, we 
cannot deal with this now. However, some explorations here and 
there would reveal the features of the coming stage, God willing. 
  [AL-WASAT] What kind of relationship is there between you 
and the military action groups in Egypt and other Arab states? 
  [AIG Leader] It is a relationship that the holy Koran has 
ordered us to develop. "But if they seek your aid in religion, 
it is your duty to help them" [Koranic verse]. In the same 
vein, the messenger of God, God's peace and blessings be upon 
him, says: "All Muslims are brothers. They must not fail, 
disgrace, or wrong each other." [passage omitted] 
  [AL-WASAT] When you select the targets of your military 
operations, do you mean to convey a political message or signal 
beyond the operation itself, or is the objective is just to kill 
without intending to convey any signals? 
  [AIG Leader] Targets for military operations are selected in 
implementation of God's words: "And slay them wherever you catch 
them, and turn them out from where they have turned you out; for 
tumult and oppression are worse than slaughter." [Koranic verse] 
  [AL-WASAT] A change in any state must cover many and various 
fields, especially in view of the fact that social, political, 
and economic relations are interlinked. Through your action, we 
notice that you focus on the military aspect only. 
  [AIG Leader] Establishing the pillars of the Muslim 
caliphate 
requires greater efforts by us. We are still at the beginning. 
We have not arrived at the stage that will enable us to think 
of such issues. Now we should stand firmly on the ground. 
Afterward, God will help us go ahead. "And those who strive in 
our cause, we will certainly guide them to our paths; for verily 
God is with those who do right." [Koranic verse] 
  [AL-WASAT] Any armed movement or revolution needs 
traditional 
leaders or symbols. Do you have such symbols? Are you capable 
of winning such symbols? Who among the Algerian personalities 
would you nominate for leading your action? 
  [AIG Leader] The existence of symbols is not a prerequisite 
for waging jihad. It is favorable and nice to have symbols. 
But if we suppose--and this is the actual situation in 
Algeria--that there is no specific symbol, will jihad cease to 
exist as a duty? This jihad began without outstanding symbols. 
It began with the youth. From the womb of the ordeal, symbols 
will be born, God willing. 
  As for the nomination of leading personalities, certain 
conditions must be observed. In addition to some leadership 
traits that must be exist in the symbol, he must have 
participated in jihad and military operations and must have 
killed a considerable number of the enemies of God. 

