BFN 

  [Text] Cartagena de Indias (Colombia), 13 Jun (EFE) -- 
High-ranking Cuban officials, who are participating in the 
meetings prior to the Fourth Ibero-American Summit, doubt that 
other presidents will ask Fidel Castro to make political 
changes, "because we have not come with an agenda to ask 
anything from anybody." 
  "Cuba respects the self-determination of every country, and 
it, therefore, demands that ours be respected as well," Cuban 
Deputy Foreign Minister Jorge Bolanos, who has participated in 
the drafting of the final document of the summit, told EFE. 
Diplomatic sources, however, said some presidents, including 
the Spanish prime minister, talked to the Cuban leader about the 
need to accelerate the economic reforms and to introduce 
political changes as he had done on previous occasions. The 
same sources said that, during the meetings prior to the summit, 
the Cuban delegation, which customarily attracts the most 
attention, "was not belligerent or demanding at all." 
  Bolanos confirmed that the final document makes a direct 
reference to the economic embargo imposed by the United States 
on Cuba over 30 years ago. "I would have preferred to say that 
the blockade is an illegal and unfair act, but when the meeting 
is held in a framework where an agenda has to be discussed, you 
have to bear these factors in mind." 
  In fact, as occurred last year during the Third 
Ibero-American Summit held in Salvador de Bahia, Brazil, neither 
Cuba nor the United States are mentioned in the final document. 
The term embargo is not used, let alone the term blockade. 
  The draft of the final document, which must be approved by 
the foreign ministers today and subsequently by the heads of 
state, "reiterates the firm rejection of any measure that 
adversely affects the free development of trade, violates the 
principles of international law, and hurts the living conditions 
of the Latin American peoples." 
  The Cuban deputy foreign minister also recognized that the 
text of the document, the contents of which are essentially 
economic in nature, is a confirmation of liberal principles, 
"with certain amendments that balance it out." 
  "The opinion of Cuba," he said, "is that any document must 
take into account the 400 million Latin Americans, especially 
the 200 million who live in conditions of extreme poverty, and 
must therefore emphasize social policies." 
  For the Cuban Government, this Fourth Ibero-American Summit 
will be a success "if the heads of state categorically speak out 
in favor of the creation of Latin American economic and trade 
opportunities that can insert Latin America into an 
international and world context," Bolanos said. 
  Presently, Cuba is not involved in any integration mechanism 
in progress, but it believes it is "very encouraging" to see 
the signing this afternoon of the free trade agreement between 
Colombia, Venezuela, and Mexico with possibilities of its being 
opened up to the Caribbean and Central American countries. 
Bolanos also noted that the Association of Caribbean States is 
currently being formed and that it includes the islands and the 
continental countries bordering the Caribbean. "Cuba has been 
there since the beginning," he said. 
  The deputy foreign minister said that during the preparatory 
meetings no delegate spoke about the hemispheric summit convened 
by U.S. President Bill Clinton, "from which we have not excluded 
ourselves but from which we have been excluded." "We neither 
like it nor dislike it, and we are not going to ask for an 
invitation," said the Cuban deputy foreign minister, who added 
that he is convinced that Clinton's initiative will not 
undermine the Ibero-American summit. In this regard, he pointed 
out that a timetable has already been drafted for the next 
summits, and, if approved by the heads of state or governments, 
they will be held in Argentina (1995), Chile (1996), Venezuela 
(1997), Portugal (1998), Cuba (1999), and Panama (2000). 

