CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zoran Petrov: "The Thieves Are Not Among Us--We </F>
Are Among Them"] 
  [Text] Now there are already numerous indications, 
information, and above all, facts showing that organized crime 
exists in Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
-- FYROM] and that among others, individuals from the Macedonian 
Government's ministries are involved in it. One of the most 
fundamental characteristics of organized crime is the brutality 
of its approach, and its basic method is corruption, and 
directly associated with it, blackmail, threats, and 
retaliation. 
  Macedonia is one of the few countries in the world where a 
person can get rich overnight, with just a single deal, 
arrangement, or transaction. Macedonia is one of the rare places 
in the world where the laws exist to be evaded, where everything 
that is not prohibited is automatically permitted, and where one 
does not go to jail for an illegal shop, for example, or for tax 
evasion. Macedonia is a sort of unique case, where directors 
open private firms as partners and competitors of socialized 
enterprises, where state officials are deeply involved in 
private business, and where the transformation of state property 
has been turned into universal theft. In such a legal vacuum, 
criminals, regardless of whether they are "white collar 
criminals" or common pickpockets, virtually obtain an alibi for 
their actions. The period of the transition from one system to 
another is full of risks and uncertainties, even when it is 
thoroughly prepared and outlined, and in circumstances like ours 
today, the danger is doubled. From any aspect, this is a time of 
various con men and worldly troublemakers. 
  In a situation like the present one, it is evident that 
there 
has been a rapid fragmentation of citizens and increasingly 
deeper dissatisfaction among the public with the striking cases 
of abuses, machinations, and speculations. The claims that the 
state authorities do not have a role in such dirty business are 
stories for little children. In a word, no matter how painful it 
sounds, the ancient system of a link between economic and 
political power is slowly coming onto the scene in the Republic 
of Macedonia; in turn, this is creating the preconditions for 
reviving the alliance between criminal circles and the state 
establishment, and in some countries that is called the mafia. 
Thus, in parallel with the newly established businessmen, 
murders for hire, threats, blackmail, kidnappings, "rackets," 
loan sharks, and drug smugglers, have appeared in Macedonia, 
i.e., everything that "embellishes" a classic mafia. 
<H5>  The Mafia Is in the Government or... </H5>
  "There is organized crime in Macedonia, and that has to be 
said openly for once," said Pavle Trajanov, assistant minister 
for operational affairs in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 
What is significant in all this, in his opinion, is that 
organized crime has slowly begun to penetrate the state's 
executive branch, since criminal conduct in an organized manner 
is not possible unless the authorities participate in it, or in 
our case, individual ministries of the government of the 
Republic of Macedonia. As our interlocutor emphasized, there are 
several evident cases of machinations under the leadership of 
state bodies. 
  One of the most characteristic cases is the process of 
obtaining a location for the construction of a temporary or 
permanent building. The Ministries of City Planning, 
Construction, Transportation, and Ecology participate in issuing 
the building permit, and the Ministry of Economy for a permit to 
conduct business, and to these one must add the Ministry of 
Finance through the tax inspectorate, and the SOK [Public 
Auditing Service].... In this whole chain, where numerous abuses 
have appeared, as Trajanov said, it is impossible that some of 
the institutions cited are not involved. The case of importing 
products is even more specific. We have analyses for three years 
back of which firms received import permits and which amounts 
they imported, Trajanov said, from which it can be clearly seen 
that all these things revolve around a small number of 
enterprises which receive import permits, and then simply sell 
them to another firm and, naturally, in the end the money is 
shared with the one that provided the permit. In other words, 
the one who is closer to the authorities through any type of 
"closeness" gains a privileged status for earning a profit. 
Thus, there are no built-in criteria for all those who have an 
interest in importing; instead, protectionist measures are 
created, through which only a narrow circle of firms are 
patronized. I can state quite authoritatively that the executive 
branch bodies are behind all of this, Trajanov said 
categorically. This highly organized crime has been going on for 
two years, and high officials in both the production enterprises 
and the government are participating in it. According to the 
assistant minister of internal affairs, it is not possible for 
what is produced and what is marketed not to be recorded without 
the involvement of some government ministry, since the net 
profit from just one truckload of cigarettes is about 300,000 
German marks [DM]. The basic methodology of organized crime is 
bribery and corruption. According to our interlocutor, these 
modes are conducted today in a very perfidious manner. "We have 
a great deal of information," he emphasized, "that state 
officials, even government ministers, have private firms, 
usually in the name of a close relative, through which organized 
crime takes place. How? The method is very simple--first a 
permit is obtained for the transit or importation of certain 
goods into Macedonia, and then the trade in the goods is 
conducted through one's own firm. Formally, everything is within 
the law," Pavle Trajanov said, "but the genesis is in the 
ordinary abuse of one's position. Nevertheless," as our 
interlocutor emphasized, "the most modern form of organized 
crime is acting as a middleman." In other words, those who are a 
factor in decisionmaking only act as middlemen among two or more 
firms, and receive a commission in return. For example, if there 
is an offer from some foreign firm, for instance for exporting 
technical equipment needed by a certain ministry or other state 
institutions, then the "middleman" appears, and puts the foreign 
firm in touch with the domestic one and charges a commission for 
this. This, Trajanov said, constitutes a textbook case of 
corruption. 
<H5>  ...The Government Is in the Mafia </H5>
  "As police, our hands are tied by several things that keep 
us 
from dealing with organized crime efficiently," Pavle Trajanov 
said. In his opinion, it is impossible for the police, without 
cooperation with other supervisory bodies in the state, to act 
on their own in this area, and likewise, another big problem is 
the still incomplete legal regulations defining certain 
relationships in the state, which at the moment are actively 
being exploited by organized crime. Our limitation, our 
interlocutor emphasized, is the constitutional barrier according 
to which only letters can be monitored, while the monitoring of 
telephones and other means of communication is not permitted. If 
this does not change in a short time, and the use of these 
operational-technical means that would be used under strictly 
established legal conditions and by a decision by a competent 
judge is not permitted, we will only obtain information that we 
will be able to comment on, but it will be much more difficult 
for us to obtain evidence, without which criminal proceedings 
cannot be started, Trajanov stated categorically. 
  Now there are already various indications, information, and 
above all facts showing that organized crime exists in Macedonia 
and that above all, the state institutions of the executive 
branch are involved in it. All of this, Trajanov emphasized, 
does not force us as the police to restructure ourselves 
organizationally. It is planned that a special section will be 
formed soon at the Ministry of Internal Affairs that will deal 
exclusively with curbing organized crime, and that will possess 
all the necessary conditions for effective operation. That, 
above all, means its staffing and professionalization of its 
operation, as well as providing it with appropriate technical 
equipment. 
  "I want to emphasize," Trajanov said, "that the Ministry of 
Internal Affairs is seriously preparing and is already 
considerably involved in all these matters associated with 
organized crime. The Ministry of Internal Affairs," he added, 
"possesses an extensive body of information, and it is known 
quite well who is involved in these illegal activities, how, and 
why, including individuals who at the moment are in high 
government positions." 
<H5>  Parallel Rule by Organized Crime </H5>
  "Collective organized crime constitutes one of the forms of 
professional crime which is characterized by a close alliance 
between professional criminals and law enforcement officials," 
said Dr. Tome Batkovski, a lecturer at the Security School in 
Skopje. According to criminologists from Western countries, of 
which this form of professional crime has been and is most 
characteristic, organized crime could not exist without 
connections and assistance from politics and politicians. 
"Professional criminals' connections with government officials," 
Batkovski emphasized, "gives representatives of organized crime 
an enormous advantage over other criminals, precisely because of 
that protection that they have. There is actually a tremendous 
threat to the human rights of a large part of the population, 
just because the center of power goes outside the framework of 
the legal institutions." 
  The criminal areas of activity of collective organized crime 
consist of smuggling narcotics, white slavery, smuggling money, 
gold, and other valuables and cultural goods, smuggling weapons, 
carrying out paid killings, prostitution, gambling, and 
recently, selling ecological wastes. According to Dr. Batkovski, 
the characteristics of the illegal associations whose activity 
in practice is organized crime are the following: above all, 
internal organization, structure, the existence of internal 
standards of conduct with discipline in carrying out 
assignments, a division of duties, a broad radius of activity, 
high effectiveness with the use of modern methods, a high degree 
of maneuverability, and going beyond the national framework. 
Finally, according to Batkovski, one of the most fundamental 
characteristics of organized crime is the brutality of its 
approach, i.e., a lack of scruples, and its basic method is 
corruption, and directly associated with it, blackmail, threats, 
and retaliation. 
  Organized crime represents a tremendous social danger, above 
all because it introduces disorganization in the state, destroys 
the legal fabric of society, instills distrust among the legal 
state bodies, and in the case of smaller states, there is a 
danger of parallel rule by organized crime, which can have 
unforeseeable consequences for undeveloped countries, including 
Macedonia. According to Dr. Batkovski, the extent of the power 
of this form of crime is best illustrated by the case of the 
Colombian cocaine mafia, which offered to repay part of this 
country's foreign debt, in the amount of--believe it or not--$28 
billion. In return, the Colombian Government was supposed to 
refuse to extradite the captured heads of the drug mafia to the 
United States. Dr. Batkovski stressed that this is a vital 
example of the enormous power of organized crime. 
  "We are talking about an extremely serious matter, and I 
think that the struggle against this organized crime has to be 
an integral part of a national strategy in the broader sense," 
our interlocutor emphasized. "Without that, through palliative 
and partial solutions, nothing can be achieved," Tome Batkovski 
said in conclusion. 
<H5>  [Box, p 16] </H5>
<H5>  Batkovski: "Organized Crime Should Not Be Underestimated" </H5>
  "If we are talking about the struggle against organized 
crime, we should note once again that it possess enormous power 
and influence. It is precisely for that reason that it is always 
one step ahead of society in the use of modern methods and 
resources. That means that in curbing it, the state's expert 
bodies and services have to keep up to date, and stay in step 
with the methods and resources used by representatives of 
organized crime. From the standpoint of its organization, modern 
operational services have to be created that will be capable of 
maneuvering quickly and adapting to organized crime's methods 
and resources, but on the other hand, that requires a societal 
guarantee to the employees of these services--not just by 
ensuring the safety of their families, but also in their 
salaries, since it is an illusion that an employee with a salary 
of DM300 or DM400 will objectively be capable of dealing with 
illegal activities in which hundreds of thousands or millions of 
German marks are involved." 
<H5>  [Box, p 16] </H5>
<H5>  Trajanov: "Some Political Parties Are Also Financed by Dirty </H5>
Deals" 
  "I can authoritatively state that the mafia in Macedonia is 
assuming an increasingly larger scale and is threatening to grow 
into a parallel state government. Likewise, I stand behind the 
assertion that numerous people in authority are also involved in 
organized crime in our country, especially in the Macedonian 
government's ministries. Those who are now enriching themselves 
this way will slowly and surely achieve influence in political 
life as well. We already possess information that certain 
political parties are being financed by such dirty deals and 
`businesses.' In other words, someone who invests in a certain 
political party will subsequently demand compensation, i.e., 
greater political influence and participation in the division of 
power in the country. All the preconditions now exist for a high 
degree of corrosion in the state, and the consequences are truly 
extremely dangerous. Unless Macedonia urgently undertakes 
something in the area of legal regulations and the internal 
organization of all structures and supervising bodies, I think 
that in two or three years we will find ourselves in the same 
situation as some of the neighboring countries." 

