BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel Wieslaw Rozbicki, spokesman for the </F>
Polish Ministry of National Defense: "We Have Disarmed 
Ourselves on Our Own"] 
  [Text]Military experts are again in charge of the 
Army. That which has been distorted in a joyful restructuring 
frenzy, will now be fixed -- so writes Colonel Wieslaw Rozbicki, 
spokesman for the Ministry of National Defense. 
  Changes in the European political scene have lead to a clear 
destabilization of international affairs. The system of 
military connections has changed. However, I often have a 
feeling that not everyone has come to realize that. 
<H5>  We Have Excessively Disarmed Ourselves </H5>
  The collapse of treaty-based structures, the withdrawal of 
Red Star tanks from the banks of the Elbe river, and the 
withdrawal of soldiers from the Soviet Army's Northern Group 
from our western border, revealed what we are really worth. In 
a situation where we knew that everything was falling apart 
(with our contribution being the biggest of all), we signed an 
agreement on European conventional forces, that is to say, an 
arms reduction treaty. 
  Even Western politicians were surprised that we approved of 
the propositions submitted to us so willingly. So, we will 
shortly have to destroy 1,120 tanks, 247 armored combat 
vehicles, 705 pieces of artillery, and 45 aircraft. Other 
countries have also been obliged to make reductions, but within 
more reasonable limits. But what will happen later, is more 
important. 
  "Later," meaning as the final goal, we are entitled to have, 
for instance, 1,730 tanks at the most. In Russia, 6,400 tanks 
will remain, in Belarus -- 1,800, while in Ukraine -- 4,080. 
All that is beyond our eastern border. What about beyond the 
Oder river? The Germans will have 4,166 tanks, and keep in mind 
that every one of those is twice as efficient as a Polish tank. 
The Russians want to question the treaty because they think 
that they should be allowed to have many more armaments. What 
about us? 
  The time for enthusiasm over the changes is gradually fading 
away. All of our neighbors are getting down to introducing 
stabilization in their countries, and I mean political, 
economic, and defense stabilization. They are paying the most 
attention to the last type of stabilization mentioned here, even 
though they refuse to admit that. On the other hand, when one 
looks at what we have been doing, one can have doubts as to 
whether we know where we are heading. 
<H5>  A Budget of Agony </H5>
  For many years in the past, we were trying to scare society 
with U.S. imperialism, and now it is the same case with Russian 
totalitarianism. In actual fact, however, the overwhelming 
majority of Polish people are afraid of neither side. Still, 
the problem is somewhere else because the line of thinking by 
the average Sejm deputy or senator, is the same as that of the 
average Pole on the street. Such an individual member of 
parliament is harmless, but a group of them with such views, can 
accomplish a lot in the Sejm. 
  Let us take this year's Army budget as an example. Last 
year, there were just enough means to survive, while this year, 
the Armed Forces are heading for agony. That is not a poetic 
metaphor. Even though the issue is serious, there are few people 
who realize it. I will not list different items in terms of how 
much the Army can spend on what. Sejm deputies are afraid that 
the generals and colonels will start purchasing official 
Mercedes cars while in fact, we can only purchase 10 tanks -- 
among others -- with the allocated money. With these kinds of 
capabilities, it would take seven years to equip just one 
armored regiment! 
  We have only a percentage of the required amount of combat 
warheads for some types of rockets, and 30 percent of required 
ammunition for selected types of cannons. Fuel and food 
reserves -- which the state should be collecting -- are also in 
bad shape. I do not even mention the issue of overhauling and 
erecting barracks in new military garrisons. That is because I 
have come across a view that since a young man has spent 18 
years in a feather bed under a solid roof, it means he will 
survive in a tent for 18 months. Well, there is an explanation 
for everything. 
  A major portion of the equipment has already lost its 
"combat 
credibility." That means that soldiers are no longer trusting 
when it comes to their tanks, aircraft, or ships. They are 
simply afraid to shoot, take off with their aircraft, or go in 
the water. 
  One can continue to use the equipment only thanks to the 
remaining spare parts, and thanks to the extraordinary skills of 
the technical staff. The cost of maintaining equipment 
continues to rise. For those reasons, among others, 820 tanks, 
570 armored transport vehicles, and over 5,000 special- and 
general-purpose vehicles were withdrawn from operation in recent 
years. 
  As a matter of fact, we do not have to destroy anything in 
order to meet the conditions of the treaty on the reduction of 
conventional arms. Due to shortage of resources, in a few 
years' time we will have, among other things, only 60 combat 
aircraft, 30 assault helicopters, and 1,230 tanks. Thus, those 
numbers of armaments will be lower than those specified in the 
treaty. 
  Even the poorest countries that are reasonable enough do not 
allow such a collapse of the Army to occur. It is time to say 
this in public. 
<H5>  Politicians Are Not Listening to Officers </H5>
  Higher-ranking commanders are talking about it; however, 
there are not many who are willing to listen to them. 
Parliamentarians, in turn, are deeply concerned about the fate 
of the "Iryda" aircraft, which the Army does not want because it 
does not meet the required parameters. The deputies order us to 
take what they are giving, and to pay. They have allocated 300 
billion zlotys for that. Not in addition; the money comes from 
that which we have received. Did they do this for the sake of 
the Army's combat readiness, or for fear of the Mielec workers, 
who have come to Warsaw several times already? 
  In every state which thinks reasonably about defense there 
must be 70 percent of combat equipment manufactured in this 
country, based on its own construction techniques and 
technology. Any graduate of an officers' training school knows 
this. Therefore, the accusation that the minister does not 
accept the "Iryda" because he wants to destroy the Polish arms 
industry is not very serious. 
  Equally unserious is the atmosphere being created around the 
Ministry of National Defense [MON]. The willingness to take 
over the ministerial portfolio has been observed for some time 
now. The more unprepared for this post a person is, the greater 
the claims he makes. For the past several years, among people 
in charge of the ministry or of one of its sections, it has been 
seen as the proper thing to do to say that one does not have the 
slightest idea what the Army is about. Such people won 
recognition in Warsaw; however, the West was surprised at them. 
Even though civilians are in charge of the defense ministries 
there, they are professionally well-prepared; they are graduates 
of military schools, reserve officers. It is not the one who 
gets up earlier who decides the issues of the state's defense 
there. 
<H5>  They Steal Documents </H5>
  Now there is a chance to repair what has been done poorly in 
the joyful rush for restructuring. A great commotion was caused 
a few months ago by the fact that the Military Information 
Services [WSI] had returned to the structures of the General 
Staff. They returned because that is their place. Information 
provided by the intelligence and counterintelligence services 
help draw operational conclusions; they help the highest-ranking 
commanders make decisions. Incidentally, it is better for state 
security when the civilian minister does not have the full 
knowledge provided by WSI. When one of Minister Koldziejczyk's 
predecessors was leaving his office on Klonowa Street, he took 
some rather important documents with him. He became so attached 
to them it was difficult to take them away from him. How many 
more such people will we see in the future? We can presume that 
they will certainly appear! 
  MON is a ministry the structure of which is complex and not 
easy to steer. It is not possible to get everything done there 
by simply issuing an order. Therefore, experts and advisers are 
needed. Deputy ministers are needed as well; people who are 
prepared theoretically, with rich experience. Can the minister 
be criticized for wanting such people? 
  There were times when there were six deputy prime ministers 
and each of them had quite a lot of work. Now there are only 
three. If there were another six, aside from them, the chief of 
the General Staff, who is in charge of the entire Armed Forces, 
would still be the last rung in the protocol hierarchy. In that 
sense, form overrides content. 
  One Sejm deputy said that the defense minister does not know 
what is going on in the country because he is travelling with 
delegations all over the world. Perhaps he is travelling because 
he knows what is going on. We are a medium-sized country in 
terms of territory and population; however, from the economic 
and military points of view, we are weak. Therefore, it is 
necessary to visit our neighbors, invite them here, talk with 
them, and assure them about our friendship and partnership. It 
is not a ministerial fancy, but a necessity, because we are 
still alone. 
  Our joining the "Partnership for Peace" program does not 
mean 
much. However, it is the first step taken by the West to 
enhance our security. We have made dozens of such steps and we 
are still underway. The actual joining of NATO is a remote 
possibility. We must try to achieve it with all our might and 
by all means. However, there is not much strength and so I do 
not know whether we will make it in time. I fear that we can 
wake up just in time to "blow out the candles." I hope that in 
a few days someone will say that I was not a good prophet. 

