BFN 

  [Text] The chamber of deputies of the Croat republic of 
Herceg-Bosna has adopted a report on the latest round of 
negotiations with the Serb side presented by Kresimir Zubak, 
president of the [Bosnia-Herzegovina] federation. Zdenko 
Vranjes has more details. 
  [Vranjes] Kresimir Zubak said that the big powers had agreed 
on Bosnia and that the contact group would not give up the 
carve-up of Bosnia at a 51:49 ratio. He also spoke in detail 
about the contact group's proposals; the division, grey zones, 
and blue roads. The Croatian side has been short-changed to 
some degree in the areas of Teslic and Kotor Varos, while Muslim 
interests have been fundamentally damaged in the area of eastern 
Bosnia. The Muslim territories around Kljuc and Sanski Most may 
be reduced as they will be designated as grey zones. 
  The Serb side's demand for two power stations near Jajce to 
be given to the Serbs has not been accepted, Zubak added. 
Passages [pasaz] are now being mentioned instead of corridors, 
Zubak said, and added that this Serb passage in Posavina will 
run through Serb villages, so the whole of Derventa will be 
included in a Croat canton. Only some Croat villages between 
Brcko and Modrica will be included in the Serb passage. 
  The president of the Bosnia-Herzegovina federation said that 
a blue road between Modrica and Bosanski Samac, via Jajce, 
Kljuc, and Sanski Most was tabled in Geneva as well as a 
corridor between Livno and Bihac. Of the three draft political 
solutions for Bosnia- Herzegovina, the Croatian side regards the 
solution that implies a confederation between the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Federation with Croatia as the most 
acceptable one, while at the same time the Serb part of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina might have a similar arrangement with Serbia 
and Montenegro, Zubak said. 
  Following a long debate and a break this afternoon, the 
chamber of deputies is expected to adopt a list of Croatian 
Democratic Union candidates for members of the federal 
government. Jadranko Prlic has been put forward as a vice 
president performing the duty of minister of defense in the 
federal government. 

