Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Johanna Mannila: ``Compensation Payment Would </F>
Improve Things in Contaminated Chelyabinsk''] 
  [Text] ``Much will be left undone in Chelyabinsk if the 
compensation being paid by Finns ceases,'' Anders Palmgren, 
director of Imatra Power, says critically about the government's 
decision last week to stop the shipment of nuclear wastes to 
Russia. 
  The spent fuel from Loviisa is taken into the southern 
Urals, 
to Chelyabinsk. The area was badly polluted during the 1950's 
when defense industry enterprises dumped nuclear wastes directly 
into a nearby river and lake. 
  Imatra Power has paid and continues to pay tens of millions 
of markkas for every shipment of fuel to Russia. ``Besides for 
the treatment of the fuel, the money is used for technical 
improvements in equipment and in cleaning up the damages to the 
environment from the military activity era,'' says Palmgren. 
<H5>  Western Equipment Cannot Be Obtained Without Foreign Currency </H5>
  ``With government decisions, Finland could stipulate that 
the 
treatment of spent fuel in foreign countries be done in a safe 
and environmentally noninjurious manner. The stipulation could 
include the provision that Finnish authorities will inspect the 
safety of the operation,'' Palmgren suggests as an alternative 
to the export ban. 
  ``Finland should have no philosophical basis for banning the 
exportation of spent fuel if Finnish authorities could inspect 
the safety of the treatment.'' 
  The leadership at the Radiation Safety Center is in 
agreement 
with this in the letter that it sent to Minister of Trade and 
Industry Seppo Kaariainen (Center Party). Head director Antti 
Vuorinen sums up the contents of the letter by stating that 
conditions at Chelyabinsk would become even worse than currently 
if the payments made by Imatra Power were to cease. ``Without 
foreign currency, Mayak, Inc., could not obtain western 
equipment.'' 
<H5>  Maintaining Collaboration Worthwhile </H5>
  In the opinion of the Radiation Safety Center, it is in 
Finland's best interests to continue and expand the well-begun 
collaboration with Russian nuclear safety authorities. ``The 
Imatra Power payments also serve to downscale the nuclear 
weapons industry in Chelyabinsk, and to transfer the personnel 
working in the area into peaceful purpose oriented jobs.'' 
  Vuorinen also reminds that civilian officials in Russia need 
Finnish support for taking care of the area and that the region 
was closed to Russian civilian officials up until last year. 
  According to the Radiation Safety Center, it is realistic 
for 
Finland to expect, over the long term, Russian technical 
competence and know-how to be able to also improve the safety of 
the burial of the Olkiluoto nuclear waste. In any case, Russia 
has to solve a much more extensive problem than Finland's in the 
ultimate storage program. 
  ``If the exporting to Russia ceases, it will mean the actual 
reduction of cooperation between our two countries in the field 
of treatment of nuclear waste. At the same time we lose our 
chance to have an impact on the safety of nuclear waste 
treatment in the Chelyabinsk region and on the environmental 
cleanup of that region,'' fears Vuorinen. 
<H5>  Efficiency Inspection in January </H5>
  Experts from the Radiation Safety Center will join Russian 
nuclear safety authorities in focusing on Chelyabinsk in 
January. During this technical visit, the radiation conditions 
of the region, as well as the safety of nuclear waste treatment 
will be mapped. 
  The agreement between Imatra Power and the Russians about 
the 
returning of fuel is in force with a noncancellability clause 
for as long as the Loviisa power plant is in use. The conditions 
of the agreement have been re-examined at five-year intervals. 
Current conditions are in force until 1996. 
  ``If no agreement on the returning of fuel is reached in 
1996, Imatra Power will continue to have the right to return 
spent fuel for three more years, but at a higher price,'' says 
Palmgren. 
  If Finland decides to not abide by the agreement, Imatra 
Power will have to pay compensation to the Russians. 
  Minister of Trade and Industry Seppo Kaariainen will soon 
decide what kind of committee will be named to study ways to 
stop exports. Jussi Manninen, the negotiating civil servant of 
the Ministry of Trade and Industry, estimates that the committee 
will arrive at a recommendation in a couple of months. 
<H5>  About Three Percent </H5>
  About 3 percent of spent fuel is of the longest lasting and 
most dangerous variety of waste, the ultra-active waste. 
  If spent fuel is placed in final storage in Finland's 
bedrock, it will all be ultra-active waste. 
  Industrial Power, Inc., intends to bury fuel from the 
Olkiluoto reactor into bedrock, and Imatra power will do 
likewise if exports cease. 
  The spent fuel that has been taken from Loviisa to Russia 
has 
undergone a retreatment process in which the ultra-active waste 
is separated from uranium and plutonium that can be recycled. 
Retreatment is a common procedure also in France, Japan, Great 
Britain, and the United States. 
  In Russia, the uranium extracted from the fuel is used in 
the 
manufacture of fuel for Chernobyl-type RBMK reactors. The 
plutonium has temporarily been put in storage because the 
manufacture of plutonium fuel, due to its high toxicity, 
requires a much more advanced technique than the manufacture of 
uranium fuel. 
  The remaining ultra-active waste has been melted into a very 
stable, glassy mass. 
  The possibility that Finland would do the retreatment has 
been considered nil, because the plants are expensive and 
require more operational volume than provided by Finland's 
nuclear program. 

