OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 94UM0153E </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE </F>
 Language: <F P=105>Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Col V. Pogozhin, candidate of military sciences] </F>
  [Text] With the start of the space age, the most 
economically developed countries sought to use the results of 
space research for military purposes. The United States and the 
former Soviet Union achieved the greatest results. The leading 
West European states lagged behind them in this considerably, 
primarily due to their limited resources. However, as the 
economy strengthened and the scientific potential increased, the 
attitude toward space research in Europe changed. The promising 
nature of space research and development is becoming 
increasingly more obvious, which contributes to these countries' 
aspiration to combine efforts in implementing a joint 
military-space policy. 
  There are significant differences between U.S. military 
space 
projects and those of Europe. Thus, for the United States, the 
global envelopment of territories by space systems is of great 
importance due to its geopolitical aspirations. Having 
recognized the advantages of space-based communications, 
intelligence collection, and navigation systems, the United 
States explored space with direct participation of military 
agencies. Virtually all the most important research in the area 
of potential use of space at the turn of the 1950's-1960's was 
organized and conducted by the Pentagon. 
  In Western Europe, work on space was initially conducted 
primarily for scientific research purposes and was concentrated 
primarily in the civilian sector. Considerably less attention 
was given to military space projects. The entry into the space 
age was marked by the creation of a number of space 
organizations. The most notable among them in the 1960's were 
the European Space Research Organization, the International 
Space Communications Organization, and the European Organization 
for the Development of Booster Rockets. 
  Later on, based on amassed experience of cooperation of 
European countries, the European Space Agency was created in May 
1975, which continues its activities to this day. It unites 13 
states: France, Great Britain, the FRG, Italy, Spain, Belgium, 
Denmark, Ireland, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Australia, and Norway. Canada participates in the work of this 
organization based on an agreement on mutual cooperation, and 
Finland is an associate member. 
  Coordination of the efforts of the countries of Europe has 
also made it possible to set the foundation for development of 
joint military space projects. Nevertheless, right up to the 
present, such projects have remained almost completely national, 
and their proportion in space research have been considerably 
less than civilian projects. 
  Today, European NATO countries have outlined a number of 
areas of using military space systems in which they are directly 
interested. These include command and control, communications, 
reconnaissance, navigation, meteorology, and manned space 
flights. A NATO-wide military space-based communications system 
has already been created and is in operation. 
  On the threshold of the 21st century, countries such as 
France, Great Britain, and the United States, already having 
their own space-based systems, will be faced with the need to 
put a new generation of satellites into service. This opens the 
way for possible cooperation not only within the framework of 
Europe but also with the United States (for example, in the area 
of standardization and introduction of standardized onboard 
relay equipment with the standard requirements for 
communications channels and data that can be transmitted, which 
is an additional incentive for integration of military space 
projects). 
  As far as the contribution of individual West European 
countries to space research is concerned, France and Great 
Britain are the most independent. Today, they are the only ones 
that have military space-based systems in operation. However, 
other countries of Europe are also working in this direction. 
  France has the lead among West European countries for the 
level of state financing of space programs and scale of work in 
the areas of space study and exploration. The beginning of 
independent research was set forth by the creation of a 
ballistic missile for the armed forces. Later, it developed its 
own Ariane-1 booster rocket under the direction of the National 
Space Research Center. It began qualification testing on 24 
December 1979, and after three successful launches was put into 
series production. 
  Thanks to the presence of a developed aerospace industry in 
the country, the foundation has been laid for a powerful 
military-space complex. Such organizations as Arianespace, 
Matra, Aerospatiale, Alcatele, and others play a leading role in 
it. 
  French firms are active in a number of national and 
international space programs, mainly those under the direction 
of the European Space Agency and other interstate organizations. 
Experts estimate that France's spending on space is the highest 
in the countries of Western Europe; in 1991 it was 16,561 
billion francs. Approximately 13,000 people are employed in the 
aerospace industry. 
  The efforts of the civilian sector are bolsterd by financing 
of military space projects. According to former French Minister 
of Defense B. Jacques, the budget for military space in fiscal 
year 1991 was 3.5 billion francs. This reflects the general 
trend of accelerating the process of transferring space funds to 
the center of the country's defense program developed in 
accordance with the "Annual Plan for Space" and being 
implemented since 1990. The plan is for up to the year 2010 and 
is adjusted annually (from 1991). It is planned to increase 
appropriations for new space projects, which may double during 
the next 10 years. As experts believe, even if the budget for 
military space in France reaches 5-6 billion francs by the year 
2000, it will still one-twentieth the U.S. budget, estimated at 
100 billion francs. 
  The success of France's space industry as a whole (civilian 
and military sectors) is bolstered by the presence of the 
Ariane-4 booster rocket system, a developed satellite control 
system, and a large number of ground space stations for various 
purposes and ground complexes for launching booster rockets. 
  Research and development under the Ariane Program 
is accomplished under the direction of the European Space 
Agency. France, with the largest share participation (64 percent 
of the total budget allocated for this program), together with 
other member countries of the organization, developed the 
Ariane-4 booster rocket, which is presently being used in six 
variants. A contract valued at approximately 24 billion francs 
($4.3 billion at the 1992 exchange rate) was signed in February 
1989 for production of 50 Ariane-4 booster rockets. As 
representatives of the firms participating in this contract 
emphasize, the cost of manufacturing the rockets can be 
decreased by 20 percent. A total of 120 firms from 11 West 
European countries are participating in the contract; work is 
planned for the period to 1999. The main orders are distributed 
in the following manner: Aerospatiale Corporation 
(France)--production of 50 first and 50 third rocket stages, 60 
solid-propellant boosters, and conduct of system research under 
the Ariane Program; the SEP Association (France)--about 350 
liquid-propellant Viking rocket engines and 50 liquid-propellant 
NM-7B rocket engines; the Matra Company (France)--50 
instrumentation compartments; the concern MBB-ERNO (FRG)--50 
second stages and 96 liquid-propellant boosters. 
  The work was done in two stages: Manufacture and preparation 
of the rocket for operation, and then its transfer to the 
Arianespace Corporation (Evreux, France), which launches booster 
rockets from the Couru range. By the year 2000, the Ariane-4 is 
to be replaced by the more powerful Ariane-5 rocket. 
  The Telecom space communications system has been 
in operation since 4 August 1984. It supports space 
communications of the French armed forces, as well as commercial 
and government organizations. Several modifications of the 
Telecom-1 satellite operated until 1991. They were taken out of 
orbit between August 1984 and March 1988; then the new Telecom-2 
satellite was put in service. 
  The Telecom-3 satellite is a multipurpose satellite that has 
26 relays, 21 of them (4-6 GHz and 12-14 GHz) used for 
commercial and government communications of France and other 
European countries and five for military space communications in 
the Syracuse system. Three Telecom-2 satellites, the booster 
rocket, and ground equipment are valued at 6.3 billion francs. 
The firms Alcatele Espas, Matra-Marconi, and Aerospatiale have 
proposed to create the Telecom-2D to extend the operating life 
of the Telecom system. Its launch is scheduled for 1996. 
  The total weight of the new satellite has been increased by 
80 percent, its payload has tripled, and the operation of the 
power sources has been increased 4.5-fold. The capacity of the 
communications channels in the C-band are four television 
programs and 16,000 telephone subscribers, which enables France 
to increase the total capacity of space communications by 15 
percent a year and double the number of television programs. 
  The general-purpose Eurostar platform, used as the base for 
Telecom-2, has developed by Matra and British Aerospace, united 
under the supervision of the international Franco-British 
organization Satcom. It is a variant of the Eurostar-2000 
platform, which took four years to develop (at a cost of 300 
million francs). The Satcom organization has ordered nine 
Eurostar platforms (four Eurostar-1000 and five Eurostar-2000 
platforms) for three types of satellites (Inmarsat-2, Telecom-2, 
and Hispasat). In addition, a variant of the platform 
Eurostar-3000 is being developed for a new heavy satellite 
weighing four tonnes. Representatives of Matra have already 
expressed a readiness to receive a contract to the end of 1993 
and manufacture such a platform. According to the development 
engineers, it will correspond to the new generation of 
American-made GSTAR communications satellites or the Eurosat and 
Eutelsat advanced European satellites scheduled for launch in 
1998. 
  Ground stations of the Telecom system include transmitter 
and 
receiver equipment and a terminal for processing signals 
received from the satellites and communications with user 
equipment. The equipment includes an antenna, power unit and 
antenna switch, a frequency converter, amplifiers, and 
transceivers. Signals are transmitted over five frequencies at a 
speed of 125 megabits per second (25 megabits per second per 
frequency). A total of 310 communications terminals (62 per 
frequency) can connect to each ground station. All ground 
stations operating in the Telecom system are equipped with TDMA 
terminals. Some of these terminals are connected directly to 
users by nonswitching communication lines, and some are 
connected to an Alcatele-10 switch station. The TDMA interface 
supports connection of a large number of users, as well as 
coding and decoding devices, facsimile machines for telecopying, 
and other equipment. 
  Thus, the Telecom-2 system has higher characteristics 
compared to its predecessor (Telecom-1); the number of ground 
stations and intensity of radio traffic have increased; 
protection against intentional and unintentional interference 
has increased; new stations are used for the top level of 
tactical direction and also for nuclear-powered 
ballistic-missile submarines [SSBN]; the area of coverage has 
increased; and it supports automatic establishment of 
communications with users and flexible configuration of the 
system. 
  The military space communications system Syracuse 
officially began to be developed in 1980, and the first 
Telecom-1 satellite with Syracuse-1 equipment was launched in 
August 1984. The French Ministry of Defense has been operating 
the Syracuse-1 system since 1985. It uses Telecom satellites, 
although it has its own ground stations. The firm Alcatele Espas 
was the chief contractor for placing the Syracuse system payload 
on the Telecom satellite and developing ground stations. The 
request for proposal for the system included requirements for 
use of the satellite (type of communications, traffic capacity 
of the channels, location of ground stations, and others) as 
well as for technical characteristics (payload weight, occupied 
space, power consumption and radiation, operating frequency 
range, and so forth). All decisions for the Syracuse system were 
made with direct participation of a commission of the Main 
Armament Directorate, which is responsible to the French 
Ministry of Defense for acquisition of weapon systems. 
  The Syracuse is intended for organizing communications 
between ships and ground stations (shore and naval bases) and 
also between field units located within and outside the country. 
The system covers the territory from the West Indies to Reunion 
Island in the Indian Ocean (roughly between 70 degrees north 
latitude and 70 degrees south latitude). Two relays were 
installed on each of the first satellites. They had a 40-MHz 
frequency bandwidth and a radiating power of 20 watts and 
operated on frequencies of 7-8 GHz. The estimated service life 
of the equipment on the satellite was seven years. 
  Ground stations (fixed, mobile, transportable) use modems to 
transmit scrambled data at a speed of 75 bits per second, 2.4 
kilobits per second, and 16 kilobits per second using delta 
modulation and vocoder coding devices, which provide the system 
a high degree of noise immunity and multistation access to the 
network. Many ground station elements are standardized, which 
simplifies their operation. The station's main operating modes 
are telephone, telegraph, and data transmission. 
  Fixed ground stations (the largest in size) serve as centers 
for exchanging information in the system. They can operate 
simultaneously over two communications channels with satellites. 
One station is the lead station and distributes the network 
resources according to requirements. Users are linked to the 
fixed ground stations through a military network with the help 
of automatic control and monitoring devices. The station 
antennas (8 meters in diameter) are parabolic in shape. 
  Mobile ground stations include a cross-country vehicle 
having 
a protected compartment, antenna devices with antennas and 
low-noise amplifiers, connecting cables, and diesel generators. 
The compartment houses transceiver equipment and an air 
conditioner. When operating under field conditions, the 
transport vehicle is in an immobile state. The 1.3-meter 
diameter antenna is set up at a distance of 2 meters from the 
vehicle and connected by cable to the transceiver equipment. It 
is pointed at the satellite manually. A remote control device 
can be moved 400 meters from the station. Preparation time is 
less than one hour. There is a three-person crew. 
  The composition of transportable stations is the same as for 
mobile systems, but the antenna is larger (3 meters in 
diameter). They operate around the clock, increasing traffic 
capacity of the communications channels. A four-person crew 
prepares the transportable station for operation within 2 hours. 
The antenna is pointed at the satellite manually. 
  Ship-borne stations have a protected compartment mounted on 
the ship's deck, two antennas covered by radar-transparent 
materials, and electronic equipment (transceivers, control 
consoles, terminals, test equipment, and so forth). The 
1.5-meter diameter antennas are installed on the ship in such a 
way that regardless of its position, at least one of them can be 
pointed at the satellite. The antenna orientation can be done 
manually or automatically. A station was developed for 
submarines in July 1991. Series production of these stations 
began in 1992 and will continue until 1997. 
  Maintenance of all types of stations, up to and including 
replacing units, is accomplished by their crew. 
  During the period 1985-1987, the French armed forces had 25 
stations for the Syracuse space communications system--3 fixed, 
9 mobile, 3 transportable, and 11 ship-borne. 
  An SCC satellite control center located at the National 
Space 
Center, an alternate control center combined with a fixed ground 
space communications center (M4), and a satellite tracking 
network (TTC) are in operation to control the Syracuse 
satellites. 
  To further develop the Syracuse system, in 1983 the General 
Armament Office instructed the firm Alcatele Espas to develop a 
new generation of Syracuse equipment with an increased 
traffic-carrying capacity and new ground stations with improved 
jamming protection. In January 1987, the new Syracuse-2 system 
project was ready and approved by the French Ministry of 
Defense. It calls for using Telecom-2 satellites with an 
operating life of 10 years. Eight billion francs were allocated 
for implementation of the project. 
  France does not rule out the possibility of concluding 
treaties with other countries for the joint design and 
manufacture of the Syracuse-2 system that meets international 
standards (with optimal distribution of financial resources). 
  The Syracuse ground stations already in operation will be 
able to operate in the Syracuse-2 system. In addition, new types 
of stations will be deployed with antennas 0.4-0.9 meters in 
diameter and designed for installation on submarines, light 
transport vehicles, and aircraft. The functions of the network 
control center will be carried out by two fixed lead stations 
with antennas 18 meters in diameter located on the territory of 
France. They will be able to receive remote coordinate 
measurement signals from satellites and transmit control 
instructions. 
  The first satellite with Syracuse-2 equipment was launched 
by 
an Ariane booster rocket on 16 December 1991, the second on 15 
April 1992, and the third is scheduled to be launched in June 
1994. This will make it possible to extend operation of the 
Syracuse-2 to the year 2005. Besides the tasks entrusted to its 
predecessor, the Syracuse-2 system will provide communications 
for the General Staff of the French armed forces, the main 
staffs of the armed services, the rapid deployment forces, and 
SSBN's on alert duty. The new ground stations began to enter 
service in mid-1992. 
  The Syracuse-2 system has a number of advantages compared to 
the Syracuse-1 system: An increased number of communication 
channels and ground stations serviced; improved ground station 
specifications and performance characteristics; ability to tie 
in with other communications systems, including ground systems 
(via fixed stations deployed on the territory of the country); 
expanded zone of operations of communications, taking into 
account the needs of the armed forces to the year 2000; and 
increased operating stability in jamming conditions. The system 
is comparable to the American DSCS-3 and the British Skynet 
systems, and in some cases is superior to them. 
  The Spot space system is a commercial program for 
studying the earth's natural resources. It is designed to obtain 
images of sections of the earth's surface and makes it possible 
to study specific sections and conduct surveillance in the 
satellite's visibility range. 
  The Spot system is made up of satellites in orbit, a control 
and preliminary data processing center, and ground receiving 
stations. The first Spot-1 satellite was launched in 1986. By 1 
January 1991, 1.9 million images had been received from it. The 
satellite was able to perform its tasks 95.5 percent of the time 
of its operation. The high operational indicators made it 
possible to delay the launch of the next Spot-2 satellite from 
1988 to 1990 (the launch took place on 22 January 1991). 
  Operation of two satellites in 1990 made it possible to make 
repeat examinations of terrain sectors at shorter time intervals 
and to obtain identical images of the same objects from 
different satellites. In early 1991, the Spot-1 satellite ceased 
transmitting images. 
  The success of the Spot-1 program helped the allocation of 
funds for creating the Spot-2 and -4 satellites, with launch 
scheduled for 1993 and 1996, respectively. They are being 
developed by the firm Matra, weigh up to 1.3 tonnes, and have 
three-axis stabilization and a large reserve of onboard fuel, 
which ensures functioning in orbit for 4-5 years. The Spot-3 has 
been assembled, shipped for storage, and is ready for launch; 
Spot-4 is in the assembly stage. Of the 10 billion francs 
allocated for the program, 7.3 billion will go toward the 
creation and operation of spacecraft alone. It is planned to 
operate the Spot-4 satellite until the year 2001. In addition, 
work is being conducted on the Spot-5 project and development of 
the next generation of satellites. 
  The pictures received from the Spot satellites in digital 
form go to the ground stations and are processed. Images of the 
sections of the earth's surface are transmitted to consumers 
already in the form of photographs with a resolution of 10 
meters for black-and-white and 20 meters for color image on an 
area of 60x60 km. They can be used for military purposes. Thus, 
during the military operations in the Persian Gulf, the Spot 
system serviced the multinational forces command. 
  In August 1990, the firm Spot Image ceased commercial 
distribution of images of the Middle East areas in connection 
with the crisis that emerged. This was caused by the need to 
preclude information from falling into the hands of the Iraqi 
armed forces command authorities. During the fighting in Kuwait, 
information from the satellites was widely used by the 
multinational forces when selecting strike targets, updating 
maps of the region, and identifying roads, airfields, and 
individual objects. The pictures were made available to the 
governments of the countries of the anti-Iraqi coalition and 
Israel. The cost of one black-and-white picture was $500. On 22 
March 1992, the firm resumed the unrestricted sale of 
photographs of the earth's surface. 
  In addition, the Spot space system was used by the U.S. 
Department of Defense to detect laser emissions from the 
territory of the CIS countries. The Spot satellite was the first 
to transmit data on the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant accident 
and the explosion of a gas combine in Libya. 
  The ground control and preliminary data processing center 
functioning in the Spot system is equipped with a receiving 
station and equipment making it possible to process data 
received from the satellite and to store and convert them into 
high-quality photographic images. It produces a standard product 
in the form of photographs and monitors its delivery to 
consumers. 
  A final assessment of image quality and adjustment (if 
necessary) is made once a month. The main quality criteria are: 
Accuracy of determining the location of pictures on the earth's 
surface, geometric accuracy, possibility of multispectral 
recording, stereoscopic accuracy, signal-to-noise ratio and 
adjustment of the detector parameters, absolute accuracy of 
calibration, and so forth. 
  The network of ground receiving stations is intended for 
receipt of data, its conversion, processing, and generation of 
photographs. During the operation of the system, it was 
constantly expanded. Additional receiving stations were put into 
service in Hartebisteck (South Africa), Alice Springs 
(Australia), and Riyadh (Saudi Arabia) in 1989, and stations 
began operating in 1990 in the vicinity of the Cotopaxi volcano 
(Ecuador) and in Beijing (China). Thus, by April 1991 there were 
14 ground stations deployed, including on the territory of 
Israel. Today, stations are being put into service in Indonesia, 
New Zealand, Kenya, Bangladesh, and other countries. The fee for 
use of the receiving station is 5-13 million francs. 
  The system for controlling French satellites, 
created by the early 1980's, included three stations and ensured 
control of satellites in orbit of the Telecom and Spot national 
space systems. The stations were designated M4, M3, and M2. They 
are deployed in the French home country: Frans Sud (M4), Favier 
(M3), and Lanveok (M2). 
  The M4 station is the central operating station in the 
Telecom and Syracuse-2 systems. It is equipped with two 18-meter 
antennas, one of which is a reserve, and one 8-meter antenna. In 
addition, the station has transceiver equipment and equipment 
for checking radio equipment aboard the satellite. 
  The M3 station is equipped with two antennas (18 and 8 
meters) and also a set of communications and monitoring 
equipment. It can be also used as the central station. The M2 
station has one 8-meter antenna and communications equipment. 
  The system control center is located at Toulouse, Couru, and 
Pretoria (South Africa). As a result of further work to expand 
the network of ground stations, the National Space Research 
Center put into operation two new stations--on Kerguelen Island 
(1989) and at Saint Pierre-et-Miquelon (1990). Their deployment 
made it possible to achieve a number of advantages of a 
technical (ensures control from the first circuit), political 
(all stations of the control system are located on its own 
territory), and economic nature (a technical base has been 
created at these places for performing the work in space). The 
location of the stations was selected in such a way that the 
Spot or Helios satellites could be controlled in the 
first-fourth circuits of their orbits and satellites in 
geostationary orbits. The cost of the work to deploy the network 
of ground stations is 100 million francs. 
  Cooperation with other countries is envisioned on matters of 
satellite control. This strengthens France's prestige and makes 
it possible to involve European states in cooperation and use of 
the national system for control of European military satellites 
of the NATO bloc. 
  The main command and control center (Toulouse) is the one 
best equipped with technical complexes and electronic equipment 
(cost of the equipment is 10 million francs). This is the first 
center in Western Europe that ensures control of the satellite 
in a geostationary orbit, and its capabilities are constantly 
expanding. 
  The leadership of France does not intend to change its view 
and priorities in the area of developing national military space 
systems, which Helios, Cerise, Osiris, Xenon, and a number of 
other programs within the framework of the European Community 
are. 
  The Helios space observation system is being 
developed jointly by France, Italy, and Spain. The idea of 
creating it belongs to France, which is linked to the desire to 
get rid of the dependence on American space systems to satisfy 
its own needs in the area of space reconnaissance. In addition, 
the leadership of France believes that the possession of nuclear 
weapons should be combined with the availability of its own 
military space reconnaissance system. Work on the Helios program 
began in the mid-1980's, and it was subsequently opened up for 
international cooperation. Italy has participated since 1987 and 
Spain since 1988. Their proportion of the total expenditures 
(approximately 7 billion francs) are 14 and 7 percent, 
respectively. 
  The Helios satellite (Figure 1 [not reproduced]) is 
developed 
based on the Spot-4 satellite (platform, onboard recording 
equipment, and a considerable portion of the electronic 
equipment). The main difference will be in the optical train and 
in the means of protecting telemetry data from enemy jamming. It 
will support conducting reconnaissance in the optical and 
infrared wavebands with a resolution of up to 1 meter, which 
exceeds the capabilities of the Spot-2 equipment by an order of 
magnitude. 
  The committee overseeing the Helios program, structurally 
part of the Main Armament Directorate of the French Ministry of 
Defense, includes French officers and one officer each from 
Italy and Spain. The main contractor for developing the space 
components of the system is the KNES Corporation, and Matra 
Espas is the main contractor for the satellite and ground 
components of the Helios system. 
  It is assumed that a second generation will follow the first 
generation of Helios satellites, which are to be launched in 
1994 and 1995. Additional infrared equipment will be installed 
on them. 
  The feasibility study of the international cooperation for 
creating the Helios system emphasized that the entire volume of 
work, including ground equipment, constructing and launching the 
first three satellites, will require expenditures of 10 billion 
francs, but the cost of each additional satellite will be only 
1-1.5 billion francs. This will enable each country, by creating 
its own components for this system, to have a national space 
reconnaissance system for accomplishing its own tasks. The 
obvious advantage of joint work on the Helios system is 
stimulating the participation in this program by other European 
countries. Presently, the Helios-1A and B satellites are being 
assembled at Toulouse. The work is classified, as is the 
construction of the two Helios command and control centers at 
Francazal Air Base and at the National Space Center. 
  The Cerise Space System. The Main Armament 
Directorate of the French Ministry of Defense and the Alcatele 
Espas Corporation were forced to admit on 8 April 1992 that a 
space system was being developed at Toulouse based on miniature 
satellites, which was given the name Cerise 
(CERISE--Caracterisation del L'Environement Radielectrigue par 
un Instrument Spatial Embarque). This system, intended for 
determining the characteristics of electronic radiation using 
space instrumentation, will make it possible to form a data bank 
of electronic equipment. The program includes development of a 
miniature satellite weighing 50 kg based on the Uosat platform 
of the British firm Suroy Satellite Technology, which will also 
supply a unique command and control station for this satellite. 
A picture of the Cerise satellite is shown in Figure 2 [not 
reproduced]. The satellite will be placed into an orbit 400-600 
km high, be stabilized using a mast 10 meters long, and occupy a 
volume of 40x40x60 cm. The payload includes transceiver 
equipment and electronic radiation recording equipment operating 
on a frequency of 1-20 GHz. The satellite is scheduled to be put 
into space by an Ariane booster rocket in mid-1994. The cost of 
the launch will be 5 million francs, and expenditures for the 
entire system are estimated at 80 million francs. 
  The Xenon space system will be France's first 
full-scale space system for electronic intelligence collection. 
Its equipment is being created based on the Cerise and Eurocom 
systems. The cost of the project is 5 billion francs; launch of 
the satellite is scheduled for 1999. Two competing consortia are 
working on this project: Matra-Marconi Space - Dassault 
Electronic and Alcatele Espas-Tomson-CSF. 
  In addition, the firms Matra-Marconi Space, Alcatele Espas, 
and Aerospatiale are conducting research on new French space 
programs calling for the creation of a radar reconnaissance 
satellites. These include the Osiris system (Figure 3 [not 
reproduced]) and the civilian Radar 2000 system. The latter was 
given the name Spot Radar in 1992 to clearly separate the 
satellites in the Spot family. It is in the stage of scientific 
study, which has been going on since 1989. Selection of the 
designs is scheduled for 1994, and launch of the satellite for 
after the year 2000. The Spot-4 platform served as the base for 
the satellite. This will make it possible to use dual-purpose 
technology (military and civilian) and save on resources. 
  A demonstration model of an active antenna with 100 
transceiving modules has already been developed by the firm 
Alcatele Espas. Testing will be conducted in space in late 1993 
or in early 1994. The Space Research Center has been financing 
this work for 3 years now, and costs are estimated at 50-60 
million francs. The firm has been conducting work under the 
Osiris program for 4 years now and has spent more than 10 
billion francs. 
  A group of development engineers under the direction of Jean 
Claude Husson has already created the Poseidon height-finding 
radar, which is carried on the Topex satellite (developed for 
NASA by the American firm Fairchild Space--a branch of Matra). 
This satellite with the Poseidon radar on board, which can be 
used for civilian and military purposes, was launched in July 
1992. Total financing for this project is estimated at 127 
million francs. 
  Alcatele Espas, jointly with the firms Argos and Steria SBS, 
has its own project for an operational height-finding satellite 
that is designated Salto. This small satellite weighing 250 kg 
can be created on the basis of an American platform of the firm 
GM or TRW. The payload (100 kg) will include radiometric 
equipment, the Poseidon height-finding radar, and a precision 
coordinate measurement system of the Doris platform in orbit, 
which has already been mounted on the Topex and Spot-2 
satellites. According to the development engineers, the Salto 
will supply national naval forces with oceanographic data on a 
global scale. 
  (To be continued.) 

