Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by staff reporter Pilar Barrera: "Summit and Peace </F>
Pact Among the Mafia"] 
  [Text] On Friday, 11 February, traffickers and spokesmen 
from the most powerful Mafia in Antioquia, Valle, and the Coast 
held a summit meeting to sign the document for the new peace 
among the Mafia. 
  After seven years of a bloody war, with hundreds of dynamite 
attacks on Down With Drugs headquarters, selective massacres, 
and the creation of Persecuted by Pablo Escobar (Pepes), the 
traffickers leading the Mafia vendettas decided to sit down at 
the same table. 
  In Valle, protected by clandestinity, those claiming to be 
authorized spokesmen for the most powerful organizations in the 
country gathered for the first time. 
  In other words, they were representatives claiming to be 
acting directly on behalf of the brothers Gilberto and Miguel 
Rodriguez Orejuela, Jose Santacruz Londono, William Ortiz 
("Miky"), and Salomon Camacho, for the Valle traffickers; Carlos 
Castano, brother of Fidel ("Rambo"), for a branch of the 
Medellin Cartel; and two lawyers and a pregnant woman, on behalf 
of the Escobars and Escobar's ex-terrorist chiefs confined in 
prison. 
  The terms of the agreement include several concrete, 
compulsory demands upon the Medellin Cartel strongholds. 
  Initially, Pablo Escobar's survivors must retract the 
accusations linking Fidel and Carlos Castano with the brutal 
attack on the Avianca airplane that occurred during December 
1989, with a toll of 111 fatalities. 
  At the same time, Carlos Mario Alzate Urquijo ("Arete") and 
other Escobar ex-terrorist chiefs now in prison must secure 
Julio Mamey's appearance before the Prosecutor General's Office. 
  According to the statements made at the summit, Mamey fled 
to 
North America after the attack of 28 July 1989 that ended the 
life of Antioquia's governor, Antonio Roldan Betancur. 
  The Castanos and the top-ranking Valle traffickers believe 
Mamey to be the only one who could reveal to the Prosecutor 
General's Office the way in which the murder was planned, and 
the steps taken, at Pablo Escobar's order, to make the car bomb 
explosion that took Roldan's life appear as a murder committed 
by Jose Santacruz Londono. 
  "Arete" and other convicted members of the Medellin Cartel 
must require the liaisons who are at large to appear before the 
Prosecutor General's Office, to confess all their crimes, and to 
submit to the prison sentences imposed on them. 
  In particular, the Valle traffickers believe that their 
former archenemies must surrender Juan Rios, an Escobar 
ringleader known by the nickname "La Chepa" ["The Hump"]. 
  The Cali traffickers accuse "La Chepa" of being the 
contriver 
of the principal massacres in Valle. They include, among others, 
the one that occurred on 25 September 1990 on a farm in the 
municipality of Candelaria (Valle), in which 27 persons were 
killed and several of the Cali Cartel's "capi di capi" [top 
bosses] escaped fortuitously. 
<H5>  Other Demands </H5>
  The police have indications that Elmer Herrera ("Pacho 
Herrera") himself escaped from the gory incident by hiding in an 
official car. 
  Finally, the Valle "narcos" and their Antioquian allies from 
the Castanos' sector demand that Pablo Escobar's former aides 
revise the charges that they have made against them in the 
investigations being conducted by the Prosecutor General's 
Office. 
  Among other claims, the Medellin traffickers would have to 
retract the names that they have given to the Prosecutor 
General's Office of presumed members of the "Pepes," beginning 
with Castano. 
  A source explained to EL TIEMPO: "The fact is that whoever 
wins will impose the conditions." 
  An additional point is that the Escobar family, or those 
left 
with his fortune, must make reparation for the harm inflicted on 
the victims of the Mafia war. 
  An authorized source explained to EL TIEMPO: "These points 
are recorded in a document, initially signed by the participants 
in the Cali summit, that is circulating in the Itagui, La 
Picota, and La Modelo jails." 
  According to the same source, "Arete," Jhon Jairo Velasquez 
Vasquez, ("Popeye"), and Carlos Aguilar Gallego ("El Mugre") 
have already signed the document. 
  The negotiation process among the cartels began brewing two 
months ago, just 15 days after the Search Bloc located and 
confronted Pablo Escobar at a residence located west of 
Medellin, on 2 December. 
  As EL TIEMPO published in its 6 February edition, at Itagui, 
La Modelo, and La Picota there was a preliminary agreement among 
the Medellin Cartel convicts to start the search for a peace 
alliance with their Valle enemies and with the one said to be 
the head of "Persecuted by Pablo Escobar," Fidel Castano. 
  An incognito ex-prosecutor, Enrique Mancera, the attorney 
who 
attempted to take the Escobar family out of the country, was 
located to act as spokesman for the Medellin convicts. 
  Even Pablo Escobar's wife, Maria Victoria Henao, and their 
son, Juan Pablo, have been involved in the negotiations. 
  Days before the summit among the Mafia spokesmen, Maria 
Victoria and her son visited Escobar's former allies at La 
Picota, on behalf of the search for peace. 
  At the same time, various documents reveal the internal 
crisis among Escobar's former allies. 
<H5>  Peace </H5>
  During a conversation between two prominent Escobar 
ex-agents, regarding the need for sending spokesmen to negotiate 
peace with the Cali Cartel, the first of them warned the other: 
"I tell you one thing, cool guy, we'll have to kneel here (...), 
or they'll kill us all; and we must at least see to it that the 
families live...." 
  Last Wednesday, after the summit among the "capos'" 
spokesmen 
in Valle, and at the request for an expansion of the 
investigation, "Arete" and "El Mugre" met in one of the rooms at 
the Prosecutor General's Office with two lawyers for the Cali 
Cartel and its representatives. 
  High-ranking spokesmen for the Prosecutor General's Office 
explained that this was no meeting, but rather a hearing on 
expansion of the investigation. However, EL TIEMPO spoke with 
attendees at the meeting, who claimed that "Arete" and "El 
Mugre" had talked for at least three hours with the Valle 
traffickers' spokesmen, one of them a man identified as 
Guillermo Angel. 
  The sources said that an incognito female prosecutor with 
the 
surname Aguilar was an exceptional witness at those talks, 
adding: "The regional director of Prosecutors' Offices in 
Bogota, Jorge Enrique Bautista, was also present for a short 
time." 
  They noted: "Meanwhile, Ana Montes, national director of 
Prosecutors' Offices, was waiting for the results of the meeting 
in another room." 
  As was reported, both "Arete" and "El Mugre" expressed their 
intention of ceasing the quarrels. "We are tired of fighting," 
they told the Cali Cartel representatives. 
  During the meeting, which lasted seven hours, between 1000 
and 1700, Pablo Escobar's men declared that they want to change 
their lives, that they need to get ahead, and that they want to 
be allowed to live calmly. 
  Also proposed was the need for helping many young criminals 
to give up their weapons. 

