BFN 

  [Text] Nairobi, April 27 (AFP) -- Renewed fighting in 
Kigali, including heavy artillery exchanges, breached unilateral 
ceasefires declared by government forces and rebels, a UN 
spokesman said Wednesday [27 April]. 
  During intense fighting early Wednesday, a shell landed on a 
tennis court 50 metres (yards) from UN headquarters near the 
Amahoro stadium where about 5,000 displaced people are 
sheltering, spokesman Abdul Kabia said. 
  By late in the day the Rwandan capital was again reported 
calm. "We drew the attention of both sides to the danger they 
were exposing us to and the fighting shifted," Kabia told AFP by 
telephone from Kigali. 
  But Kabia said the Tutsi-dominated rebel Rwandan Patriotic 
Front had shelled the airport because the Hutu-led government 
forces had set up mortars and artillery pieces there and were 
firing at rebel positions. 
  Meanwhile, the head of the ruling National Republican 
Movement for Democracy (MRND) accused former premier Agathe 
Uwilingiyimana of plotting a presidential coup prior to her 
murder on April 7, the date the ethnic carnage which has claimed 
an estimated 100,000 lives was unleashed. 
  The United Nations cancelled its flights into Kigali and 
asked government troops to move their weapons out of the 
airport, which they promised to do, Kabia said. Four UN planes 
bringing relief supplies were expected later Wednesday, he said. 
  According to International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) 
delegation head Philippe Gaillard, a rocket landed late Tuesday 
on the X-ray unit at a Kigali hospital near a Rwandan army camp. 
There were no reported casualties. 
  He said the streets of Kigali were still largely deserted, 
except for Army, UN and ICRC vehicles. 
  Both rebels and government forces have declared unilateral 
ceasefires, and claimed that they were only firing when attacked 
by the other side, Kabia said, adding that it was impossible to 
tell who had started the fighting. 
  The UN has sent ceasefire proposals drawn up by Tanzanian 
President Ali Hassan Mwinyi and Organisation of African Unity 
secretary-general Salim Ahmed Salim to both sides and was 
awaiting a response, Kabia said. 
  Interim Commerce Minister Justin Mugenzi blamed the failure 
of the truces on the fact that they were unilateral. "We must go 
back to the documents, negotiate, and reach a common ceasefire," 
he said. 
  UN envoy to Rwanda Jacques-Roger Booh-Booh is in the Kenyan 
capital Nairobi for discussions with President Daniel arap Moi. 
  The Red Cross said Booh-Booh planned to visit Zaire and 
Uganda to ask their leaders to use their "good offices" to end 
the ethnic and political carnage unleashed after the April 6 
death of President Juvenal Habyarimana in a aircraft crash. 
  Rwanda's bloodbath began when Hutu Presidential Guards 
accused the rebels of shooting down the president's plane. 
  The Presidential Guards spearheaded massacres of Tutsis and 
opposition supporters including Hutus. Clashes were also 
reported between the president's northern clan and Hutus from 
southern Rwanda. 
  Meanwhile Wednesday, the head of Habyarimana's National 
Republican Movement for Democracy (MRND) accused Uwilingiyimana, 
killed the day after the plane crash, of having been planning a 
presidential coup. 
  Matthew Ngirumpatse told a press conference here that two 
days before the plane crash, "the prime minister had called 
together a few senior officers and told them of her plan to 
organize a coup against the president." 
  "I am not trying to justify a murder," Ngirumpatse said 
here. 
"I am trying to find the reasons which made soldiers do that," 
he said. 
  Ngirumpatse also denied the existence of organized militias 
within the MRND who have been accused of involvement in 
massacres, and accused the rebels of having started the 
bloodletting. 
  Uwilingiyimana and Habyarimana were members of rival Hutu 
factions. 

