BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 7 KYODO -- Japan will aim to establish a 
new nuclear fuel system that burns off part of spent nuclear 
fuel, plutonium and uranium together without separating the 
toxic chemicals, government sources said Saturday [7 May]. 
  The Atomic Energy Commission, the country's top atomic 
energy 
policy board led by Science and Technology Agency chief Mikio 
Omi, has made the decision, taking into consideration outcries 
both at home and abroad over Japan's policy to reproduce pure 
plutonium that can be used for nuclear weapons, the sources said. 
  Under the new nuclear fuel cycle, curium and neptunium, 
which 
have a long half-life and thus are difficult to dispose of, will 
be extracted from radioactive waste contained in spent nuclear 
fuel along with plutonium and uranium to be used as new fuel, 
they said. 
  The current system separates spent nuclear fuel into 
plutonium, uranium and radioactive waste. 
  The reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel was initially 
developed as military technology to make atomic bombs and there 
are recent concerns over use of plutonium for making nuclear 
weapons. 
  North Korea, suspected of developing a nuclear arsenal, is 
allegedly using the technology. 
  The new system, however, will not reproduce pure plutonium 
that can be used for nuclear bombs, thus reducing concern over 
nuclear proliferation, the sources said. 
  The commission hopes to develop the technology by 2030, the 
target year for use of plutonium-fueled fast-breeder reactors, 
after constructing an experimental reactor and a reprocessing 
factory for the new system, the sources said. 
  On 5 April, Japan's new plutonium-fueled fast-breeder 
reactor 
``Monju'' reached criticality, the point at which the reaction 
in fissionable material is sufficient to sustain a chain 
reaction. 
  Japan has made fast-breeder reactors a cornerstone of its 
nuclear power policy. Such reactors produce more fissionable 
material than they consume. 
  At present, some 30% of Japan's electricity is 
generated by 
42 nuclear reactors throughout the country. 

