Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dinesh Kumar: "LCA Fabrication Begins"] </F>
  [Text] Bangalore, December 17--The Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (DRDO) has already begun metal cutting 
and fabrication of the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) and has 
frozen the existing design and configuration. 
  The LCA, which is a DRDO project, is expected to roll out in 
March 1985 and test flown for the first time in June 1986. 
[sentence as published] The period in between--called the 
systems integration test phase--will involve the necessary 
extensive tests before the plane actually flies. 
  The DRDO is simultaneously also working on developing a 
naval version of the LCA meant to be operated from aircraft 
carriers. Its test flight will take place only after that of the 
air force version. 
  However, it will not have a vertical take-off and landing 
capability as is the case with the Sea Harrier of British 
origin, presently in the Indian navy's inventory. 
  Similarly, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), which is 
also 
working on developing a naval version of the Advance Light 
Helicopter [ALH], is scheduled to test fly the prototype 
sometime next year. The naval version is slated to have 
anti-submarine warfare, anti-shipping and early warning 
capabilities. The Indian Navy currently makes use of the Russian 
Ka 28 and the British Sea King helicopters for anti-submarine 
warfare. 
  The DRDO has been conducting extensive wind-tunnel testing 
for the LCA's aerodynamic performance. The venues of conducting 
very high speed wind tunnel and other specialised testings have 
ranged from Onera in France, Calspan and AEDC [expansion not 
given] in the United States, and Tsagi near Moscow in Russia in 
the last two years. 
  Some more tests for fine tuning its performance is scheduled 
to be carried out at the Central Aerodynamic Research Institute, 
located near Moscow early next year. 
  The contract signed with Martin Marietta earlier this year 
to 
jointly develop a fly-by-wire flight control system for the LCA 
is expected to fructify in early 1985. [sentence as published] 
The Flight Control System, which will be similar to that being 
fitted in the Swedish JAS 39 Gripen, will involve computers, 
rate of turn, acceleration and air data sensors and actuators. 
  Discussions are on for seeking Martin Marietta's help in 
developing an armed version of the ALH for the army which is to 
be fitted with a 20-mm gun. 
  Martin Marietta has made offers to fit the APG 27 radar in 
both the LCA and for the upgraded version of the MiG-21. The 
American firm claims that the radar has a look down range of 21 
miles, a look up range of about 27 miles, apart from electronic 
counter measures matching the F-16s available with the Pakistani 
air force. 
  The current bilateral contact on the Flight Control System 
for the LCA involves complete transfer of technology to the 
aeronautical defence establishment Martin Marietta has claimed 
that the technology is at par with that fitted in the new 
generation B-2 Stealth bomber and the F-18 multi-role combat 
aircraft. This is the first time that they will be co-developing 
a system with a foreign country. 
  The Kaveri engine for the LCA, currently in an early stage 
of 
its development by DRDO, is scheduled to be ground test run by 
September 1994. It will, however, have to be taken abroad for 
high-altitude testing owing to the limitations in this facility 
in India. 
  As per an agreement signed with the United States, India is 
getting 11 General Electric GE-404 engines for the initial 
prototypes of the LCA. 
  The indigenously developed Kaveri is meant to replace the 
GE-404 engines. 
  The LCA will cater to a track-while-scan capability of up to 
eight targets, a laser designation pod, and complete software 
controls for an extremely versatile multi-role capability. The 
light supersonic fighter is to be fitted with a Beyond Visual 
Range capability of up to 60 km, a variety of state-of-the-art 
missiles, and a mission preparation and retrieval unit. 

