Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Staff Correspondent V. Matrosov: "Velvet </F>
Occupation?"] 
  [Text] During the last 10 days of January armadas of 
Japanese fishing schooners, one after another, ostentatiously 
intruded into Russian territorial waters off the Southern 
Kurils. Our marine border guards have been attempting to repel 
the violators and demanding that they head for home, but to no 
avail. The only thing left for the border guards to do is to 
curse to themselves. And to hear, in response, curses and even 
threats. The Japanese have a lot of fast schooners, and we have 
relatively few patrol boats. The mass onslaught of Japanese 
fishermen and crabbers took place under the perfectly official 
observation of three vessels of the Japanese maritime 
administration. 
  As we have learned, the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
of course, made a representation to the Japanese Embassy 
concerning the "brazen conduct toward the Russian boarder 
guards," but it received a rebuff: the Japanese government 
cannot recognize the lawfulness of calling the commanders of 
those fishing ships border violators. 
  The fishermen of the Land of the Rising Son have let 
themselves go completely: what sort of border can there be, they 
say, when the Southern Kurils and their adjoining waters belong 
to Japan! It matters little what the Russians think. And 
therefore the Japanese are robbing our sea larders on an 
ever-growing scale. The shores of the islands have been enmeshed 
in several layers of sunken nets, which causes tremendous damage 
to natural life and creates hazards for shipping. Sometimes the 
border guards fire warning shots at the poachers and even detain 
the schooners, but the Japanese side takes that as a challenge. 
When five Japanese captains were put on trial in Shikotan as 
border violators in early December, 44 fishing boats 
ostentatiously set out to poach. Some of them sailed so close to 
the shores that one could hear both their music and their 
cursing. 
  If this sort of thing continues any longer, the Kurils' 
residents say, we won't be surprised if the Japanese, some time 
at their convenience, land on our islands and, under the cover 
of their police, raise their state flag over our municipal 
offices in place of the Russian flag. 

