Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ribeirao Preto correspondent Antonio Costa </F>
Filho] 
  [Text] The Andrade Gutierrez construction group is looking 
for oil in the maritime waters off Cuba. Having installed an 
offshore platform and using its own prospecting personnel, the 
Brazilian company is working on the island as subcontractor to a 
consortium put together by Total, of France, and the Canadian 
firm CMW. 
  Exploration of the Cuban coastline in search of petroleum 
began last year when risk contracts were signed with 
multinational oil companies. Since it has no funds to meet any 
high-cost commitments, Cuba will use the oil taken from the 
bottom of the sea to pay the companies that operate there. 
<H5>  "Indications of Oil" </H5>
  Andrade Gutierrez's efforts, explained Roberto Rivas, 
director for the Americas of the Cuban Cooperation Committee, 
focused first on reserves that had already been analyzed by 
Cuban Government geologists and geophysicists. "We have 
indications that there is petroleum under the sea," said Rivas, 
who is an important adviser to Carlos Lage Davila, considered to 
be the strongman of that country's economy. 
  According to Andrade Gutierrez press advisers, the builder 
has already fulfilled half the contract. The work began on 18 
December 1993. So far, 1,760 meters of drilling has been done in 
three 3,500-meter deep wells in Cardenas Bay, on the north of 
Cuba across from Valadere beach (the country's biggest tourist 
center), according to reporter Elizabeth Rosa. 
  Andrade Gutierrez sets the total value of the project at $9 
million. It took the firm, which began drilling oil wells in 
Brazil early in the 1980's, 13 days just to transport the 
platform from Brazil to the Cuban coastline. According to 
Gutierrez, the platform was inspected by international firms and 
considered to be "in legal and acceptable condition in terms of 
the United States trade embargo against Cuba." 
<H5>  Decline in Production </H5>
  Even during the years of close ties to the Soviet Union, the 
Caribbean island had been producing as much as one million tons 
a year of petroleum, Rivas noted. But since Soviet assistance 
ended, local production has leveled off at about 500,000 tons a 
year, not enough to satisfy domestic needs. 
  The state corporation in charge of business transactions in 
the petroleum field--everything from prospecting to refining and 
distribution--is Cupet Cubana de Petroleos. The current 
off-shore risk contracts, the director of the cooperation 
committee stated, will also have the effect of using the idle 
capacity of the island's three refineries--one in Havana, 
another in Santiago de Cuba, and a third in Cienfuegos. 
Considered the most modern of Cuba's refineries, the plant at 
Cienfuegos has the capacity to refine three million tons of oil 
a year. 

