BFN 

<F P=106> [Italicized passages recorded] </F>
  [Text] Peace is in Lusaka, not in Angola. Weapons are 
still displacing words. Kuito, N'dalatando, Malanje, and 
Menongue are war zones. In the capital of Bie Province, clashes 
once again broke the silence, with Savimbi's bitter soldiers 
concentrating their artillery on Kunje commune. Our 
correspondent Abel Abraao reports: 
  [Abraao] Kuito awakened today to the explosions of 
shells from long range guns of the Black Cockerel soldiers. 
Yesterday evening and dawn today were described as the most 
violent since the resumption of the clashes on 26 May. Despite 
the fact that human and material losses caused by the Jamba 
soldiers over the last few hours are not known, some military 
sources say that they are the most extensive. Kuito is 
currently experiencing an unprecedented bloodbath. 
  Yesterday it was the Kunje commune which came under 
intense shellings of the National Union for the Total 
Independence of Angola [UNITA]. Today the rebels are 
mercilessly shelling the martyred city of Kuito. 
  Besides the shellings, the soldiers under the service 
of Jonas Savimbi have been launching attacks on government 
forces positions. Over the past 24 hours, government forces 
stationed in Kunje commune killed 23 UNITA soldiers and captured 
20 AKM arms, two 60 mm mortars, an antitank missile, two Land 
Rover vehicles, and 87 shells for B-10 guns. The government 
forces' response to the enemy of the people has been 
effective. 
  Brigadier Lucume, second commander of the Angolan Armed 
Forces [FAA] in Bie, publicly told the local press 
today that following UNITA provocations, government forces 
reoccupied the main military positions of Jonas Savimbi's 
organization during 30 days of hard clashes. At present 
[places indistinct] and some areas south east and 
northeast of Kuito are under the control of government troops, 
while government forces stationed in Kunje have repelled UNITA 
rebels who for than a year had been in [place 
indistinct], 4 km from the capital of the commune located 
north of Kuito. 
  In Malanje the military situation is still worrisome, but 
the 
FAA is scoring victories over UNITA. Our correspondent Jose 
Luis reports: 
  [Luis] A total of 11 Armed Forces for the Liberation of 
Angola [FALA] soldiers were killed on 25 June in the 
trade area 15 km from Malanje when they tried to attack 
government forces. The FAA, National Police, and civilian 
defense recovered seven AKM automatic weapons and an assortment 
of infantry ammunition from the UNITA rebels, as well as 
capturing one soldier. 
  Reports from the northeast military front General Staff 
say that government forces on 25 June repelled a rebel ambush 
in [place indistinct], killing 12 soldiers in UNITA's 
illegal army, capturing nine AKM weapons and 1,300 rounds of 
infantry ammunition. 
  After being repelled in N'dalatando the rebels once again 
shelled Popular Ward yesterday, wounding dozens of civilians who 
are facing a difficult situation because there is no medicine in 
the provincial hospital. Our correspondent Abilio Correia 
reports: 
  [Correia] UNITA launched five shells which did not 
cause any significant damage, although they partially destroyed 
some houses. A number of people admitted to N'dalatando's 
hospital due to the UNITA shellings need emergency aid since 
they face shortages of medicine and food. 
  UNITA troops launched a strong attack on Cuchi District, 
Cuando Cubango Province, on 25 June. Government troops are 
still controlling the town. Freitas Manuel reports: 
  [Manuel] A military source in Cuchi today told our 
reporters that UNITA forces launched a strong attack on 
government forces on 25 June with the intention of dislodging 
them from the district. Five UNITA battalions have arrived in 
the area and are besieging the town. Besides infantry attacks, 
the rebels are using long range artillery pieces. Civilians 
were the main victims of the weekend attacks. UNITA soldiers 
killed 25 people, wounded 18 others, and destroyed a number of 
houses. The same military source said that during the clashes 
government forces killed 12 UNITA soldiers and seized an 
assortment of military equipment. 
  Meanwhile, the tragedy of Cuchi residents is more than 
this. They face shortages of food and medicine. Lately at least 
two people have died daily of hunger and a lack of medical 
assistance. 

