Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor announced 
on 4 March that the United States will revive Article 301 of the 
1988 U.S. Trade Act in bargaining with Japan. The announcement 
came in the wake of the failure of the final round of trade 
talks on 11 February between U.S. President Bill Clinton and 
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan. There was no 
conclusion to the establishment of numerical targets for Japan's 
imports from foreign countries and the principles in assessing 
Japanese progress in opening its market to U.S. goods because 
Japan thinks the move violates the principle of free trade, 
something Japan cannot accept. 
  On this, Deputy Foreign Minister Dr. Surin Phitsuwan has 
stated Thailand's stand on the American move against Japan. 
  1. Thailand is unhappy with the American and Japanese drift 
toward a trade confrontation caused by the revival of Super 301 
against U.S. trading partners. 
  2. As the world economy liberalizes and countries push for 
the success of the Uruguay round of trade talks, Thailand does 
not want to see a strong retaliatory measure being taken against 
a trading partner. There should be an effort to push for a 
settlement of trade disputes within the framework of the 
multilateral trade forum, which is accepted worldwide. Besides, 
GATT regulations should be strictly implemented and upheld as 
the criteria for trading parties. 
  3. During the APEC [Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation] 
summit in Seattle, both Thailand and the United States kept 
repeating the importance of the success of the Uruguay round. 
Indeed, progress has been made at the Uruguay round. Thailand, 
therefore, is concerned that U.S. retaliation against its 
trading partner might affect the climate of international trade 
as well as the success of the Uruguay round. 
  4. Trade problems between the United States and Japan would 
affect the economy of both countries, and in turn the world's. 
The United States and Japan are respectively Thailand's first 
and second major export markets. Thailand thinks it is the duty 
of both Japan and the United States to solve their remaining 
trade problems in the best possible way on the basis of 
sincerity. 

