Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 29 Jan (NA) -- A high-ranking source 
close to the Foreign Ministry disclosed that next week it will 
be officially announced that the United States has acquiesced to 
fitting 36 Skyhawk A-4M planes purchased by the Argentine 
Government with late-generation radars. 
  Meanwhile, Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella, who is currently 
in Washington, asserted that the meeting he held with U.S. 
Commerce Secretary Michael Kantor to discuss Argentina's 
possibility of joining NAFTA was "highly positive." 
  On the radar issue, it leaked out that negotiations in the 
last few months with the U.S. State Department to overcome the 
logjam in the purchase of Skyhawk A-4M aircraft fitted with 
state-of-the-art radars had yielded successful results. This 
stalemate stemmed from the fact that the United Kingdom, the 
United States' leading partner in NATO, had offered ironclad 
opposition to this business transaction. 
  This information was provided to NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS by the 
aforementioned source, who also noted that the negotiations by 
the former chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, General 
Colin Powell, were of "paramount importance." 
  During President Carlos Menem's state visit to the United 
States last June, Gen. Powell pledged to Defense Minister Oscar 
Camilion to make every effort to supply the radars requested for 
the aircraft bought by Argentina. 
  As the same source pointed out, "they [the Americans] have 
understood that the planes' purchase was not due to military 
buildup reasons but rather to replace, in some way, the ones 
lost during the Malvinas war." 
  Commenting on another issue, Di Tella -- who has been in 
Washington since 26 January conducting negotiations with U.S. 
State Department officials -- played down the importance of the 
visit a group of Chilean congressmen will make to the Malvinas 
Islands. 
  To that effect, the foreign minister noted that he had 
discussed the issue with those Chilean congressmen, who not only 
told him that the reason for the trip is merely environmental, 
but also committed themselves to submitting their impressions to 
the minister once they return home from the trip. 
  Di Tella held talks with Kantor and U.S. Secretary of State 
Warren Christopher on 27 January, and this afternoon he met 
Anthony Lake, assistant to the President for national security 
affairs on the National Security Council. 
  Di Tella, speaking on the radio, said: "We discussed several 
subjects with Kantor, including Argentina's chances of joining 
NAFTA and the compatibility between that alternative and 
Mercosur. We want to study both alternatives and see how they 
can be made compatible with each other." 
  Concerning the meeting he will hold with UN Secretary 
General 
Butrus Butrus-Ghali, the foreign minister said: "Security and 
drug trafficking are sure to be on the agenda, but they will not 
constitute the main issues of the meeting." 
  To that effect, Di Tella ruled out the possibility of there 
being violent outbreaks in Argentina similar to the ones that 
occurred not long ago in the Mexican state of Chiapas. 
  Moreover, Di Tella disclosed that the luncheon he had with 
Rex Hunt, former governor of the Malvinas Islands just before 
the 1982 war, was "a cordial gesture toward hard-liners in our 
negotiations." 
  "I believe this gesture may be made extensively to all the 
rest and that is the idea they got. Our policy on the Malvinas 
is wise -- it is cordial with regard to some questions, 
especially our dealings with Malvinas' islanders, and inflexible 
as far as the issue of sovereignty is concerned," he underscored. 
  He acknowledged nonetheless that the Argentine Government 
cannot disregard "the phenomenal influence" that a little group 
of Malvinas Islands' inhabitants has over the UK Parliament. 

