Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Miroslaw Cielemecki: "`An Army in Agony'; In the </F>
NATO Armies, the Equipment Modernization Index Is 35-40 Percent; 
In Poland, It Has Dropped Below 20 Percent"] 
  [Text] In 1939 the Polish Army held its own for more than a 
month. Some generals think that today, in the event of an 
all-out attack, it would not be able to hold out any longer than 
Westerplatte did [seven days] half a century ago. 
  In 1987, which military men called the worst time for the 
Army in the last two decades, 3 percent of GNP was allocated to 
defense. In the years 1988-92, the real budget of the MON 
[Ministry of Defense] dropped by more than 60 percent. In 1990 
people were talking about a "survival budget," and then about an 
"agony budget." Defense spending this year amounts to about 30 
billion zlotys (1.9 percent of GNP). 
  When the president asked Admiral Piotr Kolodziejczyk, 
minister of defense in the governments of Tadeusz Mazowiecki and 
Jan Krzysztof Bielecki, to resume that post, he [Kolodziejczyk] 
demanded as his price that the Army receive (as it had six years 
ago) 3 percent of GNP. The General Staff estimates that with 
that level of funding the military will not be able to preserve 
even its present, modest, level of fighting power. 
  The Army may break down almost completely within two years. 
  Funding cuts over the last two years have chiefly hit 
procurement of new equipment because, in the words of the 
General Staff, "the opportunities for savings in other 
activities have already been exhausted." In 1992, according to 
some sources, 12 percent of the MON budget was allocated to 
procurement. The prediction that in 1995 the costs of new 
equipment will account to 30 percent of the budget are likely to 
prove fairly accurate. 
  Last year the weakest member of NATO, Turkey, spent $4.18 
billion on defense. The defense budget of Portugal, which is 
one-fourth the size of Poland, is estimated at about $1.8 
billion. During the same time the Polish MON was allocated 
somewhat less than $1.5 billion. 
  Budgetary shortfalls are not the only indication of the 
weakness of the Polish Army. About two-thirds of Poland's 
military equipment is imported, mainly from the former Soviet 
Union. There would be nothing wrong with this if it were the 
latest Soviet weaponry. This is, unfortunately, not the case. 
Obviously, no army in the world is outfitted with nothing but 
the latest equipment. The so-called equipment modernization 
index in the NATO armies is, however, 35-40 percent; in Poland 
it has dropped to below 20 percent. 
  The Polish electronics forces have comparatively good 
equipment for detecting aircraft and missiles. However, some of 
the equipment for combating aircraft and missiles will soon have 
to be consigned to a museum. There is a particularly acute 
shortage of surface-to-air missiles. Much of the antiaircraft 
artillery dates back to the 1950's and 1960's. We have no 
airplanes or helicopters for conducting electronic warfare. 
  The equipment of the communications troops is simply 
terrible. 
  They are using obsolete radios, lines, exchanges, etc., that 
are often 30 years old. The communications equipment is bulky, 
heavy, difficult to deploy, and extremely easy to intercept and 
jam. Unlike modern armies, which already have many such systems, 
Polish divisions do not have computerized microwave 
communications systems that make it possible to transmit 
friendly information and counter enemy communications. 
  The Polish Air Force, which is not in bad shape from the 
quantitative standpoint (507 combat aircraft), has, however, 
only 12 modern MiG-29's and several tens of the more or less 
modern MiG-23's. The rest of the Air Force consists mainly of 
obsolete MiG-21's. In the Vienna negotiations, Poland is 
assigned a ceiling of 130 combat helicopters. In actuality, we 
have only 30 Mi-24's, which were procured in the 1980's and are 
now slipping into obsolescence. The Air Forces of the Czech 
Republic and Slovakia have 20 MiG-29's, approximately 70 
MiG-23's, and about 50 Mi-24 helicopters. The small army of 
Belarus (about 144,000 soldiers) has 390 modern MiG-28, MiG-27, 
MiG-23, Su-27, Su-25, and Su-24 combat aircraft and 80 Mi-24 
attack helicopters. Ukraine (with 230,000 soldiers) has more 
than 1,400 combat aircraft (including, for example, 255 
MiG-29's, 95 MiG-25's, 190 MiG-23's, 40 Su-27's, 30 Su-25's, and 
220 Su-24's), 240 Mi-24 attack helicopters, and at least seven 
bomber divisions and brigades that are equipped with 40 Tu-16 
bombers and more than 110 Tu-22's and Tu-26's. 
  The Air Force of the Federal Republic of Germany took over 
from that of the German Democratic Republic only MiG-29 fighters 
(24 of them). The other aircraft, which are considered modern in 
Poland, the Germans just did not want. The German Air Force is 
twice as powerful as the Polish one from the standpoint of 
amount of equipment and much stronger in terms of numbers (among 
other things, 195 Tornadoes, 150 F-4's, and 160 Alpha Jets). 
  The Polish ground forces come off equally poorly in the 
comparisons. Of our neighbors (with the exception of Lithuania), 
only Slovakia and Belarus have fewer tanks. Ukraine has twice as 
many as we do. 
  Of 2,850 Polish tanks, only about 700 are reasonably modern 
T-72's. 
  The rest have long been out of production, although some are 
somewhat modernized T-55 tanks. The arsenals of the Czech and 
Slovak Armies include 815 T-72 tanks, Belarus has 1,520 T-72's 
and 310 T-62's, and Ukraine has 1,000 T-72's, 2,100 T-64's, 200 
T-62's, and 300 of the ultramodern T-80's. The Bundeswehr has 
2,370 Leopard 1 tanks and 2,020 Leopard 2 tanks. The number of 
Polish BWP-1 and BWP-2 armored combat vehicles, which are 
considered somewhat modern, is about 250 below the CFE-1 
[Conventional Armed Forces in Europe] ceiling. By the year 2000, 
the little modern rocket artillery that Poland now has will lose 
approximately 50 of its combat value. 
  The military power of a country is determined not just by 
the 
number of soldiers and amount of equipment it has, but also by 
the level of training of its reserves. If a threat were to 
arise, the Swedes and the Germans would each be able to quickly 
mobilize about 700,000 reservists who have undergone constant 
training. According to specialized foreign journals (in Poland 
such data are secret), the Polish ground forces are able to 
support about 420,000 reserve soldiers. From analyzing the 
number and scope of the exercises that have been conducted, it 
is doubtful that the reserve army is really combat ready. It is 
an open secret that, due to a lack of money, the Polish MON has 
reduced reserve training below the bare minimum. 
  The system for training reserve officer cadres has 
completely 
broken down. Among the most tightly held secrets are the status 
and quantity of equipment intended for reservists. It turns out 
that only personal weapons and field uniforms are in adequate 
supply. The situation regarding other kinds of equipment is 
considerably worse. In all likelihood, the reserve units are 
equipped with obsolete tanks, combat vehicles, radios, etc. 
  In the event of a war, the reserve army and in-place units 
are supplemented with auxiliary equipment from civilian 
industries, for example, heavy cars, buses, excavators, 
bulldozers, etc. In previous years civilian "contingents" were 
required to be ready and available on terms dictated by the MON. 
Officers from the mobilization units monitored compliance. 
Nowadays, during the period of changes in ownership and 
restructuring, the old plans have fallen apart. Private 
companies do not respect the mobilization assignments, nor do 
state firms, citing a lack of resources. The extent to which the 
national territory is prepared for a possible war has 
deteriorated to a catastrophic degree. An analysis of the food 
market (grain, flour, meat) indicates that state strategic 
reserves have declined significantly. It turns out that fuel 
reserves have also shrunk. 
  Many civil defense activities are also in poor shape. If it 
were necessary to evacuate large population centers, there would 
probably be chaos. There would be shortages of transportation, 
food, shelter, etc. People have ceased to comply with the 
requirements (common in other countries) relating to building 
civil defense shelters in new buildings. Investors cite a 
shortage of funding. Workers of the central institutions and 
some of the personnel from several factories would find shelter 
mainly in the capital. No new shelters are being built, and the 
existing ones are being allowed to deteriorate. The situation is 
similar in other parts of the country. The civil defense system 
has even had to eliminate a significant portion of the automatic 
warning siren installations for mobilization. 

