Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By M.Y. Sung in Beijing] </F>
  [Text] Beijing's advisory body on transitional issues has 
suggested that Hong Kong's chief executive heading the post-1997 
administration be chosen 18 months early -- in effect a shadow 
governor before the end of British rule. In deliberations in 
Beijing yesterday, the Preliminary Working Committee (PWC) said 
Hong Kong's most senior bureaucrat in the post-1997 government 
would be chosen in increasingly difficult circumstances of 
Sino-British non-co-operation. The Beijing-appointed think-tank 
preparing for the post-1997 administration ruled that the future 
chief executive of the first Special Administration Region (SAR) 
be selected under special arrangements earlier than had been 
envisaged by either side. 
  The PWC's government and administration group leader Leung 
Chun-ying said the first chief executive should be selected 18 
months before the transfer of sovereignty. Mr Leung said there 
would be a chief executive selected before British rule of the 
territory ended because it was impossible to select a person on 
30 June 1997. He noted that there should be enough time for the 
chief executive-elect to prepare for the establishment of the 
SAR government. Mr Leung declined to comment on whether the 
selected person would affect the power of Britain's last 
colonial governor, Chris Patten. 
  Hong Kong PWC member Lau Siu-kai conceded it was inevitable 
that two power centres would be created through the early 
selection of a chief executive while the British-appointed 
governor was still in Hong Kong. Polarisation was inevitable 
but the duplication would also help to stabilise the confidence 
of the civil servants who would know earlier who they would be 
working for after the handover, Dr Lau said. 
  Under the Basic Law, the first SAR chief executive would be 
selected by 400-member Selection Committee by means of an 
election or consultation held in the territory. Dr Lau said the 
Basic Law gave an open interpretation to the formation of the 
Selection Committee and the method used to choose the chief 
exective. Therefore the Preparatory Committee set up in 1996 
would have more flexibility in forming the Selection Committee 
and in deciding the method of selection. 

