BFN 

<F P=106> [Report attributed to BNS: "Government Toughens Rules for </F>
Arming National Defense System"] 
  [Text] From now on, the national defense system will be 
supplied with arms and ammunition only by the Lithuanian Arms 
Fund. This decision was adopted by the government, which also 
approved the rules for the national defense system to acquire, 
keep account of, store, and distribute arms and ammunition. 
Under the 8 April resolution, firearms and ammunition will now 
be assigned to the national defense structure only by the 
national defense minister's order, and to units of this 
structure -- by order of their commanders and chiefs. 
  Fixed rules will be defined by the minister, following the 
national defense statutes and requirements: The account of 
firearms must be centralized, indicating their caliber, make, 
number, and price. All arms and ammunition must be kept in 
storehouses, which must be installed to ensure reliable arms 
protection. Arms can be distributed only to guards, daytime 
patrol services, as well as for scheduled exercises. 
  In other cases, arms and ammunition can be distributed only 
with the permission of the national defense minister, the Army 
chief, the chief of the General Staff, the chief of the State 
Border Defense Service, and the director of the Civil Defense 
Department. 
  The minister's order allows officials of the national 
defense 
system to always carry pistols and revolvers. The loss of 
firearms and ammunition must be immediately reported to the 
Prosecutor General's Office, a city or regional prosecutor's 
office, the national defense minister, the Army commander, the 
chief of the State Border Defense Service, and the director of 
the Civil Defense Department. A quota is set in each such case. 
  According to the resolution, important state and other 
facilities are guarded with service arms only after the 
government adopts a decision on their protection. Officials of 
the national defense system are accountable for the illegal 
possession and use of arms under Lithuanian law. 

