Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" interview with Uruguayan Foreign Minister </F>
Sergio Abreu by unidentified reporter; place and date not given] 
  [Text] [EL PAIS] What are the premises and the principles 
upon which the Foreign Ministry based its action in 1993? 
  [Abreu] The current administration has chosen continuity and 
the development of a foreign policy of state as its general 
guiding principles. Thus the foreign policy, which is conducted 
by the president and the foreign minister, is inspired by the 
need to put its objectives at the service of permanent national 
interest and of medium- and long-term guidelines, which are 
beyond domestic political circumstances. 
  In line with this continuity, and seeking consistency in our 
foreign policy, our traditional observance of the principles of 
international law has been maintained. 
  The principles of nonintervention in the domestic affairs of 
nations, self-determination, and the peaceful settlement of 
controversies, which our country has upheld throughout its 
history as a sovereign, independent nation, have been endorsed 
during the current administration. Transformations on the 
international political stage and the dynamic changes we are 
witnessing today have emphasized the role of the law in 
international relations. 
  [EL PAIS] What is the Uruguayan foreign policy strategy? 
  [Abreu] Foreign policy decisions are not made on the basis 
of 
isolated stages or circumstances. Instead, they reflect the 
strategy with which the Foreign Ministry rates the country's 
foreign policy objectives. 
  Our foreign policy has been conducted on the basis of the 
strategy of "concentric circles," with priority areas designed 
on the basis of the country's geopolitical location: First, 
bilateral relations with neighbors, followed by the subregion, 
the region, the continent, the Iberoamerican world, and the rest 
of the world. The Foreign Ministry made major efforts during 
1993 toward attaining the above objectives in each of those 
circles. 
  First, the strategy sought to promote the competitive 
advantage of the country in a regional and subregional context, 
in which Uruguay's main partners are its neighbors, Argentina 
and Brazil. 
  [EL PAIS] What have been the main accomplishments within 
this 
framework? 
  [Abreu] Among our achievements we can mention the promotion 
of bilateral relations with Argentina and Brazil. This includes 
major achievements in physical and economic integration, 
excellent political relations, and bilateral consideration of 
the more sensible topics of the relations with our neighbors, 
like areas along the country's borders. 
  This first priority circle of the state foreign policy is 
supplemented by our active presence at a regional and 
subregional level. We have sought to promote the role of a 
supplier of goods and services at a regional level, which our 
country might play because of its privileged geopolitical 
location as the natural exit port of Latin America's richest and 
most densely populated basin. Among the specific actions that 
have been undertaken we mention: 

  -  Improvement of the navigability of Uruguay River, which 
was jointly arranged with the Argentine Government. This action 
is particularly important for the development of our ports and 
for the waterway project because it allows better ship access 
from Nueva Palmira to Salto, thus promoting the revitalization 
of the ports on the lower Uruguay River. 
  -  Actions, also with the 
Argentine Government, to dredge, place buoys, and maintain the 
River Plate channels, for which an agreement has been 
reached. 
  -  the impulse toward concluding an agreement for the 
Colonia-Buenos Aires bridge project, which for Uruguay will be 
the first stretch of the Highway Axis. This emphasizes the 
position of our country as a key area for land transportation 
between the region's large urban and industrial centers. 
  -  The 
steps taken for granting institutional status to the 
negotiations for constructing the Highway Axis joining Sao 
Paulo, Porto Alegre, Uruguay, and Argentina, a project that is 
specially significant for Uruguay and that will promote 
integration of the economies of the three countries. 
  -  The 
development of the Cuareim River basin, including the 
enforcement of the Statute of the Uruguayan-Brazilian Mixed 
Commission for that basin. 
  -  The promotion of development in areas 
along the Brazilian border, through the activities of the 
binational commission and through the strengthening of the 
importance of the existing border committees. Such activities 
fall within the framework of the border policy, which is a 
priority among our major foreign police objectives, aiming at 
consolidating national culture and national identity in border 
areas in conjunction with economic development, which is being 
jointly promoted with neighboring countries. 
  -  The actions aimed 
at enforcing the multilateral agreement on the Paraguay-Parana 
Waterway (Puerto Caceres-Nueva Palmira) and, considering the 
importance of the project's work schedule, the promotion of 
joint actions by the five countries to agree on the 
implementation of the Technical Cooperation Agreement signed 
with the IDB [Inter-American Development Bank], which seeks to 
determine the feasibility of this river way. 

  -  In turn, political relations with our main neighbors have 
been strengthened through reciprocal visits of top government 
officials. Among them we should note the visit by Brazilian 
President Itamar Franco in May 1993, the first visit by a 
Brazilian president since 1985. In addition, the Uruguayan 
foreign minister visited Brazil in November 1993. 
  -  We emphasize 
the diplomatic efforts that Uruguay has made to revitalize the 
role of Urupabol [Permanent Joint Commission of Uruguay, 
Paraguay, and Bolivia], as an instrument to promote renewed 
cooperation and coordination among its members. 
  -  The relations 
between Bolivia and the subregion have been a priority for the 
Foreign Ministry, which has proposed an analysis of the way we 
can develop closer ties with Mercosur [Common Market of the 
South]. 
  [EL PAIS] What about actions at a regional level? 
  [Abreu] Another foreign policy objective has been to 
guarantee the Uruguayan presence in the Latin American region as 
a whole, though bilateral and multilateral ties. 
  The approval of NAFTA by the U.S. Congress, which marked the 
creation of an economic bloc of great significance for the rest 
of the continent, has made it essential for us to promote our 
relations with Mexico. The promotion of our relations with that 
country, in all areas, has been one of our foreign policy 
objectives. To this end an important presidential visit was 
paid to that country in March 1993, during which agreements on 
several areas were signed, including the commercial area. 
  Meanwhile, relations with Chile were also considered a 
priority objective, particularly in the economic-commercial area. 
  From a multilateral viewpoint, the Latin American 
integration 
process implemented through LAIA [Latin American Integration 
Association] has been firmly supported. Proof of this is 
Uruguay's active engagement in the resolution of the issue 
involving Mexico's participation in NAFTA and the enforcement of 
Article 44 of the LAIA Agreement, that is, the Most Favored 
Nation Clause. This situation had produced a major disagreement 
between member countries. Our country promoted agreement 
formulas that led to the settlement of the discrepancies, thus 
preserving the organization from a conflict that could have 
seriously affected it. 
  In the political area, Uruguay has promoted the 
consolidation 
of the Rio Group as a permanent mechanism facilitating 
consultation and agreement between Latin American countries on 
issues that affect the common interest of the region. The Rio 
Group, whose members advocate the principles of democracy, 
pluralism, and respect for human rights, is an auspicious fact 
for Latin America. It is totally coincident with our foreign 
policy principles, which Uruguay has always sought to strengthen. 
  Uruguay has also maintained a major presence within the 
framework of the OAS, reaffirming the importance of this forum 
for the preservation of democracy in the continent, and 
endorsing -- as in the case of Haiti's institutional crisis -- 
measures to restore institutional democracy in that country. 
  [EL PAIS] With what countries have we made bilateral 
progress? 
  [Abreu] This government attached importance to the promotion 
of relations -- especially in the economic field -- with 
countries or group of countries with major weight in 
international commerce. Three very important presidential visits 
were made in 1993: to Belgium and to the European Community in 
April; to Great Britain in June; and to the PRC in December. In 
each case the objectives were fully achieved because the visits 
made it possible for us to inform the relevant sectors of those 
countries about existing commercial opportunities, possibilities 
for investment, and mutual benefits to be derived from 
strengthening exchange in various fields. 

