Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] In the historic address that President leader Saddam 
Husayn delivered on 30 September 1993, when his excellency 
received the chairman and members of the Executive Office of the 
National Union of Iraqi students, he touched on the situation in 
the north and reviewed in detail the tasks our great people and 
the Kurdish people, in particular, are shouldering in order to 
overcome the tragic situation in the self-rule area in Kurdistan 
and to achieve our Kurdish people's objectives of preserving the 
land and the country and protecting its freedom, security, and 
the right to a free and dignified life. These objectives are 
being interfered with by the traitors and agents in 
collaboration with their American and Zionist masters. 
  AL-'IRAQ met with a number of Kurdish political and social 
personalities as well as other citizens who spoke about this 
historical event and the tragic situation that the area is 
experiencing. 
  'Ujayl Jalal, secretary general of the Economic and 
Financial 
Affairs Committee in the self-rule area, said: 
  The speech, which President leader struggler Saddam Husayn 
made to the chairman and members of the Executive Bureau of the 
National Union of Iraqi Students, particularly in the present 
tragic situation in Kurdistan self-rule area, is a living 
example of the great love our leader holds for the Kurdish 
people. It is also a confirmation of the major historic and 
shining role the Kurdish people played in building Iraq, their 
fight against the agents, colonialists, and the covetous ones 
who wanted and still want to harm Iraq's unity and purity of its 
soil as well as to obliterate the national identity of the Kurds 
who are genuinely seeking to consolidate Iraq's unity. A lot of 
water has passed under the bridge and little is left. These are 
hard times that will pass, and beloved Kurdistan will once again 
enjoy living in prosperity and total happiness under our 
triumphant leader Saddam Husayn, may God preserve him. 
  Dr. Sakfan al-Brifkani, secretary general of Social Affairs 
in Kurdistan region, said: 
  The Kurds are the children of this great homeland; they are 
part of the Iraqi people. They reject and fight against all 
suspect ideas. Iraqi Kurdistan is part of Iraq's glorious 
history, past, present, and future. No honest Kurd who is proud 
of the soil of his Iraqi homeland would accept that Kurdistan 
region becoming a ministate and an artificial entity, separate 
from Iraq and its glory, loftiness, and splendid culture across 
7,000 years. 
  He added: The Iraqis are one body joined by blood, spirit, 
intellect, thought, conscience, and common history. Can the soul 
be separated from the body? Will the Iraqi citizen, be he Kurd 
or Arab, accept to abandon his 7000-year-old history and ancient 
culture in order to be bound to weak entities that would be 
shared and divided among the major powers, the powers of 
oppression and tyranny. Our Kurdish people's adversity will not 
last long, God willing. The leader's speech to his children, the 
students, on 30 August is a proof of this fact. His mention of 
beloved Kurdistan and of every Kurd in Irbil, Sulaymaniyah, and 
Dahouk in this historical speech was like a healing balsam for 
the wounds. All the children of Kurdistan were overwhelmed by 
joy, happiness, and delight when they heard the speech of leader 
struggler Saddam Husayn. Victory is ours, God willing. 
  Zuhdi Ahmad, secretary general for Municipality Affairs in 
self-rule region of Kurdistan, said: 
  The mean and abominable actions being committed in Kurdistan 
self-rule region by agent and treasonous gangs will only reap 
frustration and defeat. The Iraqi, whether he is a Kurd or an 
Arab or from the national minorities, is extremely sensitive 
about his dignity and is proud of his character. This character 
drives him to cling to his Iraqi nationality and sacrifice 
himself for the sake of Iraq's dignity, independence, and 
sovereignty. The Iraqi people's national revolutions and 
uprisings are proof of this. Therefore, the struggle by the 
groups of agents and traitors in Kurdistan's self-rule region, 
who are trying to corrupt honest men among our steadfast and 
patient people, are trying to destroy the unity of the Kurdish 
people who are part of Iraqi unity. They also try to sow 
sedition and create disturbances in the area. All these attempts 
are bound to fail miserably, thanks to the efforts of our 
Kurdish people, their noble character, and the deep love for the 
homeland's pure soil. Kurdistan will become the fire that will 
incinerate all agent and treasonous groups. 
  Qasim Agha, from Irbil province said: The speech by leader 
struggler, Saddam Husayn, especially the part concerning the 
Kurdish issue, confirms the degree of love his excellency has 
and the pride he feels toward every Kurd in the cherished 
northern part of the country. 
  He added: Our Kurdish people recall more than ever the 
happiness, which Kurdistan region enjoyed previously. But now we 
are experiencing a difficult economic situation and lack of 
services. But our proud people in Kurdistan will frustrate the 
sick hopes and dreams of those people. Kurdistan will once again 
rejoin the pure and beloved homeland, our struggling Iraq, and 
our great protective shield so that we will once again enjoy the 
homeland's wealth and the protection of leader Saddam Husayn. 
  He said Iraq is the homeland of all. As the President leader 
said to the chairman and members of the National Union of Iraqi 
Students: The homeland is the place where we live and die. It 
is where we own things or do not own; when we own nothing in it 
is still our country. When we own anything in it we put it in 
the service of the people. This is the homeland. 
  Concluding, he said: Thanks to its triumphant leader's 
efforts, the honest people's efforts, and the rallying of the 
masses around its historical leadership--all this constitutes a 
thorn in the side of the enemies. Our noble Kurdish people will 
be able to thwart all evil and wicked conspiracies. 
  Husam Khadr Dawud, secretary of the Legislative Council and 
chairman of the People's Assembly in Irbil province, said: 
  The people of beloved Iraqi Kurdistan today are living in a 
really tragic situation. This is because it is targeted by the 
gangs of traitors and agents as well as by those serving the 
enemy in the area. Our Kurdish people today realize more than 
ever the magnitude of the great conspiracy that has been planned 
by the tyrants who are coveting Iraq's wealth. They have sold 
their honor to the foreign colonialist who serves only his own 
interests. They have accepted living in disgrace and treachery. 
  Continuing, he said: The tragic situation, which beloved 
Kurdistan is living, and the destruction and ruination it is 
suffering because of the actions and behavior of the midgets are 
exceptional conditions that will, God willing, vanish thanks to 
the efforts of the children of our great nation and all the 
honest and good people in the area. The children of our noble 
country will not accept humiliation and disgrace. They will not 
abandon their glorious history that abounds with dignity, pride, 
and glory. The day will come when our Kurdish people will say 
their true and sincere word. They are the loyal children of 
leader Saddam Husayn and his wise leadership. Iraq is one 
integrated unit regardless of how the forces of evil and 
aggression rally against it. 
  Jamal 'Aziz Shikhu, director general of education in Irbil 
province, said: 
  Self-rule is our solid national unity. It is the Iraq of all 
of us. Any concept or idea to the contrary is rejected. We will 
fight it in the mountains and valleys; all the Iraqis will fight 
it. It means sowing the seeds of division between the Iraqis, 
something the foreigner coveting Iraq's wealth wishes. Iraq's 
unity has always been targeted both in the past and present. We 
are extremely confident that our Kurdish people's love and 
loyalty to leader Saddam Husayn, architect of self-rule and the 
achiever of all our people's aspirations from the north to the 
south, will continue to be dedicated to Saddam Husayn and to 
nobody else. The tragic situation the area is now experiencing 
is only a summer cloud that will soon pass. 
  Muhsin Tahir al-Barazanji, member of the Political Bureau of 
the Kurdish Democratic Party, said: 
  The speech of struggler leader Saddam Husayn, may God 
protect 
him, to the chairman and members of the Executive Bureau of the 
National Union of Iraqi Students on 30 August 1993 expresses a 
principled and deep belief in the Kurdish people. This was 
evident in his excellency's mention of every Kurd in the 
northern part of the country. 
  He added: Imperialism believed and still believes that the 
Kurdish problem is a trump card, which it can play to bring 
pressure on the political regime in Iraq in order to realize 
gains for itself, contrary to the real interests of the Kurdish 
people. This was clearly demonstrated in its boundless support 
over many years for the agent and suspect groups. But then it 
made a volte face when its interests dictated that. 
  We absolutely believe that the foreign umbrella over beloved 
Kurdistan will not last and the black clouds shall vanish soon, 
God willing, and Kurdistan will once again return to what it 
always used to be, a part of great Iraq and our people will once 
again be linked to the rest of the people. 
  The leader's speech has opened new opportunities for those 
who strayed from the right path and cooperated with the 
foreigner in one way or another. He called on them to return to 
the bosom of the homeland. They should realize that leader 
Saddam Husayn is understanding toward everybody and that his 
love is much greater than their sins. 
  We are confident that our Kurdish people will tear the 
foreign umbrella and expel enemies of the people. It will thus 
participate in building the great and united Iraq under the 
banner of "God is Great," which triumphant leader Saddam Husayn, 
God protect him, is carrying. 
  Ahmad Muhammad 'Inayat, member of the Central Committee of 
the Kurdish Revolutionary Party, said: 
  Our proud Kurdish people is an indivisible part of the great 
Iraqi people, joined by a long common history and joint struggle 
in defense of the homeland and its dignity. As for those who are 
now in the same trench with the traitors and embrace the enemy 
represent only themselves. Their end is near at the hands of our 
Kurdish people, which daily confirms their absolute rejection of 
their criminal actions. Let all the criminals and agents in 
Iraqi Kurdistan learn the essential fact that our people have 
devoted themselves to the great Iraq since ancient times. The 
people still maintain this pledge. The banner "God is Great," 
which struggler leader Saddam Husayn is carrying will never 
suffer a setback because it is the banner of right and justice. 
It is surrounded by the hearts of brave Iraqis and Kurds and all 
the brotherly minorities within the framework of a united and 
integrated homeland. 
  Sabri Ghulam, branch secretary of the Kurdish Revolutionary 
Party. said: 
  I would like to remind the agents and hirelings in Kurdistan 
Iraq of an essential and manifest fact--that no matter how many 
promises the colonialist makes, he honors them only as far as 
they serve his illegitimate interests. And if his interests are 
exposed to danger, he will dump his lackeys on the heap of 
history. Our people both Iraqis and Kurds have for long 
experienced this. 
  We are greatly confident that masses of our Kurdish people 
in 
Iraqi Kurdistan are aware of their responsibility in confronting 
the agents and saboteurs who are wreaking havoc in the self-rule 
region. Our people will not be misled by their false slogans and 
will forever continue to fight the traitors and the turncoats 
until final victory is achieved which, God willing, is near. 
  Ahmad Hasan 'Uthman, deputy secretary general for the 
Administration of Municipalities, expressed his astonishment and 
surprise at the falsehoods disseminated by international news 
agencies regarding the living conditions the Kurdish people are 
experiencing in the self-rule region in Kurdistan under these 
extraordinary circumstances. The life our Kurdish people are 
living is very difficult. The realities of the hardship, which 
our people are suffering, should not be glossed over. The masses 
will soon say their just word by expelling all the agents and 
traitors and turn every grain of beloved Kurdistan's soil into a 
firebrand that will burn the enemies and all the traitors. 
  Mahmud Muhammad Dizih'i from Irbil province, said: Our 
Kurdish masses will not remain silent over the hardships. The 
conditions they are living at present are exceptional and will 
vanish thanks to the efforts of all the honest and noble Kurds. 
The forces of aggression will not be able to suppress our 
Kurdish people's resolve to live a free and dignified life. The 
love for beloved leader Saddam Husayn will continue to be 
cherished in the hearts of all the honest Kurds. 
  Mrs. Samira Fadhil pointed out to the popular unrest in the 
area and the denunciation by the people of all the antipatriotic 
and antinational actions the agent cliques and colonialists 
lackeys carry out. Their aim, she said, is to implement the will 
of their masters, and to spread backwardness and destruction in 
the area rather than prosperity and progress that we have 
enjoyed under our triumphant leader Saddam Husayn. 
  Nayif Karim Muhammad and 'Aziz Mahmud al-Zibari said that 
the 
tragic situation, which the masses in Iraqi Kurdistan are 
experiencing, is due to the terrorist and repressive actions of 
the agent groups that have defiled Kurdish honor, violated the 
land of beloved Kurdistan, and turned the self-rule area into an 
arena for committing all kinds of immoralities, a spy den, and a 
drug market. Our Kurdish masses will never accept this and will 
not remain quiet no matter how long it is going to take. The 
honest Kurdish people reject the reckless actions that leaders 
of the so-called Kurdish parties commit. Falsehoods of these 
parties have been exposed. The masses are waiting for the great 
rebellion against the treasonous leaders. The coming few days 
will confirm the inevitability of the triumph of the masses. The 
agents will only reap disgrace and humiliation and Kurdistan, 
God willing, will be the graveyard for whomever tried or tries 
to subdue the Iraqi people's will and steal the achievements of 
the glorious 17-30 July revolution under the leadership of our 
triumphant leader Saddam Husayn. Children of his Kurdish people 
have confirmed and continue to confirm their deep love for him 
and to rally under the banner of his wise leadership. 

