Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] A ministerial team set up by the Federal 
Government to assess the problems and demands of the three major 
oil-producing states -- Delta, Rivers, and Akwa Ibom -- has 
completed the first phase of its tour. The team, which is 
headed by the minister of petroleum and mineral resources, Chief 
Don Etiebet, also includes the minister of internal affairs, Mr. 
Alex Ibru, and that of commerce and tourism, Chief Melford 
Okilo. Also on the team are representatives of the Oil and 
Mineral-Producing Areas Development Commission, the Federal 
Environmental Protection Agency, and the Nigerian National 
Petroleum Corporation. Addressing newsmen at the end of the 
tour of Rivers State at the Government House, Port Harcourt, 
Chief Etiebet said the team would also visit the other two 
states -- Delta and Akwa Ibom -- for a similar exercise. Energy 
correspondent Alex Udo, who was on the minister's entourage, has 
more on the story. 
  [Begin Udo recording] The ministerial team, which was 
conducted round the various oil-producing communities in Rivers 
State by the administrator, Lieutenant Colonel Dawda Komo, is to 
collate and document all the problems of the people in the 
affected areas. Chief Etiebet said the team was set up to find a 
solution to the frequent clashes between the oil-prospecting 
companies and their host communities. He said that after they 
had (?finished) the tour, government would come up with 
comprehensive and meaningful solutions to the constant clashes 
based on the team's recommendations. The minister pledged that 
the government would do everything possible to adequately 
address the problems of inadequate provision of basic amenities 
to the mineral [and] oil-producing communities. Chief Etiebet 
appealed to both the oil explorers and the various communities 
not to take the law into their hands. [passage omitted] 
  Chief Etiebet and the team also inspected some of the 
facilities of the oil-prospecting companies which were destroyed 
by indigenes of the communities during various clashes. [Words 
indistinct] where there was a communal crisis recently, members 
of the team were briefed by one of the community leaders, Mr. 
Ken Tarowiwa. He stressed the need for government to look into 
the frequent clashes, which he said resulted from the nonchalant 
attitude of some oil- prospecting companies to the needs of the 
rural communities. Mr. Tarowiwa however pledged the cooperation 
of the Ogoni people to the present administration. [end 
recording] 

