Plant 

<F P=102>   94FE0275B Tokyo NIHON GENSHIRYOKU GAKKAISHI in Japanese Oct 
93 pp 4-13--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0275B </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo NIHON GENSHIRYOKU GAKKAISHI </F>
<F P=105>  Japanese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Shingo Matsuoka, Japan Nuclear Fuel Company] </F>
  [Text] The Japan Nuclear Fuel Company was designated a 
reprocessing enterprise by the national government in December 
1992, after three years and nine months of examinations by the 
Science and Technology Agency (STA) (the primary examination) as 
well as the Japan Atomic Energy Commission (JAEC) and Japan 
Nuclear Safety Commission (the secondary examination) into the 
company's technical capability, safety of facilities, conformity 
with principles concerning the peaceful use of nuclear power, 
etc. In this article, we will verify that the design of the 
Rokkasho Reprocessing Plant ensures an extremely high degree of 
safety and that the effects of accidents, should they occur, 
would be minimal. 
<H5>  I. Foreword </H5>
  In 1980, Japan Fuel Service, Inc., was launched with the 
goal 
of building and operating Japan's first private reprocessing 
plant, with investment from about 100 firms, mainly the nine 
electric power companies and the Japan Atomic Power Company. 
Japan Fuel Service subsequently conducted surveys and studies 
both in Japan and abroad on light water reactor (LWR) fuel 
reprocessing technologies. This resulted in the adoption of 
French technology, which has the best performance record, for 
the main process, and the decision that, for the peripheral 
processes, the optimum would be to combine British, German and 
Japanese technologies (the Japanese technology was developed 
under the leadership of the Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel 
Development Corporation (PNC)). One advantage to adopting the 
French technology for the main process was that the experience 
with PNC's Tokai Reprocessing Plant, which uses that technology, 
could be used. 
  Meanwhile, in 1985, prefectural and village concurrence was 
given to a request from the Federation of Electric Power 
Companies for cooperation in establishing a nuclear fuel 
recycling facility in Rokkasho-Mura, Aomori Prefecture. 
  In this manner, after selecting optimum technologies and a 
geographical site, a basic design was compiled for the Rokkasho 
Reprocessing Plant with guarantee of safety as the first policy 
principle.[.sup]a-f[/] An application for designation as a 
reprocessing enterprise, which documented siting conditions, 
safety design, evaluation of dose equivalent during normal 
operation and safety assessment, was submitted to the prime 
minister in 1989. Examination (primary) of the application by 
STA, the regulating agency, followed by examination (secondary) 
by the JAEC and the Japan Nuclear Safety Commission, confirmed 
conformity with principles concerning peaceful use of nuclear 
power, technical capability and safety, and in 1992, the prime 
minister designated Japan Nuclear Fuel[.sup]1[/] a 
reprocessing enterprise. This was three years and nine months 
after the application was submitted, and 13 years after the 
company was formed. 
  An application (in several sections) was submitted to STA 
for 
"approval of design and construction methods" to build a plant 
this year. Approval was received for the first application, and 
construction started at the end of April. Operation is scheduled 
to begin in 2000. 
  In this article, we will explain mainly how safety is 
ensured 
even under abnormal conditions, based on the safety design and 
safety evaluation in the documents[.sup]g[/] attached to the 
application for designation as a reprocessing enterprise. 
<H5>  II. Process (Equipment) Summary </H5>
  Before beginning the explanation of safety, we will show in 
Table 1 the Rokkasho Reprocessing Plant's reprocessing capacity 
and the range of spent fuel to be reprocessed, and we will use 
the schematic diagram given in Figure 1[.sup]2[/] to explain 
the processes (equipment) based on the PUREX (plutonium and 
uranium recovery by extraction) method. The PUREX method has 
been used and modified for many years in the plants of many 
countries. It was applied at the Savannah River Plant in the 
United States 40 years ago, and it is a technology with a record 
of high safety and reliability. It also has a strong record in 
reprocessing of fuel for power generation. It is an established 
commercial technology that has been used to reprocess more than 
40,000 tons of metallic fuel extracted from gas-cooled reactors 
in Great Britain and France and over 5,000 tons of oxide fuel 
from LWRs in France and Japan. 



  Table 1: Reprocessing Capacity and Range of Spent Fuels 



Reprocessing Capacity 

Maximum Annual Capacity                    800 tU 

Capacity per Day                           4.8 tU 



Range of Spent Fuels 

Enrichment 

Enrichment, First Stage                    under 5 wt% 

Assembly Average Residual Enrichment       under 3.5 wt% 

Burnup 

Assembly Average Burnup                    under 55,000 MWd/t 

Reprocessed Fuel Average Burnup/Day        under 45,000 MWd/t 

Cooling Period 

Until Received at Reprocessing Plant       over 1 year 

Until Chopping Process Begins              over 4 years 



<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-022L-42A>      Figure 1: Rokkasho Reprocessing </FIG>


  Now, spent fuel assemblies are cooled for four years after 
extraction from power-generating LWRs, then they are cut up by a 
chopper. The resulting fuel flakes are put into a dissolver and 
dissolved by nitric acid. Uranium, plutonium and fission 
products, as part of this nitrate solution, are sent to the next 
process, the separator-distributor. 
  In the pulse column of the separator, the dissolver in 
liquid 
form (water phase) comes into contact with 30 percent 
TBP/n-dodecane (organic phase). TBP (tributyl 
phosphate) is an extractant and n-dodecane is a 
diluent. Uranium and plutonium have a high affinity with TBP, 
and are extracted into the organic phase, but low-affinity 
fission products remain in the water phase and become high-level 
waste (HLW). Next, the organic phase enters the pulse column of 
the distributor, where a reducer is supplied. Here, plutonium 
reacts with the reducer and transforms into an oxidation number 
that has low affinity with TBP. It, therefore, cannot remain in 
the organic phase and switches to the water phase. Uranium does 
not react with the reducer and remains in the organic phase. In 
this manner, uranium and plutonium are separated. When uranium, 
which is in the organic phase, comes into contact with diluted 
nitric acid in a stripper (mixer-settler), an extraction balance 
reaction shifts it to the water phase side and it is stripped 
into the water phase. 
  The uranium and plutonium solutions come from the 
distributor 
and enter separate refiners. The accompanying traces of 
impurities are similarly removed by the extraction-stripping 
operation. Before extraction, plutonium and uranium are adjusted 
to states that are more easily extracted into TBP, plutonium 
mainly by oxide reaction and uranium by raising the 
concentration of nitric acid. Refining is done twice, but is 
shown only once in the figure to illustrate the process simply. 
  Emerging from the refiners, the uranyl nitrate solution and 
the plutonium nitrate solution separately are heated to make 
them evaporate to a dry state, then they enter denitration 
equipment where the nitric acid base is dissolved until uranium 
trioxide product and mixed oxide (MOX) products--uranium dioxide 
and plutonium dioxide--remain. 
  After concentration, HLW liquid goes through HLW liquid 
storage equipment and is sent through solidification equipment. 
The concentrated waste liquid is put into a glass melting 
furnace along with raw material for glass. This mixture is 
heated to high temperature, dissolved, and turned into an oxide, 
which then is assimilated into molten glass. The molten glass is 
poured into a stainless steel container to cool and solidify. 
The container cover is welded on, making this an even more 
stable, extremely safe solid waste material. 
<H5>  III. Safety Features </H5>
  The reprocessing plant is a nuclear chemical plant that 
separates and refines the elements (not nuclides) in uranium, 
plutonium and fission products by conventional chemical 
operations. Because large volumes of unsealed radioactive 
materials are handled, complete safety must be designed in so 
that there is no effect on the environment during normal as well 
as abnormal operation. In addition to critical safety design 
unique to nuclear facilities, fire and explosion prevention 
designs unique to chemical plants are also important because 
organic solvents are used. There is risk that fire or explosion 
could impair the ability to contain radioactive substances. 
  There are safety features in reprocessing plants that, along 
with safety design, help to ensure a high degree of safety. We 
will explain these features, as follows, because understanding 
them is important to understanding the safety of the 
reprocessing plant: 
  1. Since reprocessing is carried out on spent fuel that has 
cooled for more than four years after extraction from power 
reactors, nuclides with short half-lives will have decayed. Thus 
radioactive rare gases and iodine, which easily leak out into 
the environment, will have decayed and disappeared for the most 
part. At the same time, intensional energy (decay heat) that 
might break down containment barriers will have lessened. 
  2. Although radioactive substances in an unsealed state are 
dispersed to multiple equipment for handling, the volume of the 
substances that are extracted or are subject to other physical 
or chemical reactions is relatively small because the capacity 
of columns and tanks have been designed appropriately. Also, the 
danger of an abnormal situation escalating rapidly and on a 
broad scale is basically slight because these equipment are 
operated at below normal pressure and, in most cases, at mild 
temperatures below 100C. Operations involving harsher 
chemical reactions are not carried out either. 
  3. In an accident, one thing that might affect the 
environment is release of radioactive aerosol (liquid or solid 
radioactive particles suspended in air) into the atmosphere. If 
radioactive solutions or fine particles were transferred into 
the ventilation system in aerosol form as a result of explosion 
or boiling, the amount would be slight, only 10[.sup]-3[/] - 
10[.sup]-4[/] or so[.sup]h[/] when the system is properly 
designed. Even in an organic solvent fire, if radioactive 
substances in the form of aerosol carried by smoke were to get 
into the ventilation system, it would be around 10[.sup]-3[/] 
of combustion volume.[.sup]i[/] Tolerance is designed into 
the high-efficiency particulate filters installed in the 
ventilation system so that they will continue functioning even 
under conditions brought about by an accident, but even without 
relying on these filters, the potential scale of the accident 
will be self-limiting because the transfer of radioactive 
substances into the ventilation system is small and because they 
will be removed by adhesion in the pipe ducts. 
  These safety features, combined with the safety design 
described in the section below, ensure a very high degree of 
safety in the Rokkasho Reprocessing Plant. 
<H5>  IV. Safety Design </H5>
  In this section, we will first present the basic plan of 
safety design -- targeting abnormal events that might occur in a 
reprocessing plant -- and explain representative examples of 
design, such as radioactive substance confinement design, decay 
heat elimination design, criticality prevention design, and fire 
prevention design. Next, we will explain defense design against 
external events such as earthquakes and aircraft crashes. These 
safety designs follow the "reprocessing plant safety inspection 
guidelines" established by the Japan Nuclear Safety Commission 
with safety inspections of private reprocessing plants in mind. 
<H5>  A. Safety Design Targeting Internal Events </H5>
<H5>  1. Basic Plan </H5>
  Safety is ensured by adopting the following principles of 
multi-layer defense: 
  (1) Prevent abnormal occurrences by adopting technology with 
demonstrated high reliability, designing tolerance into 
processes and equipment, and selecting appropriate materials. 
(In stages following design, this is done by activities that 
guarantee quality and by operator training and education.) 
  (2) Prevent the spread and escalation of abnormal 
occurrences: There is little danger that such abnormal 
occurrences will escalate rapidly, since reprocessing plant 
operating conditions (temperature, pressure, etc.) are mild. 
Thus in most cases, there is ample time for operators to detect 
abnormal occurrences through warning signs and transfer 
processes to a safe state. However, in the prevention of 
accidents with potentially major effects, such as criticality, 
fire and explosions, a highly reliable interlock system will 
ensure safety automatically, when necessary. 
  (3) Ameliorate effects from escalation of abnormal 
occurrences: Every measure has been taken to prevent the 
occurrence and escalation of abnormal situations, but even if a 
situation were to escalate, countermeasures have been 
established to ameliorate its effects so that the general public 
will not be affected seriously.[.sup]3[/] If an abnormal 
situation escalates, the danger arises of release of radioactive 
substances in aerosol form into the ventilation system. A 
countermeasure for all processes, to ameliorate the effects of 
abnormal situations that have escalated, is the designing of 
high-efficiency particulate filters that will function 
unimpaired even under abnormal conditions and will remove 
virtually all of the aerosol and then release it through an 
exhaust pipe with diluting and diffusing effect (see the next 
section, "confinement design"). Countermeasures to ameliorate 
specific effects include criticality prevention measures and 
fire extinguishing equipment. 
  Incidentally, dynamic equipment[.sup]4[/] that provide any 
of the multi-layer defenses and that are important for safety 
are designed with independent and redundant power sources and 
circuits so that safety performance is not impaired if one 
breaks down. 
<H5>  2. Confinement Design </H5>
  We will use Figure 2 to explain the design for confinement 
of 
radioactive solutions as a typical example. Most of the major 
equipment involve chemical processes that use nitric acid. Thus 
the columns, tanks and pipes are made of materials (stainless 
steel, zirconium) that are highly resistant to corrosion by 
nitric acid. Moreover, wetted sections are of welded 
construction for leak proofing. Because the processes use only 
low temperature and pressure, it is almost inconceivable that a 
large-volume leak would occur. Assuming that this did occur, 
however, a stainless steel receptacle for leaking liquid has 
been installed on the cell floor, and along with this, there is 
a detection device with which the operator can immediately 
detect the leak and recover the leakage in another, sound tank. 
The cell is further enclosed in housing. This multi-barrier 
construction makes it impossible for the radioactive solution to 
leak out to the external environment. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-022L-44A>      Figure 2: Confinement Function Diagram </FIG>


  On the other hand, columns and tanks are linked to the 
atmosphere by column and tank exhaust gas disposal equipment 
(their ventilation systems), and the cell and housing are linked 
separately to the atmosphere by their own ventilation systems. 
Because the radioactive substances in solution are non-volatile, 
only a small percentage would enter the ventilation system in 
aerosol form even under conditions caused by an accident, and it 
would be completely removed by high-efficiency particulate 
filters, then released through an exhaust pipe. Since air 
pressure is increasingly lower going from atmosphere to housing 
to cell to columns and tanks, radioactive aerosol will not get 
out directly into the atmosphere even if it diffuses in the cell 
or housing; it will go through high-efficiency particulate 
filters and then will be released through the exhaust pipe. In 
this way the ventilation systems are designed to be a safety 
function that ameliorates effects on the environment, even 
during accidents. 
<H5>  3. Decay Heat Elimination Design </H5>
  Most of the unsealed radioactive substances handled in the 
plant exist in storage tanks -- supply tanks, receiving tanks, 
buffer tanks -- that serve as temporary storage of radioactive 
solutions. Although radioactive solution decay heat is 
relatively low, the most important safety feature of these 
storage tanks is decay heat elimination. Figure 3 shows the 
structure of the concentrated HLW liquid storage tank cooling 
system, which will be explained from the viewpoint of prevention 
of boiling. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-022L-45A>      Figure 3: Configuration of Concentrated </FIG>


  To eliminate decay heat, two independent cooling water 
systems, including power systems, are established and operated. 
In the storage tank, five cooling coils have been installed for 
each system, but the necessary heat elimination actually can be 
done with four coils. Cooling water is circulated by a pump and 
release of heat to the outside is accomplished through an air 
fin cooler. Spares for these dynamic equipment are in place so 
that the cooling capability of the system is not lost even if 
one piece of equipment were to break down. Even if an abnormal 
situation escalates and the cooling capability of one system is 
lost, the remaining system will run and the boiling point will 
not be reached. 
  The external power source receives power through two 
circuits, so there is no hindrance to power supplying even if 
there is an outage on one circuit. To prepare against the 
possibility of outages on both circuits at the same time, an 
emergency diesel generator has been installed for each system. 
Moreover, to improve power source reliability, power can also be 
received from a spare diesel generator. 
  Also, in emergencies, solutions can be transferred to a 
spare 
storage tank that is normally empty. 
  Because of this very tightly designed system, it is 
inconceivable that the cooling capability of the two independent 
systems could be lost simultaneously or that this state could 
continue for a number of hours so that the boiling point would 
be reached. 
  A spent fuel storage pool cooling water system (two-system 
structure) and a general cooling water system have been set up 
which are completely independent from the abovementioned storage 
tank cooling water systems. These can also be used for cooling 
the concentrated HLW liquid storage tank. 
<H5>  4. Criticality Prevention Design </H5>
  Because the plant will reprocess spent fuel that was burned 
at nuclear power plants, there is essentially little danger of 
criticality in equipment that handles spent fuel assemblies or 
uranium. However, each piece of equipment has been designed to 
prevent criticality.[.sup]5[/] As a typical example of this, 
we will discuss equipment used after plutonium mixing and 
separation, where that essential argument does not apply. 
  Safety design (called "total concentration safety 
configuration and measurement control") has been applied to 
control the configuration of columns and tanks through which 
plutonium solutions flow so that criticality will not be reached 
no matter how high plutonium concentration becomes during normal 
operation. Even for columns and tanks through which plutonium 
does not flow during normal operation, safety design (called 
"limited concentration safety configuration and measurement 
control" or "concentration control") has been applied to ensure 
adequate tolerance and non-criticality below a certain 
concentration. Thus the latter criticality safety design becomes 
important if solutions flow from equipment governed by total 
concentration safety configuration and measurements control to 
equipment governed by the other control. Figure 4 explains this 
using the example of the washer (mixer-settler) in the 
distributor. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-022L-46A>      Figure 4: Example of Criticality Prevention Design </FIG>


  As explained in part II, plutonium is stripped into the 
water 
phase in the distributor column. However, a trace of plutonium 
remaining in the organic phase flows to the next step, the 
plutonium washer, along with uranium, where it comes into 
contact with a reducer and is removed to the water phase side. 
The distributor column is "total concentration safety 
configuration and measurement control" equipment, whereas the 
plutonium washer is "concentration control" equipment. If 
supplying of reducer to the distributor column stops for several 
hours, the plutonium may become concentrated and flow into the 
plutonium washer in highly concentrated form. However, an alarm 
is set off when reducer supplying stops, and the operator can 
stop the process immediately or take other safety measures. Even 
if this was neglected and developed into an abnormal situation, 
the malfunction can be observed through multiple neutron 
detectors installed in the distributor column for process 
monitoring, and the operator would have adequate time, even at 
this point, to stop the process or take other safety measures. 
Additionally, an interlock system has been designed to operate 
completely separately from operator response. As shown in Figure 
4, when neutron detectors installed in the plutonium washer 
detect a high count rate that indicates an inflow of highly 
concentrated plutonium, an alarm is set off and at the same 
time, processing is automatically shut down. This interlock 
system's high reliability is ensured by independent and 
redundant power source, gauges, cutoff valves, etc. 
  As described above, there is ample time for operator 
response 
and, beyond that, a highly reliable interlock system has been 
installed. It is therefore inconceivable that criticality will 
occur. 
<H5>  5. Fire Prevention Design </H5>
  A flammable organic solvent is used in the extraction 
process. Fire prevention design is important because, if a fire 
broke out, some radioactive substance might be carried by smoke 
and get into the ventilation system and be released into the 
atmospheric environment. Therefore, the safety design described 
below will ensure that the three conditions required for fire to 
occur ((1) solvent leaking from the container to the cell; (2) 
the solvent not being recovered and heating up to the flash 
point (74C); and (3) ignition of the solvent which has 
reached flash point) will not be fulfilled. 
  As stated in earlier sections, columns, tanks and pipes are 
built to prevent leaks, but should a leak occur, the solvent 
would be recovered immediately and could not be released. While 
there are columns or tanks that heat and use solvents, the 
temperature is limited to 50C and the heat source is not 
near the receptacle for leakage. It is therefore difficult to 
conceive of the temperature of any leaked solvent rising to the 
flash point. No equipment that could be an igniting source is 
placed in the cell, and equipment also are grounded to prevent 
static discharge. This design prevents fires, but on the 
assumption of the possibility of a fire outbreak, fire detectors 
have been installed, there are fire prevention dampers that can 
cut off air flowing into the cell, and gas extinguishers also 
have been provided. 
<H5>  B. Safety Design Against External Events </H5>
<H5>  1. Earthquake-Proofing Design </H5>
  Buildings, systems and equipment (hereafter called the 
"facility") have been separated into three classes (A, B, and C) 
in order of importance from the viewpoint of effect of 
radioactivity on the environment in the event of loss of safety 
capability as a result of an earthquake, and earthquake-proofing 
has been applied in accordance with this importance. Moreover, 
important buildings and structures will be supported by stable 
ground, the Takahoko formation (Neogene-Miocene geologic age). 
  Designation of seismic force for the design and confirmation 
of the stability of the Takahoko formation was based on the 
following survey results: 


    -  Study of documentation on past earthquakes in the area 
surrounding the site. 
  -  Study of documentation on geological 
structure (especially active faults) of the site and surrounding 
area (land and ocean), interpretation of aerial photographs, 
geological ground survey (land) and marine sonic prospecting 
(ocean). 
  -  Survey of geological structure of the site through 
elastic vibration, boring, and test pits; and testing of rocks 
and bedrock of site foundation ground. 


    Facilities in Class A will be designed to withstand the 
strongest earthquake (called "maximum magnitude earthquake for 
design purposes") that the above survey results have determined 
may affect the site in the near future. 
  Class A facilities of critical importance (such as spent 
fuel 
storage facility, system and equipment for concentrated HLW 
liquid storage and cooling systems) are designated Class A's, 
and are designed so that safety capability can be sustained even 
in the event of an earthquake stronger than the "maximum 
magnitude earthquake for design purposes" based on the survey 
results and conceivable from a seismological viewpoint. As for 
the level of that conceivable earthquake, studies were conducted 
on the occurrence of past earthquakes, past activity of the 
faults around the site, and earthquakes caused by the Pacific 
plate sinking beneath the Eurasia plate; and a magnitude 8.25 
earthquake on the border of the plate in eastern Aomori 
Prefecture, which would have the greatest effect on the 
facilities, was presumed for the purpose of evaluation. 
Additionally, although it has been confirmed that there are no 
active faults that might affect the area surrounding the site, a 
6.5 magnitude earthquake directly under the site (hypocentral 
distance 10 km) was also presumed. 
  In addition to withstanding the seismic force determined by 
the abovementioned "maximum magnitude earthquake for design 
purposes," Class A structures are designed to withstand three 
times the static seismic force determined by the Building 
Standards Act. Class B and Class C structures are designed to 
withstand 1.5 times and 1 time that static seismic force, 
respectively. The criteria for design of systems and equipment 
in those classes is 20 percent higher. 
  This sort of earthquake-proofing design precludes the 
possibility that any earthquake of any imaginable seismic force 
around the Rokkasho Reprocessing Plant will be the immediate 
cause of a serious accident. 
<H5>  2. Design for Defense Against Aircraft </H5>
  About 10 km south of the Rokkasho Reprocessing Plant is the 
Misawa air-to-ground training area, where Air Self Defense Force 
and U.S. Air Force aircraft carry out air-to-ground firing and 
bombing training flights. The airspace over the reprocessing 
plant is in the Misawa special air control district. However, 
the possibility of aircraft crashing into the plant is extremely 
slight, considering the fact that aircraft are restricted from 
flying over nuclear-related facilities, the training flight 
configuration in this area and pilot maneuvers to avoid this 
airspace in the event of breakdown. 
  Nevertheless, considering the unique social environment of 
the site, the general population would be seriously 
affected[.sup]6[/] by an accident caused by an aircraft on a 
training flight which lost engine thrust and glided off-course 
to the reprocessing plant and crashed. Therefore, the plant is 
designed so that there will be no hindrance to ensuring safety 
by appropriately protecting it with strong buildings and 
structures that will prevent penetration and remain sound 
against the impact load of an aircraft. 
  When coming up with the design, evaluation formulas that 
were 
verified for suitability were used, and its adequacy was 
confirmed through crash tests using actual and model engines as 
well as actual aircraft.[.sup]j[/] 
<H5>  V. Safety Evaluation </H5>
  The necessary safety countermeasures are drawn up as 
progress 
is made on the design, and safety assessment means reconfirming 
the adequacy of safety design as a whole by systematic and 
thorough analysis and study of abnormal events. In this section, 
we will explain the selection method and results of evaluating 
design basis events, which confirm that the multi-layer defense 
concept has been adopted appropriately, and site evaluation 
accidents, which are used to judge the adequacy of distance 
separating the plant from the general public. Incidentally, it 
has been confirmed that the design ensures complete safety 
against external events such as floods, earthquakes, and 
aircraft crashes. The content of this evaluation complies with 
the "guidelines for safety inspection of reprocessing 
facilities." 
<H5>  A. Design Basis Events </H5>
  Design basis events consist of "abnormal transient changes 
during operation" and "events exceeding abnormal transient 
changes during operation." The main purpose of "abnormal 
transient changes during operation" is to confirm the adequacy 
of measures to prevent escalation of abnormalities, the second 
level of multi-layer defense, and the main purpose of "events 
exceeding abnormal transient changes during operation" is to 
confirm the adequacy of measures to ameliorate effects, the 
third level of multi-layer defense. 
<H5>  1. Abnormal Transient Changes During Operation </H5>
  "Abnormal transient changes during operation" are equipment 
breakdowns, which are expected to happen during the life of a 
reprocessing plant, and events such as changes in operating 
conditions beyond the normal range, which are caused by operator 
error and which may expand into accidents if neglected. 
  Some events that may cause accidents are substance 
input/output, energy input/output, unusual changes in location 
or routing and loss of external power sources. Table 2 lists 14 
of these changes. For each equipment, system, glovebox, etc., 
that contain radioactive substances, the relevant changes among 
the 14 items were hypothesized, and these were analyzed and 
studied to determine what sort of events would result if these 
changes were neglected. About 600 possibilities were selected as 
abnormal events that might significantly increase the amount of 
radioactive substances released into the environment if measures 
to prevent escalation were not considered. 



  Table 2: Changes Concerning Selection of Possibilities for "Abnormal 
Transient Changes During Operation" 



Major Categories                     Subcategories 



Abnormal Changes to Liquids and      Flow Volume ChangeNuclear Fuel Substance 
Solids in Process                    Concentration ChangeFission Product 
                                     Concentration ChangeReagent 
                                     Concentration ChangeRetention Volume 
                                     ChangeTransport Route Change, Solid 
                                     Position Change 

Abnormal Changes to Gasses in        Flow Volume (or Pressure) 
Process                              ChangeComposition ChangeFlow Path Change 


Abnormal Changes to Temperature in   Heating Capability ChangeCooling 
Process                              Capability Change 

Abnormal Changes in Ventilation      Ventilation Air Flow ChangeVentilation 
System                               Flow Path Change 

External Power Source Loss           External Power Source Loss 


  Consideration was given to the fact that "abnormal transient 
changes during operation" are events that may occur to the 
extent that they are expected to occur during the life of a 
reprocessing plant, and these possibilities were narrowed down 
to 48 evaluation events. Similar items were merged, and seven 
events were designated as representative events, which are 
listed in Table 3. 



  Table 3: Selection of "Abnormal Transient Changes During Operation" 

Selected Representative Events 

1. Abnormal temperature rise in organic solvent in stripping column of 
plutonium refining equipment (organic solvent fire prevention) 

2. Abnormal rise in temperature of heating steam in concentrated HLW liquid 
boiler (prevention of sudden decomposition reaction of TBP and other 
complexes) 

3. Abnormal increase in concentration of hydrogen in reducing gas in reducing 
furnace of mixed uranium-plutonium denitration equipment (explosion 
prevention) 

4. Abnormal rise in concentration of plutonium in plutonium washer of 
distributor equipment (criticality prevention) 

5. Increase in steam volume in exhaust gas due to drop in cooling capability 
in condenser of concentrated HLW liquid boiler (prevent degradation of 
high-efficiency particulate filters) 

6. Abnormal increase in temperature in reducing furnace of mixed 
uranium-plutonium denitration equipment (prevent drop in confinement 
capability) 

7. External power source loss (prevent increase in volume of release of 
radioactive substances) 


  Evaluation confirmed that the interlock system and other 
escalation prevention measures can safely terminate all of these 
events without escalation of abnormalities. 
<H5>  2. Events Exceeding Abnormal Transient Changes During </H5>
Operation 
  "Events that exceed abnormal transient changes during 
operation" are events that escalate beyond "abnormal transient 
changes during operation" despite the fact that measures have 
been taken to prevent escalation. Their occurrence therefore is 
even less possible. In the selection process, events with an 
extremely small likelihood of occurring that were eliminated in 
the selection of "abnormal transient changes during operation" 
also were considered. Events reported at domestic and overseas 
reprocessing plants and related facilities also were used as 
reference. It was decided that it would not be necessary to 
select as "events that exceed abnormal transient changes during 
operation" events which the design would ensure that the 
operator had ample time to prevent from escalating and for which 
very secure automatic accident prevention countermeasures are 
set up. Typical examples of this are boiling in the concentrated 
HLW liquid storage tanks (mentioned in section IV.A.3 on decay 
heat elimination design), and criticality that accompanies 
unusual rise in plutonium concentration in the plutonium washer 
of the distributor (mentioned in section IV.A.4 on criticality 
safety design). 
  As a result of this study, 25 evaluation events were 
selected 
out of 600 possible events.[.sup]k[/] Similar events were 
combined to come up with seven representative events, which are 
listed in Table 4. As a result of evaluation, "criticality in 
the dissolver"[.sup]7[/] was considered the event with the 
most serious effect, and it was verified that the maximum 
effective dose equivalent inflicted on the public in the 
surrounding area would be 0.57mSv, which is below the criterion 
for judging serious effect (5mSv). 



  Table 4: Selection of "Events Exceeding Abnormal Transient Changes During 
Operation" 



Selected Representative Events 



1. Organic solvent fire in cell of plutonium refining equipment 

2. Sudden decomposition reaction of TBP and other complexes in the 
concentrated plutonium boiler 

3. Criticality in the dissolver 

4. Leak to cell from pipes of HLW liquid storage equipment 

5. Leak of molten glass in the HLW liquid glassification equipment 

6. Fall of spent fuel assemblies in the spent fuel receiving facility and 
storage facility 

7. Brief loss of all AC power supply 


<H5>  B. Site Evaluation Accident </H5>
  From a technical viewpoint, "events exceeding abnormal 
transient changes during operation" are the biggest accidents 
imaginable, and there are no accidents that would exceed such 
events. However, considering the magnitude of the potential 
effect due to the large volume of radioactive material being 
handled, the site evaluation accident was hypothesized to be 
anything from "events exceeding abnormal transient changes 
during operation" to "criticality in the dissolver" and "organic 
solvent fire in the cell of plutonium refining equipment," and 
the amount of radioactivity released was hypothesized to be even 
greater, from 10 to 1,000 times depending on the released 
nuclides. It was also hypothesized that all the rare gas and 
iodine generated at criticality immediately would go through the 
ventilation system and be released into the atmosphere through 
the chimney. The result of the evaluation was that the effect on 
the public in the surrounding area would be greatest for 
criticality, 6.1mSv (whole body dose), but this is less than the 
dose of 250mSv, which is used to determine validity. It was 
confirmed that the other evaluation items (tissue dose 
equivalent and collective dose) also met the standards for 
determination. 
<H5>  VI. Conclusion </H5>
  When designs are drawn up, ensuring safety is ranked as the 
most important matter in the performance of operations. Although 
foreign technologies are considered the major technologies, when 
it came to safety, measures that fully reflected Japan's own 
ideas were devised. We are confident that these fail-safe safety 
measures will ensure that no accident will occur that will 
inflict a significant amount of radioactivity on the environment. 
  Apart from the handling of abnormalities explained in this 
article, I would like to touch upon the radioactivity in exhaust 
gases and water released into the atmosphere and the ocean 
during normal operation, a matter of particular interest in 
terms of environmental effect. Certainly, the general public 
dose equivalent from radioactivity emitted during normal 
operation is below the maximum prescribed by law, and the policy 
is to reduce it even lower, based on the ALARA [as low as 
reasonably achievable] principle. As a result, it has been 
assessed that the effective dose equivalent received from 
radioactive emission by the public in the surrounding area would 
be a maximum of 0.022mSv per year. This is about one-tenth of 
the difference in effective dose equivalent from natural 
radioactivity in the Kanto and Kansai areas, about 0.2mSv per 
year (the radiation dose of Kansai area soil is higher because 
it contains more potassium -40, uranium series and other natural 
radionuclides), and it is inconceivable that this will have any 
health effects. 
  Nevertheless, we realize that the general public's trust in 
the reprocessing plant will be earned by its actual operation, 
and we intend to continue to make safety our primary policy in 
the construction, operation and maintenance of the plant and in 
operator education and training, and raise the safety of the 
plant even higher. 
Footnotes 
  1. In 1992, Japan Nuclear Fuel Service and Japan Nuclear 
Fuel 
Industry (involved in uranium enrichment and geological disposal 
of low-level radioactive waste) merged and became Japan Nuclear 
Fuel. 
  2. Lists only equipment necessary for summary explanation of 
processes. For more details, see item b in the bibliography. 
  3. The criterion for "no serious effect": Less than the 
effective dose equivalent of 5mSv, which is 1.3 times the 
effective dose equivalent received from a medical examination 
X-ray. 
  4. "Dynamic equipment" are pumps, relays, fans, etc., that 
run on externally supplied power. 
  5. Countermeasures for emergencies have been established for 
the dissolver tank as well because, as noted in Footnote 7, 
criticality accident is hypothesized for the evaluation. 
  6. See Footnote 3. 
  7. "Criticality in the dissolver" was selected from the 
viewpoint of evaluating the adequacy of countermeasures to limit 
effect, considering the fact that the continuous dissolver is a 
representative criticality safety control equipment that uses 
multiple criticality safety control methods (geometry control, 
concentration control, mass control, and neutron absorber 
control). 
Reference 
  a. Masatoshi Toyota, GENSHIRYOKU KOGYO, 35, 5, 1989. 
  b. Osamu Kawakatsu, GENSHIRYOKU KOGYO, 35, 9, 1989. 
  c. Hiroshi Sumitani, GENSHIRYOKU KOGYO, 35, 24, 1989. 
  d. Hayakatsu Kawamoto, GENSHIRYOKU KOGYO, 35, 33, 1989. 
  e. Masatake Aramura, GENSHIRYOKU KOGYO, 35, 36, 1989. 
  f. Hiroshi Sumitani, Hitoshi Takeuchi, Sadaaki Sasaki; 
GENSHIRYOKU KOGYO, 38, 10, 1992. 
  g. "Japan Nuclear Fuel, Ltd. Application for Designation as 
Reprocessing Enterprise" and attached documents; application - 
30 Mar 1989; revisions - 18 Oct 1990, 15 May 1991, 30 Jul 1991, 
3 Jul 1992, 16 Nov 1992. 
  h. E. Walker, "A Summary of Parameters Affecting the Release 
and Transport of Radioactive Material from an Unplanned 
Incident," BNFO-81-2, 1978 (reissued 1981). 
  i. Gunji Nishio, et al., "Safety Demonstration Tests 
Concerning Solvent Fires in Reprocessing Plants," JAERI-M 
89-032, 1989. 
  j. K. Muto, et al., "10th SMiRT Conference," J9, 1989. 
  k. Japan Nuclear Fuel, Mitsubishi Nuclear Industries; 
"Selection of Design Basis Events for Reprocessing Plants," J-M 
1004, Jul 1991 (revised Nov 1992). 

