Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, March 16 KYODO -- The approval rating for the 
cabinet of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa remains around 60 
percent, but the ratio of those disapproving grew by 7.5 
percentage points since December, according to a poll published 
Wednesday [16 March] by KYODO news service. 
  Nearly one-third of the respondents expressing disapproval 
of 
the cabinet cited Hosokawa's "lack of leadership" as their 
reason for not believing in the seven-month-old government. 
  The public opinion survey on March 12 and 13 asked 3,000 
eligible voters nationwide for their views and received 
responses from 1,995 people. The results were compared with a 
similar poll conducted in December. 
  The pollsters found that the approval rating for the cabinet 
slipped from 62.8 percent to 61.5 percent. 
  Of the cabinet supporters, 31.9 percent said there is no 
other appropriate person to head the government, while another 
23.9 percent said they trusted the prime minister. 
  Another 17.9 percent, an increase of nearly 3 percentage 
points, said they approved of the cabinet because it was not a 
Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) cabinet. The LDP was ousted last 
summer by the Hosokawa-led coalition after 38 years as the party 
in power. 
  Meanwhile, the cabinet's disapproval rating grew from 24.4 
percent to 31.9 percent over the last three months. 
  A total of 31 percent of the people disapproving of the 
cabinet saw the prime minister as lacking the ability to lead, 
three times the number in the previous survey. 
  Hosokawa's plan, later withdrawn, of creating a "social 
welfare tax" and his aborted plan to reorganize his cabinet have 
been cited by political pundits as evidence of weak leadership. 
  Instability within the coalition government was cited as a 
reason for nonsupport by 17.6 percent of the people, but that 
was about half the ratio in the previous poll. Still, 16.6 
percent of the discontented respondents do not like the 
cabinet's economic policies. 
  As for the individual political parties, support for the 
opposition LDP was still the largest, but slipped from 27.9 
percent to 25.4 percent. 
  Support for Hosokawa's Japan New Party remained about the 
same at 13.2 percent, while Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party], 
said to be the key force behind the coalition government, was 
supported by 12.1 percent of the respondents. 
  The support rate for new party Sakigake [Harbinger], nearly 
tripled from 2.6 percent to 7.2 percent. 
  Still, 19.4 percent of the respondents said they do not 
support any political party. 

