Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with PLO Political Department head Faruq Qaddumi </F>
by Sana' al-Sa'id; place and date not given] 
  [Text] [Al-Sa'id] How can the Palestinians find a way out 
of their crisis after Israel's adherence to the Cairo document 
and its insistence that this document is a common denominator of 
understanding between the Palestinians and Israel? 
  [Qaddumi] We are not in crisis, but we have a difficult 
problem before us. Undoubtedly, continuing negotiations will 
get us out of that crisis as long as Israel insists on a literal 
translation of the Declaration of Principles agreed upon last 
September. 
  [Al-Sa'id] Do you believe Israel is lying when it claims 
that 
the agreement reached in the Cairo talks last week was a 
document of understanding between the two sides and not merely 
ideas presented to both sides? 
  [Qaddumi] Yes, it is lying. Israel is used to faking facts, 
and the world and the international community must understand 
this point. There was no document and no agreement. There were 
discussions and ideas were presented. Israel is playing games 
and denying everything that was agreed upon in the agreement. 
The agreement stipulates withdrawal as a major issue. Israel 
is stalling and wants to give away scattered pieces of territory 
here and there. It also wants to control the crossings. This 
is not withdrawal. If Israel's intentions are honest, it should 
adhere to the agreement; in other words, it needs to withdraw 
early on. 
  [Al-Sa'id] The faltering in the talks might threaten the 
negotiations. And isn't Israel blaming the PLO for not adhering 
to the Cairo agreement? 
  [Qaddumi] No agreement was reached in the first place for us 
to adhere to. Cairo merely discussed Israeli ideas that were 
proposed. In general, we realized we have difficult negotiations 
ahead when we started the peace process in Madrid. Israel is 
faking facts and claiming that this territory is disputed 
territory. We insisted that it should withdraw from these 
territories so that the Palestinian identity--the real identity 
of the territories--would be reinstated on condition that 
discussion of the thorny issues is postponed. 
  Withdrawal is the basic element in this agreement. If Israel 
does not withdraw, the whole agreement is threatened with 
collapse due to Israel's belligerence and nonadherence to the 
real texts of this agreement. Israel stalls and reads the facts 
backward. It has also gone back on the major principle that 
stipulates that the land is Palestinian, which means the 
Palestinian people's sovereignty over it is the core issue. The 
responsibility of the international community is a direct 
responsibility, especially as regards those who patronize the 
peace march, that is, President Clinton. 
  [Al-Sa'id] But Israel still clings to the crossings. 
  [Qaddumi] Israel's adherence to the crossings is contrary to 
the texts. It has no right to supervise who comes and goes, 
because this land it is discussing is Palestinian. Israel must 
adhere to the agreement of principles governing the transitional 
stage. Withdrawal does not give it the right to continue being 
responsible for the movement of people and goods in and out of 
the area from which it withdraws. 
  [Al-Sa'id] There are claims that Israel insists on 
controlling the crossings merely to meet Jordan's wishes; Jordan 
is said to prefer the crossings under Israeli control than under 
Palestinian control to guarantee their security. 
  [Qaddumi] In our political path, we have become accustomed 
to 
having politicians like Kissinger tell us one thing and the Arab 
countries another. These are the methods Israel is using in its 
negotiations. It says things that are different from the facts. 
It leaks these rumors to one Arab party or another. I do not 
believe that Jordan prefers to have Israel control the crossings 
over the Palestinians. I cannot even imagine that Jordan would 
publicize something like this. Jordan is part of the Arab 
territory, we are a part of the Arab territory, and our 
interests are the same. There is no difference between the 
Palestinian and Jordanian people. These are mere names giving an 
identity for political reasons. We should have no differences 
with Jordan no matter what we might hear every now and then. We 
have joint interests with Jordan. 
  [Al-Sa'id] We interpreted your late coordination with 
Jordan as reflecting your differences. 
  [Qaddumi] It has nothing to do with any dispute with Jordan. 
We are brothers. We tried right from the start to ensure an 
Israeli withdrawal so that we could sign and coordinate with 
Jordan on a clear-cut basis. 
  [Al-Sa'id] According to some people, the United States 
appears as if it has colluded with Israel to weaken the 
negotiating position with the Palestinians. 
  [Qaddumi] The United States knows its responsibilities. It 
is the principal sponsor of this process. The United States and 
President Clinton know that any failure of the process would 
mean the failure of U.S. policy. 
  [Al-Sa'id] The Geneva meeting slated to be held between 
Presidents Hafiz al-Asad and Bill Clinton could be a prelude for 
a thaw between Syria and Israel. Could this reflect negatively 
on the Palestinian track and find you lagging behind the other 
Arab tracks? 
  [Qaddumi] On the contrary. We believe this meeting would be 
in our interest. As Palestinians and Arabs, there must be 
progress on the Syrian track. The settlement must be just and 
comprehensive, not simply progress on the Palestinian track. We 
are doing our best to achieve progress on the Syrian, Lebanese, 
and Jordanian tracks. Syria shoulders great responsibilities and 
advocates a comprehensive solution. Syria must search for a 
comprehensive solution because it has responsibilities toward 
the other brothers. 
  [Al-Sa'id] What about the acts of violence and killings in 
the occupied Arab territories that Israel is using as a pretext 
to prove that the PLO can't maintain security and control the 
situation? 
  [Qaddumi] These acts are a result of Israel's terrorism 
inside the occupied territories. Israel is resorting to this to 
prove that security is absent and that the PLO can't cope with 
the security issues. 
  We must not be too good-hearted, because the road to hell is 
paved with good intentions. We must realize that while there is 
one Israeli soldier on our land the Palestinian people must 
resist. The opposition must continue as long as Israeli 
soldiers occupy the Palestinian land. 
  [Al-Sa'id] What about the PLO's democracy amid the current 
numerous differences? 
  [Qaddumi] We have democracy so it's natural to have 
differences. It is the right of every faction to express its 
opinion freely and frankly. We want positive and objective 
criticism for the sake of building something. Praise be to God, 
all the factions abide by this. They are criticizing particular 
positions but they are not killing people. 

