Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Jakarta, Feb 10 (ANTARA) -- The Organization of 
Islamic Conference (OIC) member countries pleaded to send some 
10,000 troops to be deployed as part of the United Nations 
peacekeepers in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  "Within the U.N. system, we offer 10,000 troops which will 
come from Malaysia, Jordan, Pakistan, Egypt," chairman of the 
OIC contact group Pakistani Foreign Minister Sardar Asif Ahmad 
Ali told a press conference here Thursday. 
  In the fringes of the limited ministerial meeting of the 
Nonaligned Movement (NAM) some ministers of the OIC contact 
group on Bosnia also conducted an informal meeting to discuss 
the detariorating situation of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The Pakistani foreign minister also said that besides the 
peacekeeping troops, OIC foreign ministers also agreed to 
support NAM chairman's proposal of convening an 
appropriately-structured international conference on 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  President Suharto upon receiving Bosnian President Alija 
Izetbegovic recently mentioned the possibility of launching an 
international conference on Bosnia to find a just settlement to 
the conflict in the region. 
  "We welcome NAM chairman's decision to conduct a meeting 
through the NAM coordinating bureau in New York to demand more 
effective measures to be undertaken by the U.N," Minister Asif, 
who was accompanied by Malaysia's Foreign Minister Abdullah 
Ahmad Badawi, said. 
  He added that the OIC contact group minsters have expressed 
their strong support for the convening of a special session of 
the general assembly to bring an end to the genocide and carnage 
in Bosnia- Herzegovina. 
  When asked about NATO's 10-day ultimatum before launching 
air 
strikes if Serb artillery and other heavy weapons are not 
withdraw and placed under U.N supervision, the minister said, 
such a threat would not ensure Serbs' withdrawal of its forces. 
  Stating that the OIC contact group on Bosnia are not 
satisfied with NATO's decision, he urged NATO to immediately use 
its sophisticated armament, the one that had been used 
successfully in Iraq to launch immediate strikes against the 
Serbs. 
  "It would not ensure that [words indistinct] air strikes 
against the Serb military forces, he said that finding a 
solution for the Bosnia-Herzegovina should be the prime 
responsibility of the European Union and NATO. 
  Asif took the occassion also to remind that conflicts in the 
Balkan country had triggered the World War I and II, saying that 
"If the condition in Bosnia-Herzegovina will be worsen, the 
European countries will directly be affected." 

