Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Shalnev report: "$2,000 To Cut Up One Tank"] </F>
  [Text] Minsk -- The repair plant at Borisov, some 80 km 
outside Minsk, had almost shut down completely a week ago. 
There was no electricity. 
  So what's new?! This kind of thing happens in Belarus all 
the time: Many plants are standing idle or working at 
50-percent capacity. 
  But Repair Plant No. 140 in Borisov is a special plant. 
Special, because it is carrying out an extraordinary order: It 
is cutting up tanks and other combat equipment which Belarus has 
been instructed to destroy under the terms of the treaty on 
reducing arms in Europe. When the treaty was signed, Belarus 
was still Belorussia and the tanks were Soviet. But everything 
had changed when the treaty came into force, the main difference 
being that it was now up to Minsk, rather than Moscow, to pay 
for the tanks and their destruction. 
  Cutting up a tank is expensive. As Colonel Mikhail Volochko 
from the National Monitoring and Inspections Agency told me, 
$2,000 per tank is the bare minimum. But Belarus is committed 
to destroying 1,873 of them within 40 months of the treaty's 
coming into force, that is, by the beginning of 1996. 
  Minsk itself must find the money to destroy these tanks. 
There are no charity organizations, and no special funds are 
envisaged. So where is the money to come from? So far it has 
been provided by the Defense Ministry. From which sources? 
From the most "expendable": Those intended as allocations to 
meet the needs of officers and warrant officers, provide them 
with social facilities, and build them the most basic 
accommodations. 
  But the Defense Ministry's budget is not so much hovering on 
the brink: It is simply in a state of collapse. If the money 
had been available, under no circumstances would it have allowed 
the repair plant in Borisov to be shut down. It will be started 
up again, of course, as there is no alternative but to scrape 
together the necessary funds to cut another 102 tanks and 49 
armored vehicles into pieces by 12 January, as envisaged by the 
current stage in the implementation of the treaty. 
  "But what if the plan is not fulfilled? What will happen if 
these commitments are left hanging in the air?" I asked members 
of the military and politicians. "Will sanctions be applied to 
Belarus?" 
  No overt sanctions are envisaged, it was explained to me, 
although covert sanctions are a possibility: For example, an 
agreement on economic or commercial cooperation in which Minsk 
is particularly interested could suddenly, at the very last 
moment just before signing, be set aside "for final touches and 
adjustments." 
  The military and the Belarusian Foreign Ministry estimate 
that the republic needs at least $33 million if it is to honor 
the commitments to which the Soviet Union set its signature -- 
namely, to destroy tanks, armored personnel carriers, aircraft, 
and other military equipment -- within the deadline and to the 
standard set, that is, without prompting criticism from NATO 
inspectors and monitors. I repeat: This kind of money cannot 
be found in the republic budget, not even by making still more 
draconian public spending cuts. 
Hence the task to which, as Foreign Minister Petr Kravchanka 
told me, Belarusian diplomats are devoting paramount attention: 
The task of finding these $33 million. Where are they looking? 
Abroad mainly. 
  One would have thought nothing could be simpler: For 
example, the United States has long had a law named after its 
authors, Senators Nunn and Lugar, which provides for giving 
substantial aid to some of the former Soviet republics for the 
purpose of their demilitarization. Almost $800 million has been 
assigned, of which more than $70 million is due to Belarus. 
  But the problem is that this money is primarily "nuclear," 
that is, it is earmarked for nuclear demilitarization and 
actually has nothing to do with conventional weapons, such as 
tanks and armored vehicles. Nunn and Lugar are perfectly 
willing to allocate -- and are allocating -- $25 million to 
ensure the "environmental regeneration" of places in Belarus 
where strategic missile forces used to be stationed, but Minsk 
can go whistle as far as help with destroying tanks is 
concerned. Incidentally, I came across a very interesting 
report in a Minsk newspaper recently: A high-security 
corrective labor colony is opening on the site of a disbanded 
missile unit in Ivatsevichskiy Rayon. It will have room for 
2,000 prisoners. The report did not make clear, however, 
whether this is the "environmental regeneration" referred to in 
the Nunn-Lugar law, and, if it is, what sum the senators have 
allocated for this specific project. 
  It seems to me that this U.S. law and similar laws in other 
countries need some modifications and amendments. Obviously you 
must not look a gift horse in the mouth and so forth, but, if 
you think about it, it is probably far more important for 
Belarus to prevent the total breakdown of social programs for 
military servicemen at present than to implement in full and in 
a short space of time some of the provisions of nuclear 
demilitarization. Naturally, I am not suggesting any slowing 
down of pace, even the slightest, as far as the dismantling of 
nuclear warheads is concerned; in this regard, everything must 
go strictly according to schedule (for your information: 
Tactical nuclear weapons were removed from Belarus over a year 
ago, and 80 strategic missiles with 175 warheads remain). But 
it would certainly make sense to try to somehow rethink the 
secondary or tertiary elements in the demilitarization program: 
Either in terms of rearranging priorities or even in terms of 
putting resources to more economical use. 
  People in Belarus are grumbling. Military and civilians 
alike. Some quite openly, others in private or in Aesopian 
terms, because of their statutory obligations. They are 
grumbling about the fact that demilitarization is being 
implemented not just rigidly, but sometimes even inanely. It is 
ironic that the Soviet Union's economy was killed by 
militarization, while the post-Soviet republics' economy is 
being strangled by the reverse process. If the situation in the 
Belarusian economy were just a little better than it is now -- 
people do not leave the repair plant in Borisov, which used to 
be considered a prestigious establishment but now stands idle 
more and more often, simply because there is nowhere to go (many 
other plants are closed indefinitely) -- the reaction to the 
need for Belarus to honor its international commitments would be 
different, more understanding. 
  There is no doubt that the weapons in question must be 
disposed of, especially those which were dumped in Belarus by 
the previous power, which never troubled to find out the opinion 
of Belarus and its people. But perhaps it would be worth 
thinking about ways to ensure that the demilitarization process 
does not kill the economy before it has a chance to stand on its 
own feet and move in the direction of a real market system and 
that the disarmament of Belarus does not lead to social 
upheavals? Of course, if the $33 million are found, or even $20 
million, it will be much easier. But if not? In that case, it 
would certainly be worth raising the question of postponing the 
destruction of weapons and spreading the schedule over several 
months or even over a year or so. In what, ultimately, does the 
West have a vested interest? In a country crushed by the weight 
of its economic problems, but with not a single superfluous tank 
left exactly 40 months from now and not a day later? Or in a 
country with a more or less acceptable economy and, 
consequently, political stability, but with a superfluous 
200-300 armored vehicles, which will nevertheless be cut into 
pieces, albeit not immediately, but after a small delay? 
  The fact that Belarus takes extremely seriously the 
commitments made on its behalf by others is not in any doubt. I 
think this is partly the reason why only Minsk, apart from 
Moscow, features on the itinerary of President William Clinton's 
forthcoming visit to the former Soviet Union in January. 
  But the United States is not top of Belarus' list of foreign 
policy priorities. Russia comes first. This is clear from a 
draft of the republic's basic foreign policy concepts, a 
document which must be discussed in the Supreme Soviet in the 
very near future. At the moment, it is stamped "secret," the 
point of which no one I spoke to could explain, apart from one, 
perhaps, who said: "If the discussion were conducted openly and 
broadcast live, we would distract and agitate people. Then 
parliamentarians could say such slanderous things about other 
countries during the debates that it would cause a scandal." 
  I did nevertheless manage to find out something about the 
secret document's contents. First, the list of priorities. It 
is as follows: Russia, Ukraine, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, 
Germany, the United States, France, Britain, Italy, Austria, 
Scandinavia, China, India, Japan, and the gas- and 
oil-extracting CIS countries. I was told that, a year ago, the 
Supreme Soviet would not have placed Russia at the top of the 
list: Europe would have been there instead. Second, the 
document confirms the provision of the Belarusian Constitution 
which states that the Supreme Soviet determines the direction 
taken by foreign policy and adopts decisions on fundamental 
issues. This means that the government and, in particular, the 
Foreign Ministry are assigned a subsidiary role. 
  Be that as it may, the draft of the basic concepts has in 
fact survived all the various stages of coordination and 
agreement, including in the diplomatic department, which has not 
bothered to kick up a fuss about the Supreme Soviet being 
allowed to call the shots. Why not? Probably because, as the 
Foreign Ministry and the Supreme Soviet itself realize perfectly 
well, this document is "short-lived," designed to last one or 
two years at most. Also, in a situation where, to quote Ivan 
Tereshko, chairman of the Supreme Soviet International Affairs 
Commission, "we are simply flying headlong," there is no point 
thinking about something more permanent and stable or drawing up 
long-term foreign policy concepts. 
  But the document does have one obvious positive quality: It 
must defuse the tension which has developed around the Foreign 
Ministry in the last 12-18 months and which has manifested 
itself, in particular, in relations with the Supreme Soviet 
leadership; relations marked, as one can judge from reports of 
parliamentary debates, by accusations and counteraccusations of 
unprofessionalism, incompetence, and lack of preparation; 
relations giving cause to say -- as Zenon Poznyak, leader of the 
opposition in parliament, did say in a conversation with me -- 
that "Belarus has no foreign policy as such." 
  I am convinced of the opposite: Belarus certainly does have 
a foreign policy. A foreign policy with very clear guidelines 
and objectives, which is particularly important. This is 
evident even from the list of priorities, which does not feature 
abstract discussions about common human values, but the specific 
interests of Belarus itself, which is striving to understand 
what is happening in the countries closest to it, as it is there 
that its interests are affected in a direct and powerful way. 
  Even when Repair Plant No. 140 in Borisov, deprived of 
electricity, will get back on its feet.... 

