BFN 

  [Text] The Defense Agency and aircraft manufacturers, such 
as Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd., have started to study 
remodeling the agency's main fighter plane, the F-15. They will 
seek to improve the capabilities of the plane by adopting new 
eletronic equipment and using materials of stealth capability 
(difficult for radar to detect) on it. It is possible that 
technology related to the next-generation support fighter FSX 
will be used on it. 
  The Defense Agency may include necessary funds for the 
project in the next year's budget demand. If the remodeling work 
starts, it will become an important source of income for the 
domestic aircraft-related industry which is currently suffering 
from defense budget cuts. Some people also hope the remodeling 
project will provide an opportunity for Japan to promote 
technological exchanges with the United States. The project is 
expected to attract attention of the U.S. defense industry. 
  The F-15 is called the "world's best fighter now existing," 
and the Air Self-Defense Force [ASDF] began buying it in 1978 
and now has about 160 of them. Orignally produced by McDonnell 
Douglas, it is now being produced in Japan by Mitsubishi Heavy 
Industries under a licensing arrangement. While its successor 
in the United States is supposed to be an F-22, its 
commercialization is being delayed. It is expected that the 
F-15 will need to be used for the next 10 years. That is why 
there are growing voices saying that the plane should be 
remodeled for performance improvement. 
  The Defense Agency had a project for "trial improvement of 
the F-15" included in the Mid-Term Defense Buildup Plan 
(1991-1995), but it has not been undertaken so far. 
  Even if expenditures for it are set aside in next year's 
budget, the expenses for the initial year are likely to be 
limited to those required for research and basic design. Hence, 
the work of actual remodeling will begin only under the next 
term defense buildup plan beginning in 1996. Necessary costs 
are expected to run to more than 1 billion yen per aircraft. 

