Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with A. Kramarev, by Andrey Potapenko: "Along the </F>
`Shaky Bottom'"] 
  [Text] Arkadiy Kramarev: The main failure of the year 
is the increase in the number of undisclosed murders. The 
largest success is the lack of any major disorders in St. 
Petersburg. 
  Without any fear of getting into a stupid situation, 
the television reporter asks the businessman the question, "Who 
monitors you -- the `Chechens' or the `people from Tambov'?" And 
the businessman answers, with a certain grievance in his voice, 
"We deal only with `Malyshevskiy men.'" The most surprising 
thing in this dialogue is that he does not surprise anyone. 
  Quite recently, highly placed workers in the militia 
were indignant at journalists who spoke aloud about the Mafia 
and rackets. Incidentally, even today they are irritated by 
expressions such as "bandit city." They will look at a summary 
and say, for example, "Last year 125,083 crimes were committed 
in St. Petersburg, which is 18.3 percent more than in 1992. A 
comparative analysis attests to a reduction in the increase 
rates and to the stabilization of the crime level." And a 
cautious optimism will creep into their voice. 
  The view that the militia leadership takes of today's 
situation in the fight against crime, a view that is devoid of 
emotions, is what interested our correspondent during an 
interview he had with Major-General of Militia A. G. Kramarev, 
chief of the Main Administration of Internal Affairs of St. 
Petersburg and the oblast. 
  [Potapenko] Arkadiy Grigoryevich, is it possible to conclude 
from the statistical data that we have already seen the "bottom" 
and that the crime wave has started to recede? 
  [Kramarev] That is only partially true. Perhaps, with regard 
to the overall crime level, we have indeed reached the 
"saturation point." But you cannot say this about serious 
crimes, where we continue to observe an active increase, 
although at lesser rates. In St. Petersburg alone last year, 875 
murders were committed (twice as many as the previous year). 
  Thus, if we have indeed seen the "bottom," then it is still 
very shaky. The number of murders is increasing, and the rate of 
disclosing them is decreasing. Today every other premeditated 
murder remains unsolved. We have simply been inundated by that 
wave of crime. Whereas ten people, or sometimes even 20, used to 
participate in investigation, today we cannot assign even five 
people there. 
  For a long time crimes have not been solved in the way that 
Sherlock Holmes solved them: he smoked his pipe, played the 
violin, and the mystery was solved! Do you know how many people 
it takes to check out several stories? Take, for example, 
murders of merchants by hire. They occur, as a rule, against a 
background of conflicts in the commercial sphere. There are so 
many conflicts that checking out each of them requires one 
agent, or, even better, three. It takes a lot of time before all 
the stories can be checked out. 
  [Potapenko] Recently many crimes have been linked with the 
use of firearms. Criminals shoot at merchants, and shots are 
heard with increasing frequency at bandit meetings where various 
groupings fight for their spheres of influence, divide St. 
Petersburg among themselves... 
  [Kramarev] At one time "Lt. Shmidt's sons" divided all of 
Russia among themselves. Well, the country kept living and did 
not know anything about that. The conflicts, as a rule, occur 
because of a single item -- a cafe, for example, is divided up, 
or the two sides cannot come to any understanding as to who will 
be in charge of the prostitutes at a hotel. It is completely 
possible that the clarification of this kind of relationship can 
end in crossfire -- the number of weapons in people's hands has 
truly become very large. 
  But the thing that troubles me most is the increase in the 
number of domestic murders. Sometimes one gets the impression 
that people are simply becoming wild. No one would mind if 
people simply got into fist fights -- that's a tradition in 
Russia. But today people fight in such a way that four people 
end up dead. That never used to happen. 
  It must be admitted that we have somewhat eased up on the 
measures to prevent domestic crimes. But it's hard to do this 
under the present conditions. The previous methods don't work. 
Previously, if a person terrorized a woman in a communal 
apartment, a militiaman from the precinct could go to see that 
person, have a talk with him, and, if worse came to worst, he 
could threaten him with an article [in the criminal code] for 
parasitism or send him to an LTP [corrective labor camp]. Today 
you're lucky if you get out of that apartment alive. 
  [Potapenko] Is it possible that something that will become 
one of the elements of this preventive work will be the return 
of militia details to the streets or the resurrection of 
volunteer druzhinas, although, of course, on a 
different basis than previously? 
  [Kramarev] The militia has never left the streets. 
Especially 
in the rayons with the highest crime rate. We have begun making 
it a practice to carry out quick-response investigative 
operations, with the involvement of all the services. We 
mobilize all our barbers and clerks out onto the streets. An 
operation like this was recently carried out in 
Krasnogvardeyskiy Rayon. During a ten-day period 112 crimes were 
disclosed there, and street crime was cut in half. 
  As for druzhinas, they never did work, and that is 
why they were disbanded. Currently we are attempting to create 
combat-ready detachments. We will pay them, although not much. 
They will probably be organized on a territorial basis. A person 
will be more eager to protect the rayon where his family lives, 
and where his children go to school. It is possible to organize 
from among taxi drivers a mobile group that guarantees the 
safety of other drivers. It is necessary to make more dynamic 
use of such a force as the Cossacks -- there are still two 
Cossack villages in St. Petersburg. 
  [Potapenko] The most notorious criminal cases are occurring 
today in the economic sphere. The only thing one hears is 
corruption, bribery, and smuggling. Will the Main Administration 
be able to react adequately? 
  [Kramarev] Last year departments to counteract corruption 
and 
counterfeiters and to combat thefts of strategic resources were 
created within the Administration to Combat Economic Crimes. 
During the year 106 instances of bribery, 14 instances of 
smuggling, and 255 instances of manufacture and sale of 
counterfeit banknotes were revealed. It is a complicated matter 
to reveal economic crimes. Sociologists assert that, out of the 
total number of bribe-takers, it is possible to expose two or 
three percent. It is another matter that we have a data bank of 
information on corrupted officials in the system of the agencies 
of authority and management. We will catch these people sometime. 
  [Potapenko] In what structures do you think bribery is most 
widely developed? 
  [Kramarev] Listen, if 97 percent are in complete fog, how 
can 
I answer? In those that have been uncovered, employees of the 
militia have been noted more frequently than others. But that 
does not mean that the militia is the leader in this regard. It 
is simply that they are closer to us and it is easier to catch 
them. 
  [Potapenko] There exists a widespread opinion that many 
ordinary militiamen are being practically maintained by 
commercial structures. It is easy to understand what feeds these 
rumors --one can frequently encounter a militiaman who is 
guarding a privately owned store. 
  [Kramarev] Every contract with commercial enterprises for a 
guard is under the rigid monitoring of the main administration. 
A special commission operates for this purpose. One of the 
mandatory conditions is that the work is performed during 
nonduty hours. In addition, the militia employee receives 
payment from his own leadership, rather than from the commercial 
establishments. Of course, in the ideal situation state 
employees should get money only from the state. But even the 
state, in its turn, should pay an official in such a way that he 
can live a normal life. 
  But if we are to return to what you called a widespread 
opinion, there is yet another explanation for that. Some time 
ago, one of the managers at the main administration had the 
habit, during his lunch break, of driving around to all the 
sales areas and observing the work performed by the guards. Very 
frequently he discovered people there who were wearing the 
militia uniform, but it turned out after the appropriate check 
that only one-third of them were our people. The others were 
employees of private guard agencies who had put on the militia 
uniform. 
  [Potapenko] Guard companies are another sign of the times. 
Has the GUVD [Main Administration of Internal Affairs] found a 
common language with them? 
  [Kramarev] There was a period when no one paid any attention 
to those structures. Today we are just beginning to establish 
smooth interactions, and have begun to issue licenses to them. 
But I shall state frankly that the hopes that they will help us 
to establish order are melting from day to day. Very frequently, 
even the most respectable ones prove to be mixed up in criminal 
misdeeds. 
  [Potapenko] Arkadiy Grigoryevich, why is it that the most 
important criminal cases, in which we are dealing with 
gangsterism or corruption in the highest echelons of power, are 
investigated so slowly, or simply "disintegrate" on the way to 
court? 
  [Kramarev] Our jurisprudence now contains laws that do not 
exist in any other country. Here is just one situation. When the 
investigation is actually completed, we acquaint the accused 
with all the materials pertaining to the case, where it is 
stated in detail which witness said what, what his home address 
and place of work are, how many children he has and what school 
they attend. The accused individual studies all of this 
diligently, sometimes for months (the law does not limit him in 
this regard). The next act in this farce is the official request 
by the defense to have the restrictive measures imposed on the 
accused changed to his signed agreement not to leave the city. 
And so suspects are frequently released even if they are accused 
of gangsterism. Should one be surprised that, when the case 
comes to court, the witnesses unanimously change their 
depositions, asserting that the investigative employees had 
exerted an influence on them? 
  All these problems are by no means infrequent. Because of 
them, a large number of criminals are avoiding justice today, 
and those who are still free are flaunting their impunity. 
Politicians, if they want to curb crime successfully, must think 
seriously about this. 
  [Potapenko] At one time, after closing political agencies, 
the militia proclaimed its independence from ideological 
predilections. Are you being successful today in remaining aloof 
from political intrigues? 
  [Kramarev] Politics today is interfering in our life in an 
intermediated manner, giving rise to various social situations. 
The militia is no longer required, say, to chase away Communists 
or Democrats. Incidentally, new misfortunes have appeared, as 
Comrade Basilashvili said recently in the House of Cinema: 
"Fascists are walking along the streets, but Kramarev, with a 
cynical smile, assures us that everything in the city is all 
right." Yes, it's all right! Because while they are walking, the 
citizens have nothing to be afraid of. But it is really very 
simple to provoke gunfire. Among other things, when, in October 
of last year, riots began in Moscow, it was only with a great 
amount of work that we managed here to refrain people from using 
the same methods. Without a doubt, this was primarily thanks to 
the common sense of the St. Petersburgers -- the mentality of 
our residents is still somewhat different from that in the 
capital. But even the militia during those days displayed the 
maximum amount of restraint and patience, and that was, I 
repeat, no simple matter, and the situation at one time was 
hanging by a thread. But the people standing in the cordon are 
not made of iron. Some of the guys are 18 or 19 years of age, 
and when people spit at them and shout, "You fascist son of a 
bitch!, it takes a lot of bravery not to answer them. 
  [Potapenko] In six months the Goodwill Games will open in 
the 
city. How is the militia preparing for these events? 
  [Kramarev] The thing we are most afraid of is mass riots. 
Unfortunately, our people are not becoming more law-abiding. 
Rather, it is just the opposite. And if, in decorous Europe, a 
soccer match can end by having people set fire to automobiles 
and break windows in an entire section of the city, what can we 
say about our own country? 
  We are already taking steps today: Moscow will be allocating 
additional funds to us and will be sending people to work with 
us. We will come to an understanding with the military. They 
will help us, and we will put the students in our military 
schools on guard. On the whole, we will mobilize all our forces, 
inasmuch as fears do exist, and they are not without 
substantiation. A very complicated time was chosen for such mass 
measures. 
  Incidentally, who knows whether, possibly, it will be just 
the opposite, and the beautiful spectacle will create a good 
mood in people. It will reduce people's aggressiveness and, in 
general, will have a beneficial effect on society. God willing! 

