BFN 

<F P=106> [By Luis Alonso Lugo] </F>
  [Text] After leaving a private meeting with members of the 
Chamber of Deputies Defense Committee, Defense Minister General 
Rafael Angel Montero Revette acknowledged that part of the 
economic and financial sector is promoting a destabilization 
plan that would affect all other sectors of Venezuelan society. 
  In his elusive responses to newsmen's questions, the 
minister 
said "a plan is being executed, as we all know, which includes 
economic, social, financial destabilization, and subversion. We 
are adopting intelligence measures, however, to investigate and 
to do everything that we can to emerge from the crisis." 
  The minister voiced his optimism about "the measures adopted 
by the government which caused the rumor strategy that they 
tried to implement to fail." 
<H5>  Centaur Plan </H5>
  For his part, Deputy Ibrahim Sanchez, president of the 
Chamber of Deputies Defense Committee, reiterated that they have 
not been able to pinpoint what area of the financial sector the 
Centaur Plan is part of. The Centaur Plan consists of sending 
threatening facsimile statements to certain persons and 
financial institutions to create uncertainty. 
  According to the legislator, the minister referred to 
threats 
of bankruptcy and false dollar quotations as part of a direct 
attack on the Venezuelan financial system. This plan, in view of 
its serious economic implications, will be investigated by 
intelligence officials. 
  Montero Revette cited as an example a package of counterfeit 
dollars detected before they were placed on the financial 
market. This averted a complex situation which could have had 
violent reactions on the part of buyers who would have been 
swindled. 
  The defense minister recognized also that authorities are 
investigating the influence that narcotrafficking might have on 
this situation "where it is not a case of persons of leftist or 
rightist persuasion, but of persons who are motivated by money." 
  Montero Revette ruled out the possibility that officials who 
were dismissed for their participation in the 1992 thwarted coup 
are involved in the destabilization plan. 
  Other deputies who attended the meeting said the defense 
minister had a document on the Centaur Plan, which did not have 
specific information, but which only mentioned a so-called 
"Ayacucho Group." 

