BFN 

  [Text] The House of Representatives met this morning under 
its speaker, Shaykh 'Abdallah Bin-Husayn al-Ahmar. The session 
started with the House speaker and members reading al-Fatiha 
[the first chapter in Koran] for the souls of the martyrs of the 
3d and 1st Armored Brigades. 
  The people's deputies then listened to the minutes of the 
previous session and approved it after stressing that it must 
include the statement issued by the House of Representatives' 
extraordinary session last Thursday [28 April] on the 
regrettable events in 'Imran. The House also heard a report 
from the House committee, which is made up of the Defense and 
Security Committee and certain House members, on the 
fact-finding mission concerning the fighting between the 1st and 
3d Armored Brigades. 
  The report includes details of the committee's mission and 
field visits on Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday [28 April 
to 1 May] and the program it set for its work. The committee 
exerted great efforts to investigate facts and reach the 
conclusions included in the report, drafting it in a very 
impartial manner without bias toward any party. The committee 
urged the House speaker and members to study carefully the 
information contained in the report, which was obtained from the 
various concerned parties so that the House can, on the basis of 
this information, take decisive measures against those who were 
responsible for agitating the sedition that resulted in the 
death of our brothers and sons from the 1st and 3d Armored 
Brigades, caused material damage -- the destruction of most of 
the equipment and machinery in the camp, and terrorized innocent 
citizens. 
  The parliamentary committee's report was then presented for 
discussion by the people's deputies with the aim of reaching 
conclusions based on the information contained in the report. 
The House can thus reach its own conclusions on the events in 
'Imran city, as well as the various aspects of the regrettable 
crisis, and create the necessary climate to bring all parties 
together to resolve the suffocating crisis and rescue the Yemeni 
people from its aftermath, including the exceptional price hikes 
and fratricide among the children of the same homeland. 
  The deputies also stressed the importance of the House 
assuming its national responsibilities in light of the 
constitutional clauses and bylaws to pool the parliament's 
efforts with all the national efforts and endeavors to resolve 
the crisis and put an end to its threats and establish the 
pillars of the united state of Yemen and preserve national unity. 
  The session was attended by Brother Dr. 'Abd-al-Salam Khalid 
Salman, minister of legal affairs and minister of House of 
Representatives affairs. The House will resume its sessions 
tomorrow, Tuesday, God willing. 

