BFN 

<F P=106> [Nikolay Zhelyabov article in the "Opinion" column: </F>
"Karabakh: A Settlement, or Struggle for Influence? The 
Interests of Moscow and the West Have Clashed in the 
Transcaucasus"] 
  [Text] A lull in one of the most protracted conflicts on 
the territory of the former USSR -- Nagorno-Karabakh -- achieved 
again with Russia's mediation, allows the hope that this 
cease-fire could be final and that the sides will soon make a 
step toward a comprehensive settlement. However, even if Baku, 
Yerevan, and Stepanakert really, sooner or later, coordinate 
compromise solutions with all the parties involved, one problem 
will still remain: Will it also be possible to work out a 
general code of conduct for the intermediaries? In so far as 
Russia and the CSCE -- and in the final analysis, Russia and the 
United States -- seeking to make an impact on the course of this 
conflict, pursue not least their own regional interests, the 
parties to it, balancing on the "needle's point," are trying to 
play on their differences, turning them to their own advantage. 
  Thus, immediately after Russian Defense Minister Pavel 
Grachev, at negotiations in Moscow, tried rather rigidly to 
condition the implementation of the first, military-technical, 
stage of the Russian peace plan by participation in it of 
Russian peacekeeping forces and possibly those from CIS or CSCE 
member states, U.S. Ambassador to Azerbaijan Richard Kozlaric 
made a statement: Any plan for resolving the Karabakh problem, 
including Russia's, should be implemented within the CSCE Minsk 
group while the introduction of CIS disengagement forces should 
proceed under the supervision of international observers. 
  The problem, however, is that over two years of its work the 
CSCE Minsk group has managed to coordinate a sole document: a 
mandate of CSCE observers -- but even then it has not yet been 
approved by the Committee of Conference Senior Officials. There 
is also a "CSCE Minsk group schedule," most of whose provisions, 
however, have been drafted in Moscow. It was openly rejected by 
Azerbaijan, and even though Karabakh accepted it, it did so only 
because the plan did not please Baku: for no other reason. The 
Minsk group has made no attempts to reanimate it. Meanwhile 
Russia, leaving the CSCE "to mark time," has again invigorated 
its own intermediary offices and proposed its own plan for a 
settlement which in any event is more concrete and balanced, and 
coordinated with the parties involved. 
  This course of events, however, could hardly satisfy those 
who pursue their own ambitions in the region. But whereas, say, 
Ankara has today found itself by the wayside of the settlement, 
the United States quite openly indicates that it does not intend 
to turn a blind eye to the activity of Russia which can enhance 
its influence in the Transcaucasus. U.S. diplomats, 
incidentally, exert fairly tangible pressure both on Baku and 
Yerevan, using in one instance the issue of political freedoms, 
and in the other, cuts in humanitarian supplies in order to 
minimize Russian influence. Observers link this pressure to a 
recent rise in opposition activity in Baku which sharply moved 
against the Russian plan being adopted. 
  There is a difference in approaches also within the Minsk 
group itself. The Swedes, who preside over it now, are ready to 
interact within the Russia-CSCE tandem, aware that without 
Russia the Minsk group will not be able to work. The United 
States, on the other hand, wants not simply to change the leader 
in this linkage but to isolate Russia's activity within the 
confines of the Minsk group. 
  Recently its chairman Jan Eliasson invited Armenia, 
Azerbaijan, and Karabakh to sign a document whereby the parties 
ask the CSCE to send its observers to the conflict region, 
including observers from the CIS and Russia. In the situation 
when Russia, implementing its plan, ensures a cease-fire and 
consolidates its own positions in the region, this document at 
the very least should raise the CSCE's authority. The 
Americans, however, would like the international observer 
headquarters to appear in the conflict zone before the arrival 
of Russian peacemakers. This could bring political dividends to 
the mission but, from the "material" perspective, 34 CSCE 
observers, the first ones, based in Agdam or Stepanakert, will 
not be working "in the field" and will not be able to maintain 
or carry out on-site inspection of the cease-fire. And even in 
two weeks, when another six observer groups appear, they will 
not be able to "cover" the entire control zone whereas under the 
Russian plan, within the first three days, 49 monitoring posts 
and mobile groups will be deployed, ensuring an effective 
cease-fire. Given that the financing of the Russian 
peacekeeping operation will in all likelihood be done at 
internal standards, the following comparison will be in place: 
in South Ossetia, where a similar operation is under way, the 
commander of the Russian contingent receives less in a month 
than CSCE mission members make in a day. 
  The maximalist position is that the CSCE, if it wishes to 
play a more active role in the settlement, should provide not 
only its "front" but also the requisite maintenance for it. And 
it has no intention to incur such expenditures. Therefore 
Russians, for their own beggarly compensation, will throw 
themselves "into the thick of it" while CSCE observers will 
arrive under more comfortable conditions and only if the 
situation is calm. 
  Meanwhile, Moscow allows that the signature by a CSCE 
representative may be put under the "big" political agreement 
proposed by the Russian intermediary. Even so the geopolitical 
game continues. The military-technical document drafted by 
Pavel Grachev's office has been signed, apart from him, by 
Armenia and Karabakh, with Azerbaijan taking a wait and see 
attitude. Azerbaijan agreed to put its signature under the 
"Eliasson document" and Armenia and Karabakh are still pondering. 

