Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["AL-THAWRAH Issues" column by Muhammad 'Ali Buzah: "Saving </F>
the Peace Process"] 
  [Text] It was natural, after the atrocity and horror of the 
Ibrahimi Mosque crime, for the Washington bilaterals to stop and 
for the Arab delegations to suspend these talks in protest 
against the massacre and in solidarity with the Palestinian Arab 
people. 
  It is neither logical nor acceptable for the negotiation 
process to remain at Israel's mercy and captive to its military 
madness and bloody crimes. The Arabs cannot negotiate from a 
position of commitment to the peace process and abidance by its 
terms of reference, which are based on respect for and execution 
of the resolutions of international legitimacy, while Israel is 
free of any restriction or commitment, carrying out savage 
massacres and attacks on defenseless Palestinians and Lebanese 
and dealing blows to peace and its chances of success. 
  Israel is practicing open organized terrorism, waging a war 
of annihilation and ruination, slaughtering, attacking, and 
burning Arab lands -- all in the name of peace and under its 
banner. Yet, no one can object or utter a word of justice or 
protest in order that Israel's feelings are not hurt and the 
peace process is not jeopardized. On the other hand, the Arabs 
-- and no one else -- are expected to show flexibility, exercise 
self-restraint, and endure blows and strikes in order to 
maintain "the acquired" momentum for the continuation of the 
peace process. It is as if the Arabs are the only side 
concerned about this process and it must therefore pay the price 
by rewarding Israel, making concessions that entrench its 
usurpation of Arab lands and rights, and submitting to Israel's 
wishes and hegemony. 
  This rather strange and ridiculous Western paradox can be 
seen clearly if we were to reverse the situation and place 
Israel in the Arabs' position. We could see Israel receiving 
the blows and being subjected to daily air raids and bombing 
with the most up to date weapons of mass destruction. We could 
replace the massacres in the holy Ibrahimi Mosque in Hebron and 
in the Sayyidat al-Najat Church in Juniyah with a massacre in a 
Jewish synagogue -- even if Jewish deaths were only one tenth of 
either of the two massacres -- where the perpetrator was a lone 
Arab "lunatic." What if there were events similar to the types 
that Israel carried out when it burned al-Aqsa Mosque and 
carried out the massacres of "Rotschilion," Sabra and Shatila, 
Qibyah, Dayr Yasin, Hebron, and Zuq Mikhail. Just imagine what 
would have happened! 
  Certainly, Western and American reactions would not have 
been 
in the form of such bashful condemnations and denunciations, 
which mean nothing and do nothing to console the bereaved. The 
whole world would have been turned against the Arabs. They 
would have been castigated and branded with all forms of 
medieval terrorism and barbarism. Moreover, the nations of the 
world would have rushed to Israel's assistance and used all 
their expertise to obtain sanctions and use all kinds of 
pressure against the Arabs. In fact, the entire Arab world, 
from the ocean to the Gulf, would not have been enough for 
Israel's aggression, reprisals, and revenge for its soldier and 
settler victims. 
  No doubt, the ugliness and atrocity of the Hebron crime has 
changed many concepts, making it difficult to continue with or 
return to the bilaterals as if nothing has happened. Thus, it 
has become incumbent on the international community and the U.S. 
sponsor to punish the aggressor and to firmly confront Israel's 
aggressiveness and curb its open lust for murder, blood, and 
massacres. 
  Saving the peace process and the stumbling talks 
necessitates 
exerting all forms of pressure in order to force Israel to 
submit to the resolutions and conventions of international 
legitimacy, to respect human rights, to remove the settlements, 
to disarm the settlers, who are a mine field in the way of 
peace, and to compel its rulers to acknowledge Arab lands and 
full rights without delay. 

