BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by political correspondent Aluf Ben] </F>
  [Excerpts] Senior political elements in Jerusalem 
anticipated yesterday that the meeting between U.S. Secretary of 
State Warren Christopher and Jordan's King Husayn in London next 
week will result in a formula that will resolve the 
Jordanian-U.S. crisis created by the naval blockade on the port 
of al-'Aqabah. The elements believe that Jordan will attend the 
Washington peace talks, which are due to resume in the coming 
weeks. 
  This week, Israel and Jordan held daily contacts on various 
tracks. Elyaqim Rubinstein, head of the Israeli delegation to 
the talks with Jordan, had several telephone conversations with 
his counterpart Fayiz al-Tarawinah, the chief Jordanian delegate. 
  In these meetings, Israel sought to learn about the 
Jordanian 
stand on the naval blockade issue and to gauge the seriousness 
of Jordan's threat to suspend the peace talks if its 
disagreement with the United States is not resolved. 
  For their part, the Jordanians evinced great interest in the 
progress of the Israeli-PLO economic talks in Paris. They asked 
Israel to consider Jordan's positions in various spheres 
pertaining to the future economic ties between the Palestinian 
autonomy and Jordan. [passage omitted] 
  On another track, a periodic meeting on current problems was 
held at the beginning of this week between Israeli and Jordanian 
elements. One of the issues on the agenda was the infiltration 
of opponents of the Iraqi regime into Israel through Jordanian 
territory. 
  The track of direct, working-level encounters, which was 
established many years ago, gathered substantial momentum after 
the Israel-Jordan peace talks were launched. At present, they 
are incorporated in the political talks. 
  Within this framework, a senior Israeli element met with his 
Jordanian counterpart in Washington several weeks ago. The two 
exchanged views and assessments on the Middle East situation. 
  Jordan is more prepared than the other peace process 
participants to introduce confidence-building measures vis-a-vis 
Israel and to maintain ties with it on several tracks. 

