BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 4 Apr (NA) -- President Carlos Menem 
confirmed on 4 April "the diplomatic method" to recover the 
Malvinas Islands. Nevertheless, he hardened his stance compared 
with past years by reminding the "usurpers" that the Argentine 
soldiers who died in the 1982 war "are resting in our 
fatherland's soil." 
  Menem paid "tribute to these young men who said yes to our 
fatherland" and fell in that conflict with the United Kingdom 12 
years ago. He stressed: "Even though these usurpers hate the 
idea, these young men still are resting in our fatherland's 
soil." 
  The president made these remarks in a message of strong 
emotional content. His message was apparently aimed at again 
"Malvinizing" ["malvinizar"] society 12 years after the war 
against the British during a ceremony at the 1st Regiment 
Patricios. 
  The ceremony was attended by veterans groups from the South 
Atlantic war and their relatives. Menem personally greeted them 
-- shaking their hands -- after his speech. 
  Continuous drizzle on the regiment, headquartered in Palermo 
District, forced it to reduce the ceremony and hold it at the 
regiment's ceremonial hall, where forces and standard bearers 
from the three branches of the Armed Forces and security forces, 
as well as various war veterans groups, were lined up. 
  At the main rostrum, Menem was accompanied by Defense 
Minister Oscar Camilion, Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella, Joint 
Chief of Staff Mario Candido Diaz, Army Chief of Staff Martin 
Balza, Navy Chief of Staff Enrique Molina Pico, and Air Force 
Chief of Staff Juan Paulik. 
  On the ceremonial hall's first floor, designed for special 
guests, were Buenos Aires Mayor Saul Bouer; General Mario 
Benjamin Menendez, the former Malvinas military governor; 
Justicialist Deputy Erman Gonzalez; Jorge Isaac Anaya, a former 
member of the military junta that invaded the islands; former 
Army Chiefs of Staff Hector Rios Erenu and Jorge Harguindeguy; 
and PAMI [Comprehensive Medical Assistance Plan] President 
Matilde Menendez, the Peronist Party's No. 2 candidate for 
Constituent Assembly member from Buenos Aires. 
  The ceremony started with the national anthem, after which a 
religious ceremony was held to pay tribute to the soldiers who 
fell in the military conflict. 
  Gen. Diaz spoke afterward. He also sorted out the diplomatic 
method as a recourse to recover sovereignty over the islands. 
Gen. Diaz said: "All of us will proclaim today to all and 
sundry that the Malvinas Islands belong to us de facto and de 
jure." 
  Diaz concluded by saying: "I am sure that, using this 
method, the day will come when this flag, devised by [Argentine 
independence hero] General [Manuel] Belgrano, will again and 
definitely fly over our Malvinas Islands." 
  For his part, Menem said we Argentines "have been claiming 
in 
every way and using every method available to us the restoration 
of this mutilated part of our fatherland to our territory." 
  Menem pointed out: "This is the goal to be achieved, a goal 
that we are not giving up and will not give up." He stressed: 
"This goal represents a projection of the Argentine people's 
soul and spirit." 
  Menem emphasized: "A war may be waged not only through 
military conflicts, but also through diplomacy, talks, 
agreements, and conversations." 
  Moving on, Menem stressed that he does not harbor "the 
slightest doubt that the Argentine Government's and people's 
attitude of using diplomatic methods will unfailingly lead us to 
the recovery of this part of our land that has been clumsily 
mutilated." 
  He emphasized: "This basically represents a tribute to these 
war veterans who said yes to our fatherland in our remote 
southern sea. This is a tribute to many of those present here 
who returned to our fatherland and to those who were unable to 
return. Nevertheless, even though these usurpers hate the idea, 
these young men are still resting in our fatherland's soil." 

