BFN 

<F P=106> ["Comments on U.S. State Department Human Rights Report on </F>
China by the China Society for Human Rights Studies (June 1994)" 
-- XINHUA headline] 
  [Text] Beijing, June 8 (XINHUA) -- Following is the full 
text of the comments on the U.S. State Department human rights 
report on China by the China Society for Human Rights Studies: 
  On February 1 of this year, the U.S. Department of State 
released its human rights report for 1993. The 1,600-page 
report contains judgements and criticisms of the human rights 
situation in 193 countries and regions throughout the world. 
This society obtained the country report on China (English 
version) from the U.S. Embassy in China. The report criticized 
what it calls "widespread and well-documented human rights 
abuses" in China, and claims that "the government's overall 
human rights record in 1993 fell far short of internationally 
accepted norms." As a non-governmental academic society 
dedicated to study human rights, we are bound to seriously 
consider such grave accusations. The society has studied 
repeatedly the report and, at the same time, has checked and 
conducted investigations related to cases mentioned for three 
months. We discovered the report is not serious, unfair and 
lacks objectivity and is fundamentally based on rumors and 
subjective conjecture. We are indeed surprised that a report of 
this nature was released in the name of the U.S. Department of 
State. 
<H5>  Dual Criteria </H5>
  This human rights report of the U.S. State Department once 
again demonstrates that the U.S. Government uses dual criteria 
on the issue of human rights. The following are a few examples: 
  1. The report devotes extensive space to attacks on China's 
arrest and imprisonment of counter-revolutionary criminals. 
According to China's criminal law, counter-revolutionary crimes 
actually refer to any acts which endanger the security of the 
state. In the world today, every sovereign state enacts strict 
laws to deal with criminal activities that endanger the security 
of the state and society. For example, in the United States, 
the U.S. Code explicitly prohibits rebellion, revolt, rioting, 
instigating riots or advocating the overthrow of the government. 
Article 2383 of the Code, under the heading "rebellion or 
insurrection", stipulates, "whoever incites, sets on foot, 
assists or engages in any rebellion or insurrection against the 
authority of the U.S. or the laws thereof, or gives aid or 
comfort thereof shall be fined not more than U.S. dollars 10,000 
or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both; and shall be 
incapable of holding any office under the U.S." Article 2385 
stipulates, "whoever knowingly or willfully advocates, abets, 
advises...overthrowing or destroying the Government of the 
United States shall be imprisoned not more than 20 years." 
Since the United States enacts strict controls and punishment 
of anti-government activities, what right does the U.S. State 
Department human rights report have to charge China with 
punishing criminals who endanger the security of the state? 
  The report accuses China of indiscriminately and wantonly 
arresting and maltreating criminals. However, statistics 
indicate that in 1993 the proportion of imprisoned criminals 
accounted for only 103/100,000ths of China's total population, 
while that in the United States was 455/100,000ths. China 
regards its prisons as schools for reforming criminals, and the 
current recidivism rate in China is a low 6-8 percent, while 
that in the United States exceeds 40 percent. China has long 
before joined the convention against torture and other cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment adopted by the 
United Nations general assembly in 1984, while the United States 
has so far refrained from doing so. 
  2. The report criticizes China by alleging that "most 
women employed by industry work in low skill and low paid jobs. 
Women hold relatively few positions of significant influence 
within the party or government structure," charging China with 
discrimination against women. It should be noted that achieving 
the goal of full equality between men and women still requires 
tremendous efforts by various countries around the world. In 
this regard, China, too, still has many shortcomings. But a 
comparison between China and the United States reveals that the 
Chinese women enjoy far better status and rights than the 
American women do. The United States has not as yet joined the 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
Against Women adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 
1979, while China has already joined it. It was not until 1920, 
or 144 years after the founding of the United States, that 
American women legally gained the right to vote. However, 
immediately after the founding of the People's Republic of 
China, the government issued a proclamation stipulating that men 
and women enjoy equal status, and women and men alike have the 
right to vote and stand for election. 
  Between 1990 and 1993, the proportion of women deputies to 
people's congresses at various levels in China exceeded 20 
percent, while in the United States, the proportion of women 
members at legislatures of various levels in 1992, which was 
called the "year of congress women," was only 18.4 percent. 
According to a recent survey, in terms of urban workers and 
staff members, the average income for women employees was 77.5 
percent that of their male colleagues, while the income of rural 
women was 81.4 percent that of men. However, a sharp contrast 
exists with figures from the United States where women earn only 
51 percent of the wages paid to their male counterparts. In 
1992, the proportion of Chinese women studying in China's 
universities and as post-graduate accounted for 33.9 percent and 
24.8 percent of the total respectively, while the total number 
of female graduates majoring in engineering stood at 27 percent, 
a figure much higher than the 15 percent for American women. In 
1993, China had nearly 8.1 million women scientists and 
technicians involved in science and technology, accounting for 
35 percent of China's total number of technicians, much higher 
than the 12.2 percent in the United States for the same period. 
  3. The report describes China as a country where the life 
and safety of the people cannot be guaranteed. Obviously, this 
is not true. The Chinese people's living standards have 
continued to improve and their lives are fully guaranteed; 
whereas in the United States, the richest country in the world, 
the lives and safety of many people are being threatened. On 
January 20 this year, the eastern part of the United States was 
hit by a severe blizzard, with temperatures dropping to -20 
degrees centigrade. According to an associated press report on 
January 21, more than 130 people in Washington D.C. alone, froze 
to death while in a developing country like China a similar case 
was completely different. A recent survey shows that not a 
single person in Beijing, a city with a population of 10 
million, froze to death this year, a case which has held true 
for a number of years. It was exceptionally cold this year in 
Harbin, a city with a population of several millions, and the 
temperature on January 5 fell to -34.5 degrees centigrade. 
Nonetheless, not a single person was reported to have died from 
freezing throughout the entire rough winter. 
  The tragedy involving the freezing to death of more than 130 
people in the capital of the United States occurred on January 
21 this year. Ten days later, the U.S. State Department 
published the "human rights report," criticizing and censuring 
China and many other countries for their human rights 
situations. This is an irony of the first magnitude. 
  Self-Contradictory and Fabricating Charges 
  The report pretends to be fair, while at the same time 
making 
unwarranted charges against the status of China's human rights, 
thereby revealing its numerous contradictions, unjustness and 
attempt to fabricate charges. For example: 
  1. The report admits that China has inflicted "severe 
punishment" on officials involved in extra-judicial injuries and 
killings. Some officials received death sentences or long 
prison terms. However, the report, based on the story that a 
Shanxi farmer who was beaten by public security officials "died 
as a result of his injuries and a lack of timely medical care", 
concludes that the Chinese Government "failed to control the 
abuses by its own security forces". 
  2. The report accuses China for torturing prisoners which, 
it claims, is a result of the weaknesses in China's legal 
system, "including the emphasis on obtaining confessions as a 
basis for convictions". The report, however, also says that 
"according to (Chinese) judicial officials, confessions without 
corroborating evidence are an insufficient basis for 
conviction", and that official media and other reports indicate 
that "coerced confessions have led to erroneous convictions". 
The report says according to a Chinese report to the United 
Nations, of the 339 cases related to extorting confessions and 
torture which occurred in 1992, 209 cases were prosecuted by the 
procuratorate. In 1993, the chief of procurator of the Supreme 
People's Procuratorate announced that inspection units 
comprising 2,800 inspectors would be set up in various prisons 
and houses of detention to supervise and prevent the 
mistreatment of prisoners. While admitting the aforementioned 
fact, the report, nonetherless, reached a groundless conclusion 
that "the number of actual incidents of torture and 
ill-treatment by government officials is almost certainly far 
greater than this number". 
  3. The report asserts that many Chinese scholars "have 
declined opportunities to publish or present papers on subjects 
which they fear could be construed as sensitive". Almost 
immediately, however, it admits, "on some less sensitive, but 
still controversial subjects, such as economic policy, legal 
reform and even civil rights issues, the government has 
tolerated more vigorous public discussion." This particular 
statement is quite difficult to understand. A well-known fact 
is that economic policy, legal reform and civil rights issues 
are the major topics of public concern in China. If the report 
considers these areas less than sensitive, what then does it 
mean by sensitive issues? 
  4. The report blames China for not respecting the political 
rights of the people, saying that Chinese citizens "cannot 
freely choose or change the law or the officals who govern 
them". However, it admits in another paragraph that in some 
county- and provincial-level people's congress elections in 
1993, "the candidates most favored by authorities were defeated". 
  5. The report states, "a sharp reported drop in the 
fertility rate in 1991-92 sparked concern about a possible 
upturn in incidents of coercion." Nonetheless, it immediately 
adds, "there was strong evidence that the magnitude of the 
reported fertility drop was sharply exaggerated." Which of the 
two aforementioned statements should people accept as reliable? 
  6. The report says that "the number of Christians in China 
has grown rapidly in recent years," while at the same time 
claiming that freedom of religion is restricted in the country. 
When referring to the ethnic minority issue, the report says 
that "minorities benefit from an official policy of 'privileged 
treatment' in marriage policy, family planning, university 
admissions, and employment, as well as from disproportionate 
infrastructure investment in some minority areas." It makes 
these statements immediately after alleging that "in practice 
discrimination based on ethnicity...has persisted." 
  Furthermore, in certain sections, the report is evidently 
playing with words in an attempt to fabricate charges against 
China. For example, the report says, "no executions for 
political offenses are known to have occurred in 1993." 
Therefore, lacking an excuse, the report purposely turns simple 
facts into mysteries by suggesting that some so-called political 
dissidents might in fact have been executed. 
  The report blames Chinese judicial authorities' relevant 
regulations of 1990 requiring all organizations to be officially 
registered and approved, which, it adds, "deter the formation of 
unauthorized political or labor organizations." This seems to 
suggest that the U.S. Department of State fails to think it is 
right for Chinese judicial organs to act according to law. 
<H5>  Groundless Criticisms Against China </H5>
  As a government report, it should present accurate and solid 
facts. This is a minimum requirement. After reading the U.S. 
report, we discovered that many conclusions lack factual 
backing, and many labels lack substance. The sources of the 
so-called facts used in the report are unclear, as shown in 
phrases such as "according to a credible report," "credibly 
reported," "credible reports indicate," "some reports said," 
"there was limited evidence," "according to report," and 
"according to reliable sources." These ambiguous formulations 
can be found throughout the report, and individuals and items 
specifically mentioned in the report failed to tally with the 
facts discovered during our investigation. 
  1. The U.S. human rights report conspicuously discusses the 
mistreatment of Liu Gang, saying that "credible reports 
persisted in 1993 saying that Liu Gang, a political prisoner 
held in a Liaoning prison is in ill health as a result of 
beatings and other mistreatment." 
  Our on-the-spot investigations and discussions with the 
Labor 
Reform Bureau under the Chinese Ministry of Justice revealed 
that Liu Gang, formerly a temporary worker with the Beijing 
Wear-Resistant Materials Development Co., was sentenced to six 
years of imprisonment with deprivation of political rights for 
two additional years after being convicted of attempting to 
subvert the government in June 1989. He is serving out his 
sentence in the Lingyuan No. 2 prison in Liaoning Province. 
During the 49th meeting of the United Nations Commission on 
Human Rights, held on March 3, 1993, the U.S. representative 
criticized China, saying that "according to a report, during a 
1992 hunger strike to protest conditions in the prison, prison 
officials force-fed the prisoner (Liu Gang) and broke his arm." 
Chinese representative Zhang Yishan immediately refuted the 
rumor that "Liu Gang's arm was broken." In his statement, Zhang 
pointed out that Liu Gang had never been mistreated and shown as 
evidence a recent photo published in the Hong Kong monthly 
BAUHINIA showing Liu playing volleyball. The U.S. 
representative failed to respond to the evidence presented. 
  This year's human rights report of the U.S. Department of 
State once again advanced this rumor which was previously 
disproved. In late February of this year with special approval 
of the Ministry of Justice, a member of the society made a 
special trip to the prison to conduct an on-the-spot 
investigation of Liu Gang's situation, and while there met 
personally with Liu who appeared quite healthy. Liu lives on 
the fifth floor of the five-story prison building. Each floor 
has two cell blocks, and except for an iron bar door and a 
guard, the cell blocks are open. Each floor has a recreational 
room with a TV set, newspapers, magazines, and games such 
Chinese chess and playing cards. Liu lives in a 25-square-meter 
sun-filled room along with three other prisoners. He only 
cleans his own room without participating in any other labor and 
eats prison food just as other prisoners. He receives prompt 
medical attention for any reported illness. Our member checked 
Liu's medical records and physical examination papers kept in 
the prison hospital. In these years, his only illnesses have 
been common colds. The physical examination records show that 
Liu is in very good health. With a height of 1.66 meters, Liu 
weighed 65 kg when entering prison, but now weighs 69 kg. He 
often plays volleyball, table-tennis and bridge. 
  2. The report also mentions Wang Juntao, Chen Ziming and Ren 
Wanding, who were imprisoned for various crimes. The report 
says that when ill the men "have difficulties in obtaining 
timely and adequate medical treatment." However, investigations 
by this society showed that Wang Juntao suffered from hepatitis 
prior to being sent to jail. Doctors at the prison hospital and 
the central hospital under the Labor Reform Bureau in Beijing 
have conducted physical examinations and prescribed treatment 
for Wang on numerous occasions. They have also consulted with 
experts from other hospitals. Wang Juntao was hospitalized in 
the prison hospital for 19 months. In June 1993, he was sent to 
the nation's authoritative hepatitis hospital for treatment. He 
lived alone in a ward with a toilet. The prison administration 
has paid a huge sum of money for his hospitalization, 
examinations and medical treatment. In consideration of 
humanitarianism, a short time ago Wang Juntao was released on 
bail for medical treatment by the Chinese judicial department 
and then allowed to have medical treatment abroad. Since going 
abroad, Wang has participated in activities in the United States 
and Europe. Facts prove that he is in good health. Chen Ziming 
received good medical treatment while in prison. Recently, he 
was also released on bail for medical treatment by the Chinese 
judicial department. 
  Ren Wanding is in good health, and the allegation that he 
had 
problems in obtaining treatment is out of the question. During 
the 1992 and 1993 spring festivals, with the approval of the 
prison authorities, Ren Wanding was reunited with his family. 
In March this year, CCTV videos showed that he is in good 
health. 
  3. The report says that Yulo Dawa Tsering, Ngawang Puchung, 
Jempel Tsering, Gendun Richen and Lobsang Yonten were arrested 
because they organized a "peaceful assembly" in Tibet. A 
well-reported fact is that these people were tried by the 
Chinese judiciary because they were engaged in criminal 
activities that violated China's criminal law. Related Chinese 
authorities have on several occasions presented in-depth 
accounts of the situation of these people to the UN human rights 
bodies and human rights organizations in some countries. This 
society has once again conducted a thorough verification. 
  1) Yulo Dawa Tsering. Yulo was sentenced to imprisonment 
for life for his participation in the 1959 armed rebellion 
designed to split the country. In 1979, he was granted amnesty 
and released. In 1987, Yulo once again incited "independence of 
Tibet" and engaged in criminal activities aimed at splitting 
China. In accordance with the criminal law of the People's 
Republic of China, Yulo was sentenced to 10 years of 
imprisonment in January 1989 by the Lhasa Intermediate People's 
Court of the Tibet Autonomous Region with deprivation of 
political rights for three additional years. 
  In November 1990, diplomatic envoys from some Nordic 
countries met with Yulo Dawa Tsering during their visit to the 
Lhasa prison. Following their visit, the ambassadors admitted 
that foreign reports related to the case were unfounded. In 
October 1992, a U.S. human rights delegation met with Yulo Dawa 
Tsering during their visit to the Lhasa prison. At present, 
Yulo is serving out his sentence in Lhasa, and he is in good 
health. 
  2) Ngawang Pulchung. Beginning in August 1988, he drafted 
and printed leaflets inciting the public to overthrow the 
government. In January 1989, he founded and led an illegal 
organization with the objective of splitting China. Acting in 
compliance with the directives of anti-China forces abroad, he 
engaged in espionage and gathered state secrets. In March 1989, 
he participated in the Lhasa riots. His acts seriously 
endangered the security of the country and violated China's 
criminal law. On November 30, 1989, the Intermediate People's 
Court of Lhasa city of the Tibet Autonomous Region tried and 
convicted him according to law and, in accordance with the 
stipulations of the criminal law of the People's Republic of 
China, sentenced him to 19 years of imprisonment, with 
deprivation of political rights for five additional years. 
  3) Jampel Tsering. Jampel joined with Ngawang Pulchung and 
others to establish the illegal organization which was engaged 
in activities aimed at splitting China. He also engaged in 
espionage, supplied materials to intelligence agencies abroad 
and attempted to illegally cross the border. The Intermediate 
People's Court of Lhasa city of the Tibet Autonomous Region 
tried and convicted him according to law and sentenced him to 
five years of imprisonment in accordance with the stipulations 
of the criminal law of the People's Republic of China. 
  4) Genden Richen and Lobsang Yonten. Because the two men 
spied out state secrets which endangered the security of the 
country, they were detained and investigated according to law by 
the Public Security Department of the Tibet Autonomous Region in 
May 1993, and were later released. 
  4. The report asserts that China has "no legislation to 
ensure that buildings, even new buildings, are accessible to the 
handicapped." 
  In September 1985, in order to create an obstacle-free 
environment for the disabled, the Ministry of Construction, the 
Ministry of Civil Affairs and the Chinese Association for 
Handicapped, referring to international standards and acting in 
accordance with China's actual conditions, drafted and 
promulgated the standards for the design of urban roads and 
structures facilitating the use of people with disabilities. 
The law of the People's Republic of China on guaranteeing 
security for people with disabilities adopted in 1990 clearly 
stipulates, "the state and society will gradually put into 
practice the standard for the design of urban roads and 
structures facilitating people with disabilities and will 
introduce obstacle-free measures." The statement in the report 
indicates that officials of the U.S. Department of State reached 
irresponsible conclusions without referring to China's laws. 
  5. The report says, "unemployed (Chinese) workers are not 
considered to be union members." This is not the case. Article 
7 of the Constitution of the All-China Federation of Trade 
Unions clearly stipulates, "members who have retired or have 
been made redundant can retain their membership status and are 
exempt from membership fees." Chinese trade union organizations 
are not only concerned about the lives of their unemployed 
members, but also actively forward their demands and wishes to 
relevant authorities. 
  6. The report says, "accused persons are given virtually no 
opportunity to prepare a defense in the pretrial 
process...Defense lawyers may be retained only seven days before 
the trial." It also alleges, "under Chinese law, there is no 
requirement for the court to appoint a defense attorney for the 
defendant." The actual fact is that according to article 110 of 
China's criminal procedure law, the people's court, acting on 
the decision of a hearing, shall "serve the accused with a copy 
of the charge sheet of the people's procuratorate not less than 
seven days prior to the opening of the court session, and shall 
inform the accused that he may retain an advocate, or, where 
necessary, designate an advocate on his behalf." If the advocate 
finds the time is insufficient, he may apply for a postponement 
of the opening of the court session. The court will seriously 
consider and adopt the advocate's opinion as it deems necessary, 
as long as the application is submitted within the legal time 
limit for the hearing. Article 27 of the criminal procedure law 
stipulates, "...The people's court shall assign an advocate for 
the accused if he fails to retain one on his own...In cases 
where an accused is deaf or dumb, or a minor, the people's court 
shall assign an advocate for him if he fails to retain one on 
his own." The report distorts the stipulation that "seven days 
prior to the opening of the court session," saying instead 
"seven days before the trial," and altering "the people's court 
shall assign an advocate for the accused" to read "there is no 
requirement that the court appoint a defense attorney for the 
defendant." Was this simply a mistake resulting from the 
failure of U.S. officials to refer to China's law, or did they 
deliberately misrepresent China's law in order to deceive the 
public? 
<H5>  Arbitrary Attacks on China's Human Rights Situation </H5>
  To scientifically assess the human rights situation of a 
country, one should not focus totally on individual events or a 
few persons, while neglecting the overwhelming majority of the 
population. Assessments should not be confined to single matters 
at a given time, but rather should be an overall assessment from 
an objective, historical and developmental perspective. At 
present, there is not a single country in the world which can 
say that its human rights situation is perfect. The most 
important thing is to view a country's overall human rights 
situation, its historical background and future trend. China's 
human rights situation should be approached in this manner. 
However, the U.S. State Department's report makes a sweeping 
assessment of China by seizing on individual, minor and 
transient problems. As one Chinese saying puts it: seize upon 
one point and ignore the overall picture. A fair appraisal 
reveals that since the founding of the People's Republic of 
China in 1949, the Chinese people have completely rid themselves 
of the previous situation in which they were bullied and 
trampled upon by others, and were deprived of human rights. 
They, instead, have become the masters of their own country. 
Over the past 40-plus years since the founding of New China, 
and especially during the past decade or so, China's near 1.2 
billion people have basically solved problems related to 
adequate food and clothing, and are well on the way to a 
relatively comfortable life, with living standards improving 
with each passing day. A situation of political stability, 
economic development and people living and working in peace and 
contentment has emerged in the country. In 1993, China 
witnessed vigorous economic development and its gross domestic 
product (GDP) exceeded 3,000 billion yuan, with the urban 
residents' per-capita income increasing by 10.2 percent over the 
1992 figure. The Chinese people also made significant 
improvements in terms of human rights, and are now advancing 
toward higher objectives. China has devoted great efforts to 
strengthening socialist democratic politics and legislative 
construction. Since 1979, it has promulgated and implemented 
numerous basic laws, including the constitution, the criminal 
law, the criminal procedure law, the general principle of civil 
law, the civil procedure law and the administrative procedure 
law. More than 1,000 laws related to human rights have been 
enacted by the central and provincial governments. Law 
enforcement institutions act strictly according to law. 
Supervisory and procuratorial institutions promptly correct the 
errors made by individual personnel while enforcing law. Mass 
organizatrions (non-governmental organizations) exercise 
supervision, the people have various channels for appeal, and 
news media plays a supervisory role...It is widely acknowledged 
that great achievements have been recorded in China's 
implementing and safeguarding of human rights. These basic 
facts and favorable development trends were not given an 
objective and fair appraisal by the U.S. State Department's 
human rights report. On the contrary, it relied on hearsay, and 
especially believed rumor and slander spread by a few persons 
who vainly attempted to subvert the Chinese Government and 
overthrow China's socialist system. The report is a patchwork 
of allegations which contains censures of China. 
  Facts show that the U.S. State Department's human rights 
report is not really concerned with the interests and well- 
being of the broad masses of the Chinese people, but instead 
only concerned with the "human rights" of the handful of people 
who incited revolt, advocated the subversion of the Chinese 
Government and disrupted China's stability. 
  The issue of human rights is a major concern of people the 
world over, and enjoying full human rights is the common 
aspiration and objective of the people worldwide. The charter 
of the United Nations attaches great importance to human rights. 
Article 1 of the charter reads, the goal is "to achieve 
international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect 
for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without 
distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion." In order 
to achieve this goal, Article 2 of the charter stipulates the 
principles to be followed by the United Nations and its member 
states. The first principle is the "principle of the sovereign 
equality of all its members," and the second principle states 
that "nothing contained in the present charter authorize the 
United Nations to intervene in matters which are essentially 
within the domestic jurisdiction of any state." The U.S. 
Government which styles itself as the "judge of world human 
rights," publishes annual reports which examine the human rights 
situation in other countries, censuring the political, economic, 
social, cultural and judicial systems of other countries. 
Actions of this nature run counter to the spirit of the United 
Nations charter and add greater instability to an already 
unstable world. Such a report has naturally been criticized and 
censured by many countries. 
  Owing to the many different historical, cultural, social and 
national conditions in various countries, there have always been 
varied views on the question of human rights. Members of the 
international community should engage in dialogue and develop 
international cooperation on the basis of equality, while 
seeking common ground and preserving differences. Interaction 
such as this will help safeguard and improve the world human 
rights. The China society for human rights studies opposes the 
practice of imposing one's own views on others, and the 
hegemonism of those who intervene in the internal affairs of 
other countries and bring pressure to bear upon them under the 
pretext of human rights. China is a developing country, many 
aspects of its human rights situation have not as yet reached 
the desired level. Moreover, some 80 million Chinese people, or 
7 percent of the country's total population, still live in 
poverty. This is currently the most important and urgent human 
rights problem in China. The Chinese Government and many 
Chinese social organizations are applying themselves to the work 
of aiding the poor. The China Society for Human Rights Studies 
is greatly concerned with the human rights situation in China, a 
country with a population of nearly 1.2 billion, and in the rest 
of the world as well. It is eager to discuss questions related 
to human rights with personages and organizations of all 
countries in accordance with the principles of equality, 
fairness and non-interference in each other's internal affairs. 
It welcomes those who are truly concerned with the human rights 
situation of the masses of Chinese people to offer their 
valuable opinion, so as to bring about still greater progress in 
China's human rights situation. 

