BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by 'Ali Hamati from Washington] </F>
  [Excerpts] His Majesty King Husayn has said Jordan's 
assumption of its basic and effective role in the peace process 
should be based on a strong Jordan and a solid economic base 
that gives all members of the one large Jordanian family an 
equal opportunity to lead a dignified, secure, and stable life. 
His majesty made these statements during his meeting with U.S. 
Secretary of State Warren Christopher at the U.S. State 
Department in Washington. His majesty stressed that Jordan 
adheres to a just, durable, and comprehensive peace in the 
region, indicating that progress on the Jordanian track should 
be an incentive for progress on the other tracks. 
  For his part, Warren Christopher showed a clear 
understanding 
of the Jordanian role in the peace process and of the social and 
economic difficulties caused by this role. He said Washington 
will extend all possible assistance, whose details, he said, 
will be discussed by the joint Jordanian-U.S. committee, which 
will hold its first meeting at the State Department on Wednesday 
[22 June]. 
  His majesty and Secretary Christopher then held an expanded 
session of talks, interrupted by a working luncheon. [passage 
omitted] 
  Later, his majesty the king received U.S. Secretary of 
Commerce Ronald Brown at his place of residence in Washington . 
Bilateral trade relations were discussed during the meeting. 
  His Majesty King Husayn had earlier expressed optimism about 
progress in the Middle East peace process. Speaking to 
reporters at the State Department, he hoped the 
Jordanian-Israeli talks under U.S. sponsorship will lead to the 
demarcation of borders in the near future. Asked when his 
majesty will meet with Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin, his 
majesty said he has never been afraid of working in daylight. 
He hoped the opportunity will come soon for a meeting between 
Jordanian and Israeli officials at the highest level. He also 
hoped that the near future will witness further progress in the 
peace process. [passage omitted] 
  His majesty the king will hold a news conference later today 
to brief local and world press correspondents on the latest 
developments of the peace process and other important issues. 
  In another development, the Jordanian and U.S. experts held 
a 
meeting at the Jordanian delegation's place of residence in 
Washington at dawn today, Amman time. During this preliminary 
meeting, bilateral relations and the burdens of the peace 
process on Jordan were discussed. The Jordanian side explained 
these burdens. 

