Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Pietro Gianvanni: "Polyphem, The Arrival of </F>
Optical Fibers"] 
  [Text] The German Army, like most of the other European 
armies, is feeling the lack of air transport vehicles for the 
movement and deployment of mobile contingents. This shortage 
has become more pronounced with the organization of the NATO 
Rapid Reaction Force. The Bundeswehr has tried to get round 
this problem using sections equipped with light armaments for 
which the biggest problem remains that of firing support, both 
of the traditional type supplied by field equipment (artillery 
and tanks), and that given by fighter helicopters. However, 
this is inevitable, since the firing power is not sufficient to 
meet the requirements of lightness and mobility. Because of 
this situation, interest has arisen in a weapon that is light 
enough, accurate, and powerful, that would be able to make valid 
tactical support available to detachments. 
  The French find themselves in a better situation as far as 
mobility is concerned. However, they also need an antitank 
system capable of effecting medium distance strikes beyond the 
horizon. In 1984 the German MBB [Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm] 
and L'Aerospatiale started to study the concept of a missile 
able to cover distances exceeding 10 kilometers, connected to a 
fixed position by means of an optical fiber cable that transmits 
images to the operator, showing the ground over which the 
missile flies, and enabling the operator to search for the 
target, identify it, and strike it. The results of the research 
were verified in 1988, on the Magny range, by four launches made 
to demonstrate the technology of the system. Four SS12M 
anti-tank missiles were converted for the occasion. They were 
renamed "Polyphem-demo," the program taking its name from one of 
the Cyclops of Greek mythology. They weighed 76 kilograms and 
the warheads had been substituted by miniature television 
cameras mounted on triaxial stabilized platforms, the wiring of 
their remote control systems being substituted by optical 
fibers. The television cameras and the optical fiber 
connections had been derived from commercial products, the first 
from Sony and the second from Fukuda. The autonomy of the 
missiles was limited to six kilometers by the length of the 
cable and the size of the range. 
  The success of the Polyphem-demo enabled the two companies 
to 
obtain an order to continue with the work, valued at 216 million 
French francs [Fr] (about 48 billion Italian lire), from the 
French and German governments in 1991. This sum represents 60 
percent of the Fr360 million necessary to complete the 
demonstration phase. The remaining 40 percent will come from 
industry. 
  Deutsche Aerospace (which in the meantime has absorbed MBB) 
and Aerospatiale are engaged in a 51-month program to test the 
validity of a guidance system that uses optical fibers. The 
work will end with the test launching of a missile 2.40 meters 
long, with a wing span of 1.10 meters, weighing 100 kilograms, 
and having an autonomy of 15 kilometers, with its flight slated 
for 1995, and with the testing of its relative fixed guidance 
position. 
  DASA [German Aerospace Corporation] is following the 
development of the missile, while Aerospatiale has been 
entrusted with the ground station. The main subcontractors are 
BMW/Rolls Royce for the jet engine, SEL [Lorenz Standard 
Electric company] for the optical fibers, and Rheinmetall for 
the initial acceleration booster and the actuators for the fins. 
  Italy also joined the program in 1992 but is excluded from 
this phase which is now too far advanced. It could participate 
in the perfection and personalization of the ground station and 
the launching modules. 
  Funding of 6.6 billion lire has been made available for the 
project under the Italian defense budget for 1994. DASA and 
Aerospatiale are in close contact with the Italmissile 
consortium, that comprises Alenia, OTO Melara and Snia BPD 
[Bombrini, Parodi and Delfino], for the Polyphem missile. 
<H5>  Polyphem Takes Form </H5>
  The antitank version of the Polyphem missile will be two 
meters long and the anti-helicopter version will be 1.6 meters 
long. The launching weight, depending on the use of the 
missile, will be either 53 or 43 kilograms. The diameter of the 
body will be 16.5 centimeters. The body is divided into three 
main parts, the nose contains the infrared sensor mounted on a 
stabilized platform, the transmission electronics, and the 
warhead; the central part contains the jet engine, the booster, 
the fuel tank and the fins that can be unfolded. Finally, the 
rear end contains the cable bobbin, the folding directional 
fins, and the battery. 
  The telecamera on the Polyphem prototype will be replaced 
with an infrared sensor that will enable the missile to be used 
both during the day and at night. The selected wavelength is 
between three and five millimeters. The sensitive material is 
made of platinum silicon cells, their sensitivity can be varied 
by the computer at the ground station and the results are 
reproduced on a television screen. The latter and the image 
recorder are made of normal materials that are commercially 
available, which confirms the fact that the quality of civilian 
products is reaching levels that were unimaginable until a few 
years ago. 
  The entire configuration is so elastic that high definition 
television systems, able to utilize the current 625 scanning 
lines, will be able to be used in the future. The search for 
and identification of targets requires the image to be as still 
as possible, and therefore the sensor has been fixed on a 
platform that is stabilized on three axes. The clarity of the 
images and the availability of long focuses have also been at 
the basis of the decision not to weigh down the missile with 
other navigational sensors with the exception of an altimeter 
that checks that height is maintained. 
  The designers have looked at the problem of navigation over 
the sea and in areas of poor contrast (such as the desert) and 
for this type of use GPS [global positioning system] Navstar 
equipment could be mounted in the anterior part of the missile 
supplying information on the position and height every half 
second. The precision necessary (remembering that the 
degradation of the signal of the GPS satellites available to the 
defense department does not permit better precision than 100 
meters, compared to the 10 meters available to the U.S. Army) 
would be obtained by using an additional GPS on the ground, by 
means of the so-called differential GPS procedure, in which the 
data from a fixed GPS enables the data from the mobile system 
mounted on the missile to be rapidly corrected. 
  The Polyphem is assisted by a Rheinmetall booster during the 
launching stage. This takes it up to an initial height of 200 
meters and a speed of 150 meters per second. The cruising 
engine is a derivative of the WJ119-2 made by Williams, the 
American company, and built under license by BMW-Rolls Royce. 
The air inlets and the exhausts are fitted onto the sides of 
the body so that they do not disturb the unrolling of the cable. 
The jet module is an integral part of the body and the presence 
of an engine of this type permits a certain elasticity in the 
choice of speed for the missile, which can vary between 120 and 
180 meters per second, with a flexibility that cannot be 
obtained from propulsion systems that are exclusively propelled 
by rockets. The Polyphem has four folding wings that are fixed 
onto the central section and four moveable directional fins, 
that also fold and that are fitted onto the final section. 
  However, the real news regarding the Polyphem, lies in the 
command transmission system and the images received via a 0.25 
millimeter optical fiber cable. The technicians have given 
assurance that once the system has been perfected it will be 
possible to follow the missile for a distance of up to 60 k both 
directions with the command data travelling toward the missile 
and the video data arriving at the guidance station from the 
missile. The "extension" of the missile's electronics on the 
ground has made it possible for the equipment on board to be 
simplified and for the missile to be so light and small. 
Another advantage of this choice is that all the updates and 
improvements of the hardware and of the software (processing the 
optical signals, regulating the levels of sensitivity of the 
sensors, and the tracking and navigation procedures) can be made 
through interventions at the ground station alone. 
  The real technological challenge is, on the other hand, the 
perfection of the winding system for the optical fiber, that 
must allow it to work in harmony with the varying speeds of the 
missile. The cable is extremely resistant to abrasion too, but 
the tensions to which it is subjected are already high, without 
considering any eventual "jerks" due to the unwinding and 
rewinding phenomena that are typical of bobbins turning at 
speeds that are not constant. The cable is wound in successive 
layers that stick together lightly so as to avoid widening of 
the turns, but enough to allow it to work without presenting too 
much resistance. DASA and Filotex SEL/Alcatel are continuing 
their studies with the intention of achieving a bobbin able to 
contain up to 100 kilometers of cable. 
  The operator is provided with a stick at the ground station 
with which he controls the movements of the fins and the engine 
of the missile according to the images that he sees on the 
screen. The guidance options that are available provide for the 
Polyphem to fly in a straight line at cruising speed (in this 
mode the movement of the missile is not tied to that of the 
telecamera, that can be turned at will to explore the scene); or 
it can proportionally follow the movements ordered to the 
television camera in a horizontal plane (maintaining its 
height), or link the movements of the missile to those of the 
television camera both in azimuth and in elevation; this latter 
system is normally used whilst closing in on the target. In the 
final stage of attack a tracking system comes into play that 
keeps the target at the center of the television screen, in this 
case the operator only makes the corrections that he considers 
necessary to hit the target at its most vulnerable point. 
  The warhead varies according to the type of objective. For 
antitank missions it is of the tandem type, having a total 
weight of nine kilograms of explosive, whilst for use against 
helicopters it is a single three kilogram warhead. The Polyphem 
is transported in, and launched from, containers having variable 
configurations from six to 40 cells. The containers can be 
fitted onto trucks or onto caterpillar chassis, or be fixed 
batteries on ships or part of coastal defenses. Amongst the 
hypotheses concerning the use of the missile there is also that 
of launching it from submarines. The concept of this hypothesis 
is being studied by the Bundesmarine [Federal Navy] 
independently of the Polyphem agreement. 
  The Polyphem program represents the first use of optical 
fiber technology for military operations. It is a technology 
that promises many advantages but that also presents margins of 
doubt. Amongst the first let us remember the possibility of 
seeing the battlefield from beyond the horizon and following the 
weapon as far as the target without having to load it with 
expensive and complex systems as well as being able to "speak 
to" the missile in a secure way, even in an environment 
saturated with countermeasures. On the other hand the velocity 
of the missile plays against it, as it is not high and over long 
distances it could allow the enemy to organize effective 
defense, also because, increasing the distance, the missile must 
increase its quota to allow the optical fiber cable to function 
correctly. 

