Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Viktor Sheynis, deputy chairman of the </F>
President's Legislative Proposals Commission, by correspondent 
Lyubov Volodina; place and date not given: "The Rules of the 
Game for Deputies"] 
  [Text] The elaboration of the draft laws which will enable 
the Federal Assembly to carry out its activity is being 
completed by the President's Legislative Proposals Commission. 
Commission Deputy Chairman Viktor Sheynis here talks about them 
to your correspondent. 
  [Volodina] Viktor Leonidovich, why did the need arise to 
draw up the legislative organ's standing orders before the 
Federal Assembly starts work? After all, this was previously 
done by parliament itself. 
  [Sheynis] I regard this as a sensible decision because 
parliament cannot operate without standing orders or a law on 
the status of deputies. We cannot use the old standing orders 
and the old law because we have a parliament that is 
fundamentally different in terms of its organization, structure, 
method of election, and constitutional functions. Fundamentally 
new documents regulating its activity are correspondingly 
essential. The fact that we have gotten down to preparing these 
draft laws is sensible, in my view, because the questions of the 
actual organization of parliament's work must be resolved before 
we move on to substantive questions. Otherwise it is unclear 
how those substantive issues will be tackled. But our society 
is interested above all in the actual work of legislation, which 
is bound up with tackling the fundamental issues that concern 
our society and were so clearly manifest at the elections and in 
the referendum, rather than the manner in which deputies will 
conduct themselves, how voting will be carried out or the 
chairman elected, or how many committees the State Duma and 
Federation Council will set up. Therefore the preparatory work, 
which is being carried out in a sufficiently expert manner and 
which in no way predetermines the final versions which the State 
Duma and Federation Council will adopt, will simply save time 
and enable us to cover more quickly the ground which is 
preparatory in nature and get down to the main business for 
which the new parliament was elected. 
  [Volodina] You do not anticipate that the State Duma and 
Federation Council will refuse to accept the proposed drafts on 
the grounds that they have been drawn up by the president's 
commission, that is to say, by the executive branch, and embark 
on their own work? From scratch.... 
  [Sheynis] Theoretically that is feasible, of course. 
Practically, however, it seems to me that sensible people, the 
people elected as members of parliament, will not be able to 
dispense with the work which has already been done and which 
will, I hope, satisfy them to a considerable extent. But two 
provisos have to be made here. The first is that groups of 
deputies have already been set up to prepare the sessions of the 
future parliament, and the Legislative Proposals Commission's 
draft outlines will be submitted for their examination. It is 
highly likely that they will make their own contribution to this 
work in the time remaining before 11 January. Thus the 
documents will to some extent be approved by deputies of the 
present convocation. As for the second proviso, I think that the 
introduction of certain emendations to the drafts is not only 
possible but also extremely desirable. A number of serious 
conceptual disagreements have arisen in the process of working 
on them. I, in particular, as a participant in this work on the 
one hand and as a deputy of the State Duma of the present 
convocation on the other, have a whole series of serious 
objections to the text which now exists and will do all in my 
power to make the necessary amendments to it. 
  [Volodina] What is the nub of those disagreements? 
  [Sheynis] The standing orders and the status of deputies 
touch above all on the question of whether deputies will have an 
obligatory or free mandate. In other words, can a deputy 
elected, say, on the federation-wide list be stripped of his 
status as a deputy on the basis of a decision by the electoral 
association which entered his name on the list? There are 
differing approaches here: Both sides have their arguments for 
and against. The second point is: Can a deputy quit one 
faction and join another? How strict and tough are the 
conditions governing a deputy's involvement in a faction's 
activity? I consider that the very division of the legislative 
organ on the basis of political positions rather than according 
to regions, as used to be the case, marks a huge step toward a 
civilized parliament. But I do think that binding every deputy 
to a particular faction in an extremely strict manner will 
undermine the activity of the factions as groups of political 
associations of deputies among themselves and create unnecessary 
inner tension within factions. 
  Moreover, the very serious problem arises not just of the 
relationship between a deputy and his faction but also of the 
relationship between a deputy and a committee and a deputy and 
the organs which provide services to the State Duma and the 
Federation Council. There clearly exists a common opinion, one 
reflected in the the drafts, that we should in no circumstance 
have a sovereign presidium or a "speaker of all Russia," who is 
an independent figure and issues directives which are mandatory 
for parliament and binding on deputies. Decisions in parliament 
should, in keeping with the very raison d'etre of that organ, be 
made on a collegial basis. As far as the chairman, deputy 
chairmen, and committee chairmen are concerned, they exercise 
purely organizational and coordinating functions. Here there is 
clearly a wide degree of agreement, although it does seem to me 
that certain statutes must also be amended here to ensure the 
individiual deputy's sovereignty. 
  [Volodina] Won't the election of some deputies on a 
proportional system and correspondingly their more rigid 
attachment to factions than before tend to intensify political 
struggle inside the State Duma rather than weaken it, as 
relatively strong and internally disciplined groups will be 
counterposed? 
  [Sheynis] I think it essential to enshrine in both the 
status of the deputy and in the standing orders the fact that a 
deputy is free to express his own opinions. A faction is 
entitled to dispense with a deputy's services and exclude him 
from its ranks, and a deputy then loses all the additional 
opportunities which he obtains from affiliation to a faction. 
He will thus think long and hard before deciding to take the 
extreme measure of severing his connection with the faction. I 
think it correct to enshrine in the standing orders (there is 
nothing on that score in the draft to date) that a faction can 
expel a deputy, although this should not be done lightly: The 
procedure pertaining to such a decision should be strictly 
stipulated. Likewise a deputy is entitled to withdraw from a 
faction of his own accord. A faction should have the right to 
accept other deputies into its ranks, including those elected 
for single-seat electoral districts. I think that this will 
alleviate tension inside a faction to a certain extent. But the 
movement toward a party political organization of parliament 
marks in itself, in my view, a considerable step forward, one 
prompted by our election law. Today certain imperfections and 
failings in the election legislation are apparent -- this was 
our first effort, after all. But its merit resides precisely in 
the fact that a definite political structure has replaced 
disorganized deputies and more or less haphazard decisionmaking, 
decisions which could be made either under the influence of a 
volatile mood or as a result, say, of manipulation by the 
speaker, and so forth. Real social contradictions will not 
disappear; they exist. Political struggle will go on. The 
problem is not to exclude struggle but to channel it within the 
normal civilized norms accepted throughout the world. And, as I 
see it, faction-based organization helps rather than hinders 
this cause. 
  [Volodina] Will the Legislative Proposals Commission cease 
to exist with the start of the parliament's work, or will it 
remain? 
  [Sheynis] The President's Legislative Proposals Commission 
was set up by the president. The decision will consequently be 
made by him. From my own standpoint, the existence of such a 
commission is useful. It is useful insofar as a significant 
amount of legislation is submitted on the president's behalf. 
That is world practice too: The executive branch in the person 
of the government or the president introduces 70 to 90 percent 
of all draft laws. To ensure that they are worked on to a high 
standard I think it useful to have such a structure in the 
Presidential Administration. It is another issue that this 
structure, if it is retained -- I repeat, I do not know what 
decision the president will make -- should, of course, be 
somewhat restructured, if only because a considerable number of 
the commission personnel, elected deputies, will go into the 
Federal Assembly. That is the provision of the law, and I 
myself have already tendered my resignation as deputy chairman 
of the commission, as prescribed by law. But I do think that a 
sufficient number of skilled people who acquired experience in 
legislative work in the last parliament will remain in the 
commission, and it would be wasteful and uneconomical, given our 
situation, to dispense with those people and the activity which 
they can successfully undertake. Therefore, if I were the 
person deciding the question, I would keep the commission in a 
transformed guise. 

