Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres by political </F>
correspondent Shlomo Raz on 11 February; place not given -- 
recorded] 
  [Text] [Raz] Mr. Foreign Minister, you concluded security 
issues in Cairo which should lead to more security and calm, yet 
this past week we witnessed two more murders, a renewed wave of 
terror. 
  [Peres] One must not forget, the negotiations as well as the 
agreement are still only on paper, they are not reality. The 
Palestinians do not have a police force, nor responsibility. 
Responsibility is still 100 percent ours. Therefore, they 
cannot be expected to do what they cannot. Things will 
hopefully change in the future, but we will have to go through a 
difficult period still. 'Arafat told me he clearly understands 
that if anything happens in Gaza -- God forbid -- all fingers, 
the Israelis, the Europeans, and the Americans, will be pointed 
at him. He said he surely understands that establishing peace 
is in their supreme interest. 
  [Raz] Still, the last two murders took place inside Israel. 
  [Peres] Yes, but we know who perpetrated them. Hamas 
[Islamic Resistance Movement] -- not the PLO -- did this. 
Murder occurs in Arab countries too; fundamentalists exist 
there too. I believe that when the agreement is translated into 
reality, we will feel the change on the ground. 
  [Raz] When will the agreement turn into reality indeed? The 
talks in Taba and Paris are slated to resume next week, I 
understand, and this is another stage on the way toward 
implementation. 
  [Peres] Numerically speaking, we overcame only some of the 
problems. Qualitatively, we surmounted most of the difficult 
problems, although we are facing additional difficult problems 
still. I must tell you though, that there were moments during 
these talks that I doubted we would overcome. The gaps are so 
big. I am referring to gaps in formulation, in views, and even 
more so, in feelings. 
  [Raz] How did you manage to overcome problems then? Who 
gave or caved in? 
  [Peres] This is not a matter of caving in. It is not a 
give- and-take type of negotiation. You know, many ask me what 
we received. From Israel's viewpoint, we first and foremost 
negotiate with ourselves rather than with the Palestinians. The 
Likud acted wisely: It conducted negotiations with itself; it 
did not give up anything. The disadvantage is that this cannot 
lead to any results; rather, this can result in greater enmity 
and hatred, greater danger and number of casualties involved. 
Where does this unforgettable genius lead? 
  [Raz] Still, what are the weaknesses in the agreement you 
worked out in Cairo? 
  [Peres] You know, we initially said we would give the 
Palestinians honor and they would give us security, or rather, 
agree on security issues, but the truth is that what we call 
security they call honor, and what they term honor we think of 
as security. For example, will the Palestinian policemen 
stationed in the border terminal be armed with pistols or not? 
Can you conceive of a policeman without a pistol? A policeman 
needs weapons for self- defense in case an armed person enters 
or in case somebody runs wild. This is a simple example of a 
problem that caused hardship. 
  [Raz] They will have pistols after all, I believe. 
  [Peres] Yes. Reference is to up to 10 policemen. 
  [Raz] So, is it because of 10 armed policemen that the 
defense establishment had so many reservations, according to 
several reports? 
  [Peres] Do not lead me into this kind of false drama. There 
is a military echelon which should give military advice. This 
is its duty and I have no complaints about this. Just as 
doctors give medical counseling, the Army counsels on security 
issues and should insist on this, and so should the politicians, 
for their part, insist on what is politically necessary. I have 
no complaints about this. 
  Doubts arise though. The whole issue of crossing the 
border terminal for instance. They say we are giving them 
autonomy rather than independence, but when a Jericho resident 
arrives at the terminal, what does autonomy mean to him? -- Let 
him be welcomed by a Palestinian policeman with a Palestinian 
flag. We said no, we want to check everyone who goes through. 
You can ask why there is an argument over a policeman. The 
argument is not over a policeman but over a sea of feelings, of 
anxieties, suspicions, and hopes, and with correct phrasing you 
can sometimes surmount problems. 
  [Raz] Who guarantees, Mr. Peres, that these formulations 
will pass the test of reality? Your experience shows that 
'Arafat went back on agreements at the very last minute? 
  [Peres] Who can guarantee there will be no war, or anything 
else for that matter? Gambling or risks is the name of the game 
wherever you turn. You may bring about war, but then you may 
also bring about peace. There are no absolute guarantees, 
rather absolute choices. If you ask me, the Palestinians are 
dead tired of the current situation. I noticed the great 
distress, the numerous internal struggles they have constantly 
experienced regarding the negotiations. They too are facing an 
opposition. The difference is that ours is usually expressed in 
no-confidence motions, while theirs is manifest in shooting to 
kill. A death threat is hovering over almost every person who 
sat to the negotiations table with us. 
  [Raz] What request or demand by the Palestinians we could 
not accept? 
  [Peres] For instance, a demand that we shoulder joint rather 
than full responsibility for the border, the terminals, and the 
roads which connect the settlements to Israel. They told us: 
Do you think we do not want to fight murderers? Our answer 
was: Although it is true that we cannot guarantee the safety of 
our people 100 percent even when we are fully in charge of 
security, still, when something happens God forbid, nobody would 
doubt that we made our best efforts to prevent this. We told 
them: Imagine that we share responsibility, that you and we, 
each share 50 percent responsibility, and a fatal incident 
occurs, everyone will then say it is because of you that we do 
not have full security. 
  As for the three roads, the Palestinians told us: Is it for 
a single settlement, with 28 families, that you want to control 
a 5-km long road, to have the right to absolute responsibility 
over this road and the areas alongside it? 
  [Raz] You are referring to the settlement of Netzarim, I 
understand. 
  [Peres] I am talking of two roads which branch off from the 
Qatif Bloc, one southward, south-east, and the other northward, 
north-east, as well as a road to Netzarim. The Palestinians 
say: We have villages and traffic too, after all, while you want 
5 km for 28 families; you have to be logical too as to what you 
are doing. I am giving the other side's contention. You know, 
sitting at home and negotiating with yourself is very simple, 
but here you sit opposite the other side and want to reach an 
agreement with it rather than to imposing an agreement. There 
were moments when they simply said they could not go back to 
their people with what was raised. Well, if it is impossible, 
it is impossible. 
  [Raz] This may be a hypothetical question, but would you 
support the evacuation of any settlements in the Gaza Strip? 
  [Peres] Not under the pressure of negotiations. I believe 
the Likud established a terrible precedent with regard to the 
Sinai. Those who criticize us about the settlements today are 
those who forcefully evacuated the settlers from the Sinai at 
the time! To tell you the truth, I have questions which should 
be asked out loud indeed: What is the sense in keeping a 
settlement of 28 families that need laborers from Thailand, that 
need a military company to defend them, and whose road should 
always be protected? Where are the bounds of logic here? Have 
we not effected cuts in the Israel Aircraft Industries and 
REFA'EL [Armament Development Authority]? Are these not cuts in 
the defense sphere? We went to maximum extremes here from the 
economic and security viewpoints. I heard one of the 
settlements' residents say that the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] 
would not have stayed in the area had it not been for them. 
Well, what does the Army need to do there? The moment we 
decided the IDF will not be Gaza's policeman, then.... 
  [Raz, interrupting] I would like to go beyond the 
Palestinian issue. How does this agreement you consolidated in 
Cairo influence other tracks of the negotiations, the talks with 
Syria, Jordan, and Lebanon? 
  [Peres] First, this agreement surely impressed the world. 
Why? This was because we overcame very complex problems, 
involving historic, mental, and territorial disagreements, 
without guns firing, without war threats, without planes. As 
for the Syrians, if they do not expand the negotiation, if they 
maintain them on a narrow path, we will face only difficulties, 
I believe. We have a very talented representative, our 
ambassador in Washington, Itamar Rabinovich, who knows the 
subject matter and how to conduct negotiations. He is a very 
serious, able person, but he will not be able to make progress 
on this narrow path. 
  [Raz] Are you alluding to the necessity of having a summit 
meeting with al-Asad? 
  [Peres] Yes, but in general, the negotiations should be 
expanded. In my opinion, it is desirable to have a meeting 
between al-Asad and Rabin, and the negotiations should then move 
into the political plane. Look how matters proceeded with 
Egypt. The negotiations cannot remain so controlled and 
restricted to such a narrow channel. [laughingly] We need a 
second channel [referring to New Israel Television Channel 2] 
  [Raz] How about Jordan? 
  [Peres] As for Jordan, the Jordanians have taken steps. The 
king's statement is important, in my opinion. I think that he 
admitted that there were secret meetings first. In other words, 
he paved the road for open meetings in the future. He said.... 
  [Raz, interrupting] Is a date emerging for an open meeting 
already? 
  [Peres] Not yet, not yet. The point about the Jordanians is 
that they are saying the correct things now. We did succeed in 
one thing: We stopped the secrecy. I told the Jordanians: Is 
peace an underground matter? Why are you complaining about 
leaks on our side? We dislike that you want to conceal this in 
the first place? What do you mean by this? So now, the 
Jordanians came out with matters openly. I am also happy that 
the king spoke of the economic issue. Incidentally, 'Arafat too 
began to discuss economics with me. I think he even quoted from 
a book I wrote, but then he may have wanted to please me, who 
knows? 
  [Raz] There is another question I must ask you. Do you too 
think that the government will have to resign if a referendum is 
held and the government does not win a majority? 
  [Peres] I think it will win a majority. I cannot conceive 
of anything else. If we succeed in the negotiations, the 
majority will support us. If we fail, we will need to be thrown 
out anyway. A government is elected every four years rather 
than four days since a government which cannot be unpopular does 
not deserve to rule. The four years are granted so that the 
government can also adopt unpopular measures in order to achieve 
popular goals, for otherwise, nothing will be gained. 
  [Raz] Mr. Foreign Minister, thank you very much. 
  [Peres] You are welcome. 

