Language: <F P=105> Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aap Tanav: "Niitenberg Not Afraid of </F>
 Nuclear 
Plants"] 
<H6>  The Daughter of Estonia's Energy Minister Arvo Niitenberg Is 
Involved In Liquidating Accidents at Nuclear Plants </H6>
  [Text] 
  "I have been telling my Western colleagues that had 
they had a steep price hike like we had in Estonia, they would 
have had rioting in the streets," says energy minister Arvo 
Niitenberg smugly, as he recalls the economic crisis of the 70's 
in the United States. At that time, Americans raised the price 
of a liter of gasoline by 10 cents, and there were incidents of 
shooting at gas stations. Estonia's energetics has survived a 
major price shock over the past two years. Coal, heating oil, 
natural gas, diesel fuel and gasoline have been brought to world 
market prices. "Oil shale and electricity are not at world 
market prices," says Niitenberg, satisfied that Estonia has 
moved into world economy. The price of gasoline in Estonia and 
the world price of unprocessed crude are now linked. 
  One dramatic example of relentlessly rising prices is the 
754-time jump in the price of natural gas, as compared to the 
Soviet era. The minister believes that our energy policy which, 
in its formative stages, drew praise from its teachers like the 
World Bank, the European Bank of Development and Reconstruction, 
and other organizations, will make Estonia stronger in the 
future. The days of wasting cheap energy are over. 
<H5>  No More Sudden Price Hikes </H5>
  "As is happening elsewhere, the price of energy in Estonia 
will still be going up, but I don't foresee any sudden jumps," 
says Niitenberg and finds that the price of electricity, for 
example, is favorably low, compared to some of our neighbors. He 
does not believe that the price of electricity will ever go up 
to Finland's level (5 times higher than ours), and that Estonia 
will always have an advantage. Electricity is unnaturally cheap 
in Russia but, compared to other neighboring states, Estonian 
producers enjoy a certain advantage. 
  While the consumption of electricity has been going up 
lately, the demand for liquid fuel has been dropping. During 
1993, only 600,000 tonnes of heating oil were consumed, compared 
to its previous consumption levels of up to 1,600,000 tonnes a 
year. 
  "Part of that difference is attributable to user economy, 
the 
rest to a general economic decline. I believe we can increase 
production without drastically increasing the demand for energy. 
We have to reduce the energy loss that currently amounts to 
roughly one third of the total. If that part of the energy could 
be used to develop the economy, energy expenditures would not 
have to go up for the time being," Niitenberg says. As an 
example, he cites Denmark, where energy consumption goes up by 
less than 1 percent, yet the economy is developing at a much 
faster rate. This is the result of energy conservation programs. 
The Danes have made a transition to more modern heating systems, 
they have financing. Estonia, by contrast, is plagued by lack of 
capital. 
<H5>  The Proportion of Domestic Fuel Is Small </H5>
  "For the development of energetics, we have received loans 
from the European Community totaling 76.7 million Estonian 
kroons. With that money, more than 140 energy-related projects 
have been carried out in different parts of Estonia. These have 
been mostly small plants for local parish use, installed to make 
a transition to domestic fuel, and to reduce energy loss," 
Niitenberg says. 
  The proportion of domestic fuel sources is currently not as 
great in Estonia as it is in our neighboring countries. Timber 
and peat provide 3.5 percent of the necessary energy. In the 
Nordic countries, this share is roughly 7 percent; in Finland 
between 12 and 13 percent. 
  "It would be possible to increase the share of timber and 
peat to 10 percent. It is interesting to note that, even though 
Estonia imports much of its fuel, close to 70 percent of the 
energy is obtained locally. In this respect we are much better 
off than Latvia or Lithuania. We have oil shale, electricity, 
timber and peat, only liquid fuel and natural gas are brought 
in," Niitenberg says. 
<H5>  Estonia Needs an Explosives Plant </H5>
  Out of the production cost for oil shale, one third goes for 
explosives which, for the time being, are still coming from our 
eastern neighbors. Prices of explosives and fuses have gone up 
and that, in turn, has jacked up the price of oil shale. Eesti 
Polevkivi [Estonian Oil Shale] is in the process of 
negotiating with a Swedish and a German firm for putting up an 
explosives plant in Estonia, specifically for mining. Depending 
on technology, this will require an investment of roughly $5 to 
$10 million. A study is being conducted to show how fast the 
plant can pay for itself. 
  "Last year, 13.5 million tonnes of oil shale were produced 
in 
Estonia, and I cannot see that volume going down in the near 
future. We can tell potential foreign buyers that the market is 
stable, and give them certain guarantees," Niitenberg thinks. 
<H5>  Send Us Pressure Pipe, Not Experts </H5>
  Both firms are interested, but are still busy looking for 
marketing possibilities in other nearby regions. Niitenberg 
thinks there are certain advantages to investing in Estonia. It 
is not like dealing with the Third World countries, who cannot 
manage on their own. We have technical know-how and an 
industrial infra-structure. All we need is modern technology. 
  "In my dealings with foreigners, I have had to repeat, time 
and again, please believe me, we also have experts. We would 
rather have 300 meters of pressure pipe than seven experts," 
says Niitenberg, convinced that Estonia can offer some excellent 
specialists in the area of energetics. In addition to capital, 
we also lack the skill of organizing the work. 
<H5>  A Strategic Reserve Would Be Necessary </H5>
  Lack of capital also stands in the way of creating a 
strategic reserve of fuel. Niitenberg is a believer in having 
strategic reserves, the only question being what is the most 
effective way of using the financial resources available. For 
Estonia to to maintain a three-month reserve of liquid fuel, 
would tie up $300 to $400 million. 
  "Estonia is not rich enough to let such amounts sit idle. 
First, a decision needs to be made how much of a reserve should 
be maintained. This presumes that we know what we want to be 
insured against. We have the facilities for storing liquid fuel, 
but not for natural gas, 100 percent of which comes in from 
Russia. Putting those up would take an extremely large 
investment, the closest usable storage facilities are located in 
Latvia," Niitenberg says, adding that the question of strategic 
reserves has been discussed in government and has been assigned 
to the working group of the Economic Ministry. The problem is 
wider in scope, and includes the areas of medicine, food and 
other such. 
<H5>  Refining Plant To Cost $1 Billion </H5>
  Canada, where Niitenberg worked for many years in leading 
positions within the energy system, had a relatively low level 
of reserves. Emphasis was placed on infra-structure, making sure 
that fuel could be moved immediately whenever needed. The 
reserves of liquid fuel were distributed between big oil 
companies, with the state keeping track of how fast some company 
or other could obtain a certain quantity of fuel. Most of the 
responsibility was borne by Petro Canada, a company similar to 
our Eesti Kutus [Estonian Fuel]. There is always the 
question: Can the state place an obligation on a private company? 
  "In case of a possible crisis, we have two choices. Either 
we 
have barrels stored somewhere, or we have a firm plan for how to 
transport the necessary amount of fuel from some refining plant 
in Denmark or Poland to Estonia within three days. Putting up 
our own plant would require a capital outlay of $800 to $900 
million, whereas transportation, storage and other support 
services for import have improved significantly as of late. 
  "In Canada, I dealt with electricity that could not be kept 
in reserve. For unexpected situations, alternatives had to be 
found," Niitenberg says. 
<H5>  A Nuclear Plant Does Not Have To Be Hazardous </H5>
  Among specialists, there has also been talk about putting up 
a nuclear power plant in Estonia. Speaking of money, Niitenberg 
volunteered the cost of the Darlington nuclear power plant as an 
example. Ontario Hydro, the Canadian company where Niitenberg 
worked before coming to Estonia, and where he still has a 
position waiting for him, invested 14 billion Canadian dollars 
in building this 3,600 MW capacity power plant. This project, 
designed for an operating life of 30 to 40 years, is not 
expected to turn a profit for the first 10 years. 
  "The possibility of putting up a nuclear power plant should 
be analyzed, above all, from an economic point of view. If the 
potential profit is a mere two cents per kilowatt, it will 
obviously not be worth the risk. It would be a completely 
different situation, however, if the nuclear plant would enable 
us to produce electricity at half the previous cost. One of the 
biggest burdens imaginable is a nuclear plant that does not work 
efficiently or does not have a sufficient load. However, atomic 
power plants can turn out to be extremely profitable. We should 
not dismiss any of the alternatives on simply emotional grounds, 
even though we know what happened at Chernobyl and what is going 
on in Paldiski, where the biggest danger is over by now," says 
Niitenberg, who was in charge of 20 nuclear power plants in 
Canada, and who has a daughter involved in liquidating nuclear 
power plant accidents. 
  "As long as everything is well organized, this field is not 
as dangerous as it is thought to be. If that were not so, I 
would not have allowed my daughter to work in this field. It is 
significant that, in accordance with international agreements, 
information should be disclosed on any accident so that 
appropriate conclusions could be drawn by nuclear energy 
specialists in neighboring countries and throughout the world. 
At Chernobyl, this agreement was violated," Niitenberg explained. 
<H5>  Future Will Bring New Solutions </H5>
  Niitenberg thinks that this issue will not come up on 
Estonia's agenda before the year 2000, for sure, and that it 
will take a political decision, in principle, either by 
politicians or by a referendum. 
  As far as the future of energetics for the whole world goes, 
Niitenberg does not deign offer anything specific. 
  "If I knew the solution, I would become a very rich man," he 
laughs and thinks that bio-energetics will develop, for sure. 
Also feasible is the so-called fusion method, which 
is the next step in harnessing nuclear energy, based on the 
ability of heavy hydrogen isotopes to combine into helium at 
extremely high temperatures, yielding energy from the neutron 
thus released. 
  To the question about current fuel reserves and how long 
they 
will last, Niitenberg replies with another question: For what 
kind of money? Canada has supposedly more crude oil than all 
Arab countries combined but, due to natural conditions, pumping 
it out would cost 30 times more than the current norm. 

