Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Make the Most of Learning From Construction </F>
Talks To Break Deadlock Over the Framework Talks"] 
  [Text] To break the deadlock over the Japan-U.S. economic 
framework talks is one of the most urgent tasks for the Hosokawa 
administration. 
  The framework talks got started last fall to determine 
measures for opening Japan's auto, auto parts, medical 
equipment, and insurance markets in preparation for the 
Hosokawa-Clinton talks in February. However, the talks have long 
been stalled over characterization of criteria to measure 
achievements in Japan's open market policy. 
  The bilateral talks have great influence on the very 
foundation of Japan's trade policy. Also, the future direction 
of the nation's U.S. policy depends on development in the talks. 
We cannot accept unreasonable solutions, but neither do we 
think the bilateral discord is unsolvable. To break the 
deadlock over the framework talks, it is probably a good idea to 
make the most of the precedence of the bilateral accord on the 
construction talks. 
  Concerning the "objective criteria" to assess how the 
Japanese market is open to foreign companies, the United States 
says one of the desirable solutions is to use such figures as 
"foreign-made products' market share in other advanced 
countries." Also, it is calling for the Japanese Government's 
supervision over automakers' parts procurement plans. 
  On the other hand, Japan intends to reject the U.S. 
proposal, 
saying "we can never accept such numerical targets." Instead, 
it insists past records, such as the number of imported 
foreign-made cars and of foreign car dealers, are good enough 
for the criteria. 
  As a matter of fact, it seems Japan's standpoint is more 
reasonable. Setting target figures in individual trade fields 
is undesirable since it is what we call controlled trade. Yet, 
the Ministry of International Trade and Industry [MITI] is 
supposed to reconsider why U.S. negotiators adhere to such an 
idea. 
  The MITI has been frequently exercising its supervisory 
authority over the business sector by setting numerical targets. 
This methodology was used in the Japan-U.S. semiconductor 
agreement. Also, the Japanese Government forced automakers to 
prepare action plans to expand imports of U.S.-made cars and 
auto parts when former U.S. President George Bush visited Japan 
in 1992. 
  Under such circumstances, the Clinton administration 
officials are wondering why Japan refuses the favor it once 
offered the former Republican administration. 
  The MITI says that is because of the bitter experience of 
the 
1991 semiconductor agreement. The bilateral agreement 
accelerated cooperation between Japanese and U.S. companies. 
However, it also resulted in the MITI's excessive intervention 
in private business. Moreover, the United States treated the 
objective figures as if they were an intergovernmental pledge of 
Japan, and threatened that the United States would impose 
sanctions if Japan failed in satisfying the objective. 
  On that ground, Japan's trade policy is leaning toward 
"GATT-centrism," rather than its conventional U.S.-oriented 
stance. 
  Japan is showing a rigid stance toward U.S. demands in view 
of the current economic situation, such as the reinforced 
competitive power of U.S.-made automobile. On the other hand, 
the Clinton administration has a strong desire for visible 
achievements in its first bilateral negotiations. Also, U.S. 
negotiators seem to believe that Japanese bureaucrats have power 
to freely manipulate the nation's economy. 
  The bilateral construction talks underwent rough sailing, 
but 
were settled by a Japanese decision to introduce open 
competition to biddings for larger projects. The United States 
welcomed Japan's drastic measure for replacing unclear and 
unfair designated biddings with competitive biddings. Follow-up 
evaluations of achievements will be assessed every year with 
six-point criteria, including the total amount and the number of 
contracts won by foreign companies. 
  We welcome the government's action plan to review the 
procurement policy in the sense that it took the initiative in a 
drastic revision of the existing bidding system. And we hope 
the government will handle the auto and insurance talks in the 
same manner. 
  For example, the MITI may announce a decision to immediately 
discontinue questionable administrative ordinances, even though 
these includes requests for automakers' voluntary restraint of 
auto export to the United States and for the business sector's 
import expansion. We believe Japan should take a bold action to 
have the United States understand that the Japanese market is 
the same as those of the rest of the world. 

