CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Shih Liu-tzu (4258 2692 1311): "The Beginning of </F>
Journalistic Freedom in Mainland China--the Rise of a 
`Semi-Official' Press"] 
  [Text] Although the CPC authorities still insist on 
putting a tight clamp on the news media, in the wake of 
increasingly thorough reform, the people's field of vision has 
broadened, initial market mechanisms have been formed, and the 
authorities have cut subsidies toward the propaganda units. 
These and other factors inevitably and irreversibly have changed 
the mainland press's sole purpose as propaganda tool. It is 
becoming diversified, multi-purpose, and enterprise-like. A 
"semi-official" press has quietly appeared, and it is full of 
vitality. It is signifying the beginning of the freedom of the 
press in Mainland China. 
  Even though the Chinese authorities are still insisting on 
putting a tight clamp on news media, and the press can be 
destroyed at anytime in a political storm or simply wither away 
under their own self-discipline, in the wake of increasingly 
thorough reform, the people's field of vision has broadened, 
initial market mechanisms have been formed, and the authorities 
have cut subsidies toward the propaganda units. These and other 
factors inevitably and irreversibly have changed the mainland 
press's sole purpose as propaganda tool. It is becoming 
diversified, multi-purpose, and enterprise-like. 
  No doubt mainland China still does not allow individuals to 
run the press, but the overall official tone of the press is 
fading. In the past, people have paid too much attention to the 
major papers put out by the CPC party committee organs and have 
overlooked the rise of the "semi-official" press. Today, these 
publications have a wider readership than the party papers. 
  The quietly flourishing "semi-official" press and its great 
vitality may not have radically changed the media control system 
favored by high-level CPC officials, and news is far from being 
reported in a realistic and objective manner, but the tabloids 
nevertheless are different from the party newspapers with their 
archaic sermons. They are signifying the beginning of 
journalistic freedom in Mainland China. 
<H5>  Tabloids Turning "Mainstream" Newspapers </H5>
  The so-called "semi-official" variety tabloids and trade 
papers refer primarily to the non-official small newspapers as 
compared to newspapers put out by party committee or ministry 
committee organs. They may be derivatives of official newspapers 
or published by various mass organizations or even enterprises, 
or they may be linked to certain units but are in fact 
"privately run" by a few people who share a common goal. 
  These tabloids first appeared in the early 1980's and 
reached 
a peak in the mid-1980's. In 1978, mainland China had less than 
1,000 newspapers of all types; subsequently, with the appearance 
of massive "semi-official" variety tabloids and trade papers, 
the number grew to more than 1,600. In 1989, many popular 
"semi-official" variety tabloids were condemned by the 
authorities. In the second half of 1989 alone, 200 
"semi-official" press were forced to shut down. In 1992, various 
tabloids were "resurrected." 
  Literary Tabloids Were the First To become 
Best-Sellers 
  At the beginning, literary tabloids were the first major 
"semi-official" variety newspapers; they were the best-selling 
tabloids. Most were published by prefectural and city-level 
literary associations and cultural centers. They contained 
primarily martial-arts stories, legendary tales, criminal cases 
and so all. Overall, the quality was poor, and while the 
writings contained little raw sex, they were often accompanied 
by offensive illustrations and headlines. This kind of 
newspapers were generally controlled by individual booksellers 
who spent large sums of money to hire people to write the 
stories and do the illustrations, and they handled the printing 
themselves and used civilian network to distribute them. 
<H5>  Digests Are the Most "Liberalized" </H5>
  This type of newspaper has become the mainstream among the 
"semi-official" tabloids today. Their circulation continues to 
increase. Often they are published weekly on quarto pages, and 
although they are derivatives of the ossified party newspapers, 
they mainly contain articles found in various foreign and 
domestic publications that deal with sensitive issues, 
criticisms of party and governments, media personalities, and 
anecdotes, funny episodes, and literary essays. They are 
tasteful, informative, intellectual, and very interesting. The 
most influential among this type of newspaper are BAOKAN 
WENZHAI, WENZHAI BAO, and WENZHAI ZHOUBAO. 
  An official once said, "The most liberalized newspaper today 
in fact is WENZHAI BAO. It gathers the nation's reports on the 
dark side and even prints abstracts of overseas newspaper 
articles at will. But it is difficult to criticize and censor 
it, because WENZHAI BAO only does the abstracting." 
<H5>  Financial Newspapers Promotes Marketization </H5>
  In the wake of the restructuring of the economic system and 
the opening up of the markets, financial newspapers of all kinds 
began to appear in the early 1980's. They are distributed 
primarily by enterprises, businesses, and government 
departments. The sponsors are mainly government economic 
management departments, economic societies, and enterprises, and 
almost every province has newspapers of this type. They play a 
very important role in the mainland's marketization. They 
include XINXI RIBAO, SHICHANG BAO, JINGJI XINXIBAO, ZHONGGUO 
CHENGXIANG XINXI BAO, XIAOFEI SHIBAO, XINXI SHIBAO, and ZHONGHUA 
GONGSHANG SHIBAO. 
  The most noteworthy among the above is XINXI SHIBAO. It is 
published in Guangzhou and owns its own XINXI SHIBAO 
Corporation. In recent years, its average profit has exceeded 1 
million yuan a year. It not only has repaid the 200,000-yuan 
loan taken out when the paper first started but is partners with 
Hong Kong's CHING-CHI TAO-PAO in forming the Guangfa Press Co. 
Ltd., a company equipped with the latest advanced equipment. It 
also has entered into a joint venture with Zhujiang Foreign 
Trade Construction Corporation to run the Zhujiang Newspaper 
Publishing Co. Ltd. 
<H5>  Youth Magazines Are Cute and Lively </H5>
  This type of newspaper is primarily published by the 
provincial CYL organs, but the editors and reporters in charge 
are mostly young people who are more liberal-minded. Since most 
of them are weekly papers, they can avoid printing official news 
and replace them with cute and lively articles on subjects of 
greater interest to the young people. Among them are QINGNIAN 
BAO, BEIJING QINGNIAN BAO, WUHAN QINGNIAN BAO, QINGNIAN CANKAO, 
and QINGNIAN ZHISHIBAO. 
  In terms of layout, these youth magazines are quite unique: 
For example, BEIJING QINGNIAN BAO uses dark lines to separate 
the columns and handles photographs like posters, and the 
headlines are often cute and different. 
<H5>  Legal Reports Are the Most Exciting </H5>
  This type of newspaper is usually published by various 
provincial and city governments' political and law committees or 
judicial departments. Politically, they are more rigid and 
conservative than the other tabloids, but because they print 
many court cases and occasionally criticize the political and 
legal systems, they are very popular with the readers. 
Circulation has been soaring in recent years. The more 
influential papers include SHENZHEN FAZHI BAO, GUANGZHOU FAZHI 
BAO, SHANGHAI FAZHI BAO, WUHAN FAZHI BAO, and FAZHI ZHOUBAO. 
<H5>  Party Newspapers' Special Zone: Weekend Editions </H5>
  Dry and worn-out political sermons have caused CPC party 
newspapers (including various ministry and committee organ 
papers) and local party papers to rapidly lose readership. In 
recent years, the party newspaper's total circulation has 
plummeted by around 30 percent. 
  At the same time, their "illegitimate sons" are being 
favored 
by many readers. These "illegitimate sons" are the party papers' 
"weekend editions," "month-end editions," and "expanded 
editions." They, together with the GUANGBO DIANSHI JIEMU BAO 
which became popular several years ago and the digests and legal 
newspapers, have become the "hottest newspapers" in town. 
  We use "illegitimate sons" and "special zone" to describe 
the 
"weekend editions" because, as far as the publishers of the 
party newspapers are concerned, it is not the main purpose of 
the "weekend editions" to give publicity to the party's general 
and specific policies. They are recreational "tabloids" catering 
to ordinary citizens, and that makes them "illegitimate." It is 
also because these "weekend editions" are different from the 
"orthodox party newspapers" in writing and layout, and to the 
editing and reporting staff, there is a "special policy" toward 
these "weekend editions," and therefore they are called "special 
zone." They are mutant party papers, and they too are signalling 
the beginning of journalistic freedom in mainland China. 
<H5>  ZHONGGUO QINGNIAN BAO's Inaugural "Weekend Edition" </H5>
  "Weekend edition" was first introduced by the CYL's party 
organ newspaper, ZHONGGUO QINGNIAN BAO, on 4 January 1981. It 
was named ZHONGUO QINGNIAN BAO, Sunday Edition. 
  This Sunday Edition basically did not print any of the 
stuffy 
official documents or the leaders' hackneyed and boring 
speeches; it emphasized intellectual, interesting, literary, and 
social matters. Each page was in fact a "special column" on a 
set topic, including society news, marriage and family, 
historical knowledge, tourism, humorous articles, book review, 
literary works, abstracts, and so on. They also used colored 
prints, and the layout was lively, and basically, it was a 
"supplement"-like tabloid. But this unorthodox "Sunday Edition" 
was very popular at the newspaper stands. 
  On 21 February 1984, a second "weekend edition" was 
published 
in Guangzhou. It was published by NANFANG RIBAO, a Guangdong 
Provincial Party Committee organ publication. It was named 
NANFANG ZHOUMO. It put even greater emphasis on society news and 
media personalities. Its reports were more in-depth, and the 
articles tended to be longer, some as long as 10,000 words. 
Basically it was a magazine-like paper. It differed from some 
popular low-class literary tabloids in that its editing and 
reporting styles were very serious. NANFANG RIBAO was a local 
party newspaper circulating within Guangdong Province, but 
NANFANG ZHOUMO quickly spread to all large- and medium-sized 
cities throughout the nation; sales were brisk. 
  The success of ZHONGGUO QINGNAN BAO's Sunday Edition and 
NANFANG RIBAO's NANFANG ZHOUMO enticed some other newspapers to 
follow in their footsteps. But from 1987 to 1989, the CPC 
continuously cracked down on the press, closing many 
"semi-official" tabloids and magazines and even prohibiting the 
CPC ministry and committee organ newspapers and local party 
newspapers from starting their "weekend editions." As a result, 
the development of "weekend editions" slowed. By 1990, the 
nation had less than 20 "weekend edition" newspapers. 
<H5>  "Weekend Editions" Helped Promote Sales of "Party Papers" </H5>
  After "June 4," almost all CPC party newspapers were 
restored 
to their original form before the fall of the "Gang of Four." 
They were full of articles of harsh criticisms and 
advertisements; information was greatly curtailed. In addition, 
there was a drastic increase in the price of newspapers at that 
time, and with stiff competition from other media such as radio 
and television, party paper circulation plummeted. But 
circulation of newspapers such as JIEFANG RIBAO, GUANGZHOU 
RIBAO, and SHENZHEN TEQU BAO, with their "weekend editions" and 
"expanded editions" (eight folio pages,) was increasing at rates 
of 6-8 percent, forcing many papers to plead with their 
superiors to run "weekend editions" or expanded editions. 
  Thus, from the central authorities to the localities, 
everybody caught the "weekend editions" and expanded edition 
fever. Even REMIN RIBAO put out its DADI ZHOUMOBAN. JIEFANGJUN 
BAO's weekend edition even won the support of some generals. 
They said, "It makes live rich and colorful and gives it a 
modern flavor." 
<H5>  Are Liberal Elements Flocking to the "Weekend Editions"? </H5>
  Of course "weekend editions" do not represent free press; at 
least politically they, like the orthodox party papers, dare not 
step out of bounds. But compared to the orthodox party papers, 
they indeed have their unique characteristics: 
  To capture more readers, the "weekend editions" are much 
more 
readable and more informative. Most have columns entitled "In 
Pursuit of Hot Tips," "Legendary Figures," "Society Close-Up," 
"News Analysis," "Wide-Angle Lens," "Marriage and Family," "Hot 
Topics," "Hong Kong-Macao-Overseas," "Police Whistle," 
"Anecdotes on Movie and Recording Stars," "Everyday Questions 
and Answers," "Mini Bookseller," "Abstracts," and so on. 
"Society News" and other special topics emphasize 
news-worthiness, literary content, and readability. They take 
social topics and social issues that attract much attention but 
are not abrupt incidents, and they report them at different 
levels. "Hong Kong-Macao-Taiwan Overseas Affairs" often carries 
abstracts of articles published in Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwan, and 
overseas newspapers, including reportages on overseas democracy 
movements (of course these are negative reports, but the readers 
can get an idea of the democracy movements abroad.) "News 
Analysis" has deep-probing antennas too. "Abstracts" is even 
more of a condensed information warehouse. 
  Take some of the articles published in JIEFANGJUN BAO's 
Weekend Edition for example. They are more interesting than the 
ordinary formal and proper reportages: "The Sino-Russian Border 
Under the Watch Tower," published on 30 May 1992; "Our Little 
Japanese Friends, a Xisha Sailor Has Picked Up the Bottle You 
Set Adrift," published on 23 May; "The Mysterious Chinese Man in 
the Gulf War" and "China's Frogmen," both published on 13 June. 
  A writer said, "The liberalized elements have all flocked to 
the Weekend Editions." Indeed, many writers who were censured 
just two years ago have quietly reappeared on the "weekend 
editions." Compared to the days when they "gave advice to the 
nation and wrote encouraging words," the only change is that 
some of these people are no longer keen on discussing great 
plans for the country or writing prescriptions to save the 
world. They are no longer full of fire, nor do they care to 
state their case with vehemence; instead, they have risen above 
worldly affairs and can talk everything under the sun, and in 
their irreverence, they are both serious and humorous. Their 
style is not unlike that of Lin Yutang and Zhou Zuoren of the 
by-gone days. 
  The "weekend editions" use simple narratives and everyday 
language, and the readers readily accept this kind of "popular 
culture" (or "consumer culture") in a familiar and natural 
setting. 
  In terms of page layout, the "weekend editions" are more 
meticulous and refined than the orthodox party newspapers. Most 
either use red highlight or color print; they use block setting 
and dazzling headlines, and they emphasize writing as well as 
illustrations and accept all types of literary styles. 
<H5>  The "Popular" Magazine Craze Is Still Going Strong </H5>
  Compared to newspapers, magazines are even more 
folk-oriented; they are even bolder in stepping on the forbidden 
zones of news reporting. The most important sign of this is that 
many writers' reportages are being published in magazines. In 
fact, not only are writers but many newspaper reporters are 
turning their most substantive, most in-depth, most dangerous 
news articles into reportages and sending them to the magazines 
for publication. The fact that magazines are more voluminous is 
certainly a factor, but more important is that compared to 
newspapers, magazines are less tightly controlled by the "party." 
  Of course, the party has very "discerning" eyes. In the two 
rounds of rectification of the press in 1987 and 1989, magazines 
suffered much greater damage than newspapers. In 1989 alone, 400 
magazines, twice the number of newspapers, were shut down, and 
they were all social-science type magazines. 
  Today, Mainland China has more than 6,500 kinds of regularly 
published magazines; more than 48 percent are in the social 
science category, and 40 percent of that are published by CPC 
organs, groups, and research units; 60 percent are published by 
the localities. Among the social science publications, the 
largest percentage has to do with literature and art, followed 
by cultural and educational journals, and lastly there are the 
financial journals. There are few pure news-oriented magazines, 
but the variety magazines usually carry a large number of news 
articles. 
  Like the tabloids, in the course of developing different 
types of magazines, there is a mixture of good and bad 
magazines. Tasteless, superstitious, pornographic, violent, 
brutal crime magazines whose sole purpose is to make money are 
doing extremely well in the market. But there are also many 
outstanding magazines that propagate Western civilization, make 
in-depth reports on China's real problems, uncover historical 
events, or even attack existing abuses and advocate reform and 
opening up. 
<H5>  Political Commentaries and Academic Magazines Occasionally </H5>
Deliver Shocking Opinions 
  Representatives of this type of magazines in the last decade 
are QINGNIAN LUNTAN [YOUTH FORUM], DUSHU [STUDY] and GUOQING 
YANJIU [STATE OF THE NATION]. 
<H5>  Current Events and Factual Reports Touch On a Broad Range of </H5>
Subjects 
  This type of magazines are hot-sellers in the market, 
because 
they cover a wide range of subjects, they are bold, they dare to 
crash the forbidden zones, and because they are very readable. 
Prior to 1989, the better known magazines of this type were 
XINGUANCHA [NEW OBSERVATION], HAINAN JISHI [HAINAN EVENTS], 
DONGFANG JISHI, JINGDAO [GOLDEN ISLAND], WENHUI YUEKAN [ESSAYS 
MONTHLY], HUAREN SHIJIE [CHINESE PEOPLE'S WORLD] (Overseas 
Edition). 
  Although all of the above publications were shut down in 
1989, similar magazines are still around. They include 
NANFANGCHUANG [EAST WIND WINDOW], XINSHIJI [NEW CENTURY], JISHI 
WENXUE [REPORTAGE], and so on. These magazines can take care of 
their own profits of losses; some are directly controlled by 
individual booksellers, and naturally they must publish works 
that attract readers. For example, the objective of Guangzhou's 
NANFANGCHUANG is to "propagate new ideas, lend support to new 
things, uncover new tendencies, and promote new trends." There 
is no mention of "upholding the four basic principles" normally 
cited by all regular publications! Since its founding, that 
magazine has never accepted a cent from the government in the 
form of startup fund, operating fund, financial subsidy, or 
wages. It earns its own keep. 
<H5>  Legal and Youth Magazines Rarely Prints Stuffy Sermons </H5>
  China's political and legal system are ideologically very 
conservative, but the publications put out by them often take 
advantage of their natural conditions to deliver more frequent 
and bolder reports on social issues and crime cases than other 
publications, and therefore they are very popular with the 
readers. The reason behind this is, just like the factual 
reportages, they too are seduced by money and are printing what 
is selling. 
  Publications that target the young people and woman readers 
are seldom stuffy in composition or in content. Compared to the 
reportages and legal magazines, they have much less of a 
political overtone. They emphasize discussing ethics and moral 
principles and introduce the readers to Western society. 
<H5>  There Is Reason To Be Optimistic About Freedom of the Press </H5>
  Changes in mainland China obviously have not been as drastic 
as that in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, but compared to 
the old days, China indeed is completely transforming itself, 
including in the sensitive news media area. If, instead of 
making a simplistic comparison between the CPC's propaganda tool 
and the West's free press, we look at this change from the 
historical point of view, we will have reason to be optimistic 
about journalistic freedom in China in the future. 
  A CASS Journalism Institute researcher made the following 
comment which makes the best conclusion for this article: "A 
spontaneous reform of the press that raises no noise and causes 
no sensationalism is being launched among the mainland's news 
organizations. This reform which comes from below and which has 
never been publicly acknowledged by the authorities can be 
likened to executing a criminal first and report to the emperor 
later--what is done is done. By the time the dogmatic 
ideological leaders realize that the old system is under siege, 
a new mechanism accepted by the people has already been formed." 

