Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Reports from Afghanistan speak of continued air 
attacks on the capital, Kabul, for the consecutive third day 
today after the 36-hour temporary cease-fire broke down on 
Monday. Reports say General Rashid Dostam's jet planes made 
three sorties today and bombed the presidential palace and key 
positions of Afghan government. There are also reports of 
intense fighting in Mazar-e Sharif between the rival Afghan 
factions. 
  Since the outbreak of fighting in Kabul on 1 January, 
hundreds of civilians have been forced to flee their homes. 
More than 14,000 people have taken refuge in Pakistan. They 
reached Peshawar via Jalalabad. According to the representative 
of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees [UNHCR], at least 
50,000 displaced people have reached Jalalabad. UNHCR has sent 
2,100 tents to Jalalabad. Food, blankets, and medicines have 
also been dispatched. 
  A Foreign Office spokesman termed the situation in 
Afghanistan as tragic and hoped that the warring factions would 
respond positively to the appeal of the president, Farooq Ahmad 
Khan Leghari, and the prime minister, Ms. Benazir Bhutto, for 
cessation of hostilities from Friday morning. The spokesman 
told at a news briefing in Islamabad today that there had been a 
large number of civilian casualties in the fighting and hoped 
that the cease-fire would be accepted so that the medicines and 
relief supplies could be rushed to Afghanistan. He said so far 
over 14,000 Afghan nationals have been registered by Pakistani 
and UN officials, besides those who have arrived in Pakistan. 
The spokesman said 54 diplomatic personnel from Pakistan, 
Turkey, Libya, Sudan, United Nations, and other international 
agencies have been evacuated to Pakistan via Jalalabad. 
  The spokesman said Pakistan has convened a meeting of the 
ICO 
[Islamic Conference Organization] contact group at ministerial 
level in Geneva on Monday to review the latest developments in 
Bosnia. The meeting convened at the request of President Alija 
Izetbegovic of Bosnia will be presided over by Foreign Minister 
Sardar Asif Ahmad Ali. He said Prime Minister Ms. Benazir 
Bhutto, along with the Turkish prime minister, Madam Tansu 
Ciller, will visit the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, on 2d of next 
month as a gesture of solidarity with the Bosnian people. 

