BFN 

  [Excerpts] Recently, Beijing Municipality sponsored a joint 
work conference on investigation and study. During the 
conference, the opinions adopted by the municipal party standing 
committee were relayed and the arrangements for the 
investigation and study work this year were adopted. Attending 
the joint conference were leading comrades from the municipal 
party committee, the municipal people's congress standing 
committee, the municipal people's government, and the municipal 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference committee; 
directors of the research offices of various districts and 
counties; and some specialists and scholars. Chen Xitong, 
secretary of the municipal party committee, was also on hand and 
spoke. [passage omitted] 
  In his speech Chen Xitong cited the issue of how to further 
enhance the investigation and study work. He said: According 
to the spirit of directives issued by the central authorities 
and Comrade Jiang Zemin, we extensively and deeply carried out 
investigation and study throughout the municipality last year, 
which strengthened the scientific nature of policy decisions 
made by the leadership at all levels and promoted the 
realization of surpassing the 1992 work in an overall way. 
Thus, the municipality as a whole made a good and initial start 
in energetically encouraging the practice of investigation and 
study. He extended cordial regard on behalf of the municipal 
people's government to all personnel who had industriously 
worked in this regard. 
  In his speech Chen Xitong put forward the following four 
opinions on the issue of how to further and successfully conduct 
the investigation and study work this year: 
  1. Efforts should be made to surpass the work done in 1993. 
Although we scored results in the work last year, we should not 
relax our efforts and slow down the work this year. By no means 
should we "chop and change" in the work. We should strive to 
surpass the work done in 1993 in the fields of scoring 
achievements in the investigation and study work, making the 
usage of investigation and study results, building investigation 
and study network, and training cadres through investigation and 
study. 
  2. Efforts should be made to uphold the principle of having 
leading cadres take the lead in the work. The key to making 
success in investigation and study lies on leading cadres and 
particularly on the first leading cadres of party and government 
organs. We must have leading cadres take the lead in the work, 
turn the practice in this regard into a routine, and uphold the 
practice by carrying forward it forever. He pointed out: 
Leading cadres should have the following two basic skills: 
First, they should be able to carry out investigation and 
study. Without investigation and study, these leading cadres 
will have no right to voice their opinions and to join in the 
making of policy decisions and will be unable to truly possess 
the power of leadership. Second, they should be good at doing 
the work related to the masses. Without doing the work related 
to the masses, it is impossible for them to unify the masses' 
understanding with the party's line, principles, and policies; 
to bring the masses' enthusiasm into play; and to unite as one 
in striving to realize the fixed targets. Without the two 
skills, it is difficult for them to be a competent leader. In 
training and appraising cadres, attention should be paid to the 
two skills. In view of many new and young comrades who have 
been promoted into leading posts and bodies during the 
term-shift election at the county level, they should even make 
efforts to master or study well the work of investigation and 
study and to know well the skills as soon as possible. 
  3. Efforts should be made to vigorously revise or formulate 
and implement investigation and study plans. Units concerned 
have initially put forward their plan in this regard and should 
implement their plan vigorously. They should first select 
correct subjects for their investigation and study because an 
incorrect subject will directly and adversely affect results in 
this regard. One of the major reasons for the poor results 
scored by some units in their investigation and study work last 
year was their incorrect subject. It is necessary to select the 
subject closely according to the implementation of the spirit of 
the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee; to 
the work guideline of the central authorities; to the municipal 
plan for becoming better-off; and to the adequate handling of 
relationship among reform, development, and stability. By 
firmly bearing the reality in their minds, units should select 
the subjects aiming at dealing with the problems in some fields 
and bringing along the work in some fields. Special attention 
should be paid to selecting the subjects aiming at resolving 
difficult, hot, and "knotty" problems. Various fronts, 
districts, and counties have reported their investigation and 
study subjects to the municipal authorities as of present. 
Therefore, all incorrect subjects may be readjusted. He 
stressed: After defining their subjects various departments, 
commissions, offices, and district-county party committees 
should hold earnest discussion; set up work division among 
leading personnel; assign tasks to personnel; and organize or 
carry out investigation and study rapidly. The municipal party 
committee grasped the investigation and study on four occasion 
last year and will persistently do the same this year. The 
conference represents the first drive in this regard of the 
year. Through several-year or many-year efforts, we should 
gradually turn investigation and study into a routine and a 
necessary procedure for leadership to make policy decisions. In 
doing the work, by no means should we rely on inspiration, petty 
trick, and empiricism. Policy decisions made by relying on such 
things are dangerous. 
  4. Efforts should be made to continuously create favorable 
environment and work conditions for investigation and study and 
attention should be paid to dealing with the practical problems 
encountered by the investigation and study organs at all levels. 
  Chen Xitong said: Investigation and study represent a 
complicated and arduous work. Comrades engaging in this work 
are very laborious. Leadership at all levels should show 
concern for their work and life. Based on the work done in 1993 
they should help the investigation and study organs deal with 
their practical problems cropping up in the fields of funds, 
post titles, duties, and investigation and study tours as well 
as better bring into play the enthusiasm of the personnel 
contingent. 
  Duan Bingren, member of the municipal party standing 
committee and secretary general of the municipal party 
committee, also attended and addressed the conference. 

