BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Erol Manisali: "Cyprus: A Test of the West's </F>
Stance Towards Turkey"] 
  [Text] The post cold war period has been marked by problems 
in the Balkans, the Caucasus and in the Middle East. The 
European Union's [EU] and the United States' post cold war 
approach to the region is the main cause of the conflicts. In 
the Balkans the EU and the United States could have stopped the 
dissolution of the former Yugoslavia from the start. But no 
strict measures were taken by the Allies, the United States and 
the EU against the Serbs. In the Caucasus, Armenian aggression 
was supported by some European countries, the United States and 
the Russian Federation as a result of pressure by Armenian 
settlers in the United States and in France. 
  Greek aggressiveness in the Balkans, in the Aegean and in 
Cyprus has been, directly or indirectly, supported by the United 
States and the EU. In North Iraq, the Kurdish formation of an 
autonomous administration has also been directly supported by 
the United States, France and the United Kingdom. 
  Despite the existence of a pro-U.S. and pro-EU government in 
Ankara, the Turkish people and Turkish public opinion do not 
find it easy to understand in order to evaluate favorably the 
West's approach to the developments in the Balkans, the Caucasus 
and in the Middle East (North Iraq). 
  The fundamentalist Refah Party's last victory in March 1994 
is a result of a reevaluation of policies in Turkey at home and 
abroad. The failure of the Western-oriented main political 
parties in Turkey is not due mainly to domestic developments; 
foreign affairs and the stance of the West regarding the 
developments in the region, which is not largely favorable to 
Turkey's expectations have resulted in the reevaluation of 
foreign and domestic policy by the Turkish public. 
  The large majority of Turkish intellectuals and influential 
circles supports new policies towards the United States, the EU 
and NATO. 
  Since the beginning of the Gulf War (1990), developments in 
the Gulf (and N. Iraq), in the Balkans and in the Caucasus have 
demonstrated the new policy of the United States and the EU to 
isolate Turkey. The United States and the EU have lost their 
reliability in the eyes of the Turkish public. The continuation 
of the existing policies in the West in the region has created 
anti-western feelings in Turkey. 
  The West's stance in the Turkish-Greek and Turkish-Armenian 
relations (or conflicts) is not compatible with justice and 
peace in the region. 
  It is difficult for Turkey to understand the pressure from 
the United States and the EU regarding a solution of the Cyprus 
issue. 
  The Turkish public believes that, first of all, the United 
States and the EU have to accept the existence of two separate 
political establishments in Cyprus (two states on the island), 
then try to secure their cooperation, instead of ignoring one of 
the political establishments in the island, which is the Turkish 
Republic of Northern Cyprus. 
  This is a vital political question for Turkey today, and a 
test of the attitude of the West towards Turkey. Artificial 
pressures by the West on unreal problems on the island have been 
feeding anti-Western feelings in Turkey. 
  With the support of certain international circles, the U.N. 
Secretary General has been trying to get the two sides (Turks 
and Greeks) on the island to intermingle, a policy which is 
bound to create new problems between the two peoples. Turkey 
will never accept a solution which ignores the independence and 
political integrity of the Turkish people there. None of the 
governments in Ankara is able to agree to any solution which 
provides for Greek domination of the island. If this reality is 
not understood by the United States and the EU, Turkey's 
relations with the West will be seriously harmed. 

