CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Serhiy Zhurets, under the rubric "A Sociological </F>
View": "Chaplains on Active Military Service?.."] 
  [Text] Young people's attitudes to religion have 
recently become a topical issue not only in society in general, 
but also in the Armed Forces. Consequently, the question has 
arisen of creating the institution of military chaplains in the 
army. But is there a real need and foundation for this? 
  The results of a sociological survey conducted by the 
Institute of Sociology of the Academy of Sciences of Ukraine 
show that the high potential of religion in the army is cited 
primarily by the clergy themselves. Ninety percent of the 
clergymen surveyed are in favor of creating the institution of 
chaplain in the Armed Forces, and 99 percent of representatives 
of all faiths are ready to begin this work now. 
  The military, however, takes a more cautious view of this 
prospect: 25 percent of the officers polled think that the 
prospects for the institution of chaplains in the army are not 
significant, 18 percent of the respondents believe that the role 
of religion in the education of youth should be increased in 
schools rather than in the army. Nevertheless, nearly one-third 
of the officers taking part in the survey stressed the need for 
a greater role for religion in the military environment. 
  As to personal attitudes to religion among the military, the 
results of the study conducted in the Armed Forces by the 
Institute of Sociology show that 50 percent, or half, of the 
officers regard themselves as nonbelievers, 15 percent of the 
military respondents describe themselves as not religious, and 
35 percent are unable to give a firm answer. 
  In the case of soldiers and sergeants, it appears that among 
term servicemen, the level of religiosity decreases with time. 
Thus, 36 percent consider themselves to be religious at the 
beginning of their term of service, and only 30 percent still 
describe themselves as such at the time of discharge. The 
percentage of those surveyed who count themselves among 
nonbelievers increases accordingly: 19 percent at the beginning 
of their service and 27 percent of the soldiers and sergeants 
completing their terms. This drop is explained as due primarily 
to the absence of the institution of chaplain in the army. As a 
matter of fact, according to reports in the mass media, the 
Russian Army is planning to appoint one of the hierarchs of the 
Russian Orthodox Church as the chief chaplain of the army 
already this year. They are also going to establish a system of 
educational institutions to train military chaplains. 
  In the Armed Forces of Ukraine, despite the discussions that 
have been going on about this subject for the past two years, no 
steps have been taken to introduce the post of military chaplain 
in the army. It is difficult to say what is causing this delay. 
Perhaps the fact that the Ukrainian military has more urgent 
problems to solve at this time -- how to feed the troops or 
where to find the necessary funds. In this situation, God helps 
those who help themselves, as they say. 

