BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on environmental issues monitored through 14 April: 
<H5>  Argentina </H5>
  About 300 metric tons of garbage was shipped from military 
bases and shelters in the Antarctic to the port of Buenos Aires, 
the Argentine Navy reported in the last week of March. The 
garbage was brought by the icebreaker Almirante Irizar on its 
return from the 1993/94 Summer Antarctic Campaign. In a press 
communique, the Navy said the cleanup of Antarctic bases follows 
the strict international regulations on conservation in the area 
contained in the Antarctic Treaty's 1991 Protocol of 
Environmental Protection. The protocol was ratified by 
Argentina last October. The shipment included scrap metal, 
plastic, metal, food remains, cables, tubes, wires, and other 
materials used by workers. The waste will be dumped in 
landfills. (Buenos Aires BUENOS AIRES HERALD in English 2 Apr 94 
p 5) 
<H5>  Brazil </H5>
  Japan has guaranteed Brazil $66.4 million for the 
Japanese-Brazilian Cooperation Program for the Development of 
the Woodland Savannah, Proceder. Of this, 80 percent will be 
financed by the Japan International Cooperation Agency, JICA, 
and the remaining 20 percent by private banks. The project will 
focus on an area of 80,000 hectares in the states of Maranhao 
and Tocantins, part of which will be used for agriculture and 
the other part for forest reserve, preserving the environment. 
(Rio de Janeiro O GLOBO in Portuguese 1 Apr 94 p 18) 
  The Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics has 
reported that 303 species and subspecies of the Brazilian fauna 
are in danger of extinction. Experts estimate that 24 of them, 
especially birds, are in serious process of extinction or could 
have disappeared. Areas of the Pantanal reserve in Mato Grosso, 
and the Amazon Basin are registering an increasing extinction 
process because of deforestation, indiscriminate burning, 
clandestine hunting and fishing, pollution of rivers, among 
other reasons. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 2224 GMT 12 Apr 94) 
<H5>  Chile </H5>
  The Navy has ordered special emergency measures following an 
accident in which three containers with sodium cyanide fell into 
the sea. The accident occurred off (Tunquien Bay) near 
Valparaiso on 9 April. The containers fell from the Bahamas 
flagged ship Camina. (Santiago Television Nacional de Chile 
Imagen Internacional in Spanish 0100 GMT 12 Apr 94) 
  Chilean Agricultural Minister Emiliano Ortega on 8 April 
condemned the illegal destruction of a vast native forest in the 
Chilo region by the Philippine Golden Spring Forestal de Chile 
consortium and backed the $50,000 fine imposed on the company. 
Ecologist groups state that about 120,000 hectares of forests 
are destroyed per year. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 2336 GMT 8 Apr 94) 
<H5>  Uruguay </H5>
  The Colonia City Hall has promulgated regulations to 
effectively preserve the native flora in Colonia department in 
keeping with the 1987 Forest Law. Severe sanctions are foreseen 
for those who violate the norms. (Montevideo LA MANANA in 
Spanish 29 Mar 94 p 35) 
  The National Farm Research Institute, INIA, and Botanic 
Garden representatives on 23 February signed an agreement to 
improve the native flora preservation and to promote rational 
exploitation. (Montevideo BUSQUEDA in Spanish 7 April 94 p 43) 

