BFN 

  [Text] Jakarta (JP) -- The Jakarta municipal 
administration is going to register all stateless Chinese living 
in the city starting from May 6, in order to get accurate data 
on the group and to settle the issue of their status once and 
for all. 
  "Thus far there has never been an efficient, comprehensive 
registration of the group. Each agency in the city 
administration has its own records, which conflict with each 
other. That's why the registration is being done", Idrus, the 
deputy governor in charge of administration affairs, announced 
yesterday. 
  Nurhadi Judi, director of the Office for Developing National 
Unity at the Ministry of Home Affairs, who was also at the press 
conference, said the registration is in adherence to the 
memorandum of understanding signed by Indonesia and the People's 
Republic of China in 1992. The memorandum concerned the ethnic 
Chinese living in Indonesia without clear citizenship status. 
  "There are many Chinese here who are registered as stateless 
residents. They are not recorded as Indonesians because they 
haven't been naturalized yet. Moreover, they have no passport 
to prove that they hold Chinese citizenship," Nurhadi said. 
  According to the records at the Jakarta Population Affairs 
Office, around 27,590 stateless people of Chinese descent live 
in the capital. 
  "I believe the actual number is much higher than the figure 
we have recorded," Idrus said. 
  Idrus said the stateless Chinese to be registered are those 
who have lived here for one generation but have not yet been 
naturalized, as well as illegal immigrants. 
  Chinese residents classified as "ex-PP 10/1959" also will be 
asked to register. The PP 10/1959 is governmental regulation 
No. 10 of 1959 concerning the obligation of all ethnic Chinese 
in Indonesia to choose either Chinese or Indonesian citizenship. 
  The term "ex-PP 10/1959 was coined to refer to thos who 
opted 
for Chinese citizenship but remained in the archipelago into the 
mid 1960s. The Indonesian government faced difficulty sending 
them back to China following the break in diplomatic ties 
between the two countries after the abortive communist-led coup 
in 1965. 
  Idrus said the upcoming registration was based on a 1993 
instruction from the Ministry of Home Affairs which applied 
nationwide, except in East Timor, where all residents 
automatically became Indonesian citizen in 1976. 
  Nine provinces nationwide, North Sumatera, Riau, Jambi South 
Sumatera, West Java Central Java, East Java, East Kalimantan and 
South Sulawesi, have carried out similar registration drives. 
  In Jakarta, the provincial secretary, Harun Al Rasyid serves 
as chairman of the registration team. 
  "Everyone wanting to register should come in person," Idrus 
said. The registration will be done at district offices. 
  After being registered each person, who qualifies, can apply 
for Indonesian citizenship, while the rest will be given 
documents to announce their foreign citizenship. 
  For naturalization, each person has to have more than a 
dozen 
documents, including a birth certificate, a document certifying 
loyalty to the nation and good conduct papers, which may cost 
each individual a total of Rp [Rupiah] 647,000 (US$302.30). 

