CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by PL staff correspondent: "The Baltics Could Use a </F>
Fund for Venture Capital"] 
  [Text] 
  TALLINN (PL). The annual meeting of the European Bank 
of Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) held in St. Petersburg 
turned out to be very successful for Estonia. According to 
finance minister Heiki Kranich, who represented Estonia at the 
meeting, EBRD president Jacques de Larosi&egrave;re showed a 
lively 
interest in things Estonian, and was ready to consider some of 
Estonia's proposals. He also expressed hope that "results of the 
meeting held between Estonia and the EBRD could soon be 
felt." 
  Estonia expected more in the way of flexibility and 
risk-taking from the bank than there has been before. Of the 
latter special attention was given to establishing a venture 
capital fund with resources coming from the EBRD. Out of the 
resources of such a fund, investments would be channeled 
directly into the equity base of a venture, and the bank would 
become a shareholder in Estonian enterprises through the fund. 
Kranich said that the creation of a joint fund for the Baltics 
was also being discussed at the St. Petersburg meeting. Since 
the levels of the Baltic states are different at the moment, 
Kranich proposed that the fund be first activated in Estonia, 
and later expanded to the other Baltic states. EBRD's board of 
directors did pass a resolution, in principle, to increase its 
investments of startup capital for new ventures. So far, EBRD's 
involvement in Estonia has been limited mainly to the state 
sector. In the future, however, more attention will be paid to 
the private sector. 
  Delegates from Estonia had longer talks with representatives 
of the Nordic Countries Bank of Investments and Japanese 
financial institutions. 
  United States' Stanley Morgan was willing to measure 
Estonia's credit rating to its lenders by international 
standards. Enn Pant, chancellor of the Finance Ministry was of 
the opinion that, at the moment, Estonia's rating is quite 
favorable. Stanley Morgan also offered his help with the issue 
of state obligations and corporate shares. Japan's Namura 
International, however, showed great interest in Estonia's ports. 
  Those attending the EBRD annual meeting attributed great 
significance to the loan agreement signed between the 
Export-Import Bank of Japan, EBRD and Estonia, which opened up a 
$3 million credit line. Martin Poder, vice chancellor of 
the 
Finance Ministry, said that this credit can be used for "joint 
financing with EBRD in cooperation on projects being carried 
out." The agreement is also expected to enhance further direct 
cooperation with the Export-Import Bank of Japan. 
  Heiki Kranich remarked that Estonia was the first 
East-European country to start negotiating for such an agreement 
and that, in the course of negotiations, it was also joined by 
Latvia and Lithuania. 
  At the EBRD annual meeting, favorable recognition was also 
given to relations between Estonia and the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF). What deserves notice in this connection, 
Kranich said, is not that the IMF directives are being followed 
blindly, but rather that the positions taken by the Estonian 
government and the IMF coincide. "Estonia is the favorite of 
IMF," was one of the remarks heard at the EBRD annual meeting. 
  The finance ministers of the three Baltic states are 
planning 
to meet in June of this year, for a further discussion of 
possible cooperative projects. 

