Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Isis Maria Allen for the "Evening Information </F>
Review" newscast] 
  [Text] With the reorganization of its internal structure 
and the perfecting of its directorship system, the Cuban tourism 
sector in 1993 ranked among the most dynamic and significant 
sectors of the country's economy. Although official reports on 
these changes have not yet been issued, it has been learned that 
in 1994 the tourism industry will have a ministry that will 
group through a central directorate the Cubanacan Corporation, 
the Gaviota Group, and several hotel chains operating National 
Tourism Institute installations. 
  Statistics show that 600,000 tourists visited the island in 
1993, most of them from Canada, Germany, Spain, Mexico, and 
Italy. Gross revenue figures total over $530 million, which 
represents an almost $200-million increase over the 1992 figure. 
  Given the tourism industry's pivotal role in the Cuban 
economy, the topic was dealt with extensively in debates held by 
the party's provincial assembly in Havana City. The assembly 
agreed that Cuba ranks high among the most popular tourist 
locations in the world. During the debates the assembly also 
discussed shortcomings of the hotel industry such as the lack of 
an established authority and adequate Cuban economic mechanisms 
to manage the tourism sector. Changes were proposed for 1994 
with a view to improving conditions in the tourism industry. 
  Discussing the tourism development program in Cuba from 
another angle, it is worth mentioning that in the past year, 
despite harsh economic conditions and the U.S. blockade, the 
plan to increase our lodging capability continued. For 
instance, not only was the number of airports in various 
locations around the country increased to six, but the 
facilities were adapted to receive international flights. New 
communications systems were either added to or improved upon to 
meet tourist demands. In addition, several hotels opened in 
1993, including the five-star hotel Guitart-Cayo Coco [words 
indistinct] Ciego de Avila, which was inaugurated by President 
Fidel Castro. This hotel is considered one of the most 
beautiful in Cuba and shows the respect that Cuba has for the 
environment in its tourism projects. In addition, it is a clear 
example of the harmonious way in which man can coexist with 
untouched nature. Other newly opened hotels include the 
four-star Barlovento Hotel at the famous Varadero seaside 
resort, the Cuatro Vientos Hotel in Camaguey Province, and the 
Tierramar Hotel in Santiago de Cuba. 
  All of this is evidence of the development program that 
Cuban 
authorities are implementing throughout the entire country. In 
1993, 3,000 new rooms were incorporated into the tourism 
industry. The plan to rescue old installations was clearly 
evinced with the major repairs performed on the Sevilla Hotel in 
Havana, where similar works began this year on the Havana Libre 
and Havana Riviera Hotels under the auspices of such Spanish 
companies as Guitart and the Caguama Caribbean Hotel. The year 
1993 saw the reaffirmation of the presence of hotel chains from 
various countries in Cuba, which is considered by the Cuban 
Government as a necessary and unavoidable step toward achieving 
the rapid growth Cuba is seeking. 
  This foreign participation in the tourism industry has 
yielded very positive results. The administration and marketing 
of Cuban units by foreign chains has led to a higher level of 
occupation of the installations, where the process of perfecting 
the quality of service is noticeable along with the improved 
efficiency of Cuban personnel, who are gaining greater 
experience in an industry that is just beginning in Cuba. 
  Tourism entities from 11 countries -- including Spain, 
Germany, Italy, Canada, Mexico, Jamaica, Chile, and Holland -- 
are present here. Additionally, businessmen from various 
regions have joined the national tourism industry with contracts 
for joint projects such as the Guitart Group with Cubanacan for 
a new hotel in Cayo Coco. 
  New routes of air transportation between cities of this 
Caribbean island and other countries have opened up through 
various companies. Cubana de Aviacion, Cuba's official tourism 
airline, has increased its world's destinations to 30 cities. 
Regular and chartered flights will begin this year to Santa Fe 
de Bogota, Colombia; Paris, France; and Munich, Germany. 
  Cuban cities were added to the itineraries of European air 
companies such as (Stainal), which links Madrid and Santiago de 
Cuba and Varadero, and (Eaurope), which joins Barcelona with 
Victoria, capital of the Basque country, and the famous resort 
of Varadero. In addition, the Italian city of Milan and Cayo 
Largo and Ciego de Avila have been linked. Chilena del Cobre 
Airline, Ladeco, also began flights to this Caribbean island. 
Costa Rica's LACSA and Antillana de Aviacion are now joining 
Holland, Curacao, and Cuba. All these openings promote a broader 
tourism movement to Cuba. 
  Cruises also began this year operated by a mixed foreign 
company. This undertaking will bring large profits to the 
country as vacationers will be able to take a large number of 
tours from Cuban ports. This will allow us to gain experience 
with a view to a possible increase in this activity, which for 
the first time will originate from Cuba. 
  The year 1993 has been, in sum, a year of evolution, 
advancement, and notable perspectives for the tourism industry 
in Cuba, which has as its main resources the natural beauty, 
hospitality, and friendliness of its people, security for 
visitors, culture, history, and a social system that is becoming 
more exclusive in the world. Most tourists list those reasons 
for traveling to this Caribbean island, where they also find 
comfortable accommodations that include in their decor 
representative samples of the works of Cuban artists. They and 
other professionals contribute to perfecting the tourism 
experience. The tourism sector has become a large employer, 
hiring over 60,000 workers directly and promoting the 
development of other areas of the country. 
  Given that tourism will go from third to first place in 
resource generation in the world, Cuba, which needs a notable 
advancement in its economy, has reaffirmed this year its 
willingness to use every resource at hand to develop this 
industry. As Fidel Castro said when inaugurating the Guitart 
Cayo Coco Hotel, tourism revenues can compensate for the losses 
resulting from the disappearance of the Soviet Union and the 
socialist bloc. 

