Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by correspondents Carmen Parra] </F>
  [Text] Neither the Socialist parliamentary group nor 
Convergence and Union will support amendments to the labor 
reform act proposed by the trade unions, because they realize 
those changes would affect the substance of the government 
legislation. UGT and CCOO have found sympathetic listeners only 
in the IU, Catalonian Initiative, Canaries Coalition, and PNV 
[Basque Nationalist Party]. The PP is taking a 
middle-of-the-road position; it will argue for some changes in 
apprenticeship contracts, but nothing substantial with respect 
to dismissals or relocation. 
  Francisco Arnau for the Socialist Party and Miquel Roca of 
the CiU yesterday limited themselves to hearing proposals from 
the labor centrals contained in a 54-page document. The 
amendments which the two groups presented yesterday, the last 
day for doing so, are "technical improvements." The most 
important of them would recognize the right to paid maternity 
leave for apprentice employees. A change supported by 
practically all the groups, it would also remove a conflict 
between the language of the government bill and a recommendation 
of the International Labor Organization (ILO). 
  Union officials were visibly disappointed after their 
meetings with the PSOE and CiU. Jose Maria Fidalgo of CCOO said 
the unions were most upset by the fact that the government has 
proposed to debate the labor reform bills as an "urgent matter," 
which in his opinion will make it more difficult for 
negotiations to be pursued in a calm and orderly fashion. "The 
government had told us parliament would be a good forum for 
continuing the dialogue, but now they're sending it through 
under fast-track procedures," he said. 
  Despite this, PP deputy Celia Villalobos has promised the 
unions to continue the dialogue, while the bills work their way 
through the legislative process, to see if consensus can be 
reached to allow presentation of compromise ("in voce") 
amendments. For the moment, the PP is in agreement with CCOO and 
UGT about correcting several features of apprenticeship 
contracts: reducing the upper age limit from 25 to 21, linking 
this type of contract to vocational training requirements to 
guarantee that training occurs, and stipulating that a youth 
cannot be employed as an apprentice after completing his 
training as an apprentice. It will also present an amendment to 
"employment adjustment" procedures locking in the employers' 
commitment to devise "social plans." Its purpose is to retrain 
laid off workers, especially those 46 and older. 
<H5>  Reasonable Demands </H5>
  The PNV views some of the union demands as reasonable and is 
going to consider them. It favors maintaining the requirement 
for prior administrative authorization in collective layoffs, 
but only if the percentage of company work force affected is 
less than the 10 percent figure set by the government. Nor does 
it support new grounds for dismissal--organizational and 
production-related--"because this gives the companies carte 
blanche for layoffs," according to Emilio Olabarria. The Basque 
group is not asking to lower the age ceiling for apprentices but 
argues that they should not be paid less than the minimum wage, 
whereas the government bill provides for hiring them at 70 
percent of the minimum wage. 
  The CiU group will also continue dialoguing with the unions 
to see if some agreement can be reached that "does not decrease 
the value of the reform, which we support," said Miquel Roca 
yesterday. CiU will argue for "technical improvements" and has 
proposed to PSOE the introduction of a new dismissal category 
falling between "wrongful dismissal"--which must be indemnified 
with severance equaling 45 days's pay for each year worked--and 
"disciplinary dismissal" requiring no indemnification. The new 
category, should it be created, would carry an intermediate 
level of severance pay. 
  The Socialist Party, as expected, presented no substantial 
amendments yesterday. Francisco Arnau said that "the reform is 
on the right track, and the PSOE is going to continue to defend 
it." 

