Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Mehetsah Yildiz, OZGUR GUNDEM journalist, by </F>
Monika Hoehn; place and date not given: "If This Is Democracy, 
I Am Against It"] 
  [Text] At noon on 25 November 1993, on the road from 
Diyarbakir to Bismil: A police patrol arrests a group involved 
with caring for Kurdish refugees in the FRG. On their trip to 
the victims of Turkish terror in Kurdistan, they were 
accompanied by two journalists from the daily OZGUR GUNDEM. The 
Germans are now safe again, as opposed to their comrades. 
  Monika Hoehn talked to OZGUR GUNDEM journalist Mehetsah 
Yildiz, one of her colleagues, following their release. 
  [Hoehn] What sort of reprisals are you subject to in your 
work as a journalist? 
  [Yildiz] Our newspaper and its employees are constantly 
subjected to reprisals. So far, nine employees have been 
arrested. Some of my colleagues were imprisoned for three and 
sometimes four months and tortured in prison -- even though 
there was no evidence of guilt on their part. We are persecuted 
because we are against the war and report on the war 
objectively. The Turkish Government and its security forces do 
not want to let us investigate and work in peace. There is no 
freedom of the press of any kind. After the threat, I went from 
Batman to Diyarbakir. Nothing happened there until I was 
arrested with you. 
  There is no doubt that our life is in danger. However, there 
is a standard for correspondents -- namely, to tell the truth -- 
and we are doing this work by risking our life. We do this for 
our people who are tortured and massacred, and who live in 
misery. 
  [Hoehn] You said torture is an everyday occurrence, and that 
you live with it. How is this possible in a country described 
by Prime Minister Ciller as a pioneer of democracy and human 
rights? 
  [Yildiz] Every day 30 soldiers and a few guerillas and 
civilians are shot dead. Nevertheless, Mrs. Ciller says there 
are only a few terrorist actions and there is no war. There is 
a war of intimidation underway, and murders are committed by 
unknown perpetrators. There are 200 arrests every day. They 
all take place under the aegis of the state of emergency. One 
must ask why these people are killed. There is a war between 
the Turkish Army and the Kurdish people. 
  [Hoehn] What personal reprisals have you suffered? 
  [Yildiz] In Izmir I was arrested by the police because of an 
investigation. Some time later, the police broke into my 
apartment again. On 1 May, I was arrested again and spent three 
months in prison. Then I went to Batman. On 12 September 1993, 
around 2230 -- we were sleeping in our office -- a bomb was 
thrown into our office. One minute later the police chief and 
his deputy were there. They lined us up against the wall and 
asked us why we wanted to blow up our office. Then the deputy 
of the political police beat me, held a gun to my head, and said 
we should get lost or they would kill us. 
  They stole my money (6 million Turkish lira) and the 
electrical equipment. The same night, they took me to the 
"Antiterrorism" Department of the Political Police. They 
tortured me and my colleague for three days. 
  The torture consists of having your arms tied behind your 
back and being pulled up with a rope or a chain until your arms 
slide out of their sockets and you faints. You are brought back 
to consciousness with electrical charges to your feet or 
genitalia. All in all, we were in prison for 10 days before we 
were finally taken to a judge. In order to hide the evidence of 
torture, they washed us and treated us with ointments every day. 
And there were constant threats: "Get out of here, or we will 
kill you." 
  Then we were taken to court. When it turned out that we were 
innocent, we were released. 
  When I was released, I went to the Human Rights Foundation 
in 
Izmir. This is not a state institution, but a medical 
institution. They said I should not move my arms for six months 
and that I would bear the traces of torture for a long time. I 
still have scars below the shoulder blades. Sometimes I cannot 
even remember the names of my two children. 
  [Hoehn] Mehmetsah, do you have hopes and wishes that I could 
tell my fellow-citizens? 
  [Yildiz] We would like to stress, above all, that we are 
journalists and not armed militants. Nevertheless, the state 
harasses and tortures us. In 1993 at least 10 persons were 
killed as a result of torture. When Mrs. Ciller claims this is 
Turkish democracy, then it ought to be possible to invite 
investigations and international observers. Abuses in torture 
chambers are an effort to destroy people's personality and to 
plant crimes on them. In Kurdistan there is practically no one 
left who has not been tortured at least once. If Mrs. Ciller 
claims we have democracy here, then I am against this democracy. 
It is good when foreign observer delegations come here, because 
they have the opportunity to report torture and reprisals. It 
is our hope that the world public will not keep silent about the 
genocide and reprisals of the Turkish state against the Kurdish 
people. We want the world public to become sensitized to what 
is really going on here. 

