BFN 

<F P=106> [By Marie-Goretti Uwibambe] </F>
  [Text] Kigali, April 10 (AFP) -- Ethnic killings, mainly of 
the Tutsi minority, and manhunts were still under way in the 
Rwandan capital Kigali on Sunday [10 April], leaving many bodies 
lying in the streets. 
  The massacres were taking place mostly in working-class 
districts, an AFP correspondent reported, four days after 
Rwanda's president and his counterpart from neighbouring Burundi 
were slain when their plane was reportedly shot down. 
  The correspondent saw at least 20 bodies piled up in front 
of 
her own home in a northeastern part of Kigali. Vans were 
picking up the dead to take them off for burial in mass graves. 
  Many people were murdered in their homes, and most Kigali 
residents dared not venture into the streets except to purchase 
essential food supplies. 
  Residents of the Hutu majority in the capital, sometimes 
backed by members of the Rwandan army, were murdering Tutsis in 
the latest flare-up of the central African nation's endemic 
ethnic strife, following the death of the Hutu president Juvenal 
Habyarimana. 
  Red Cross workers reported light arms fire in the morning 
Sunday, but said they could no longer hear any heavy weapons 
fire. 
  The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) also 
stated that there were "too many bodies in the streets and the 
ICRC is giving priority to the living, the injured." 
  The ICRC earlier reported that "thousands" of people had 
been 
killed and wounded in ethnic bloodletting which brought the 
country to the brink of civil war since the death of Habyarimana 
in what the Rwandan government described as a rocket attack on 
his plane. 
  The president had been on his way home from a regional 
summit 
in Uganda to discuss UN-sponsored peace-making efforts in Rwanda 
and Burundi, also troubled by strife between Hutus and Tutsis. 
  His government last year signed a ceasefire and political 
deal with Tutsi rebels of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), but 
the front had yet to be brought into government. 

