Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Jingfu (3769 2529 1381): "Money Worship: A </F>
Raging Black Whirlpool"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] 
<H5>  Phenomenon and Characteristics </H5>
  [passage omitted] 
  One: Money supremacy. 
  To money worshippers, raking in money is the only goal in 
life. Provided they can grasp money, they can do without any 
morals, conscience, dignity or honor. National interests or the 
people's well-being are not worth a cent indeed in the eyes of 
such people. Satisfaction of their own insatiable desires alone 
is perfectly justified. 
  In the great surge of reform some have thrown away beliefs, 
oaths, ideals, party spirit, and national and moral dignity. 
Coveting money, they are like a group of madly flying moths; 
facing a roaring fire, they still flit around like crazy, even 
to the point of cremation. In 1992, money-grabbing was the chief 
cause of crimes committed by the 1,142 people detained at the 
Tangshan municipal guardhouse; of this figure, 50.87 percent of 
the total was for theft and 9.8 percent for robbery. Graft also 
is on the rise. Seven of nine female criminals presently 
detained committed graft. Of those locked up, a four-person gang 
led by a certain Liu killed four people, wounded five and 
committed more than 30 robberies in less than one year. They 
understand the mercilessness of the law even more than good and 
honest people but disregard all for money. Just as one criminal 
said, "So, it's 100,000 yuan after all, this purse full of 100 
yuan bills. I could not earn that much in several lifetimes!" He 
was destroyed by money. 
  Two: Abuse of power. 
  Under market economy conditions, power enters the market and 
becomes a "magic weapon" to gain money. Certain leading cadres 
corrupted by money abuse power with inflated selfish desires in 
the great surge of commodities. They disobey the law and create 
disorder. The methods used in the power-for-money trade are 
thought-provoking and make one feel righteously indignant. 
  With a nod of the head some people can provide others with a 
great quantity of parity goods and materials and then 
magnificently collect several thousand, ten thousand or several 
hundred thousand in handling fees. Others rely on power to 
contract out certain construction projects, issue loans or 
special funds, promote some officials, or alter work posts. With 
a signature, by writing a note, or by making a telephone call, 
money seems to have grown hands to stick itself into their 
pockets. In what was the former Hulan county, agricultural bank 
chief Gao Heng used loan approval power to accept verifiable 
bribes of more than 430,000 yuan. After Gao's case, deputy bank 
chief Liu Kui was awed by the dignity of the law and confessed 
to inspectors the criminal facts of accepting more than 140,000 
yuan in 12 bribes. The director of that bank's credit 
cooperative in a certain town, Li so-and-so, together with his 
partner Suo so-and-so, vice stock head of the county 
agricultural credit stock, loaned 600,000 yuan to individual 
households, from which they skimmed off 60,000 yuan. At the same 
branch, seven other workers illegally loaned six million yuan to 
individual households, from which they took 170,000 in bribes. 
  Three: By hook or by crook. 
  To gain even more funds, people sullied by money worship 
ignore legal orders, seek private gain with power, engage in 
graft, take bribes, pervert justice for bribes, and even 
publically strecth their hands out in extortion or blackmail. 
They defy morals, ignore honor, and sell their bodies and souls. 
They do not mind being imprisoned or beheaded. They wantonly 
sell people, arrange prostitution and gambling, steal cultural 
artifacts, sell state secrets or manufacture inferior products. 
These are by no means isolated cases. 
  Between January 1988 and June 1990, Han Aihua, a female 
office staff policewoman with great authority administering 
household registration at the people's police substation of a 
certain county, and her partners illegally handled more than 300 
"peasant transfer to non-agricultural" migration permits for 96 
households for which they accepted more than 200,000 yuan in 
bribes. Between 1987 and 1990, Zhang Mayun, household 
registration policeman of the South Liberation Road police 
substation in a certain city, illegally handled household 
registration procedures for more than 60 people, taking in a 
total of 210,000 yuan in bribes. Chen Lu, the vault and loan 
officer of a certain credit cooperation covertly disposed of the 
keys to the vault held by two others. On four occasions he 
secretly opened the vault and stole 650,000 yuan worth of 
national treasury bonds. The head of the bond group at the 
People's Bank of China in a certain county fled in a panic after 
stealing 120,000 yuan in funds. Sun so-and-so, cashier at a 
certain credit cooperative, together with Zhang so-and-so, a 
savings officer at another credit cooperative, absconded with 
110,000 yuan in public funds. In November 1992 the procuratorate 
of a certain city uncovered five graft and embezzlement of 
public fund cases, for a total misappropriation of more than 
400,000 yuan in state fiscal resources. The majority of the 
public funds were squandered, gambled or used for prostitutes. 
  Four: Money spent like water. 
  The life of those tainted with money worship is extremely 
decadent. Most spend money like water, squander it to no end, 
are gluttonous in appetite, recklessly waste food, and live in 
wanton extravagence. They stake 1,000 gold pieces on one throw. 
They are insufferably arrogant, buy followers and insult women 
for the scent of money. Some sell their souls for money, 
fabricate evils, invert justice, and confuse right and wrong. 
  In a certain province, someone spent 300,000 yuan on a 
miniature-type dog and 400,000 yuan on a tropical fish. They 
even have "golden banquets" only to "parade their wealth." Some 
are tired of eating the delicacies of land and sea. Others are 
bored with beautiful clothing. They enjoy getting married, 
courting mistresses, or being with prostitutes. When some 
upstarts gamble they think it troublesome to count the stakes so 
they invented a new calculation method using a ruler to count 
the height of a wad of bills. Some "big spenders" who have just 
learned to walk in life are beginning preparations for the 
"netherworld." They spend several thousand or tens of thousands 
to build and repair such things as ornate furniture for the 
afterlife. Some of the rich and powerful are so silly that they 
toss on the table several thousand or tens of thousands yuan to 
order food, drink and female "companions." There are even those 
who are ensnared in heavy debt yet ride in fancy cars instead of 
walking. They eat and stay in high-class hotels, immersed in 
pools of wine and feasts of food the whole day long. The head of 
a private enterprise had no fixed assets at all and owed more 
than 200,000 yuan in bank loans and interest yet he himself was 
in a foreign-style building with high quality consumer goods and 
a motorcycle all there. It is said that almost all individual 
businessmen unanimously believe that one is a fool to use one's 
own money in business or to build a factory. The notion has 
developed to the point that people believe one should consume a 
lot if one has the money: "I will get drunk this morning because 
I have wine today." Such willfull squandering really makes 
people stare. 
  Money worship is an extremely harmful corrosive, the 
"alienation" of commodity currency. It brings about the evil 
inflation of egoism and individualism. It twists normal 
interpersonal relationships to out and out cold and unfeeling 
monetary relationships. The outcome is a loss of ideology and 
morals and the emergence of corrupt and vulgar mores. When the 
social atmosphere is undermined, politics are corrupted, 
meaning severe hardship for the work of the party and the people. 
  The masses ask: Where is party organization? Where is the 
government of the people? Party and government leaders at all 
levels are images. There is great harm and even worse influence 
when some leading cadres in party and government organs are 
corrupt or bad. This not only directly harms the image of the 
party and the government but also could become the source and 
umbrella for departmental, business or even social impropriety, 
seriously harming socialist spirit, educational work and party 
and government behavior. This could have an inestimable negative 
effect on the party and the people. 
  China's vitality has thrived in a decade of reform. However, 
the flood of money worship following the upsurge of the market 
economy has brought severe obstacles to and effects on reform, 
opening up to the outside world, and market economy and 
enterprise development. In this respect "peaceful coexistence" 
will not work. There will be no end to future trouble if allowed 
to take its natural course. 
<H5>  Sources and Things To Be On Guard Against </H5>
  [passage omitted] One, a confused understanding of the 
boundary between the Marxist principle of material interests and 
money worship which mixes the concepts of money and money 
worship in the development of socialist commodity and market 
economies, contending that a market economy inevitably means 
money worship. Two, the influence of improper behavior. All of a 
sudden some party member and cadres cannot set examples by the 
incorrect practice of "big bribes for big authority and little 
bribes for little authority." Taken to the next step, those 
without authority illegally seize money in reckless moves. 
Three, unforceful penalty attacks. At present the level of 
investigation and case breaking by certain organs is unsuited 
to the complex situation of cases and crimes since reform and 
opening up to the outside world. They are weak and lenient in 
terms of the volume of cases, penalties and disciplinary action. 
Thus there is no change in the perniciousness of criminal 
elements. Four, looser party leadership, giving up on 
ideological and political work an d a loss of spiritual stamina. 
Five, imperfect restraint mechanisms and a lack of essential 
internal and external supervisi on and control measures. 
[passage omitted] 

