CSO 

<F P=106> [DESCO ``Special Report'' No. 35: "Political Violence in </F>
Peru Today," issued by Peru's Center for Development Studies and 
Promotion (DESCO)] 
  [Text] During March 1994, political violence increased 
slightly, compared to the months of January and February. There 
were 43 attacks on persons, or 10 percent more than in January 
(when there were 34) and February (when there were 32). 
Fortunately, there was a considerable decrease in the number of 
persons killed. The attacks in March caused 17 deaths. Twelve 
involved presumed subversives, four were civilians, and one was 
a member of the armed forces. 
  Lima continued to be the area where the largest number of 
subversive actions took place. A total of 27 (63 percent) of the 
attacks took place here. In March, two periods of time were 
preferred for subversive activity: the middle and the end of the 
month. Shining Path [SL] carried out two waves of attacks, 
including a series which took place during two weeks in the 
middle of March as part of a "subversive celebration" to 
commemorate two anniversaries: the attack on the CRAS [Social 
Rehabilitation Center--after prison training center] in Ayacucho 
and the establishment of Socorro Popular [People's Assistance 
Organization, the SL equivalent of the Red Cross]. The wave of 
attacks which took place during the last few days of March 
involved a series of actions in anticipation of the anniversary 
of the coup d'etat of 5 April. 
  Most of the attacks in Lima involved acts of sabotage 
against 
branch banks, supermarkets, and high voltage electricity pylons. 
The most serious action, however, involved the detonation of a 
tricycle bomb in the home of Patricio Ricketts, a journalist. 
  In second place in terms of acts of political violence was a 
three-way tie between the subversives' Principal, Norte, and 
Centro [Principal, North, and Center] regions. Four attacks (9 
percent of the total) took place in each region. 
  In the Principal region, there were three raids on towns in 
the Province of Acobamba and an act of terror in the Province of 
Huancasancos in which the governor of the province was wounded. 
  In the Norte region, subversives attacked the local 
headquarters of a company which repairs highways, murdered a 
local official, and incited a mob to lynch a group of farmers. 
Finally, two members of the MRTA [Tupac Amaru Revolutionary 
Movement] were captured when they attempted to break into a 
house. 
  In the Centro region, there were two clashes, one of them 
initiated by the Army and the other by indigenous people of the 
Ashaninka tribe. At the same time, subversives sabotaged 
electric lines in the Valle del Mantaro area. 
  In third and last place, a tie was also recorded between the 
Regional Committees of La Selva and Sur, with two attacks each 
(5 percent of the total). 
  In La Selva region, there was a clash and a deliberately 
targeted murder, whereas in the Sur region there was also a 
clash in Orurillo, Province of Puno. The subversives detonated 
explosives against a special project. 
  Regarding persons killed, the leading area was the Centro 
region, with 13 persons killed (72 percent of the total). These 
figures include subversive deaths in clashes with the security 
forces and with a group of indigenous people of the Ashaninka 
tribe. 
  In second place, as far as persons killed are concerned were 
the Lima and La Selva regions, with two each (11 percent of the 
total). The two civilians, killed in Lima, died in the attack on 
the home of Patricio Ricketts, a journalist, while in La Selva 
region, a Army sergeant died in a clash with subversives and a 
farmer was murdered for not paying taxes levied by the SL. 
  Finally, in last place in terms of persons killed was the 
Norte region, with one person dead (six percent of the total). 
This was the murder of the mayor of Huaylillas, in the Province 
of Pataz. 
<H5>  Persons Killed by SL by Region in March 1994 </H5>
  Centro: 71 percent 
  Lima: 12 percent 
  La Selva: 12 percent 
  Norte: 6 percent 
<H5>  Persons Killed and Attacks by SL by Region in March 1994 </H5>
  Lima: 2 civilians killed for total of 2; 26 attacks. 
  La Selva: 1 member of the armed forces, 1 civilian killed, 
for total of 2 killed; 2 attacks. 
  Principal: None killed; 4 attacks. 
  Sur: None killed; 2 attacks. 
  Norte: 1 civilian killed for total of 1; 4 attacks. 
  Centro: 1 civilian, 12 subversives killed for total of 13; 
4 attacks. 
  TOTAL: 1 member of the armed forces, 4 civilians, 12 
subversives killed for total of 17 killed; 42 attacks. 

