BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Giampiero Di Santo: "Fiat's New Challenge Comes </F>
From Melfi"] 
  [Text] If the first Henry Ford, the inventor of the 
assembly line, and Charlie Chaplin, the director and actor in 
Modern Times, were to walk through the entrance of the SATA 
[Advanced Technology Automobile Company] arm-in-arm, they would 
be amazed. 
  Yes, because here at Melfi, in a plain that is green in 
spring and parched by the sun in the summer, nothing is left of 
the world that was created by the former and described by the 
latter. Even the blue overalls have been replaced by purple 
work clothes. Not even the infernal work schedules that spurred 
on the protagonists of Chaplin's film remain, and neither does 
the continuous line that forced the workers to make the same 
movements all the time. 
  Here, in a factory that tries to do as little damage to the 
environment as possible (its base is sand colored, the upper 
part is painted with blue and gray horizontal bands), the latest 
challenge from the Fiat company, the Punto, is being produced. 
Three hundred and fifty automobiles are produced each day. The 
number will rise to 400 in June, and 1,600 when the integrated 
factory is working at full capacity (about 450,000 vehicles per 
year) with those employed in the plant and the subcontractors 
totalling 9,000 workers. Everything is automated, from where the 
sheet steel enters the two Weingarden lines that prepare it for 
pressing, to the three Schuler and Komatsu 3,200- and 
4,800-tonne presses (that will soon become four), to the welding 
operations (each Punto has 3,500 welding points), to the 
painting (performed by a Smart robot produced by Comau of the 
Fiat group) up to the point where it leaves the factory 20.8 
hours later. Everything is synchronized in accordance with 
just-in-time logic. The suppliers supply the lines day by day 
and in accordance with production requirements. Their factories 
are there, inside the fence that encloses an area of 2.7 million 
square meters. They have at their disposal a 700-thousand 
square meter area and the so-called highway inside the 
production lines that is used to transport the materials right 
up to the point where they are required for production. There 
are now six suppliers, but installations for another 12 are 
ready. The area is surrounded by a four-lane circular road, and 
there is a railway terminal that will be used for dispatching 
the vehicles once it is finished. For the time being, 
transporter trucks are being used to shuttle back and forth 
along the Naples-Bari highway. 
  Giovanni Agnelli's Fiat is launching its challenge to 
competition from this corner of the South between Basilicata 
(Melfi is in the province of Potenza), Campagnia, and Puglia. 
Innovation, flexibility and participation are the words that 
recur most frequently in the vocabulary of the managers in Corso 
Marconi [Fiat headquarters]. Here, between the robots and 
intelligent trolleys that only move when it is necessary, 
"Fordism," the immutable process that could not be stopped, is 
truly dead. Everything can change rapidly, and the workers 
participate in the management with ideas and proposals for 
improvement. The office block no longer exists. The clerks 
work side-by-side with the workers. The levels of hierarchy 
have been reduced from seven to five. 
  There is a training center nearby that prepares a general 
worker in four weeks, and a specialist in four months. The 
suppliers are involved in the design of the product and in the 
study of possible improvements. In short, there is a change of 
direction to achieve ambitious objectives: When the factory is 
working flat out each employee will produce 79 Puntos a year, 
compared with an average of 48 for the industry worldwide. 
  San Nicola di Melfi is a laboratory therefore. New theories 
are being tested, new foundations are being laid for industrial 
relations, original shifts and work hours are being studied (at 
present there are two but they will become three), the variable 
part of the salary is dependent on three different factors (the 
efficiency of the UTE, the so-called Elementary Technological 
Unit, the efficiency of the workshop, and the efficiency of the 
company). However, in every laboratory there is a danger that 
the field trials will disappoint the expectations. They are 
keeping their fingers crossed at Fiat. The company has invested 
3.316 trillion lire (1.355 trillion lire from the government) in 
Melfi. 

