Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Minister of Health Yuriy Spizhenko by </F>
DEMOKRATYCHNA UKRAYINA correspondent Valentyna Skoropadska, 
under the rubric "Critical Point"; place and date not given: 
"The Doctor Might Lose His Patients"] 
  [Text] 
  [Skoropadska] Yuriy Prokopovych, at present our society has 
serious complaints about the health care sector because both the 
medical services and the health of the population of Ukraine 
have deteriorated considerably. 
  [Spizhenko] Let us begin with the fact that the health of 
the 
population is determined by a number of factors, the key factors 
being the standard and way of life, the influence of the 
environment on people, their heredity, and only after that the 
standard of medical aid. As you know, at present the ecological, 
social, and economic conditions for living in Ukraine do not 
guarantee its citizens any of those factors that shape the 
health status of the nation. 
  We, physicians are particularly concerned about a 
considerable deterioration in the diet of the people and the 
growing incidence of disease, the overall death rate, to say 
nothing of the pronounced drop in the birth rate associated with 
this--11.4 per 1,000 population in 1992. An extremely 
unfavorable demographic situation has developed. Since 1990 
natural population growth has been negative. Last year almost 
100,000 more people died than were born. 
  The main biological characteristics of a person, the immune 
system, incidence of disease, and life expectancy depend on the 
adequate supply of vital substances to the organism. According 
to data from the Scientific Research Institute of Nutritional 
Hygiene, a person should consume no less than 150 grams of meat, 
700 grams of milk and dairy products, 40 grams of fish, and 
about 300 grams of bread, potatoes, and other vegetables daily. 
However, a considerably greater amount of money than people make 
in many cases would now have to be spent on a monthly basis in 
order to comply with these minimum physiological norms. Given 
that, why would they be healthy? According to data from 
specialists, the daily ration of foodstuffs includes only 30-40 
percent of meat and 30 percent of fish compared to the 
recommended norms. We should also say that diets have 
deteriorated considerably due to reductions in the consumption 
of vegetables and fruit by almost one-half. The carbohydrate 
component and energy content of the diet are ensured virtually 
in their entirety through increasing the consumption of bread 
products, sugar, and other refined carbohydrates. 
  [Skoropadska] Recently the immune systems of many residents 
of Ukraine, even those who were not in Chernobyl, have been 
disrupted. A stable upward trend in cardiovascular and 
gastrointestinal disease, anemias, and gallstone diseases has 
been registered. The number of hypertension sufferers is up 84 
percent, diabetes mellitus patients--up 49 percent, patients 
with ulcer, gastric, and duodenum diseases--up 44 percent. How 
do you explain all of this? 
  [Spizhenko] I have said it before, and will repeat again: A 
considerable reduction in the consumption of animal protein, 
vitamins, and mineral substances brings about the development of 
the diseases in question. 
  We should speak the bitter truth today so that tomorrow it 
will not be too late. Certainly, the considerable increase in 
the number of people who are destitute and the unsatisfactory 
supply of foodstuffs to preschool and youth establishments are 
causing partial undernourishment of children and young people. 
The shortage of protein in the diets of children in organized 
collective settings comes to 36 percent; this includes animal 
protein--50 percent, fats--22 percent, carbohydrates--38 
percent, and micro- and macroelements--about 60 percent. Vitamin 
deficiencies are being registered in almost all children. In 
view of the increase in the cost of meals, only one-third of 
schoolchildren eat at school (in 1990 this was 80 percent). 
  One in three children in Ukraine has exudative-catarrhal 
diathesis and food allergies because of nonrational nutrition. 
Among children who died before the age of four months, 82 
percent received incorrect artificial nutrition. Substitutes for 
breast milk are in an extremely short supply, and the quality of 
those that are produced is very low. We should also mention that 
the operation of infant formula distribution centers has become 
much more difficult. Government assignments to build and equip 
enterprises and shops producing infant formula have not been 
carried out year after year. While two canned dairy product 
combines exist (in Khorol, Poltava Oblast, and Balta, Odessa 
Oblast) which could not only keep Ukrainian children fully fed 
but also manufacture products for sale, the issue of baby food 
has not been resolved because of the unstable situation at these 
enterprises. How is our future nation supposed to be healthy? 
  Unbalanced nutrition, pollution of the natural environment 
with harmful industrial waste, herbicides, and pesticides in 
agriculture result in the organism's reduced resistance to 
disease factors or, as physicians say, immune deficiency. 
Infectious diseases are developing even among children and 
adults who have been inoculated with special serums--diphtheria, 
tuberculosis, which is trending up, and whooping cough--which 
definitely confirms a pronounced immune deficiency. 
  [Skoropadska] Yuriy Prokopovych, a catastrophic situation 
has 
now emerged in Ukraine as far as the incidence of diphtheria is 
concerned. What is the ministry doing at present to snuff out 
this dangerous disease? 
  [Spizhenko] I would like to say that we are doing everything 
to stop this menacing illness. However, we must look the truth 
in the eye. More than 2,000 cases have already been registered, 
415 in children. Some 70 people have died, of them, 22 children. 
Other long-forgotten diseases have also reared their ugly heads. 
The disease control situation involving poliomyelitis has become 
more complex (since 1992, 16 cases have been registered). 
  The Ministry of Health is facing the persistent need to 
sharply reduce the shortage of diphtheria, poliomyelitis, 
measles, and tuberculosis vaccines, and those of other 
infectious diseases, and to improve the quality of those 
vaccines. 
  With a view to reducing the volume of imports of biological 
immunity preparations, the National Program for Immunological 
Prevention among the Population in 1993 through 2000, which has 
been approved by the government, envisions the establishment of 
domestic production of vaccines at the Kharkov, Kiev, and Odessa 
Biological Preparations Enterprises. 
  According to a technical and economic evaluation, 
establishing a new a complete technological cycle of vaccine 
production will require $32.5 million. Some $1.6 million are 
necessary in order to acquire special refrigerated trucks and 
freezing chambers. It is the government's duty to find a way to 
finance these measures even under the current conditions. 
  [Skoropadska] Yuriy Prokopovych, at present all of us are 
feeling the shortage of drugs, including vital, in pharmacies 
and medical facilities. What is being done to improve this 
situation? 
  [Spizhenko] Within the USSR, drugs worth about $800 million 
were allocated to Ukraine, whereas recently about $80 million 
were allocated. This has already affected the health of the 
population perceptibly. As a result of discontinued payments we 
are not able to get raw materials from Russia, Belarus, and so 
on. Even planned surgery, including vital, is frequently not 
performed. Thus at present the need for them is met 30-50 
percent precisely because of the absence of the most necessary 
preparations. Here is an example: With an annual need for kidney 
transplants of 1,500 people, transplants are actually provided 
to 120-150 patients. The extremely limited acquisition of 
preparations preventing rejection is the reason. 
  Between 6,500 and 6,700 operations for heart diseases are 
performed in Ukraine annually, but 36,000 patients need it! The 
reason is the same in this instance. A critical situation has 
emerged in the treatment of endocrine patients, who number over 
1 million. Of these, more than 800,000 have diabetes mellitus. 
Insulin, which is vitally indicated for them, is not produced in 
Ukraine, and foreign exchange funds to organize production 
cannot be found. More examples may be given. The Ministry of 
Health believes that implementation of the Comprehensive Program 
for the Development of the Medical Industry, which was approved 
by the Cabinet of Ministers in October, is one of the main 
directions for overcoming the crisis; this is also associated 
with the allocation of requisite appropriations. 
  The system for supplying medicines to the population is now 
being restructured with the inclusion of foreign investment and 
the funds of enterprises of other, nonstate forms of ownership. 
This makes it possible to increase the acquisition of imported 
drugs which are in very short supply and deliver them to Ukraine. 
  The issue of social protection for the population is being 
resolved by way of state regulation of price-setting for drugs 
and their targeted provision for almost 50 groups of the 
population and categories of diseases. 
  Our ministry has developed a system under which the 
development and production of drugs would take the shortest 
route. Pharmacology and pharmacopoeia committees are already in 
operation in Kiev, Kharkov, Vinnitsa, and other places. 
Industrial production of drugs, reagents, antiseptic compounds, 
and so on has been established. The specially established 
Medical Committee of the Cabinet of Ministers has been brought 
in to solve this problem. 
  However, let us come back to the present: At this stage, 
foreign exchange funds are necessary to purchase annually the 
vital medical preparations worth $800-860 million which are not 
manufactured in Ukraine. I believe that the problem of drug 
supply ranks second to the problem of food supply. Consequently, 
it is necessary to find sources of financing to purchase drugs 
with foreign exchange. This will reduce social tensions 
accordingly in our society. 
  I must mention the beggarly existence of the health care 
sector. The budget for 1993 was approved in the amount of 1,036 
billion karbovantsy, or 60 percent of the need. However, funding 
is provided at the rate of 50-60 percent of the tentatively 
established budget, and is irregular, coming in small amounts 
and with considerable delays. Telegrams are being received from 
health care establishments stating that regular operation is 
impossible, and hospitals are threatening to close because there 
is nothing to either treat or feed the patients with. 
  Indeed, medical personnel must save or help people suffering 
grave diseases. This is our professional responsibility. 
However, the sacred duty of the government is to ensure normal 
funding for the medical sector. 

