BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by K. I. Angelopoulos: "Ankara's Summer </F>
`Targets'..."] 
  [Text] Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf Denktas was clear when 
on Friday [6 May], for the second time in one week, he said in 
Istanbul: If Cyprus becomes a member of the European Union [EU] 
before Turkey, then the "state" of northern Cyprus "will proceed 
to economic and political incorporation with Turkey." 
  Denktas made the above statement after publicly expressing 
his "relief" at the confirmation that the Turkish leadership 
once again adopted his policy on the Cyprus issue. Indeed, now 
the Turkish military leadership agrees with Denktas that 
occupied northern Cyprus should remain what it essentially is 
now: a Turkish province. That is why he should not get 
involved in discussions (at the United Nations) that could 
result in the beginning of "confidence" with Nicosia. This 
could possibly lead to talks about a "federation." And Ankara 
estimates that this, in turn, would lead the EU partners to 
examine more carefully the issue of the Republic of Cyprus' 
accession to the European Union. The EU Commission's opinion on 
Cyprus' accession notes that the only problem obstructing this 
accession is "political." 
  Nicosia and Athens will try in 1995 (when the issue of 
Cyprus' accession will return to the agenda) to convince the EU 
partners that the nonsolution of the political problem is 
exclusively due to the Turkish side. Consequently, the 
accession of Cyprus should proceed, which by itself would 
facilitate the search for a federal solution in Cyprus based on 
the fact that Athens and Nicosia have accepted the 
"confidence-building measures." 
  Now, Turkey says--thus revealing its true intentions on the 
future of Cyprus--that if such developments unfold, the occupied 
northern Cyprus will officially become Turkish territory. 
  The formulation of this position by Ankara (through Denktas) 
comes to complete a scenario drawn by Turkey's military 
establishment regarding Greek-Turkish relations: North Cyprus 
is Turkish, the militarized Greek islands in the Aegean lead 
Turkey to contemplate a "reaction" of a military nature, and the 
"oppression" of the "Turkish minority" in western Thrace forces 
Ankara to mobilize the mechanism for its "protection." 
  Twenty years after "Attila's" invasion of Cyprus, the 
Turkish 
leadership confirms today that Greece remains its "target." And 
everything indicates that the outright failure of the power 
system imposed by Evren's military dictatorship from 1980 and 
beyond leads Ankara to reinforce its aim to attack, at the first 
opportunity, the line running western Thrace-Aegean-Cyprus. As 
I KATHIMERINI has pointed out, the Turkish regime today is 
anxiously searching for a "victory" in order to reinforce its 
badly damaged prestige on the domestic front. 
  Athens knows that despite the Turkish leadership's usual 
loud 
rhetoric, a "move" by Ankara in the summer cannot be ruled out. 
The government has information on the possibility of 
"provocations" in western Thrace, Cyprus or the Aegean to be 
appropriately "utilized" by Ankara, in conjunction with Greece's 
known "Balkan problems." 
  The Greek Government is obliged to be ready for a "hot" 
summer. 

