CSO 

<F P=106> [Untitled report prepared by Marina Denisova] </F>
  [Text] As of today about 260 independent television and 
radio companies are registered in Russia. Starting next year the 
issuing of licenses will be suspended temporarily, but the 
immense waiting list of people wanting to have their own 
television and radio stations continues to grow. There are 600 
of them today. In the opinion of the representative of the board 
of the Fund for Protection of Glasnost, Aleksey Simonov, the 
influence and audience of independent and state companies are 
practically equal. 
  Muscovites, "spoiled" with six television channels, do not 
even suspect that in Siberia television viewers have a choice as 
well. Way out in Krasnoyarsk, in addition to Channel 1 
Ostankino, Russian television, and Channel 6 St. Petersburg, it 
is also possible to see programs on commercial Channel 11, in 
which four nonstate television stations are concentrated, and 
Channel 9, which belongs to the independent television company 
Afontovo. It began 24-hour broadcasting on 2 April 1993. 
Incidentally, state companies of the capital, which are groaning 
under debts to the Ministry of Communications, can broadcast at 
night only on holidays. 
  Over the year Afontovo has become the most popular channel 
in 
Krasnoyarsk. They have managed to buy their own transmitter. 
Today Afontovo has its own information service which prepares 
local news for three 20-minute broadcasts daily. 
  The Afontovo information-entertainment channel is not 
worried 
about the problem of filling air time. Thank God it has plenty 
of sources. It buys programs and films from 2X2, Russian Video, 
KTV-1, and Channel 6 St. Petersburg. Afontovo also produces its 
own programs. The services of production firms from the capital 
are very costly. 
  Almost all the independent companies earn money through 
piracy. In the words of the general director of Afontovo, 
Aleksandr Karpov, the volume of pirated products today is 
approximately 30 percent of the overall number of programs and 
films. And just a year ago his television company was an evil 
100-percent pirate. Everyone understands quite well that it is 
necessary to join up with civilization. 
  The Tomsk independent television company TV-2 is a veteran 
and has been in operation for three years already. It broadcasts 
13 hours a day. Its potential audience includes 700,000 viewers. 
TV-2 is a heroic company; during the August and October putsches 
it was the only one in Tomsk that did not stop operating. Local 
Afghanistan veterans had to protect the station so that they did 
not chop down the transmitter. Incidentally, in October, when 
the commandos stormed Ostankino, on that same Shushenskiy they 
were receiving BBC-Asia programs through a satellite with direct 
relay, and the entire Siberian region was abreast of events 
developing in Moscow. Moreover, Siberians received more complete 
information than Muscovites. 
  Samara state television does not have its own channel, it 
covers the air time of the Russian channel and successfully 
sells it to commercial organizations. So before and after 
"Vesti," instead of clips propagandizing the activity of Check 
Investment Funds, in the glorious city of Samara there is local 
advertising. The situation is unique--state television has 
managed to drive its air time in twice. 
  The association of regional independent television companies 
actually exists. The largest of them--representatives of 10 
cities of Russia and Kazakhstan--have created an enterprise 
whose goal is to provide all stations with licensed products and 
centralize the search for advertisers. Nonstate companies of 
Siberia have managed to sell their air time to large foreign 
advertising agencies, which have offered in exchange a package 
of 40 films. As a result the independent television companies 
now have not only high-class films but also advertisers of the 
world level like Coca-Cola. 
  Through collective efforts independent television companies 
are trying to work out a system for transmitting the television 
signal through the Gorizont communications satellite, which 
makes it possible to cover the territory from the Urals to 
Baykal. 

