BFN 

    [Editorial Report] 
<H8>  THE STAR </H8>
  De Klerk, Mandela Set Example in Reconciliation -- 
Johannesburg THE STAR in English on 4 May in a page-12 editorial 
says the "overwhelming response" to ANC leader Nelson Mandela's 
election victory speech, and President de Klerk's concession 
speech, on 2 May "has been one of admiration and affection for 
both speakers." Both men "went well beyond the formalities, 
well beyond the expectable courtesies. They created lumps in 
many millions of throats by the earnestness of their goodwill, 
the sincerity of their intentions. They have set an example that 
the country seems well tuned to receive. The emotional turmoil 
of this remarkable period has affected most of us far more 
deeply than we had expected. Now the seeds have been sown by 
Messrs Mandela and De Klerk for a harvest greater than even the 
optimists had expected. They have set an example in 
reconciliation to all of us, and we dare not let them down." 
  Criticism of `Third Force' Generals' Return to Work -- A 
second editorial on the same page notes that two generals 
implicated in "third force" activities, were back at work this 
week "in an extraordinary, inexplicable and unacceptable move 
that demands the fullest explanation." Six weeks ago the 
Goldstone Commission found there was prima facie evidence that 
they were involved in, and "probably masterminded, a Third 
Force." Now Police Commissioner Johan van der Merwe, after 
consulting the Transvaal Attorney- General, ordered the two, 
Generals Basie Smit and Johan le Roux, to return to work because 
"there were `no grounds' for their continued absence." THE STAR 
disagrees with this decision. "The generals have been accused 
in public and until they are cleared in public they should not 
be allowed back in control of the police. Both justice and 
their own reputations demand this." 
<H8>  BUSINESS DAY </H8>
  Lack of Security for Mandela -- Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY in 
English on 4 May in a page-10 editorial says: "Mandela's 
enthusiasm at the ANC victory party this week was 
understandable, as was his desire to celebrate with crowds in 
the streets, but it did not make him any safer. Nor did the 
lack of security surrounding the country's next head of state." 
"Tight security will keep him further from the people than he 
would like, but it is an inevitable feature of a world in which 
presidents are no safer than prime ministers, princes or popes. 
And when he finds it irksome, Mandela can remind himself that 
his job is to protect this country's assets. He features too 
high on that list to go dancing in the streets, no matter how 
jubilant he feels." 
<H8>  SOWETAN </H8>
  Tribute to Mandela, De Klerk, Buthelezi, Viljoen -- 
Referring 
to the "explosion of joy and excitement in the streets of the 
townships and in suburbs" following Nelson Mandela's election 
victory speech, Johannesburg SOWETAN in English on 4 May in a 
page-6 editorial says: "While it is easy in today's world for 
things to get out of hand and for violence to explode into 
action, most people are held back by the awe and respect they 
have for Mandela." SOWETAN also praises President de Klerk "for 
the role he has played in this drama. It was De Klerk's courage 
that eventually led to the events of this day. It was a courage 
in the face of hate and abuse from his own people and his act on 
February 2 1990 will be recorded by history as the turning point 
towards a democratic majority government in South Africa." 
SOWETAN also notes Inkatha leader Buthelezi's "undeniable" 
"control on his people and area." Buthelezi has received 
sufficient votes "to show he has a place in the hearts of the 
people of South Africa." Finally, tribute goes to Freedom Front 
leader Constand Viljoen who "could have been influenced by the 
radicals among Afrikaners to violence," but who "wisely" chose 
the path of negotiation. 
<H8>  BEELD </H8>
  Election Outcome Fair Reflection of Electorate Desire -- 
Johannesburg BEELD in Afrikaans on 2 May notes in a page-8 
editorial: "South Africans' rising and other activities today 
will take place with the overwhelming knowledge that, by all 
indications, Mr.Nelson Mandela, the leader of the ANC, has been 
chosen president in the first representative election in South 
Africa. We write this in the midst of efforts to obtain a 
result from of the vote-counting chaos," but "everything points 
to Mr. Mandela having completed his long march to freedom." 
"Through the election the country has arrived at the future 
which, due to racism and conflicting nationalisms, so long 
evaded it. Some would no doubt wish that they could enter a 
time machine to escape the significance of 2 May 1994. There are 
some to the right who are mentally moving into the laager, while 
others threaten war," but "the election has shown that they 
represent a tiny minority." "The election was the final 
irreversible step. South Africa can never be the same again. 
Despite tremendous, even shocking shortcomings in the 
administration of the election, we believe that the outcome is a 
fair reflection of the will of the electorate, and therefore 
South Africa now has a representative and fully legitimate 
government." "We identify fully with the new reality of South 
Africa." "Our best wishes go to the ANC which received a clear 
mandate from the voters. There are aspects of its leadership 
and policy which worry us, and we will oppose these by 
highlighting the better options. We wish Mr. Mandela good luck, 
and hope he will be blessed with wisdom and grace to lead the 
country away from the abysses of the past. It will depend on 
him to what extent the government of national unity and the 
philosophy of reconciliation can gain stature and produce 
tangible results. We also wish the National Party strength; an 
important portion of the electorate placed their trust in it. 
BEELD enters the new dispensation as a watchdog which will try 
to serve the cause of democracy and freedom from a position of 
loyalty to the country." 

