Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Linda Choy] </F>
  [Text] Senior Hong Kong-based Chinese officials yesterday 
repeated a warning against foreign intervention in Hong Kong 
affairs. That came after Australian officials proclaimed 
support for the electoral reforms of the Governor, Chris Patten. 
  Qin Wenjin, a deputy director of XINHUA (the New China News 
Agency), said the question of Hong Kong remained an issue 
between China and Britain prior to the changeover. After 1997, 
it would become purely an internal matter of China. "We have 
told the world time and again that no third country should have 
the right to make irresponsible comments or indiscreet remarks 
on the question of Hong Kong." Mr Qin was referring to praise 
by Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans for the political 
reform proposals of Mr Patten. 
  The Governor also received a similar reception at his 
meeting 
with other Australian ministers yesterday Mr Qin described Mr 
Patten's speech on Asia's human rights situation as "a tragedy" 
arising from misunderstanding. The Asian region had been 
subjected to colonial rule and its human rights sit uation and 
democracy should be developed step by step according to the 
development of individual areas. Mr Qin said. 
  Mr Patten is now in Melbourne on the final leg of his 
official tour of Australia. He flew from Canberra yesterday 
where he held meetings with the Governor-Ceneral of Australia 
Bill Hayden, the Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee and the 
Senate Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade. 
Mr Patten also had a working lunch with senior academics of the 
Australian National University in Canberra. Last night, he was 
guest of honour at a dinner hosted by the Victorian State 
Minister for industry and employment, Philip Gude. Today Mr 
Patten will visit several prominent companies trading in Hong 
Kong and the Asian region as well as delivering what is being 
heralded as a significant address to the Committee for the 
Economic Development of Australia. 

