Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] Writing in the 17 February Athens weekly 
OIKONOMIKOS TAKHIDROMOS, Yiannis Marinos quotes his own 11 
November 93 article, in which he had drawn the attention of the 
then newly installed Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK) 
government on what he termed the "erroneous" abolition of the 
law forbidding press publication of terrorist statements 
claiming responsibility for political assassinations. While no 
true democrat should support laws limiting a free press and the 
free movement of ideas, the law instituted under the previous 
New Democracy (ND) government essentially aimed at preventing 
terrorists from using assassination to propagate ideas that 
would otherwise not see the light of day, Marinos contended at 
the time. An indication--if not proof--that terrorists used 
newspapers to promote their views was the fact that for more 
than a year, when the law was in existence, no attacks had taken 
place, Marinos had written then. 
  Returning to the present, Marinos notes that "unfortunately, 
his minority opinion" was ignored, the law was abolished, and 
terrorist 17 November resumed the course of assassinations "with 
renewed enthusiasm," murdering Mikhalis Vranopoulos, former 
director of the National Bank of Greece. 17 November can now 
rely on the "hospitable" columns of various newspapers to 
convince people that the entire Greek political class, which 
they elect through democratic processes, is made up of "bums, 
thieves, and fraudulent and corrupt officials" whom only 
terrorists can punish in the name of the people's interest, 
Marinos writes. Referring to the 17 November proclamation on the 
Vranopoulos assassination, he notes that in an attempt to "fill 
the gap" created by the non-publication of previous claims while 
the anti-terrorist law was in effect, the terrorists have now 
warned hundreds of income tax agents and Ministry of National 
Economy officials that they will henceforth be attacked without 
warning. While Minister of Justice Kouvelakis can now rest 
assured that no individual rights of terrorist suspects will be 
violated, Marinos wryly notes, he should also be aware that he 
is facilitating "involuntarily" the violation of potential 
victims' human rights. While the government spokesman asserted 
that terrorism cannot be prosecuted through harsh legislation, 
he must know that the most fearsome European terrorist 
organizations were quickly and essentially dismantled when 
special anti-terrorist legislation was adopted in Italy, France 
and Germany, Marinos states. He then proceeds to quote the 
"incredible" statement made by Court of Appeals prosecutor 
Khristoforos Tzannakakis, according to whom "there must be a 
reason for the 17 November assassinations...A man is not 
executed unless there is a crime." "If Tzannakakis speaks the 
same language as other Greeks and is aware of what he is 
saying," Marinos comments, then: 
  1. 17 November victims are criminals, for otherwise they 
would not be executed. 
  2. Tzannakakis uses the term "execute" in the same sense as 
the terrorists, who imply that the death penalty is meted out to 
criminals, thus arrogating to themselves the role of the justice 
system. 
  3. Logically, Vranopoulos and other victims of l7 November 
were criminals who provoked the "punitive intervention" of the 
terrorist organization. 
  Finally, Marinos cites Tzannakakis as answering a reporter's 
question by saying he does not feel threatened by terrorism 
because "he has never aroused personal hatreds," and "has done 
nothing in his professional life to cause anyone's anger, 
especially that of 17 November." This naturally leads the 
terrorist organization to conclude that according to the 
prosecutor himself, he should not be "executed," but others who 
have committed "crimes" should, Marinos bitterly concludes. 

