Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] According to a YUNNAN RIBAO report, last year the 
national economy showed a good trend of steady growth on the 
basis fast development in the previous year. Initial statistics 
provided by the relevant department indicate that in 1993, the 
province's GNP will amount to 64.8 billion yuan, an increase of 
10 percent over the previous year; tertiary industries will 
increase by 15 percent, higher than primary and secondary 
industries. 
  The characteristics of last year's economic activity are as 
follows: 
  Agriculture saw a comparatively good harvest. Despite 
serious natural disasters including large areas of drought and 
flooding and bitter cold weather, agriculture still saw a 
comparatively good harvest due to the efforts of cadres and 
masses. Grain output for the whole of last year was estimated 
at 10.85 million metric tons, an increase of 1.4 percent over 
the previous year. Flue-cured tobacco, tea, silkworm 
mulberries, and other major industrial crops, as well as animal 
husbandry, continued to increase. 
  Township and town enterprises developed fast; their total 
earnings were estimated at more than 2 million yuan, an increase 
of 53.2 percent. Industrial production grew steadily. Despite 
electric power and fund shortages as well as price increases in 
raw materials, the gross industrial output value will amount to 
53 billion yuan, an increase of 14 percent. Market sales 
remained stable. Following the implementation of macrocontrol 
and regulatory policies, markets gradually became stable. From 
January to November, the retail sales volume of commodities in 
society amounted to 24.6 billion yuan, an increase of 23 percent 
over the same period of the previous year. The increase in 
institutional purchases was brought under control. The 
contradiction between supply and demand for major materials such 
as steel and cement was alleviated. The monetary situation was 
turning better. Through rectification and improvement, fund 
expenditures in violation of regulations were effectively 
controlled, as were willful fund raising activities. Civilian 
deposits increased, and banks' payment ability became stronger. 
Revenue and expenditure were comparatively balanced. Last 
year's local revenues were estimated at 14.5 billion yuan. 
Civilian income continued to increase. The income of the people 
in cities and towns for last year was estimated at 2,340 yuan; 
peasant per capita net income was 670 yuan, an increase 
respectively of 6 and 2 percent over the previous year, allowing 
for price rises. 
  Imports and exports continued to improve. Foreign trade and 
exports were estimated at $510 million last year, an increase of 
12 percent; imports were estimated at $230 million, an increase 
of 12.7 percent. Imports and exports through border trade were 
estimated at 2.8 billion yuan, an increase of 25 percent. 
Tourism kept growing. Tourists coming to Yunnan from outside 
the country were estimated at 376,000, an increase of 20 percent 
over the previous year. Foreign certificate income from tourism 
was 530 million yuan, an increase of 43 percent. 
  An objective analysis indicates that in the course of a 
steady economic growth, there are still contradictions and 
problems in Yunnan's economic life. These find expression in 
the emergence of new problems resulting from serious natural 
disasters in agriculture and price rises in production 
materials. The task still remains tough in controlling price 
hikes. Enterprises are incurring more losses and are behind in 
their tax payments. These problems should be resolved by 
deepening reform. 

