Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] The chairman of the National Provisional Ruling 
Council [NPRC] and head of state, Captain Valentine Strasser, 
has said that 1993 ended in an atmosphere characterized by a 
heightening of public confidence in Sierra Leone and the 
country's capacity to face the daunting challenges ahead. 
Speaking in Freetown this morning during his annual reception 
for heads of diplomatic missions and international organizations 
accredited to this country, Capt. Strasser said one of such 
challenges is the sustenance of that public confidence which is 
essential to the revival of meaningful investment in the private 
sector. 
  According to the head of state, the major preoccupations of 
the NPRC since the 29 April Revolution have basically been 
three-fold. These include the speedy conclusion of the rebel 
war, the structural reform of the economy to achieve sustainable 
growth, and the return to democratic constitutional rule. The 
NPRC government, he said, has recorded considerable progress 
although more will remain to be done. 
  Capt. Strasser explained how as evidence of his government's 
good faith and determination to effect an early end to the war, 
it had declared a unilateral cease-fire for four weeks and 
renewed the amnesty offered last December which was flagrantly 
violated by the rebels who are apparently not interested in 
peace. He said as [the] message of cease-fire and amnesty was 
not acceptable to most rebels, they used the cease-fire period 
to regroup and rearm for an offensive against government troops. 
The head of state used the opportunity to recall what he called 
the abiding appreciation of the government and people of Sierra 
Leone to all friendly countries and organizations who have 
helped (?in our efforts) in diverse ways. 
  Turning to the question of reconstruction and rehabilitation 
of the war-affected areas, Capt. Strasser appealed to the 
international community to augment and complement our scarce 
resources. He recalled the 26th of November last year when he 
launched the (?constitutional) program which heralded the 
irreversible process of returning this country to democratic 
civilian rule, culminating in elections in 1995. 
  Capt. Strasser assured his audience of the NPRC's 
determination to ensure that the transition program is not 
derailed and hoped that with the recent constitution of the 
electoral commission, donor countries and agencies will now be 
in a position to define their response to requests for 
assistance. 
  With regard to economic reform, the head of state said we 
have gone the extra mile towards fulfilling all of the 
conditionalities imposed by the IMF and the World Bank. He 
maintained that having removed all the distortions and with the 
needed assistance, it is expected that the national economy will 
ultimately take off, bringing in its wake the restoration of 
social progress. Capt. Strasser said social progress was 
subject to less unfavorable conditions in externally economic 
environment and called for improved access of our products to 
the international market and the guarantee for fair and 
reasonable remuneration for our exports. 
  Capt. Strasser called for the globalization of the principle 
of aid for serious political reforms by the Group of Seven 
industrialized countries and emphasized that West African 
countries, more than any group, deserve to be (?beneficiaries) 
of this new principle. He underscored our commitment to 
regional cooperation under the aegis of ECOWAS [Economic 
Community of West African States] and emphasized our 
(?unflinching) support for the ECOWAS peace plan for Liberia. 
Capt. Strasser called on the warring factions to respect the 
accord and disarm and urged ECOMOG [ECOWAS Cease-Fire Monitoring 
Group] to put the buffer zone along the Sierra-Leone-Liberia 
border in place to prevent any further [word indistinct] border 
military activities. [passage omitted] 

