Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article based on materials from the Postfactum Agency: ``A </F>
Wave of Infections Rolls Deep Into Russia''] 
  [Text] Anthrax cases were registered in Iskitim, 
Novosibirsk Oblast, according to Vladimir Akulov, a 
correspondent of the Postfactum Agency and director of the 
oblast center for sanitary- epidemiological oversight. Anthrax 
was transmitted to butchers and cooks of the dining hall of the 
local construction administration No 28. The meat had been 
purchased in Altay, and it was accompanied by a certificate 
issued by the local center for sanitary-epidemiological 
oversight. 
  Four patients are now in the infection hospital. The 
necessary steps were taken to keep this disease from spreading 
through the oblast. 
  A diphtheria epidemic has begun in Vladivostok. In the last 
few days 85 cases of disease were registered. The average age of 
the patients is 25-30 years. 
  An extraordinary epidemiological commission was established 
in the city administration to eliminate the sources of disease. 
  According to a report from the Tomsk newspaper KRASNOYE 
ZNAMYA 29 diphtheria cases were revealed in Tomsk since the 
beginning of the year, two of them fatal. In the meantime only 
five diphtheria cases were registered in the past 20 years. The 
administration head of Tomsk Oblast published a resolution on 
fighting diphtheria. According to the resolution whenever 
applicants are accepted for secondary special educational 
institutions and VUZes, they must present an immunization 
document. All children in schools, boarding schools and 
nurseries are to be immunized this quarter. Testing for 
pathogenic bacteria at industrial enterprises will be one of the 
diphtheria control measures. The chief physician of the 
sanitary-epidemiological station has been granted the right not 
to issue trade permits without presentation of the necessary 
medical documents. The Tomsk city epidemiological station will 
be given 5 million rubles to acquire the necessary medical 
resources. 
  An outbreak of epidemic hepatitis was noted in schools of 
Kamensk (Rostov Oblast). Several students have been 
hospitalized. Several schools and boarding schools were closed 
in order to prevent the spread of hepatitis. Medical workers 
believe that overcrowding in the schools, the poor diet of the 
students and unsatisfactory public health and hygienic 
conditions were the causes of illness. 
  Case of food poisoning have become more frequent in 
Novokuznetsk. Forty-five poisoning cases caused by 
staphylococcus were registered in the city. It was revealed that 
most poisoning cases were associated with consumption of poor 
quality sour cream. 
  Other cases of mass intestinal infections were also 
registered in Kemerovo Oblast in October. One hundred forty-two 
persons suffered typhoid fever, an intestinal infection, because 
of a faulty water intake in the town of Novyy Karakan (Belovskiy 
Rayon). Doctors registered over 120 cases of dysentery in 
Krapivinskiy Rayon (Zelenkova village). 
  Materials on these cases are being forwarded by oblast 
centers for sanitary-epidemiological oversight to the procuracy 
for the purposes of instituting criminal proceedings. 


