BFN 

<F P=106> [By Gilles Campion] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, April 4 (AFP)--The family of China's most 
famous dissident, Wei Jingsheng, said Monday [4 April] it was 
afraid he was still being detained, three days after the Beijing 
police said he had been questioned and left their offices. 
  The official XINHUA NEWS AGENCY had announced Saturday "the 
Beijing Public Security Bureau had a conversation with Wei on 
Friday and he left the bureau immediately afterward." The 
Public Security Bureau's public relations office, questioned 
Monday, said it knew "nothing of this affair," and refused to 
say how long Wei's most recent arrest lasted. 
  A Foreign Ministry spokesman said only that "Wei Jingsheng 
violated relevant regulations when he was on parole and while 
still being deprived of his political rights. The Public 
Security department has the right to interrogate according to 
the law." 
  Wei's relatives as well as his close friends said Monday 
they 
had received no word at all from the dissident since his arrest 
at 5:00 p.m. Friday afternoon (0900 GMT) some 20 kilometers (12 
miles) from Beijing, on his way back from an "enforced" 
four-week vacation outside the capital. 
  Tong Yi, Wei's secretary, said Monday by telephone that she 
had no idea where he could be, but ruled out the possibility 
that Wei would have left Beijing voluntarily without informing 
her. 
  Wei brother and sister seemed equally convinced he was not 
free. "If he had gone on vacation outside Beijing, he would 
surely have told me," his brother Wei Xiaotao said by telephone 
from the southern province of Guangxi. 
  The dissident's sister, Wei Ling, who works in Beijing, said 
she had had no sign of her brother's freedom since Friday, when 
he had been expected to return to the capital. 
  Wei Jingsheng, 43, had been detained for 24 hours in early 
March after making remarks critical of China's government during 
a meeting with U.S. Undersecretary of State for Humanitarian 
Affairs John Shattuck on February 27. Following the meeting 
police strongly urged him to leave the capital before the 
ensuing visit of U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher. 
  According to his brother, Wei "took a four-week vacation" in 
Dalian, northeastern China and in the eastern city of Qingdao, 
before trying to return to Beijing Friday. As the Chinese 
government's de-facto "public enemy number one," Wei spent 
nearly 15 years in prison for "counter-revolutionary activities" 
during the Democracy Wall period of 1978-79. He was freed on 
parole last September, six months short of completing his 
sentence. 
  Chinese authorities said this week he had been deprived of 
his political rights for three years and that he was therefore 
not allowed to meet foreign journalists or officials during this 
time. His feared "disappearance" comes as China prepares to 
honor its dead Tuesday on the traditional Qing Ming holiday. 
  The authorities appear to dread the prospect of dissidents 
seizing the occasion to commemorate those killed during the 
Tiananmen Square massacre in June, 1989. 
  A reporter for THE WASHINGTON POST was held for questioning 
for several hours Saturday after photographing the Beijing 
gravesites of several young pro-democracy activists who died in 
the massacre. 

