BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Abarinov report under the "Yugoslavia" rubric: </F>
"Russia Washes Its Hands. Have the Bosnian Serbs Lost Their 
Last Ally?"] 
  [Text] According to reports from confidential sources, the 
document drawn up at the Russian Foreign Ministry had a harsh 
tone: they in Moscow think that the Bosnian Serb leaders hold a 
clearly unconstructive stance aimed at destroying Muslim 
enclaves on the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the 
current situation Russia does not see any reason to continue its 
mediatory efforts. The reserves of goodwill have been exhausted. 
The world community cannot tolerate the incidents of downright 
aggression and genocide. From now on the coercion into peace 
holds the only chance to bring the situation back into a 
manageable and legitimate framework. This is how the 
president's statement should have sounded. Boris Yeltsin, 
however, limited himself to yet another appeal for peace 
addressed to the Bosnian Serbs and the world community. 
  It could not be taken for granted that the Russian 
president, 
who has repeatedly said that he will not allow the use of force 
in Bosnia, would sign the text of a diametrically opposed 
content. It is known, however, that the soldiers who were 
supposed to reinforce the Russian peacekeeping contingent in 
Sarajevo received an eleventh hour stand-down signal and are 
presently heading for the much more secure Croatia. The next 
step may involve a full evacuation of the Russian battalion from 
the area of Sarajevo. According to reports received by 
SEGODNYA, our soldiers, who were initially welcomed in an 
altogether friendly manner by the Serbs, now have found 
themselves in the position of invaders. Serb leaders have fully 
discredited themselves as responsible politicians, a trustworthy 
source said. Insinuations that Radovan Karadzic and General 
Granic cannot control the activities of field commanders are 
groundless. Evidently, we are witnessing a deliberate 
obstruction of any attempts to organize a constructive dialogue 
between the warring sides, a clear violation of undertaken 
obligations, the desire to impose on the international community 
the status quo that has come about as a result of territorial 
seizures that have not been authorized by anyone, presenting the 
world with a fait accompli. 
  Be that as it may, the Russian Foreign Ministry has fully 
lost faith in the possibility of an effective political dialogue 
with the Bosnian Serbs. The perfidy of our counterparts, the 
source said, is beyond description. The situation is 
reminiscent precisely of those as a result of which world wars 
were unleashed. The world community is facing a difficult 
dilemma. The possibilities of talks, however, have been fully 
exhausted. 
  There is still a question mark as to the stance of the 
Belgrade authorities, the Foreign Ministry source said. One is 
getting the impression that Yugoslav President Slobodan 
Milosevic has fallen victim to treachery by his own 
comrades-in-arms in Bosnia. It is quite possible, however, that 
he himself may be an accomplice in the treachery. In this case, 
there is no longer any point in any contacts with Belgrade at 
all. According to SEGODNYA's information, today the Russian 
Federation Foreign Ministry decided to recall to Moscow for 
consultations Gennadiy Shikin, Russian ambassador to the Union 
Republic of Yugoslavia. In terms of severity, this diplomatic 
demarche is second only to a break in diplomatic ties. 
  Thus Moscow has given the go-ahead to NATO's actions in 
Bosnia. 

