BFN 

<F P=106> [By Bruce Gilley] </F>
  [Text] The anti-piracy centre of the International 
Maritime Bureau (IMB) in Kuala Lumpur is about to issue a report 
on six incidents in which vessels were detained or boarded by 
Chinese patrol craft in the South China Sea over the past three 
months. 
  Four of the incidents have been acknowledged by Chinese 
authorities. 
  This represents a "quite significant" increase in piracy 
activity, an IMB official told Eastern Express. 
  China faces growing pressure from the United Nations to 
control piracy by its vessels, which has led to sometimes 
violent incidents from Japan to Indonesia. 
  In response, Beijing has stripped local maritime departments 
of the right to issue identification numbers for boats. 
  On Monday, China's three non-military departments involved 
in 
maritime affairs -- Public Security, Customs and Oceans -- began 
a centralised control of boat numbering, mainland maritime 
sources said. 
  Local bureaus of the departments will have to renumber 
existing fleets according to directions from their head office. 
  "We have taken back this function from the localities," an 
official of the National Bureau of Oceanography (NBO) said in 
Beijing. 
  "They can no longer just issue boat numbers as they please." 
  The inclusion of the Customs and Oceans departments in the 
clampdown appears to reflect a new worry that public security 
vessels are not the only source of official piracy. 
  The North Sea fleet of the NBO, based in Qingdao in Shandong 
province, operates only 12 vessels officially but "many more" 
have been sent to sea by other northern branches sporting 
numbers chosen at random, the official said. 
  This had caused "irregular" behaviour by some of the 
bureau's 
vessels, he said. 
  China's first admission of piracy came from the Ministry of 
Public Security (MPS) three weeks ago. 
  "Some departments not involved in anti-smuggling operations 
were prompted by personal interests to send their own men to 
sea, leading to a number of incidents in which foreigners were 
involved," Li Huan, a deputy director of the Ministry's Frontier 
Guard Bureau, said. 
  Li announced new measures "to counter the chaotic state of 
marine anti-smuggling operations". 
  He said coastguard boats, involved in marine security and 
anti- smuggling operations, would have to follow a nationally 
standardised code system. 
  This was apparently a reference to the system which took 
effect on April 1. 
  Li said MPS personnel would be issued with forgery-proof 
marine- patrol duty passes and would have to wear arm bands for 
identification purposes. 
  "The new and uniform identification system will help prevent 
other boats from going out to sea to hunt for smugglers while 
masquerading as Public Security border units," he said. 
  The forthcoming IMB report will detail four incidents of 
detention by official Chinese vessels in the Hong 
Kong-Luzon-Hainan triangle this year. 
  According to international law, official vessels should not 
halt foreign vessels more than 12 miles, or 19 kilometres from 
their coastline. 
  In one case, confirmed by the Chinese coastguard, the 
Panamanian- registered Alicia Starr was detained more than 475 
kilometres off the Chinese coast at the end of January. 
  China told the IMB the vessel was suspected of cigarette 
smuggling. 
  The bulk carrier Vlaherna evaded an attempted boarding on 
February 16 about 250 kilometres southeast of Hong Kong, 
although the identity of the pursuing boat is not known. 
  Six incidents had been confirmed in the whole South China 
Sea 
in the first three months of the year, compared with 17 for last 
year. 
  However, the IMB expected the number to rise "quite 
significantly" after receiving new information from the Hong 
Kong Marine Department recently. 
  Almost half of the 98 attacks detailed by Hong Kong 
authorities since September 1992 involve official Chinese 
vessels. 
  The Marine Department has been relaying information about 
suspected official piracy incidents to Guangdong authorities 
since last year. 
  However, the territory's shipping community has taken a low 
key approach with Beijing over the issue. 
  "China's problem is in the regions, so there's no point in 
embarrassing the centre," one Hong Kong shipowner said. 
  "We can just point out that all this activity is bringing 
them into disrepute in the international community," he said. 
  The chairman of the Hong Kong Shipowners Association, C.C. 
Tung, said the Chinese government was taking the matter more 
seriously following a visit to Beijing by a United Nations 
maritime safety official last month. 
  "They are in no way condoning these activities," he said. 
  The issue was likely to be raised with Chinese officials 
during a meeting of the Asian Shipowners Forum in Beijing next 
month, Tung said. 
  Russian officials protested last June after the vessel 
Kovdor 
was pursued by a Chinese-flagged speed boat 150 kilometres 
southeast of Shanghai. 
  "At a short distance from the Kovdor, the sailors began to 
demonstratively put on the uniform of the Chinese frontier 
guards," the Russian navy press office said. 
  It is understood the safety committee of the UN 
International 
Maritime Organisation will next month consider plans to set up 
its own antipiracy centre. 

