BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on an "exclusive" interview with PLO Executive </F>
Committee Chairman Yasir 'Arafat by the AL-BILAD political 
editor in Amman; date not given] 
  [Text] Abu-'Ammar [Yasir 'Arafat], why are you here in 
Amman? I mean what is your agenda here in Jordan? I addressed 
this apparently provocative question to the Palestinian 
president, who came to Amman on a short working visit of less 
than 24 hours. He answered: I am always here. I got used to 
traveling. I am here in Amman based on a mutual desire on my 
part and on the part of His Majesty King Husayn. Hakam Bal'awi 
was told this when he visited Amman last week with a message 
from the Palestinian leadership. 
  I said: The press reported that Bal'awi's visit was a 
failure. 
  He replied: The press is hallucinating. Did you not hear 
brother Dr. 'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali's reply to the reporters who 
said Bal'awi's visit was unsuccessful? It was a successful 
visit crowned by his majesty's meeting with the Palestinian 
envoy. The envoy explained our view toward insisting on raising 
the question of Jerusalem within the context, and at the heart, 
of Security Council Resolution 904. Jordan has shown 
understanding of our position despite its previous reservations. 
I must note here King Husayn's efforts by contacting several 
Arab kings and presidents and President Clinton regarding this 
question to contain any complications. After all, we are 
working for the same cause. It is true that Jerusalem is the 
capital of Palestine. But it is also of interest to Arabs, 
Muslims, and Christians, since it is the cradle of Jesus Christ, 
the first of the two prayer directions, the third holiest 
shrine, and the destination of Prophet Muhammad's nocturnal 
journey. As King Husayn always says, there can be no peace 
without Jerusalem. It is the gate of peace. We will not and 
cannot abandon it. There is no one on earth who would bargain 
over Jerusalem. 
  [AL-BILAD] What was the result of your visit to Amman? 
  ['Arafat] Success, understanding, and continuation of our 
joint march in order to achieve what we are seeking. I agreed 
with King Husayn and the prime minister to intensify 
consultations and devise a better mechanism for our contacts. 
  [AL-BILAD] But the Jordanians and Palestinians this 
unfruitful formula of coordination, which is apparently 
inefficient. [sentence as published] This is clear in the 
differences in views that emerge. 
  ['Arafat] Our journey is long and we must have endurance, 
only impatient people get bored. I want to say that our cause 
is complex and is affected, more than other issues, by local, 
regional, and international factors. This is why our tactics 
appear to be contradictory. This might be true. However, the 
results we seek to achieve are the same -- removing the 
occupation and the return of security and stability to our 
region. This will happen after the Palestinian people, just 
like their brothers, secure their independence and freedom and 
establish their independent state. This state will have a 
special, equal relationship with Jordan to be defined by the two 
brotherly peoples through their legislative institutions or 
through a public referendum. This is what we are seeking. 
Anything said otherwise is merely conjecture. 
  [AL-BILAD] It is said that you want relations with Egypt 
that are stronger than relations with any other country. 
  ['Arafat] Why not? Egypt is an Arab country that has weight 
and influence, but this should not be at the expense of our 
relations with anyone else. Cairo today is a crossing point and 
mechanism [for implementing the Oslo agreement], and it has 
strong relations with Israel, the U.S. sponsor, and other 
parties, in addition to its role and status, so I have to 
benefit from it and from its role, which it is playing in the 
best manner. 
  I said to President 'Arafat: But there are some flaws in 
coordination with Jordan. 
  He replied by saying: This may be true, but it is not 
deliberate. The quick developments, the interlinking of courses 
and interests, and an important factor that we should not 
overlook -- the interference of third parties that have no 
interest in the Jordanian-Palestinian relations and 
understanding -- all contribute. This is seen in the press in 
Jordan and abroad. For example the visit to Jordan by Hakam 
Bal'awi. Published reports indicated that the visit was a 
failure although this was incorrect. So, in whose interest are 
such inaccurate reports published? I think you published 
reports that are different from what the others did. 
  I interrupted the president and said: Does this mean that 
you are acquainted with what AL-BILAD published? 
  He replied: Of course, I do not miss anything, including 
slander and charges of treason. I reply to those who make such 
charges by saying: O God forgive some of my people because they 
do not know, but some others, as I know, have motives, and a 
third group has motives for which they are paid. 
  Jordan, my brother, is a country that is unfairly treated, 
and I know the size of the pressure employed against it. Even 
wide sectors of Jordanians do not know the size of the pressure 
and temptations. When King Husayn was in Washington, they 
offered him billions to accept a peace treaty with Israel, but 
he refused. He is paying the price -- the price of his faith 
and principled position. 
  [[AL-BILAD] Are you optimistic about the future? 
  ['Arafat] I have no doubts about the future. I am a faithful 
man and I learned politics from history. As you know, history 
has a price, and he who studies the history of our people knows 
that our people have paid a high price represented in the best 
of their sons and leaders. The result of their sacrifices is 
the Israeli acceptance of the principle of withdrawal and 
settlement. Look around you. Everything is in Israel's favor: 
The international and Arab situation, the balance of power, and 
the sieges imposed upon us. All these things serve the 
objective of Grater Israel on all of Palestinian territories, 
but what happened changed that. Today we are restoring what we 
lost yesterday. We are not to blame for what we lost. There 
are several factors that forces these options. We are stubborn 
people and cannot relax until the occupation is over and until 
our people get their full rights to freedom and independence. 
God willing, this will be realized in stages. 
  At this point, the interview, which was interrupted several 
times, came to an end. President 'Arafat promised us of another 
broader and more comprehensive interview in spite of his 
reservations as a result of AL-BILAD's hostile attitude toward 
the Palestinian leadership as he put it. 
  We in AL-BILAD emphasize that there is no hostile attitude 
toward the Palestinian leadership. Our motives are the public 
interest and our respect for the profession, nothing more. 

