Participation 

<F P=102>   43070046A Tokyo TOYOTA TECHNICAL REVIEW in English Sep 93 pp 
6-13 -- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 43070046A </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo TOYOTA TECHNICAL REVIEW </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Kazumasa Nakamura, Yoshikazu Noguchi, Hideki </F>
Kusunoki, and Akihiko Nojima, Research &amp; Advanced Development 
Planning Div.] 
  [Text] Research work on intelligent vehicles utilizing 
communication and control technologies have been promoted. Goals 
and objectives of its concept are to reduce congestion, increase 
traffic efficiency, improve safety and reduce environmental 
impacts. Operational test named Vehicle Information and 
Communication System (VICS), in which Toyota participates and 
plays a leading role is now about to start in Japan. In the 
U.S., lots of area-wide projects including large scale field 
tests have also been planned and deployed under the 
participation from public/private/academic sectors. While in 
Europe, PROMETHEUS and DRIVE projects are now running in the EC 
domain. 
<H5>  1. Introduction </H5>
  In Japan, experiments dealing with road information and 
traffic control system has been conducted since 1973 under the 
auspices of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry. 
Viability of this technology, which has exerted tremendous 
influence worldwide, is studied by VICS, a project that has been 
set up to use the public tests of the Ministry of Construction's 
Road Automobile Communication System (RACS) and the National 
Police Agency's Advanced Mobile Traffic Information and 
Communication System (AMTICS), and that is run jointly by these 
two government bodies the Ministry of Posts and 
Telecommunications. [as published] 
  In Europe, development of ALI started up in the 
mid-seventies, and a large-scale test, called ALI-SCOUT, was 
carried out in Berlin in 1987. International research projects 
within Europe were established with PROMETHEUS, launched in 
1986, and DRIVE, begun in 1988. In the States in 1987, the 
research team Mobility 2000 was formed as a voluntary group from 
academics, federal and state transportation officials, and 
representatives of the private industries. This group set up the 
foundations of IVHS America (the Intelligent Vehicle Highway 
Society of America), established in 1991. 
<H5>  2. Trends in Development Projects in Japan </H5>
  In the field of road traffic information and traffic 
control, 
a project called Comprehensive Automobile Traffic Control System 
(CACS) was begun back in 1973, and AMTICS and RACS tests 
verified that dynamic route guidance could lead to lower 
congestion. In the area of automatic driving, a vehicle was 
driven automatically at 100 km/h in 1967, and further R&amp;D has 
been done since then. The following paragraphs outline the 
principal projects in which Japanese ministries and agencies are 
involved. 
  2.1 VICS (Vehicle Information and Communication 
System) 
  The VICS Promotion Council was established in 1991 by 
representatives of the National Police Agency; the Ministry of 
Posts and Telecommunications; the Ministry of Construction; 
three extra-departmental bodies, namely the Japan Traffic 
Management Technology Association, the Research &amp; Development 
Center for Radio Systems, and the Highway Industry Development 
Organization; and over 200 corporations and organizations from 
the private sector. 
  The purpose of VICS was to provide road traffic information 
that would lead to greater safety, smoothing traffic flow and 
preservation of the environment. 
  The system can supply information on congestion, accidents, 
regulations, and parking space. This is expected to result in 
reduced driving confusion, the elimination of unnecessary 
traffic and well distributed traffic flow. Demonstration tests 
are planned to be carried out in Tokyo during 1993. Toyota is 
playing some of central role in this project, and its staffs 
hold the positions of Representative Promoter, Vice-chairman, 
and Chairman of the Steering Committee. 
  2.1.1 Architecture of VICS 
  Figure 1 illustrates the architecture of VICS. It is made up 
of four areas: information collection, editing and processing, 
communication media, and in-vehicle equipment. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-012L-81A>      Figure 1. VICS Architecture (Source: VICS Promotion Council) </FIG>

  (1) Information collection: Congestion, accident and 
temporary regulation information is collected in realtime by 
vehicle detectors and ITV cameras and transmitted to the VICS 
center. 
  (2) Editing and processing: The VICS center edits and 
processes the received information and passes this on to the 
media. 
  (3) Communication media: Three media are being planned 
currently. 

  -  Beacon: This would send traffic information to vehicles 
passing directly beneath the transmitter erected on the roadside. 
  -  FM &amp; Multiplex broadcast: Codified traffic information is 
combined and transmitted in conventional broadcasts. Information 
could be supplied over a comparatively wide area of 30 km in 
diameter. 
  -  Teleterminal: This would perform two-way communication over 
an 
area of 3 km in diameter. This is now planned for testing on a 
commercial base now. 

    (4) In-vehicle equipment: Three types of in-vehicle 
equipment 
are being studied. 

  -  Map display type: Displays congestion information and 
parking space information superimposed on a detailed map drawn 
by the in-vehicle map database. 
  -  Simple diagram display type: Does not have an in-vehicle map 
database, but displays simple diagrams and text. 
  -  Text display type: Displays text and symbols. 

    2.2 ARTS (Advanced Road Traffic System) 
  With the 21st century near at hand, feasibility studies are 
underway for a road traffic system having new functions suitable 
to the next generation of roads. Research and development is 
being propelled by HIDO, the Ministry of Construction's 
extra-departmental arm, and associated private corporations. 
  The working groups of ARTS are the Vehicle Headway Control 
System Working Group, LCX (Leakage Coaxial Cable) Working Group, 
and Guidelight System Working Group. These groups are engaged in 
an extensive range of R&amp;D covering display and warning of 
surrounding vehicle positions, warning of on-coming vehicles, 
and continuous infrastructure-vehicle communication technology. 
  Here too, Toyota participates in the ARTS committees, 
technical sub-committees, and working groups. 
  2.3 SSVS (Super Smart Vehicle System) 
  The Association of Electronics Technology for Automobile 
Traffic and Driving (JSK) was commissioned by the Mechanical 
Social Systems Foundation to collaborate with interested private 
corporations on studying 21st century traffic and transportation 
systems that will incorporate dramatically advancing 
technologies in the fields of information communication, image 
processing, and electronic control. 
  From early in 1992, the following representative systems 
have 
been studied. 
  (1) Cooperative Driving System 
  Aims at safety for the vehicle group and smooth travel 
through vehicle to vehicle communication. 
  (2) Control Configured Vehicle System With Ultra-Little 
Vehicles 
  Aims at easing traffic jams by having ultra-little vehicles 
travel in groups. 
  (3) Active Driver Assistance System for Avoiding Emergencies 
  Aims to enhance safety by supporting the driver at each 
stage 
from offering information services through to automatic driving 
services. 
  (4) Advanced Intelligent Intersection System 
  Aims to make traffic safer and more streamlined by providing 
information, warnings, and traffic flow control at intersections. 
  (5) Intelligent Logistics Information System 
  Aims to improve logistics efficient and less labor-intensive 
by means of an intelligent control system using an integrated 
information network. 
  (6) Intelligent Situation-Recognizing System 
  The common underlying technologies for image processing, 
sensors and the above systems are being studied. 
  At the moment, studies are being conducted with the view of 
making specific project proposals, and Toyota staffs are taking 
part either as leaders of working groups or as committee members. 
  2.4 Research Committee on Provision of Expressway 
Information 
  In 1990 the Japan Highway Public Corporation commissioned 
the 
Express Highway Research Foundation of Japan to collaborate with 
concerned private corporations in studying technical directions 
of ``new information systems'' and ``automatic driving systems'' 
that are expected to be incorporated in expressway facilities in 
the 21st century. 
  The study group includes the Automatic Driving Subcommittee, 
the Driving Support Subcommittee, and the Vehicle Communication 
Subcommittee. Toyota participates in both the Automatic Driving 
and the Driving Support Subcommittees. The Automatic Driving 
Subcommittee studies concepts for automatic driving systems for 
expressways. The Driving Support Subcommittee is looking into 
obstacles and route abnormality warning systems, surface 
condition warning systems, poor visibility relief systems, side 
wind warning systems, and systems to supplement the driver's 
physical functions. 
  2.5 ASV (Advanced Safety Vehicle) 
  In 1991, the Regional Traffic Office of the Ministry of 
Transport formed a project team together with experts and 
interested automobile manufacturers to carry out research over a 
five-year period. The project is testing an ASV with the view of 
working out future safety measures. In addition to conventional 
technologies, the project is applying electronic control 
technologies in carrying out (1) preventive safety measures for 
normal traveling, (2) accident avoidance measures, (3) measures 
to mitigate the harm caused by collisions, and (4) measures to 
prevent secondary damage. 
  From 1992 through 1995 the project is building and 
evaluating 
prototype vehicles, and intends to expedite development of 
safety technologies. Toyota is also involved in planning and 
developing the ASV. 
<H5>  3. Trends in the U.S. </H5>
  In the late sixties, the Experimental Route Guidance System 
(ERGS) was developed under the auspices of the Department of 
Transportation. This system used loop antennas buried beneath 
the road surface to perform digital communication, providing 
vehicles with guidance on how to proceed to optimum routes to 
reach their destinations. This project was studied in theory 
only, and did not go as far as actual tests. Nevertheless it was 
a world pioneer in the field of vehicle information 
communication systems. 
  Following this project, attention turned to resources for 
extending and repairing highways. The expressway network that 
covered the entire nation made a tremendous contribution to 
America's economic progress. Meanwhile, there was a blank in the 
development of vehicle traffic/driving systems. Around the 
mid-eighties, problems of congestion, accidents, and pollution 
began to emerge in most regions. Clearly, further extension of 
roads was both financially and environmentally unsound, and the 
development of traffic systems was seen to be of increasing 
importance. 
  Birth of IVHS America (Intelligent Vehicle Highway 
Society of America) 
  Whether in terms of industry or academia, vehicle 
traffic/driving systems occupy a wide-ranging and vast 
territory. As well as the technologies in the fields of traffic 
engineering, civil engineering, mechanics, electricity and 
electronics, control, and information, the subject involves 
human factors and legal matters, and it has other facets because 
of its connection with traffic economics and traffic policies. 
These characteristics necessitate an organization with enough 
punch to provide general coordination for the entire field. The 
progress of projects in Japan and Europe involving industry, 
government and academic sectors served as a major stimulus, 
added to which there was a fear that U.S. industry would be left 
behind. Hence, in September 1988, Congress requested the 
Department of Transport to report on IVHS activities in America. 
Leaders of independent R&amp;D efforts in the various states 
banded 
together to form a voluntary organization of representatives 
from industry, government, and academia. 
  This was called ``Mobility 2000.'' As a result of many 
meetings, it analyzed the feasibility and benefits of technical 
areas, and summed up the importance and necessity of embarking 
on IVHS research and development. Largely on the basis of these 
results, the Department of Transport submitted a general report 
to Congress. Ultimately, the activities of Mobility 2000 
blossomed into IVHS America. 
  In December 1990, IVHS America was inaugurated as a 
committee 
composed of members from the industrial, government and academic 
ranks, charged with the task to engage in R&amp;D and educational 
activities related to IVHS technologies. In March of the 
following year, it was authorized as a Federal Advisory 
Committee for the Department of Transportation. 
  Objectives of IVHS America 
  The activities of IVHS America are as follows: 

  -  Advises the Department of Transportation with regard to 
IVHS plans. 
  -  Devises targets and plans for IVHS. 
  -  Promotes IVHS R&amp;D. 
  -  Engages in support activities for the preparation and 
decision 
to deploy IVHS. 
  -  Tackles administrative and institutional matters. 
  -  Coordinates international cooperation. 
  -  Tackles the setting of standards and uniformity. 
  -  Releases information concerning IVHS. 
  -  Proposes reform policies concerning central and regional 
jurisdictional matters. 
  -  Decides the architecture and role of the system. 

    Organization of IVHS America 
  Figure 2 [not reproduced] illustrates the organization of 
IVHS America. Members number upward of 500, counting corporate 
and individual members. Basically, industrial-university 
interests take the lead in conferences and committees, with the 
government assuming the office and secretarial roles. As the 
figure shows, there are 11 technical committees. 
  These meet several times a year to map out the plans and 
progress of the research and development for which they are 
responsible. Particularly influential are the committees working 
on developing systems, especially the Advanced Traveler 
Information Systems (ATIS), Advanced Traffic Management Systems 
(ATMS), Advanced Vehicle Control Systems (AVCS), and Commercial 
Vehicle Operations (CVO). Committees dealing with safety/human 
factors and legal issues check these aspects from the viewpoint 
of human engineering, the law and the social structure, and 
study ways obtaining consensus. The Advanced Public 
Transportation Systems (APTS) were added recently for the 
purpose of attaining efficiency including organic linkage 
between vehicles and public traffic systems. The committee 
line-up is completed with a special touch, the Benefits, 
Evaluation, and Costs Committee. 
  The task of clinching the roles for IVHS is taken on by 
subcommittees. These are the Strategic Planning Subcommittee, 
International Liaison Subcommittee, and Informational 
Clearinghouse and Editorial Review Subcommittee. 
  Operations of IVHS America 
  IVHS America was given an impressive kickoff when, in 
December 1991, the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency 
Act authorized a six-year budget of $155 billion, of which a 
$660 million, six-year budget was allocated for R&amp;D. Congress 
directed the Department of Transportation to submit a 
``Strategic Plan for IVHS in the United States.'' In June 1992, 
in response to the request from the Department of 
Transportation, IVHS America set out a strategic scenario for 
R&amp;D covering time spans of 5, 10, and 20 years, and plans for 
proceeding with and deploying IVHS. It has been acting 
vigorously since then. The following November it submitted the 
1994-95 Tactical Plan based on the strategic plan. This 
delineated the order of priority for R&amp;D and field tests, as 
well as requests for funding. 
  In the realm of international cooperation, IVHS America has 
been no less energetic, visiting Europe and Japan to observe how 
other nations are going about their R&amp;D and seeking technical 
and human resources exchange. In Japan, the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry (MITI) noted this trend, and 
set about plans for interchange of IVHS America people, for 
information exchange, and for international activities that 
would set the stage for standardization. 
  Toyota's Participation in IVHS America 
  Toyota was a corporate member of IVHS America from the 
outset, and collaborates with TTC, TMCS and the U.S. Toyota 
Group companies in having seats on all the various technical 
committees, making diverse proposals and providing technical 
cooperation, and positively contributing to international 
interchange activities. Further, this Spring, Toyota cooperated 
in sending a Japan Fellow from the JSK to work in the IVHS 
America office, and also began committee activities and 
information exchange. 
  The following sections introduce some of the experimental 
projects involving basic research by traffic and transportation 
research institutes of leading universities, information 
communication systems developed mainly by private industry, and 
guidance from state authorities. 
  3.1 Pathfinder Project 
  Between Los Angeles and Santa Monica runs one highway and 
five parallel general roads. This project was begun for the 
purpose of resolving the chronic highway congestion here, by 
using information communication technology to send appropriate 
information to drivers and to control traffic overall. 
  This project is operated by the Californian State 
Transportation Committee and the California Department of 
Transportation. It has a budget of around $40 million. Different 
means of transmitting information to the driver are being used, 
such as traffic information services via radio broadcasts and 
telephone, communication from the roadside infrastructure to the 
vehicle's navigation system, and changeable message boards. The 
experiment has now entered Phase III. 
  3.2 Guidestar Project 
  This is a large-scale experiment covering a 250-mile highway 
stretching between the twin cities of Minneapolis and Saint Paul 
in Minnesota. The project aims to reduce congestion and 
accidents and to improve mobility by providing traffic control 
and traffic information. 
  The project is run by the Federal Highway Agency (FHWA), the 
Minnesota State Department of Transportation, and the Minnesota 
University Traffic Research Center. Currently the experiment 
covers an array of services including information on congestion 
status and the shortest route to the driver's destination, 
online control of high-speed lamps and interchanges, and 
realtime processing for accidents. 
  3.3 TravTek Project 
  TravTek is the name of a field test in Orlando, Florida 
(home 
of Disneyworld) offering travel information, traffic 
information, route guidance and other driver service information. 
  In this test, a traffic control center offers realtime 
information via digital data broadcasts to 100 rental cars 
equipped with in-vehicle devices that can display the following 
information: 

  -  Map information and text information on locations of 
traffic congestion, accidents and construction, as well as other 
services. 
  -  Route guidance by means of simple symbols such as directional 
arrow 

    This spring marks the end of the one-year test. The system 
is 
now being evaluated and improved. 
<H5>  4. Trends in Development Projects in Europe </H5>
  In Europe, from 1979 through 1982, the Autofahrer Leitund 
Informations System (ALI) developed by Volkswagen and Blaupunkt 
was tested on the German autobahn. ALI was a route guidance 
system using an induction loop for infrastructure-vehicle 
communication and measuring traffic flow. Later, ALI merged with 
the Siemens-developed AUTOSCOUT, which used infrared ray 
communication. The new ALI-SCOUT implemented full-scale tests in 
Berlin in 1991. 
  In Europe, the all-embracing R&amp;D project for vehicle 
traffic/driving systems was PROMETHEUS, promoted by a group 
representing most European car manufacturers. It has been 
succeeded by DRIVE, a project promoted by the EC. 
  PROMETHEUS and DRIVE conduct R&amp;D of European unified 
traffic 
and driving systems from the standpoints of the vehicle and 
infrastructure respectively. These projects are planning and 
implementing deployment experiments currently. In 1991, the 
European Road Transport Telematics Implementation Co-ordination 
Organization (ERTICO) was established as a nonprofit, 
pan-European organization to promote deployment tests of the 
R&amp;D 
results of such projects as PROMETHEUS and DRIVE. ERTICO aims to 
propel these projects along by promoting such activities as 
liaison among concerned parties, legal issues, funding, and 
forming friendly public opinions. 
  4.1 PROMETHEUS (PROgraMme for a European Traffic with 
Highest Efficiency and Unprecedented Safety) 
  PROMETHEUS was begun by the European automotive industry, 
merging with the EUREKA project in 1986. 
  In 1986, 19 automobile manufacturers, 56 electronics 
manufacturers and 115 basic research institutes had joined the 
project and were making research proposals. In the 1989 research 
phase, its annual budget was 90 MECU, two-thirds of which was 
borne by private industry. The remaining third was supplied by 
the various governments. 
  PROMETHEUS aims to develop an accident avoidance system to 
reduce accidents, a superior traffic information system to 
reduce fuel consumption, noise, and exhaust, and a 
state-of-the-art information system to improve traffic flow. 
  In the PROMETHEUS approach, a vehicle is one element in the 
traffic system, and the in-vehicle and infrastructure 
information technology are to be developed together. When the 
traffic infrastructure for all Europe is completed, it is 
predicted that road safety will improve by 30 percent and that 
traffic will become 20 percent more efficient. In September 
1991, the results of PROMETHEUS research were put through a 
demonstration test in Torino, Italy. The details are outlined 
below. 
  Vision Enhancement 
  This function provides the driver with visual information 
about the scenery and road conditions. Ultraviolet illumination 
is used to light up traffic signs, pedestrians, and vehicles. 
Research is looking into displaying images taken by a near 
infrared camera to warn of danger, displaying thermal images of 
pedestrians taken by a far infrared camera, and 
``head-up-display'' in which the scene the driver sees is 
overlapped with the image acquired by the sensor (for night and 
foggy scenarios). 
  Ultraviolet and infrared rays do not dazzle the occupants of 
the oncoming vehicle, and yet it enables vision that is 
unattainable by normal illumination. 
  Lateral Control 
  This function detects the lane clearly marked on the road, 
and either gives a warning or corrects the steering when the 
driver's attention slackens so much that the vehicle is about to 
veer out of the lane. 
  Collision Avoidance 
  Multiple sensors detect the conditions in front of the 
vehicle, and control the axle, break, and handle. 
  Microwave radar, laser radar, TV camera and image processing 
technologies are being studied as means of recognizing the 
surrounding conditions. Through vehicle to vehicle 
communication, vehicle movements can be mutually adjusted, and 
information communicated. The collision avoidance technology may 
be used in the short term for warning. 
  Cooperative Driving and Emergency Warning 
  Medium-range road information can be exchanged through 
intervehicle and vehicle-infrastructure communication, so that 
accidents ahead can be reported to police, ambulance and 
following traffic, and collisions can be avoided. 
  Autonomous Intelligent Cruise Control 
  When no vehicle is detected ahead, this function works like 
an ordinary cruise control. When a vehicle is detected, it 
switches to distance control. The sensor used is similar to the 
collision avoidance sensor described above. This control does 
not include the steering wheel, but controls the axle and break. 
  Commercial Fleet Management 
  A European unified information chain is to be created to 
enable improved transport planning, lower unused cargo space, 
monitor valuable and dangerous cargoes, and improve emergency 
reporting procedures. The system will enable position 
determination, and communication of traffic information and 
freight service messages. 
  Dual Mode Route Guidance System 
  This system provides route guidance by using realtime 
traffic 
information. Currently, media being studied for communicating 
the traffic information include FM multiplex, digital cellular 
phone, and roadside beacon. 
  Travel Information Services 
  Travelers will be provided with public transport 
information, 
as well as information and booking services for Park &amp; Ride 
facilities. Travel information will be available at home, the 
office, public terminals, and in the vehicle, and technologies 
employed will include FM multiplex, telephone, and Videotex. 
  4.2 DRIVE (Dedicated Road and Infrastructure for 
Vehicle safety in Europe) 
  Underwritten by the EC, DRIVE is one of the EC R&amp;D 
programs 
aimed at strengthening the international competitiveness of 
European industries. The purpose of DRIVE is to build a uniform 
European traffic infrastructure. DRIVE has been given stimulus 
by the research into vehicle traffic/driving systems carried out 
in different countries, such as the PROMETHEUS project. Its 
establishment was announced in 1987, and it was launched 
formally in 1988. With 71 projects being funded, its budget is 
around 60 MECU. 
  DRIVE works on R&amp;D into traffic information 
technologies, 
evaluation of strategic options, and proposals for 
standardization. 
  Technical Fields Studied by DRIVE 
  DRIVE is studying project deployment in the fields listed 
below, from the viewpoints of social, legal and institutional 
issues. 

  -  Dynamic route guidance using cellular phones 
  -  Prototypes of automatic tolling systems 
  -  Prototype of digital maps 
  -  Prototypes of all types of traffic control systems 
  -  Incorporation of route guidance in traffic control systems 
  -  Reduction of air pollution through communication systems 
  -  Management of commercial freight operations 

    The original DRIVE project was wound up in 1992, and was 
succeeded by DRIVE II, which is being implemented between 1991 
and 1994. The activities of DRIVE II fall into three types, 
being deployment strategies for system engineering in the 
Advanced Transport Telematics (ATT) field, technical research, 
and evaluation of pilot projects. Topics covered by DRIVE II 
research include the following: 

  -  Demand Management 
  -  Traffic and Travel Information 
  -  Integrated Urban Traffic Management 
  -  Integrated Inter-urban Traffic Management 
  -  Driver Assistance &amp; Cooperative Driving 
  -  Freight &amp; Fleet Management 
  -  Public Transport Management 

<H5>    5. Conclusion </H5>
  In the 1970's, such projects as Japan's CACS and West 
Germany's ALI were at the stage of detecting traffic flow and 
optimizing control of traffic lights, and gave guidance to 
vehicles in an overall effort to improve traffic flow. 
  In the latter half of the eighties, Europe had two major 
projects underway, the manufacturer-oriented PROMETHEUS and the 
government-led DRIVE, in readiness to build an all-Europe 
uniform traffic communications environment. 
  These movements prompted the U.S. interests to form Mobility 
2000, out of which grew IVHS America, a project devoted to 
comprehensive development and demonstration test strategies. 
  The Japanese projects and IVHS America have been influenced 
by the fact that PROMETHEUS offers in-vehicle control in 
addition to traffic information, route guidance, and traffic 
management. 
  Thus, the Japanese, American and European projects have 
proceeded with their R&amp;D and demonstration tests while 
keeping 
an eye on developments elsewhere, and it appears that we are 
about to witness a tremendous surge in the role of intelligent 
functions in vehicles and traffic infrastructure. The automobile 
is a global product, and we must try to increasingly supply 
excellent products at low cost, as well as prevent user 
confusion caused by differing operation methods. To this end we 
need to standardize the systems worldwide in the early stages 
through automobile manufacturers, infrastructure manufacturers, 
governments and academicians cooperating on a global scale to 
map out the system construction. 

