BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 12 (CNS) -- A rising securities market 
and its potential for further exploitation in China have aroused 
the attention of many foreign companies asking for the issuance 
of their shares in the Chinese securities market. The market, 
however, has not yet been opened to foreign companies. 
  The Chairman of the China Securities Committee, Mr Liu 
Hongru, speaking at a confrence on international economic 
affairs held in Beijing said that securities had so far been 
closed to foreign investors mainly because a number of 
preparations have yet to be made including the formulation of 
laws and regulations to govern the listing of foreign companies 
in China. The committee has also to make sure which kind of 
accounting practice is to be employed by foreign companies when 
they are listed in China. Another main point the committee has 
to consider is what kind of foreign companies are qualified for 
listing in China and the supervision of these companies once 
they are listed. 
  Mr Liu stressed that the most important point lay in solving 
the capital problem under circumstances where the renminbi has 
not yet become a convertible currency and the control of foreign 
exchange is still in place in China. Should the renminbi 
possessed by a foreign company or investor not be converted, it 
would lose significance for the floating of shares by a foreign 
investor in China. 
  Seen from the long run, Mr Liu said that the securities 
market and other commodity markets would open to the outside 
world. China is now considering seriously all proposals raised 
by foreign companies. 
  As for the merging of "A" shares and "B" shares, Mr Liu 
noted 
that such a practice had to be based on the convertibility of 
the renminbi and also depended on share prices shown in the two 
markets when such a merging was going to take place. The 
development of the stock market will be centered on expansion of 
the issuance of "B" shares and on the boosting of its mobility 
in a bid to push forward its development. 
  China will continue to select some enterprises to be listed 
overseas, according to Mr Liu. There was the first batch of 
nine state-owned enterprises going abroad for issuance of "H" 
shares on a trial basis last year. About 22 more enterprises 
have been chosen for overseas listing on a trial basis this 
year. They, however, will no longer be listed in Hong Kong, but 
rather some of them will have their shares issued in the United 
States. 

