BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentator's article: "A Respectable 'Beam of Light'-- </F>
Praising PLA Soldier Jin Zhenghong"] 
  [Text] Jin Zhenghong is a volunteer in a People's 
Liberation Army [PLA] company. Unlike heroic soldier Xu 
Honggang who has performed magnificent feats, Jin Zhenghong has 
merely done some ordinary things which many people are able to 
do. However, each of these ordinary things is very touching and 
shines with extraordinary splendor. 
  Jin Zhenghong likened himself to "a beam of sunlight" and 
spared no effort in giving people his light and warmth. It 
shows that he is a man of noble character and with a strong 
sense of social responsibility. Starting with doing his own 
duties properly, he really spared no effort in giving people his 
light and warmth. What is particularly commendable is that 
during his 12 years of active service, he continuously did good 
things. He solved problems for others, mediated in disputes, 
and could still contribute his share magnanimously without any 
hesitation even when he was misunderstood by others, thus 
enabling him to stand up to any test. It is essential to work 
for ethical progress. We must upgrade the construction of 
socialist spiritual civilization to a new level and rely on 
everyone's concern and participation. Jin Zhenghong's good 
deeds only benefited some people but their positive influence is 
immeasurable. As far as the great undertaking of purifying our 
social atmosphere and upgrading our morals is concerned, we 
should lay special stress on the contributions made by this 
ordinary soldier! 
  Society comprises every specific individual. Our party also 
comprises every specific party member. The masses love and 
support the CPC precisely because the CPC's aim is to 
wholeheartedly serve the people and because tens of thousands of 
CPC members are bringing their light and warmth into play. 
Every citizen, and every CPC member, is required to play his 
own part in improving our party style and the general mood of 
society, creating good social ethics and atmosphere. Bits and 
pieces of floating clouds can still be found in a clear and 
boundless sky. Similarly, in our society, which is full of life 
and vitality, there are also a number of unsatisfactory 
phenomena in our party style and the general mood of society. 
It is quite natural that people should have complaints about 
this. Our Party and government attach great importance to this 
problem and are taking vigorous measures to solve it. It is 
necessary to rely on everybody's efforts to check and eradicate 
negative and corrupt phenomena. Leading cadres, and members of 
the CPC in particular, must take the initiative in this respect. 
What Jin Zhenghong has said is quite true: It would be better 
to kindle one's own flame first than to grumble at the poor 
social atmosphere. It would be better to do concrete work than 
to always bear resentment against anyone since the more doers 
there are, the less bystanders we have. Whether he is aware of 
it or not, everything Jin Zhenghong has done has educated and 
influenced people around him, like a "light breeze blowing in 
the night which soothes things silently." In our country, if 
everyone, like Jin Zhenghong, brings his "beam of light" into 
play, the construction of the two civilizations will advance to 
a new stage, new results will be achieved, the world will be 
warmer, and our society will become brighter. In this 
connection, Jin Zhenghong has really set an example of how to 
act as a citizen of the Republic and as a true CPC member. 
  We hope that more and more people in our society will follow 
the example of Jin Zhenghong. We hope that the lofty spirit 
presented by the deeds of Xu Honggang and Jin Zhenghong will be 
carried forward so that the sky of our motherland will be filled 
with warmer sunlight! 

