BFN 

<F P=106> [By Louis Ng] </F>
  [Text] The Government will not favour journalists when it 
allocates the 3,600 unfilled places in the final phase of the 
British Nationality Selection Scheme. 
  Legislator Emily Lau Wai-hing, a former journalist, asked at 
a Legislative Council nationality committee meeting yesterday 
whether the government would consider granting more British 
passports to journalists to allay fears triggered by the recent 
trial of reporter Xi Yang. Xi was sentenced to 12 years' jail 
by mainland authorities for "stealing state secrets," prompting 
vehement local protests. 
  News editors and journalists are among one of the more 
competitive occupational groups in the final phase of the scheme. 
  There have been 244 applications for the 45 places on offer 
in this category, which means fewer than one in five applicants 
can succeed. 
  Government statistics show that only 194 applications were 
received for the 3,811 "sensitive service class" places, leaving 
more than 3,600 places to be reallocated. Deputy Secretary for 
Security Keith Kwok Kakeung said the remaining allocations would 
be considered on a case-by-case basis. Mr Kwok said legislation 
stipulated that priority be given to those whose work was 
considered in the interests of the Hong Kong Government. He 
said it would be difficult for the Government to favour all 
journalists who applied. 
  The Government would have a clearer picture of the final 
allocations by the end of the year. Applications for the second 
phase closed on March 31, drawing 41,567 applicants for a total 
of 13,156 places. The first phase of the scheme began in 
December 1990 and ended on January 1, 1994. 
  Meanwhile, eight China-appointed Hong Kong affairs advisers 
have made a plea for the immediate release of Xi. They said the 
secret trial of Xi had infringed his lawful rights, dealt a 
heavy blow to public confidence in China's judiciary and 
deepened public worries and fears over press freedom. The eight 
are Anthony Cheung Bing- leung, Lee Kai-ming, Yuk Tak-fun, Lau 
Kong-wah, Hui Yin-fat, Chang Ka-mun, Frederick Fung Kin-kee and 
Vincent Cheng Hoi-chuen. 
  They have appealed in a letter to the director of the Hong 
Kong and Macau Affairs Office, Lu Ping, and Xinhua (New China 
News Agency) boss Zhou Nan. 

