Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Israel's Military Hurting Peace Prospects"] </F>
  [Text] Palestinian President Yasir 'Arafat expressed 
concern after the Hebron massacre, and rightly so, that the 
Israeli Army and settlers are conspiring to derail the peace 
talks. We had no doubt that the settlers would do something to 
kill the peace process. What surprises us is the army's attempt 
to do the same. 
  The army's actions in Lebanon, the West Bank and Gaza Strip 
speak for themselves. In Lebanon, the Israeli army reacted to 
attacks against army bases by shelling civilian centers in south 
Lebanon outside the so-called security zone. The result was the 
brutal and merciless murder and injury of children when Israeli 
army shells hit a school bus. Then the Israeli army dares to 
complain when Katyusha rockets fall on vacant land in northern 
Israel and threaten to react harshly, as if the damage and pain 
already done was not enough. 
  In the West Bank, the Israeli army fired rockets at a house 
in the heart of Hebron, allegedly in pursuit of armed 
Palestinian activists. For 18 hours, the army engaged the 
Palestinians and opened fire on them from all directions with 
the intention to kill. The severity of the shelling only proves 
that the army had no intention to take the Palestinians alive. 
Finally, after killing four activists and a pregnant mother 
sitting in her home, the army demolished the house. 
  All this happened while Hebron was still under curfew since 
the massacre at the Ibrahimi Mosque on Feb. 25. Every time the 
army lifts the curfew for a few hours, a young Palestinian or 
two is shot and killed by the military. The TV news clearly 
shows that the army opens fire and shoots at demonstrators all 
the time. It also shows children shot while running away from 
army bullets and not threatening anyone. So, they have no 
excuse to open fire at them. 
  The testimonies of ranking army officers at the Israeli 
Commission of Inquiry try to justify the army and the settlers' 
trigger-happy policy in the occupied territories. In reality, 
they only prove that the army has one mode of thinking: the gun 
is the only means of negotiating. 
  With Yitzhaq Rabin serving as Israel's prime minister and 
number one decision-maker, as well as serving as defense 
minister responsible for the army's actions, one is left to 
wonder what his real intentions are. If we assume his 
intentions are the same as his generals, then the peace process 
is in real trouble. It is then up to the civilian members of 
the Israeli Cabinet to correct this defect, if they are really 
interested in a peace settlement. 

