Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: ``Pakistan Has Full Capability in Nuclear </F>
Technology''] 
  [Text] The declaration by Dr. Ashfaq Ahmed, chairman of the 
Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission, that Pakistan is among the 
few countries in the world that have achieved effective 
capability in all fields of nuclear technology is highly 
reassuring. Pakistan has achieved self-sufficiency in uranium, 
and only locally-processed uranium is being used in nuclear 
power stations. Addressing the inaugural function of the second 
science conference at Aitchison College in Lahore, he disclosed 
that Pakistan is processing uranium by itself and making it 
usable. There are only a few countries that are self-sufficient 
in uranium. Most countries import uranium to meet their 
requirements, but Pakistan does not need to do so because it has 
its own uranium reserves. Uranium is a metallic element that is 
used as fuel in nuclear reactors or for producing energy. 
  Ashfaq Ahmed said that Pakistan has been successfully 
pursuing its nuclear program since 1976, and that Pakistani 
scientists do not receive any external assistance or cooperation 
in this regard. They are fulfilling their scientific duty by 
utilizing their own resources, which is a tremendous scientific 
achievement. Pakistani scientists and technologists have not 
allowed the shortage of funds to impede their work. They have 
built locally several major parts for a nuclear power plant that 
were previously imported, and have not let external impediments 
stand in the way of the smooth operation of their program. 
Pakistan's first nuclear power plant was supplied by Canada 
some 20-22 years ago, but due to international pressure it soon 
stopped supplying uranium, the fuel; heavy water; and spare 
parts. This was a great challenge for Pakistan, which our 
scientists accepted with great dexterity. They succeeded in 
keeping the plant operational by utilizing local resources. 
China is the only country that has provided a 300-kilowatt 
nuclear power plant, now being constructed at Chashma. 
  Dr. Ashfaq Ahmed said that we are capable of building 
nuclear 
power stations. Nuclear energy is indispensable for Pakistan. 
Pakistan has no option but to use nuclear technology to increase 
electricity production, because it cannot meet all of its energy 
requirements by utilizing such conventional energy production 
resources as water, oil, gas, and coal. The country is facing 
the difficulty of power blackouts due to the shortage of 
electricity. 
  The nuclear energy chief said there are 6,550 nuclear 
medicine centers in various countries around the world, of which 
nine are in Pakistan. Several of these centers will be set up 
in the country to help diagnose and treat complicated diseases. 
The private sector will be encouraged to play a role in this 
field as well. He added that nuclear technology is also being 
used in the agricultural field, and 18 new crop varieties have 
been discovered. Ashfaq Ahmed declared that Pakistan's nuclear 
program is solely for peaceful purposes. 
  Nuclear power plants generate 70 percent of the world's 
electricity. France meets 75 percent of its energy requirements 
with nuclear power plants. There are 424 nuclear power reactors 
in the world. Therefore, there is no reason why Pakistan should 
be asked to desist from utilizing nuclear technology to increase 
electricity production, improve health care facilities, and 
boost agricultural production. 
  As far as the question of rolling back the nuclear program 
is 
concerned, it is entirely a political issue, and the nuclear 
scientists have nothing to do with it. The Chashma nuclear 
power plant will start producing electricity in 1997-98. 
Pakistan needs several more similar nuclear power plants. If 
France had not refused to supply the nuclear reprocessing plant 
for enriching uranium, Pakistan would have been able to set up 
nuclear power stations by now. In any case, the country's 
future energy requirements can only be met through the 
establishment of nuclear power plants. 

