Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 14 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Vice-Premier 
Qian Qichen said here today that the differences between China 
and the United States can only be resolved through consultations 
and negotiations on an equal footing. 
  Qian, also foreign minister, made the remark while speaking 
to Chinese and foreign journalists prior to the conclusion of 
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher's four-day official 
visit to China. 
  Responding to a question about the differences between China 
and the United States, Qian quoted Christopher as saying that he 
had to implement the U.S. president's executive order and abide 
by the U.S. laws which link the human rights issue with the 
most-favored-nation (MFN) status. 
  "This is understandable," Qian said. However, "as the 
secretary of state is a lawyer, I told him that he must 
understand that neither the U.S. president's executive order nor 
U.S. laws are applicable to China. China has no obligations to 
implement them," Qian said. 
  "The differences between China and the United States can 
only 
be resolved through consultations and negotiations on an equal 
footing," he said. 
  On the MFN issue, Qian said that there are different views 
even in the United States. 
  U.S. business circles strongly support the continuation of 
MFN status to China, Qian said. But there is also opposition to 
its renewal. 
  China and the United States have a lot of common interests 
and they also have differences, he said. It is a fact. 
  China cannot become the United States, he said. It is 
impossible to ask China to accept what the U.S. sees as 
important, even so far as to become the same as the United 
States for the sake of developing trade. He said, then there 
would be no trade in the world at all, Qian said. 
  He said, "I believe Sino-U.S. trade will continue." 
  Answering a question about the impact of Christopher's visit 
on Sino-U.S. relations, Qian described the impact as "crucial." 
  He said he believed that, judging from the developing 
tendency of bilateral ties, both sides wish to implement the 
understanding reached between the heads of state of the two 
countries in Seattle last November. 
  "I believe that the U.S. secretary of state's China visit is 
aimed at resolving problems. The momentum for the development 
of Sino-U.S. relations will continue, although there are 
difficulties," Qian concluded. 

