Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, Feb. 3 (YONHAP) -- Russia does not accept 
some of North Korea's positions in connection with its nuclear 
development program, Russian Ambassador to South Korea Georgiy 
Kunadze said on Thursday. Kunadze, who arrived here last month 
to take up his new post, said in an exclusive interview with 
YONHAP news agency that North Korea is using its withdrawal from 
the nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) as a bargaining chip 
in negotiations with other countries and international 
organizations, a practice which he said is not acceptable. 
  Meanwhile, Kunadze said he believes that President Kim 
Yong-sam will visit Moscow this year as the president expressed 
a strong desire to do so when the envoy presented his 
credentials to Kim Tuesday. 
  "This coming June has great significance for being the fifth 
anniversary of Kim's visit to Russia in his capacity as an 
opposition leader," the Russian official said, indicating that 
preparations were being pushed for Kim's second visit to take 
place in June. 
  Kunadze said North Korea wants to be given special status 
for 
nuclear inspections, but Russia believes that Pyongyang should 
observe the obligations of NPT. 
  Russia wants to maintain constructive and rational relations 
with North Korea in order to expand trade while revising a 
logging agreement with Pyongyang to their mutual benefit, he 
said. Russia believes that North Korea, as a member of the 
international community, should be subjected to neither special 
treatment nor discrimination, he added. 
  Touching on repayment of loans from South Korea to the 
former 
Soviet Union and Russia, Kunadze said his country has the 
capability to repay but, according to an agreement between 
Russia and the Paris Club -- a group of Western creditor 
countries -- non-members of the club are not entitled to better 
status than club members in receiving repayment. Therefore 
Seoul, which is not a member of the Paris Club, unfortunately 
may be in a worse position to obtain repayment from Russia. He 
thus proposed that Koreans take a broader view of relations with 
Russia, not just focusing on this particular problem. 
  Asked about the possibility of Russia compensating the 
families of victims of Korean Air 007, which was shot down by 
Soviet fighters over Sakhalin in 1983, Kunadze said his 
government had disclosed many details of the incident last year 
and would continue to investigate in the future. 
  Russia does not believe the problem has been resolved 
completely, and thinks that other countries will unveil related 
information, he said. 
  The Russian Government attaches great importance to the 
Asia- 
Pacific region in its foreign policy, the ambassador said. He 
added that Russia fully supports the recent proposal by South 
Korean Foreign Minister Han Sung-chu on holding a security 
dialogue in the region. 

