CSO 

<F P=106> [Collection of essays: "An Investigative Report on China's </F>
Surplus Rural Labor Force; Exploring the Sources, Part VI -- 
What the Peasants Themselves Have To Say"] 
  [Text] This part was originally entitled 
"Developmental Plans For the Year 2000 For the Towns and 
Townships Where the Villages In This Report Are Located." But in 
the course of investigation, it was discovered that Gansu's 
Liufeng township where Xinzhuang village is located and 
Shandong's Guanfang Township where Liujiaguanfang is located had 
no plans. Jiangsu Province's Hengsheng Town where Guozi village 
is located only has a plan for the current term of the 
government (three years). Meanwhile by the year 1995, Hengsheng 
Town's total income is expected to reach 32.965 million yuan, 
49.1 percent more than in 1992. At the end of the Eighth 
Five-Year period, Goudun Town's GVIOA [Gross Value of Industrial 
and Agricultural Output] is expected to double that of 1993's, 
surpassing 600 million yuan. Jiangxi's Huangtugang town where 
Huxia village is located projects that by the year 2000, each 
village under its jurisdiction should have an income of 100,000 
yuan. 
<H5>  Huxia Village Branch Secretary Zou Chungen [6760 1504 2704] </H5>
Says: "Go And Take a Look First"--by reporter Lu Yuegang [4151 
6460 0474] 
  In discussing Huxia's future, the village branch secretary 
Zou Chungen said, "There is no stability without agriculture; 
there is no wealth without industry." 
  How is agriculture doing? 
  He said, "China's grain supply is still tight. The peasants 
don't want to see grain prices go up. We have an analogy: Grain 
is the water and industrial products are the boats, and if the 
water rises, the boats rise along with it, and how much money 
will truly end up in the peasants' hands? Moreover, the 
authorities want to see the per capita income increase every 
year. We have no sideline productions or industries in the 
village. How do we make our income go up? The authorities won't 
like the numbers we show them, and so we simply don't report 
anything and just stamp the village's seal and let them fill in 
whatever they want." (Note: According to the town party 
committee secretary, Du Shuiyuan, the higher authorities have 
asked the town for an 80-yuan increase in per capita income for 
1993, and the localities have asked for another 20 yuan, making 
it a total of 100 yuan. This is known as "talking strategy on 
paper--just words.") He is probably exaggerating. 
  "There is no wealth without industry." He said, "In here, 
even if we worked for free, investors would not come here to 
invest. Enterprises need electricity. We don't even have 
electricity to cook dinner, hull rice, or for a television set. 
Who is going to invest here? (Note: Every household in Huxia has 
electricity for lighting, but I was there for eight days, and 
lights were lit for only a few hours in all.) 
  "Agriculture can barely keep people warm and fed. We have 
surplus labor, but various constraining factors have kept us 
from setting up enterprises, and so we must ship out the surplus 
labor instead. But who wants them? We have strength but no place 
to spend it. Furthermore, the peasants here have no skill. 
Technical training requires investments. Who will pay? I figure 
that the village has more than 1,000 people and there are only 
four cement and tile setters, two carpenters, six bamboo 
weavers, one tailor, one blacksmith, and one barber. They total 
19 people, young and old. It is written in our Zou's Family 
Annals, `Only with a generation of talents can there be a 
generation of undertakings. A generation's undertakings rely on 
a generation of talents.' Where has our generation of talents 
gone? 
  Developing rural productive forces is easier said than done. 
We will have to take one step at a time." 
<H5>  Ping Yuanbiao [1627 0337 2871], President of Dagang's </H5>
Village Committee, Says, "First You Want To Leave, Then You Want 
To Come Home"--by reporter Dai Yuanzhi [2071 0337 2871] 
  Not far from the bridge in the heart of the village are the 
offices of Dagang's village committee and village branch party 
committee. The village's office on crackdowns, family planning 
committee, joint defense brigade and other village-level organs, 
and the radio station and health center are all located there. 
  Ping Yuanbiao, president of the villagers' committee, has 
been in office for only one month. He told this reporter that 
the village is within the Huanghuaihai Plains Planned 
Development Zone. Most of the village's low-lying paddy fields 
are susceptible to waterlogging. 
  He said that without sufficient labor input, each mu of land 
will be lucky to just break even. Today, the main approach is to 
diversify, like planting lake mulberry and raising ducks, sheep, 
pigs, and aquatic products and so on. Raising poultry earns more 
money than farming, and aquatic products make more money than 
poultry. The village has 446 households and 1,768 people. Each 
household has an average of 1 mu of mulberry. There are 250 mu 
of water for breeding aquatic products along the interior 
rivers, and there are plans for a 100-mu fishpond. Among the 
aquatic products, specialty products make the most money but 
require some input and special techniques. Labor export, 
however, requires little outlay and is one way for the village 
to get rich. 
  The village has a tradition of emphasizing education and 
learning. Since 1989, the village has raised funds for the 
schools each year. This reporter noticed that it has built a 
little pavilion for the elementary school and has given it land 
for a fishpond. An elderly man helped Ping Yuanbiao figure out 
that the village has produced five college students, two 
polytechnic school graduates, around 25 high school graduates, 
and 130-140 middle school graduates. 
  President Ping told me that in 1990, the village ran a 
70-80,000 yuan deficit, and today, it still has over 10,000 yuan 
in deficits. The village-run factory has shut down, and it now 
only has a few household-run factories. 
  The accountant has figured out that the village has 1,950 mu 
of land and 980 workers, nearly 600 of them work at home, in the 
farms, or engage in diversified management; more than 200 work 
elsewhere year-round; more than 100 hold temporary jobs. This 
still leaves around 80 surplus workers. 
  The village party branch secretary, Lao Xu, said that the 
village has more people than land, and even if they had more 
land, it wouldn't earn much. People are not enthusiastic about 
farming. More than 40 percent of those who leave the village are 
young people; they have had at least middle school education and 
with that they have more confidence in themselves. 
  President Ping took me on a bike-ride around the village. 
Chen Jiaxin [7115 1367 2450] has a family of four; no family 
member works outside the village. They have 12-13 mu of land, 4 
of which they use to plant cotton. Each year they raise 10 
chickens and four pigs, and their per capita net income is 500 
yuan. Wang Dengrong's [3769 4098 2837] family has one member 
working elsewhere; their per capita income is more than 600 
yuan. Chen Jiawang [7115 1367 3076] has a family of four; two 
are farmers and two are workers out-of-town, and their annual 
net income is 1,500 yuan higher. 
  It seems that besides letting the workers who are staying in 
the village grow more grain and cotton, they must let some of 
the surplus labor shift to diversified management, especially to 
breed specialty aquatic products, and meanwhile continue to 
export the remaining surplus labor. This probably is the main 
direction of the village leaders' future plans. Working for 
others is a way to escape poverty and attain wealth and 
accumulate funds for setting up enterprises in the future. It is 
also a way to explore future projects (including learning about 
information, technologies, management, raw materials, and sales 
channels). This is the village's guiding ideology for 
encouraging labor export. 
  But I was told that none of those who had left have 
returned. 
  On the morning of my departure, the landlord woke me up. The 
cock was crowing. Before I boarded the boat, I took one last 
look at the village. I hope one day some people will "return to 
cause a revolution here." Let Dagang, "a land where a cockcrow 
wakes three counties' people", rise up; let the villagers get 
rich even faster. 
<H5>  Xinzhuang Village's Branch Secretary Gong Wanfu [7255 5502 </H5>
4395] Says, "Cities Don't Belong Only to the City Folks"--by 
reporter Sun Kai [1327 0418] 
  "To tell the truth, those who go out to work as common 
laborer and suffer are people without ability, that is, they are 
us peasants. They can do nothing else and have no choice, so 
they must go to the city to do what other people are not willing 
to do in order to make a little money," said Gong Wanfu, 
Xinzhuang village's branch party committee. 
  "Things were terrible a few years ago. The village was so 
poor it couldn't even afford to buy a piece of paper and the 
people didn't have enough sorghum noodle to eat. It was at that 
time that we began exporting labor, and things began to improve 
slowly." 
  Gong said, "When I read the newspaper, sometimes they say 
that too many of our peasants go to the cities and create public 
security problems for the cities. Our own village people come 
back and say the same thing. I myself often go to town and feel 
the same way. This is a law enforcement problem. But I also feel 
that some city people tend to thumb their noses at the people 
from the villages. Actually, cities do not belong to the city 
folks alone. They are part of the state and belong to the 
village people too. Just like in our village, when the elder son 
repairs the house and the younger son moves in and later the 
elder son wants to move back into the house and the younger son 
is upset, but in fact it was the elder son who repaired the 
house and not the younger son." 
  "No matter how you look at it, city people do benefit more 
from the state. If you don't believe me, ask the state to repair 
the roads or build a theater or a park in our village so that we 
can be better than the city." Gong lit a cigarette and went on, 
"Xinzhuang village has money. We just don't want to show it. The 
shabbier a person looks, the richer he may be. The rich wear 
cheap clothes, and the poor wear good clothes. In my village, at 
least a dozen families have more than 100,000 yuan, at least a 
dozen have 50-60,000 yuan, and three or four families have 
200-300,000 yuan or 300-400,000 yuan. No less than a hundred 
families have 20-30,000 or 30-40,000 yuan. Believe it or not. I 
have no reason to exaggerate." 
  Gong said, "Village people don't like to show their wealth. 
They won't tell you the truth. They don't want to part with 
their money. They dont's eat good food or wear expensive 
clothes; some don't even go to the bank--they don't put the 
money in the bank but prefer to put it in a jar and bury it in 
the ground. They are different from city folks. City people who 
have some money will invest it or have fun. We village people 
have to work hard to earn our money, and we don't want to part 
with it." 
  "City people nevertheless are more cultured; they have 
experienced more and seen more. We in the village have our 
advantages. We can have fresh vegetables anytime; we have our 
own land to grow things, and we don't have to pay. It is just 
that we country people are kind of dumb, a bit shortsighted, and 
kind of narrow-minded." 
  In talking about his future plans, he said, "This village's 
future is fairly limited. There is less land and more people 
everyday. The village's own cement factory has shut down. We 
mainly have to turn to the outside." 
  "If we have nothing to do, we will fix the village roads and 
then add a large well. That is our plan for the next two years." 
<H5>  Liujiaguanfang's Village Branch Secretary Liu and President </H5>
Liu Say, "Not Enough Ways To Make Money."--by reporter Liu Jian 
[0491 1696] 
  Forty-eight-year-old Liu Jinghan [0491 2529 3352] returned 
to 
the village in the 1970's after serving in the army. A few years 
later he joined the party branch group and became secretary 
early last year. Liu Hengye [1854 0673], who was in his early 
20's in 1971 also joined the part branch at the same time and 
has been president of the village committee for more than a 
decade. 
  While I was interviewing them, the loudspeaker outside was 
broadcasting, "A few households have not paid their electric 
bills. Pay them now. You are fussing over a little electric 
bill. Don't fuss." 
  "We are in a most difficult time. The village debts will not 
be easily paid off. If we didn't have the cotton responsibility, 
it would have been easier. But we still have to plant this 
year's cotton. The village owes money for it, and the citizens 
don't feel like planting cotton. Isn't it terrible? In recent 
years, the higher authorities want the citizens to plant several 
things, and you will be fined if you don't. They insist that we 
plant yellow tobacco, and when the authorities come to procure 
the tobacco, they cheat at the scales. Secretary Li of the 
village party committee has personallly arrested some of them. 
This year, we still have to plant it. 
  Other matters such as fund collection and retention are 
better left unsaid. 
  Those not leaving the village but are staying home will have 
to depend on breeding and planting to make a living. Individual 
families may raise pigs or chickens. Growing crops doesn't pay 
and even if one makes some money, it is negligible. In the old 
days when we were learning from Dazhai, we weren't even allowed 
to leave the village. Those who moved about illegally would find 
their families being dragged to study lessons or even to the 
communes and fined. But in fact that had not stopped the people 
from moving. Not long ago, there was another round [of 
prohibitions]: Those who wanted to leave had to have a letter 
from the county government before they could purchase a train 
ticket. The railroads couldn't handle them all. In recent years, 
there have been no more attempts to stop the people. Anyone who 
wants to leave may leave. We neither encourage nor discourage 
them. Whoever makes the money is entitled to pocket the money. 
We have no sideline production, and the little bit of land is 
not enough for growing anything, and that is why people want to 
leave. Today, one may not see a young person in the village all 
day. Anybody who can leave have left. 
  Just say that there is a way to make money and the people 
will go crazy. Making a little money is better than none. But 
there are just not enough ways to make money. It is easier said 
than done. Tell me, where would one make money these days? 
  The biggest difference between today and the old days is 
that 
everybody is basically warm and fed today. Before the 
re-allocation of land, people mostly lived on yam stalks and 
didn't even have enough of that to eat. Each commune member had 
10-20 jin of wheat a year; some had to sell that in order to get 
more yam stalks. Today, most families' staple food is noodles. 
In the past, half the people who left the village left because 
they were hungry. Today, they leave for money. The people live 
one day at a time. In the long-run, they will only grow 
stronger." 
<H5>  Guozi Village's Branch Secretary Liu Bencheng [0491 2609 </H5>
2052] Says, "People Always Want To Move Up. Why Stop Them?"--by 
Mao Hao [3029 3185] 
  I interviewed Liu Bencheng, the village branch secretary, in 
a small grocery store at one end of Guozi village. 
  "To tell the truth, today, nobody wants to be a cadre. All 
the smart people have left the village. I am useless, and that 
is why I am standing around like a stick (a little humor here.) 
A few years ago, everybody kept their eyes on the steelyard 
(referring to their grain allotment). Today, with their ID 
cards, they can go anywhere they please. You can't even stop 
them. At first, we were willing to heed the authorities to stop 
the people. But then we figured, we couldn't solve their 
problems, so why stop them? People always want to move upward, 
just like water always flows downward. Want to tie them up? 
  To tell you the truth, my four sons and two daughters-in-law 
all work on the outside. They stay out for a month and can make 
enough to buy a year's grain. In 1984, when the system of 
setting farm output quota for each household was implemented, 
grain production doubled, which more or less ended the practice 
of reselling government-procured grain to feed the people, but 
it was still impossible to rely on agriculture to make the 
people well-off. We tried. In 1990, I made a come-back and was 
determined to do something big. That winter, the village people 
planted an average of 600 mulberry trees per person and 
instantly increased the number of sheets of paper with silkworm 
eggs from 27 to 265. The county's silkworm and mulberry work 
committee was started here. The entire county came to tour the 
village. Impressive enough for you? But when they came to 
collect the cacoons, the silkworm stations refused to buy up 
everything. The contracted price of 9 jue per jin had to be 
lowered to 7 jue. The procurement was completed later only when 
urged by the town's party committee and the town government. 
They still owe us 4,800 yuan today. The people were upset. Last 
year, there were attempts to destroy the mulberry trees. 
  To be fair, we can't blame it all on the silkworm stations. 
When it comes to farm work, we are dependent on nature. That 
year, the village people who sold mulberry and cacoons made 150 
yuan per person, which was not bad. But at year-end, those who 
had left the village to work came home (people left en masse 
beginning in 1989,) and upon figuring and comparing the numbers, 
that little bit of income came to less than one-tenth of what 
the others made on the outside. People who have left in recent 
years are coming back with their wives to build new houses. Now, 
that is heavy stuff. We can't measure up. 
  In my experience, working on the outside won't last. Things 
will change later. Everybody is out there trying to make a 
bundle while they still can, and if you are stupid enough to 
stick around the farm, you will regret it later. Today, many 
young people don't even come home for Spring Festival. They are 
afraid that they may not be able to find work later. The kids 
are having a tough time out there. I know. Well, there is 
nothing good about the peasants except that they can endure 
hardship. I encourage every young person in the village to get 
out there to see the world. That is why I always issue a permit 
to anyone who asks. 
  Of course, the draining of manpower is not without its 
problems. I am a village branch secretary. `Deceiving those 
above me and bullying those below me' is an honest day's work (a 
little humor here). But I feel that like it or not, it is 
already a fact that most young workers have gone out to find 
work; we can no longer pretend that we don't know about it. But 
we need clear regulations on issues such as the transfer of 
contracted land. The kind of private negotiation we have going 
on today is not a solution. I always feel that working for 
others out there is not a permanent solution. The young people 
will come back home. If Gouzi village really wants to get rich, 
it must have its own township enterprises. 

