Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The list of vice-speakers and Duma committee 
leaders, agreed with the Duma Council, which comprised the House 
Chairman and faction leaders, was endorsed on Monday in a single 
"package". 290 Duma members voted for the list 63 voted against 
and 8 members abstained from voting. 
  Most posts of committee chairmen (5) were secured by the 
Liberal Democratic faction (led by Vladimir Zhirinovskiy). 
However, these committees -- on work and social support, on 
environment, on industry, on natural resources, on agriculture, 
and on geopolitics -- are not the key committees. As Arkady 
Murashev, a leader of "Russia's Choice" has explained to 
INTERFAX, the Committee on Geopolitics was set up specially for 
the liberal democrats so that Zhirinovskiy would not claim the 
post of Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee. 
  "Russia's Choice" takes over 4 committees, including that on 
defence to be led by the faction's Executive Secretary Sergey 
Yushenkkov, earlier the First Assistant to the Federal 
Information Center's President. The former information center's 
chief Mikhail Poltoranin is in charge of the Information Policy 
and Communication Committee. Besides, the "Russia's Choice" 
controls the Committee on Health and the Committee on Duma 
Management. 
  The "New Regional Policy" faction is responsible for 3 
committees -- on education, on property, privatization, and 
economic activity, and on ethnic affairs. 
  The Agrarian party gets two parliamentary committees -- on 
agriculture and legislation and on a judicial reform. The 
latter structure is led by Vladimir Isakov, an opposition leader 
in the dissolved Supreme Soviet. 
  Communists control the Committee on Security and on Public 
and Religious Organizations. This body is led by Victor 
Ilyukhin, sacked from the Procurator General's Office in 1991 
after starting a legal case against Mikhail Gorbachev (the then 
USSR President) on treason charges. During the rebellion in 
Moscow in October, Ilyukhin was in the White House through 
October 4. 
  The Unity and Concord Party takes three committees -- on CIS 
affairs and contacts with compatriots (led by Kostantin 
Zatulin), on Federation affairs, and on local self-government. 
The Committee on Local Self-Government is headed by Anatoliy 
Sliva, a deputy chief of the president's legal department. 
  The "Apple" faction controls committees on budgets, taxes, 
banks, finances (led by Mikhail Zadornov) and on international 
affairs. The Chairman of the International Affairs Committee is 
Vladimir Lukin, Russia's former Ambassador to U.S., who before 
his departure for Washington led a similar committee in the 
previous Russian parliament. 
  A legislator from Russia's Democratic Party Sergey Glazyev, 
the former Minister on Foreign Economic Ties chairs the Economic 
Policy Committee. 
  A representative of the faction of "Russia's Women" leads 
the 
Committee on the Affairs of Women, Family, and Youth. 
  The posts of vice-chairmen of committees were distributed 
this way: six went to "New Regional Policy", five to "Russia's 
Choice", four to the Democratic Party, and the Unity and Concord 
Party, "Apple", the Communist and Agrarian Parties got two posts 
each. 

