CSO 

    [Editorial Report] On the eve of the 8 May parliamentary 
election, media supporting the present right-of-center 
government gave unprecedented publicity to charges that Gyula 
Horn, chairman of the Hungarian Socialist Party 
(MSZP)--successor to the former ruling Communist Party's 
reformist wing--took part in the violent suppression of the 1956 
anti-communist revolution. On 25 April the daily PESTI HIRLAP 
reported that Andras Bencsik, the paper's chief editor and a 
parliamentary candidate of the present governing coalition's 
main party, the Hungarian Democratic Forum (MDF), said at a 
political rally in Budapest that Horn is "certainly a criminal 
and possibly a murderer." Although "it may not be possible to 
prove" that Horn committed a specific crime, Bencsik said, "he 
was a member of an armed organization that is smeared with 
blood"--evidently referring to rumors, which Horn has not 
denied, that as a young Communist in 1956 he was active in an 
armed militia that fought against the revolutionaries. 
  On 30 April PESTI HIRLAP also ran excerpts from an interview 
that appeared on the television program "Panorama" in which Imre 
Kaldiko, a 1956 revolutionary, charged that in the hospital 
where he was kept prisoner after being wounded during the 
fighting, Horn "kicked him in the mouth twice," doing permanent 
damage. He recognized Horn's photograph after Horn became a 
prominent politician in the Kadar regime, Kaldiko claimed. 
  The other main pro-government daily, UJ MAGYARORSZAG, 
reported on 30 April that the Horn issue had come up at the 
MDF's weekly news conference the day before. At the news 
conference Interior Ministry State Secretary Fabian Jozsa 
speculated that the reason that the MSZP did not name its 
chairman, Horn, as its prime ministerial candidate--the MSZP was 
the only major party to go into the election without naming its 
nominee for prime minister--was that the MSZP was "prepared for 
the attacks" against Horn's "political past." 
  Rumors about Horn's 1956 activities started surfacing a few 
years ago but did not get much publicity even after a letter 
demanding an investigation of his past appeared in the 2 
September 1991 UJ MAGYARORSZAG, which has a relatively small 
circulation. The letter quoted from the January 1990 issue of 
the prominent monthly MOZGO VILAG--published while the 
Communists were still in power--according to which Robert 
Ribanszki, secretary of the official Patriotic People's Front 
under the Kadar regime, allegedly declared that Horn had been 
"merciless" in fighting the revolutionaries. "Gyula was 
relentless. He slashed and shot like a madman," Ribanszki 
reportedly said. 
  Although the MSZP denounced Bencsik's charges as "going 
beyond all normal and acceptable limits" and demanded that the 
MDF withdraw Bencsik's candidacy for parliament (NEPSZABADSAG 26 
Apr 94), Horn announced that he would not sue for libel because 
he "trusted in public opinion to condemn" Bencsik for making the 
allegations (NEPSZABADSAG 27 Apr 94). Horn also attacked the 
"Panorama" television program for airing the charges against 
him, declaring that he had "never been" to any prison hospital 
or even the town where the alleged events occurred. Denouncing 
the program for publicizing "gross lies that hurt my human 
dignity without giving me a chance to answer," Horn said that 
the public service media were guilty of "unprecedented . . . 
abuses" during the election campaign (MAGYAR HIRLAP 2 May 94). 
  In their denunciations and denials, the MSZP did not say 
what 
the actual charges against Horn were, thus limiting further 
publicity. Similarly, while NEPSZABADSAG, which calls itself a 
"socialist daily," and MAGYAR HIRLAP, a paper with a liberal 
orientation, published the MSZP's statements, they did not 
detail the allegations against Horn and thus refrained from 
publicizing the charges against him. 

