BFN 

<F P=106> [Edict No. 1016 of the Russian Federation President "On </F>
Urgent Measures to Implement the Russian Federation Federal 
Program To Step Up the Fight Against Crime in 1994-1995," dated 
24 May 1994, The Kremlin, Moscow, and signed by Russian 
Federation President B. Yeltsin] 
  [Excerpt] In view of the continuing growth of crime, which 
is posing a serious threat to the security of the state and of 
society, in order to reinforce the protection of citizens' 
constitutional rights and freedoms against encroachments by 
criminals and to mobilize the forces and resources to do this, I 
rule that: 
  1. The Russian Federation Federal Program To Step Up the 
Fight Against Crime in 1994-1995 (appended) is to be approved. 
  The Russian Federation Government is to provide finance for 
the aforesaid Program. 
  The leaders of Russian Federation ministries, departments, 
and institutions executing the Russian Federation Federal 
Program To Step Up the Fight Against Crime in 1994-1995 are to 
be made personally responsible for its full and timely 
implementation. 
  O.I. Lobov, secretary of the Russian Federation Security 
Council, is to oversee the implementation of the Russian 
Federation Federal Program To Step Up the Fight Against Crime in 
1994-1995. 
  2. The Federal Assembly State Duma is to be recommended to 
examine on a priority basis draft laws submitted by the Russian 
Federation president and Russian Federation Government geared to 
stepping up the fight against crime and improving criminal, 
criminal procedure, enforcement, administrative, and 
administrative procedure legislation and also the activities of 
law-enforcement organs. 
  3. It is recommended that organs of state power in the 
components of the Russian Federation: 
  --adopt comprehensive regional programs to step up the fight 
against crime; 
  --bring the strength of subunits of the public safety 
militia 
(local militia), financed by the budgets of the components of 
the Russian Federation, up to authorized strength by 1 July 1994; 
  --complete in the first half of 1994 the formation of 
regional nonbudget funds set up to provide additional finance 
for measures to strengthen the rule of law and public order, to 
provide more materials and equipment for law-enforcement organs 
and citizens' public associations to protect law and order, and 
also to pay for citizens' public order work; 
  --provide concessions on taxes and other payments to the 
budgets of Russian Federation componments for enterprises, 
organizations, and instituitions utilizing the labor of people 
serving jail sentences. 
  4. The Russian Federation Government is to: 
  --regard as a priority area of its activities the prompt 
elaboration and enactment of normative government documents 
aimed at stepping up the fight against crime, protecting 
property and public order, and improving the activities of 
law-enforcement organs; 
  --examine in the first half of 1994 the question of 
increasing the authorized strength of transport militia subunits 
in order to ensure public order and passenger safety on 
long-distance and suburban trains; 
  --complete in the first half of 1996 the formation of a 
state 
nonbudget fund, the money to be used to provide additional 
finance for measures to implement federal and regional programs 
to combat crime and also to strengthen the law-enforcement 
organs' material and technical base; 
  --devise a federal program to prevent child neglect and 
offenses by minors and young people; 
  --elaborate within three months a federal program to promote 
the employment of people sentenced to jail terms; 
  --devise a range of moral and material incentives in order 
to 
retain investigators and operational staff in law-enforcement 
organs and ensure the prompt and high-standard investigation of 
criminal cases -- incentives based on their level of training, 
length of service, and nature of the crimes under investigation: 
  --finance in 1994-1995 measures to increase the strength of 
operational formations and troop units of the Russian Federation 
Internal Affairs Ministry Internal Forces and to provide 
accommodation for them; 
  --provide Russian Federation Internal Affairs Ministry 
Internal Troops with combat equipment, armaments, special 
vehicles and special facilities in 1994-1995, depending on the 
nature and size of the tasks being performed by the Internal 
Troops. Make the requisite amendments to the Russian Federation 
Government's decisions on these matters; 
  --elaborate within three months and enact model statutes on 
federal, municipal, and departmental stocks of official housing 
allocated to judges, staff of law-enforcement organs, and 
servicemen of the Russian Federation Internal Affairs Ministry 
Internal Forces; 
  --elaborate within one month and approve standard statutes 
on 
assistant heads of organs of executive authority in the Russian 
Federation on crime-fighting matters. 
  5. Leaders of federal organs of executive authority and 
organs of executive authority in the components of the Russian 
Federation are to create conditions encouraging citizens and 
their associations to participate in the protection of public 
order and the prevention and stopping of crime. 
  6. The Russian Federation Foreign Ministry is to take 
immediate steps to increase control over the issuing of entry 
visas by Russian diplomatic and consular establishments in 
states from which there is uncontrolled immigration into the 
Russian Federation. 
  7. In order to strengthen the system of Russian Federation 
Justice Ministry forensic science establishments, the Russian 
Federation Government has been given a month to sort out the pay 
of forensic science establishments' staff, applying the pay 
principles operating in Russian Federation General Prosecutor's 
Office scientific and educational establishments. 
  The Russian Federation Justice Ministry has a month to 
prepare draft statutes on the class ranks of Russian Federation 
Justice Ministry forensic scientists, to be submitted to the 
Federal Assembly State Duma in the proper manner. 
  8. As of 1 July 1994 an obligatory record is to be kept in 
the Russian Federation of color copying facilities (desktop 
publishing, duplicating machinery, inkjet printers) acquired by 
citizens and by enterprises, organizations, and establishments, 
irrespective of the form of ownership and sphere of activity. 
  The Russian Federation Government has two months to approve 
the rules for registering, keeping, and using color copying 
facilities in the Russian Federation. 
  9. The Russian Federation Internal Affairs Ministry and the 
Russian Federation Justice Ministry, in conjunction with other 
interested federal organs of executive authority, in order to 
widen the militia's rights in the fight against crime, will 
prepare within two months proposals on the relevant amendments 
to Russian Federation legislative acts, envisaging: 
  --granting the militia the right to inspect buildings and 
premises of enterprises, institutions, and organizations, 
irrespective of the form of ownership (except the buildings and 
premises of diplomatic, consular, and other establishments of 
foreign states and international organizations enjoying immunity 
in accordance with international treaties or Russian Federation 
legislation), if there is reliable evidence that a crime is 
under preparation; 
  --changing the rules and procedure for the use of weapons by 
officers of law-enforcement organs when performing their 
official duties protecting public order and fighting crime. 
  10. The numerical strength of operational formations and 
troop units of the Russian Federation Internal Affairs Ministry 
Internal Forces is to be increased by 52,000. 
  The Russian Federation Internal Affairs Ministry is to be 
given the right to redistribute the Internal Forces' numbers in 
accordance with any change in the size of the tasks they perform. 
  11. The Russian Federation Internal Affairs Ministry, 
Russian Federation Transport Ministry, and Russian Federation 
Ministry of Railways are to: 
  --take additional steps to guarantee citizens' safety in 
airports, sea and river ports, and stations; 
  --set up special militia subunits to travel on long-distance 
and suburban trains and decide how they will operate; 
  --elaborate within a month comprehensive measures to prevent 
and stop offenses on transport that pose a threat to passenger 
safety. 
  12. The Russian Federation Internal Affairs Ministry, 
Russian Federation Federal Counterintelligence Service, Russian 
Federation State Customs Committee, and Russian Federation Tax 
Police Department are to regularly carry out large-scale 
coordinated targeted operations to identify and stop corruption, 
criminal activities by organized gangs and groups, smuggling, 
the illegal export of strategically important goods, and illegal 
arms and drugs trafficking. 
  13. The Russian Federation State Customs Committee, Russian 
Federation Federal Border Service and Border Forces' Main 
Command, and the Russian Federation State Committee for Sanitary 
and Epidemiological Supervision are to take the necessary steps 
to prevent consumer goods that are a danger to people's lives or 
health from penetrating the domestic market from abroad. 
  14. The Russian Federation Defense Ministry is to: 
  --transfer to the Russian Federation Internal Affairs 
Ministry vacant military camps or training facilities that will 
be suitable for stationing the Internal Forces' operational 
formations and troop units that are being set up. They have one 
month to submit to the Russian Federation Government a list of 
and schedule for the transfer of the aforementioned military 
camps and training facilities, agreed with the Russian 
Federation Internal Affairs Ministry; 
  --ensure the training of cadres for Internal Forces at 
military training establishments, paid for by the Russian 
Federation Internal Affairs Ministry; 
  --allocate in 1994-1995, in accordance with Russian 
Federation Internal Affairs Ministry Internal Forces staffing 
requests, a contingent of conscripts that meets the requirements 
of service in the Internal Forces. 
  15. This edict enters into effect the moment it is signed. 
  Russian Federation President B. Yeltsin. 
  The Kremlin, Moscow, 24 May 1994. 
[passage omitted comprising the appended "Russian Federation 
Federal Program To Step Up the Fight Against Crime in 
1994-1995"]. 

