Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 21 (XINHUA) -- Special economic 
zones (SEZ) in China will continue to play exemplary roles in 
reform and opening to the outside world, but they have to have 
new strategies to achieve continued high growth, according to 
deputies to the Eighth National People's Congress [NPC]. 
  The NPC deputies from the SEZs said that development of the 
SEZs will depend on their existing advantages and functions 
rather than on continued state preferential policies. 
  China has established five SEZs of Shenzhen, Zhuhai, 
Shantou, 
Xiamen and Hainan since the late 1970s. Thanks to tax breaks 
and other preferential policies, the SEZs have attracted 
one-fifth of the total foreign investment in China and achieved 
eye-catching progress. 
  Shenzhen has developed from a sleepy border town into a 
modern city with a gross domestic product (GDP) of over 30 
billion yuan in 1993. 
  The SEZs have served as China's window for foreign 
investment, technology and management expertise. 
  However, with the opening of coastal cities and areas 
flanking the Chang Jiang River and border regions, the SEZs have 
lost much of their uniqueness. The SEZs must develop their own 
advantages to continue to lead the nation in economic 
development. 
  Shenzhen Mayor Li Youwei said that the SEZs should set up an 
efficient system, upgrade management, establish a market 
economy, converge with the international market, and attract 
foreign funds and import technology by giving up a share of the 
domestic market to foreign goods and services. 
  The SEZs must replace its present labor-intensive industries 
with technology- and capital-intensive industries, Li said. 
  Zhuhai Mayor Liang Guangda said that the SEZs should upgrade 
the technology of their existing enterprises, develop upper-end 
products and manufacture goods competitive on both domestic and 
international markets. 
  Some deputies said the SEZs should adopt a new strategy of 
balancing imports and exports, encouraging both inward and 
outbound investment instead of the previous strategy of 
encouraging exports and fund influx only. 
  Shantou Mayor Wu Bo said the SEZs should build more free 
trade zones with a concentration of bonded markets, warehouses 
and factories to promote international trade. 
  Yuan Chongwu, governor of Hainan Province, said "small 
government" is a natural choice for the SEZs so that they can 
cut red-tapes, improve work efficiency, upgrade governmental 
services and convenience investors. 

