Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, March 10 (TANJUG) -- President of the 
republic of Serb Krajina (R.S.K.) Milan Martic proposed on 
Thursday to the U.S. President Bill Clinton to send a study 
delegation to ``ascertain the historical and contemporary causes 
of the war in the former Yugoslavia.'' 
  In his letter to Clinton, the copy of which was given to 
TANJUG, Martic says that ``the United States diplomatic body 
fails to gather information from the Serb side, and focuses its 
attention only on those given by Croatian, Moslem or Albanian 
sources.'' 
  Both the U.S. Embassy in Belgrade and American Ambassador in 
Zagreb Peter Galbraith act in this way, warns the president of 
the Republic of Serb Krajina, a republic proclaimed on the 
predominantly Serb-populated parts of Croatia in 1991, following 
Croatia's violent secession from the former Yugoslavia and the 
attempt to reduce the status of Serb people to that of an ethnic 
minority. 
  ``Mr. Galbraith has never mentioned in his public 
appearances 
any of ethnic cleansing operations the Serbs have been exposed 
to in Croatia since 1990-1991,'' Martic says, bearing in mind 
that about 300,000 Serbs were expelled from Croatia under 
different pressures. 
  ``Mr. Galbraith should know that Croatia killed about 
1,200,000 Serbs during the World War Two, half of them in the 
Jasenovac death camp. He lays blame on Serbs alone, which is as 
great a sin as to blame the Jews for being massively burned by 
Germans in Hitler's death camps,'' Martic says. 
  He reminds Clinton of an incident in May 1992, when the 
Bosnian Moslems planted explosive in central Sarajevo, 
committing a crime against their own citizens so that they could 
blame Serbs for it, and this was why the U.N. imposed sanctions 
on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which have had disastrous 
consequences so far. Serb babies die massively due to a lack of 
basic medicaments. For nearly two years Serbs have not been 
allowed either to import or export, while at the same time the 
war between Bosnian Croats and Moslems has been going on and no 
one has been punished for it, Martic says in his letter. 
  ``I believe, Mr. President, that you would agree with me, if 
you only had the true information, that it is disastrous to 
equal the states such as Croatia and Moslem Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
with the states of free and democratic West,'' Martic says in 
his letter to Clinton. 

