Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Takemura Employs Risky Strategy </F>
Toward Reorganization of the Political World"] 
  [Text] Chief Cabinet Secretary Takemura, representative of 
the Sakigake [Harbinger] Party, is employing a risky strategy 
anticipating reorganization of the political world. Since 
leaving the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP], he has been in close 
contact with the LDP members who are in favor of political 
reform, such as ex-Prime Minister and Minister of Justice Gotoda 
and others. Recently, however, he is making himself conspicuous 
by making contacts at every strategic juncture with former Prime 
Minister Takeshita, Policy Research Council Chairman Hashimoto, 
and former Secretary General Kajiyama, who still bear resentment 
toward Ozawa, the representative secretary of Shinseito [Japan 
Renewal Party]. Against this, both Shinseito and Komeito 
expressed their revulsion, calling Takemura's move "an attempt 
to organize a big anti-Ozawa alliance." Thus, Takemura's move 
is creating discord within the coalition government. Distress 
over his move is being voiced even within the LDP's reformist 
group, his old home, that "Takemura is using a forbidden 
strategy," and there is a subtle feeling being created among 
them to distance themselves from him. 
<H5>  Takemura's Influence Is Being Weakened </H5>
  Takemura's fundamental strategy is to maintain friendly 
relations with Prime Minister Hosokawa through the formation of 
a "new new party" with a merger of Sakigake and the Japan New 
Party, and, at the same time, to unite the LDP's "reformist 
group" with the SDPJ's [Social Democratic Party of Japan] 
realistic group consisting of younger members who are to bring 
Yokomichi, governor of Hokkaido, forward as their leader. With 
this current as background, Takemura intends to draw a line 
between him and Shinseito and Komeito within the coalition 
parties, and to take the initiative in steering the government 
without being controlled by Ozawa and his associates. 
  Originally, the most important pillar of this strategy was 
to 
form an alliance with the LDP's reformist group. Takemura has 
been regarded as an important figure within the coalition 
government, comparable to Ozawa, because of his connection with 
Gotoda, who is his senior in the bureaucracy in charge of home 
affairs and to whom he pays respect as his teacher, and Masayasu 
Kitagawa, deputy secretary general, who is Takemura's intimate 
friend as a member of the Mitsuzuka faction before Takemura left 
the party. However, a subtle change has been taking place since 
the middle of November last year when the bills related to the 
political reform were approved by the House of Representatives. 
While lessening his contact with "the reformist group," he has 
been making himself conspicuous by publicly meeting with 
Hashimoto. 
  In dealing with the heiritsu system of single-seat districts 
and proportionally represented districts, Takemura arranged to 
make a compromise proposal allocating 280 seats to the 
single-seat districts, which he reported to the prime minister, 
and tried to obtain preliminary consent within the LDP through 
Gotoda, who is also President Kono's guardian. After all, 
however, both the prime minister and Kono did not give their 
consent. A leading member of the LDP's "reformist group" says: 
"Actually, his proposal was not taken up as a main subject of 
discussion between the ruling parties and the opposition 
parties," and points out that, with this incident partly to 
blame, the influence of the Takemura-Gotoda line has declined. 
<H5>  Takemura Keeps Contacts With Hashimoto </H5>
  The Kitagawa group, which is the leading group within the 
"reformist group," has been regarded as "pro-Sakigake." 
However, it is rather likely that Takemura's side has been 
frequently casting sheep's eyes at the Kitagawa group urging the 
group "to take action promptly." Yet the Kitagawa group is not 
moving as Takemura expects. Persons related to the Kitagawa 
group emphasize: "By all means, we are to act independently. 
Although we may be allied with [Sakigake] on equal conditions 
in the course of reorganization of the political world, it is 
impossible for us to join the Sakigake." 
  After all, Mitsuzuka, chairman of the political reform 
headquarters, on whom Takemura has been relying, and Secretary 
General Mori are not as influential within the party as 
expected. Under the circumstances, Takemura's contact with 
Hashimoto has become frequent not only regarding political 
reform, but also in dealing with such significant matters as the 
liberalization of the rice market and countercyclical measures. 
Now, people know that "Takemura calls Hashimoto whenever an 
important political problem takes place," thus laying a hotline 
between his official residence and the LDP. 
  It is not only Hashimoto with whom Takemura is making 
contacts. He has reportedly talked with Kajiyama, whom he 
opposed in dealing with political reform, several times in an 
attempt to restore their relationship. Even after formation of 
the coalition government, Takemura is supposed to have kept up 
private contacts with Takeshita, who has been his intimate 
friend since he entered the political world, and has received 
Takeshita's advice from time to time. The fact that Takemura is 
making contacts with Hashimoto can be regarded as an indication 
that relations between Takemura and Takeshita's line are being 
tightened. 
  Also, we may understand the situation that Takemura has 
given 
up his reliance on "the reformist group," which is not working 
as he would like, and has clearly expressed his opposition to 
Ozawa by availing himself of the "pro-Ozawa" versus "anti-Ozawa" 
structure that has been in existence since the split of the 
former Takeshita faction. It is certain that Ozawa, who has 
recently been pretending to be taking "a rest," is unhappy about 
such an underhanded move. 
<H5>  Discord Is Being Amplified </H5>
  The prime minister, whom Takemura trusts as his intimate 
friend, also tends to follow the Ozawa line in dealing with the 
political situation. Such being the situation, Takemura is 
certainly in a fix, and it seems inevitable for him, in order to 
secure his influence within the coalition parties, to employ a 
strategy to check Ozawa and his associates by suggesting the 
formation of "a big alliance of anti-Ozawa groups." Yet, as a 
leading member of the LDP's reformist group expressed his 
anxiety that "it will not work if the chief cabinet secretary 
makes contacts with the LDP alone," it is true that Takemura's 
move is amplifying the discord within the coalition government. 
  There is also a feeling within the LDP's reformist group 
that 
"we do not want to be involved in the antagonistic pro-Ozawa 
versus anti-Ozawa structure." It is partly because of this 
feeling that the Kitagawa group and others tend to distance 
themselves from Takemura, who clearly expresses his "anti-Ozawa" 
attitude. Though Takemura has expressed his "anti-Ozawa" line 
by staking his political life on the line in reorganizing the 
political world, it might create a crack in the framework of the 
government if the antagonism between the chief cabinet 
secretary, who is the key person of the government, and the man 
of influence within the coalition parties becomes decisive. 

