BFN 

  [Excerpts] On 10 and 11 April, Russian mass media reported 
on unusual incidents in Odessa -- an incident with the 
hydrographic ship the Cheleken, and an assault by a Ukrainian 
special task force on a Black Sea Fleet division. [passage 
omitted] We have a live connection with our Odessa correspondent 
Leonid Denysko. 
  [Denysko] A couple of hours ago, First Rank Captain 
Volodymyr Orlov, senior naval chief of the Ukrainian Navy Odessa 
garrison, and First Rank Captain Mykola Arkhypov, Odessa Border 
Ship Brigade commander, held a news conference. There was an 
urgent need to deny the next lie [word indistinct] regarding the 
incident in the port and the events that followed. The reports 
cited a few minutes ago make people feel ill at ease. One has 
the impression that there is shooting in Odessa, that people are 
being handcuffed and abducted. What happened in reality? The 
hydrographic ship Cheleken belonging to the Black Sea Fleet 
shipped foodstuffs for the military contingent in Odessa. Before 
the return journey on the evening of 8 April, the cargo deck was 
loaded with alleged navigation equipment. Given that the ship, 
for some reason, was sailing under the Russian flag, the senior 
naval chief on legal grounds requested that the shipping 
documents be presented. He wanted to know whether there was a 
permit to ship property from Ukrainian territory, and where and 
to whom it was being shipped. The captain of the ship stated 
that Cheleken was Russian territory and that he would not allow 
any inspection. He ordered the crew to cast off. Unarmed 
border guards sealed off the moor. Soon, a group of sailors 
armed with assault rifles arrived at the [word indistinct] 
Odessa Harbor from the 318th Black Sea Fleet Conservation 
Division. They were ordered to secure the ship's departure. 
Cheleken cast off and, threatening an accident, sailed off 
toward the external roadstead. A cutter approached it. Using 
light signals, loudspeakers, and the radio, border guards 
ordered the violators to return to the moor to sort out all the 
circumstances. There was no response. Only due to border 
guards' patience a collision was averted. Escorted by another 
cutter, Cheleken arrived from Sevastopol [as heard] at 1540 
hours on 9 April. 
  To investigate the incident the Military Prosecutor's Office 
subpoenaed the direct culprits, Black Sea Fleet officers 
Feoktistov, Zelenko, and Starkov. They had no individual arms 
so how can anybody speak about disarming those officers? No 
force was used against them. After a talk, Zelenko and Starkov 
were permitted to leave the Prosecutor's Office. However 
Feoktistov, had to be put to bed, because having taken a drop 
too much, he was talking gibberish. Thus, he became the only, so 
to say, victim or hostage in the incident. Regarding any shots, 
there was only a holiday salvo: On 10 April, the hero city of 
Odessa was celebrating the golden anniversary of its liberation. 
It is very sad that this arrogant provocation occurred at such 
a sacred time. Representatives of the 318th division were also 
invited to the news conference, but never showed up. However 
sailors Maltsev, Osadchyy, and Latyshev told reporters that they 
were gotten up by an alarm, given assault rifles and ammunition, 
and ordered to act firmly. Asked by correspondents whether they 
would have opened fire, Latyshev answered: We would not shoot 
at our countrymen. Given that almost 70 percent of the 318th 
Division's personnel voiced their desire to serve Ukraine, an 
order has been issued to transform the division into the 1st 
Brigade for the Protection of the Water Region, subordinated to 
the Ukrainian Navy. ITAR-TASS correspondent in Ukraine Yefim 
Shvartsman and Ostankino reporter Yuriy Kolyvanov who were 
present at the news conference, officially stated that they did 
not send any reports to Moscow regarding those events. This is 
not for the first time that dangerous lies were circulated. 
This means that someone wants to raise a storm in the Black Sea 
Fleet, and to cause a quarrel between the two friendly nations. 
Captains Orlov and Arkhypov asserted that Ukrainian laws had 
not been violated; the situation is under control, regular 
service continues on the ships and in the units. 

