BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Leading Cadres Must Shoulder the Important </F>
Task of Handling Well the Contradictions Among People -- On 
Relations Between Improving Leading Cadres' Workstyle and 
Handling Well the Contradictions Among People"] 
  [Text] At present, handling well the contradictions among 
the people under the new situation is of primary importance to 
deepening reform, promoting development, and stabilizing the 
general situation. To leading organs and leading cadres in 
particular, doing this work well has something to do with their 
method of work. However, what is more important is that they 
must further enhance their understanding and improve their work 
style. They must devote their vigorous efforts to these two 
kinds of work in order to achieve actual results. 
  Under the new situation of deepening reform, and 
accelerating 
the establishment of the socialist market economy system, owing 
to the fact that the adjustments and changes in interest 
relationships, uneven economic development, and changes in 
superstructure and concepts have conflicted with certain 
understandings and habits of the masses, many new contradictions 
taken shape among the people. These contradictions cannot be 
mentioned in the same breath as previous ones in terms of scope, 
degree, and complexity. Whether we can solve these 
contradictions well is a matter for concern in the general 
situation of reform, opening up, and socialist construction. 
Leading cadres at all levels must truly grasp this work well and 
treat it as a matter of primary importance. 
  To do this work well, leading cadres must further cultivate 
their workstyle of opposing corruption, advocating honesty and 
cleanliness, and overcoming bureaucracy. This is an important 
aspect in easing contradictions among the people. At present, 
what the masses in some localities complain about most is the 
failure of a handful of cadres to be clean and honest in their 
government administration, as well as their seriously 
bureaucratic workstyle. Many conflicts of interest have become 
complicated, or even antagonistic because of this. Therefore, 
enhancing understanding, devoting main efforts to solve the 
problem of failing to become clean and honest in government 
administration, taking the initiative to shoulder the 
responsibility of handling well the contradictions among the 
people are the vital issues leading cadres must solve. 
  First, it is necessary to set up correct relations between 
public servants and masters, always assign the interests of the 
masses a most important position, and bear in mind at all times 
the purpose of serving the people wholeheartedly. If we fail to 
set up such correct relations and to improve cadres' workstyle, 
the correctness of our policy decision and guideline for 
handling relations among the people, and the actual results of 
our problem-solving work will be affected. The masses are 
reasonable. As long as leading cadres respect them, are fair 
and selfless, and work for the masses wholeheartedly, they will 
win the support of the masses. Various kinds of contradictions 
will be mitigated. Some problems cannot be solved temporarily, 
owing to restrictions imposed by conditions. However, as long as 
the masses are aware of the real situation, they will make 
allowances for it. On the contrary, if leading cadres are not 
clean and honest in their government administration, or are 
filled with bureaucratic airs, or ride roughshod over the 
masses, or adopt a stiff and rude manner, this naturally will 
cause discontent among the masses. It will not be easy to solve 
contradictions, which might even become intensified. In the 
course of reform and opening up, it is not a terrifying thing to 
see that the number of contradictions has increased, and that 
they have become more complicated. What we are afraid of is 
that leading cadres are not clean and honest in their government 
administration, and are swollen with bureaucratic style. 
  Second, the key solution to overcoming leading cadres' 
defects of not being clean and honest in their government 
administration and of being swollen with bureaucracy, as well as 
the solution to handling well the contradictions among the 
people lies in reform. Comrade Deng Xiaoping pointed out: It 
is true that bureaucracy originated from cadres' ideological 
workstyle, but what is more important is that it is originated 
from our own systems. Owing to the overconcentration of power, 
leading organs at all levels have managed to handle things "they 
must not handle, or cannot handle well, or that are outside 
their concern." This is the "general root-cause" of all our 
bureaucracy. The various kinds of reforms we have been carrying 
out over the past 10 years or so -- such as delegating power, 
streamlining organs, improving the responsibility system, and 
transforming the cadre system -- actually are revolting against 
bureaucracy. Many contradictions among the people are solved 
precisely in such "revolts." In the future, therefore, we must 
continue to speed up the process of reform, and bring the 
improvement of leading cadres' workstyle and handling of 
contradictions among the people into the orbit of democracy and 
the legal system. We must let our people truly exercise the 
power conferred on them by the Constitution and the law. 
Whenever we take important measures, we must consult with the 
masses. Leading cadres must place themselves under the 
supervision of the broad masses of people. We must enhance the 
concepts of the cadres and masses regarding the legal system. 
No matter what kinds of contradictions and problems, they can 
be solved only within the scope of the laws, decrees, and 
systems of the state. In so doing, we not only can effectively 
overcome certain leading cadres' bureaucracy, but also 
effectively prevent a certain anarchism among the masses, so 
that contradictions among the people can be solved correctly and 
properly. At present, like the whole country, the situation in 
our province is favorable. On the road of advance, however, 
there are still some difficulties and problems. We must attach 
great importance to them, and never treat them lightly. Leading 
cadres at all levels -- and main leading cadres, in particular 
-- must solve prominent local problems in person, do ideological 
and political work well, unite with the masses, make joint 
efforts to maintain our stable political situation, and create a 
fine social environment so as to accelerate the establishment of 
the socialist market economy system, and to ensure the 
sustained, rapid, and healthy development of our national 
economy. 

