Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By political editor Danny Gittings and Doreen Cheung in </F>
Beijing] 
  [Text] Hong Kong need not fear any more secret deals from 
the past waiting to be sprung upon it by Chinese officials, 
Governor Chris Patten has pledged. Expanding on British denials 
of Chinese allegations about an unpublished understanding over 
airport debt, Mr Patten told the SUNDAY MORNING POST there were 
no secret deals on any subject. 
  "I know of no secret deals relating to political 
development, 
relating to the airport or relating to any other matters," he 
said. "There has been, and will continue to be, private and 
successful diplomacy on a huge number of matters. But I know of 
nothing, of no deal or understanding, which is being denied to 
the people of Hong Kong. None at all." 
  Although Britain has promised not to sign any future secret 
deals, Mr Patten's statement is the first to address local 
concerns that other secret understandings exist, but have yet to 
be publicly revealed. "I don't think anyone could accuse me of 
trying to do deals behind Hong Kong's back," the Governor said. 
"My position on the discussion, on the resolution of these 
issues in the community is pretty clear." 
  Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office chief Lu Ping has 
previously refused to rule out the existence of further secret 
deals between Britain and China. The Governor's comments came 
as China yesterday repeated its accusation that a secret deal 
was struck on airport debt in 1991, and launched a fresh attack 
over the issue. 
  Mr Patten stressed he was ready to be "flexible and helpful" 
in putting forward new proposals on airport funding. But he 
warned there was a bottom line beyond which he would not go. 
"I'm not going to make decisions about funding which would be 
unwise and unreasonable to the Hong Kong taxpayer in order to 
try and bring things forward by a week or two," he said. He 
also tacitly questioned China's pledge not to link the airport 
to other issues. "We keep on producing proposals for funding. 
Somehow we never quite pass the test and, each time, the 
Chinese side say, of course, we must separate politics and 
livelihood issues," he said. 
  But speaking in Beijing yesterday, the local deputy director 
of XINHUA (New China News Agency), Zhang Junsheng, accused 
London of changing the name of the body that would run the Chek 
Lap Kok site, to avoid consulting China about its debt. "(The 
British side) has deliberately changed `Airport Authority' into 
'Airport Corporation' to escape from a stipulation in the 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that Britain should consult 
China on any debts handed over to the Special Administrative 
Region Government, and take unilateral actions," he said. 
  The change was made in the recently published Airport Bill, 
and has been criticised by a number of pro-China figures. 
Although Mr Zhang stopped short of saying which title Beijing 
preferred, Mr Lu dropped a strong hint last week, describing the 
body as the "Airport Authority". Mr Zhang also defended Mr Lu's 
allegation of a secret deal, that all airport-related debt 
should fall within the $5-billion limit set out in the MOU. 
  A Government source last night dismissed the Chinese 
accusation, saying the administration had already told Beijing 
it was happy to use whichever title mainland officials 
preferred. "We have suggested using the name `corporation' on 
the airport solely because it is more suitable for an 
organisation operating in the commercial world than `authority' 
which, in Hong Kong, is used for regulatory bodies, such as the 
Monetary Authority," a Government spokesman said. "The name has 
no other significance whatsoever, and has nothing to do with the 
financial or other powers and functions of the organisation. 

