Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Ren Youming: "Adhering to the Reform and </F>
Opening Up Policy and Strengthening Macroeconomic Control -- 
Tibet's Economic Operation Is Entering the Orbit of Sound 
Circulation"; from the "News" program] 
  [Text] Last year, to adapt itself to the establishment of 
a socialist market economic structure, Tibet seized the 
opportunities to continue carrying out the reform and opening up 
policy and to strengthen macroeconomic control, thus enabling 
Tibet's economic operation to move into the orbit of sound 
circulation. The region's economy grew steadily. 
  1. Farm and animal husbandry production expanded steadily. 
In the field of agriculture in particular, a bumper harvest was 
reaped for the sixth consecutive year in 1993. Total output of 
grain and oil-bearing crops amounted to 620 million kg, up 3.3 
percent over 1992. Total agricultural output value is expected 
to top 2.22 billion yuan, up 5.3 percent over 1992. In 
livestock production, despite difficulties caused by natural 
disasters, the main production quotas were slightly higher than 
or were basically equal to those of the previous year. Town and 
village enterprises and diversified undertakings expanded fairly 
rapidly. The total output value of town and village enterprises 
reached 340 million yuan, breaking all previous records and 
presenting an increase of 14.9 percent over 1992. 
  2. There was a marked improvement in the economic returns of 
transport and industrial enterprises. The region's total 
industrial output value is expected to reach 470 million yuan, 
up 7.8 percent over the previous year. The output of major 
items rose by a big margin over that of 1992. Product quality 
improved, and production capacity and marketing ratio reached 
94.85 percent. Both production and marketing efficiency rose. 
The number of losing enterprises declined by a small margin. 
  3. New progress was made in foreign economic relations, 
trade, and tourism. The region's foreign trade is expected to 
reach $100 million, up 55.4 percent over 1992. In tourism, 
efforts were made to improve management and operational 
standards, to open up new roads and scenic spots, and to develop 
a special category of tourism to enhance attraction. In 1993, 
Tibet recorded 23,000 visits by foreign tourists, and the income 
from tourism topped 106 million yuan, an all-time-high record. 
  4. Investment in fixed assets expanded steadily, and fairly 
significant progress was made in the construction of key 
projects. The region's investment in fixed assets came to 1.59 
billion yuan, up 15 percent over the previous year. 
  5. Individual economy grew rapidly. At present, there are 
41,000 individually and privately run enterprises in the region, 
employing more than 70,000 people, with total capital topping 
200 million yuan. Annual taxes paid by these enterprises 
accounted for 40 percent of the region's industrial and business 
taxes. 
  6. The reform of the economic structure continued to develop 
in depth. The proportion of mandatory plans in the planned 
economy dropped, while the ratio of market regulation rose. 
Great strides were made in pricing reform. The prices of 
timber and other products were decontrolled. The market was 
growing. The pace of reform of the commodity circulation system 
was accelerated. Last year, the region's total retail sales 
reached 1.9 billion yuan, up 13.1 over 1992. 
  7. Macroeconomic control was strengthened, and financial 
order improved markedly. The region's financial institutions 
recovered 220 million yuan of inter-bank loans, accounting for 
more than 60 percent of the total loans, (?eliminated) over 80 
items involving arbitrary exaction of fees and fines from 
enterprises, and returned more than 2.5 million yuan to staff 
and workers who had asked to participate in a fund pooling 
effort. In addition, the balance of deposits in banks 
throughout the region topped 900 million yuan, up 29.46 percent 
over the previous year. The region's revenue exceeded 140 
million yuan, up 37 percent over 1992. 

