Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, Jan. 25 KYODO -- Senior officials of the 
House of Representatives Steering Committee agreed Tuesday [25 
January] to set up a joint committee of both houses of the Diet 
to discuss the fate of the government-proposed political reform 
bills rejected by the House of Councillors last week, Diet 
sources said. The lower house will approve the establishment of 
the panel at a plenary session Wednesday afternoon, the sources 
said. 
  The lower house, which approved the bills in November, will 
select its 10 members from among those who voted for them. The 
upper chamber will send 10 members from among those who voted 
against the bills. 
  If two-thirds of the joint panel members agree on a 
compromise plan, the package can be written into law once they 
are endorsed by a majority of votes at plenary sessions of both 
houses of the Diet. 
  Earlier in the day the main opposition Liberal Democratic 
Party (LDP) agreed to set up the panel after a three-hour stormy 
session of the decision-making Executive Council, party 
officials said. The LDP is divided over electoral reform bills, 
the center pillar of the package. 
  The seven-party coalition hopes that the package will be 
enacted during the current Diet session by reaching a compromise 
with the LDP at the joint committee. But the prospect of 
reaching an accord before Saturday's closure of the Diet is 
slim, political sources said. 
  The coalition will be forced to take a floor vote on the 
package again at a plenary session of the lower chamber, the 
sources said. 
  The legislation could become law when passed a second time 
by 
the lower chamber by a majority of two-thirds or more of the 
members present. However, the coalition will need about 70 
defections from the LDP to secure a majority of two-thirds in 
the lower house and political analysts say such a situation is 
unlikely. 
  Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, who has staked his 
political career on enacting the legislation before the current 
Diet session ends Saturday, is planning to hold a press 
conference to call for popular support to enact the package, 
government sources said. 
  Hosokawa also hopes to hold a top meeting with LDP President 
Yohei Kono to break the deadlock, the sources said. The 
Hosokawa government displaced the LDP from power last August for 
the first time in nearly 40 years, pledging to clean up Japan's 
scandal- tainted political system. 
  Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata hinted at the possibility of 
dissolving the lower house for a snap election, should the 
government-proposed political reform bills be scrapped by the 
Diet. 
  But Chief Cabinet Secretary Masayoshi Takemura, leader of 
Sakigake (Harbinger), Health and Welfare Minister Keigo Ouchi, 
leader of the Democratic Socialist Party and Social Democratic 
Party Chairman Tomiichi Murayama ruled out such a possibility. 

