Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Xu Jingyue (1776 0079 6460)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 14 Jan (XINHUA) -- China's third-generation 
robots, which possess technology which is on a par with the 
world's best, have replaced manual operations in some production 
procedures which are harmful and too strenuous for human beings. 
This shows that this is the end of the stage in which robots 
were only samples and exhibits for demonstrative purposes. 
  China started robotic research during the Sixth Five-Year 
Plan period, and robotic technology has eventually become 
applicable after nearly two generations of research, 
manufacturing, and development. The China National Astronautics 
Company, China's first unit engaged in developing robots, has 
now developed nine types of robots, including robots capable of 
carrying out arc and spot welding, painting, handling equipment 
for general use, assembling items, and moving; robots for 
teaching and scientific research; and robots for disposing of 
toxic materials and explosives. The robots developed by the 
company are among the best in the country in terms of their 
variety, capabilities, quality, and reliability; and the 
controlling technology, which has been described as the robots' 
brain, is among the best in the world. This reporter saw that a 
robot built to arc and spot weld had the intelligence to repeat 
instructions, meaning that after it was instructed once, it 
could accurately and flawlessly repeat the motions it had been 
taught. A painting robot -- which could dexterously move its 
waist, arms, and wrists, hold a 10-kg tool, and repeatedly 
reposition itself with a precision of less than 2 mm -- has been 
designated by the state as a major technology to be popularized 
in the country. Robots designed to assemble electronics 
components have visual distinguishing functions, and they can 
grip specific components for precision assembly and reposition 
themselves with a precision of less than 0.03 mm. These robots, 
which can be used to assemble household appliances, calculators, 
automobiles, cameras, wristwatches, and so on, have been in use 
at the Shanghai Instrument and Meter Plant for assembling 
electronics components. Robots for arc and spot welding and 
painting are being produced in small quantities, and these 
robots are being used to weld and paint Audi automobiles at the 
No. One Motor Plant as well as Tongfeng trucks at the No. Two 
Motor Plant. This has substantially increased production 
automation and management. 
  It has been learned that robots capable of building pier 
buttresses [ma duo 4316 1000], packaging, climbing walls, 
walking upright, and controlling reconnaissance drones are being 
developed. 

