BFN 

  COST OF ILLEGAL SALES: The Supreme Inspection Office 
discovered that the National Property Fund (FNM) chaired by 
Tomas Jezek had illegally passed property worth billions to 
private investors. This began with the government decision of 8 
January 1992 to sell more than 1 million shares of Cokoladovny 
(Chocolate Works) Prague to Swiss Nestle, French BSN, and the 
EBRD for 3.26 billion korunas (Kc). The FNM violated this 
decision and sold without approval approximately 85,000 shares 
to the Prvni Investicni (First Investment) Co. (current value 
Kc637 million for a profit between the purchase price and 
current value of Kc532.5 million -- the profit would have 
exceeded Kc1 billion if sold in February). The Fund also sold 
almost one-third more shares to approved buyers than authorized 
by the cabinet, and not at the price of Kc3,119 set by the 
government but approximately 30 percent cheaper so the total 
received corresponds to the total price approved. The price of 
the illegally sold stock is approximately Kc3 billion (and was 
as much as Kc5.8 billion). (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 27 Apr 
94 p 1) Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus today dismissed press 
claims that in talks with Deputy Prime Minister Jan Kalvoda and 
Privatization Minister Jiri Skalicky last week he had decided to 
postpone the dismissal of FNM Chairman Tomas Jezek. On 30 April 
the left-orientated RUDE PRAVO, referring to an unnamed 
"coalition source" wrote that Klaus, together with Kalvoda and 
Skalicky had decided on Thursday (28 April) not to dismiss Jezek 
for the time being. According to the paper, the dismissal was 
demanded by six out of the nine members of the FNM council, 
which is chaired by Skalicky. After the council's meeting, 
Skalicky told journalists that the council members had made a 
number of criticial comments on FNM activity, but did not 
dismiss Jezek. Speculation about Jezek's dismissal or 
resignation appearead especially in connection with recent 
scandals accompanying the sales of the shares of some 
enterprises held by the FNM. (Prague CTK in English 1648 GMT 2 
May 94) 
  VIDEOTEXT FRENCH CONNECTION: The Czech Republic is the first 
of the postcommunist countries to connect its videotext network 
to the French Teletel system (subsidiary of Telecom). Through 
the French network subscribers obtain contacts to all EU 
countries and the United States. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 
27 Apr 94 p 2) 
  TAX PACT WITH ISRAEL: The parliament today approved an 
agreement between the Czech Republic and Israel preventing 
double taxation and income tax evasion signed in December last 
year. Investors will now be able to make exact calculations of 
earnings from their investments, Economy Minister Karel Dyba 
said in parliament today. The agreement provides for the right 
to collect taxes from incomes and property to be divided between 
the two states if the source of income is in one country while 
the income is received by an individual resident in the second 
country. The agreement should render bilateral relations more 
objective in the economic, trade and cultural areas. (Prague 
CTK in English 1305 GMT 27 Apr 94) 
  TAX PACT WITH ROMANIA: The Chamber of Deputies approved an 
agreement between the Czech Republic and Romania preventing 
double taxation and income tax evasion signed in Bucharest on 8 
November 1993. (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 28 Apr 94 p 2) 
  SALES TO SIEMENS: The sale of Moravian Electrical 
Engineering Works plants in Mohelnice, Frenstat pod Radhostem, 
and Draslov to the German Siemens concern is to be approved 
within days. Siemens is to acquire 100 percent ownership of all 
three plants manufacturing asynchronous electric motors. 
According to the contract, Siemens will pay Kc1.5 billion and 
assume responsibility for possible environmental damage. It 
will invest another Kc1.3 billion in the plants. (Prague LIDOVE 
NOVINY in Czech 28 Apr 94 p 9) 
  SURVEY OF RETAILERS: A survey conducted by the Czech 
Statistical Office shows 80 percent retailers find their 
economic situation at the end of March normal. Sales improved 
in March for 70 percent of respondents, remained unchanged for 
18 percent, and declined for 12 percent. The financial 
situation of their business is assessed by 66 percent of those 
asked as the same as in February, as improved by 16 percent, and 
as worse by 18 percent of the respondents; 45 percent of the 
retailers report insolvency. (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 28 
Apr 94 p 14) 
  AGRICULTURE LOSSES: According to Agriculture Minister Lux, 
1993 losses in agriculture reached Kc8 billion. Of this amount, 
Kc4.5 billion are losses generated by remaindered (zbytkove) 
state farms, so the actual deficit comes to about Kc4 billion. 
(Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 29 Apr 94 p 3) 
  SKODA INDONESIA BID: A Kaltimex Jaya representative visited 
Skoda Diesel in April. This firm represents Skoda interests in 
Indonesia. The purpose of the visit was to prepare a quality 
bid for a competition for a supply of an automatic 
diesel-electric power plant using waste heat. Approximately 80 
percent of Skoda Diesel production goes to exports 
(approximately $250 million) to markets like India, China, Peru, 
Iran, Egypt, Nigeria, and also Sweden. (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 29 Apr 94 p 6) 
  BUSINESS WITH LATIN AMERICA: On 28 April, 70 Czech 
businessmen returned from Latin America where they sought and 
found markets for their products. The LIAZ truck manufacturer 
signed a contract in Argentina with Vasquez Iglesias to supply 
40 vehicles valued at $1.5 million, 120-200 vehicles are to be 
shipped to Chile, and exports to Peru and Bolivia are also in 
the works. The Prerovske strojirny (Prerov Engineering Works) 
finalized its agreements with the Brazilian cement firm GIS on 
completion and bringing into operation of two plants worth $29 
million, and discussed a joint venture with the largest 
cement-manufacturing group in the country, Votorantim. As these 
examples show, the largest mission of Czech businessmen to Latin 
America so far proved the good prospects of this market for 
Czech firms. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 29 Apr 94 p 
21) The CZ Strakonice company will ship to Argentina this year 
12,000 motorcycles worth approximately $12 million. (Prague 
MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 30 Apr 94 p 14) 
  KUNZ PUMPS PROFITABLE: In 1993, the Kunz Hranice Co. (former 
subsidiary of Sigma) generated profit in the amount of Kc29.4 
million, and the estimated profit for this year is Kc55.8 
million. The traditional pump manufacturer intends to sell 
one-quarter of its production to Eastern Europe and East Asia. 
The largest single contract of the year is the supply of Kc240 
million worth of equipment for an aluminum factory in Nikolayev, 
Ukraine. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 29 Apr 94 FINANCNI 
NOVINY supplement p 1) 
  VITKOVICE IRON MILL LOSS: Vitkovice Iron Mills report for 
1993 after-tax losses in excess of Kc1 billion. The turnover for 
the year totalled Kc23 billion, output more than Kc13 billion. 
Exports declined by 17 percent in comparison with 1992. The 
company cut manpower by approximately 3,000 to 25,000. On the 
other hand, the average salary rose by 25 percent. The 
enterprise is transforming its production from metallurgy to 
engineering (currently 40 percent). (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in 
Czech 29 Apr 94 FINANCNI NOVINY supplement p 1) 
  CSOB ADJUSTS INTEREST: On 2 May, the CSOB (Czechoslovak 
Foreign Trade Bank) changes the rate of interest paid on certain 
foreign currency and koruna accounts. Some examples are the 
following: The interest on two-week koruna deposits increases 
by one-half percentage point (to 5.5-6.5 percent), and the 
increase is one-quarter percent on two to three months deposits. 
The rate of interest paid on deposits for terms longer than six 
months declines by up to 1 percentage point. (Prague RUDE PRAVO 
in Czech 29 Apr 94 p 8) 
  INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: The Czech Statistical Office 
estimates that the volume of industrial production in the first 
quarter of 1994 is 0.8 percent lower than in the same period 
last year. The output was 0.9 percent lower in March 1994 than 
in the same month of 1993. The volume of construction in the 
first quarter was 6.5 percent higher than in the same period 
last year. (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 29 Apr 94 p 8) 
  PROPERTY FUND BALANCES: The National Property Fund Presidium 
on 29 April adopted its annual report and closing balance. 
According to the report, a total of 2,962 privatization projects 
representing Kc871.6 billion were submitted to the fund by the 
Privatization Ministry as of 31 December 1993. Of these, 1,596 
(Kc599.3 billion worth) were actually implemented. The overall 
revenues to 31 December amounted to Kc54.2 billion, and 
expenditures to Kc42.9 billion. Only Kc2.8 billion, however, of 
the Kc11.3 billion surplus is liquid. (Prague CESKY DENIK in 
Czech 30 Apr 94 p 14) 
  PRAGUE-MANNHEIM AIR SERVICE: The Czech company 
Bemoinvest-Bemoair and the German airline Arcus-air-logistic are 
to open a regular service between Prague and Mannheim on May 9, 
Bemoinvest-Bemoair director Josef Drab told CTK on 30 April. 
For a start, the service will fly on weekdays, Drabek said. 
The two airlines plan a joint network of 60 booking offices 
across the Czech Republic, with those in industrial centres 
opening first in view of the service's intention to cater above 
all for entrepreneurs. Bemoair-operated L 41O UVP-E takes 17 
passengers, the same as the Dornier 228-212 operated by 
Arcus-air. Weekend charter flights to Karlovy Vary, West 
Bohemia, Piestany, West Slovakia, and the Vysoke Tatry mountain 
region in East Slovakia, with tourism in mind, will be operated 
later, Drabek said. (Prague CTK in English 1530 GMT 30 Apr 94) 
  ZBROJOVKA BRNO LOSSES: Despite sales of Kc450 million, 
Zbrojovka Brno (manufacturer of sporting arms, tools and 
tool-making machines) suffered losses of Kc200 million. The 
deficit is not a result of the operation but of too high an 
assessment of the value of the firm's property. The company 
intends to solve the situation by reducing the ordinary stock of 
the company -- currently Kc768 million -- by 20 percent. At the 
same time, the reserve fund is to be reduced by 86 percent. 
While the production of machinery and tools declined last year, 
the sporting arms output increased by 41 percent (42 percent of 
the total), and it is expected to increase by another 13 percent 
(to surpass 50 percent of total output). (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 2 May 94 p 2) 
  FRENCH JOINT VENTURE: Magnet Pardubice and SPDS- Camif of 
France agreed to found a joint venture Magnet-Camif Co. The 
French partner will hold a 51 percent stake in the catalog sales 
venture. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 2 May 94 p 6) 
  KOMERCNI BANKA PROFIT: The Komercni Banka reported Kc2 
billion after-tax profit for 1993. The gross profit was 
reported as almost Kc8 billion. The meeting of shareholders 
approved a 12-percent dividend, i.e., Kc60 per share. (Prague 
LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 2 May 94 p 2) 
  EARLY IMF PAYMENT: The Czech Republic will make an early 
payment on the $430 million it owes the IMF for 1995, an advisor 
to the prime minister said today. Czech ministers met today to 
discuss the country's repayment of debt to the IMF, and decided 
to make the recommendation mainly because of the continuing 
growth of the Czech National Bank's foreign currency reserves. 
The advisor also said the ministers recommended that the 
government's export guarantee agency EGAP set up a subsidiary to 
function as an export bank. (Prague CTK in English 1747 GMT 3 
May 94) 
  DENTAL INCREASES PRODUCTION: The profit of the state 
enterprise (dental products manufacturer) Dental (450 employees) 
surpassed Kc86 million (with total costs of Kc181 million) last 
year. The value of output increased by 18.4 percent with sales 
reaching almost Kc250 million. The book value of the enterprise 
is Kc195.6 million, and 39,883 shares (23 percent; 51 percent 
should go to Denfos Co., 10 percent to Jan Kricka, 10 percent to 
Health Insurance Co., 2 percent to employee shares and the rest 
to restitution funds) will go to the second wave of coupon 
privatization. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 3 May 94 p 10) 
  SELLIER, BELLOT PROFIT: The volume of sales of the Vlasim 
ammunition company, Sellier &amp; Bellot, reached approximately 
Kc700 million last year. The company profit was Kc80 million. 
This year's sales are expected to exceed Kc1 billion. 
Approximately 30 percent of the production is packaging 
machines particularly for food industry. At the time of 
privatization, the enterprise had debts of Kc27 million, but it 
is clear of debt now, under the new management and as a private 
company. (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 3 May 94 p 14) 
  BOHEMIA BANK TRANSFERS: Bohemia Bank customers, whose 
deposits were frozen on April 15 by the central-bank appointed 
administrator, will have from May 10 to June 10 to transfer 
their deposits to Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka (CSOB). CSOB 
director Pavel Kavanek made the announcement at a press 
conference today. Transfers of most deposits will be allowed. 
(Prague CTK in English 1630 GMT 4 May 94) 
  TOURISM: According to the Czech Statistical Office, more 
than 16.41 million foreign tourists visited the Czech Republic 
in the first quarter of 1994. Of those, 12.5 million came from 
the neighboring countries, 73,000 from countries with visa 
obligation, and almost 3.84 million from other countries. Most 
of the tourists came from Germany (almost 9 million), the least 
from Slovakia (approximately 1.43 million. At the same time, 
almost 7.15 million Czechs travelled abroad. (Prague MLADA 
FRONTA DNES in Czech 4 May 94 p 13) 
  CEZ RATING, SALES: CEZ Co. (The Czech Power Generating 
Works) was rated BBB minus by Standard &amp; Poor's with a 
positive 
development. No Czech entity can be rated higher than BBB 
because that is the rating of the Czech National Bank. Last 
year's sales of CEZ totalled 48.5 billion korunas (Kc), pre-tax 
profit reached Kc17.5 billion, after-tax Kc7.5 billion. (Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 4 May 94 p 1) 
  TRADE WITH UKRAINE, RUSSIA: According to Jan Hronek, 
Industry and Trade Ministry official, the volume of trade with 
all 15 former USSR republics amounted to $2.2 billion, of which 
the turnover of trade with Russia alone was worth $1.8 billion, 
with Ukraine $210 million, Kazakhstan $29 million, Belarus $23 
million, etc. The balance of trade with Ukraine improved last 
year, Hronek said, although it still shows a deficit (1993: 
exports -- $95.4 million, imports -- $114.4 million, deficit -- 
$19.0 million; 1992: exports -- $77.4 million, imports -- 
$127.8 million, deficit -- $50.4 million). The overall balance 
of trade with the former USSR republics shows a deficit that is 
concentrated in the trade with Russia and based mostly on 
energy-fuel substances, particularly crude oil. Regarding 
transport -- imports from Russia are covered by the Federation 
as far as the Czech border (ruble agreement), while the Czechs 
must pay for transport (transit through Ukraine) of their 
exports in convertible currency. Special clearing accounts are 
planned for trading with Ukraine (Ukrainian imports would be 
paid in korunas on a Czech bank account, from which exports to 
Ukraine would be paid). (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 4 
May 94 p 20) 
  SECURITIES PRICES DROP: The official index of the Prague 
Securities Exchange, PX50, continues to fall. The index rose 
only when first introduced (by two points), and it has fallen 
ever since -- to 849.9 points on 3 May. (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF 
in Czech 4 May 94 p 1) 
  COMPANY TO BE LISTED: Ceska Zbrojovka Uhersky Brod, 
manufacturer of a large assortment of hand-held firearms 
(capital assets of Kc687 million, 2,700 employees), is soon to 
be listed on the exchange. The company's biggest problem is the 
shortage of production capacities. It invested approximately 
Kc500 million in modernization of its equipment over the past 
five years, and another Kc200-300 million is to be invested in 
the next two years (this does not include any expansion). The 
output doubled in comparison with 1989 to reach sales of Kc940 
million (almost 80 percent for exports) last year. The company 
is 53.1 percent owned by privatization funds, 21.4 percent by 
individual shareholders, and approximately 22.5 percent will be 
privatized in the second wave of privatization. (Prague RUDE 
PRAVO in Czech 4 May 94 p 9) 
  MANUFACTURER FOCUSES ON EXPORTS: Vulkan Hradek nad Nisou 
intends to export as much as 50 percent of its output. This 
year, its foreign trade turnover will be in excess of Kc110 
million. This company, with a profit last year of Kc12.5 
million, is being privatized in the second privatization wave. 
(Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 5 May 94 p 6) 
  UK TRADE TIES: British commentators consider the Czech 
Republic an "outpost" of free market democracy in the changing 
Central and Eastern European region. Nevertheless, the Czech 
Republic's trade with Great Britain lags behind its trade with 
other Western countries. Last year its deficit with Great 
Britain reached 40 million pounds sterling. If Czech sources 
show a surplus of 45 million pounds, it is because they include 
goods and services that go on to other countries after reaching 
London. British companies are seventh on the ladder of foreign 
investors, having put about 80 million pounds into Czech 
companies since 1989. However, this sum does not include 
investments mediated by international banks and financial 
institutions, such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development. Some British projects in the Czech Republic, such 
as the purchase of 34 percent of the shares in Prague Breweries 
for 9 million pounds by the British company Bass, have provoked 
the criticism of independent economists for their allegedly low 
prices. The British Government supports the opening of Western 
markets for goods from Central and Eastern Europe, but at the 
same time it protects its labor market relatively strictly. 
Only around 400 work permits were issued to Czech citizens last 
year, although according to unofficial estimates there are about 
another 3,000 Czechs working illegally in Britain. In an 
attempt to protect the British market from illegal workers, each 
year the British authorities refuse entry to several hundred 
people coming from the Czech Republic as tourists. (Prague CTK 
in English 1202 GMT 5 May 94) Czech exports (55 percent 
machines and transport equipment) to Great Britain rose by 98 
percent, imports (47 percent machines and transport equipment, 
21 percent chemicals) by 22.2 percent. While the trade deficit 
was $69.9 million in 1992, there was a surplus of $68.6 million 
in 1993. (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 5 May 94 p 8) 
  SKODA LOSS, INCREASED SALES: The auto maker Skoda Mlada 
Boleslav has shown a Kc4.3 billion (about $143 million) loss for 
last year, according to the year-end statement approved by its 
shareholders at a general meeting on 5 May. The meeting took 
place to complete the one from April 15. A statement issued from 
the original meeting says that the loss was caused mainly by "a 
change in the Czech Republic's accounting system, which occurred 
in 1993 when its methods were adapted to international 
standards." If the results had been evaluated according to the 
original method, Skoda would have shown a profit of 8 million 
marks, the statement says. The shareholders also expressed 
contentment with the VW management's confirmation on May 3 that 
it would soon begin investing in the production of a new 
medium-category Skoda model. The new model seemed to be 
threatened since the world banks' loan to Skoda was canceled and 
VW investment reduced last year as VW ran into financial 
difficulties. The shareholders praised the increase in Skoda's 
1993 production and sales of about 10 percent to almost 220,000 
cars amid the general decline in sales on world markets as well 
as the cars' higher quality. They stressed Skoda's importance 
for domestic suppliers, whose share of contracts will remain the 
same. (Prague CTK in English 1844 GMT 5 May 94) Skoda has sold 
4,100 cars in Britain so far this year, four times the figure 
for the same period last year. Robin Woollcock, director of 
Skoda Automobile U.K., said dealers are very satisfied with the 
current models available, and are not overly impatient for the 
Czech manufacturer's new model, expected after 1995. Skoda's 
Favorit starts at 5,600 pounds. Overall car sales in Britain 
were up 14 percent this year over last. Sales of other 
manufacturers in the Volkswagen group, which owns 31 percent of 
Skoda, ranged from 4,330 for Spain's Seat to 26,300 for 
Volkswagen cars. (Prague CTK in English 1147 GMT 10 May 94) 
  PRIVATIZATION STATISTICS: A total of 1.8 million citizens 
participated in the first round of the second wave of coupon 
privatization on April 11-25, Jaroslav Lizner, director of the 
Coupon Privatization Center, said today. They submitted 
2,154,755 coupons with 5,064,246 orders, he added. Of the 353 
registered investment and mutual funds, only 13 did not take 
part in the first round. Funds had 3.9 billion investment 
points and individual investors 2.3 billion. The final results 
of the first round and new share prices will be published May 19 
in the center's regular guide, Lizner said. The following day 
this data will be available on diskettes and at registration 
sites as well. Coupon investment holders will be sent letters 
containing the results of their orders between May 16 and 20. 
Funds have been using property obtained in the first wave as 
collateral for loans from banks, according to Marie Jezkova of 
the Finance Ministry. That is a serious violation of the law 
and an irresponsible way to use the property of investors, and 
it is sad that banks accept such guarantees, she said. The 
Coupon Privatization Center will no longer offer services not 
required under the Securities Act as of September 1994, Lizner 
announced. (Prague CTK in English 1931 GMT 5 May 94) 
  FAX SERVICE: The Czech postal service has introduced a 
postfax service that facilitates the transfer of fax messages 
anywhere in the republic and abroad. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in 
Czech 6 May 94 FINANCNI NOVINY supplement p i) 
  INCREASED STAKE IN CMZRB: The Czech-Moravian Warranty and 
Development Bank (CMZRB) will increase its capital stock from 
Kc305 million to 500 million as required by the new Czech 
National Bank regulations. The government passed a motion on 4 
May, according to which it will increase its stake -- through 
the Ministry of the Economy -- by Kc136.7 million to hold 49 
percent -- as compared with the present 33 percent - stake in 
the Ceskomoravska Zarucni a Rozvojova Banka. The remaining 
capital will be raised through redistribution of the bank's 1993 
profit. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 6 May 94 p 2) 
  AGRICULTURAL PRIVATIZATION: According to the Land Fund 
budget 
report, the overall revenue from the privatization of the state 
agricultural holdings currently administered by the Land Funds 
are expected to bring in approximately Kc23.5 billion. On the 
liabilities side, expenditures (unsettled claims, debts, etc.) 
are expected to reach Kc17 billion. This year the privatization 
of farm property should yield Kc3.035 billion. This reckoning 
does not, however, take into account that the buyers use a 
long-term (20 year) payments purchase scheme, or that many 
lessees do not (are not able to) pay their rent. (Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 6 May 94 p 3) 
  SLOVAK PRICES RISE FASTER: According to the Statistical 
Offices of the two republics, the growth of prices continued in 
Slovakia in March at a faster pace than in the Czech Republic 
(consumer and industrial manufacturer prices by 0.2 percentage 
point but in construction work by 1.2 points). The increase was 
also higher in Slovakia for the first three months of the year 
(consumer prices by 0.2 percent, industrial manufacturer prices 
by 0.4 percent, and construction work by 0.7 percentage points). 
(Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 6 May 94 p 7) 
  VS TEMELIN DIVIDENDS: The general meeting of shareholders of 
the VS (Hydroelectric Construction) Temelin decided to pay out 
Kc35.973 million in dividends (after tax, Kc100 per share). The 
company's total profit reached Kc65.101 million, of which -- 
next to the dividends -- Kc22.6 million is earmarked for 
investments and conceivable write-off of bad claims. (Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 6 May 94 BURZOVNI NOVINY supplement 
p vi) 
  KAMENICKY SENOV DIVIDENDS: Kamenicky Senov Chandeliers (65 
percent owned by privatization funds) will pay almost Kc9 
million in dividends to its shareholders. The 1993 sales 
reached Kc327.84 million (Kc60 million more than in 1992), the 
pre-tax profit was Kc28 million. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in 
Czech 6 May 94 BURZOVNI NOVINY supplement p vi) 
  AMMUNITION MANUFACTURE: The Sellier &amp; Bellot Co. of 
Vlasim 
(2,300 employees) does not intend ever to revive its production 
of military ammunition to the pre-1989 volume. The chairman of 
the board said that it is even no longer technically possible. 
In 1989, most of the output was military ammunition for the 
Czechoslovak Army and engineering products for the USSR. Today, 
97 percent of the munitions produced consists of ammunition for 
sporting and hunting arms. With some items, handgun cartridges, 
for instance, they cannot even satisfy the demand. The 
production of military ammunition is minimal. The latest 
addition in this sphere are special NATO standard cartridges. 
The firm is prepared to supply the Czech Army with that 
ammunition if the Army is rearmed. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in 
Czech 6 May 94 FINANCNI NOVINY supplement p xii) 
  MOSER SALES: Moser Karlovy Vary (artistic non-lead glass 
manufacturer, 350 employees) reports sales of Kc100 million. 
(Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 6 May 94 FINANCNI NOVINY 
supplement p xii) 
  FUND ISSUES: On 10 May, over-the-counter trading on the 
Prague Security Exchange will begin in shares of three 
investment funds -- the Kvanto Income (Duchodovy) Investment 
Fund with an issue price of Kc1,500, Kvanto Growth Investment 
Fund with an issue price of Kc1,000, and the First National 
Investment Fund with an issue price of Kc1,000. (Prague DENNI 
TELEGRAF in Czech 6 May 94 p 2) 
  BANK STOCK DIVIDEND: On 31 July 1994, the Ekoagrobanka will 
pay out Kc55.45 million, or 17.4 percent of the bank's paid 
capital stock, in dividends. This was decided by the general 
meeting of shareholders on 6 May. The meeting also decided to 
increase the capital stock by Kc600 million to be raised by the 
issue of new shares. The financial statement gives Kc598.7 
million as the capital stock of the bank, and assets of 
Kc12,002.3 million. (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 7 May 94 p 
8) 
  CSA REDUCES LOSSES: Czechoslovak Airlines (CSA) admitted to 
losses in the first quarter but did not publish the amount. The 
management reports, however, that the losses are Kc168.8 million 
(or 35 percent) lower than for the same period last year. The 
company is in the red, although the volume of transport rose. 
(Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 7 May 94 p 1) 
  CZECH PORK BANNED: Because of the outbreak of swine fever at 
the Turovec farm of Tabor Agropodnik, all neighboring countries 
have banned imports of pork from the Czech Republic. The 
measure will be withdrawn after the disease is eliminated. 
(Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 7 May 94 p 8) 
  MINING ACTIVITY DROPS: Since 1989, the extraction of most 
minerals has dropped 30 to 40 percent, Economy Minister Karel 
Dyba announced on 9 May. The drop in extraction is attributable 
to a certain extent to a drop in exports, he added. The 
extraction of raw materials for bricks and other construction 
materials decreased the most. Those materials, after brown 
coal, are mined in the greatest volume in the Czech Republic. 
On January 1 of this year, the extraction of ore (tin, lead, 
zinc, copper, silver, and gold) ceased. By the end of 1994, 
fluorite and baryte will also no longer be mined. On the other 
hand, the extraction of oil, china clay, and feldspar has 
increased. Mineral reserves vary from 30 years for uranium ore 
to 1,380 years for china clay, he concluded. (Prague CTK in 
English 1959 GMT 9 May 94) 
  BANK HOLDING PRECIOUS STONES: Investicni a Postovni Banka 
(IPB) is holding precious stones received as a Kc750 million 
loan payment, whose market value is a quarter of that, MLADA 
FRONTA DNES reported today, citing unnamed sources. The daily 
cited a source close to the bank and another from the Czech 
intelligence service, both of whom asked not to be named due to 
bank secrecy provisions. A bank spokesman said only that the 
topic was highly confidential but that officials denied the 
existence of any such valuables. IPB, the fourth largest 
banking house in the country, allegedly received the stones, 
which come from Africa and the former USSR, from several 
customers over a year ago. It has since tried to sell them 
several times without success. Both sources also claimed the 
existence of similar holdings by other banks. A spokeswoman of 
one of these, Komercni banka, refused to comment on the claims. 
Police and the Czech Economic Interests Protection Service both 
have information on precious-stones trading. The director of the 
government agency, Jan Sula, said banks accepted them as loan 
collateral in the past, but that it was unlikely they would 
continue the practice. (Prague CTK in English 1144 GMT 10 May 
94) 
  MARKET DECLINE STOPPED: The PX50 index broke its one- 
month-long fall and eked a 0.02 percent gain to 842.7 points. 
Nevertheless, experts do not believe in a turnabout in the 
market and, because of the small volume traded, expect a further 
decline. The volume of Kc57.4 million is one of the lowest in 
the history of Prague exchange. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 
10 May 94 p 2) 
  DEUTSCHE BANK OPENS: The first branch of the Deutsche Bank 
in the former Eastern bloc is its Prague office, which opened 
for business on 9 May. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 10 
May 94 p 2) 
  DEPOSITS FROZEN: Deposits at AB Banka Co. are being frozen 
while the Czech National Bank (CNB) goes through procedures to 
suspend its banking license, CNB spokesman Martin Svehla said on 
11 May. The central bank blamed mismanagement for AB's problems 
and said it was working out a solution that would allow 
depositors to access their accounts again. CNB officials 
discussed AB's situation on 6 May and found its liquidity, 
capital ratio, and loans to be "unfavorable in the long run." A 
bridge loan provided by the central bank did not improve the 
situation either. (Prague CTK in English 1137 GMT 11 May 94) 
  FUNDS FROM BOND SALE: Funds from the sale of Prague's 
municipal bonds on the London Stock Exchange, about Kc7.5 
billion (some $250 million), were transferred on 10 May to the 
city's short-term account, Mayor Jan Koukal announced today. 
The City Council has decided not to take out a Kc950 million 
loan from Ceska Sporitelna as planned, he added, but will make 
use of the aforementioned sum to fund its projects. The first 
three projects have been approved. The city will put Kc2.1 
billion into road repairs, Kc1 billion into the extension of the 
metro (subway) system, and Kc300 million into purchasing 
property, Koukal specified. Further projects will be discussed 
in late May. The city had a budget surplus of Kc22 million for 
the first quarter. Its revenues amounted to Kc2.326 billion, 
and expenditures totalled 2.304 billion. (Prague CTK in English 
1350 GMT 11 May 94) 
  PRESIDENTIAL BUDGET LOSSES: The Presidential Office 
illegally covered Kc769,753 worth of costs ($25,500) from its 
budget last year, according to a Supreme Inspection Office (NKU) 
report debated by the parliamentary committee on 11 May. The 
committee requested a report from the Presidential Office 
explaining what measures it will take to make good the budget 
losses. The NKU claims costs of Kc83,000 ($2,800) were not 
documented in the stipulated manner. Among other things certain 
catering expenses were not covered in accordance with the 
regulations and three personal vehicles given to the Office as a 
gift were not correctly entered in the inventory of movable 
property. The NKU also cites the illegal covering of suppliers' 
invoices and certain irregularities in the payment of employees. 
(Prague CTK in English 1354 GMT 11 May 94) 
  TOURISM REVENUES: According to preliminary data from the 
Czech National Bank, tourism revenues reached $25 million in the 
first quarter of 1994. That is an increase of 39 percent in 
comparison with the same period last year. At the same time, 
spending of Czech tourists travelling abroad increased by 34 
percent to reach $175 million. The surplus for the first three 
months of the year is $150 million, almost 50 percent more than 
last year. According to the Statistical Office, 16.5 million 
visitors arrived in the Czech Republic in the first quarter (23 
percent more than last year), of which 2.6 million were 
tourists. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 11 May 94 p 2) 
  FOREIGN CURRENCY DEPOSITS: While in December 1992 9.3 
percent of all deposits were kept on foreign currency accounts, 
this portion declined by the end of 1993 to 8 percent. The 
expected transfer from koruna to foreign currency accounts took 
place only in the first half of the year (to 9.8 percent). 
(Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 11 May 94 p 2) 
  AVIATION INDUSTRY: The economy ministers recently approved 
the method of consolidation of the Aero aviation holding that 
also solves the difficulties of all its subsidiaries (Motorlet, 
Moravan, and Let Kunovice). According to Minister Dlouhy, 
negotiations are in progress with the Canadian firm Pratt &amp; 
Whitney regarding the purchase of Motorlet (there are two other 
interested parties). Meanwhile, Aero is preparing a project for 
consolidation of Motorlet with the Ceska Sporitelna and other 
banks for the possibility that the offers are not accepted. If 
talks with investors fail, the Investicni a Postovni Banka will 
purchase 100 percent of the Moravan shares at nominal price. 
Moreover, the bank will waive punitive interest charges 
retrospectively to 31 January 1994. That alone covers 
approximately one-third of Aero debt to the IPB. In the 
instance of Let Kunovice, the talks with foreign partners were 
halted. We are contemplating a consolidation similar to that of 
Motorlet, and possibly without a foreign partner. Hence, no 
bankruptcy should occur in aviation industry. The CKD Prague 
holding is the first industrial giant to be consolidated by a 
public tender. So far, eight bidders demonstrated interest in 
the purchase of majority stake in the company. Of course, the 
price is only one of the criteria. (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in 
Czech 11 May 94 p 13) 
  BRITISH INVESTMENT: A supranational company, AVX/Kyocera 
Group, has built in Lanskroun in less than one year a new 
electronics plant with a capacity of 4 million tantalum 
condensers. The $30-million plant is the largest British (the 
European seat of the AVX is in Great Britain) investment in the 
Czech Republic. More than 1,000 people found employment in the 
new Lanskroun plant. (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 11 May 94 p 16) 
  TATRA LOSSES: The Tatra Koprivnice car and truck 
manufacturer was more than 2.2 billion korunas (Kc) in the red 
in 1993 (approximately Kc1 billion more than expected). Thus, 
the losses more than quadrapled since 1992, when the loss was 
just Kc0.5 billion. The firm sold 117 more trucks last year 
than in 1992, and exports surpassed 93 percent of total sales. 
Nonetheless, the truck production declined to 2,950 units. The 
management plans for marketing the trucks in Italy and Spain 
have not been realized, and the car manufacture was transformed 
to custom production (98 cars were assembled). The company 
plans to market 4,500 trucks and 150 cars in 1994. (Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 12 May 94 p 2) 
  STONES OVERPRICED: According to police findings, most of the 
precious stones that several banks accepted as a collateral for 
provided credits come from a north Bohemian firm, Ikona 
Frydlant. This firm was a center of police attention before -- 
when it attempted illegal export of five Soviet-made helicopters 
to Yugoslavia. The financial institutions that accepted the 
stones as a collateral a year ago based the value of the pledge 
on false expert evaluation. As a result they lost tens of 
millions of korunas. The original owner of the aforementioned 
helicopters was a Moscow firm Berkut that also deals in precious 
stones. (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 12 May 94 p 1) 
  COMPANIES LISTED: It is expected that because of their 
excellent economic results, three new companies will join the 11 
companies currently listed on the Prague Securities Exchange 
within a month. They are Ceska Zbrojovka, traditional 
manufacturer of military and sporting firearms (77 percent 
shares sold in first wave of coupon privatization), Elektropraga 
Hlinsko, monopoly domestic manufacturer of small electric 
appliances (almost completely sold in coupon privatization), and 
Jihoceske Mlekarny (South Bohemian Dairies, capital stock of 
Kc755 million, 84 percent shares sold in coupon privatization). 
(Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 12 May 94 PENIZE supplement 
p xiii) 
  MINISTER ON TRADE DEFICIT: The foreign trade deficit that 
the Czech Republic ran at the end of the first three months of 
this year is not dramatic, Trade and Industry Minister Vladimir 
Dlouhy told journalists on 12 May. Czech exports fell almost 5 
percent against the same period last year, whereas imports grew 
16 percent, Dlouhy said, hinting that the figures reflected 
imports of technology, considered normal for a country 
undergoing transformation. Exports to Slovakia have recently 
continued to fall, he said, and currently stands at two- thirds 
of the level a year ago. Czech exports in 1993 reached $12.8 
million and imports $12.5 million but this year may be 
different, Dlouhy said. Czech exports in the first three months 
of this year excluding those to Slovakia went up 4.1 percent and 
imports excluding those from Slovakia went up 24.5 percent. The 
ministry intends to launch a consulting centre to help Czech 
exporters, Dlouhy said. (Prague CTK in English 1425 GMT 12 May 
94) 
  ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION: Average per capita electricity 
consumption in the Czech Republic has been steadily increasing, 
Erik Schmidt of the CEZ power generating works said on 12 May. 
It has risen from 676 kwh in 1983 to 1,068 kwh last year, an 
increase of 58 percent, he specified. Last year, CEZ and 
distribution companies supplied 41.163 gwh, a drop of 0.6 
percent compared to 1992. Supplies from the very high voltage 
network decreased 4.8 percent over the preceding year to 23.809 
gwh. On the other hand, supplies from the low voltage network 
increased 5.7 percent to 17.354 gwh. Increased supplies from the 
low voltage network is attributable mainly to household energy 
consumption, which totalled 11.107 gwh last year, 7.4 percent 
more than in 1992. Household electricity consumption 
represented 27 percent of total consumption last year. 
"Consumption in households is expected to further increase 
because people are using more and more household appliances. 
That is why energy conserving appliances should be promoted," 
Erik Schmidt stated. (Prague CTK in English 2012 GMT 12 May 94) 
  GERMANS BUY PLANTS: The government acknowledged on 11 May 
the sale of a part of the Pal Prague property to the German 
company VDO Schindling. The company will purchase for Kc50 
million (129 percent of book value) the car control board gauges 
assembly plant in Prague and the Adrspach plant prior to 
implementation of the privatization project. The German firm 
also promises to invest 5.5 million German marks in the plants 
before 1998. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 13 May 94 p 2) 
  EXPORT BANK FOUNDED: The general meeting on 12 May of the 
Export, Guarantee, and Insurance Co. (EGAP) decided to found the 
Czech Export Bank. The bank is to provide advantageous credits 
for financing export operations. (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 13 
May 94 p 3) 
  EXPORTS TO SLOVAKIA DECLINE: The full effect of the 
devaluation of Slovak currency is only now being felt. In the 
first quarter of 1994, Czech exports to Slovakia declined by 
33.5 percent in comparison with the same period last year. 
(Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 13 May 94 p 8) 
  RUSSIAN OIL DRILLING: Kokes, director of Plzen Inwest 
Leasing Co., signed an agreement in Moscow on 12 May on 
developing and expanding the oil drilling project of the 
Russian-Czech joint venture (of Plzen private Inwest Leasing Co. 
and Russian state enterprise Udmurtneft) Ural Inwest Oil 
Corporation (UIOC). The corporation has 112 producing wells and 
supplies oil to the Czech Republic. (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in 
Czech 14 May 94 p 14) 
  BANK BUSINESS AS USUAL: With the exception of the AB Bank, 
Bohemia Bank, and Kreditni Bank there has not been a run on any 
bank in the Czech Republic. There is no significant increase in 
withdrawals or deposits at any of the banks surveyed following 
the collapse of the three aforementioned banks. (Prague LIDOVE 
NOVINY in Czech 14 May 94 p 12) 
  FEAR OF COLLAPSE: The fears expressed by Bohemian-Moravian 
Center Party (CMSS) Chairman Jan Krycer, that more small banks 
may collapse, could be justified if they stick to the ways of 
the collapsed Credit and Industrial, Bohemia and AB banks, Czech 
Social Democratic Party (CSSD) Deputy Chairman Vaclav Grulich 
told journalists on 16 May. If they get into difficulties, the 
least they can expect is "stricter control by the Czech National 
Bank, so that the spots that are beginning to show do not 
produce a domino effect," Grulich said, adding that people with 
small accounts and trades people would be most hurt. "It shows 
that the there is a lot of foul play in our economy with the 
dirt going deeper and reaching into the banking sphere. We lack 
thorough and well-devised inspection," Grulich said. He also 
called for a thorough and nonpartisan inspection of the National 
Property Fund (FNM) and criticized the government for allowing 
the continuation of "scandalous imports" of heating oil and its 
sale by unscrupulous entrepreneurs at a profit running into 
billions of korunas, which ought to have gone to the state. 
(Prague CTK in English 1229 GMT 16 May 94) 
  FIRST ROUND PRIVATIZATION: According to a Finance Ministry 
report, 20.94 million shares (13.51 percent of the total of 155 
million 1,000- koruna shares of 861 companies) were sold in the 
first round of the second wave of coupon privatization. Of this 
amount, investment privatization funds obtained 15.44 million 
and individual investors 5.5 million shares. Demand exceeded 
supply by 129 companies. In 15 instances the orders could be 
reduced, i.e., the sale was completed. Of the total number of 
investment points, 5.61 billion, or 91.08 percent, have been 
invested in the first round. (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 14 
May 94 p 1) 
  ENTERPRISE INSOLVENCY: At the beginning of April, 61 percent 
of the surveyed 757 industrial enterprises were insolvent. 
(Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 14 May 94 p 14) 
  VITKOVICE INCREASES EXPORTS: Vitkovice Co. is successful in 
gradually increasing its exports of rolled steel. Only exports 
of thick sheets to Germany reached 24,000 metric tons in the 
first quarter. This enterprise is among the largest exporters of 
metallurgical products in the entire former Eastern bloc. An 
important market for Vitkovice is also the United States, where 
the company managed to sell 10,000 metric tons of sheets by the 
end of March. Based on signed contracts, exports to Croatia 
should reach 35,000 metric tons of rolled material before the 
end of the year. Vitkovice was also successful in Poland, 
Austria, Sweden, Netherlands, and Belgium. Exports of sheet 
pile -- particularly to Netherlands -- are expected to grow 
further, and there is a great demand for the so-called IPE 
profiles (which are price-wise very attractive for the 
enterprise). (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 17 May 94 KORUNA 
supplement p viii) 
  HOP MARKET THREATENED: The Czech Republic cultivates 
approximately 6.5 percent of the total world area of 
hop-gardens. Hop production is 2.5 percent of all crop farming 
in the country. Approximately one-third of the crop is sold on 
the domestic market. Because of the subsidies in EU countries, 
however, marketing difficulties are expected. In addition, 
fewer hops are needed in beer production because of the modern 
technology, and cheap hop concentrates are also becoming more 
readily available. (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 18 May 94 p 
8) 
  POWER, GAS PRICES: On 1 June, prices of electric power and 
gas supplied to households will increase by an average of 10 
percent. In addition, the prices of solid fuel, completely 
liberated on May 1, might also increase. (Prague RUDE PRAVO in 
Czech 18 May 94 pp 1, 2) 
  FARM DEBT ALLOCATION: The government allocated Kc7 billion 
($230 million) to cover the debts of the "residual state farms" 
from the budget of the National Property Fund (FNM), Prime 
Minister Vaclav Klaus told journalists after the government 
session on 18 May. He said that this sort of debt repayment 
from the FNM funds had occurred only in agriculture. On the 
other hand, the sum will alleviate the banking sphere, to which 
some of the irrecoverable credits will be paid back, Klaus 
added. (Prague CTK in English 1720 GMT 18 May 94) 
  LOCAL PRIVATIZATION: MLADA FRONTA DNES comments on Czech 
ministers' decision to turn down foreign investors and prefer 
local companies in the privatization of refineries. "Analysts 
from large consultation companies will now have enough stuff to 
think about. If the government followed this pattern, the 
season of great deals would end for them. But Tuesday's (17 
May) move by economy ministers is a real breakthrough at first 
sight only. The state has been making it apparent for a long 
time now that it wants to maintain control of the fundamental 
chemical industry. It is a most important strategic branch -- 
especially until the country is more self-assured and becomes 
independent of supplies from the unstable Russia. That is also 
why the government has offered guarantees for the oil pipeline 
from Ingolstadt (Bavaria, to Kralupy nad Vltavou, central 
Bohemia, to be completed by 1996). This is also the main reason 
why it has not allowed strong foreign capital to enter the 
refineries," the paper writes. (Prague CTK in English 2244 GMT 
18 May 94) 
  SPAS DIVIDENDS: The largest fund of the first wave of 
privatization, the Saving Privatization Co. (SPAS) achieved a 
net profit of Kc693 million and will pay a dividend of Kc25 per 
share (after tax). Since 20 shares were issued per coupon book 
(purchased for Kc1,000), it means a dividend of Kc500 per book. 
This was decided by the general meeting of shareholders on 18 
May. The Fund obtained in the first wave investment points from 
1,035,000 shareholders and invested them in 514 companies. The 
market value of this property amounted to Kc18.5 billion at the 
end of the year, or Kc927 per share. (Prague RUDE PRAVO in 
Czech 19 May 94 p 2) 
  FINANCE GROUP: The Ceska Pojistovna Co. (Czech Insurance 
Co.) Group is the name of the finance group founded by the Ceska 
Pojistovna Co. with its major subsidiaries (Kapitalova 
Investicni Co., Alpha Broker Co., Pragobanka Co., Ceska 
Pojistovna Slovensko, Ceska Pojistovna Zdravi Co., and Ceska 
Pojistovna Pension Fund). The equity of the group exceeds Kc1.7 
billion, capital stock reaches approximately Kc57 billion. 
(Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 20 May 94 p 2) 
  MINISTER'S AGRICULTURE REPORT: The agricultural sector made 
a loss of Kc9.7 billion (about $323 million) in 1993 as 
expected, according to the Report on the State of Czech 
Agriculture in 1993, Agriculture Minister Josef Lux said on 20 
May. Of that figure, accounting losses connected to the farms 
that inherited the majority of debts from the former state farms 
after privatization represent 30 percent; therefore, real losses 
amount to Kc6 billion, he explained. The share of agriculture 
in gross domestic product has been steadily decreasing. Last 
year it was 5 percent. Agricultural production is dropping 
slightly; last year it was 0.8 percent lower than the year 
before. Animal products output was 6.1 percent lower, while 
vegetable products output was 6.4 percent higher. Last year 56 
percent of agricultural enterprises were loss-making. The 10.6 
percent increase in work productivity over 1992 is attributable 
to the lower number of workers. Workers in the agricultural 
sector earn on average 85 percent of what industrial workers 
make. Last year it became more difficult to obtain loans for 
agriculture, and the total value of loans issued for that sector 
was 14 percent lower than in 1992. The private sector's share 
in primary agricultural production was 77 percent last year. 
Private entities established during the period of economic 
transformation cultivated 85 percent of land; 67 percent of land 
was cultivated by private legal entities and 18 percent by 
individuals. The share of agriculture, including fishing and 
forestry, in employment was 6.4 percent, half of the 1989 share. 
Lux said that the lack of financial resources to complete the 
restructuring process and to boost competitiveness was still a 
major problem. The share of agriculture in total investment has 
been decreasing; in 1993 it was 3.8 percent. Lux said that the 
privatization of agriculture was continuing, but that the 
transformation of ownership relations has not yet been 
completed. In 1993, 919 privatization projects for 85 percent of 
the property to be privatized were approved. The number of 
landowners is many times higher than the number of 
entrepreneurial entities, which means that most entrepreneurs 
cultivate rented land. The share of rented land in total 
acreage is 60 percent. Private enterprises in the Czech 
Republic are about 10 times larger than in the European Union; 
their average acreage is 135 hectares, excluding entities 
cultivating less than one hectare. (Prague CTK in English 2021 
GMT 20 May 94) 
  APRIL INDUSTRIAL PRICES: Industrial prices continued to 
increase marginally in April. The month-to-month pace in 
individual sectors hovered between 0.4 and 1.5 percent. The 
slightest was the increase in prices of industrial manufacturers 
(0.4 percent), while the prices of construction work (up 1.2 
percent) and water (1.5 percent) rose the most. The increase 
from the beginning of the year was 2.4 percent in industrial 
manufacturers' prices, and 4.8 percent in construction. A 
significant increase was registered by water (up approx. 16 
percent) and freight transport (8.3 percent) -- mostly because 
of the hefty increase in the first months of the year. In 
comparison with the same period last year, the industrial 
manufacturers' prices rose 4.9 percent, construction work 16.1 
percent (although prices of construction material increased by 
only 6 percent), prices of communications rose by 28.2 percent, 
and water by 40 percent. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 23 
May 94 p 7) 
  SKODA RETURNS TO IRAN: The Skoda Diesel Co. signed a Kc10 
million contract on a supply of diesel aggregates. At the same 
time, negotiations continue regarding delivery of another Kc100 
million worth of diesel aggregates. (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 
23 May 94 p 12) 
  FREIGHT DECLINE: Over the first three months of the year, 
the volume of goods conveyed by public freight transport 
declined by 7 percent in comparison with the same period last 
year. A total of 43.417 million metric tons of cargo (62.1 
percent railroad, and 35.8 percent road transport). The 
railroad is mostly responsible for the decline (15.9 percent 
less cargo than a year ago -- the volume of river transport 
declined 16.1 percent but it conveyed only 2.1 percent of the 
total cargo). (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 23 May 94 p 12) 
  EBRD SHAREHOLDER IN KAROSA: The traditional domestic bus 
manufacturer, Karosa Vysoke Myto (1,750 employees, sales of more 
than Kc2 billion in 1993), transferred 181,145 new shares to the 
account of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(EBRD). Thus, the bank, which paid more than Kc200 million for 
its stake, becomes 17-percent owner of the vehicle manufacturing 
firm. The capital stock of the company has now reached Kc1.065 
billion. The main shareholder is the French Renault Vehicules 
Industriels S.A. with 34 percent (which should eventually 
acquire 51 percent majority). (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in 
Czech 24 May 94 p 13) 
  FARM PRICES UP: Agricultural manufacturers' prices rose in 
April by 4.4 percent in comparison with the same period last 
year. Prices of vegetable products including fruit and 
vegetables declined by 16.3 percent, prices of animal products 
rose by 6.5 percent. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 24 May 
94 p 2) 
  MORAVIAN AIR CARRIER: The Air Ostrava Co. was officially 
introduced on 23 May as the new owner of Air Vitkovice (formerly 
Air Transport Co. Vitkovice). The new owner purchased 100 
percent of the firm at the end of April. It currently employs a 
staff of 37 and operates three scheduled links (Ostrava- Prague, 
Prague-Nuremberg, and Ostrava-Vienna). The company's largest 
problem is at present its aircraft pool (five 15-seat aircraft 
with 700 km flight range). Over the next three years, Air 
Ostrava will invest $15 million in the expansion and 
modernization of the company's equipment. (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 24 May 94 p 2) 
  EXPORTS TO LATIN AMERICA: The managers of Prerov Engineering 
Works, CZ Strakonice, and LIAZ used the recent 10-day Czech 
business mission to sign contracts with partners in Argentina, 
Chile, and Brazil. For LIAZ, Latin America is a traditional 
partner. The company signed contracts to deliver 40 vehicles to 
Argentina, 120 to Chile, and there are good prospects for 
additional contracts. LIAZ expect to place 12 percent of its 
output -- or approximately $8 million worth of goods -- on Latin 
American markets. This year, the expected total sales should 
reach 1,500 vehicles (4,500 engines should be manufactured by 
the end of the year) and the value of the sales should reach 
Kc2.5 billion. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 24 May 94 p 6) 
  KAUCUK PROFIT: The petrochemicals products manufacturer 
Kaucuk Co. Kralupy made a profit of almost 541 million korunas 
(Kc) in the first quarter, which is approximately 7 percent more 
than in the same period last year. The Kaucuk earnings amounted 
to more than Kc3.66 billion with costs exceeding Kc3.12 billion. 
The results are based on fuel production (60.8 percent), 
polystyrene goods production (19.2 percent), power (10 percent), 
and rubber (7.2 percent). (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 
25 May 94 p 2) 
  SKODA DIESEL STOCK: The general meeting of Skoda Diesel 
shareholders on 24 May approved a Kc53 million increase of the 
company capital stock by means of a non-financial investment of 
Skoda Plzen represented by the Skoda trademark. The increase is 
in fact compensation for the license fee. (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 25 May 94 p 2) 
  HOUSING CONSTRUCTION: There were only 7,454 housing starts 
in the republic in 1993, 11.6 percent down on a year earlier. 
Moreover, individual construction is responsible for 91.5 
percent of them. There are only 350 cooperative housing unit 
starts on record for 1993 (4.7 percent of housing starts) and 
192 community units (2.6 percent). The declining trend was also 
apparent in completed housing -- a total of 31,509 units was 
completed, i.e., 13.4 percent fewer than in 1992 (9,606 
cooperative units -- 36.4 percent drop, 621.3 community units -- 
12.3 percent decline). In individual construction, on the other 
hand, the number of completed units rose by 14.5 percent to 
14,316 units. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 25 May 94 KORUNA 
supplement p iii) 
  CSOB CUTS RATES: On 1 June, the Czechoslovak International 
Trade Bank (CSOB) reduces its interest rate on practically all 
koruna term deposits, many foreign currency deposits, and 
several types of current account deposits (from 2.5 to 2.0 
percent). On the other hand, it increases the rate of interest 
paid on U.S. and Canadian $ accounts. (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 26 May 94 p 2) 
  SLOVAK DEFICIT BALANCE: The deficit balance on the clearing 
account for trade with Slovakia reached Kc243 million (7.2 
million ECU) on 24 May. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 26 May 
94 KORUNA supplement p i) 
  RUSSIAN TRADE: The conditions for trade with Russia are not 
improving. Thus, any improvement in trade is due to the Czech 
firms having learned to better apply barter trade, accept 
payments in rubles, etc. Exports of equipment for the gas and 
oil industry is advantageous but the Russians have no money for 
payments. Exports to Russia amounted to Kc2,683 million in the 
first quarter, while imports reached Kc11,532 million. (Prague 
LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 26 May 94 KORUNA supplement p i) 
  EU ANTI-DUMPING PROCEDURES: The European Commission started 
anti-dumping procedures against the imports of foundry pig iron 
from the Czech Republic, HOSPODARSKE NOVINY reported on 27 May. 
Jiri Vavra from the Czech mission to the European Union in 
Brussels confirmed the news on 26 May to the paper, stressing 
that the commission had not yet officially informed the Czech 
side about the move and that the Czechs had learned about it 
from the commission's official bulletin. He said that the 
procedures were opened on the initiative of Eurofontes, the 
European association of foundry companies. The commission thus 
expanded its previously started procedures against Brazil, 
Poland, Russia and Ukraine. Eurofontes has sent a complaint to 
the commission, pointing out that imports of the Czech foundry 
pig iron are effected at substantially lower prices than 
production costs plus an adequate profit. It does not specify 
the value of the dumping but says that the Czech prices were 
about one-third of the EU ones. Eurofontes also argues that the 
Czech Republic was not exporting pig iron to the European Union 
before 1991, while in 1992 its exports to EU represented 4,316 
metric tons and in the first seven months of the last year even 
8,826 metric tons. Czech exports in the first quarter of this 
year were around 8,000 metric tons. The Czech share in the 
foundry pig iron market thus increased from zero to 2.4 percent 
in less than three years and on the German market even to almost 
10 percent. Eurofontes does not name any specific exporter, but 
sources close to the Czech mission do not exclude that the 
company in question is Vitkovice of Ostrava. It has been lately 
the only company which started exporting foundry pig iron. Most 
steel companies are avoiding exports of the semi- completed 
product because it has low added value. The Czech mission 
protested the European Commission's procedures through the Joint 
Czech-EU Committee, saying that the move went counter to the 
1991 Preliminary Agreement because that document preferred 
bilateral talks to opening anti-dumping procedures. This is the 
second anti-dumping procedure against the Czech Republic started 
in a short period of time. Czech representatives in Brussels 
believe that the exporters should be more disciplined and focus 
rather on long-term targets than on immediate profits. The daily 
has learned that further anti-dumping procedures may hit Czech 
exporters, this time those of steel tubes and possibly steel 
profiles. (Prague CTK in English 1251 GMT 27 May 94) 
  UNHARVESTED GRAIN: Czech farmers received in April 
approximately Kc1 billion from the government for 500,000 metric 
tons of so far unharvested grain for the period for which they 
signed contracts. The agriculture ministry also intends to 
introduce a "hill farming subsidy" this year. According to this 
program, the farms in mountainous regions, which would grow 
grass on some of the land, would receive between Kc1,000 and 
2,500 per hectare annually, provided their is no increase in 
milk production. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 30 May 94 
KORUNA supplement p i) 
  STRAKONICE DIVIDENDS: The general meeting of shareholders of 
CZ Strakonice approved dividends in the amount of Kc17 million, 
or Kc10 per share. The company also reported that its long-term 
obligations were reduced from Kc13.5 million to Kc4.1 million, 
and the short-term ones from Kc353.1 million to Kc229.6 million. 
1993 net profit of CZ amounted to Kc27.268 million. (Prague 
LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 30 May 94 KORUNA supplement p i) 
  BANK CAPITAL, PROFIT: The general meeting of shareholders of 
the Kreditni Banka Co. Plzen approved the issue of new shares to 
increase the company capital stock by Kc400 million. The 
company capital stock is expected to reach Kc1.51 billion within 
two years. Last year's disposable profit exceeded Kc83 million 
(2.5 times more than in 1992), and Kc60 million will be paid out 
in dividends. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 30 May 94 p 2) 
  COAL PRICES UP: After the deregulation of solid fuel prices 
on 1 May, in many places, prices of coke and black coal went up 
(as much as 20 percent). On the other hand, the prices of brown 
coal (lignite) did not change, and the brown coal is often sold 
at a discount. (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 30 May 94 p 3) 
  TRANSEUROPEAN RAIL SYSTEM: Transport Minister Jan Strasky 
signed an agreement on a trans-European railway system (TER) in 
Geneva on 29 May, HOSPODARSKE NOVINY daily reports on 30 May. 
The project, worked out by the United Nations' Economic 
Commission for Europe, aims to improve the quality and 
effectiveness of international railways, set up a combined 
transport network in the postcommunist countries and upgrade 
links to the West. The project also strives to extend and 
improve the present infrastructure, modernize transport control 
and signalling systems, and adapt railway management to the 
demands of the free market economy, the paper writes. (Prague 
CTK in English 0825 GMT 30 May 94) 
  TEXTILE JOINT VENTURE: One of the largest domestic producers 
of technical textiles, the Technolen Lomnice nad Popelkou 
company, is establishing a joint venture with two foreign 
partners. One of the partners is a Belgian industrial investor, 
Wittock, and the other one is a British investment fund, 
Fleming. The two of them will jointly hold 45.9 percent of the 
company and the stake of the shareholders from the first wave of 
coupon privatization, management, and their co-investors will be 
"diluted" by this issue. Company Director Josef Subrt believes 
that the financial situation of the company will improve and 
that the new firm, Technolen WF, will be able to invest in the 
modernization of production. The management turned to foreign 
investors because a long-term loan could not be obtained in the 
republic. Technolen WF should obtain a loan of $10 million 
probably in June. Moreover, the company will obtain from 
Wittock the production program of the closed plant in Belgium as 
well as some of the machinery. "We will most probably 
participate in government orders," J. Subrt said. [Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 20 May 94 p 2] 

