CSO 

<F P=106> [Appendix to Statute on Organizing and Carrying Out Expert </F>
Examination of Planning and Other Materials and Documents 
Substantiating the Safety of Nuclear- and Radiation-Hazardous 
Objects (Products) and Production Facilities (Technology): 
"Requirements for Expert Decision"] 
  [Text] 
<H8>  1. General Requirements </H8>
  1.1. The expert decision should be objective, conclusive and 
well-argued. Analysis of the substantiating documents, 
conclusions and comments should be accompanied by references to 
specific requirements for the normative documents or to other 
scientific-technical materials. 
  1.2. As a rule, all the components of each substantiating 
document (chapters, sections, clauses, individual paragraphs) 
are analyzed. Their numbers must be indicated in the text of the 
decision (for a paragraph -- location on the page). 
  1.3. If there are points in the substantiating documents on 
which the expert cannot give a competent evaluation, the 
appropriate recommendations for their expert examination by 
other specialists should be entered in the expert decision. 
  1.4. The expert decision should contain the following 
obligatory sections: 
  --tasks of the expert examination; 
  --criteria adopted for the evaluation; 
  --expert evaluations; 
  --conclusions and recommendations. 
<H8>  2. Requirements for the Section "Tasks of the Expert </H8>
Examination" 
  The tasks of the expert examination should be set forth in 
accordance with the requirements of the assignment, as applied 
to the composition and structure of the documents under 
consideration. 
<H8>  3. Requirements for the Contents of the Section "Criteria </H8>
Adopted for the Evaluation" 
  The adequacy of the criteria, norms, rules, methodologies, 
programs, instructions and other normative-technical documents 
(NTD) on the safety of the stated activity used (adopted) by the 
declarant should be evaluated. 
  If the expert agrees on the scope of the list submitted, he 
should confirm, in this section of the decision, that he will 
analyze the materials using the corresponding criteria of the 
NTD of this list. 
  If the expert does not agree with the scope of the list in 
this section of the decision, he must indicate additional NTD, 
in accordance with the demands of which the expert examination 
will be carried out. 
  If, in the opinion of an expert, certain norms applicable to 
the system (element) under consideration are lacking in the list 
of NTD on safety of Russian Gosatomnadzor, then in order to 
fulfill the task of the expert examination, other documents may 
be drawn in: general industrial NTD, foreign NTD (IAEA 
[International Atomic Energy Agency]) and other published 
scientific-technical materials, the use of which should be 
substantiated by the expert. 
<H8>  4. Requirements for the Content of the Section, "Expert </H8>
Evaluations" 
  4.1. The section, "Expert Evaluations," should as a rule 
contain unambiguous answers to the following questions. 
  4.1.1. Does the expert feel that: 
  --the designation of the section (subsection) was correctly 
chosen; 
  --there are indications of the stage of development of the 
object (product) or production facility (technology) under 
consideration; 
  --there is an adequate list of reference documents; 
  --the terminology corresponds to the terminology accepted in 
domestic NTD. 
  If information is lacking or is not complete enough, or 
non-standard terms and designations are used, comments should be 
made, and moreover, on the terms and designations -- with 
allusions to the NTD. 
  4.1.2. Does the information presented correspond to the 
requirements of the specific points of the NTD, the force of 
which extends to the object (product) or production facility 
(technology) under consideration. 
  4.1.3. Does the expert feel that the chapter (section) 
contains suitable descriptive information with respect to its 
full reflection of: 
  --the structural and technological peculiarities of the 
object (product), production facility (technology) and systems 
and elements important for safety; 
  --work under normal operating conditions, and with 
disruption 
of the conditions for normal operation, emergency situations, 
planning and project emergencies; 
  --interaction and inter-influence under all the above 
conditions; 
  --spatial arrangement; 
  --degree of substantiation of information presented. 
  4.1.4. Do the adequacy, amount of information and quality of 
executing the graphic information presented suit the expert. 
  4.1.5. Has the nuclear- and/or radiation-hazardous object 
(product), technology (production facilities) under 
consideration been classified for safety, seismic- and 
fire-resistance, etc. (if this classification is stipulated by 
the NTD), and is it presented to the expert fully and correctly. 
  4.1.6. Is there information on the control and monitoring 
systems and other systems (ventilation, communications, etc.) 
involved in the functioning of the nuclear- and/or 
radiation-hazardous object (product) and production facility 
(technology) under consideration, and does it meet the 
requirements of the corresponding NTD. 
  4.1.7. Is the substantiation of the choice of materials, 
technological qualities, monitoring- and repair capacity made 
adequately and fully in the chapters (section) under 
consideration, and does it meet the requirements of the 
corresponding NTD. 
  4.1.8. Are the problems of radiation protection of the 
personnel and population, as applied to the nuclear- and/or 
radiation-hazardous object (product) and production facility 
(technology), adequately and fully substantiated under all work 
conditions, including a disruption in the conditions for normal 
operation, and planning and design emergencies. 
  4.1.9. Have the problems of ensuring high quality been taken 
into consideration in the material presented, and does the 
information meet the requirements of the corresponding NTD. 
  4.2. An approach analogous with that described above should 
be observed with respect to information: 
  --on running-in; 
  --on monitoring and testing when operating; 
  --on reliability analysis; 
  --on the limits and conditions of operation; 
  --on removing from operation; 
  --on the list of initial events and analysis of accidents, 
and moreover here the expert should evaluate the declarant's 
approach to determining the list of repair procedures for normal 
operation, disruptions in the conditions for normal operation, 
emergency situations, planning accidents, project accidents; 
break-down of the list into groups by type of accident; 
selection from the group of the accidents with the most serious 
consequences, for their subsequent analysis. 
  When the expert does not agree with the approaches to 
analysis proposed by the declarant, a different scheme for 
analysis of the above-listed conditions should if possible be 
recommended in the expert decision. 
  4.3. The expert should evaluate the level of the calculation 
and experimental substantiations of the information on safety: 
  --the presence of information on all calculations made; 
  --sufficient and full volume of calculations made, the 
degree 
of consideration of all factors affecting the results of the 
calculation; 
  --the presence of data sufficient to make an expert 
calculation (calculation system, assumptions, initial data, 
results, their interpretation, conclusions); 
  --the expediency of carrying out expert calculation; if it 
is 
impossible for this expert to make it, it is desirable that a 
recommendation be made on the organization, enterprise or expert 
able to perform this expert calculation; 
  --the presence of information on all the calculation 
programs 
used and their certification or verification; 
  --the volume and adequacy of describing the programs for an 
understanding and evaluation of their acceptability; 
  --the presence of information on experiments made, 
particularly on nuclear- and radiation-hazardous objects 
(products) and production facilities (technology) which contain 
new technical approaches, as compared with those formerly used; 
  --the adequacy of the experimental base used; 
  --the volume and adequacy of the description of the 
experiments for understanding and evaluation; 
  --the presence of substantiations of the scale of the 
experimental devices and the suitability of other assumptions 
and restrictions used in the experiment, in relation to actual 
work conditions. 
<H8>  5. Requirements for the Content of the Section, "Conclusions </H8>
and Recommendations" 
  In the section, "Conclusions and Recommendations," on the 
basis of the comments formulated in the preceding part of the 
decision, the expert should draw conclusions as to the degree to 
which the material under consideration meets the requirements of 
the NTD on safety. 
  The following proposals may serve as recommendations to 
eliminate existing shortcomings and bring the object to the 
required safety level: 
  --information in addition to the existing volume; 
  --the need to perform additional calculations, calculation 
analyses and experimental research; 
  --making additional analyses of the development and course 
of 
accidents. 
  If, in the opinion of the expert, the material under 
consideration satisfies the requirements of NTD, and an expert 
examination is carried out to determine the possibility of 
issuing a provisional or special permit for the type of activity 
overseen by Russian Gosatomnadzor, the expert must formulate his 
recommendations for maintaining the conditions for issuing the 
permit. 
<H8>  6. Requirements for Legalizing the Expert Decision </H8>
  6.1. The description of the expert decision indicates a full 
designation of the substantiating document. The last name and 
initials of the experts should be indicated after the 
designation. 
  6.2. The expert decision is presented in the form of a 
typewritten text, verified by the stamp of the expert 
enterprise, in the number of copies indicated in the assignment 
for carrying out the expert examination, and on a 5.25-inch 
floppy disk (diskette). 
  The diskettes should be formatted for 360 kilobytes. The 
files on the diskette should be compatible with the LEXICON 
editor routine. 
  The format of the file pages: number of lines per page -- 
40-43, left-hand margin -- 8 spaces, length of line -- 70 
spaces, paragraph indentation -- 13 spaces. 
  6.3. The typed text should be signed by all the experts 
carrying out the expert examination of the corresponding 
document. 
  [Signed] Russian Gosatomnadzor 
  Registered by 
Scientific-Technical Administration of Russian Gosatomnadzor 
  11 April 1994 
  Registration No 100-94 

