CSO 

  [Text] Cairo--The Egyptian Businessmen's Association called 
upon the Egyptian Government to embark on certain structural 
economic reforms in anticipation of the effects on the Egyptian 
economy of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade [GATT] and 
in order to maximize the benefits [to Egypt] of that agreement. 
  An Association study emphasized that 95 percent of world 
trade is covered by the agreement, which is to be finalized in 
Marrakech, Morocco, in the middle of next month. It should be 
mandated, therefore, to seek to benefit by that agreement to the 
extent possible. 
  With regard to the remarks and demands that the Egyptian 
side 
could contribute before the final signing of the agreement, the 
study explained the possibility of focusing on the benefits the 
new organization, the World Trade Organization, could offer 
developing countries in terms of information on the 
implementation of the agreement, training the cadres involved 
with it in both government and private sectors, and reinforcing 
guarantees for the protection of national industries. 
  The study suggested bolstering the organizational setup that 
would monitor the domestic implementation of the agreement to 
ensure full participation by private sector institutions. 
  On the development and promotion of Egyptian exports, the 
Association called for a comprehensive strategy appropriate for 
recent developments in the world trade system. Such a strategy, 
to be devised by the private sector in partnership with state 
agencies, would focus on certain areas, such as giving exports 
priority and preferential treatment in the state's economic 
development policy, identifying the goods and services that 
offer comparative advantage in propelling the export sector and 
boosting its potential, lifting export impediments, and 
providing needed export incentives. 
  As to investments under GATT, the Association called for 
lifting trade restrictions that have a negative impact on 
foreign investments. The Egyptian Businessmen's Association 
emphasized that removing foreign investment restrictions could 
be of considerable help in boosting the activities of 
multinational corporations, especially since benefits to Egypt 
from such corporations so far have been far less than minimal. 
  The study strongly recommended adoption of the ISO 
[International Standardization Organization] 9000 system of 
standards and measures since it will be a vital component of 
future export operations. 
  The study also emphasized that the GATT-stipulated principle 
of competition in the field of services would be more beneficial 
to Egypt than harmful since Egypt is one of those countries 
whose services account for a high percentage of national income. 
Services [in Egypt] are also a major source of foreign exchange, 
especially from tourism and expatriate remittances. 
  The Businessmen's Association also called upon various 
government agencies to prepare themselves to meet the 
agreement's new requirements in order to benefit from it to the 
maximum. It pointed out that efficiency and production quality 
will be the major criteria for competition even among the 
developing nations themselves. 
  Separately, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT was told by Sa'id al-Tawil, 
president of the Egyptian Businessmen's Association, that 
reducing customs duties and other fees and opening world markets 
to Egyptian products would inevitably propel exports since 
domestic products have been encountering sizable obstacles in 
European and American markets that have not been serious in 
their commitment to international trade rules. 
  Al-Tawil elucidated: "Some may believe that reducing trade 
restrictions inherently carries negative implications for 
developing countries in general, such as exposing national 
industries, and especially nascent ones, to intense competition, 
particularly from advanced and Asian nations. Those objections, 
however, must not raise Egyptian fears because the agreement has 
given the group of developing nations, including Egypt, the 
right to protect its industries and to monitor domestic markets 
against the dumping of foreign products." 
  He pointed out that one shortcoming of the agreement is that 
it did not open the door fully to textile exports but rather 
maintained the quota system, which is to be phased out over 10 
years ending in 2004. That, however, could serve the interests 
of Egypt since the sudden abolition of quotas could expose 
Egyptian products to intense Asian competition, and since Egypt 
does not exhaust its quota. 
  It has been claimed that prices of imported farm products 
could go up when they are no longer subsidized by the advanced 
nations. Those fears may be exaggerated, however, since the 
reduction in subsidies will be no more than 20 percent and will 
be phased-in over six years. This would also be mitigated by 
other factors such the facilities granted by international world 
financial organizations. [as published] 
  On tourism, the president of the Egyptian Businessmen's 
Association pointed out that Egypt's openness to the world 
produced a large increase in the number of tourists and in 
tourism revenues. That sector was liberalized to the extent 
possible in the market while safeguarding Egyptian interests. 

