BFN 

<F P=106> [By Herold Jean-Francois] </F>
  [Text] Port-au-Prince, 13 May (EFE) -- De facto President 
Emile Jonassaint, 84, and his allies have been isolated by the 
country's major political sectors despite the fact that 
Jonassaint is supported by the coupist military. 
  Former de facto Prime Minister Marc Bazin has joined the 
voices condemning Jonassaint's designation as provisional 
president. 
  A minority of legislators, with the backing of the top 
military commands and General Raoul Cedras, leader of the 
military coup that toppled Constitutional President 
Jean-Bertrand Aristide on 30 September 1991, named Jonassaint to 
replace him. "There is no serious basis for what happened on 
11 May; not at a political consensus level, a constitutional 
level, or in foreign relations," stated Bazin, leader of the 
Movement for the Establishment of Democracy in Haiti (MIDH). 
According to Bazin, the "Jonassaint solution" complicates and 
delays a solution to the crisis in Haiti because it closes the 
door to dialogue. In remarks made on the radio, Bazin said his 
party disagreed with the designation and considered it "a 
dead-end street." He went on to ask for "a realistic 
compromise to rescue Haiti's democracy and independence." 
  "I hope," he said, "that before 21 May, the date the total 
embargo against this country goes into force, we can prevent the 
escalation toward absurdity and desolation." 
  Ferge Gilles of the Haitian Nationalist Progressive 
Revolutionary Party (Pampra), said socialists will not 
participate in the future government of Jonassaint and called 
for the resumption of dialogue and negotiation. 
  With the rejection of these two political groups, Pampra and 
MIDH, which have representatives in the Assembly, as well as of 
the constitutionalists, Jonassaint and his allies have been 
practically isolated, which could have an impact on the 
formation of his cabinet. 
  Louis E. Roy, considered the father of the Haitian 
Constitution and a colleague of Jonassaint in the Assembly that 
drafted the Constitution, said it saddened him that a former 
colleague went along with a military ploy. 
  Roy made those remarks from exile in Canada and said he 
understands that the "judge was pressured by those who forced 
Aristide to abandon power." 
  Only Humbert de Ronceray, leader of the Mobilization for 
National Development (MDN) and proponent of the appointment of a 
new president to replace Aristide, has endorsed Jonassaint's 
appointment. 
  Outgoing Prime Minister Robert Malval; Aristide spokesman 
Jean Claude Martineau; Victor Benoit, leader of the National 
Congress of Democratic Forces (Conacom); and the National Front 
for Change and Democracy (FNCD) that took Aristide to power have 
condemned Jonassaint's "illegal" and "illegitimate" designation. 
The Haitian Workers Federation [Central de los Trabajadores 
Haitianos] said Bernard Sansaricq, Jonassaint, and those who 
have supported the ploy will be chiefly responsible for any 
possible foreign intervention. Banes Cherestal, secretary 
general of the National Federation of Popular Organizations, 
described the appointment as a new coup d'etat that will 
exacerbate the extreme poverty of the Haitian people. 
  Jonassaint has begun consultations to name the new prime 
minister, a task that will be difficult in view of the threats 
by the U.S. Government to cancel the entry visas of those who 
join his government. 

