BFN 

  [Text] Prague, April 8 (CTK) -- The following is the full 
text of Czech Premier Vaclav Klaus's address at the first 
congress of the Bohemian-Moravian Chamber of Trade Unions 
(CMKOS) today. 
  The government considers trade unions an important element 
of 
a democratic society. I see trade unions as a good example of 
organizing, on a voluntary basis, people who are united by 
common interests and who want to pursue these interests together 
within our democratic society. There had never been, there are 
not and there will never be any doubts about this. 
  The government is attentively watching the trade union 
movement's transformation in the Czech Republic, a process which 
is accompanied by the same search and the same difficulties as 
the transformation of the whole country. I wish you well in 
managing successfully and quickly the transformation of the 
former trade union movement -- false, formal, monolithic, 
passively agreeing with the communist regime and with obligatory 
membership -- into a voluntary, authentic, active and 
pluralistic organization. This transformation is in the 
interests of us all, in the interests of the whole country. 
  I firmly believe that like our whole society the trade union 
organization should also be consistently reformed from below 
because the essential meaning of trade unions lies in the 
relationship of individual union members and their basic trade 
union organizations on the company level towards employers and 
towards the management of the company -- that is in the 
relationship on a micro level and not on a macro level which 
consists of relations between the trade unions' leadership and 
the government. These relations are only supplementary ones, 
they are only that famous top of the iceberg which, although 
seen more frequently in the media are not decisive. I hope that 
this is exactly the sense in which you understand certain recent 
government statements about its intention to gradually withdraw 
from the Tripartite (the Council of Economic and Social 
Agreement comprising representatives of the government, unions 
and employers) which was established in the post-November 1989 
period or about its possible transition into a consultative 
body, an idea which we are in no case abandoning. I hope that 
some of our reservations against higher collective agreements 
and others are understood exactly in this sense. 
  Our emphasis on micro-relations, on relations on a company 
level, stems from our deep conviction that every voluntarily 
established civic organization should represent its members and 
that it should not speak on behalf of its non-members, be they 
employees of the same company or workers of the same profession. 
In the first case it would approach the status and the role of 
a political party, in the second it would be something close to 
guild or a professional chamber. I believe that trade unions 
are neither the first nor the second. 
  The government understands the employees' interest on the 
company level, it fully respects it and believes that this 
interest, defended by the unions, contributes to something that 
surely concerns us all -- the creation of a well functioning and 
prosperous society and economy where we will all feel good, 
where we all find the place that suits us and where the 
elementary principle of honesty and fair play reigns. 
  The government is completely aware that the interests of the 
employee and employer are not identical in the short term and 
maybe also the medium term (in the long term it is less clear) 
and therefore we consider it utterly logical that this clash of 
interests is institutionalized -- on the company level -- in 
collective agreements. As I have already said we do have our 
doubts about the meaning and actual contribution to be made by 
collective rights of a higher type and in particular of 
employer-employee negotiations on the macro-level. 
  We consider erroneous and contentious any attempts to 
transfer automatically wages or other employment conditions from 
one company to another, from one branch of industry to another, 
or even from one country to another. The government 
nevertheless does not have the least doubt about the mission of 
the unions and it would be wrong to accuse it of doubting this. 
  At this point I am coming to some thoughts on our opinion 
of the operation of unions on the macro-level. I have 
repeatedly spoken in favor of consultative relations, in favor 
of mutually informing each other, in favor of listening to each 
other and thanks to all of this in favor of significant mutual 
enrichment. The government does not have a patent on 
reasonableness and thus listens carefully, and I can assure you 
that in the future also it will listen to union recommendations 
on legislation and the economy and the social policies of this 
country. The government is seeking the fundamental consensus of 
the people on basic questions of our present and our future and 
it realizes that the unions play an exceptionally important role 
in this. 
  Hence we respect the Council of Economic and Social 
Agreement 
and will endeavor to continue to negotiate within its framework, 
even if the role of the government (and state) as employer 
changes in an essential way because of privatization. We will 
bring proposals on partial changes and shifts in the Tripartite 
talks, but I would like to emphasize, here before you, that we 
will not call for any revolution, nor for radical change. 
Partial differences of opinion in these matters should not, in 
my view, be dramatized. 
  In its economic and social policy, the government strives 
for 
the maximum possible well-being of all our citizens and maximum 
possible employment since we are aware of the unpropitious 
effect, one which degrades the human nature, of high and 
long-term unemployment. I believe that every one of our 
fellow-citizens and union members can see the extent of our 
country's achievement in the period since November 1989, and 
that they can see and assess them not in isolation but 
  -- in the context of the unique task of removing the 
communist heritage and 
  -- in relation to the other countries faced with a task 
similar to one facing this country. 
  I am not drawing on any statistics here because I think we 
have discussed them quite often and because after all everyone 
is able to see them all around them in their everyday life. I 
feel certain that everyone knows that our rate of inflation as 
well as unemployment are among the lowest in the world, and 
usually run at ten times lower then elsewhere. 
  Nor do I believe that recent developments in employment 
legislation were a turn for the worse for the workers' situation 
and I also believe that the recent pointed differences between 
the government and the unions were no more (and no less) than 
different opinions on one and the same issue and that they are 
common differences of opinion which every democratic society 
allows to exist legitimately. 
  I cannot agree with people saying, as they did at your 
recent 
demonstration, that unions have to face up to "apathetic 
politicians and deputies" since I can responsibly claim that in 
the recent past the government accepted lots of union proposals 
on wide-ranging issues; I cannot accept reproaches that we are 
"unable to listen to the people" and that we "shut ourselves 
away in offices, luxurious foreign cars and behind empty little 
phrases," because it simply is not true. We, as well as others, 
may not succeed at everything but it is not true that we do not 
strive for maximum possible dialogue with the people of this 
country. Nor do I agree that we fail to show "social 
sensibility" since we have implemented and continue on a day to 
day basis to implement a number of social measures. I do not 
believe it fitting to say at that same demonstration that "we 
must not let people at work feel like helpless cogs in a 
machine." I, for one, do not believe that this is really the 
union members' dominant feeling -- except perhaps of those who 
in the past Communist era became used to a leisurely working 
pace. 
  I am convinced -- and I believe that most of you will feel 
the same -- that we have been tackling the sorely needed task of 
social change at the fastest pace and least individual expense 
possible. This is why I also cannot agree with the view, voiced 
at your recent demonstration, that we "as citizens 
democratically voted for belt-tightening," since I want to say 
that we did not vote for anything like that. Our belts were 
tightened without our consent by the former communist regime, 
and in the moments of returning to normal society we are not 
left with any other options. The collapse of communism and 
consequently that of our Comecon [CEMA -- Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance] markets has led to inescapable and 
irrevocable losses which of necessity it will take all of us to 
repair. If we could go on exporting our goods to the former 
Soviet Union, a number of our companies would be better off than 
they are. But you yourselves know best that this is what the 
government, along with you, wished. Unfortunately, we have not 
had any choice in this and we have not begun to tighten our 
belts of our own free will. It must be said that in the past we 
not only lived off the more distant past but also off future 
while today we are left with no one and nothing to live off. 
When I hear someone say that "already far too many people feel 
that this belt is beginning to be too tight," once again I 
cannot agree. After real incomes plummeted in 1991, at the time 
of the breakup of Comecon, they grew 10 per cent in 1992, 4.5 
per cent in 1993 and in 1994 the trend has so far been holding. 
I am sure that this year will see an economic recovery equal to 
a rise of several per cent in the GNP and that this will enable 
further growth in real incomes. I do not see any reasons why 
the real income growth should stop in the near future. 
  If I say this I also say, in the same breath, that we are 
aware of the irregularity of economic and wage development 
within our country and of certain remaining social problems 
which weigh heavily on some of our fellow citizens, and 
therefore we are trying our utmost -- in most cases, I think, 
not in conflict with union views -- to perfect our social 
policy. Not at the expense of our future, but on the basis of 
our possibilities today and our activities today. 
  I know the unions do not like the introduction of pay 
regulation, but after the excesses of too fast a growth in wages 
in some companies over the last two years, the step 
unfortunately was essential. I believe the very cautious extent 
of regulation that was chosen makes two basic things possible: 
  -- the growth of real wages and 
  -- essential wage differentiation between successful and 
unsuccessful companies, effective and ineffective workers. 
  And this is precisely what is most needed today for all of 
us. A sensible level of wages is after all the most important 
precondition for maintaining a low level of unemployment and for 
the general success of our post-communist era. 
  I believe that in all these things and in many others we are 
not too distant from the opinions of the unions and therefore 
the little phrase at your recent demonstration that "we will 
choose more carefully at the next elections" was only rhetorical 
overstatement and did not represent a serious and universal 
appraisal of the situation in our country. 
  The era of state ownership and state enterprises is drawing 
to an end. The share of private ownership is increasing; 
employers, entrepreneurs and private owners of businesses are 
getting stronger. The counterweight to this is the unions and we 
want them to really be a counterweight and contribute in this 
way to the creation of a conceptually, economically and socially 
balanced society. I am certain that you will address these 
matters at your congress and that on the basis of this you will 
formulate your strategy for the time to come. 
  For all these reasons I wish your congress great success. 

