Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Alexandria, 16 Jan (MENA)-- Arab League Secretary 
General Dr. 'Ismat 'Abd-al-Majid has affirmed that the new stage 
in the new world order demands restoring Arab solidarity, 
restoring confidence in Arab relations, and achieving economic 
integration in order to seriously and objectively deal with the 
changes that are taking place in international political and 
economic relations. 
  Speaking at a meeting with members of the Businessmen's 
Association in Alexandria last night, Dr. 'Abd-al-Majid said 
that the Arab nation possess economic, human, and cultural 
resources that would enable it to carry out an effective role in 
the new world order. As a regional organization, the Arab 
League can play an effective role in most major issues facing 
the Arab world. 
  He added that the Arab League dealt objectively with the 
Gulf 
crisis in 1990. It views the Palestinian-Israeli Declaration of 
Principles as an important turning point in the Arab-Israeli 
conflict. The Arab League also welcomes the efforts to 
establish a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East and 
supports the Arab states participating in the peace process. 
  Dr. 'Abd-al-Majid pointed out that the Arab position on a 
peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict is based on the 
implementation of the UN Security Council resolutions in this 
regard and emphasizes the principle of land for peace, the right 
of the Palestinian people to self-determination and to return, 
and on the Arabism of Jerusalem. 
  He added that there is a need for progress on the 
Israeli-Syrian, Israeli-Jordanian, and Israeli-Lebanese tracks 
in order to establish confidence and advance the peace process. 
Israel must realize that it will be the primary beneficiary 
from peace and stability in the Middle East. 
  Regarding the Middle East economic market, the Arab League 
secretary general affirmed that the establishment of such a 
market does not frighten the Arabs, because peace with Israel 
does not mean it will have any economic advantage over the 
Arabs. Israel will be dealt with according to criteria and 
controls established by each state according to its national 
interest. Each Arab state enjoys full sovereignty and will not 
be forced to deal with Israel. 
  He said that any Middle East arrangement to which Israel is 
a 
party must not be at the expense of Arab relations. Regional 
cooperation in the Middle East will not necessarily be confined 
to the Arab states and Israel, but might extend to other states 
in the region, such as Iran, Turkey, and Cyprus. Therefore, the 
Middle Eastern market will be a free trade area involving 
reduced customs barriers, with each state maintaining its own 
customs policy. 
  Dr. 'Abd-al-Majid said that the Arab boycott of Israel was 
imposed for certain reasons, and when these reasons cease to 
exist, the Arab states can consider ending the boycott. 
  Referring to the GATT agreement and its effects on the Arab 
states, Dr. 'Abd-al-Majid affirmed the need for the Arabs to 
deal with this issue with full understanding and awareness. The 
Arabs must also achieve economic integration so as to protect 
Arab national security. He called for Arab reconciliation as a 
prerequisite for restoring Arab solidarity and achieving the 
aspirations and ambitions of the Arab nation. 
  He said that the restoration of Arab solidarity is 
accomplished by respecting the Arab states' independence, 
territorial integrity, and sovereignty over their resources, and 
by noninterference in their internal affairs. It will also be 
necessary to close the file of the Gulf crisis and begin 
establishing an Arab security structure to achieve stability and 
national security by intrinsic means. There must be guarantees 
that Iraq's invasion of Kuwait will not be repeated. The Arab 
League must be provided with the necessary means to resolve Arab 
conflicts by peaceful means. He said that this requires that 
serious consideration be given to amending the Arab League 
Charter by adding annexes to it and establishing an Arab court 
of justice. 
  Dr. 'Abd-al-Majid also spoke about the Arab League's role in 
solving the Libyan-Western crisis, the problem of Iran's 
occupation of three islands belonging to the United Arab 
Emirates, solving the Somali problem, and efforts to end the 
problem of Kuwaiti prisoners and missing in Iraq and solve the 
problems facing the Iraqi people as a result of the sanctions 
imposed on them. 

