Language: <F P=105> Macedonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Borko Stanoevski, governor of the National </F>
Bank of Macedonia, by Vasko Eftov and Vesna M. Bozinovska; place 
and date not given: "Balancing Between the Government's Course 
and the Banks"] 
  [Text] Our conversation with Borko Stanoevski, 
governor of the NBM [National Bank of Macedonia (The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM)] takes place as calls 
for his replacement ahead of schedule are becoming louder. 
Allegedly, his stubborn attitude toward certain questions has 
not won him great sympathy among certain members of the 
government. And while competition in the press about the names 
of his possible successors has already become intense, Mr. 
Stanoevski, in his interview with VECER, begins to speak 
sincerely about these controversial issues. 
  [VECER] Mr. Stanoevski, it is precisely in the monetary 
sphere that there have been open questions about the 
negotiations with the World Bank that took place last week in 
Skopje. Were the ambiguities clarified during the somewhat 
delayed visit of Minister Trpevski to Washington? 
  [Stanoevski] During the negotiations with the World Bank, 
the 
particular problem was voiced because of their demand that we be 
very restrictive with respect to further loans to enterprises 
that are not liquidated. Naturally, they have demanded that the 
government or the NBM through its processes relieve the banks of 
that burden and issue a regulation through which they would be 
prohibited from issuing credit to enterprises that are not able 
to meet their obligations. This issue was also present to a 
great extent in dicussions with the IMF. I, personally, 
discussed the matter with the chief of the mission who was here 
and convinced him that this demand was unacceptable. 
<H5>  Monetary Disagreements </H5>
  [VECER] Was the disagreement precisely the reason the 
negotiations were abandoned at one point? 
  [Stanoevski] I did not abandon them; I have never abandoned 
any negotiations. But, on one occasion, we reached the point at 
which, instead of increasing the investment by as much as 21 
percent, they proposed a reduction of six percent. We could not 
accept that and proposed another solution. The increase in the 
investments of the resources of the banks could go up to 16 
percent; the fact that we were unable to go to a variant growth 
in the investments so that they would amount to 21 percent was 
that the entire program could not be brought before the Board of 
Directors, so we agreed that this should not be a criterion for 
fulfilling the program. We documented our doubts that, because 
of the fact that a large number of enterprises were in 
particularly difficult circumstances, that instrument could not 
be put into effect. We agreed to consult a second time, in the 
second quarter of this year, on the basis on the results that 
would be achieved during the first three months. 
  The World Bank suddenly demanded that we refuse to offer 
credits to enterprises that have great losses, but those are 
enterprises with a great number of workers; some 20 enterprises 
have suffered 90 percent of the losses and have about 40 percent 
of the employees in the economy. For the state, that would be 
very difficult to accept, and a compromise solution was found. 
It was approved by us and the government. A group of the 25 
largest losing enterprises will, after presenting concluding 
accounts, be able to use credits from the banks thereafter, but 
only if the government guarantees them. But this arrangement is 
valid only until 30 June, and after that date the enterprises 
will be able to use credits only if they are creditworthy. At 
the beginning, the World Bank wanted such a decision to be made 
by the NBM, even though I think that the NBM does not have the 
authority to introduce such a regulation. Now, it is necessary 
for the government to do it, and the NBM assumes the obligation 
in the second quarter from the possible growth of denar 
investments, which amount to 608 million denars, to ensure 300 
million denars to be used only by these enterprises. We will 
devote the remaining 308 million denars to the use of the 
remaining enterprises. The NBM will issue that regulation. 
Otherwise, as far as the methods for granting credit to the 
greatest losers up to 30 June, the government held a special 
session at which each of its members had to declare whether he 
was prepared to accept that obligation. 
  [VECER] January 15 will be remembered as the date on which 
the Board of Directors of the International Monetary Fund met 
and the program had to be verified. But could that deadline not 
be extended somehow? 
  [Stanoevski] No, the IMF and World Bank boards did not set 
the date in advance. According to the latest information, the 
meeting of the IMF Board of Directors was set for yesterday. I 
think that the program will pass without difficulty because we 
succeeded in reaching an agreement about these details in the 
past few days. On 8 February, the World Bank board will meet, 
and I think that there will not be any problem there, either. 
  [VECER] It means that the positions on our side are also in 
agreement. How is it that we found out on Wednesday that you had 
a meeting with Prime Minister Crvenkovski and other ministers 
who are involved in the work? 
  [Stanoevski] Everything is in agreement, there are no open 
questions. All the technical problems associated with providing 
resources, for getting through, and settling obligations toward 
the bank should be completed by the middle of next month, which 
will be followed by withdrawals against the first tranches. 
  [VECER] Will we pay off the debt ourselves or will there be 
an alternative whereby Holland or the Central Bank in Zurich 
will do it first, and then we would settle with them? 
  [Stanoevski] It will be a combination. The main debt, which 
reaches its deadline for payment at the end of September and 
amounts to about $107 million, should be paid at once through 
the bank for transfer to the account in Zurich and in 
conjunction with the Netherlands Central Bank. Later, we will 
settle the debt to them either with resources from donors or 
from our reserves. Otherwise, up to now, about $27 million has 
been agreed upon by the donors, part of which has been paid in 
advance and part of which awaits decisions by the governments of 
those countries. Those are the percentages. At the present time, 
the donors' assistance will be about $35 million, but the 
process of acquiring the donors' assistance will be extended 
throughout the entire year. 
  [VECER] Will the Soros credit be left out of the 
combination? 
  [Stanoevski] No, the Soros Foundation is not left out of the 
combination. Thereafter, to survive, we will incur debts of $25 
million, if everything is passed by our parliament, of course. 
<H5>  Expanded Independence </H5>
  [VECER] Since May last year, the Central Bank has gained 
greater autonomy in its activities, above all vis-a-vis the 
government. How do you evaluate such a loosening trend? 
  [Stanoevski] You see, the Central Bank is quasi autonomous 
in 
its activities, which is a consequence of the Constitution of 
the Republic of Macedonia. As far as its work is concerned, the 
bank is basically responsible to the parliament. However, in the 
true meaning of the word--autonomy--an independent central bank 
does not exist anywhere in the world, as the bank directs 
monetary policy which is only one segment of the macroeconomic 
policy of a state, which is proposed, enacted, and carried out 
by the government. Here, it means that a very close, 
coexistential, and routine cooperation must exist. In that 
context, it is understood that there can often be disagreements. 
However, there are frequent discussions about the extent to 
which a measure, from the aspect of monetary policy, is 
acceptable to the government. 
  [VECER] Is there an unwritten rule about how much the 
Central 
Bank is independent in its work, and how much the government 
wants to focus attention on itself? 
  [Stanoevski] Perhaps there is some truth in that. I do not 
know how to approach that question. You should ask the 
government that. 
  [VECER] Last spring, the legal decisions needed by the 
National Bank to enable the Central Bank to gain a greater 
degree of autonomy in its activities vis-a-vis the state organs 
had great difficulty in getting passed. It is even said that the 
government accepted the measures under pressure from the IMF. It 
is also interesting--this metamorphosis of the leadership of the 
NBM from our conservative attitudes with respect to the monetary 
sovereignty of Macedonia to the hard work, at least under our 
circumstances, of taking radical steps for the greater 
independence of the Central Bank. 
  [Stanoevski] We have not been conservative when the issue of 
monetary independence arose, even though to a foreigner it may 
have appeared that way. You know, 1991 was a very exceptional 
year. In the parliament, those preliminary steps were taken; for 
three or four months, we had no elected government; the priority 
was to get decisions with political substance.... Actually, that 
year, not a single item from the economic sphere came before the 
parliament. 
  [VECER] Okay. Do you treat monetary independence only as an 
economic problem? 
  [Stanoevski] It is a multifaceted problem. In 1991 we made 
good use of 11 percent of the emission from the National Bank of 
Yugoslavia, even though according to the size of the social 
product, we could have exploited at most 5.5 percent and bought 
currency reserves from the National Bank of Yugoslavia to the 
magnitude of 197 million dollars, and that is 17.5 percent of 
the total currency sold by the National Bank of Yugoslavia for 
that year. We did not buy that much currency in the three 
previous years. That year, Macedonia was swimming in gasoline, 
so we began building currency reserves. 
  [VECER] In what way did the government transgress in order 
to 
accept the measures for greater independence of the Central Bank 
last spring, even though the members of the cabinet of Mr. 
Crvenkovski did not in the end agree with such an alternative? 
  [Stanoevski] No, they did not agree; they were just 
indecisive. I tell you frankly that we were also hesitant. I 
endured great apprehension over the changes. Imagine, we, who, 
for 50 years were on a fixed course, suddenly had to change to a 
course determined by the market. Generally speaking, it was not 
simple. Meanwhile, I must say here that, at the beginning, there 
were still many progressives in the government who supported 
this program. We had a much greater misunderstanding outside the 
government--in the Economic Chamber and in other institutions 
which showed greater skepticism. 
<H5>  Communication With the Government </H5>
  [VECER] How are your relations with the government? It is 
said that your stubborn attitude on that specific issue did not 
find you great sympathy among particular government ministers, 
above all, those directly responsible for the economy. 
  [Stanoevski] No, we have already talked about that, about 
the 
opposing interests, which are known. 
  [VECER] Yes, but we did not talk about the misunderstandings 
that have been reported about interest rate policy last year. 
  [Stanoevski] Okay, we have discussed interest rates. The 
government adopted some recommendations and resolutions about 
interest rate policy which were created here. Together, we 
estimated that the interest rate policy of the commercial banks 
in the first half of last year was not set realistically. The 
economy rightly rebelled against the high interest rates. We 
discussed this problem at the Bank's Council, and the government 
also discussed it at its own special session. We came up with 
identical decisions: we charged the banks with re-examining 
their interest rate policies. 
  [VECER] You say that the government discussed the interest 
rate policy at its session. Why should the government discuss 
the interest rate policy when it is the responsibility of the 
NBM? Is that not just interference by meddlers? 
  [Stanoevski] No, the government discussed it under pressure 
from the chamber and from a group of economic leaders who 
demanded an audience with the government. Otherwise, the 
interest policy of the commercial banks is not within the 
competence of either the NBM or the government. 
  [VECER] Is it true that the Central Bank does not have any 
difficulty in carrying out the inadequate interest rate policy 
in the commercial banks without anyone taking administrative 
measures against it? 
  [Stanoevski] We do not have any legal basis for such 
administrative measures. 
  [VECER] Don't you think that the NBM, however, should be 
able 
to regulate interest rate policy with administrative measures? 
Countries like the U.S. until 1986 or Spain until 1987 fixed 
interest rates in the commercial banks using administrative 
means, didn't they? 
  [Stanoevski] Okay, I agree that there should be some 
measures. However, the measures should be based on indirect 
means, through monetary policy measures in order to cut interest 
rates. And we will try to do that above all through auctions. 
  [VECER] Were you on the same wave length as the government 
when it was a matter of the financial reorganization of the 
banks, especially with respect to the formation of an agency for 
the financial reorganization of the banks? 
  [Stanoevski] Here we had a small problem. Now, there is no 
kind of agreement. There were two theses. We all agreed that an 
agency for the financial reorganization of the banks should be 
formed--as an institution which would be professionally charged 
with that work, and not, as it has been up to now, by necessity. 
Debatably, it was completely a technical question. Should all 
the technical work for the agency be conducted by the bank? What 
should be meant by that--technical and administrative work? No 
one defined it. Such a decision, for a particular short period, 
was used in Slovenia, but it was emphasized that it should be 
duplicated in our law. Our opinion was that it should be an 
independent government agency. And, in the end, our 
interpretation was accepted. On the contrary, let's say, the 
director of the agency, in a way, would also be a director of a 
detached sector in the Central Bank. I could not accept that. 
With that, the independence of a working unit would be 
statutorily established having two masters. On the one hand, the 
council and the government, and on the other, a managing council 
of some agency. It is a good thing that there was, in the end, 
someone who thought that it should remain as it was. 
  [VECER] Was the law taken out or returned in the assembly's 
procedure? 
  [Stanoevski] The law was not taken from the procedure; it 
was 
incorrectly introduced. Simply, before the law entered the 
procedure, we agreed with the leader of the government that a 
controversial article would be expunged. Moreover, Bekir Zuta 
incorrectly accepted it and transferred it to the ministry [not 
further identified] which took the law out of the procedure. 
When we saw what had been done, we immediately corrected the 
error and returned the law to the procedure. 
  [VECER] How much do the state reserves amount to currently? 
  [Stanoevski] At the moment, there are about $122 million, 
but 
that is subject to very rapid change with respect to the fact 
that the obligations to the World Bank should now be paid. The 
largest share of the currency reserves has been acquired through 
exchange transactions. We ended 1992 with about $66 million in 
currency reserves, but now, you see, they have increased by 
about $60 million, of which $50 million was derived from 
exchange transactions, but the rest is from abroad. Actually, we 
sold more abroad through the currency market than we bought. 
<H5>  (Non)Immunity of the Policy </H5>
  [VECER] Does politics interfere with the work of the bank? 
Now, an election of three deputy governors is imminent. Saban 
Prevala is a representative of the Party for Democratic 
Prosperity, Dusanka Hristova is a member of the presidency of 
the Liberal Party, and Dr. Gligor Bisev has been called up to 
now an independent. 
  [Stanoevski] You see, before the end of last year, we were 
left without a deputy governor. In accordance with my dutiee, I 
am charged with suggesting the election of deputy governors and 
of an acting governor. Considering that for me, as governor, it 
was the president of the republic who named me and who can 
dismiss me, I first acquainted him with the problem. We examined 
two possible options. The matter could be left until the 
election of the next governor, or it could be resolved now in 
order for the people to ensure continuity and to assume a 
portion of the governor's duties. Parliament selects them, and, 
in the final analysis, they are responsible to the Assembly and 
not just to me as governor. We agreed, however, that it would be 
better not to wait for the expiration of my term, but rather to 
propose deputy governors. 
  [VECER] We hear that there are some problems with the rules 
concerning their appointment? 
  [Stanoevski] Well, until yesterday, until the withdrawal of 
the proposal from the agenda, I thought that there were no 
problems of any kind. Where things stand now, I have not been 
informed. In the public media, I read that this was tied to my 
replacement, and that the nomination of the new governor and the 
election of the new deputy governors should be postponed for a 
while. 
  [VECER] When will your term expire? Do you have the right to 
campaign for a second term? 
  [Stanoevski] I cannot campaign for myself. It is up to the 
president of the republic to offer a nomination. My term expires 
on 19 October this year. 
  [VECER] To what extent is there a possibility for you to be 
governor of the National Bank for a second time? 
  [Stanoevski] That would depend upon many circumstances. And, 
it is most likely that, at that time, it would be possible for 
me to say whether I would be a candidate. Above all, it depends 
on who will be president of the republic and what kind of 
composition the government will have. 
  [VECER] When your term expires, the president of the 
republic 
and the composition of the government will certainly be the 
same, considering that the elections will probably be even later. 
  [Stanoevski] I do not know whether, in the last month of 
their work, the parliamentarians will debate the selection of a 
new governor. It is most likely that would leave me in place 
after the expiration of my term, provided of course, that I wait 
through the end of the term, and another few months as acting 
governor. Consequently, if they want to replace me, they should 
do so now. 
  [VECER] In our conversation, you continually stress--if I 
wait through the end of the term. Do you really feel such strong 
pressure to resign? 
  [Stanoevski] No. I have experienced absolutely no such 
pressure. But recently the press has begun to write about that. 
  [VECER] And just how much power does the press have? 
Certainly, it cannot replace you? 
  [Stanoevski] No, it certainly won't replace me. I trust the 
press, and I trust that you now have exact data and do not 
fabricate things. You probably know something now that I do not. 
  [VECER] They say, when all kinds of stories begin to 
circulate about a certain person in political life, then 
certainly they are trying to suggest something to him. What is 
suggested to you by the stories that you have a private bank? 
  [Stanoevski] I have not heard these stories. Unfortunately, 
I 
do not have any kind of bank, and I do not have even one denar 
of stock in any kind of bank. My wife is in one bank, in the 
Credit Bank, and probably that is the grounds for the stories. 
For me, it is an unfulfilled dream to have my own bank, but I 
cannot get the capital since I do not have 150,000 marks. 
  [VECER] Much earlier, you changed the law which strengthened 
the limits for opening savings accounts. Previously, other 
things being equal, would it have been easier for you to open a 
savings account? 
  [Stanoevski] If I made a mistake, I made it earlier, four or 
five years ago, in the former Yugoslavia. I should have formed a 
bank then. 
<H5>  Scandals </H5>
  [VECER] Speaking about private banks and savings accounts, 
is 
it possible for us to have a scandal along the lines of those of 
"Dafiment Bank" or "Jugoskandik Bank?" 
  [Stanoevski] As far as I know, a scandal has already arisen. 
It concerns a savings account which called itself a branch of 
some Belgian bank. It promised credits up to 60,000 German marks 
with a hypothetical deal with which it collected a lot of 
resources from citizens and suddenly disappeared. Another case, 
and a much bigger scandal, involves the situation with 
"Jugomarket Stedilnica" savings bank. As a result, we made a 
decision that the license of that bank should be revoked. The 
consequences are known: They will not work either as a bank or 
as a savings institution; they will go bankrupt, and the 
deposits will be settled by the bankruptcy court. 
  [VECER] What's going on with "Karic Bank?" 
  [Stanoevski] "Karic Bank" of Belgrade has a business branch 
in Skopje which was in compliance with the provisional rules of 
the law on banks as it then existed. But, as such, it was not 
under the control of the NBM. I spoke with the owners of "Karic 
Bank" and they were categorical that not a single depositor 
would lose money, either interest or principal. I promised them 
assistance and that I would discuss with some of our banks 
giving them denar credits on the basis of the hard currency 
deposits and that the NBM would not treat these deposits in 
accordance with the bank's hard currency policy. Thus, we would 
make an exception in the interest of the citizens. 
  [VECER] To what extent do you work with the Bank for Foreign 
Trade? 
  [Stanoevski] In my opinion, the Bank for Foreign Trade has 
not carried out the procedures for separating itself from the 
former "Jugobanka" in the most felicitous manner. That is why, 
from the very beginning of its operations, it encountered 
liquidity problems. Toward the end of last year, the liquidity 
of the bank reached a critical point for paying into the savings 
accounts of citizens, as guaranteed by the NBM, and they began 
to draw on the resources of the central bank. At that point, we 
issued a ruling which prohibited them from using this money for 
other purposes while drawing the resources for the savings 
accounts. This prohibition lasted only 15 days. Later, we 
replaced this ruling with another one which stipulated certain 
measures to overcome the problem. In three months, we will 
decide whether the bank should enter the restructuring process. 
  [VECER] Have the ambiguities regarding the business balance 
between "Komercijalna" and "Stopanska" banks been fully 
clarified? 
  [Stanoevski] No. The business balance was not fully 
completed, and I think that the entire work should be finished 
much quicker. The two banks should themselves work out a mutual 
agreement. It would be wrong for the "Komercijalna" Bank to 
think that it has extricated itself from this. There will be 
problems. For example, the "Stopanska" Bank could take advantage 
of some unfair practices. The World Bank, the IMF, and the other 
international financial institutions should be informed that the 
dispute between the two banks has not ended. 
  [VECER] And in conclusion, the competition for new 
Macedonian 
bank notes has ended. How far has work progressed? 
  [Stanoevski] The competition has ended, but the decisions on 
the bids have been reviewed by a specially formed group which is 
under the auspices of the National Bank and on which artistic, 
scholarly, and financial experts collaborate. In accordance with 
their suggestions, we agreed to make a contract with the winning 
contestant, Biljana Unkovska, who now lives in Slovenia. She is 
to prepare six bank notes with figures and six bank notes with 
other symbols from our cultural and national heritage. When 
these are ready, we will decide which design to accept. 

