CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Chong Hui-sang] </F>
  [Text] The Sisa Journal news team's infiltration 
and coverage of the scene of Southeast Asian drug production and 
supply began at the Mekong River, where Thailand, Burma and Laos 
meet. If from the mountainous city of Chiang Mai in northern 
Thailand one travels to the northeast about four hours by car, 
one comes to a small border city called Chiang Saeri. Getting on 
a boat at the river ferry crossing of this city located on the 
banks of the Mekong River, the news team asked the Thai ferryman 
to go in the direction of the Golden Triangle. Rushing down over 
2,000 km from the Tibetan Plateau, the Mekong River's current, 
with its majestic, muddy-yellow waves lapping against the boat 
as if to swallow it, divides the jungles of Laos from the lofty 
mountains of Thailand and Burma. Having traveled about 30 
minutes, the boat dropped off the news team in the Golden 
Triangle, the place's original name. As the name implies, it is 
the drug production center of Southeast Asia and the point were 
Thailand, Laos and Burma meet. 
  The Golden Triangle is said to produce 70 percent of the 
entire world's heroin supply. Going to the actual site, however, 
the team could find no trace of drugs. The people said to come 
from all nations of the world with their eyes on the gold mine 
of drug distribution were nowhere to be seen and there were no 
opium fields. Instead, there were two blocks of large-scale, 
gambling casino buildings, the construction of which was about 
70 percent complete. The work of building two large sight-seeing 
ships, which following the Mekong River would navigate all the 
way to China proper, was at its height. 
  Bunsit (44), a native of Burma who claims to have been born 
and to have lived his whole life in the Golden Triangle, 
explains it this way. "Up through the 1970's, big ships would 
anchor right at this place, and a worldwide drug market was held 
inside. Opium fields were spread out endlessly in the jungle you 
see before you, and in the foothills of the mountains behind. 
But now the places for doing business and the fields have all 
been moved to secret locations in the Thai-Burmese border region 
and inside Laos." 
  To infiltrate into the relocated Golden Triangle, the news 
team turned their steps toward Mae Sai, a city on Thailand's 
northernmost border. The closer they drew to the Burma, the more 
serious and strict were the Thai military checkpoints. Because 
the militaries of the Burmese government and Southeast Asian 
drug lord Khun Sa had been waging war in the vicinity of the 
Thai-Burmese border beginning a month before, the Thai side was 
suddenly controlling travelers' access to the border. 
  Departing from Mae Sai on 13 January, the news team arrived 
at a Burmese border checkpoint and, giving an official 500 baht 
[Bt] in Thai money, obtained permission to enter Burma without a 
visa. 
  Passing the Burmese border city of Tachilek and driving tens 
of kilometers in the direction of Keng Tung, here the news team 
entered the small village of an ethnic minority ruled by Khun 
Sa. This was to meet with an intelligence official belonging to 
the Khun Sa military, Mong Tai Army (MTA) [Chinese name, Chang 
Chi-fu], with whom they had secretly been connected since 
Thailand's Chiang Mai. This village is situated behind the Shan 
Plateau, an MTA stronghold. Beginning last 10 December, the 
Burmese Government's crack 88th division surrounded the Shan 
Plateau, fighting against Khun Sa's declaration of an 
independent Shan state. Thus, it was the very front line, 
covered by the clouds of war. 
  This intelligence official, introducing himself as Sai Chan 
(48), has for the last 25 years been active as a soldier in the 
Khun Sa organization, a drug-trade agent, and an intelligence 
agent of the MTA. In an approximately two-hour interview, he 
revealed the state of drug production and supply within the 
Golden Triangle, and even disclosed the existence of a few 
Koreans within the Khun Sa organization. 
  Having already come this far, their plan had been to go deep 
into Burma to officially cover Khun Sa's camp. They had to 
change this after meeting with the Khun Sa intelligence agent. 
This was because three Burmese divisions were mounting a 
full-scale attack on key points of Khun Sa's camp and Khun Sa's 
side too, fully mobilizing 40,000 troops, were putting up a 
desperate resistance. The news team ultimately decided to 
secretly go as far as the Salween River basin, 1 thousand km to 
the west, following the Thai-Burmese border, as a method of 
approaching the scene of opium production and supply. 
  When they had crossed back over the border and returned to 
Mae Sai, they discovered that this small town with a population 
of just over 15,000 had an unusually large number of banks. 
Counting the banks lined up along a big road, there were no less 
than 12. The news team's guide, who had experience in smuggling 
jewels, bear gall bladders, etc., in the border zone, explains 
that these banks are the distribution channels of drug-trade 
money. "Any significant commercial power in Thailand and Burma 
is controlled by the Chinese. As for the drug-trade money going 
into the Khun Sa region, banks support it with a secret currency 
called Baeng Durong. The Thai Government is also having problems 
because of this currency. Because of the tremendous assets of 
the Khun Sa camp, it is impossible for them to eradicate it. 
Even apart from the Baeng Durong, drug money is accepted by 
Chinese herbal and jeweler's chain stores spread throughout the 
world." According to him, the herb and jeweler's stores operated 
by Chinese are trusted by the drug organization much more than 
banks. When heroin arrives safely in Singapore, Hong Kong, New 
York, etc., payment is settled using these stores. When the 
payment is made to a jeweler, an encrypted receipt and resident 
registration (passport) number is immediately sent by facsimile 
to a jeweler in the recipient's area. Thus, the money is easily 
moved. In this situation, no matter how large the amount of drug 
money, in only a few minutes it is moved from all regions of the 
world into the Khun Sa region, according to the guide. 
  Renting a jeep and departing Mae Sai, the news team headed 
toward the border city Mae Sa Rong, know as one of the first 
"gateways" within Thailand by which heroin refined in the Khun 
Sa region goes out to the world market. An unpaved road along a 
ridge was the border line dividing Burma and Thailand. Above the 
Shan Plateau stretching endlessly before them was fighter in 
low-altitude flight, adding to the tension. 
  Located deep in the mountains, Mae Salong is the area to 
which some Kuomintang officials and military (93d and 96th 
Divisions) fled and settled after their defeat by the Chinese 
Communist Party in 1949. They cleared land between the villages 
of native mountain people's, the Akha and Lisu, forming Chinese 
villages. 
  One Chinese man, selling snake liquor in front of a house 
located in the center of the village and displaying a portrait 
and relics of the Kuomintang 93d Division commander who fled 
here, boasted of the fact that they were wealthy. "We are always 
ahead of other peoples because we as a people are good at 
business and stick together wherever we are. When a person born 
here reaches the age of 15, the Taiwanese Government sends 
someone to take that person back and give them a job. Our two 
children also are now working in Taiwan." This was to say that 
the Taiwanese government takes the descendants of the 93d and 
96th Divisions living in the Khun Sa region and uses them for an 
industrial work force. According to him, the place where drugs 
were handed over to middlemen was the 1,500-m-high Doi Mae 
Salong (Mae Salong Mountain) behind the village. There, Khun Sa 
soldiers are stationed to protect the drug trade. Recently, 
being in the middle of a war, outside traders do not want to 
come this far, so the drug economy is in a slump, he says. 
  On 14 January, the news team arrived at a Shan village close 
to the border north of Fang. The mood of the Shan village was 
extremely threatening toward the news team. About one month 
before, a nearby heroin-refining factory operated by Khun Sa was 
bombed in a large-scale attack by the Burmese military. With the 
beginning of the all-out war, all men in the village 18 years 
and older entered the MTA and left for the front lines on the 
Salween River. To these people, all strangers were the objects 
of suspicion and all necessary preparations had been made to 
kill if needed. When the news team arrived at the home of 
village chief Sairakun (46), the villagers, with suspicion in 
their eyes, crowded into the courtyard of the chief's house. 
Here and there could be seen people holding guns. It was only 
when the chief heard the explanation of the news team's guide, 
with whom he was familiar, that he softened the suspicions of 
the villagers and put there minds at ease. 
  Introduced as photojournalists, the news team listened late 
into the night to the chief's explanation of the situation they 
faced and their posture toward the war. 
  They had no choice but to cultivate opium in order to 
survive, he explained. Made up of over 140 households and over 
500 persons, the villagers cultivate about 30 lai (one lai is 
about 485 pyong [30 lai equals about 57,530.7 sq. yards]) per 
household. However, with that they are only able to make about 
B1 thousand per year in Thai money. There is no way they can 
live off of this, he says. If they cultivate opium, 1 lai of 
well-planted land can produce about 3 kg of poppy latex. Since 
Khun Sa's representatives calculate 1 kg at about B5 thousand, 
they say that opium is their life and Khun Sa, their benefactor. 
  The chief refused the news team's request to photograph the 
village's opium fields. When the team offered $300 (about 
Bt7,500), he consented on the condition they go with armed men 
from the village. Just in case, the news team demanded that they 
be accompanied by five young Shan women, including the chief's 
daughter. He accepted this. After staying the night at the 
chief's house, they headed for the opium fields the next morning. 
  Four Shan residents armed with pistols and rifles escorted 
the news team and the women. Crossing the 2,000-meter-high 
border mountains, the party was able to reach the opium fields 
only after five hours had passed since its departure. Passing 
through jungle three times, forests of scrub brush twice, and a 
swamp once, the opium field stretching before the eyes of the 
news team was about 7,500 pyong [about 29,655 sq. yards] and 
situated in an area of flat hills. As it was the harvest 
seasons, three villagers had arrived three days before, had put 
up a mud hut beside the field, and were collecting latex among 
the fully-bloomed poppy flowers. They said the soil of a place 
where opium has been planted for three years goes bad and cannot 
be planted again, so they have to clear a new location every 
year. 
  Arriving at the village at about 2000, 12 hours after 
completing their coverage of the opium field and setting out on 
the return trip, the news team refused the kindness of the 
chief, who said they should stay there another night, an 
hurriedly slipped out of the village. This was because they 
witnessed a Khun Sa opium-collection agent come to the village, 
gather the villagers together, and press them hard for answers 
on the appearance of suspicious "foreigners." 
  Coming out that night as far as the Thai border city, Fang, 
the news team met another Chinese drug middleman there. They 
were able to learn from him how refined heroin was being 
distributed recently. Saying that he absolutely would not reveal 
his name, he introduced the main heroin-transportation method 
being used in Thailand also. "Heroin refined by Khun Sa 
generally slips across the Thai-Burmese border in cars to be 
transported overseas through Thailand. Korean-made cars, which 
have been growing in popularity in Thailand of late, have the 
advantage of being less suspect than Japanese-made cars. They 
can safely cross the border if bags of heroin are packed in the 
car wheels. The problem is avoiding the attention of anti-drug 
units chasing them all the way to Bangkok. Once they have 
crossed the border, they park in front of an automobile repair 
shop in a small town and intentionally puncture the tire on the 
opposite side. At this time, someone from the repair-shop will 
come up as prearranged and say, `It will be difficult to repair 
this today. Please leave your car with us.' This is the relay 
code. The driver's job ends here. The next day, while the 
heroin is going to Bangkok, having been moved to the wheel of 
another car, the car which crossed the border the previous night 
draws the vehicular inquiries of the anti-drug unit and slowly 
disappears down a different road." 
  This relay organization is interlinked like a net from the 
Khun Sa region to Bangkok, and other methods not using cars are 
all done similarly, he said. 
  In Fang, alarming news on the battle between the Khun Sa and 
Burmese militaries was circulating. Hundreds had died in the 
Salween-River combat between the two sides, grown fierce 
beginning in early January. It was rumored that Burmese troops 
would soon cross the Salween River. With a grasp of the combat 
situation and intending to change their route, the team stopped 
by a mountain village of the Chinese Chinho people, the border 
village Ampo Pai (Pai-up) in Mae Hong Son Province. This was 
because they had acquired information that a regional commander 
of the MTA was staying at this place. For safety, they first 
hired as a guide a young person of the Lisu people who lived in 
Pai-up and had a deep relationship with the regional commander. 
  Although midday, the Chinese village was deathly quiet. The 
house at the very top of the village was the regional 
commander's. In view of the fact that it was equipped with a 
satellite antenna in this out-of-the-way mountainous area, they 
got the feeling that this was not a normal Shan village. The 
Lisu guide had gone to bring the MTA regional commander, but 
returned some time later deathly pale. "Let's get out of here 
quick. They say an order has been given in the village to kill 
all foreigners entering it. After picking out seven young 
villagers and sending them to the front yesterday, the commander 
left for the other side of the mountain because of a meeting 
this morning. He's not here." 
  Making it passed a critical moment, the news team hurriedly 
slipped out of the mountain village, and hid in Pai-up, about 10 
km away. As luck would have it, in Pai-up they were able to meet 
their Lisu guide's brother-in-law (a Thai), who was just 
returning from transporting rice to an MTA supply depot. He said 
that every day he transported rice and medicine to an MTA supply 
depot located about an hour by truck from Pai, and that for this 
he received B1,500 per day from the Khun Sa side. He 
occasionally transported weapons too. In such cases, MTA people 
made sure he absolutely could not see the weapons, so he was 
unable to identify what nation's products they were, he said. 
  The 25-year-old Lisu youth acting as the news team's guide 
asked the route they had traveled to gather information for 
their story. When they explained it to him, he told them to 
quickly get out of Mae Hong Song Province. He said that the road 
traveled by the news team was known by the intelligence network 
of the Khun Sa camp and that they could not know when they might 
suffer some accident. In a friendly way, he advised them that 
Khun Sa actually controlled the road from Fang to the city of 
Mae Hong Son, and that gunfire was often directed against 
vehicles at night, so they should only move during the day. 
  Arriving at Mae Hong Son on 17 January, the news team, after 
inquiring into rumors, were able to discover the whereabouts of 
the Korean within the Khun Sa camp, about whom the Khun Sa 
intelligence official had provided information on the Shan 
Plateau in Burma. It was revealed that the Korean Khun Sa agent 
living in a village called Naiso in the Khun Sa region, which 
goes over to the state of Shan from Mae Hong Son, was Mun 
Chung-il (56). It was impossible to meet with him, however. He 
knew ahead of time when the news team was entering the village 
to see him, so he sent his wife down to the village entrance. 
  Mun's wife, looking like a typical woman from a Korean 
farming village with her permed hair, only repeated the words, 
"We're in danger," her face pale with fear. A teacher at a 
Chinese school in the Khun Sa region, Mun Chung-il has a wife, a 
son and a daughter. It was confirmed that all, including the 
children, live in the village. 
  The request of the news team to meet Mun was buried in the 
screams of his wife, who said that the night before seven people 
were publicly killed on the charge of contacting foreigners 
(disclosing intelligence). She said that if the news team were 
to enter, the Mun family and the team would all be in danger. 
The last thing she said was that the war had temporarily been 
interrupted and that in the fierce Salween-River battle, which 
took place around January 10th, over 100 Burmese and 20 MTA 
soldiers had died. 
  The news team, which had been frequenting the Khun Sa camp 
-- 
an area stretching more than 1 thousand km, beginning on the 
Shan Plateau and reaching the border at Mae Hong Son -- decided 
to again cross the border to cover the fighting at the Salween 
River. Because the circumstances made it impossible for them to 
go to the battle front through the Khun Sa region (the state of 
Shan), they set up a plan to make use of the self-governing 
state of Karen. Touching the southwest end of the state of Shan, 
which Khun Sa had declared independent, is the state of Karen. 
The Karens also demand their independence and have been fighting 
an undeclared war with Burmese troops for the last 30 years. 
  Meeting with Vice President Taebupe (55), who leads the 
provisional government from the village of Naiso on the border 
north of Mae Hong Son, the news team asked him to let them 
approach the Salween River through the state of Karen. He said 
that he would gladly help, but the problem was the Thai border 
guards. The Thai border guards here strongly maintained that 
they could not send foreign reporters into the war zone. They 
said that in early January over ten Western reporters had 
gathered at this place, intending to enter the Salween River 
combat area, but that they had turned them away. Ultimately, the 
news team had to end here the first attempt ever made to cover 
the drug war and the scene of drug production and supply in the 
Khun Sa region. 

