Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Lidiya Lukyanova report: "We Are Threatened With a </F>
`Typist's Option'"] 
  [Text] The Secretariat of the Russian Journalists Union 
has decided periodically to hold journalistic hearings: As of 
now it will thus discuss draft government laws and resolutions 
which regulate the life and activity of the press, as well as 
conflicts related to the privatization or corporatization of 
media outlets. Hearing organizers intend to enforce the presence 
of both sides concerned: authors of the documents and those who 
will have to live by them, as well as experts. 
  Russian Journalists Union Chairman Vsevolod Bogdanov thus 
substantiated the need for joint discussions: 
  "When it concerns ourselves, the journalists are known to 
swing their fists after a fight, that is to say, when a draft 
has already become law or a resolution been passed. It is 
always more difficult to remedy or change anything than to 
prevent in good time a mistake from occurring." 
  The first hearing took place at the Journalists' House on 25 
March. It discussed propositions for creating a Russian federal 
TV and radio broadcasting service. In the expression of Aleksey 
Simonov, who presided over the discussion, this document seems 
to be roaming, moving about the government and Duma offices, but 
all attempts to find and invite its authors for the debate have 
proved futile. The authors prefer to remain anonymous. Thus, 
two Ostankino TV and Radio Company chiefs, Valentin Lazutkin and 
Aleksandr Yakovlev, have denied its paternity. Speakers cited 
abundantly the absent Aleksandr Nikolayevich Yakovlev, who had 
assured them that he had not endorsed any such draft or 
presented it to the State Duma or the government. Yakovlev 
described this draft as a typist's option. 
  It needs to be made clear: a very highly placed typist and 
moreover very ambitious, to the point of diktat which was 
established over TV during the rule of the CPSU Central 
Committee. In other words, again censorship, monopoly of 
information and all the rest of it. If the proposed draft is 
approved, something like the Vremya program will reappear on TV, 
excluding from the air waves any other news programs. And not 
even a trace of competition. Enough!... 
  The participants in the discussion made this conclusion: It 
is necessary for the journalists to work out and propose to the 
lawmaker a mechanism for preparing all documents bearing on 
press activity. Without the participation of the sides 
concerned and behind the backs of TV and radio journalists, it 
is impossible to elaborate draft laws regimenting their work 
conditions in a rule-of- law state. 
  The Russian Journalists Union leadership has been tasked to 
make this point of view known to the two branches. 

