BFN 

  [Text] After signing the convention between the Romanian 
Government and the Alfa Cartel National Trade Union 
Confederation, Florin Georgescu, state minister and finance 
minister, and Alfa Cartel leader Bogdan Hossu made the following 
statements to the press: 
  [Begin Georgescu recording] The negotiations that concluded 
tonight took place, most of the time, in a constructive 
atmosphere, and in our opinion their results are in accordance 
both with the need to continue and accelerate reform, on the one 
hand, and, on the other, with the imperative of raising the 
standard of living of all our citizens. 
  Practically, the conclusions contained in the convention 
concluded between the government party and the trade union party 
establish the principles and the methods of negotiating salaries 
over the coming time, but this has to be in accordance with the 
performance of our economy and with the financial means of the 
companies in question. Similarly, the convention also 
establishes methods and ways by which we can avoid that the 
macroeconomic situation, which has became quite stable over the 
recent months, should be endangered by the phenomenon of 
inflation, the evolution of the national currency exchange rate, 
and everything they imply, regardless of how future negotiations 
between the employers and the trade unions will evolve. 
  In our opinion, the final form of the convention concluded 
between the two parties observes both the principles of market 
economy, which are being strengthened in our country, and the 
democratic way they manifest themselves for the parties engaged 
in negotiations and in the erection and consolidation of the 
market economy. [end recording] 
  [Begin Hossu recording] After three days of intense and 
sometimes quite tense negotiations, the two parties managed to 
finalize them by signing tonight a convention which manages to 
solve the unblocking of the admissible funds [deblocarea 
fondului admisibil], in view of negotiations on the salary 
system at the level of companies. Besides, we obtained an 
increment of the minimal salaries throughout the economy, which 
will have beneficial effects, above all for pensioners and for 
unemployment benefits granted to the jobless. 
  On the other hand, we established that over the next week we 
could possibly finalize, under the patronage of the prime 
minister, the negotiation of the collective labor contracts at 
the national level. 
  The government decisions that used to regulate the 
retirement 
of employees and the social protection granted to certain 
disadvantaged professional categories, such as the miners or 
employees in the chemical and the oil processing industry, were 
altered so that the employees in question are now protected. 
  Considering that during the negotiations we concretely 
solved 
our four claims, our national trade union confederation, with 
the consent of the participants in the rally, decided to suspend 
this action. Everyone is to leave for home and clear Victory 
Square. [end recording] 

