Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nihad al-Ghadiri] </F>
  [Text] An old Arab friend of mine with a great history 
wrote to me a long letter dripping with blood and tears, asking: 
Did you forget Iraq? I was surprised by the question for two 
reasons: First because we did not forget Iraq and are actually 
sharing its sufferings, and, second, because the question 
resounds with bitter rebuke of a true friend. When we are 
overwhelmed by fast developing events around us and are forced 
to deal with them, we actually do commit the crime of remaining 
silent and of forgetting Iraq. 
  The question here is not one of supporting Iraq for Iraq's 
sake only, although such a stand is rightful and honorable. The 
question is that with our momentary and unintended silence we 
would unwittingly be participating in the big conspiracy which 
we are witnessing taking place on the world stage, and which 
threatens us all, with no difference between one Arab and 
another and one country and another. Everybody is targeted and 
everybody is planning to crush it. Iraq is just one example of 
the fate awaiting the others--all the others. Therefore 
forgetting Iraq and keeping silence over what is being done to 
it--the continuing unjust siege, the suffering of its patient 
people, the enduring of force and injustice, all with the 
blessing of the Arabs of thirst and drought--is tantamount to 
keeping silence over what is awaiting all of us tomorrow and 
what is going to befall us at the hands of the cruel 
international legality which is singling out the Arab countries 
one by one. Although the methods differ, the objective is one. 
  Three years have passed since that cursed war whose aim we 
were told was to regain Kuwait. They have regained "their 
Kuwait" and the matter is over. Why is the siege continuing and 
how can they justify the hardships they are inflicting on the 
Iraqi people? 
  Had they recaptured Kuwait and gone, leaving Iraq alone, we 
would have believed them, or at least some of us would have 
believed that Kuwait was the reason and the objective. But the 
fact that the sanctions are continuing after three years 
uncovers the contemporary pirates' real objective of the war and 
the siege: The target is Iraq's strength, independence, and its 
people's dignity. It is also the victory it achieved in the 
first Gulf [Iraq-Iran] war, the war that has saved them all. 
They want to prevent Iraq from physically embodying this 
victory, which is its right and its historical right to do. Iraq 
is targeted whether because of Kuwait or otherwise. If Kuwait's 
story did not exist they would have found another excuse and 
another justification for their war. 
  The question of the continuing siege of Iraq that is 
continuing up to this day has two aspects: 
  The aspect of the Western stand, which is understood within 
the framework of Western imperialist policy and its attempt to 
dominate the area, plunder its wealth, and maintain its 
supremacy at the expense of others. 
  And the aspect of the incomprehensible Arab stand which, in 
a 
moment of incredible impotency and cowardice, abandoned all the 
Arab values, history, kinsfolk, language, beliefs and dreams, 
and threw itself at the first Western feet to set on the 
area--licking its boots, prostrating itself, begging, asking 
forgiveness, seeking self-protection, thinking that foot that is 
stepping on it today will spare its being crushed underfoot 
tomorrow. 
  Now that we have spoken a lot, written a lot, and suffered a 
great deal more we would ask the ordinary Arab citizen and the 
patriotic nationalist elite, or what we think is the patriotic 
nationalist elite, is it not time for them to move, to organize, 
to set up organizations to fill the Arab arena, to shout at the 
top of their voices, to ask their rulers and colonizers, to tell 
them: You cowards, did you not have enough of Iraq, of its 
children's blood, of its hunger and deprivation? 
  What stops any Arab country from breaking the siege and 
defying the illegitimate legality [as published] and injustice 
that should arouse deep anger among Arabs? Or, has the arena 
become vacant of men and the Arabs lost their senses, so the men 
are neither men nor are they Arab. 
  What stops any community in every country neighboring Iraq 
from defying the siege by breaking it and carrying on its back 
flour, medicine, food, and baby's milk, and shout in the face of 
the United Nations and its Butrus Ghali: You all go to hell! I 
could almost shout: When Iraq starves and we are only onlookers, 
let us too go to hell. 
  May our right arm forget us if we forget thee Iraq! 

