BFN 

  [Text] PORT MORESBY, April 6 (AFP) -- The Papua New Guinea 
government on Wednesday banned national radio from broadcasting 
news of a controversial provincial premiers' conference. 
Communications minister Martin Thompson ordered the National 
Broadcasting Commission (NBC) not to broadcast news from the 
conference this week. The move was thought to be one of the 
first acts of media censorship here, and it came from the 
minister who only last month presented the country's first 
official communications policy which guaranteed press freedoms. 
  Premiers from the five island provinces of Manus, New 
Ireland, East and West New Britain and Bougainville were meeting 
to discuss Port Moresby's move to take away powers from 
provincial governments and give them to national 
parliamentarians and village level governments. The provinces 
have threatened to secede if the government does not back down. 
  In a statement released from Prime Minister Paias Wingti's 
office, Thompson said the NBC had been told not to broadcast 
anything arising from the premier's meeting. The statement said 
the order was issued to NBC chairman Alkan Tololo and all 19 
provincial station managers. It said the order was issued under 
sections of the NBC Act which allowed him to direct the 
commission not to broadcast certain issues. 
  Thompson said while it was NBC's duty to provide balanced, 
objective and impartial broadcasting service, it was paramount 
that such services should reflect the overall drive for national 
unity and that extreme care should be taken in broadcasting 
material that could inflame racial or sectional feelings. NBC 
management was not immediately available for comment. Other 
media organisations including three newspapers and a television 
station were bracing for confrontation if the news ban was 
extended to them. 
  Thompson's communication policy presented to parliament last 
month said in part that "the radio industry should grow as a 
free medium following the rights provided by the PNG 
constitution. The extent of this freedom is underscored by the 
laws which prohibit censorship of broadcast material." 

