BFN 

<F P=106> [By Martin Lee, legislative councillor and chairman of the </F>
United Democrats of Hong Kong: "Harsh Truth in Seeking Facts"] 
  [Text] "Seek truth from facts." To many, the People's 
Supreme Court made a mockery of Deng Xiaoping's well-known 
instruction by sentencing Hong Kong journalist Xi Yang to 12 
years' imprisonment. In Hong Kong, this event has signalled once 
again the price of seeking facts in China may be far too high. 
  The lessons here are not just for journalists but for all of 
us who will soon live under Chinese sovereignty. Indeed, the Xi 
incident represents exhibit A in the case that China's legal 
system is an oxymoron, a contradictory concept. 
  When Ming Pao reporter Xi was detained last summer, Xinhua 
(the New China News Agency) announced he had been arrested for 
"espionage regarding state secrets on banking". The state 
secrets apparently involved the Bank of China's unremarkable 
plans "regarding interest rate movements and sale of gold in the 
international market". Xi was an experienced journalist 
employed full-time by a Hong Kong newspaper. Like reporters for 
this paper and others, he was in China on the trail of a scoop. 
  Throughout most of the world, reporters win awards for 
gathering information and investigative reporting. Few 
journalists would have reason to think financial information 
provided by that most common of journalistic sources -- a 
government official -- would constitute a state secret. Perhaps 
one of the reasons Xi's case has struck a chord with Hong Kong 
reporters is they have always assumed (now falsely, it seems) so 
long as they covered business and economics and steered clear of 
politics -- they would stay out of hot water. 
  Once charged, Xi was denied legal representation (the 
authorities explained he "did not want a lawyer") and visits by 
his family or employer. Tried in secret, he was sentenced to a 
12-year jail term and stripped of political rights for a further 
two years. He is to be permitted an appeal but the lawyer 
representing him must be endorsed by the Higher People's Court 
and he has had one lawyer ditch his case already. In the light 
of this treatment, it is worth remembering at least under the 
Chinese constitution, Xi was exercising the freedom of speech 
and of the press, guaranteed to all Chinese citizens. 
  But in China, the letter of the law has little significance 
and the courts have only one master: the Chinese Communist 
Party. Most laws exist principally to bolster the power of the 
state. This is why the clarification of guidelines for Hong 
Kong journalists in China will make little difference. Xi would 
have been "presumed guilty until found guilty" anyway. 
  Sentencing, too, is subject to cadre capriciousness. Last 
year a Xinhua sub-editor was sentenced to life imprisonment for 
revealing an advance copy of a dry speech by Communist Party 
chief Jiang Ze min. The Express journalist who reported it was 
lucky: she was released after a week's detention. But given 
the ease of passing such draconian sentencing, it would not be 
surprising if some journalists in Hong Kong were to take this 
opportunity to question their choice of profession. 
  Knowledge is power and in China, as with other authoritarian 
regimes, leaders tightly control information. The press serves 
as a propaganda function. But in Hong Kong, we attach special 
value to our media which serves to keep the public informed, and 
keep politicians and the business community more or less honest. 
Equally important, the international business community -- Hong 
Kong's golden egg-laying goose -- has come to rely on objective 
coverage of local and international events. 
  For although it is quite normal in China to harness the 
press 
to the political whims of party cadres and the policy aims of 
the central authorities, gagging the press and impeding the free 
flow of information in Hong Kong will almost certainly deal a 
mortal blow to our image as a world-class financial centre. 
  But clearly Beijing is engaged in a long-term effort to 
transfer China's system of press controls to Hong Kong. Hong 
Kong journalists have found themselves bribed, blacklisted and 
befriended in the process. Making an example of Xi Yang is 
merely the latest attempt to rattle Hong Kong journalists and to 
cripple the development of the powers and autonomy of the press 
during the transitional period to control information in Hong 
Kong after 1997. 
  The assurances from Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office 
Director Lu Ping that "the sentence will not affect Hong Kong 
reporters' normal reporting work" ring hollow. Likewise, 
Foreign Ministry spokesman Wu Jianmin maintains so long as Hong 
Kong reporters stick to "economic information in an effort to 
boost (China's) economic and trade relations", there should be 
no need for concern. China's local advisers insist Xi's case 
has no relevance to Hong Kong reporters because he is a 
mainlander. But it is wrong for us to think that because he is 
originally from China, Xi's predicament has nothing to do with 
the rest of us in Hong Kong. 
  In fact, Xi's case and the steady erosion of our press 
freedom is only a single piece in the jigsaw puzzle of Hong 
Kong's transition of sovereignty to China. 
  With Beijing in the throes of a succession crisis, current 
policy towards Hong Kong on press freedom and political reform 
is dictated principally by old and weary men. In the vacuum of 
power created by Deng Xiaoping's failing health, Hong Kong 
provides a convenient target for hardline dogma. 
  For a long time, Britain and China led Hong Kong people to 
believe there would be a smooth transition in 1997 -- that, for 
instance, only one or two legislators would be thrown off the 
legislative through-train for their beliefs. But in the past 
year we have learned China intends to derail all three tiers of 
our system of representative government and there will also be 
no through train for senior civil servants. Similarly, our 
business community has been intimidated, and companies and 
individuals who support democratic reform have been targeted for 
retribution. 
  Although there have been earlier attempts to bully -- or 
simply buy Hong Kong's local papers into submission, Xi Yang's 
case is an omen there may well be no through train for 
journalists either. And if China does succeed in gagging the 
press in Hong Kong as in China, it is safe to say "one country, 
two systems" will be close to impossible. 
  I hope Beijing will see the good sense of releasing Xi Yang 
immediately and take a hard look at the debilitating effect his 
conviction and sentencing have already had on Hong Kong's 
confidence. But if China fails to do so, the reasons for the Xi 
verdict must be made public and Xi must be provided a defence 
lawyer of his own choice, who should be permitted to defend him 
without interference of any kind. Beijing has an obligation to 
allow Xi Yang a fair appeal that is open to the public -- and 
most importantly -- the press. 
  Xi's situation is an opportunity for Hong Kong people to 
look 
critically at China's system and recognise the value of our own. 
What happened to Xi is not currently a possibility in Hong Kong 
because we have accountable judges in an independent judicial 
system. We have separation of powers where the executive is 
checked by the legislature and cannot interfere with the 
administration of justice. 
  But it will not always be so. After 1997, Beijing will 
control the executive through appointments and can influence the 
judiciary through its interpretation of the Basic Law. If we do 
not have a legislature that is democratically constituted with 
enough members to say "no" to Beijing on Hong Kong matters of 
vital importance, we will have little hope of preserving our 
rule of law and freedoms. Beijing will have succeeded in its 
effort to transfer China's authoritarian system to Hong Kong and 
we will have no press freedom, no accountability and no rule of 
law. 
  I hope our press will not be intimidated into silence by the 
Xi Yang case. Ultimately, whether Hong Kong is able to maintain 
a society where the rule of law is supreme and where the press 
can report freely, will depend on whether we as a community 
recognise these values are what make Hong Kong and China so 
clearly two systems. Unless we speak up and fight to preserve 
our way of life now, we will surely see our promised autonomy 
perish. And Xi Yang's case will only be a chilling sign of 
things to come. 

