Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Statement by Greenpeace in Russia: "`Treasures' of the </F>
Baltic"] 
  [Text] The main military bases to have become sources 
of pollution of the Baltic are situated in Chernyakhovka and 
Tartu, where strategic bombers are located, and also the bases 
of submarines and ships capable of carrying nuclear weapons. 
These are Kotlin (Kronshtadt), Oraniyenbaum, Ventspils, 
Liyepaya, Klaipeda, Paldiyeski, Tallinn, Baltiysk and 
Kaliningrad. 
  Among the best-known incidents in the Baltic are the dumping 
of chemical weapons which occurred from 1951 through the start 
of the 1980's and the accident that occurred on a Soviet 
submarine in September 1981, when several explosions were 
recorded and the submarine itself, which was carrying nuclear 
weapons, was towed to a base in Kaliningrad. A similar incident 
occurred on 27 October 1981, when a Soviet Whiskey-class 
submarine carrying nuclear weapons ran aground in the area of 
the Karlskrona Swedish military base. On 25 October 1976 Finnish 
seismological stations registered an earthquake in the area of 
the Soviet naval base in Paldiyeski. Approximately 20 persons 
were hospitalized, and, according to certain information, a 
series of explosions at storehouses of the base, which were 
accompanied by a leak of toxic substances into the Baltic, had 
been taken to be an earthquake. Releases of radioactive 
substances from the nuclear power station at Sosnovyy Bor have 
been recorded on several occasions also.... 
  ...In addition, leaks of toxic waste from the military 
plants 
in Kaliningrad and Riga and also from enterprises mining 
urano-phosphate in Sillamae have occurred repeatedly. 
<H5>  Dumping of Chemical Weapons </H5>
  The dumping of chemical weapons and military-produced 
chemical waste in the Baltic began in 1951. In accordance with 
an order of Marshal of the Soviet Union R. Malinovskiy dated 16 
December 1949, an inspection was conducted at dumps where 
captured arms of the German, Italian, Romanian, and Japanese 
armies were stored: mainly aerial bombs, artillery shells, 
antipersonnel mines, and canister war gas. The inspection was 
completed by the start of October 1950, and several tens of 
thousands of weapons not conforming to safety standards were 
discovered. A decision was made a month later to dump the 
munitions in the sea. Three regions were selected, in accordance 
with Marshal R. Malinovskiy's proposal, for the burials: areas 
of the White and Barents Seas and also the Baltic. 
  One of the biggest dumps was located at Arkhangelsk Oblast's 
Obozerskaya Station. A large part of the 
munitions--antipersonnel mines and artillery shells--was shipped 
out and dropped in the White Sea. But approximately 200 tonnes 
of munitions, mainly 50-100 kg aerial bombs containing sarin, 
mustard gas, and lewisite from 1938-1939 manufacture were 
transported to the ports of Liyepaya and Klaipeda for dumping in 
the Baltic. Some of the munitions of 1941-1943 manufacture 
stored at dumps at Leonidovka Station near Stalingrad (now 
Volgograd) were sent to the port of Tallinn. The trains were 
accompanied by students of the Saratov School for Chemical 
Defense Forces. One of them, Colonel (retired) Nikolay Masterov, 
said: 
  "We shipped the munitions out from May 1951 through November 
1955. At the port of Tallinn we transferred the aerial bombs 
from the trains onto barges of the local maritime shipping 
company chartered by the Ministry of Defense. As far as I know, 
the munitions were dumped straight into the waters of the port, 
and some were taken to the area of Saarema Island. The seamen 
told me that some bombs were shot up at close range to help them 
sink." 
  According to the information of witnesses and participants 
in 
the chemical weapons sinking operations, burials were carried 
out in 1961-1968, 1972-1973, and 1979 also. According to Captain 
1st Rank V. Nikitin, former deputy commander of Kronshtadt Naval 
Base for rear support, the sinking of the captured munitions had 
been completed by the start of the 1970's. According to his 
information, 235 points in the Baltic and the Gulf of Finland 
where the burials were performed had been plotted on military 
maps. At the same time, on the other hand, a considerable number 
of burial places were not plotted on maps. A. Filippovskiy, a 
reserve lieutenant captain, who served on transport vessel 324 
registered with the Ventspils Naval Base in 1969-1972, said that 
in half the cases the ship did not reach the point assigned in 
the order, dumping its cargo at the first point in the sea which 
it came to, frequently off the coast. 
  Aside from captured munitions, the dumping of Soviet 
chemical 
weapons which had outlived their service life into the Barents 
and White Seas, the Sea of Kars, and the Baltic began at the 
start of the 1970's. Ascertaining the precise quantity of 
weapons dumped is impossible since all the information on this 
is still under "top-secret" classification. But according to a 
naval officer who requested that his name not be mentioned, 
approximately 90 freight cars carrying chemical munitions for 
dumping arrived at the base in Paldiyeski in the period from May 
through July 1975 alone. 
  Russia's official position on this issue was expressed by 
Lieutenant General Anatoliy Kuntsevich, deputy commander of 
Russia's chemical forces. He said in an interview: 
  "We have never denied that in the 1950's the Soviet Union in 
conjunction with Great Britain and some other West European 
countries buried chemical weapons in the Baltic. But I know of 
not a single instance of the burial of chemical weapons since 
this time." 
  Gen. A. Kuntsevich declined to comment on the witnesses' 
testimony. He observed, it is true, that the burial places are 
not monitored and that no one knows the present condition of the 
sunken munitions or their preservation and safety for the 
environment. 
<H5>  Dumping of Radioactive Substances </H5>
  The Soviet authorities denied the whole time that they were 
to blame for the contamination of the Baltic by radioactive 
substances. Nonetheless, according to witnesses' testimony, at 
least two nuclear warheads were sunk in the sea in the period 
since 1964. One of them was lost in March 1976 during a patrol 
flight over the sea from a MiG-21 fighter registered with the 
air base in Tartu. 
  In August 1973 there was an accident on a Golf 2-class 
submarine registered with the Kaliningrad Base, as a result of 
which it was decided to jettison propellant in order to maintain 
buoyancy. As a result of a mistake by the crew, one of the six 
torpedoes sank into the sea. 
  Viktor Gerasimenko, who worked from 1984 through 1988 at the 
nuclear power station at Sosnovyy Bor, maintains that water in 
the station's sumps following the cooling of reactors frequently 
flowed into the reservoirs flowing into the Baltic. 
<H5>  Dumping of Toxic Waste </H5>
  Aside from the dumping from submarines and surface ships of 
the navy which occurred repeatedly as a result of accidents, the 
warship-maintenance plant in Kaliningrad and the plant 
manufacturing rocket engines in Riga also dump highly toxic 
waste in the Baltic. It is practically impossible to establish 
the precise amounts of the discharges since civilian control 
inspections and employees of sanitary supervision offices are 
not admitted to the military enterprises. The results of 
inspections by military control services are under a 
"top-secret" stamp. 
  Aleksandr Kocheyev, who until 1990 was an engineer at the 
Riga Rocket Engines Plant, said that the plant's waste is 
usually dumped in the River Daugava without any preliminary 
purification, from where it subsequently ends up in the Baltic. 
  Two accidents accompanied by a leak of waste into the sea 
occurred in 1992. Two phosphate containers were lost from a 
dry-cargo ship registered to the Tallinn Seaport and en route to 
Finland. During loading at the port of Riga of a consignment of 
copper intended for Sweden part of the cargo sank into the 
maritime bay in July of that same year. During the control 
inspection it was ascertained that the copper had been heavily 
contaminated by radionuclides. 

