BFN 

  [Excerpts] House of Representatives Speaker Shaykh 
'Abdallah Bin-Husayn al-Ahmar has sent a message to 'Amr Musa, 
chairman of the current session of the nonaligned foreign 
ministers' conference, in which he expressed, on his behalf and 
on behalf of the members of the House of Representatives, wishes 
of success for the conference. Attached to the message was a 
message from the House of Representatives addressed to the 
chairman of the session, its rapporteur, and members of the 
conference. 
  The message includes the House's appreciation for the 
aforementioned parties' concern for safeguarding the 
sovereignty, freedom, and independence of the member states of 
the Nonaligned Movement. 
  The House of Representatives' message also includes 
clarification of some facts related to the Yemeni issue. Among 
these are facts related to the deep roots of the Yemeni unity in 
the history and culture of our people, the Yemeni people's 
blessing of the reestablishment of the Yemeni unity on 22 May 
1990, and the achievement of national consensus of unity during 
the conduction of the general referendum on the constitution of 
the unity state in 1991. The message notes that international 
democratic organizations supervised this referendum. 
  Within the context of reviewing these facts, the message 
refers to the elections of 27 April 1993 which were held in 
Yemen as the first unified parliamentary elections, during which 
more than 22 parties competed, in addition to the independents. 
The entire world applauded these honest elections which were 
held on free, democratic bases. All the parties and 
organizations, including the [Yemeni] Socialist Party, accepted 
their results. [passage omitted] 
  In its message, the House of Representatives emphasized the 
national constants, chief of which is adherence to unity as the 
fate and destiny of the Yemeni people. The message says that 
unity is irrevocable and that there will be no compromise on it. 
  The House of Representatives appealed to the nonaligned 
foreign ministers' conference to deal with what is taking place 
in our country as an internal affair, and to pressure the 
nonaligned member states which seek to gain a foothold in what 
is taking place in Yemen, not to interfere in our country's 
internal affairs, especially since this will escalate the 
situation and prolong and expand the war. 
  The House of Representatives asked the conference not to 
deal 
with any requests to recognize the claims of the secessionists 
and rebels because this will be against the Yemeni people's 
will, interference in their internal affairs, and a contribution 
to escalating the conflict in the country. 

