Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Humanitarianism and Conditions"] </F>
  [Text] On Saturday Thailand was criticized by Cambodian 
Foreign Minister Prince Norodom Sirivut after having pushed back 
some 20,000 Cambodian refugees from Pong Nam Ron District, 
Chanthaburi Province. The Cambodian foreign minister said the 
push back was an inhuman act because it amounted to sending 
these people to their deaths or to face starvation. 
  In the middle of last week some 30,000 Cambodian civilians 
fled the violent fighting between the Khmer Rouge, who were 
defending their base in Pailin, and the attacking government 
forces across the border. The government forces succeeded in 
capturing Pailin. 
  The Cambodian foreign minister's timely use of the 
opportunity to criticize Thailand for pushing back the refugees 
has damaged Thailand's image. The world could probably also 
envisage some victimization of the Cambodian refugees. 
  On humanitarian grounds, the fleeing Cambodians should 
receive protection and appropriate humanitarian assistance from 
the neighboring country. 
  It is true that the Thai Government has made public its 
policy of not reopening any refugee camp after the peace accord 
was reached in Paris in October 1991. The UN supervised 
election in Cambodia in May 1993 was followed by the 
repatriation of the last batch of Cambodians from Thailand. 
  The Thai policy of not reopening a refugee camp and its 
appeal to the United Nations to establish a safety zone inside 
Cambodia to assist the Cambodians are sound in principle. 
However, it is inappropriate to use the plight of the 
Cambodians as a bargaining tool when it results in the violation 
of human rights and humanitarian principles. 
  At least, the Thai Government cannot deny that hundreds of 
thousands of Burmese still remain in Thailand after the Burmese 
Army suppression of Burmese politicians and students, which 
started in 1988. Why then used harsh measures against the 
Cambodians? 
  Is it not this government which implemented the policy of 
lenient passport and visa checks to facilitate the entry of 
foreign visitors, the policy which enables international 
terrorists to sneak into the country? But the same government 
has sent back Cambodian civilians less than a week after they 
fled the war to Thailand. The government should consider the 
reaction of the world from the humanitarian and human rights 
angles. 

