BFN 

  [Text] Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk has issued an 
appeal to the Crimean Supreme Soviet. I have learned, the 
appeal states, that reinstatement of several provisions of the 
Crimean Constitution, in the version adopted on 6 May 1992, is 
expected to be examined at a plenary session of the Crimean 
Supreme Soviet. In particular, they concern the incorporation 
of the Crimean Republic into Ukraine based on treaties and 
agreements, the right of Crimean residents to dual citizenship, 
creation of individual military formations, etc. Resolution of 
these issues in compliance with the Ukrainian Constitution and 
Ukrainian legislation on sharing powers between government 
institutions in Ukraine and the Crimean Republic, adopted by the 
Crimean Supreme Soviet, lies exclusively with the Ukrainian 
Supreme Council. As you understand, in question here is a 
revision of fundamental principles of relations between Ukraine 
and one of its integral parts, the Crimean Republic. Violation 
of those principles may lead to conflicts and other 
unpredictable consequences. 
  By adopting such decisions, Leonid Kravchuk's appeal to the 
Crimean Supreme Soviet emphasized, you will practically be 
making moves aimed at violating Ukraine's territorial integrity, 
which runs counter to generally accepted international 
standards. The international community closely watches 
developments in the Crimea and hopes that we will be wise enough 
to keep the situation within the limits of the currently valid 
Ukrainian and Crimean Constitutions. 
  I hope that while performing important state work, you will 
display high political maturity, balanced approaches, common 
sense, wisdom, and an understanding of the tremendous 
responsibility you have assumed. I suggest that before 
examining those issues at the session, you send a 
plenipotentiary delegation of Crimean people's deputies to Kiev 
for handling issues that will be examined along with the 
Ukrainian Supreme Council, the administration of the Ukrainian 
president, and the Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers, the appeal 
from Leonid Kravchuk noted. 

