BFN 

<F P=106> [Government work report delivered by Zhejiang Governor Wan </F>
Xueyuan at the Second Session of the Eighth Zhejiang Provincial 
People's Congress on 26 February 1994] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies: 
  Please examine the government work report I am going to give 
on behalf of the provincial people's government. I would also 
like to ask members of the provincial committee of the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference and other observers 
at this meeting to present their views. 
<H5>  1. A Review of Work Accomplished in 1993 </H5>
  The year 1993 was one in which Zhejiang seized opportunities 
to speed up its development. It was also a year in which 
Zhejiang was able to maintain a steady economic growth while 
intensifying macroeconomic regulation and control. Under the 
leadership of the party Central Committee, the State Council, 
and the Zhejiang Provincial CPC Committee, we achieved new 
successes in all sectors, thanks to following the guidelines 
laid down in Comrade Deng Xiaoping's important talks and those 
of the 14th national party congress and the resolution of the 
first session of the provincial people's congress, as well as 
the efforts exerted by people throughout Zhejiang. We enjoyed 
fast economic growth, social prosperity and progress, and 
political unity and stability. Most of the objectives set in 
our economic and social development plan were fulfilled and 
overfulfilled. The gross domestic output is expected to 
increase 25 percent over that of 1992, reaching 164.5 billion 
yuan. The objective of quadrupling the gross industrial and 
agricultural output was achieved seven years ahead of time. 
  In 1993, Zhejiang maintained a sustained, rapid, and 
healthy economic growth, giving priority to strengthening the 
agricultural foundation, improving industrial efficiency, 
opening up the economic sector to the outside, building stronger 
infrastructures, and improving financial and banking 
operations 
  -- Zhejiang's agriculture and rural economy withstood severe 
tests caused by the removal of controls over grain buying and 
marketing prices, and our province used this as an opportunity 
to speed up agricultural restructuring. Agricultural projects 
which emphasized efficient and high yield of quality 
agricultural products developed. The rural areas' primary, 
secondary, and tertiary industries all enjoyed growth. The 
development of village and town enterprises reached a higher 
level. The proportion of the province's village and town 
enterprises increased to 65 percent from the previous 56 percent 
in Zhejiang's industry, and their sales increased 76.21 percent 
over that a year before, reaching 238.952 billion yuan. 
  -- The province's industrial production became more 
efficient 
while maintaining its rapid growth. It is expected that the 
added value of industry will be 40 percent higher than that of 
1992, reaching 87 billion yuan. Those industrial enterprises, 
which are operated by townships and larger areas and which are 
authorized to have independent accounting, succeeded in 
increasing their output, sales, and profit taxes at the same 
time by 46.9, 52, and 42.5 percent, respectively, over 1992. 
Enterprises also accelerated the pace of upgrading their 
technology. Their technology and equipment are now better as a 
result of their investment of 12.4 billion yuan, an amount which 
exceeded that of 1992 by more than 100 percent. 
  -- New successes in opening up our economic sector were 
achieved with progress made in developing foreign trade, using 
foreign capital, and promoting foreign economic relations. The 
province's exports increased 19.9 percent over 1992, reaching 
$4.439 billion; and the province's growth in ordinary trade and 
the volume of exports handled by cities, prefectures, and 
counties themselves ranked top in the country. Last year, the 
province approved the establishment of 4,487 foreign-funded 
enterprises; new agreements were signed on the utilization of 
$3.746 billion of foreign capital, and the amount of foreign 
capital actually used during the year was $1.033 billion, 
topping those of 1992 by 191.9 and 128.8 percent, respectively. 
The absolute values of both exceeded the total amounts 
registered in the preceding 14-year period. Noticeable 
progress was achieved in promoting foreign economic and 
technical cooperation, as well as in developing international 
tourism. 
  -- More efforts have been made in improving the 
infrastructure, with key construction projects going on 
smoothly. The investment in state-owned fixed assets reached 60 
billion yuan in 1993, an increase of 66.2 percent over the 
previous year. The Xiaoshan power station's 125,000 kw 
generating units, the Nantaitou water control gate project in 
the Hangjia Hu, and 10 other key construction projects have been 
put into operation, with good economic results. Construction of 
the Jinwen railway, the Hangyong superhighway, a 200,000-tonnage 
ore berth in Beilun Harbor, and other major projects is in full 
swing. Postal services and telecommunications are in a leading 
role for the whole nation. Eight optical fiber lines have been 
built and are now on a trial run. Program-controlled and 
cellular telephone service is now available in all counties and 
cities. Particularly, the investment system has been improved 
in accordance with the principle that each locality is 
responsible for seeking investment funds for itself, building 
projects for itself, managing projects for itself, and paying 
back loans itself. As a result, substantial progress has been 
made in transportation construction. Last year witnessed the 
largest investment in transportation construction, with an 
initial estimate of 2.52 billion yuan including 1.02 billion 
yuan of self-funded investment. New progress has been made in 
water conservancy projects, with the state, collectives, and 
peasants having put in 900 million yuan of investment and 360 
million work hours. Urban construction and renovation have been 
accelerated by implementing a system for the transfer of 
state-owned land-use rights with compensation, promoting 
commercialization of housing projects, and attracting peasants' 
investment for undertakings in cities. 
  -- The financial and banking situation has been improved, 
with urban and rural markets enjoying prosperity. Zhejiang's 
fiscal income reached 16.665 billion yuan in 1993, representing 
an increase of 38.6 percent over the previous year and 128.2 
percent of its annual budget. Deposits in banking institutions 
at the end of 1993 increased by 27.982 billion yuan, with 12.82 
billion yuan coming from urban and rural residents' savings. 
Urban and rural markets enjoy brisk business, with an ample 
supply of commodities. The total retail sales of consumptxion 
commodities reached 67.837 billion yuan, an increase of 37.4 
percent over previous year. While the economic situation 
improved, people enjoyed a better living standard. Urban 
residents' per capita living expense income reached 3,371, while 
peasants' per capita net income was 1,746, respectively, 
representing an increase of 15 percent and 10.3 percent after 
adjusted for inflation. 
  In 1993, Zhejiang did a great deal of work in carrying 
out macroeconomic control, promoting reform and opening, and 
developing scientific, technological, and educational 
undertakings by centering around the work of creating a fine 
economic environment and invigorating the national economy. 
  (1) Uphold the principle of proceeding from the actual 
situation in Zhejiang and conscientiously carrying out the 
central authorities' major decision concerning the improvement 
of macro-economic control. 
  On the basis of studying the guiding spirit of the central 
authorities and unifying ideological understanding, we have 
consolidated financial order and enforced financial discipline 
to deal with some new problems cropping up during the course of 
rapid economic growth. We have concentrated our efforts to 
ensure the construction of major projects and strengthened 
control over investment in fixed assets. More efforts have been 
made to improve financial and taxation management and curtail 
financial deficits. The management of real estate markets has 
been strengthened and various kinds of development zones have 
been consolidated and standardized. Positive results have been 
achieved in macroeconomic control. The financial situation is 
increasingly stable. Financial and taxation order are gradually 
being standardized. The investment scale is under control and 
the investment structure was improved. Zhejiang does not issue 
"iou" slips for the purchase of main farm and nonstaple 
products. Funds for key construction projects and circulating 
funds for enterprises can be obtained fairly easily. 
  When enforcing macroeconomic regulation and control 
measures, we took Zhejiang's actual conditions into 
consideration, paid attention to applying proper force in 
implementing macroeconomic regulation and control measures and 
to carrying out in-depth reform to solve economic problems. 
This helped maintain the momentum of a sustained, rapid, and 
healthy development of the province's economy. With a view to 
bringing about new growth in other economic sectors and to 
steping up building a reserve force for development, we 
conducted study on and worked out arrangements for urban 
construction, exploitation of marine resources, development of 
hilly areas, and for rendering support to poor households in old 
revolutionary bases, in regions inhabited by minorities, and in 
remote areas. We mapped out development plans for transport and 
power supply. We also strove to improve the economic setup and 
to readjust the industrial structure. 
<H5>  (2) Constantly Promote Reform and Opening Up To Build a </H5>
Socialist Market Economic System 
  The provincial government formulated and promulgated rules 
to 
implement the "Regulations on the Transformation of the 
Management System of State-Owned Industrial Enterprises." We 
returned autonomy rights to enterprises. To promote enterprise 
reform in depth and breadth, we sought a breakthrough by 
reforming the property rights system. The shareholding system 
was tried out in a number of large and medium-sized state and 
collective-owned enterprises. The shareholding cooperative 
system was promoted on a large scale at collective enterprises 
in urban and rural areas. Measures were taken to step up 
experiments with leasing, mergers, auctions, and bankruptcy at 
small industrial and commercial enterprises. Foreign investment 
helped transform the management systems of some 800 enterprises. 
Some 200 new enterprise groups were formed through mergers and 
share acquisition. 
  Steps were taken to accelerate the pace of building up and 
improving various market systems. A large number of specialized 
retail markets emerged throughout the province. There were 107 
retail markets in the province, with eah one's annual business 
turnover reaching over 100 million yuan; ten of them even 
exceeded 1 billion yuan. Of the plan to organize the 
establishment of 12 provincial-level large scale markets for 
means of production at the beginning of the year, 9 became 
operational. Labor and real estate markets developed rapidly. 
While fostering market systems, the province stepped up market 
management, cracked down on fake and shoddy goods, checked 
unfair competition, and put some irregular market practices 
under control. 
  Reform of the social security system was carried out in 
depth. A system requiring administrative employees and workers 
to contribute premiums to a pension insurance fund was put in 
place in the province. An integrated pension system was 
promoted among administrative employees and workers at urban and 
rural enterprises and among private businessmen in Wenzhou and 
Taizhou. A total of 32 counties and cities were selected to 
experiment with a pension system for farmers. Unemployment 
insurance was extended to cover administrative employees and 
workers at urban and rural enterprises. Approved by the 
provincial government, cities and counties in the province began 
implementing the housing system reform plan. Progress was made 
in reforming the public health care system at government organs, 
institutions, and enterprises. 
  Government functions were transformed and macromanagement 
mechanisms were reformed. The province basically lifted control 
on the prices of agricultural and industrial products. 
Mandatory plans for agricultural and industrial production and 
for the distribution sector were scrapped. To meet the 
requirements of the nation's efforts to reform the macroeconomic 
system, the province reformed its finance, monetary, invesment, 
foreign trade, and state-assets management systems by taking 
Zhejiang's actual situation into consideration. The province 
also formulated an implementation program for reform of 
provincial-level government organs. 
  Rural reform was further deepened. Controls on grain 
procurement and marketing prices were lifted. A shareholding 
cooperative system was developed. Large-scale operation was 
cautiously promoted. Support was given to develop the 
"locomotive" enterprises. The socialized service system was 
improved. Pilot poverty-shedding programs were conducted. 
Moves were taken to enhance the reserve strength of the rural 
economy. 
  The province strove to open itself wider to the outside 
world. Approved by the State Council, the province set up the 
Hangzhou and Xiaoshan state-level economic and technological 
development zones and embarked on the Daxie Island comprehensive 
development project. On the basis of rectification, 
consolidation, and standardization, the provincial government 
newly approved a number of provincial- level economic 
development zones. We also sponsored several large scale trade 
fairs, expanded cooperation and increased exchanges with foreign 
countries, and achieved some fruitful results. 
  (3) Actively Implement the Strategy of Using Science 
and Education To Invigorate the Province and Make Scientic and 
Technological Education Better Serve Economic Construction 
  To reform the scientific and technological system, establish 
a technological market, and encourage scientific and 
technological progress, the provincial government worked out a 
number of strategic documents; localities also adopted 
corresponding measures to coordinate with the provincial 
government. This helped further mobilize the enthusiasm of 
scientists and technicians and enhanced scientific research 
units' development capability and their capability to better 
serve economic construction. The technological market saw rapid 
development and the technological trade amount increased by 
leaps and bounds. The province achieved new progress in 
tackling scientific problems, implementing the Torch Plan, the 
Spark plan, developing new and high technologies, and in 
transforming traditional industries. A total of 297 scientific 
and technological items won provincial-level scientific and 
technological progress awards, and 49 items won spark prizes. 
The province reaped great benefits from the application of a 
number of scientific and technological results in production. 
  New progress was achieved in the steady implementation of 
the 
"Program for Reform and Development of China's Education," in 
further defining the idea and goals for education reform and 
development, in deepening reform of the educational system, in 
readjusting eduational and teaching structures, in relying on 
society to run schools, in increasing investment in education, 
and in improving teachers' quality. The nine-year-compulsory 
education was extended to 74.5 percent of villages and townships 
which encompassed 83.1 percent of the province's population. 
Some 96,000 young and middle-aged people were taught to read 
and write. The province certified that 17 counties and cites 
(districts) had basically practised the nine-year-compulsory 
education and basically eliminated illiteracy among young and 
middle-aged people. Enrollment at various types of middle-level 
vocational schools and at ordinary high schools increased 37.6 
percent and 31 percent, respectively, from the previous year. 
We also provided 4 million people with various types of 
on-the-job training. 
  While accelerating the pace of economic development 
last year, the province stressed the policy of "promoting the 
reform and opening up with one hand and cracking down on severe 
crimes with the other and of placing equal emphasis on both" and 
enhanced socialist spiritual civilization building, democratic 
legal system building, and government administration 
improvement 
  We conscientiously implemented the "Program To Promote 
Spiritual Civilization Building in Zhejiang," extensively 
carried out the drive to promote spiritual civilization building 
and to spread the guidelines set forth at the 14th CPC National 
Congress among the masses. The drive to crack down on 
pornography was carried out in earnest. Efforts to build and 
enhance management over cultural market were made. We saw the 
production of excellent artistic works and publication of a 
number of good books. Construction of cultural facilities was 
stepped up. The building of the new Zhejiang Museum was 
completed. The Yuyaohe Mudu Museum and the Zhejiang Natural 
Museum were open to the public. The Shanghang radio and 
satellite television station was completed and became 
operational. Provincial-level radio and television programs 
could be tuned in and received in 41 countries and regions. 
Sports became more popular with the masses. The province's 
athletes won 55 gold medals at major domestic and foreign sports 
meets. Some 10 demonstrative counties passed state inspection 
on implementing primary-level public healthcare plan. Public 
health conditions in urban and rural areas improved. Greater 
efforts were exerted to prevent and immunize against local 
diseases, job-related diseases, and infectious diseases. 
Various social sectors attached greater importance to family 
planning and to environmental protection. The province's 
natural population growth rate stood at 7.03 percent. Regions 
which used to be weak in family planning work showed 
improvement. The target responsiblity system for environmnetal 
protection was better implemented. Steps were also taken to 
strengthen construction in urban and rural areas. Remedial 
efforts were taken to deal with major pollution cases. 
  The Zhejiang Provincial People's Government has 
conscientiously accepted supervision from the Zhejiang 
Provincial People's Congress and promptly reported to the 
people's congress and its standing committee on major issues 
during the course of economic and social development. The 
Zhejiang Provincial People's Government has supported the 
Zhejiang Provincial Committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference in carrying out its fundamental 
functions of political consultation and democratic supervision 
and listened to opinions expressed by provincial committees of 
all democratic parties and the All-China Federation of Industry 
and Commerce in their participation in the administration and 
discussion of state affairs. In its effort to accelerate the 
administrative legislature, the provincial government has 
submitted to the provincial people's congress standing committee 
eight regional regulation drafts and promulgated 11 regional 
administrative provisions and regulations. We have done a great 
deal to improve all facets of public security and launched a 
drive to eliminate social evils and severely punish offenders of 
various criminal and economic crimes. The government has 
strengthened efforts in publicizing the legal system and in 
promoting law dissemination awareness. Great progress has also 
been made in the work concerning religious affairs, nationality 
affairs, foreign affairs, overseas Chinese affairs, and Taiwan 
affairs. Extensive efforts have been made to launch campaigns 
such as supporting the army and giving preferential treatment to 
the families of revolutionary soldiers, supporting the 
government and loving the people, as well as joint construction 
between the army, the police, and the people. We have 
energetically promoted national defense education and 
strengthened border and coastal control. We have 
conscientiously carried out the work concerning conscription, 
arranging new jobs or living places for retired soldiers, 
training of reserve militia, and arming the people. As a 
result, relations between the army, the government, and the 
people have become even closer. 
  In accordance with the unified planing of the central and 
provincial CPC committees, we have conducted a thoroughgoing 
anticorruption campaign. Leading cadres at all levels have 
conducted self-inspection and self-correction in accordance with 
the five regulations for promoting integrity and 
self-discipline. All supervision organs in Zhejiang have 
registered and investigated 464 corruption cases. As a result, 
346 people have been given the punishment of political 
discipline. The provincial government has canceled 310 
irrational charges and fees and conducted a special supervision 
and inspection to alleviate peasants' burdens. Relevant 
departments of city, prefectural, and county as well as 
provincial levels have also canceled a batch of irrational 
charges and fees. Efforts have been made to check whether 
governmental organizations have engaged in business operations 
or running enterprises. Problems such as abusing power and 
monopolizing business operations have been checked. The 
practices of accepting gifts in the forms of money or valuable 
certificates have been basically stopped. While conducting the 
anticorruption campaign, we have also emphasized the importance 
of diligently attending to government affairs and cherishing the 
people as well as that of earnest work. To achieve these goals 
and carry out the major tasks for each developmental stage as 
put forward in the government work report adopted by the First 
Session of the Eighth Provincial People's Congress, we have 
assigned specific localities and departments to accomplish 
specific tasks. We have conducted routine inspections and 
supervision on these tasks. 
  Fellow deputies, Zhejiang's economic development and 
achievements in various undertakings over the past year have not 
been easily won. On behalf of the Zhejiang Provincial People's 
Government, I would like to express my sincere thanks to 
workers, peasants, intellectuals, cadres, PLA personnel, and 
armed police as well as to all friends at home and abroad who 
are concerned about and support Zhejiang's undertakings. 
  While affirming the achievements, we should also 
soberly understand that deep-seated structural problems in our 
economic system are still outstanding. Many problems also exist 
in our social life. With a poor agricultural foundation, 
the comparative economic performance for grain production has 
dropped. Serious phenomena, such as unauthorized use of 
farmland for nonagricultural purposes and leaving farmland 
unplowed, led to less production of grain, cotton, and 
oil-bearing seeds in 1993, as compared with the previous year. 
Industrial enterprises are relatively poor in their ability to 
adapt to the changes in the outer environment. Some enterprises 
produce poor economic results because their circulating funds 
cannot be retrieved promptly. Commodity price increases came 
too fast, resulting an increase of 16.7 percent over the 
previous year. The supply and demand of daily necessities, 
mainly "vegetable basket" commodities, experienced a fairly 
great fluctuation. As a result, some people's living conditions 
have been affected. The contradiction between the construction 
scale and the supply of capital is very serious. Bottleneck 
problems in transportation, energy, and other aspects are still 
very serious. Scientific, technological, educational, cultural, 
public health, sports, and other undertakings cannot meet the 
needs of economic development and the people's livelihood. 
Unstable factors still exist in our social life, with some 
localities having poor public security conditions. 
  There are still weak links in the work of the government. 
In the course of replacing the old system with a new one, the 
government has failed to keep up with the developing situation 
in the fields of organizational setup, management system, 
thinking and concepts, and work style. Some departments and 
units have lacked a strong concept of service, and their work 
efficiency is low. The unhealthy tendencies and corruptive 
practices among some functionaries have affected the close ties 
between the government and the people. We must pay close 
attention to these problems and be serious in solving them. 
<H5>  2. Major Tasks and Work in 1994 </H5>
  Nineteen ninety-four is a crucial year for deepening the 
reform and is also an important year for maintaining the growth 
momentum of the national economy. This year, the general 
requirements of government work are, under the guidance of 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics and the party's basic line, to implement 
in an all-around way the guidelines of the 14th CPC National 
Congress and the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee; to implement the guidelines of the ninth provincial 
party congress; to accelerate the building of a socialist market 
economic structure; to strive to realize sustained, rapid, and 
healthy development of the national economy and all-round social 
progress; and to basically fulfill Zhejiang's Eighth Five- Year 
Plan one year ahead of schedule. 
  Seizing opportunities, deepening the reform, opening wider 
to 
the outside world, promoting development, and maintaining 
stability remain the important parts of our work this year. 
Economic development is the center of all work; reform and 
opening to the outside world is a strong motive force for 
stimulating development; development is the foundation for 
political and social stability, and maintaining social stability 
is an indispensable condition for economic development and the 
smooth progress of reform. We must correctly handle the 
relationship between reform, development, and stability. The 
three should coordinate with and promote one another to ensure 
that all tasks are done well. 
  In accordance with the requirements mention above, this year 
we plan to increase the gross provincial product by 12 percent 
over that of 1992, of which primary industry will increase 2.8 
percent; secondary industry, 15 percent; and tertiary industry, 
over 12 percent. Investment in fixed assets will go up 20 
percent; total sales of consumer goods, 22 percent; exports, 12 
percent; annual inflation will be kept under 12 percent; and the 
natural population growth rate will be around 8.39 per 1,000. 
<H5>  (1) Quicken the Pace of Reform and Acclerate in an </H5>
All-Around Way the Building of a Socialist Market Economic System 
  The following are the main points of the reform of the 
economic structure this year: First, we will deepen reform of 
the enterprise system; seond, we will accelerate reform of the 
system of macroeconomic control. In coordination with this 
reform, we will advance the building of a market system with 
priority on the building of markets for important means of 
production, and push forward the reform of the social security 
system. 
  We will strive to explore effective ways and methods of 
building a modern enterprise system; continue to implement the 
"Enterprise Law," the "Regulations on Transforming the Operating 
Mechanisms of Industrial Enterprises Owned by the Whole People," 
and the "Implementation Rules" formulated by the province; give 
enterprises greater decisionmaking power; and guide enterprises 
to deepen their labor, personnel, and wage reform. We will 
strengthen supervision over and management of state-owned assets 
and strive to preserve and increase their value; focus on reform 
of the system of property rights in enterprises, and clearly 
define property rights relationships, and strive to make 
breakthrough progress in this respect. We will actively 
encourage large and medium enterprises to form limited liability 
companies whose stocks are owned by several legal entities; 
expand experiments in forming shareholding limited companies; 
rationalize the property rights relations in collective 
enterprises, especially town and village enterprises; and 
popularize the shareholding cooperative system. For small 
state-owned and collective enterprises, we will, in line with 
different conditions, accelerate the introduction of the methods 
of leasing, auctioning, merging, and bankruptcy. We will 
continue to form, in a planned way, inter-regional and 
intertrade enterprise groups with large and medium enterprises 
as the core; encourage qualified enterprise groups to develop 
into transnational corporations; and encourage various areas to 
conduct experiments and exploration in changing the operating 
mechanisms of enterprises. 
  We should earnestly reform the 
financial, banking, and investment system. In accordance with 
the principles of fairness, norms, and simplicity and 
convenience, we should adjust the financial relations between 
the province and cities, prefectures, or counties rationally; 
establish a financial management system on the basis of the 
system of tax distribution; double our efforts in levying and 
controlling tax revenues; and crack down on tax evasion and 
fraud and refusal to pay taxes. Financial organs at various 
levels should adhere to the principles of keeping expenditures 
within the limits of income and acting in accordance with their 
capacities; strictly control financial expenditures; and strive 
to keep a balance between financial revenue and expenditure. We 
should support people's banks in tightening their supervision 
and management over financial institutions and banking 
activities according to law; support and help specialized banks 
change to commercial banks step by step; step up the 
construction of credit cooperatives in rural and urban areas; 
create conditions for establishing cooperative banks in urban 
and rural areas; and win over national commercial banks, 
policy-related banks, and regional commercial banks to set up 
branches in Zhejiang. We should further administer and develop 
such nonbanking institutions as insurance and stock companies; 
operate and manage different trades separately; perfect and 
oversee cooperative funds in rural areas; and earnestly guide 
nongovernmental investment. We should deepen reform of the 
investment system; define the principal part of investment by 
differentiating investment in competing projects from that in 
infrastructural and social welfare projects; implement a 
corporate responsibility system for a key project under 
construction in an all-around manner; establish a risk 
responsibility system of corporate investment and bank credit 
step by step; strengthen macroeconomic regulation and control 
over the volume and structure of investment; and avoid acting 
blindly. 
  We should make great efforts to develop a market system. In 
accordance with the principles of uniformity, openness, 
competition, and orderliness, we should double our efforts in 
planning and managing the building of markets. While 
consolidating, perfecting, and improving the consumer goods 
markets, we should give the establishment and development of 
various production-factors markets strategic importance. We 
should further develop the interbank borrowing and lending 
network; earnestly expand the stock markets; establish interbank 
foreign exchange markets; develop the property rights markets in 
a planned way; help liquidate assets and increase asset value; 
continue to construct a large-scale capital goods market; 
further develop labor, technology, real estate, and information 
markets; strive to build futures markets in line with domestic 
and international demands; and develop and perfect brokerage 
organizations for various markets. We should improve and 
strengthen management and supervision over markets; perfect 
market rules; put an end to illicit competition; punish such 
illegal activities as production and sale of fake and shoddy 
products, cheating, and monopolizing strictly according to law; 
maintain market order; and protect the legitimate interests of 
operators and consumers. 
  We should continue to reform the social security system and 
the housing system in cities and towns. We should popularize 
the procedures for integrating social pensions and social 
security; perfect the unemployment insurance system; and expand 
unemployment insurance coverage. In the prerequisite of 
ensuring basic medical care for workers, we should continue to 
study and reform public health services and the labor insurance 
system. We should promote the sale, leasing, and construction 
of housing simultaneously while concentrating on the sale of 
public housing; accelerate housing construction in cities and 
towns, especially the construction of housing for those who have 
housing difficulties and residential housing construction with 
marginal profits; and help commercialize residential housing. 
  While strengthening the public sector of the economy, all 
localities in the province should continue their efforts to 
attract foreign investment, actively encourage the development 
of the individual and private economy, and seriously guide and 
administer these sectors of the economy to ensure their healthy 
development. Governments at all levels should treat all 
enterprises equally and create an environment for them to 
compete in the market on an equal footing. 
  This is a year in which we have published more reform 
measures, and there are both a great momentum and great 
difficulties in various reforms. We must strengthen leadership 
over reforms, strive to make overall progress while making 
breakthroughs in selected aspects, and carry out various reforms 
in a more coordinated way. Attention should be paid to studying 
the feasibility of reform plans. While supporting bold 
exploratory reforms in various localities, we should also pay 
attention to reducing risks and promote reforms in a steady and 
safe way. We should adhere to a mass line; wholeheartedly rely 
on the working class; give full play to the initiative and 
creativity of workers, peasants, intellectuals, cadres and other 
working people; and ensure a smooth proceeding of all reform 
measures. 
<H5>  (2) Open Up Wider to the Outside World and Vigorously </H5>
Develop an Export-Oriented Economy 
  Zhejiang has a relatively high degree of market economy and 
a 
relatively better foundation of opening up. We should take full 
advantage of this strong point to open the province to the 
outside even wider and deeper and to a higher degree. We should 
make better use of both international and domestic markets and 
both foreign and Chinese resources, take an active part in 
international economic cooperation and division of labor, and 
accelerate the process of making our economic structure and 
operational mechanisms compatible with the international 
economic and international market. 
  In support of the development and opening up of [Shanghai's] 
Pudong, we should take the further step of improving the 
province's opening arrangements. In opening up the province to 
the outside world, we should bring into full play the leading 
role of the coastal open cities of Ningbo and Wenzhou, the 
international tourism city Hangzhou, and the economic 
development zones. In particular, we should support Ningbo in 
accelerating its comprehensive reform according to the demands 
of the state. Its reform should lead to opening up wider and 
provide some experience for the whole province to learn from. 
We will urge the State Council to give a prompt approval for 
Wenling and some other counties and cities to become coastal 
open economic zones so that a longer stretch of coastal area is 
open to the outside world. We should accelerate the development 
of the areas along the Zhejiang-Jiangxi railroad and the Jinhua- 
Wenzhou railroad, as well as border cities and counties, and 
open up Zhejiang's central and western parts wider to the 
outside. 
  We should actively and effectively use foreign capital. We 
should pay attention to guiding foreign investment into desired 
fields and reserve the proper projects for foreign investors. 
We should encourage foreign investment in basic industries, 
such as energy sources and raw and processed materials 
industries, in developmental agriculture and export-oriented 
agriculture, in transforming conventional industries, in the 
development of high- technological industries, in tourism, and 
in the tertiary industry which directly serves production and 
the people's livelihood. We should encourage the establishment 
of more foreign-funded banks and conduct an experiment on 
allowing foreign-funded retail enterprises. While continuing to 
attract investors from Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao, we should 
make more efforts to invite investors from Europe, the United 
States, Japan, the ROK, and Southeast Asian nations. We should 
try in every possible way to attract more investment by foreign 
consortiums and large enterprises and strive to enlarge the 
scale and raise the technological level of foreign investment. 
To obtain more outside investment, we should give full play to 
the positive role of Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao compatriots; 
overseas Chinese compatriots; and Zhejiang's organizations 
abroad. We should further improve the investment environment 
and make great efforts to accelerate infrastructural 
construction, improve policies and legislation, simplify 
administrative procedures, provide better services, and raise 
the quality of workers and staff members. We should administer 
foreign-funded enterprises according to the law and protect 
their legitimate rights and interests and their legitimate 
production and business activities. We should see to it that 
they put their capital into operation and start operations on 
time according to contract. We should urge them to raise their 
foreign exchange earnings and economic efficiency. 
  We should concentrate on running well the development zones 
of various categories. We should persist in making scientific 
and rational plans, promote development with good projects, set 
high standards for construction, raise the efficiency of 
development, and step up the infrastructural construction and 
the work of inviting investors for the development zones. The 
Ningbo, Wenzhou, Hangzhou and Xiaoshan economic and 
technological development zones, the Hangzhou high-technological 
industrial development zone, and the Zhijiang tourism district 
have entered the stage of inviting investors and large-scale 
construction. The Ningbo bonded zone has been put into 
operation. We are assisting in formulating the overall 
development plan for Daxie Island. By formulating and improving 
the procedures for managing the provincial-level development 
zones, we have been performing a standardized management of the 
development zones and appraising them according to their actual 
performances. 
  We will maintain the good foreign trade development trend. 
Proceeding from unifying foreign exchange rates, we will make 
positive efforts to transform foreign trade enterprises' 
operating mechanisms; strive to win foreign trade rights for 
more cities, counties, enterprises engaging in both production 
and marketing, and research units; encourage the three kinds of 
partially or wholly foreign-owned enterprises to increase 
exports; and further ensure that the province earns more foreign 
exchange by exporting products of various categories. We will 
step up efforts to integrate marketing operations with 
industrial production, marketing operations with agricultural 
production, and marketing operations with technological 
development. We will quicken the step of establishing foreign 
trade-based enterprise groups and export production bases, with 
the aim of establishing more enterprise groups and of making our 
enterprises more industry-based and internationalized. We will 
practice the development strategy of diversifying our markets 
and winning customers with our good-quality products. We will 
step up efforts to keep track of and study international market; 
to improve our export product mix; improve the quality, grades, 
and efficiency of our export products; and increase exports and 
foreign exchange earnings. 
  We will extensively promote foreign economic and 
technological exchange and cooperation, will further broaden the 
scope of foreign labor cooperation and project contracting, 
introduce more technologies and intellectual resources from 
outside the country, and take various measures to develop 
international tourism. We will endeavor to properly manage 
enterprises invested by companies outside the country, establish 
and refine regulations for managing these enterprises, and 
improve management of them. We will step up exchanges and 
cooperation with our sister cities and look for new ways to 
strengthen foreign economic and technological exchange and 
cooperation. 
  While broadening the scope of opening up to the outside 
world, we will establish closer ties with central government 
departments and fraternal provinces and municipalities, promote 
economic cooperation in various forms with them, and encourage 
mutual support between counterpart departments of the Zhejiang 
and central government departments and counterpart departments 
of our fraternal provinces and municipalities, in order to 
benefit each other and to achieve common prosperity. 
<H5>  (3) Strengthen the Agricultural Base To Bring About a </H5>
Bumper Agricultural, Especially Grain, Harvest 
  Agriculture is a fundamental issue affecting the overall 
situation. Governments at all levels must place agriculture on 
the top of their economic work; top leaders of all localities 
must personally take charge of and assume overall responsibility 
for agricultural work; agricultural work should be used as a 
major criterion for evaluating leaders' performance. While 
decontrolling the purchase and marketing prices of grain, and 
while developing "good-quality, high-yield, and 
highly-efficient" agriculture and making agriculture more 
market-oriented, we should take comprehensive economic and legal 
means and necessary administrative measures to further protect 
and support and to improve macroeconomic management of the 
agriculture to ensure that it develops continuously and peasant 
incomes increase steadily. 
  To step up agricultural production, we must first ensure the 
production of grain, cotton, and oil-bearing crops. Grain is a 
special commodity that affects the national economy and the 
people's livelihood, as well as a strategic material that 
affects social stability; therefore, we must always pay close 
attention to grain production -- an issue affecting the overall 
situation -- and ensure that the grain production areage, grain 
output, and grain stock are maintained at certain levels. We 
should ensure that the principle "be self-sufficient in grain 
supply, regulate surplus grain, and ship in grain to make up for 
grain shortages" is truly carried out, and that the province's 
total grain output is maintained at about 15 million tonnes. 
According to the law, we will resolutely prevent farmland from 
being left unused, and strictly prohibit farmland, especially 
grain fields, from being used for growing perennial crops to 
maintain our grain, cotton, and oil-bearing crops production 
capabilities. We will refine the contract purchasing system; 
appropriately increase the grain purchase prices and the 
contract purchase prices of cotton; refine the system of 
establishing grain risk funds and the system of adjusting grain 
stock; establish a system for maintaining a stock of major 
agricultural capital goods; support the efforts of major grain, 
cotton, and oil-bearing crops production areas to increase 
production and to promote value-adding processing of 
agricultural products; improve relative agricultural production 
efficiency; and rally peasants' production enthusiasm. 
Currently, we should particularly ensure that the decided early 
rice growing acreage is fully planted with the crop and early 
rice is properly taken care of. We will strive to expand the 
acreage of spring corn, spring soybeans, and vegetables, and 
ensure the supply of farming materials, to lay a good foundation 
for reaping a bumper agricutural harvest this year. 
  In addition to making efforts to stabilize grain 
production, we actively provided guidance to farmers and 
encouraged them to readjust the agricultural production 
structure; to grow nongrain crops and cash crops; to develop 
forestry, animal husbandry, sideline products, and fisheries; 
and to increase the effective supply of farm produce and its 
added value. We persisted in relying on science to develop 
agriculure. We helped stabilize the ranks of farm technology 
teams and improved their services in rural areas; stepped up 
efforts to popularize advanced agricultural technologies and to 
introduce technologies suitable for rural areas; encouraged 
farmers to grow excellent strains of early rice; and offered 
good prices to procure quality grains. We spared no efforts in 
increasing investment in agriculture. Expenditures provided by 
the province's budget in support of farming production rose by 
10 percent over the previous year. While striving to control 
the extension of new loans at the previous year's level, banks 
in the province still managed to increase the proportion of 
loans for agriculture. Fees were collected across the province 
for setting up a special water conservancy fund. A special land 
development fund was set up with fees collected from land 
leasing and from granting of land-use rights. We improved the 
mechanisms of "industry supporting agricultural development" and 
of "agricultural sectors extending mutual support to each 
other." We made sure that the agricultural development fund 
contributed to by village and township enterprises would always 
be in place. Farmers and economic organizations in rural areas 
were mobilized to try various ways to increase investment in 
agriculture. We built and repaired irrigation works, greatly 
promoted farmland infrastructure, and concentrated efforts to 
harness the rivers in the Taihu and the Hangjiahu River basins 
and to tame the "three rivers" system. Measures to protect 
farmers' interests, to lighten their burdens, and to help them 
enhance the capability to combat natural disasters were 
continuously implemented. Steps were taken to enhance 
management over prices for means of agricultural production and 
to resolutely investigate cases of "cheating" farmers. Measures 
to strengthen land management was further strengthened. We 
mapped out a general plan for land utilization, worked out a 
sound system for the establishment of a farmland protection 
zone, and vigorously developed land resources. Stricter 
guidelines were set for construction-use land planning. We also 
tightened the processing and approval of construction-use land 
applications. We resolutely put a stop to illegal land use and 
to illegal occupuation and abuse of arable land. After land was 
requisitioned for development, we saw that an early development 
was carried out. A large-scale afforestation drive was launched 
to realize the goal of greening all the mountains in our 
province one year ahead of schedule. 
  We carried out in-depth reform in rural areas. We strove to 
improve the dual management system of unified and independent 
management which is based on the household contract 
responsibility system; we also extended the land-contracting 
period. While adhering to the principle of land being owned by 
the collective and to the principle of not changing the basic 
purpose for the use of land, we established a turnover mechanism 
for the right to use land. We actively promoted large-scale 
agricultural operations in regions with advantageous conditions. 
The shareholding cooperative system was expanded from village 
and township enterprises to other economic sectors in rural 
areas. We strove to bring about a rational distribution of 
major means for agricultural production. In addition to 
establishing a sound socialized service system in rural areas 
and to reforming the distribution system for agricultural 
products, we encouraged and supported various social sectors, 
particularly those collective economic organizations in rural 
areas and those specialized farm households, to set up 
"locomotive" enterprises. We helped farmers to bring their 
produce to the market and strove to bring about the 
comprehensive development of the agriculture and the rural 
economy. 
<H5>  (4) Readjust and Optimize the Economic Structure and Help </H5>
Raise Quality in the Growth of the National Economy 
  To promote development, we focused our efforts on 
readjusting 
structure, raising product quality, and improving economic 
efficiency. We not only strove to consolidate and upgrade 
agriculture, but also increased efforts in infrastructure 
construction and basic industry. We also strove to transform 
and upgrade the processing industry, to foster and develop 
leading industrial sectors, and to accelerate the pace of 
developing tertiary industry. To readjust industry mix in our 
province, we made good use of market mechanisms. 
  We should improve the structure of investment in 
fixed assets and step up the building of infrastructural 
facilities and basic industries. Continuous efforts should be 
made to control the scale of investment in fixed assets. We 
should give first priority to alleviating the strain on 
transportation. Focusing our attention on projects in 
transportation, communications, power, and water conservancy, we 
should speed up the construction of the Shanghai-Hangzhou-Ningbo 
Expressway, the Jinhua-Wenzhou Railway, the Zhejiang-Jiangxi 
Multiple-Track Railway, the Zhujiajian Airport, the ore wharf at 
Beilun Harbor for 200,000-ton ships, telephone networks in the 
province's cities and prefectures, the Beilun Power Plant, the 
second-stage project of the Qinshan Nuclear Power Plant, the 
Jiaxing Power Plant, the Tianhuangping Pumped Hydroelectric 
Storage Station, the Wuxi Jiang diversion project, the 
Jinqingxin floodgate, the Shafan and Wanyao reservoirs, and the 
key Yuxi water conservancy project. Conditions should be 
created for building the Xiaoshan- Ningbo Multiple-Track Railway 
and the fourth-stage project of the Taizhou Power Plant. Full 
preparations should be made for the construction of the new 
Hangzhou international airport, the Taizhou section of the 
Ningbo-Taizhou-Wenzhou Expressway, a second bridge over the Ou 
Jiang, the Hangzhou-Jinhua-Quzhou special highway for motor 
vehicles, the Zhejiang section of the Hangzhou-Nanjing 
Expressway, the Sanmen Nuclear Power Plant, thermal power plants 
in coastal areas, the key Shanxi water conservancy project, and 
the Tankeng Hydroelectric Power Station. In raw and 
semifinished materials industry, we should continue to do a good 
job in building the Zhejiang Acrylic Fiber Plant, the Zhejiang 
Polyester Fiber Plant, the Zhejiang Chemicals Plant, and the 
Quhua fluoride project and make full preparations for the 
construction of the 600,000-tonne catalytic cracking project, 
the Beilun Iron and Steel Works, and the 300,000-tonne ethylene 
project. 
  It is crucial to raise funds and use them according to plan 
in stepping up the construction of infrastructural facilities 
and basic industries. Governments at various levels should 
institute a system under which special funds are earmarked for 
the construction of communications, electric power, and water 
conservancy projects. Meanwhile, they should actively introduce 
market mechanisms and open channels for raising funds. On the 
one hand, they may raise funds by issuing bonds or stocks. In 
building communications, power, and major raw and semifinished 
materials projects, they may organize shareholding companies 
which will be responsible for raising funds and the construction 
and operation of projects. While strengthening communications 
management, they should further implement and improve the 
principle of "self-reliance in four aspects [si zi fang zhen 
0934 5261 2455 6859]" and give full play to the initiative of 
localities in setting up and running transport facilities. On 
the other hand, they should try to attract foreign funds and 
have them participate in building projects in infrastructure and 
basic industries. Limited funds should be used for key 
projects. The provincial government should concentrate its 
resources on projects bearing on the overall situation. City, 
prefectural, and county governments should do their best to 
build key projects according to their own capabilities. 
  We should vigorously open markets, accelerate 
technological progress, and resolutely develop industry by 
improving its management. We should effectively strengthen 
our market analyses and provide more market information. We 
should guide enterprises in giving first priority to opening 
markets, actively readjusting their product mix, and improve the 
competitiveness and market percentage of their products. 
Enterprises should exercise strict internal management and 
improve the system of responsibility for putting an to losses 
and increasing profits, strengthen their quality control, and 
lower their consumption of energy and raw materials. Now 
accidents occur rather often in production. Governments at 
various levels should pay close attention to safety in 
production and do a good job in labor protection. Further 
efforts should be made to establish or improve the system of 
safety in production under which enterprises are responsible for 
safety, professional people are assigned to ensure safety, the 
state oversees it, and masses supervise it. 
  We should continue to accelerate the technical 
transformation 
of enterprises. In view of the new situations occurring with 
reform of the financial, taxation, banking, and investment 
systems, we should study such situations and adopt policy 
measures to encourage enterprises to use foreign funds for their 
technical transformation. We should protect and strengthen their 
initiative in carrying out technical transformation. Technical 
transformation projects started according to the Eighth 
Five-Year Plan are now in full swing. We should make vigorous 
efforts to carry out such projects, ensure their quality, and 
strive to have them completed, put into operation, and yield the 
desired results as early as possible. 
  We should transform conventional industries; cultivate new 
industries; improve planning for the machine-building, 
electronics, light, textile, chemical and building materials 
industries; work out detailed plans for the development of 
telecommunications equipment, transport equipment, engineering 
machinery, new, high-grade synthetic materials, new building 
materials, medicine, and iron and steel; and actively implement 
plans to accelerate the overall industrial structure. We should 
pay attention to giving play to our traditional strength in the 
building industry, improve equipment, and enhance our 
competitive power. 
  We should arouse enthusiasm in all quarters to 
accelerate the development of tertiary industry. While we 
should adhere to a unified plan, we should give different 
guidance to suit different conditions. While continuing to 
improve transport, post and telecommunications, and science and 
technology education, we should support all localities in 
broadening the area of development of tertiary industry in light 
of local resources and actual needs. In cities, we should give 
a high priority to the development of commerce, banking, 
insurance, real estate, information and consulting services 
during the course of urban transformation and construction. In 
rural areas, we should give a high priority to perfecting the 
socialized service system. In areas with rich tourism 
resources, we should accelerate the development of tourism, and 
let tourism play a leading role in developing relevant 
industries. We should encourage and guide both urban and rural 
areas to undertake more tertiary industry projects that require 
less investment, yield quick results, and directly serve 
production and people's livelihood. During the course of 
development, we should strive to broaden the fields, increase 
the categories, and upgrade tertiary industry. 
  We should take a further step to optimize the geographical 
distribution of economic undertakings and strive to cultivate 
new areas of development. While continuing to give full play to 
the leading and promoting role of urban centers, we should 
particularly do a good job in the following three respects this 
year: 
  First, we should strengthen the county economy. Village and 
town enterprises are the main bodies of the county economy. To 
bring about major development and improvement, we should 
actively guide and support village and town enterprises in 
increasing production and accumulation, stepping up technical 
updating, performing strict internal management, practicing the 
cooperative share-holding system, and raising their level of 
specialized cooperation and organization. We should help some 
selected major village and town enterprises expand, improve 
quality, and vigorously develop an open-type economy. We should 
combine the efforts to build small towns with the efforts to 
develop nonfarming undertakings of which the village and town 
enterprises are the main form; and in this way, we should 
accelerate the industrialization and urbanization of rural 
areas. We should reform the urban household registration 
system, popularize the experience of building rural towns by 
peasants, give higher priority to developing urban centers 
within counties, and promote the gathering of rural secondary 
and tertiary industries in the urban centers. The province 
should pay more attention to some economically strong counties 
and a number of economically less developed countries. The 
former should serve as a model for the latter to accelerate 
development. 
  Second, we should accelerate development of the marine 
economy. We should take full advantage of our rich marine 
resources, long coastline, and many deep-water harbors and 
seriously do a good job in planning the exploitation of marine 
resources. We should speed up the construction of the coastal 
ports Ningbo, Zhoushan, Wenzhou, Taizhou, and Zhapu with more 
emphasis on the first two. For these ports, we should build 
supporting transport projects, particularly transport lines 
leading from them to inland areas. We should step up the 
construction of Beilun harbor according to the standards of a 
large international transshipment port, important trade port, 
and heavy chemical industry base. We should vigorously develop 
shipping, marine fishing and aquaculture, coastal industries, 
ocean tourism, and domestic and foreign trade. In support of 
the exploitation of the oil and gas fields in the East China 
Sea, we should build well a rear base at Wenzhou. We should 
gradually improve interisland transportation, alleviate water 
and power shortages on coastal islets, and improve the post and 
telecommunications service there. 
  Third, we should vigorously develop the economy in 
mountainous regions. We should support the mountainous regions 
in accelerating the construction of transport, water resources, 
electric power, and telecommunications projects to gradually 
improve their infrastructure. While encouraging according to 
plan the urban and coastal regions to relocate some of their 
industries to mountainous regions, we should guide and assist 
mountainous regions in using local resources to comprehensively 
develop crop cultivation, livestock breeding and aquaculture, 
and processing industries, and in developing secondary and 
tertiary industries which suit local conditions. We should 
support provincial border regions in developing border trade. 
We should adhere to the demands set in the state help-the-poor 
plan to actively support the economic development of poor 
regions, particularly the old revolutionary base areas and 
minority nationalities regions. We should broaden our concepts 
and make greater efforts to help the poor. In helping the poor, 
we should adopt measures which have proven effective through 
practice, such as cooperation between departments and 
localities, application of science and technology, financial 
assistance, and leading cadres each assuming responsibility for 
a fixed spot. We should help some localities overcome poverty 
by seeking additional income elsewhere if they can. We should 
step up the construction of economic development zones in poor 
regions and thus provide those regions with economic development 
bases. 
  (5) Give Priority to Developing Science, Technology, 
and Education and Promote the Integration of Science, 
Technology, and Education with the Economy 
  We will further put into practice the strategy of 
invigorating Zhejiang with science and education and closely 
integrate science, technology, and education with the economy. 
This is aimed at making science, technology, and education 
serve economic construction more consciously and at making 
economic construction rely on science and technology and on 
skilled labor. 
  Science and technology should serve the needs of economic 
construction. While focusing on strengthening the foundation of 
agriculture and transforming traditional industries and town and 
village enterprises, we will develop industries using high and 
new technologies; continue to implement the "problems tackling," 
"Spark," "Torch," and "bumper harvest" plans and the "Golden 
Bridge" project; and promote application of science and 
technology, development of science and technology, and research 
in basic science. We will drawn up integrated development plans 
for agriculture, science, and education; set up agriculture 
demonstration zones that stresse the use of fine strains and 
high yields; and speed up the importation and cultivation of new 
seed strains. We will earnestly implement plans for developing 
new and high technologies and for transforming traditional 
industries; and conduct experiments in the reform of the 
petro-chemical and electronic industries. We will develop new 
and high technologies and gradually build up a number of new- 
and high-tech enterprises in the fields of electronics, 
information, new materials, new energy, biological technology, 
as well as in the manufacturing of machinery and electrical 
products. We will strengthen research in basic science and do a 
good job in building the second batch of 17 provincial-level 
laboratories and experimental bases. 
  We will deepen reform of the scientific and technological 
system. In accordance with the principle of "holding fast to one 
end and leaving the whole field open," we will stabilize and 
strengthen the number of specialized personnel needed for 
research in basic science. On this basis, we will vigorously 
promote the restructuring of various scientific research 
institutions; redeploy personnel; strive to build economic 
entities embracing scientific research, production, and 
operations; or directly deploy research personnel in enterprises 
or enterprise groups, thus becoming the technical development 
centers of enterprises. We will strengthen the leading role of 
enterprises in technical progress, encourage large and medium 
enterprises to set up and improve their technological 
development centers, and encourage medium and small enterprises 
to form their own technological backing. We will vigorously 
promote technological cooperation among enterprises, schools of 
higher learning, and scientific research institutions; encourage 
and support the building of civilian-run scientific and 
technological organizations; and enhance the role of scientific 
associations and societies in promoting scientific and 
technological development. We will speed up the 
commercialization of scientific and technological results and 
promptly put them to use in production. 
  The stamina for economic and social development is more and 
more dependent on the improved quality of the work force and the 
training of talented people. To attach importance to education 
means to set great store in Zhejiang's future. We should 
further implement the "Outline on Reforming and Developing 
Education in China;" and, with a view to training qualified 
personnel and ensuring their moral, intellectual, and physical 
development for socialist modernization construction, should 
accelerate the reform and development of education, focused on 
basic education and vocational and technical education, in a bid 
to raise the quality of education and efficiency of schools in 
all fields. We should strengthen nine-year compulsory 
education, striving to enforce it on 38.7 million people in 
1,515 townships and towns this year, or 90 percent of the total 
population in 82 percent of the townships and towns. Where 
conditions permit, we should gradually expand senior middle 
school education. We should energetically develop vocational 
and technical education, increase the ratio of vocational 
schools to the total of secondary schools, and encourage more 
graduates of junior and senior middle schools to undergo 
vocational and technical training. We should support schools of 
higher learning in optimizing structure, extending scale, and 
raising overall efficiency. We should strive to manage well a 
number of key subjects and actively create the conditions for 
several institutes of higher learning to be incorporated into 
the state's "Project 2110." We should grant more managerial 
autonomy to schools of higher learning, quicken reform of the 
enrollment system of new students and the job assignment system 
for graduates, and increase the portion of enrollment under 
regulatory planning. We should actively develop adult 
education, nursery education, special education, and various 
kinds of social education; and should strive to eliminate 
illiteracy among young and middle-aged people. We should 
conduct on-the-job training, continuing education, and 
in-service diploma education in various forms so as to raise the 
ideological and cultural standards and technical skills of 
professionals at large. We should pay close attention to 
teachers' training schools and universities of various kinds, 
and should strengthen the training of competent teachers. We 
should earnestly publicize and implement the "Teachers Law" and 
protect teachers' lawful rights and interests. Delayed payments 
of teachers' wages should not be allowed; and everything should 
be done to solve housing problems for young and middle-aged 
teachers in urban areas. We should increase fiscal input into 
education, and ensure a good job in collecting the "educational 
surcharge." Meanwhile, we should actively explore other forms of 
schools run with funds raised through various channels from 
different walks of life, energetically encourage nonovernment 
sectors to set up schools, and improve the conditions for 
running schools so as to gradually change the situation in which 
the government runs all schools with a serious shortage of 
educational input. 
  We should make further efforts to create an atmosphere of 
respect for learning and for professionally trained people; 
earnestly improve the working, studying, and living conditions 
of intellectuals; and help them solve practical problems. We 
should strive to train a number of academic and technological 
leaders competent for entering the front line of the world's 
science and technology; organically integrate the training of 
personnel with rational use of talents; institute supporting 
reforms in the labor and personnel systems; promote rational 
mobility of talents; and through different forms, encourage and 
attract Chinese and foreign talents to serve Zhejiang. 
<H5>  (6) Be Concerned With People's Well-being and Continue To </H5>
Improve the Masses' Income and Living Quality 
  The purpose of deepening reform, opening wider to the 
outside 
world, and developing the economy is to improve people's living 
standards. With deepening the reform in an all-around manner 
and accelerating the readjustment of the interest pattern, 
governments at various levels across Zhejiang should acquire the 
mass viewpoint; conscientiously take the entire situation into 
consideration to stabilize the economy and society; take 
practical measures to show concern for the well-being of the 
masses; and safeguard the immediate interests of the masses of 
various classes in the urban and rural areas. 
  We should make a success of producing and supplying daily 
necessities to the masses; exercise strict control over prices; 
continue to implement the responsibility system of governors, 
mayors, and county magistrates; step up the construction of the 
"grain sack" and "vegetable basket" projects; stabilize 
production at current bases; develop new vegetable and nonstaple 
foodstuffs bases; strengthen control over grain and cooking oil 
supply; establish the market risk fund; perfect the reserve 
system for major agricultural products; and help markets in 
urban and rural areas to flourish. While carrying out price 
reform in a stable way, we should make great efforts to 
strengthen control over market prices; give full play to the 
press, public opinion, and all walks of life in society to 
supervise commodity prices; crack down on such illegal 
activities as forcing up prices, hoarding and speculation, and 
profiteering. 
  We should further improve the incomes of both urban and 
rural 
people in the light of the economic development and improved 
efficiency. We should reform the distribution system of 
enterprises and institutions and administrative organs in 
accordance with the requirements of "to each according to his 
work" as the principal mode of distribution, facilitating the 
coexistence of multiple distribution methods, and implementing 
the principle of giving priority to efficiency while taking 
fairness into account. Given that the rate of increase in the 
total amount of workers' wages is lower than that in 
enterprises' economic efficiency and the rate of increase in 
workers' average wages is lower than that in enterprises' 
productivity, we should give a free hand to state-owned 
enterprises to decide the wage level and mode of distribution 
according to changes in employment supply and demand and the 
state's relevant policies and regulations; establish regular 
promotion and wage increase mechanisms for organs and 
institutions step by step; pay attention to making adequate 
arrangements for the daily life of the retired, workers of 
loss-making enterprises, low-income workers, and peasants in 
poverty-stricken areas. We should institute and perfect the 
systems of price compensation and extra allowances for living 
expenses and thoroughly implement the regulations on workers' 
minimum wages to ensure that the increase in people's real 
incomes is greater than that in commodity prices and that the 
basic needs of low-income households and households with 
material difficulties are met. We should explore all 
possibilities for employment; rationally guide redundant 
personnel of organs and enterprises and institutions to new 
jobs; and transfer surplus labor out of agriculture. 
  We should attach great importance to and make a success of 
family planning and environmental protection; ensure better 
prenatal care and sound practices in rearing children; 
strengthen the population target responsibility system; 
strengthen control over family planning for the rural population 
and the urban floating population; continue to urge key cities 
and counties to pay attention to family planning; and ensure the 
fulfillment of Zhejiang's population target. We should continue 
to implement the environmental protection target responsibility 
system; strengthen monitoring and control over the environment; 
earnestly harness industrial pollution caused by gaseous, 
liquid, or solid wastes; control and reduce pollutants; 
strengthen management over water resources; truly protect river 
water quality; improve environmental quality in both urban and 
rural areas; and earnestly make a success of preventing and 
reducing disasters. 
  (7) Strengthen the Building of Socialist Spiritual 
Civilization, Promote All-Around Development of Social 
Undertakings 
  Spiritual civilization is an important component of 
modernization construction. We shall steadfastly implement the 
principle of "grasping two links at the same time" and earnestly 
carry out the "Outline for Building Socialist Spiritual 
Civilization in Zhejiang," persisting in arming people's mind 
with scientific theory, in guiding people with the correct 
public opinion, in portraying people with a noble spirit, and in 
inspiring people with outstanding works, thereby providing a 
powerful spiritual force, intellectual support, and ideological 
guarantee for reform, opening up, and economic construction. 
  The primary task of building socialist spiritual 
civilization 
in the new era is to study and publicize Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. We 
should organize cadres and the people in various ways to study 
in depth Volume 3 of the "Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping" in 
the light of reality, should earnestly educate them once again 
in the 14th CPC National Congress guidelines, and should help 
cadres and the people strengthen their conviction in socialism 
and enhance their awareness of implementing the party's basic 
line and development of a socialist market economy. We should 
continue to conduct extensive education on patriotism, 
collectivism, and socialism as well as on a pioneering spirit in 
the new era; should launch in-depth drives to emulate Lei Feng, 
Jiao Yulu, Xu Honggang, and other heroes and models; should 
actively advocate and publicize the correct ideals, belief, 
outlook on life, and concept of values; should resolutely oppose 
money worshipping, hedonism, and ultraindividualism; and should 
resist the inroads of bourgeois and feudal decadent ideas. We 
should focus attention on training a new generation of people 
with noble ideals, discipline, morality, and general knowledge 
by promoting public and professional ethics and reinforcing 
professional norms and discipline to improve service quality. 
We should strive to foster and create harmonious human 
relations by actively encouraging such healthy general conduct 
as observing discipline, respecting the old and cherishing the 
young, and readily taking up the cudgels for a just cause. We 
should work out meticulous plans on mass activities on building 
spiritual civilization by coordinating army, police, and 
civilian efforts to build civility units. We should continue to 
organize the drive to build civility cities and extend the drive 
to counties; and should gradually set up a new pattern of cities 
setting a good example for counties, rural towns for villages, 
and model units for entire trades and professions in building 
spiritual civilization. 
  In building spiritual civilization, we should have 
long-range 
objectives as well as interim requirements, striving to achieve 
marked results in improving the general mood of society in the 
following aspects: First, we should improve the work style of 
trades and professions closely related to the masses and correct 
unhealthy practices to bring about a noticeable improvement in 
the style of various trades and professions. Second, we should 
strengthen the management of cultural markets and continue to 
crack down on pornography to promote healthy development of 
cultural markets. Third, we should step up ideological and 
moral education among youngsters; and should closely coordinate 
school, family, and community in fostering sound milieus for 
education. Fourth, we should go all out to change unhealthy 
social customs and habits; and should resolutely check the 
spread of such unhealthy practices as mass gambling, feudal 
superstition, and extravagant weddings and funerals. 
  We should pay close attention to the work related to 
culture, 
public health, and physical culture. We should adhere to the 
orientation of "serving the people and socialism" and the policy 
of "letting a hundred flowers bloom and a hundred schools of 
thought contend;" and should strive to create diversified 
artistic works reflecting the theme of our times to the delight 
of the masses. We should deepen reform of the culture 
management system, improve the quality of cultural workers, and 
go all out to launch mass cultural and recreational activities 
to satisfy growing needs in the cultural life of the masses. We 
should attach importance to the work related to cultural relics, 
archives, and annals of local history. In the press and 
publications and radio and television, we should adhere to the 
principle of unity, stability and encouragement; should persist 
in positive propaganda; should pay particular attention to 
publicizing reform, opening up, and economic construction; and 
strive to create an environment of public opinion that is 
conducive to promoting socialist modernization, reform, and 
opening up. We should step up and enliven the study of social 
sciences, putting particular emphasis on new circumstances and 
problems cropping up in building the socialist market economic 
structure. We should energetically popularize knowledge on 
health, focusing on hygiene, disease prevention, and self-care. 
We should launch an in-depth patriotic healthy campaign, and 
actively prevent and control endemic diseases, occupational 
diseases, contagious diseases, and common diseases. 
  We 
should improve medical and health care undertakings in urban and 
rural areas, comprehensively implement the primary health care 
program in rural areas, set up a sound cooperative medical 
system, and ensure a good job in improving drinking water and 
building more latrines to constantly improve the medical and 
health conditions in rural areas. We should accelerate the 
reform of hospitals, promote medical ethics, improve the work 
style of medical personnel, and raise the quality of medical 
technology and services. We should launch extensive mass sports 
activities, step up efforts to train athletes, strive to raise 
the level of competitive sports, and ensure the success of the 
10th provincial sports meet. We should gradually encourage 
communities, organizations, and industries to run sports 
undertakings. We should strive to increase the input in 
building spiritual civilization, and strengthen the construction 
of infrastructure for social undertakings. The construction of 
the new Zhejiang Library, ZHEJIANG RIBAO news building, and the 
Huanglongdong sports center should be started, and that of the 
radio production building should be basically completed this 
year. We should show concern for undertakings of the aged, 
women, children, and the disabled; and should effectively 
protect the lawful rights and interests of the old, women, 
children, and the disabled. 
<H5>  (8) Promote the construction of Socialist Democracy and the </H5>
Legal System, Consolidate and Develop Political Stability and 
Unity 
  The faster reform, opening up, and development advance, the 
more necessary it is to have a stable social environment. We 
must attach great importance to social stability and go all out 
to strengthen the construction of socialist democracy and the 
legal system. 
  Efforts must be made to continually perfect socialist 
democracy. We should promptly report our work to the people's 
congress and its standing committee, conscientiously accept 
their supervision, and earnestly implement various decisions and 
resolutions. We should support the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference [CPPCC] to bring into full play its role 
in political consultation and democratic supervision; should 
take the initiative to brief and solicit opinions from the 
CPPCC, various democratic parties, and the industry and commerce 
federations; and should set up a sound system for the democratic 
parties and industry and commerce federations to establish ties 
with relevant government departments. We should speed up the 
handling of motions, suggestions, and opinions from people's 
congress deputies and CPPCC members; and should improve the 
handling system and raise the quality of handling motions. We 
should earnestly implement the party and state's policies toward 
minority nationalities and religious affairs, and should 
continue to pay keen attention to work concerning foreign, 
overseas Chinese, and Taiwan affairs. We should forge close 
ties with trade unions, the Communist Youth League, women's 
federations, and other mass organizations. We should attach 
great importance to letters and visits from the people, and 
should properly handle contradictions among the people. We 
should constantly perfect the system and procedures for the 
government to make policy decisions in a democratic and 
scientific manner, and should bring into full play the role of 
experts and research and consultation institutions. We should 
establish and improve villager's and residents' committees and 
other mass self-government organizations and should further 
promote the construction of democracy at the grass roots. 
  Efforts must be stepped up to improve government legislative 
work. We should strengthen economic legislation, focusing on 
laws and regulations for standardizing market norms, for keeping 
the market in order, for improving and tightening macroeconomic 
regulation and control, and for setting up and improving the 
social security system. We should promptly formulate 
administrative rules and regulations urgently needed for 
accelerating economic development, and should amend or abolish 
those which prove ill-suited with realities. We should also 
step up efforts to draft relevant local laws and regulations. 
Efforts must be made to strictly enforce laws in administrative 
work; to establish a sound law-enforcement supervisory 
mechanism; to ensure a good job in administrative 
reconsideration work; to raise the competence of administrative 
law-enforcement personnel; to resolutely correct violations of 
the law such as failure to abide by the law, lax law 
enforcement, and letting lawbreakers go free; and to protect 
citizens' legitimate rights and interests according to the law. 
We should continue to carry out educational activities on the 
second five-year plan for popularizing legal knowledge; should 
publicize in particular laws and regulations closely related to 
the development of a socialist market economy; should enhance 
awareness of laws and the legal system among the large numbers 
of cadres and people, especially leading cadres and 
law-enforcement personnel; and should strive to formulate laws 
for work in all fields. 
  We will concentrate our efforts on comprehensive management 
of social order. We will adhere to the principle of "whoever is 
in charge will take the responsibility" and establish a 
leadership responsibility system at all levels. How well local 
governments have carried out comprehensive management of social 
order and how well they have improved security in their 
localities will be made an important critia in evaluating local 
governments' performance. We will better promote the "Fengqiao 
experience" through beefing up a collective crime-fighting 
network at the grass-roots level and through improving 
management over monitoring of the security situation. Special 
anticrime drives will be continuously launched and major 
crime-prevention measures will be adopted. We will vigorously 
crack down on serious crimes according to the law by targeting 
gang members, bandits who rob passengers travelling on buses and 
trains, those who illegally set up barricades along the highway 
to collect tolls, and those who kidnap women and children for 
sale. We will sternly deal with major corruption, bribery, and 
smuggling cases as well as with criminal activities that 
endanger the national security. We will continue to work toward 
eliminating such ugly social evils as prostitution. We will 
help mediate disputes among the people. We will improve 
management over the lawyers, notary publics and the 
reform-through-labor, and education-through-labor work. We will 
also do our best to improve social order in urban and rural 
areas. 
  We will give great support to the People's Liberation Army 
and the People's Armed Police. Well-prepared campaigns will be 
launched among the cadres and the masses to raise their 
consciousness for national defense and for fulfilling their 
national defense obligations. To build up the national defense 
reserve force, we will continue to beef up the militia. 
Management over border defense, coastal defense, and civil air 
defense will be strengthened. Military installations will be 
protected according to the law. We will do an even better job 
in conscription work, on settling demobilized servicemen and 
retired military cadres, and on taking care of military 
dependents' welfare. Preferential policies for families of 
martyred servicemen and for disabled servicemen will be 
implemented in a down-to-earth manner. We will take the 
initiative to help the military solve problems. To further 
forge unity between the military and the government and between 
the military and the people, we will concentrate building 
"double-support model cities" and "double-support model 
counties" and launch various activities among the people to 
support the servicemen and give preferential treatment to their 
families and among the servicemen to support the government and 
show concern for the people. 
<H5>  (9) Change Government Functions; Strengthen and Improve </H5>
Government Work 
  Central to strengthening and improving the government work 
in 
the new period is changing government functions, to bring about 
a change from direct government management to indirect 
management, from micromanagement to macromanagement, and from 
depending chiefly on administrative means to mainly economic and 
legal means. In changing government functions, we need to 
follow the spirit of reform to the letter. This year, we will 
chiefly devote our efforts to helping change and improve 
government work style, to embark on reform of government organs, 
and to build a clean administration. 
  Conscientious efforts should be made to improve work style 
and the government's ability to regulate and control the economy 
and to deal with various social affairs. 1. It is necessary to 
organize cadres, especially leading cadres, to investigate and 
study actual conditions. They should stress the investigation 
of difficult problems or problems indicating a trend that occurs 
in the course of establishing a socialist market economic 
structure, study them, and seeking ways to solve them. We 
should start drafting the Ninth Five-Year Plan for the province 
on the basis of investigation and study. 2. It is necessary to 
improve the system of responsibility for government work. We 
should conscientiously keep track of and supervise the 
implementation of various principles and policies. Leaders, 
especially principal leaders, should be held responsible for the 
carrying out of major tasks and the bridling of key projects. 
We should work hard to implement principles and policies. We 
should be determined to reduce meetings, documents, and social 
activities; rid ourselves of bureaucratism, subjectivism, and 
formalism; and resolutely oppose and stop the practice of fraud. 
3. We should strictly enforce government discipline and 
subordinate the interests of the part to those of the whole and 
immediate interests to long-term interests. While continuing to 
make decisions in a scientific way, we should strictly implement 
such decisions and resolutely overcome such phenomena as taking 
what one needs or going one's own way in disregard of orders and 
prohibitions to ensure the smooth implementation of government 
decrees. 
  In accordance with the unified state arrangements and the 
principles of separating government administration from 
enterprise management and achieving simplification, uniformity, 
and efficiency, we should vigorously carry out the reform of 
government organizations. While stressing transforming 
government functions, we should strengthen departments in charge 
of supervision and macroeconomic regulation and control as well 
as departments exercising social management functions; we should 
change some specialized economic departments into industrial 
management organs or economic entities. We should basically 
finish the reform of government organizations at the provincial, 
city, and prefectural levels this year. After summing up our 
experiences in experimenting with the reform of government 
organizations in Shangyu, Lanxi, and Nongquan, we should step up 
our preparations for the reform of government organizations at 
the county level. This reform involves many fields, which is 
bound to touch on the relationship of interest that has formed 
for a long time under the old system. We should carefully 
organize people to carry out the reform step by step. We should 
conscientiously do a good job in controlling the establishment 
of administrative organs and their manning quotas, and pay 
attention to the stability and continuity of our work. In 
connection with the reform of government organizations, we 
should actively promote the public service system. 
  Punishing the corrupt and strengthening the building of a 
clean and honest government are a matter of great importance 
which has a bearing on the success or failure of socialist 
modernization. So we must persist in doing this work well. We 
should strictly implement the central authorities' regulations 
on building a clean and honest government, formulate measures 
for supervising leading cadres in self-discipline and in 
practicing a clean and honest work style, and strengthen the 
mechanism of supervision over cadres, especially leading cadres. 
Particular attention should be paid to investigating and 
dealing with violations of the law and discipline in leading 
bodies, administrative law enforcement departments, economic 
management departments, and public utilities units and by their 
personnel. Cases should be dealt with in strict accordance with 
the law. Violations of the law should investigated thoroughly 
and dealt with sternly. Those who commit crimes shortly after 
being released or without regard for any danger should be 
punished more sternly, and their leaders should be investigated 
for responsibility in this regard. Special plans should be made 
for tackling problems about which the masses have a lot of 
complaints. We should continue to stop the arbitrary imposition 
of fees, and the categories of fees which have been canceled 
must remain so. Government organs are strictly forbidden to 
engage in business or run an enterprise. Government organs which 
have set up economic entities and which are to separate 
themselves from these entities under relevant regulations must 
do so promptly. Economic entities which are supposed to be 
transferred to other units should be transferred promptly. We 
should resolutely stop people from traveling abroad as tourists 
on public funds. Comprehensive measures should be taken to 
build a clean and honest government -- one the one hand, it is 
necessary to step up ideological education, to persistently 
serve the people wholeheartedly, to further enhance government 
functionaries' sense of public servants, and to do practical 
work for the grass-roots level and the masses of people; on the 
other hand, it is necessary to institute more systems as 
necessary, to uphold and improve the measures for "being open in 
two aspects and exercise supervision" [liang gong kai yi jian du 
0357 0361 7030 0001 4148 4206], to increase the transparency of 
government work; to expand the contingent of supervisors engaged 
by special arrangement, to strengthen the system of laws and 
regulations concerning supervision and restraint, and to seek 
ways to strengthen the building of a clean and honest government 
through ideological education and effective systems. 
  Fellow Deputies, the province's situation in economic and 
social development was very good last year, but we have no 
reason to feel complacent. This is because we still lag behind 
other provinces in many fields of work, and there are still many 
difficulties on the road of advance. We must make arduous 
efforts to overcome such difficulties. In the new year, the 
tasks on our shoulders are arduous yet glorious. Let us rally 
more closely around the party Central Committee with Comrade 
Jiang Zemin as the core and, under the leadership of the 
Zhejiang Provincial CPC Committee, rely on people throughout the 
province to work with one heart and one mind for the prosperity 
of the country and to win fresh, ever greater victory in the 
strive for socialist 

