BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] Vietnamese Deputy Prime Minister Tran Duc Luong 
received in Hanoi a Japanese Government delegation led by Mr. 
Shigekazu Sato, director in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, 
who is on a working visit to Vietnam. Following is our radio 
comment on the relations between Vietnam and Japan: 
  Over the pasts years, relations between Vietnam and Japan 
have developed rapidly. The turning point of the development 
was the visit to Japan by Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet in March 
1993. During this visit, the Japanese Government welcomed and 
highly valued Vietnam's policy for renovation. After the 
resumption of Japan's ODA [Overseas Development Aid] for Vietnam 
at the end of 1992, the Japanese Government promised to further 
strengthen and develop the economic, scientific, and 
technological cooperation with Vietnam to a level in conformity 
with the potentials of the two countries. This commitment has 
been implemented effectively, especially after the lifting of 
the U.S. embargo against Vietnam. 
  Since early this year, many high level government 
delegations 
and businessmen from both Japan and Vietnam exchanged working 
visits in each country to discuss effective measures to 
strengthen bilateral relations. Recently at the reception given 
to Deputy Foreign Minister Vu Khoan in Tokyo, Japanese Foreign 
Minister Kakizawa affirmed Japan's unswerving policy to 
cooperate with Vietnam. Also in this occasion, Japan voiced its 
support for Vietnam to take part in regional organizations 
including ASEAN, and for Vietnam's activities in the Asian 
Pacific region. 
  Economically, Japan is the biggest trade partner of Vietnam. 
The two way trade turnover in 1993 was nearly $1.3 billion. 
Japan is the fifth largest investor in Vietnam. At the press 
conference in Hanoi during his working visit to Vietnam, Mr. 
(Akira Mishio), chairman of the Joint Japan Vietnam Economic 
Committee, said that Japanese businessmen showed great interest 
in Vietnam. He said that 1994 was a year for Japan to invest in 
Vietnam. Japan's position will be changed when the 
Japan-invested project on cement factory in north Vietnam with a 
total capital of over $200 million is completed. 
  Nineteen ninety-four is also the year that Japanese 
Government has honored its commitment. On 28 January 1994, 
representatives from the Japanese Government and the Vietnamese 
Government signed exchanged notes and agreement on the Japanese 
ODA granted to Vietnam in the fiscal year 1993 with the total 
value of $426 million. A number of other agreements on the 
Japanese Government's assistance to the development in economy, 
education, and health care in some localities in Vietnam were 
also signed. 
  This time Mr. Shigekazu Sato and his party are in Vietnam to 
discuss with Vietnamese agencies concerned to promote economic 
cooperation between the two governments, especially the Japanese 
Government ODA in the form of loan to Vietnam. 

