BFN 

  [Text] Mexico City, 26 Jun (DPA) -- Today, Jorge Carpizo, 
Mexican interior secretary and the country's highest electoral 
authority, withdrew the resignation he tendered on 24 June 
following controversies over the organization of the 21 August 
presidential and legislative elections. 
  The unexpected resignation of Minister Carpizo, who is also 
the Federal Electoral Institute (IFE) president and known for 
his honesty and impartiality, shook the Mexican political system 
by casting new doubts on the honesty, legality, and credibility 
of the Mexican electoral process. 
  In a letter sent to President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, 
Carpizo said he will remain in his post "to accomplish the 
duties inherent to the office during the upcoming federal 
elections" in light of the "solid support" expressed by large 
sectors of society; the president himself; political parties; 
and nongovernmental, professional, and educational organizations. 
  President Salinas expressed his "complete satisfaction" upon 
learning of Carpizo's decision to withdraw his resignation and 
said the support expressed for the interior minister by Mexican 
society "reflects the impressive resolve, which I share, to make 
democratic progress in accordance with the law and free of 
violence." 
  In his letter to Salinas, the minister and IFE president 
vowed to be impartial and added that he will continue to act "in 
strict accordance with the law and will hold honest, fair, 
objective, and unbiased elections." 
  The minister reiterated his decision not to occupy any other 
political post once his job as head of the Interior Ministry and 
the institute in charge of organizing the current elections ends. 
  Minister Carpizo had based his resignation on reports on the 
attitude of "certain sectors," which he accused of fighting only 
"for personal or group interests without caring for Mexico." 
That is why he said he was "more than angry, indignant, and 
disillusioned". 
  The official sharply disapproved of the attitude taken by a 
certain political party, whose name he refused to disclose, 
thereby sparking all kinds of speculation about whether he was 
alluding to the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) 
or the opposing Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD). 
  As he announced the withdrawal of his resignation, Carpizo 
again refused to specify which political party he had referred 
to because he believes it would "seriously impair" his 
impartiality and the role he must play in the electoral process. 
  PRD presidential candidate Cuauhtemoc Cardenas accused 
President Salinas and PRI presidential candidate Ernesto Zedillo 
of being responsible for Carpizo's resignation. Cardenas 
believes this situation reflects the existence of internal 
conflicts within the ruling party. 
  Meanwhile, Zedillo accused the PRD, without mentioning it by 
name, of being responsible for Carpizo's resignation. Zedillo 
blamed "the enemies of democracy," who "make fruitless attempts 
at subterfuge to incite a large electoral fraud in order to 
justify their anticipated defeat." 

