BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Admiral Igor Kasatonov, deputy commander in </F>
chief of the Russian Navy, by Andrey Papushin: "`I Hope Common 
Sense Will Prevail'" -- place, date not given; first seven 
paragraphs are introductory comments by Leonid Gvozdev] 
  [Text] A ball of problems, insults, agreements, and 
violations regarding the Black Sea Fleet is growing, threads are 
falling unevenly, loops are getting tighter... Those who are 
not winding or tightening it, but are just following the events 
may notice that any new knot emerges in the ball precisely when 
something goes wrong with politicians elsewhere, in a place 
fairly remote from Crimea or the Black Sea, and when they 
desperately need to distract society's attention. 
  I will not recall ill-conceived, and sometimes even 
provocative, actions, the starting point of which is located in 
Ukraine -- more than enough has already written about that. But 
on our, Russian part there have been plenty of them, too. 
Suffice it to recall at least the explosive decree on Crimea by 
the former Supreme Soviet... 
  Meanwhile, the matter is as simple as it is complicated. 
Maybe the only thing we need is to say aloud for all to hear a 
few obvious axioms, however unpleasant they might sound to a 
Russian ear. Such as, for instance: Crimea is part of the 
territory of friendly Ukraine. Just say so and stop kindling 
dangerous and futile hopes of many (yes, many!) residents of the 
peninsula. After all, a bloc called "Russia" has already won an 
election there! (I wonder how Russian patriots and "patriots" 
would react if a party named after a neighboring state that has 
territorial claims on us were to win elections in a Russian 
oblast?) I do not know what the activists of Crimea's "Russia" 
are seeking and what their program is in the long run, but I can 
guess what these games may end in. War and bloodshed. Nothing 
less. 
  But Ukraine seemed about to be ready to give up the Black 
Sea 
Fleet. Or rather to sell its share. We too would have agreed 
on the lease of land and water territories one way or another. 
It is clear even to a fool that the maintenance of the Black 
Sea Fleet is too costly for it. Just a little more bargaining 
and there you are... But who, please, tell me, would constantly 
try to humiliate and maliciously provoke its partner while 
bargaining is under way? 
  Don't you see, dear readers, that the Black Sea Fleet 
problem 
and that of Baykonur are very much alike? But we did resolve 
the space center dispute! After some bargaining the two sides 
resolved it to mutual satisfaction. How could it be otherwise! 
Now imagine journalists and politicians screaming day in and 
day out into Kazakhstan's ear: "Baykonur is ours! 
Ours!! OURS!!!" Would we gain much by such bargaining? 
  There is something to ponder here. 
  Turning to Adm. Kasatonov, deputy commander in chief of the 
Russian Navy, we, of course, did not know in advance what 
answers he might give. We would have published them in any way, 
but now that the text of the conversation is ready and approved, 
we can welcome with satisfaction and understandable relief its 
calm and businesslike tone, its clear and realistic content. In 
my view, this is precisely the case where a trite expression -- 
a balanced approach -- would be pertinent. 
  [Papushin] Igor Vladimirovich, your name has been 
justifiably identified by our countrymen with Sevastopol and the 
Black Sea Fleet. But Moscow is a landlocked city. This is why 
no one is better equipped than you -- who commanded the Black 
Sea Fleet at what may be the most dramatic juncture of its 
modern history -- to tell Muscovites about the situation in 
which people who have defended Russia's southern borders have 
found themselves. 
  Could you, please, briefly characterize the origins and the 
essence of the problems the Black Sea Fleet sailors have to 
solve at this point. 
  [Kasatonov] The problem of the Black Sea Fleet emerged in 
January 1992, that is, at a time when Ukraine began setting up 
its own armed forces. 
  Ukraine's initial stance on the Black Sea Fleet was stated 
by 
President Kravchuk in a protocol of the working meeting of the 
CIS heads of states on 16 January 1992, which said: "The Navy 
of the former USSR is part of the strategic forces of the 
Commonwealth, except for the forces of the Black Sea Fleet that 
will become part of the Ukrainian Armed Forces." The last 
phrase (on the Black Sea Fleet) was included in the protocol 
personally by the Ukrainian president. As early as April 1992, 
however, an edict was issued whereby Black Sea Fleet forces on 
Ukrainian territory were proclaimed part of the Ukrainian Armed 
Forces, and only a part of the ships and units was placed under 
the operational command of the CIS Strategic Forces Command. 
Following measure taken by Russia, the edict was suspended. 
Since that time, for nearly two years already, talks on the 
Black Sea Fleet have been under way at various levels between 
the Russian Federation and Ukraine. 
  Three interstate agreements have been signed -- the Dagomys 
agreement of 23 June 1992; the Yalta agreement of 3 August 1992; 
the Moscow agreement of 17 June 1993; and also the Massandra 
protocol of 3 September 1993. 
  In the Dagomys agreement, the sides expressed their 
readiness to develop their relations as friendly states and to 
start working out without delay a full-scale political treaty. 
They reaffirmed the importance of continuing talks on setting 
up in the Black Sea the Russian and Ukrainian Navies (on the 
basis of the Black Sea Fleet). They also agreed to use on a 
contract basis the existing system of deployment and logistic 
support, and also to refrain from unilateral actions with regard 
to the Fleet until talks are completed. 
  The Yalta agreement established a transition period (up to 
1995 inclusive) to form the Russian and Ukrainian Navies in the 
Black Sea. The two sides agreed to bring the Black Sea Fleet up 
to strength with conscripts in an equal proportion (50-50) and 
to conclude follow-up agreements to specify provision of the 
Yalta accord. 
  In the Moscow agreement, the sides specified that they would 
complete the formation of the Russian and Ukrainian Navies by 
1996; the Fleet would be split equally (50-50), same as the cost 
of its financing before the split is completed. At the same 
time, the Russian Federation and Ukraine stressed once again 
that any unilateral actions with regard to the Black Sea 
Fleet during the transition period are prohibited. 
  Finally, in the Massandra protocol the presidents agreed 
that 
the entire Black Sea Fleet would be turned over to Russian 
jurisdiction along with its entire infrastructure in Crimea and 
that Russia would compensate Ukraine for its share... 
  I have deliberately characterized all the agreements so that 
readers will understand the problems [as published, apparently 
"steps" or "measures"] that have been taken to find a solution. 
However, they have not been realized, but not through the 
Russian side's fault. 
  By now only a few minor provisions of the Yalta agreement 
have effectively been implemented: On the appointment of the 
Black Sea Fleet commander directly subordinated to the two 
presidents, and on bringing the Fleet up to strength with 
Russian and Ukrainian conscripts, each side providing 50 
percent. As for the provision on joint financing and on banning 
unilateral actions, they have constantly been violated by the 
Ukrainian side. 
  Since January 1992 alone the Ukrainian authorities have 
taken 
more than 70 unlawful actions against the Black Sea Fleet. The 
Ukrainian leadership (primarily the Defense Ministry) is taking 
economic, political, legislative, and information measures aimed 
at deciding the Black Sea Fleet's fate in its favor. For 
instance, in order to persuade wavering servicemen to take an 
Ukrainian loyalty oath they have been promised various kinds of 
benefits. With regard to those who remain true to the oath they 
once took, various methods have been invented to frighten them 
and to infringe on their rights. Where the situation allowed, 
individual units and ships of the Black Sea Fleet have been 
placed under the command of the Ukrainian Armed Forces. The 
seizure and hijacking to Odessa of the SKR-112 ship; the 
detention of a Pacific Fleet floating dry dock for more than two 
years amount to unprecedented actions violating all tenets of 
international law... First the Ukrainian side prevented Russia 
from financing the Black Sea Fleet thus trying to break the 
Black Sea Fleet sailors; then -- having realized that it is 
unable to maintain the Fleet -- it completely stopped financing 
it in September 1993. Moreover, it has imposed on a fleet 
subordinated to the Ukrainian president customs duties and a 
land tax. 
  The Russian Defense and Foreign Ministries' protests against 
these unlawful actions have fallen on deaf ears; not a single 
illegal enactment has been rescinded after the protests were 
lodged. 
  From what I have said it becomes clear that the Black Sea 
Fleet sailors are facing mounting problems, including the status 
of the city of Sevastopol, dual citizenship, the logistic 
support and maintenance of the Fleet, social safety nets, 
housing problems. And also the forcible collection of taxes for 
land use and customs duties for cargoes brought in for the 
Fleet's needs from funds earmarked to pay money allowances to 
Black Sea Fleet servicemen and civilian employees. 
  In addition, there are problems in the Black Sea Fleet that 
are typical of all fleets -- first of all a lack of funds for 
repair and the maintenance of the ships' technical readiness. 
  These are, of course, the key problems. 
  [Papushin] What way of resolving the problems do you see? 
  [Kasatonov] By implementing the Massandra protocol of 3 
September 1993. An agreement should be drawn up "whereby 
the entire Black Sea Fleet with its entire infrastructure 
in Crimea will be operated by Russia and obtain Russian 
symbols." This fundamental decision would make it possible 
to remove the Black Sea Fleet issue from the agenda of talks 
between Russia and Ukraine and to resolve the main problems 
facing the Fleet. The main thing is that this would meet the 
expectations of the personnel. 
  But at present the talks between state delegations have 
stalemated: The Ukrainian side is for the umpteenth time trying 
to shirk the implementation of earlier agreements. 
  [Papushin] What steps are the Russian Navy command taking to 
settle the situation around the Black Sea Fleet? 
  [Kasatonov] Owing to subordinating the Black Sea Fleet 
directly to the presidents of the Russian Federation and 
Ukraine, the possibilities of the Black Sea Fleet command are 
limited. At the same time, we constantly analyze and assess the 
situation in the Fleet. The basis for such an analysis is 
provided by reports from the command of the Fleet and the work 
by officers of the central Navy apparatus in the Fleet. This 
makes it possible to react to changes in the situation in a 
timely manner and file corresponding reports with proposals to 
the leadership and the president of Russia. 
  During the first quarter of this year alone, the Navy has 
lodged protests with Ukraine's Defense Ministry, and submitted 
reports to the government and the president of Russia concerning 
the illegal actions on the part of the Ukrainian side in 
violation of the understandings reached (the seizure -- in 
December 1993 -- of the Naval Engineering Service departments, 
and the Directorates of the work supervisor in Nikolayev, 
Odessa, and Izmail; in February 1994, of a hospital base and a 
naval hospital in Nikolayev; and in March 1994, of the naval 
sick bay in Ochakov). Such protests lodged over last two years 
are without number. 
  The Navy command, together with qualified experts, takes 
part 
in the negotiations on the Black Sea Fleet, works out proposals 
for the inclusion in the drafts of negotiation documents, 
provides necessary information to the state delegation, carries 
out special expert assessment of proposals being considered. 
  The questions of social protection for the Fleet's personnel 
are also in the center of attention. Notwithstanding all the 
difficulties with financing, and despite the hurdles raised by 
Ukraine's Defense Ministry, funds are found to provide 
allowances and other types of supply to the personnel in a 
timely manner. 
  [Papushin] What is the Fleet's material-technical and moral 
state today? 
  [Kasatonov] The Fleet's vague status and the Ukrainian 
side's 
actions aimed at hampering its activity put additional limits on 
supplying the Black Sea Fleet with some types of materiel. The 
customs duties (up to 0.15 percent of the cost) levied by 
Ukraine on imported military equipment, and the introduced rent 
on land limit the Fleet's possibility for buying the necessary 
materiel, for repairing ships and vessels. For example, as 
little as a third of the ships needing repair can be taken care 
of in the current year, and the Fleet command is unfortunately 
powerless to help it in this matter. Unless the status of the 
Black Sea Fleet has been determined, it is impossible to 
appropriate funds for capital construction, the construction of 
housing and of sociocultural facilities. 
  Such a state of affairs causes considerable difficulties in 
carrying out combat training and maintaining the Fleet's forces 
in the prescribed readiness to carry out its assigned mission. 
  Meanwhile the morale of Black Sea Fleet personnel today 
affords continued maintenance of the Fleet's forces in the 
prescribed degree of combat readiness. I would like to 
underline with deep satisfaction that, in this complex 
situation, the overwhelming majority of the personnel remain 
true to the oath of loyalty and, despite the persistent attempts 
by Ukraine's Defense Ministry to force them into taking the oath 
of loyalty to Ukraine, continue to carry out their military duty. 
  Unfortunately, the Fleet's location on the territory of 
another state makes it for the time being impossible to extend 
to its servicemen the rights and benefits provided for in 
Russia. This to a certain extent affects the moral climate in 
the military collectives. But we are taking all possible 
measures to solve the fundamental legal questions applicable to 
the Fleet's personnel. 
  [Papushin] Is the Fleet capable of carrying out missions 
assigned to it? 
  [Kasatonov] At the present time -- despite all the political 
and material difficulties it is experiencing, and given the 
makeup of the forces and weapons for naval combat, technical 
state, the amount and state of training of its personnel, and 
the provision of all types of materiel -- the Black Sea Fleet 
retains the capability to carry out the assigned missions and, 
what is more, is a stabilizing factor in the Black Sea region. 
  The standard missions of the Fleet are to repulse the 
strikes 
of a possible adversary from the sea, to protect merchant 
shipping, to participate together with other services and arms 
in carrying out of joint missions in the maritime sector, among 
a range of other missions. 
  The presence in the Black Sea zone of regional conflicts has 
additionally set the Black Sea Fleet the missions of a 
peacekeeping nature. Suffice it to say that, ever since the 
armed conflict between Georgia and Abkhazia broke out (in August 
1992) the Fleet's forces have been periodically called upon to 
evacuate refugees, escort convoys with humanitarian aid to 
civilian populations provided by Russia and the other CIS 
countries, provide materiel to combined units of the Russian 
Federation Armed Forces present in the conflict zone. Over the 
period, the Fleet's ships and vessels have carried nearly 70,000 
people and 45,000 tonnes of cargo. For example, in August 1992 
a great number of vacationers were urgently shipped from the 
territory of Abkhazia, including 58 children evacuated from a 
Young Pioneer camp in Pitsunda at the Ukraine president's 
request. A Black Sea task force (made up of eight ships, two 
vessels, and a reinforced marine battalion) was guarding and 
defending the sea port and the rail center in Poti and protected 
shipping along the coastline of Georgia and Abkhazia in the 
period between 1 and 30 November on the basis of a decision made 
by the governments of Russia, Ukraine, and Georgia. 
  Those are far from all the missions the Black Sea Fleet 
happened to carry out in modern conditions and which the Fleet's 
personnel is carrying out in a proper fashion. 
  [Papushin] Some writers (and occasionally even politicians) 
maintain that a single and powerful Black Sea Fleet is an 
extravagant luxury, especially given that the situation in the 
Black Sea does not threaten Russia's security. Why is so much 
importance being attached to the preservation of a single Black 
Sea Fleet? 
  [Kasatonov] As a military man who, in addition, has for a 
long time dealt with the problem of ensuring the protection of 
Russia's interests in the Black Sea region, I cannot agree with 
such statements. 
  The Black Sea Fleet has always played a major role in 
stabilizing the situation in the southwestern strategic sector, 
including the Mediterranean and the Black Sea. Stability in 
this region has been ensured by achieving a strategic balance of 
forces, and the violation of this balance can lead to 
developments in the military-political situation unfavorable to 
Russia. At this stage already one can see increasing naval 
activity by foreign states, primarily Turkey... The 
disintegration of the single Black Sea Fleet, sought by Ukraine 
(and, as a result, the declining combat capability of its forces 
in the central and western parts of the Black Sea), will allow 
the Turkish Navy to become the leader in the Black Sea region. 
This will enable Turkey to resolve its geopolitical tasks of 
gaining and consolidating its influence on the Black Sea basin 
countries, which Russia has been fighting to prevent for several 
centuries.... 
  Furthermore, as the situation shows, the unceasing regional 
conflicts in the eastern part of the Black Sea require a 
sufficient amount of mobile forces capable, with ground 
communications disrupted, of ensuring the operation of the 
Russian Federation Armed Forces units stationed on the territory 
of Transcaucasian CIS member states. These tasks are now being 
accomplished successfully by Black Sea Fleet forces. 
  In peacetime, ways of safeguarding Russia's interests in the 
southwestern sector lie primarily in creating a reliable defense 
system allowing, with any (even the most unfavorable) situation, 
to prevent potential damage for the country. This system should 
envision the creation of stable and favorable operational 
conditions allowing to maintain effective control of the sea and 
the adjacent coast. 
  Clearly, such tasks are within the range of only such a 
single and sufficiently powerful fleet as the Black Sea Fleet. 
  There is also another aspect to this problem: Close 
interrelation of all the Fleet structures to ensure its normal 
functioning. 
  We have always acted on the assumption that the Fleet's 
missions can be achieved only with the entire strength of the 
Black Sea Fleet, in interaction with other fleets and branches 
of the Armed Forces. In other words, only a single fleet is 
capable of ensuring the requisite concentration of efforts and 
most effective accomplishment of missions in areas of threat. 
  On the other hand, Ukraine's unilateral seizure, for 
instance, of a Black Sea Fleet unit on Zmeinyy Peninsula, 
designed to monitor the situation and ensure the security of 
navigation in the western part of the Black Sea, has led to a 
substantial weakening of the Black Sea Fleet capabilities for 
early detection of foreign warships and aircraft. 
  In upholding the preservation of a single Black Sea Fleet, 
we 
relate this closely also to the interests of the people serving 
there: The Fleet's division can have most severe complications 
for their fate. 
  [Papushin] Has the situation around the Black Sea Fleet 
changed following presidential elections in Crimea? 
  [Kasatonov] Yes, it has generally changed. Since the moment 
he took office Yuriy Meshkov and his military adviser have 
stated repeatedly: 
  a) the need to downsize Ukrainian troops on the peninsula 
(in 
the past year alone their strength has grown from 18,000 to 
51,000); 
  b) the sufficiency of the Black Sea Fleet forces for 
protecting the southern sea borders of Ukraine and Russia; 
  c) the promotion of businesslike contacts with the Black Sea 
Fleet Command on major aspects of the military-political 
situation in Crimea. 
  Such an approach, as well as a number of other statements by 
the Crimean president with respect to Kiev officialdom, was not 
slow in producing a reaction: On 1 April 1994 L. Kravchuk 
appointed his special representative to Crimea. 
  In view of a change of leadership in Crimea it has also 
attracted increased attention from the U.S. Embassy in Kiev and 
U.S. Ambassador Miller in particular. During a recent visit to 
Sevastopol he stated that he wants to study the problems of the 
Fleet and Crimea personally.... Regrettably, Russian Ambassador 
Smolyakov has not even once visited Sevastopol in the past year. 
On the other hand, the city's problems have evoked a response 
from the mayors of Moscow, Volgograd, Krasnodar, and Belgorod. 
  With these changes in the situation, Ukraine's Air Force has 
intensified its activity around the Black Sea Fleet. Statements 
by its command have appeared in the media about the Black Sea 
Fleet's "illegal" presence in Crimea, the need to return to the 
Yalta agreements and to renounce the Massandra protocol. Work 
is under way to move the Ukrainian Air Force Headquarters to the 
territory of the former Nakhimov Higher Naval Academy (at 
present the headquarters is located on the territory of a former 
military construction NCO school). This is an attempt by 
Ukraine's Air Force to strengthen its presence in Crimea. 
  [Papushin] How do you assess the efforts by the Moscow City 
Hall and government to render assistance to the Fleet and 
Sevastopol? 
  [Kasatonov] Only positively. We are grateful to the 
Muscovites and Yuriy Mikhaylovich Luzhkov personally for 
reviving a dying tradition: Sponsorship by oblasts, krays, and 
cities of the Navy's battleships and units. As for Sevastopol, 
thanks to the Moscow City Hall and government, a project has 
been launched to build a 100-apartment residential complex for 
the seamen's families. The first floor of a 15-apartment section 
has been put up already, and a foundation has been laid for a 
20-apartment section. Work is proceeding on schedule. The 150 
million rubles transferred to the personnel of the Moskva 
cruiser have been used to buy TV sets, VCR's, and musical 
instruments; psychological relaxation rooms are being set up for 
servicemen where they will be able to relax and spend their 
leisure hours effectively. 
  Out the 30 tonnes of humanitarian supplies, the Fleet's 
servicemen have by unanimous consent donated five tonnes to 
helicopter pilots, five tonnes to the marines, one tonne to a 
kindergarten, and one tonne to a hospital. A share has also 
been ceded to ailing war veterans. 
  Moscow's example of maintaining direct patronage links has 
been followed by cities and districts in Krasnodar and Stavropol 
Krays and several regions in Volga Oblast. Documents are being 
prepared for Moscow Oblast's sponsorship program for the Navy's 
flagship, the USSR Admiral Kuznetsov cruiser.... We hope that 
this benevolent wave of sponsorship will also reach other 
regions of Russia. 
  As for Sevastopol, it will again be waiting for its patrons: 
For the celebration of the 50th anniversary of liberation. On 
7 May groups of entertainers, artists, musicians, and writers 
will arrive there, and we are sure that these meetings will 
benefit all. 
  Incidentally, at present intensive preparations are 
beginning 
to mark the 50th anniversary of the city's liberation: The 
Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers has allocated two billion 
karbovanets for these purposes. According to preliminary 
reports from the organizing committee, approximately 1,300 
veterans of the Great Patriotic War from other Commonwealth 
countries and cities have expressed an interest in taking part 
in the festivities. 
  I very much hope that common sense will prevail. That the 
fate of the Black Sea Fleet will be decided in accordance with 
the Massandra Protocol and that the Fleet will continue in the 
future fittingly to ensure protection of Russia's borders from 
southern maritime directions, serving as a guarantor of 
stability in the entire Black Sea region. 
  [Papushin] Thank you very much. 

