BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
fileworthy reports on the activities of members of the Politburo 
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Cuba (PCC) 
carried on Havana radio and television in Spanish between 28 
March and 4 April. 
  Ulises Rosales del Toro and Candido Palmero Hernandez 
observed a potato-digging contest conducted by the Agricultural 
and Livestock Workers Union in Havana Province. The contest took 
place at the Niceto Perez Cooperative with 33 two-man teams from 
various Basic Cooperative Production Units. The most outstanding 
harvester teams received incentives and prizes. A total of 1,625 
bags of potatoes were harvested during the contest. (Tele 
Rebelde and Cuba Vision 0100 GMT 28 Mar) 
  Maria de los Angeles Garcia and Concepcion Campa on 28 March 
presided over the fourth plenum of the national committee of the 
national secretariat of the Science Workers Union. Delegations 
from all provinces attended the plenum. (Radio Rebelde 1800 GMT 
28 Mar) 
  Maria de los Angeles Garcia addressed the fourth plenum of 
the national committee of the Science Workers Union on 28 March 
and said science must help reduce costs, improve quality, and 
show the population that resources are being used as reasonably 
and efficiently as possible. (Radio Progreso 1200 GMT 29 Mar) 
  Esteban Lazo Hernandez attended the opening session of the 
third conference on participatory democracy, held in Santiago de 
Cuba. (Radio Reloj 0000 GMT 30 Mar] 
  Julian Rizo attended an assessment meeting in Camaguey where 
he praised the efforts of Camaguey workers and expressed 
confidence that they would meet their goals. (Radio Rebelde 1000 
GMT 31 Mar] 
  Pedro Ross Leal opened the national Cuban Workers Federation 
seminar on organizational issues, which is under way in Havana 
and scheduled to last through 3 April. (Radio Reloj 2059 GMT 31 
Mar) 
  Concepcion Campa, Rosa Elena Simeon, and Juan Contino 
attended the ceremony marking the beginning of the "Abril con 
Vida" ("A Lively April") round of activities in Havana sponsored 
by the Union of Young Communists. (Tele Rebelde and Cuba Vision 
0100 GMT 1 Apr) 
  Abel Prieto, Maria de los Angeles Garcia, and Minister of 
Culture Armando Hart Davalos attended the ceremony marking Cuban 
Book Day, at which outstanding writers were honored. (Tele 
Rebelde and Cuba Vision 0100 GMT 1 Apr) 
  Jorge Lezcano Perez attended the provincial plenum of the 
Communist Party of Cuba in Havana City. The plenum discussed 
ways to increase low-cost housing production. Each municipality 
presented its results for 1993. (Tele Rebelde and Cuba Vision 
0100 GMT 2 Apr) 
  Candido Palmero has rewarded the Jesus Menendez Brigade of 
the 17 de Mayo Agricultural Production Cooperative in Quivican, 
Havana Province, for being the first to manually cut 1 million 
arrobas of cane in this territory. These cutters managed to 
reach this objective in 68 days, seven days ahead of schedule. 
(Radio Reloj 1930 GMT 4 Apr) 
  Pedro Ross Leal said workers will be mobilized toward 
priority tasks throughout April and May and that 1 May 
celebrations have not been suspended in Cuba, but will be 
multiplied by the diversity of the established tasks and 
celebrations. The international labor day will be held in 
workplaces throughout the country and in localities considered 
in a position to do so, such as the principal municipalities of 
Pinar del Rio and Matanzas, and in some municipalities in Havana 
Province. (Radio Reloj 1930 GMT 4 Apr) 
  Today, Ricardo Alarcon de Quesada, president of the National 
Assembly of the People's Government and a Politburo member, is 
visiting Granma Province, together with other members of the 
ANPP committees, in preparation for the rendering of accounts 
that this province will make at the next regular session of the 
ANPP. (Cuba Vision Network 2220 GMT 4 Apr) 

