CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ursula Schiele-Trauth, Christa Friedl: </F>
``Raw Materials Lurk in Special Waste Materials''; Subhead: 
``Recycling Must Not Be More Costly Than Incineration, So Far 
Only Small Quantities Recycled''] 
  [Text] Duesseldorf, 4 March 1994 -- Recycling is becoming 
worthwhile as incineration costs rise and landfill capacity 
declines. This holds good increasingly even for special kinds of 
waste. New processes are supposed to bring the waste streams 
into production. 
  No one is able to state precisely how much special waste 
material is actually piling up in the FRG. Berlin's federal 
environmental department [UBA] bases itself on projections from 
the federal statistics department from the year 1990 and 
estimates nearly 14.5 million tons per year. For certain, the 
technical guidelines for special waste from the year 1990 saw to 
it that more waste has been estimated as special waste material 
since they distinctly expanded the list of the sorts of waste. 
Additionally, the waste spectrum is undergoing change. For 
example, the accumulation of contaminated soil from the cleanup 
of old dumps is increasing and so is the accumulation of sewage 
sludge from the purification of effluent. 
  About one fifth of such dangerous waste materials in Germany 
is actually slated for incineration. Peter Reher, chairman of 
the committee for waste treatment of the German Industry 
Association [VDI] Society for process engineering and chemical 
engineering [GVC], remarks: ``The capacity of existing 
facilities is totally inadequate. The fact is that seven of the 
16 laender have no incinerator capacity for special kinds of 
waste.'' 
  German waste legislation recognizes 332 kinds of special 
waste materials, but just 11 significant streams constitute 
nearly 40 percent of the sourcing. Topping the list with much 
more than one million tons are industrial sludges and sulfite 
liquors from the paper industry. There are presently no 
alternatives to incineration worth mentioning for either of 
those two sorts. 
  Research activities are underway throughout Europe to reduce 
the amounts of special waste materials in all fields, since it 
is not only in Germany that there is a shortage of incinerator 
and landfill capacity. The Euroenviron working group's report 
``industrial wastes,'' that was recently submitted by the UBA, 
for example, reports on such endeavors. Uppermost is the quest 
for economically practicable processes since lots of possible 
recycling processes founder on the high costs for them. 
  Berzelius Umwelt-Chemie [BUS], Luenen, is operating a 
demonstration facility for the processing of salt slag resulting 
from the recycling of aluminum alloys. In it, the scrap aluminum 
is liquefied under a coating of molten salt. The salt coating 
protects the metallic aluminum from oxidation and absorbs 
pollutants and reaction products that form during the melting 
process. After casting of the liquid aluminum alloy, the molten 
salt solidifies into slag. Each ton of secondary aluminum that 
is produced accounts for 0.7 t of salt slag. According to UBA 
statistics this is approximately 232,000 t per year. Aluminum 
alloy granulate residues, but, above all, the qualitatively 
high-grade coating salt are recovered by dissolving and 
recrystallizing the slag. The waste management contribution for 
the slag is lower than landfill costs in this context. 
  For quite some time industry has also been working on the 
processing of solvents and used oils. Modern combustion engines 
require oils that contain a large number of synthetic additives 
in addition to actual raw petroleum products. This sophisticated 
blend has posed a number of unsolvable problems for traditional 
recycling processes. Dollbergen refinery has now succeeded in 
processing even those kinds of used oils and emulsions without 
the addition of chemicals. ``Multi-effect vacuum distillation'' 
operates on a cascade system at graduated temperatures under a 
slight vacuum. Oils recycled here meet the high requirements, 
for example, of the automobile and steel industry, according to 
the operators. 
  Waste materials expert Herbert Maerz of Stuttgart's 
Baden-Wuerttemberg special waste material disposal [SBW] GmbH, 
views the increasing recycling of solvents and used oils with 
mixed feelings. ``The high thermal value fractions are thereby 
removed from the waste stream.'' It is hardly possible with the 
remaining spectrum of poorly combustible, mostly solid waste 
materials, to maintain a conventional combustion process without 
the addition of oil or gas as backup energy. One alternative is 
the thermo-cycling process developed jointly by SBW and BC 
Berlin Consult for low thermal value special waste materials. It 
is currently undergoing testing. 
  Also among the top contenders in the special waste materials 
statistics are waste lacquers with nearly 193,000 tons per year. 
The Bremen branch of Mercedes-Benz, for example, uses 
hydrogenation of the dried lacquer sludge together with other 
organic residues as an important step in the reduction of that 
source. Besides a liquid phase similar to petroleum, the 
resulting end product is also gaseous hydrocarbons that are 
reused in petroleum refineries. The solid residue from fillers 
and pigments can be disposed of in coking processes. 
  Notwithstanding the high standard for industrial serial 
lacquering, in every lacquering process high percentages of the 
color droplets overshoot the workpiece and are collected as 
overspray in a curtain of water. Depending on the plant's degree 
of automation, in extreme instances, up to 80 percent of the 
lacquer that is used ends up in the resulting sludge. Currently, 
a process by the Duisberg firm Envilack promises to recover the 
raw materials from those amounts with no loss of quality. 
Envilack managing director Peter Brodt describes his experience: 
``The chromophore portions can be very well separated out from 
the dehydrated lacquer coagulates.'' 
  The group from Duisberg uses the force of gravity in its 
process. Generally speaking, inorganic pigments and fillers are 
heavier than binders and solvents and therefore can be separated 
out using disk centrifuges. A second step is membrane filtration 
to separate out the organic pigments. The result is a clear 
honey-yellow lacquer that can be used without reservations for 
the production of new lacquers. The processed pigments are used 
in anti-corrosives. The portion of the cost for the process that 
is borne by the producer of the residue is, according to Brodt, 
DM1,000 per ton less than the cost of incineration. 
  Rippert Anlagentechnik in Clarholz has developed a fresh 
concept for lacquering processes suing water-base lacquers. No 
lacquer sludge accumulates here at all initially. In the spray 
cabin no water trickles down the walls, only the water-base 
lacquer that is to be sprayed. The overspray now directly hits 
the circulating lacquer that is trickling down and is 
immediately reabsorbed by it. The compound is continuously 
checked by appropriate measuring devices. According to data from 
the producer, such a ``lacquer in lacquer'' spray cabin can pay 
for itself in as little as two years with 100 percent usage of 
the lacquer and no need for disposal of sludge. 
  In a report last year the UBA reported: ``Despite recycling 
and efforts at avoidance, the amount of dangerous waste 
materials in the FRG still continues to increase.'' In this 
connection, there is hardly any segment of waste management 
where data and statistics are so uncertain as in special waste 
materials. Reports on the results of the individual laender 
regarding recycling quotas and the decline of up to 30 percent 
of special waste materials are often no more than wishful 
thinking or a question of definition. UBA expert Hans W. Jacobi 
cites one example: ``Special waste materials that are piled up 
in landfills are considered to be disposed of.'' Even Envilack 
managing director Brodt is aware that recycling efforts are only 
in the first stage: ``The amounts that are now being recycled 
are of no consequence.'' 

