Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] At the news conference held this evening for 
domestic and foreign correspondents, President of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency Alija Izetbegovic made a short 
statement that we have just received. 
  [Begin Izetbegovic recording] I have called this conference 
because many events occurred today, and I am afraid that they 
might overshadow a very important problem -- the problem of 
Maglaj. I wish to call your attention, and the attention of the 
public, to the issue of Maglaj, which for days now has been the 
target of brutal attacks and attempts at capturing the town. I 
appeal to you to write about this and to inform the public that 
the danger of Maglaj falling has still not been averted, despite 
the fact that we have undertaken all the measures on our part, 
both political and military ones in order to save the town. 
Namely, I fear that, due to events like the downing of the Serb 
planes, the violation of the Sarajevo cease-fire, and the moving 
of the tanks [from the exclusion zone] by the Serbs. I fear 
that these events, the bombing of the Tuzla airport, and so 
forth, will overshadow [word indistinct]. The problem is that 
the Serbs might (?use this excuse) to undertake a decisive 
offensive on the town. You know that the Serbs have today 
pulled out at least six tanks, we do not know the exact number, 
it varies greatly from six to 20 tanks; therefore, there is a 
chance that the number of moved tanks is much greater. This 
means that the agreement to have the Serb weaponry moved from 
the outskirts of Sarajevo has been flagrantly violated. We have 
demanded from the UN Protection Forces [UNPROFOR] that the tanks 
be returned or become a NATO target. This example shows that we 
were right when we demanded that the aggressor's troops should 
not be allowed to stay near the surrendered weaponry. 
  I want to stress one of the more positive things and that is 
that the cease-fire with the Croatian Defense Council [HVO] 
rebel forces is being gradually implemented. Of course, it is 
not complete, but we believe that it has every chance of being 
fully implemented. The situation is somewhat unclear with the 
111th HVO Brigade whose behavior is still unclear [sentence as 
heard]. As you know, it is stationed on the southern access 
points to Maglaj. 
  Everything about the downing of the Serbian planes is known, 
and I have no particular comments on it, except that this is 
UNPROFOR's, that is, the United Nations' and NATO's first 
reaction after several hundred, maybe even more than a thousand, 
violations of the No Fly zone. 
  First, the reactions. The negotiations in Washington 
continue and they are in progress as we conduct this press 
conference. The final phase [changes thought] the negotiations 
could end tomorrow. Moreover, the finalization of the Sarajevo 
resolution is underway in the UN Security Council. [end 
recording] 

