Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Dan Margalit: "To Go On As If 'Arafat Was </F>
There"] 
  [Text] The ministers have been spreading themselves thin 
over all Israeli and foreign electronic and print media, 
desperately urging Yasir 'Arafat to return expeditiously to the 
negotiating table. The Hebron massacre increased Yitzhaq 
Rabin's dependence on the PLO leader and encouraged -- perhaps 
even forced -- 'Arafat to present some extraordinary demands 
which no responsible prime minister could accept, even under the 
heavy shadow of the Cave of the Patriarchs massacre. 
  Disarm the settlers? This would be tantamount to leaving 
them there to be murdered by Palestinians. Deploy an 
international element in the territories? By the time of this 
was actually implemented, Israel would have been coerced into 
agreeing to an international presence that was far greater in 
scope and higher in status than the government could ever have 
imagined. Permit the Security Council to intervene in the 
political process? That would mean the collapse of the first of 
Israeli diplomacy's Ten Commandments. Or move the talks to 
Washington? This would indicate the end of all hope that the 
two nations at the center of the conflict could make their way 
through an agreement manufactured in the Middle East. 
  Even after the massacre, there are things Israel can offer 
to 
and trade with the PLO, but it has no option that will allow its 
government to take independent action designed to pressure 
'Arafat to stop stalling. 
  The debate on a unilateral Israeli withdrawal from the 
territories seems to have died out with the signing of the 
Israeli-PLO Declaration of Principles in September 1993. Who 
would want to be a solo dancer when two are willing to 
participate in this tango and when all the ministers firmly 
believe that this twosome is a prerequisite? 
  What we have now is not merely a new situation but also a 
new 
option. Under the present circumstances, Environment Minister 
Yosi Sarid, who participated in the political talks with the 
Palestinians, is willing to consider a combination of two 
approaches: Israel should make it clear to the PLO that it will 
not confront it with a fait accompli in the territories but will 
take steps toward a unilateral implementation of the nearly 
signed Israeli-Palestinian Gaza-Jericho agreement. Until now, 
Sarid had persistently opposed the idea of a unilateral 
withdrawal. 
  The difference here is substantial. Had the original 
unilateral withdrawal proposal been accepted, Israel would have 
announced the parameters of its withdrawal from the territories, 
the locations it was abandoning, and the dates. The present 
case is different. Warren Christopher stated last Tuesday that 
95 percent of the agreement on the first phase of autonomy has 
been completed. This can be used to threaten the PLO that 
Israel will implement the agreement even without it and that it 
had better seriously go about making practical preparations on 
the ground. 
  In practice, this would enable Israel to pull the IDF 
[Israel Defense Forces] out of these areas; to abolish the 
military-civilian bodies still operating there; to take labor- 
and economy-related steps in accordance with the agreements 
Avraham Shohat was about to finalize with Abu-al-'Ala' [Ahmad 
Quray']; and to make progress on some particularly difficult 
clauses in the agreement with the PLO, such as the Rafah and the 
Jordan River border crossings. 
  Israel can set up these border crossings in accordance with 
plans finalized in the Cairo talks and start operating them in 
the agreed manner. The Palestinian side of the crossings will 
remain vacant until 'Arafat decides to man it. The Israeli side 
of the crossing will be fully operational, and Israel will fill 
in for the Palestinians as long as they remain absent. 
  And what about the issues that have not been concluded? What 
kind of documents will the Palestinians issue? How will a mass 
influx of refugees into the territories be prevented? And 
mainly, how many square kilometers will the Jericho arrangement 
cover? 
  On these matters, Israel will do what it considers 
convenient 
but, at the same time, will stress that negotiations on them can 
resume at the exact point at which they were broken off. 
  Even those who opposed a unilateral Israeli withdrawal from 
the territories now realize that such a move will spur the PLO 
to return promptly to the negotiating path, lest Gaza and 
Jericho drop like ripe fruit into Hamas' [Islamic Resistance 
Movement] lap. 'Arafat may even be interested in receiving such 
a threat from the Israelis. 
  While a decisive step of this kind will exacerbate the 
dispute with the right-wing opposition, we must admit -- 
embarrassing as it is -- that it is easier to go through any 
national soul-searching under the new circumstances than in any 
other political scenario. At this time, it is hard for the 
settlers to recruit even part of the Likud, the NRP [National 
Religious Party], and Tzomet for an effective opposition. 
  In addition, the present climate offers a secondary gain. 
Rabin, who has been refusing to uproot a single Israeli 
settlement, was unable to do it under a pressure from and for 
the sake of the PLO; but should he come to terms with himself, 
even border adjustments in Netzarim, Tall al-Rumaythah, and 
Hebron's Bet Hadassah are not impossible -- on condition that 
the government wants it with all its heart and has the necessary 
political and personal energy. 

