CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Andrey Illarionov: ``The Sturgeon Were the First </F>
To Die''] 
  [Text] Can an ``environmentally uneducated'' individual 
foresee something that science cannot or will not predict? 
  I recall how alarmed natives of the Volga region became when 
construction began on the huge Volga hydroelectric power 
stations. And even though one heated conversation about it was 
enough for one to wind up with the other convicts building the 
``great Stalinist construction projects,'' the prophets would 
not be quiet. 
  ``How will we live without the floodplain? It feeds us,'' 
said one. 
  ``How will the Astrakhan herring reach their spawning 
grounds 
through a dam?'' asked another in despair. 
  ``Ah, the fish will go around the dams on fish ladders,'' I 
recall my father retorting, mimicking a lecturer from the State 
Committee for Hydraulic Projects. 
  These fighters for truth, willing to be crucified for the 
Volga, were not just fed by the great river. As native-born 
Volgans they could not imagine life without it. And the way they 
lived their lives included a certain degree of spontaneous 
environmental consciousness. 
  Their worst fears have been confirmed. The changes began 
with 
the most valuable fish species of all: the sterlet and the 
sturgeon for which that stretch of the river was famed did not 
like the stagnant water of the Volga ``seas.'' Also gone were 
the lampreys, which we were sure were the finest delicacy in the 
world. Then the less-finicky bream, pike perch and catfish 
became rarities. Then, like visions from a nightmare, tiny 
bullheads with misshapen heads and half a body began to appear. 
  But even worse than those visions was the kilometers-long 
strip of rotting, stinking fish that lined the riverbank. Yet 
that was not the end of the grim effects of the Volga's version 
of natural dialectics. V. Osipov, director of Khvalynsk Forestry 
Kolkhoz and a person very familiar with the area, has often 
shown me places where the pines are turning a sickly yellow and 
the aspens lose their leaves in the middle of the summer, where 
oaks in their prime are drying up. And there has been no 
significant honey harvest from the linden trees for a decade now. 
  This damage is not limited to the Saratov Reservoir and its 
surrounding area. The greater portion of the Volga region is 
suffering. A fellow villager of mine, now deputy chief of the 
rayon administration, asks: ``Who is going to pay for these 
damages? Who will save the Volga, and how?'' To find an answer 
to those questions I took a trip to the city of Tolyatti, where 
I visited the Russian Academy of Sciences Institute of Volga 
Watershed Ecology. 
  The institute has been in existence for 10 years, and it has 
research vessels that ply the expanses of the Volga ``seas,'' 
stations on picturesque shores and laboratories in Tolyatti and 
several other cities. In recent years it has published several 
very useful monographs on the logic of development of human 
works -- the reservoirs -- and a portion of the great river's 
natural environment. And, remarkably in these times, against a 
backdrop of general impoverishment in the sciences the institute 
is holding a steadier course than some more famous academic 
institutions. 
  What did I hear there? Regarding the death of fish in the 
Volga I got a complete answer: this is due to the reckless 
pollution of the river, a slowdown in the reservoirs' 
self-cleansing capacity and a deadly ``bloom'' of blue-green 
algae. Our discussion of problems in the Khvalynsk Forest was 
limited to broad conjectures, as those I spoke with, the 
institute's directors, did not indicate any familiarity with the 
forest or any particular interest in its fate. Yet the Khvalynsk 
upland forest is an ecologists' treasure -- a surviving island 
of ancient forest that spread hundreds of kilometers south of 
the usual forest boundary 500 years ago or more. It comes to the 
Volga's environmental crisis with a tremendous amount of 
survival ``experience.'' The presence there of pines that have 
miraculously survived from the Cretaceous Period -- the 
ancestors of today's pines -- should alone be enough to excite 
keen scientific interest. But it has not... 
  Of course, the institute, which is modest in size and fairly 
limited in its scientific scope, is not yet capable of 
monitoring and providing ongoing assessment of environmental 
changes in a region with an area of 1.3 million square 
kilometers. But I believe the institute's problem is that as a 
scientific institution it has been too slow in undertaking the 
expected large-scale research. ``It is cause for bitter regret 
that in all these years the institute,'' self-critically 
acknowledged Gennadiy Rozenberg, its director and a doctor of 
biological sciences, ``has not acquired an ichthyological 
environmental laboratory, without which we are unable to study 
all the problems of Volga fish or develop all possible measures 
to help them survive.'' 
  Almost half of the Volga watershed is covered with forest, 
and everyone knows that the Volga and its tributaries flow out 
of forests. And if the forests retreat, the Volga will also 
retreat, and desert will replace it. That means the institution 
should have a forest ecology laboratory. But right now that does 
not seem to be the accepted wisdom. 
  So how can the Volga be saved? If by some miracle the 
100,000 
sources of toxic discharges into it were shut off, even that 
would not save the great river. The underlying problem -- the 
gigantic dams -- would still be there, and the livelihood of the 
Volga's people has long since become closely linked to them. 
  ``If only we could regulate the Volga's flow so that it 
would 
facilitate self-cleansing and protect the fishing industry's 
interests,'' was one fine idea put forward by the institute's 
director. And even though river flow is dictated by the very 
pressing need to generate as much electric power as possible, 
why is the institute not attempting to model the process, or at 
least its most general parameters? Just to know what the first 
step toward saving the river will cost. 
  As for the individual but on the whole equally important 
issues pertaining to the survival of nature on land in the Volga 
watershed, they depend to a greater extent on local efforts. 
And, thank God, there are people of action among those who live 
along the Volga. V. Osipov, who holds the title ``distinguished 
forester of Russia,'' has been planting Siberian larch in the 
Khvalynsk Forest for many years. There, far from its home, it is 
adapting splendidly, growing quickly and avoiding the diseases 
that are typical of it in Siberia. Thus it has been possible to 
compensate in part for the loss of other valuable species unable 
to stand the environmental strain. 
  A positive environmental initiative, is it not? However, at 
the institute in Tolyatti a laboratory head offhandedly and 
decisively expressed his opposition to the idea, asking how the 
larch-produced bactericides, fungicides and protozoacides might 
affect their environment. I dared object to that scientist that 
since for two decades now the plantings have produced only 
positive results, it might be possible to visit the area, study 
it carefully and then support and recommend expansion of the 
experiment... But this local scientist was not interested in the 
larch growing nearby on the banks of the Volga. So I turned to 
academician Aleksandr Isayev, director of the International 
Forest Institute in Moscow. He termed the Khvalynsk Forestry 
Kolkhoz's experiment not only interesting, but very promising. 
That is because the larch, which is very resistant to chemical 
pollution, also tolerates other trees, shrubs and grasses in its 
vicinity... 
  I am not debating a specific point -- this is a matter of 
attitude. The institute condemns the ``excessive enthusiasm of 
some neophytes to improve the state of the environment though 
they lack professionalism...'' End of discussion. In this 
connection academician Vlail Kaznachayev recently said to me: 
people out in the field, with their great wealth of experience 
when it comes to the survival of the environment, seldom win 
arguments with scientists... 
  At the institute attempts to establish regional programs to 
save the Volga are sarcastically termed ``the landslide 
process.'' That assessment probably does contain an element of 
truth, but the whole problem is that while scientists are making 
fun of efforts to save the Volga and developing a theory -- 
discovering the mechanism by which ecological laws operate -- 
the degradation process is gathering speed and becoming, to use 
a currently fashionable word, irreversible. 
  Should it come as any surprise that the local Green movement 
is very suspicious of the aforementioned institute? And there 
are a great many environmentally unschooled people along the 
Volga who have no idea that the Institute for Volga Watershed 
Ecology even exists... Oh, if only all these as yet isolated 
forces could come together! If science and folk wisdom could 
join hands... Wishes are not enough to bring about such an 
environmental alliance of the Volga people's efforts -- what is 
needed is massive, systematic coordination of research and 
practical efforts by academic and ministerial institutes, 
environmental monitoring and protection agencies, enterprises in 
industry, agriculture and forestry and public movements. 
  Who can coordinate efforts to save the Volga? The Institute 
for Volga Watershed Ecology, or perhaps some other governmental 
institution? It is easier to ask than it is to answer... The 
responsibility is just too great. 

