BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Alain Juppe by Josette </F>
Alia; place and date not given: "Alain Juppe: What Has Changed 
in Bosnia"] 
  [Text] [Alia] Since you became minister, you have clearly 
defined your positions on Bosnia. But you have not clearly 
explained the reasons why the policy you have pursued in power 
is different from the one you proposed in opposition. 
  [Juppe] Your publication has already expressed such a 
judgment by applying answers written in 1992 to questions posed 
in 1994, which I believe is not very honest intellectually, for 
at least two reasons. First, because the situation in the field 
has totally changed between 1992 and 1994. In 1992, when I 
called for air strikes, there were not 20,000 Blue Helmets in 
Bosnia and the Serbs did not occupy 70 percent of the country. 
We could still have dissuaded the Serbs from attacking -- and 
that is what we should have done -- whereas today we would have 
to eject them, which involves a totally different kind of 
military intervention. 
  Also, the policy pursued since 1993 is not the same as 
previously. We have set three new objectives: to identify and 
penalize the aggressor; to reduce the suffering of the 
population by using force if necessary; and to define and 
promote a peace plan. We first strongly condemned the Serb 
aggressor through the draconian sanctions imposed by the United 
Nations in April 1993. Since then, the embargo on the Danube 
and on the Adriatic coast has been better respected. The 
Serbian economy has been severely hit. If you do not see any 
change in policy in Paris, then let me tell you that they can 
certainly see it in Belgrade! 
  Second, we have pushed for the establishment of safe havens 
and succeeded in involving the Atlantic Alliance in this 
process, with the result that in February 1994 the NATO 
ultimatum and threats of air strikes saved the inhabitants of 
Sarajevo: There is now no bombing, fear is disappearing, the 
town is slowly coming to life, and we can now begin to work on 
its reconstruction. The same people who are now calling for 
capitulation then loudly applauded the ultimatum. Have they 
forgotten everything in four months? Finally, we have patiently 
drawn up a peace plan which enjoys the unanimous support of the 
major powers. Contrary to what [Socialist Party Secretary 
General] Michel Rocard may say, this plan has been adopted by 
the Twelve as the European Union's first foreign policy action. 
  [Alia] The way you stopped the suffering in Sarajevo has 
certainly won you unanimous praise. But there is the feeling 
that you subsequently abandoned demanding or rather obtaining 
the followup to this action, in Gorazde for example. 
  [Juppe] We did not abandon anything. And we also obtained an 
ultimatum in Gorazde. The shelling then ceased, the Serbian 
heavy weapons were withdrawn to outside a 3-km and later a 20-km 
zone. 
  [Alia] After much prevarication. 
  [Juppe] Yes. I said so at the time. They acted too late and 
too feebly in Gorazde. 
  [Alia] Who are "they?" 
  [Juppe] The special representative of the UN secretary 
general and the UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] commander. But 
we can understand their position. They have men under fire. 
They thus prefer to avoid the use of air strikes and the 
potential risk of escalation. If I were in their position I 
would probably think the same. 
  [Alia] Do you believe we should continue with air strikes? 
  [Juppe] Certainly. UN and NATO decisions must be applied. 
When Serbian shells fall on the runway at Tuzla, even if they do 
not cause civilian casualties, we should strike at Serbian 
positions. I regret that we do not do this. We are calling for 
it, but it is not France that decides. 
  [Alia] Let us return to the essentials. This peace plan 
which has the backing of the entire international community. Do 
you find it fair and would it be lasting? 
  [Juppe] It is an essential step. When voices are raised in 
France or the United States to say to the Bosnians: "You must 
continue to fight, because you will achieve through force what 
you will not achieve through negotiation," I tremble! Do people 
who give such advice think of the responsibility they are 
taking? We are on a razor's edge at the moment. The situation 
in the field is stable, but the troops in the field are 
strengthening their positions and hostilities could break out 
again at any moment. 
  [Alia] Perhaps because we are trying to make the Muslims 
sign 
a peace plan which they refuse to accept. They are afraid that 
we are imposing a Serbian diktat. In order not to bring more 
war, some of them may feel that Serbian imperialism is being 
imposed without giving them the means to defend themselves 
against it. 
  [Juppe] We are not seeking to impose anything on anyone. We 
just want everyone to face up to their responsibilities. Is 
there really any question of ejecting the Serbs from Bosnia? 
There are Bosnian Serbs too and they accounted for 
approximately 35 percent of the country's population at the time 
of the last available census! The three "nationalities" (as was 
said at the time of the former Yugoslavia) must find a 
constitutional arrangement and a territorial settlement in order 
to learn how to live together again. That is the basis of our 
proposal. 
  [Alia] This "arrangement" is in fact a partition along 
ethnic and religious lines. 
  [Juppe] What is [Bosnian] President Izetbegovic proposing? 
The division of Bosnia-Herzegovina into two, with a 
Croato-Muslim area covering 58 percent of the territory. What 
does the Geneva plan propose? A Croato-Muslim area covering 51 
percent of the territory. That is the problem. With 58 
percent, we would be respecting, they say, international 
morality, right, and justice. With 51 percent, we would be 
blamed with capitulation and the acceptance of an ethnic 
division! Does the difference between good and evil lie in 7 
percent more or less land? I also remind you that the Geneva 
proposal (51/49) was accepted by all the parties last December. 
  [Alia] But why deny the aggressed the right to defend 
themselves against the aggressors? 
  [Juppe] It is a question of deciding whether you want war or 
peace. If you want war, then you simply have to lift the 
embargo and give arms to everybody. But, even supposing that 
were desirable, how would you do it? You would need a new 
Security Council resolution. But the Russians have already said 
that they would veto it. So would you ignore the Security 
Council resolutions? That would be the end of the United 
Nations. 
  [Alia] Raising the possibility alone could be a means of 
exerting pressure on the negotiations. As when you threaten to 
withdraw Blue Helmets, which would also certainly result in 
massacres. 
  [Juppe] The withdrawal of the Blue Helmets is, as I have 
said 
100 times, the solution of despair. If we fail, we will have no 
alternative but that. But we are not about to resign ourselves 
to failure. The negotiations still have a chance of succeeding. 
The chances are even higher now that the Americans, Europeans, 
and Russians are on the same wavelength. Unless we step up the 
bellicose declarations which can very easily thwart any chances 
of peace. The war will then extend to the Balkans as a whole. 
I want people to know this because that can happen. But the 
purpose of my struggle is to avoid the worst. You do not stop a 
war by supplying arms. You stop it by drawing up a plan which 
all parties can accept. 
  [Alia] Does not this plan based on military gains set a 
terrible precedent for other countries, in particular in the 
former Soviet Union? 
  [Juppe] Military victory for the Serbs would be to retain 70 
percent of the territory they occupy, the disappearance of 
Bosnia- Herzegovina as a state, and drawing a veil over ethnic 
cleansing. We are not going to accept that. 
  [Alia] But is not your solution, at the very least, 
pragmatic 
and imperfect, if not immoral. 
  [Juppe] It is a compromise. I do not know if it is right. I 
feel it is balanced and that it provides a way of stopping the 
fighting. It is not by proclaiming that it is bad that we are 
going to boost its chances of success! 
  [Alia] But we have conducted negotiations while proclaiming 
that we are not going to intervene. 
  [Juppe] These negotiations are in the process of succeeding. 
  [Alia] What guarantees have you that the agreement will be 
applied by the fighters in the field? 
  [Juppe] The signature of all three. And the presence of an 
international force on the spot to see to it that the agreement 
is respected. President Clinton has affirmed that, in such 
circumstances, U.S. soldiers would be present in the field. And 
we would maintain the presence of our Blue Helmets. We are 
already working on achieving international status for Sarajevo; 
the European representative who has to administer the town of 
Mostar has been appointed; credits are being arranged. That is 
the combat we are pursuing. What is the alternative? Today 
there are more than 200 Serbian guns guarded by French Blue 
Helmets in the exclusion zone around Sarajevo. Are we to give 
guns to the Bosnians so that they can go on the offensive? Is 
it not better, on the contrary, to seek to remove heavy weapons 
from those who have them, and to demilitarize zones under 
international control? 
  [Alia] Do you believe that present negotiations are going to 
succeed? 
  [Juppe] There is a chance. The Croats accept the Geneva 
plan. The Serbs accept the Geneva plan. I believe that the 
Muslims would accept the 51/49-percent split as they did in 
Geneva last December, if we also designate 4 to 5 percent as 
"gray areas" under UN control. 
  [Alia] You cannot deny that French public opinion in general 
is deeply affected by what is happening in the former 
Yugoslavia. The entry of the "Sarajevo" list in the European 
election campaign is proof of that. 
  [Juppe] And me, am I not deeply affected? Do you feel, when 
you listen to me, that the situation in Bosnia has not affected 
me over the past 14 months? I believe that France has done its 
duty. And its duty is to prepare for reconstruction in Bosnia, 
and not for war in Bosnia. 

