CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with presidential economic adviser Franjo </F>
Greguric by Tihomir Dujmovic; place and date not given: "We Are 
Still Offering the Serbs Oil"] 
  [Excerpt] Dr. Franjo Greguric still does not want to talk 
about current events in the incumbent party, events involving 
his party colleagues. It is quite certain that he is still 
firmly behind President Tudjman, although some in the HDZ 
[Croatian Democratic Union] say that up to now he has been close 
to what is called the left wing. Greguric is a successful 
businessman, an advocate of privatization, managing director of 
the most important firm in Croatia, and the president's economic 
adviser, and therefore always an interesting and relevant source 
of information, even when he is evading "hot" political topics. 
  [Dujmovic] Do you agree with the critics who say that 
transformation is showing that the adopted model is defective? 
Is there truth in the speculation that Croatian emigres are 
being prevented in various ways from taking part in the 
transformation? 
  [Greguric] Debate on the proposal for transformation of 
socially owned firms was conducted very temperamentally among 
the experts, in the Croatian Government, in the Croatian 
Parliament, and in many public discussions before the law was 
adopted in regular proceedings. The Law on Sale of Socially 
Owned Housing and other laws regulating the issue of commercial 
space were adopted at the same time. The law was debated during 
1991, and then it was adopted toward the end of the year. 
  The law has also been supplemented and amended on several 
occasions. When military operations spread in Croatia, new 
relations were created on Croatian soil, and they required 
serious changes in the law; among other things they have 
resulted in the gratis distribution of shares to disabled 
veterans of the homeland war and families of fighting men who 
were killed, and also exemptions in making regular payments that 
have come due for shares already purchased. That is why the law 
should be viewed dynamically over the period from its adoption 
to the present day, and it needs to be said that the Croatian 
Government and Parliament have shown an appreciation for the 
position of small shareholders, whose position actually is more 
and more difficult, and for Croatia's impoverished economy. So, 
I cannot accept the assertion that the Law is defective, 
especially since there is no ideal law for this subject matter, 
just as there is no optimum model of transformation of socially 
owned property. Every country that had a socialist system has 
been resolving the issue of transformation of ownership of 
socially owned and government-owned firms in its own way, 
adapting it to its own material and political conditions. 
  Nor is there any basis for speculation that Croatian emigres 
are being prevented from taking part in the transformation. It 
is quite certain that there has been a great deal of 
misunderstanding on both sides; the emigres expected to receive 
better information about possible purchase of shares of small 
and medium-sized firms, but the Fund and the firms involved in 
transformation proceedings did not have all the necessary 
documents prepared for quality transformation. Today the 
situation in this area is much better than it was a year or more 
ago: The Fund has put together a team of specialists, the 
enabling regulations are in place, and there is a readiness to 
quickly process the applications of our emigres. For instance, 
the Karlovac Brewery was sold to Mr. Luksic in the United 
States, Mr. Radosevic has become the owner of the former Zagreb 
Bus Factory, and many others have found ways of becoming owners 
of real estate in Croatia. 
  I mentioned the Law on Sale of Socially Owned Housing. Under 
that law 157,000 units of socially owned housing have so far 
been sold out of a total of 393,000, which under wartime 
conditions has also been a considerable contribution to 
resolving more rapidly not only the issue of privatization of 
the housing stock, but also the issue of replenishing the state 
budget. 
  [Dujmovic] As the president's adviser for the economy, 
please 
tell us whether there is any serious intention to undertake the 
process of denationalization, which has been announced for 
months now? 
  [Greguric] The process of denationalization has been debated 
in recent days by the HDZ presidium, at the request of the 
Government of the Republic of Croatia. I must say that there are 
no good reasons to fear denationalization and that too much 
mystery is being made of this term. I would like to recall once 
again that in 1991 all private applications for recovery of 
nationalized property were recorded in the government office for 
denationalization, and an immense job was done, and that is the 
basis for material assessment of the consequences of 
denationalization. Be that as it may, there is no reason for 
initiating a broad debate of the criteria for denationalization, 
especially since the beginnings of denationalization were 
envisaged by laws adopted in 1991 and 1992 -- the Law on 
Transformation of Socially Owned Enterprises and the package of 
housing laws. I think that the government has a good concept and 
it should be analyzed disinterestedly and submitted to regular 
public and parliamentary proceedings. 
  There is no ideal solution, and it cannot all be given back; 
denationalization ought to be carried out in both forms, i.e. 
the natural form, the return of real estate and property, where 
this can be done without creating new injustices; when that is 
not possible because of interests of the state and public 
interests, material compensation should be used, as is done by 
all countries in the world. In other words, we should not flee 
from denationalization but undertake a public debate and 
adoption of the law as soon as possible. 
  [Dujmovic] Will foreign oil companies be allowed to open 
service stations, and when might that happen? 
  [Greguric] The INA [Petroleum Industry] is not alone in 
marketing petroleum products on the Croatian market. You know 
that during the last quarter of last year we rented out 30 
service stations in Croatia, and after the experience we have 
had in that connection, we are thinking of renting out another 
80 service stations, subject to certain criteria. The criteria 
have been published in the daily press. Commissions consisting 
of representatives of INA, the zupanijas, and the trade unions 
have made the selection, so that in this way we have protected 
not only our own interests but also the interests of the 
employed personnel and the interests of the local authorities on 
whose territories the service stations are operating. At the 
same time, you have seen for yourself the emergence of private 
service stations; we think that this is a good thing, that it 
strengthens competition, raises the quality of services, and 
offers something more than what was offered by our stations 
alone. The Galic service station as you leave Zagreb on the 
Varazdin road is an example; along with a beautiful design, 
quality service, and facilities from a restaurant to a small 
motel, it offers everything that might attract the public. In 
addition to pumping gas, the individual may need to have his car 
washed, to buy things he needs on the trip, and to rest. This is 
also good because it stimulates a rise in the quality of 
services at our service stations. 
  Now, we already have foreign oil companies in Croatia, for 
example OMV Istrabenz, which is owned by three oil companies: 
INA, OMV and Istrabenz. Other foreign oil companies will 
probably also come, since most expect a definitive peace on our 
territory and cessation of the war in our neighborhood. Just as 
soon as lasting peace is established in Bosnia-Herzegovina, we 
are preparing to undertake intensive reconstruction and 
development of service stations on this territory as well as in 
the temporarily occupied regions of Croatia. 
  [Dujmovic] During the debate about tax regulations, some 
deputies proposed higher taxation of oil and petroleum products 
after the pattern of the Western countries. Are the estimates 
accurate that this would augment the budget by 40 percent? 
  [Greguric] There is a bill in Parliament proceedings 
concerning a special tax on petroleum products calling for 
taxation of all types of motor gasoline, diesel fuel, heating 
oil, mazut and LP gas. We consider it quite natural as part of 
the new tax system for value-added taxes to be adopted in the 
manner envisaged by the law. We can only speak about whether the 
rates of the special tax on petroleum products, so-called excise 
taxes, are comparable to similar taxes in other European 
countries. I think no reasonable person can object to payment of 
the tax, just as no reasonable person can fail to take into 
account the available technological condition of refinery 
installations for the production and refining of petroleum and 
the distribution system. It is often forgotten that we need to 
bear in mind that every country in the world must have a minimal 
energy independence and self-sufficiency, just as we must have 
it in the areas of defense and protection of the state. Under 
such conditions Croatia must have secure sources of all types of 
energy, from electric power to petroleum products. If that were 
not the case, of course, we would have had a hard time during 
this war --which, we hope, is behind us -- obtaining sufficient 
quantities of energy sources. 
  Unfortunately, the former system and Yugoslavia 
systematically depleted the Croatian oil industry. They put 
pressure through the price system on domestic oil and gas 
production and favored cheap energy on the territory of the 
former Yugoslavia, especially in parts which did not have 
sources of oil and gas, which means in Serbia, 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic 
of Macedonia -- FYROM]. Now that petroleum production in Croatia 
is practically stagnant, and the refineries are worn out because 
of low investment, we face a decision on more intense oil and 
gas exploration and rapid reconstruction and modernization of 
the refineries so that we can make optimum use of the 
professional potential and international reputation of the 
Croatian oil industry to plug it back into the advanced European 
countries. Many say that this is not necessary, since we can buy 
oil and petroleum products more cheaply, but I think that such a 
simple and one-sided short-term policy would destroy that 
industry and make Croatia completely energy-dependent, which 
must not be the policy of the young state of Croatia. 
  [Dujmovic] With respect to peaceful reintegration of the 
UNPA 
[UN Protected Areas], the issue of INA's entry into the occupied 
areas will certainly be raised soon. Do you have a program 
prepared? 
  [Greguric] In late November 1993 we submitted to the 
Parliament's commission for relations with the Serbs in the 
temporarily occupies aread of Croatia a proposal for gradually 
opening service stations. Specifically, we proposed for a start 
that service stations be opened in Okucani and Petrinja to 
supply the public in that area with INA's assortment of fuel, 
obviously at the prices in effect in the other parts of our 
homeland. We proposed payment in Croatian dinars or any other 
convertible currency. Unfortunately, there has been no response 
to that proposal. Now, we are continuing to offer it, we are 
reiterating it even through this interview. At the same time, we 
offer to use our service stations in the temporarily occupied 
areas to market fertilizer and other products that would fill 
out the shelves of our stations. It is now up to the Serbs in 
the occupied territories and the negotiating teams. The program, 
which does not need amendment, envisages delivery of the fuel 
and fertilizer and consumer goods in our vehicles, with or 
without the support of the UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces]. 
[passage omitted] 

