Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Cand Biol Sci Yelena Mikhaylovna Vlasikhina: </F>
``Equal to AIDS, if not More Frightening''] 
  [Text]Today, scientists are already absolutely sure 
of the existence of 7 (seven!) hepatitis viruses infecting man 
and striking his most important organ--the liver. The disease 
arising in this case take many forms: hepatitis, cirrhosis and 
primary cancer of the liver. It seems as if we can no longer 
amaze or frighten our people by anything. But this.... 
  At the infection hospital. The hepatitis and viral disease 
department. Those who wind up here can now recall (with a 
doctor's help) how and where they became infected. ``I was 
working as a dental hygienist,'' said an attractive young woman. 
An elderly woman bitterly recalled undergoing a course of 
acupuncture a few months ago, and then there was another, a 
quite one, in the corner of the ward, who had recently visited 
Israel as a guest. 
  And now let's move on to the pediatric clinic, the 
gastroenterology department. Children with a terrible 
diagnosis-- cirrhosis of the liver--are treated here. And most 
know that this disease is the punishment suffered by alcoholics. 
Sometimes it is hard for the doctor to figure out how this 
disease came about. The mother of an 11-year-old boy, her eyes 
sunken from sleepless nights no longer able to shed tears, 
explained: ``The boy fell ill after a routine immunization. 
Botkin's disease was the diagnosis. He recovered, but he still 
feels poorly sometimes.'' Now the sentence has been handed 
down--a year and a half to live, nothing can be done. The 
doctors are powerless. Now that the disease has come into its 
own. But could anything have been done sooner? Yes. That's what 
this article is about. 
  Viral hepatitis is a disease that occurs extensively 
throughout the entire world. Up to 250,000 cases are registered 
annually in our country. These are only the acute and obvious 
cases of infection, while in fact it is believed that this 
figure is understated by a factor of 10! Perhaps only acute 
respiratory diseases afflict people more often. And as for the 
number of fatalities and complications, there are no equals to 
this infection. Medical workers of the developed countries, in 
which the fight against viral hepatitis has been raised to the 
rank of a state program, came to understand this long ago. 
  Relying on laboratory tests, medical workers can distinguish 
hepatitis today into type A (the dirty hands disease) and type B 
(so-called serum hepatitis). Five other variants are not 
recognized by Russian statistics, and they are classified by a 
process of elimination as a mixed group--neither A nor B. 
  In Russia, hepatitis A is encountered more often than the 
other types, making up 60-70 percent of all hepatitis cases in 
adults and 70-80 percent in children. As with any other 
intestinal infection, hepatitis A is typified by seasonal 
occurrence. And so it is now, in fall, that epidemiologists are 
noting an increase in morbidity, especially among children 
attending nursery school and schoolchildren. Many probably 
recall that gamma-globulin immunizations used to be given 
against jaundice in times of mass outbreaks. Today, this is 
hardly possible--it's expensive, and the preparation is not 
available in sufficient quantity. 
  How do we protect ourselves? The advice is simple--wash your 
hands more frequently, don't eat unwashed food, don't drink 
water from unfamiliar sources, and it would be better to boil 
all drinking water. And if you happen to make contact with a 
person who has the disease, be on guard for 5 weeks. 
  Medical workers advise caution to tourists to developing 
countries of Asia and Africa. This infection is extremely 
widespread there, and most of the population suffers the disease 
in early childhood. Western tourists make an effort to immunize 
themselves against hepatitis A. There is a specific vaccine 
already, and clinical tests have proven it to be highly 
effective. Such a preparation has also been developed in Russia, 
its study has just begun, and therefore we need to follow the 
rule that ``Saving the drowning is a matter for the drowning 
themselves.'' 
  And this is in fact possible. The Scandinavian countries, 
where the hepatitis A is an extremely rare phenomenon, are an 
example of this: Isolated cases for every 100,000 population 
(for comparison, the figure is up to 100 in certain regions of 
our country). At least another two types of hepatitis are 
transmitted by dirty hands. Hepatitis E has now been studied 
sufficiently well. This type occurs most often in developing 
countries. Russians are absolutely defenseless before it, and 
its course is much more serious than that of hepatitis A. 
Vaccines against this infection are not even available yet 
abroad, and therefore the sole defense is to observe the rules 
of personal and social hygiene. 
  And now let's talk about the forms of hepatitis for which 
blood is the gateway. In the early 1960s the American scientists 
Blamberg discovered a characteristic serum protein of hepatitis 
virus, for which he was subsequently awarded the Nobel Prize. 
Since that time a real possibility has appeared for doctors to 
distinguish between only two types of hepatitis by blood 
tests--A and B. 
  Detection of a protein (antigen) specific to hepatitis B in 
blood made it possible to use this marker to determine the 
extent of blood infection. Modern testing methods are so 
sensitive that they can detect a quantity of virus of less than 
1 gm in a billion trials. This quantity of virus, by the way, is 
fully sufficient to cause disease. For this, the virus needs to 
find the slightest break in the skin or mucous membranes of the 
recipient, enter the blood through it, and then reach the liver 
with its flow. The liver is the only place in the human body 
where hepatitis B virus can multiply. Infected persons react 
variously to what happens in the liver. As a result totally 
different courses appear--virus carrier, acute infection, 
chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis and cancer of the liver. It is not 
at all necessary for jaundice to accompany acute hepatitis B. 
Medical workers note that the beginning of disease can recall 
the pattern of intestinal infection, and even ear, nose and 
throat diseases, especially among children. The main thing is 
that the liver is enlarged, which is something you have to know 
how to detect. 
  A diagnosis as to precisely what type of hepatitis is 
present 
can be established only after a number of specialized laboratory 
tests. To prevent infection of patients receiving transfusion of 
blood (plasma), its preparations and components, all blood 
procured from donors must be tested mandatorily. Such 
tests have been conducted in our country for 20 years already, 
but for some reason post-transfusion hepatitis continues to be a 
frequent phenomenon. Could it be because the blood service has 
been using tests of very low sensitivity? 
  In developed countries, where a very serious effort has now 
been made for over 10 years to test blood for hepatitis B, its 
proportion in the structure of hepatitis after blood transfusion 
has been reduced to 10 percent. Ninety percent of hepatitis is 
associated there with infection by yet another virus--hepatitis 
C. This virus resisted detection for a long time, and what is 
interesting is that the test for this infection was developed 
before the agent itself was described--in 1989. A check of 
donors in many countries of the world revealed that a 
significant part of the world's population is afflicted with 
hepatitis C. What raises concern is the fact that presence of 
infection can be judged only indirectly for the moment, by 
revealing antibodies to the virus (as for example in the cases 
of AIDS and syphilis), which significantly reduces the true 
number of infected individuals. Today most developed and 
developing countries have introduced mandatory testing of blood 
for hepatitis C into their blood services. This isn't as 
successful of course as in the case of hepatitis B; nonetheless, 
today this is the only means of preventing post- transfusion 
hepatitis C. It may be said that blood is not yet being tested 
for this infection in our country. 
  If hepatitis is so widespread, it is fully logical to 
suppose 
that it is transmitted not only by donated blood, but also by 
other pathways. In fact, hepatitis B is astounding in the 
diversity of the means by which the body is infected. Children 
fated to be born from mothers who are carriers of the infection 
or who contracted the disease during pregnancy (and not 
necessarily in its jaundice form) fall into the risk group. This 
is why hepatitis B testing of pregnant women is mandatory in 
many countries. Hepatitis B is transmitted sexually (the virus 
is detected in sperm and in vaginal secretions). A special risk 
group has been determined-- prostitutes, who are breeding 
grounds of infection. Unfortunately there are few who know that 
hepatitis B is even categorized as a venereal disease for this 
reason. The slightest break in a partner's mucous membranes is 
enough for the virus to get into the blood. These two 
pathways--vertical (from mother to child) and horizontal 
(sexual)--perhaps dominate in various developing countries, in 
which it is believed that over 20 percent of the population is 
infected. It has been noted that entire families may be infected 
with hepatitis B virus. We know of one Moscow family in which a 
newborn infant contracted the disease in the hospital, the 
mother was then infected from the child during breast feeding, 
and finally the father of the child managed to catch the disease 
from the mother. 
  Neither the sexual nor the vertical pathway of infection is 
typical of hepatitis C, but as with hepatitis B, this disease is 
transmitted through close personal communication, when the 
elementary rules of hygiene are not observed. Viruses may be 
transmitted from one to another by sharing combs, manicure and 
pedicure instruments, and tattooing tools. 
  Still, the greatest percentage of infections occurs in 
therapeutic institutions. Medical workers are especially at 
risk. Selective testing of medical personnel revealed particular 
hepatitis B markers five times more frequently that in donated 
blood. Several cases of acute hepatitis are noted every year in 
almost every large clinic, in which case fatalities have been 
known. They have all been the result of job-related infection. 
Medical workers who come in contact with blood daily are at the 
greatest risk--surgeons, surgical and procedural nurses, and 
specialists in procuring and testing the blood of donors and 
patients. Hepatitis B and C infection may spread within a 
hospital if diagnostic and therapeutic procedures that invade 
the skin and mucous membranes are carried out with reusable and 
poorly cleaned instruments. 
  Among patients, those who receive poorly tested blood on the 
basis of vital indications carry the greatest risk of falling 
ill. This is well known to medical workers, but they are 
powerless if material support to the use of high quality blood 
tests is insufficient. Are there really no other ways of 
stopping hepatitis B and C besides blood tests? 
  In 30 years of scientific research in this field, some 
things 
have already been accomplished. Creation of a specific vaccine 
against hepatitis B is the greatest accomplishment. When 
scientists reported this, the press wrote triumphantly that the 
first vaccine against cancer had been developed. Hepatitis B 
vaccinations have been available for over 12 years already, 
during which time hundreds of millions of the planet's 
inhabitants have been immunized. It has been demonstrated that 
the vaccination course can provide defense against the virus for 
7 or more years. 
  Unfortunately you can't get immunized anywhere in Russia 
today, either free of charge or for money. The domestically made 
preparation has not yet been perfected for practical use. 
Foreign preparations are not being purchased, although Western 
firms have already been producing second-generation vaccine that 
is absolutely safe and effective for a long time. Medical 
workers and newborn infants from mothers who are carriers of the 
virus are mandatorily immunized in most developed countries. But 
even where the epidemiological situation is recognized to be 
unfavorable (there are several such regions in Russia), 
hepatitis B vaccine is included on the calendar of children's 
immunizations. Responding to a proposal by the World Health 
Organization, a number of African countries and Italy have begun 
implementing a program of expanded immunization of the 
population. 
  It is disappointing to learn of such accomplishments that 
are 
inaccessible to Russia. This is why Moscow's scientists and 
medical workers have joined together to establish the Hepatitis 
Control Assistance Fund--a public organization bringing together 
all who desire to join in the struggle using the resources of 
modern accomplishments in the epidemiology, prevention, 
diagnosis and treatment of viral diseases of the liver. The gap 
today between what has been accomplished through world progress 
in the area of hepatitis and what Russian practical health has 
available to it today is rather large. The fund has developed 
the ``Anti-hepatitis'' program, and we invite all who wish to do 
so to work with us to carry it out. The fund already has a 
possibility for testing donated blood in the way it is done in 
America and Europe. We also have hepatitis B vaccine. 
  In Moscow we can be reached by telephone at 490-1414 and 
365-8998. 


