Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Paris, 13 March (PANA) -- "I have not come for the 
purpose of doing a strip-tease dance or to make myself liked, 
but simply to make myself understood," Congolese President 
Pascal Lissouba declared in an interview with the PAN AFRICAN 
NEWS AGENCY at the end of a working visit to France. President 
Lissouba implicitly confirmed the poor climate of 
Franco-Congolese relations, however he hinted that the situation 
was becoming progressively better. 
  Citing journalists, whom he blames for being more or less 
responsible for this situation, President Lissouba, in a flash 
of wit, indicated that "the dark clouds are clearing (...) and 
things are going to be all right." Issues concerning security 
and the devaluation were the focus of his discussions with 
French authorities. 
  The Congo has asked for French assistance in reorganizing 
its 
security services, the weaknesses of which were exposed by the 
recent unrest in Brazzaville. When questioned about the 
devaluation, the Congolese president warned against the risk of 
repeating the maneuver due to negative reactions on the part of 
the countries concerned. 
  "The devaluation is just a monetary adjustment. If the 
economies of African states are in poor shape because negative 
policies were pursued, it is clear that those same policies will 
produce the same results as before," President Lissouba stated. 
  The devaluation should not be perceived as France abandoning 
the franc zone countries, according to President Lissouba, who 
advocates subregional and regional cooperation and the joint 
development of scientific and technological potential. 
  Speaking on his country's economic situation, President 
Lissouba announced that an agreement would be signed with the 
IMF in the "coming days," stressing that "things are well under 
way." Furthermore, President Lissouba confirmed that his country 
would reduce the number of civil service employees by 8,000, 
this on instructions from the IMF. According to President 
Lissouba, the Congo has the world's highest number of civil 
servants per capita. He stated that this is because the civil 
service is the country's sole industry. However, the Congolese 
head of state gave assurances that the affected workers will be 
redeployed elsewhere, "as quickly as possible." 

