BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Liu Chengguo, vice minister of agriculture, </F>
by staff reporter Liu Xianghong (0491 0686 4767); place and date 
not given: "Rural Economic Development Is Encouraging, Greater 
Efforts Have Yet To Be Made To Ensure Increase in Output and 
Revenue--Interview With Liu Chengguo, Vice Minister of 
Agriculture"] 
  [Text] [Liu Xianghong] Better harvests have been reaped in 
China for several years in succession, and the total grain 
output last year hit an all-time high once again. Judging from 
the present circumstances, what is the situation of grain, 
edible oil, and cotton production and the "shopping basket" 
project in China this year? 
  [Liu Chengguo] The party Central Committee and State Council 
successively convened two rural work meetings in October last 
year and March this year. These meetings repeatedly stressed 
the predominant position of agriculture and rural work in 
economic development and social stability and promulgated a 
series of policies. As a functional department under the State 
Council in charge of the rural economy and the comprehensive 
management of such industries as crop cultivation, animal 
husbandry, fishing, agriculture, township and town enterprises, 
farm machinery, feed-processing, the Ministry of Agriculture has 
made positive efforts to implement the guidelines of the above 
central rural work meetings. As viewed from the conditions in 
various sectors, the current operation of agriculture and the 
rural economy is basically normal. Serious attention has been 
paid to grain production, quantities of "shopping basket" 
products and township and town enterprises grew relatively 
rapidly, and the peasants' cash income increased more rapidly 
than last year. The grain acreage this summer will be 465 
million mu, decreasing by 7 million mu as compared with last 
year. It is anticipated that total grain output will exceed 210 
billion jin and the sown area of grain in the whole year will be 
approximately 1.646 billion mu, decreasing slightly in terms of 
output and by approximately 12 million mu in terms of area as 
compared with last year. Summing up pertinent analyses and 
predictions, we expect that, barring abnormal weather in the 
latter half of this year, the total grain output will be close 
to that of 1993, a year of an extraordinary bumper harvest. The 
sown area of oil-bearing crops has increased so that output for 
the entire year will hopefully be larger than last year. Since 
the procurement price of cotton was raised, the enthusiasm for 
growing cotton has been rekindled to some extent in the cotton 
growing areas, and the sown area will reach approximately 80 
million mu, higher than last year. The production situation is 
still grim, however, as there is a considerable gap with the 
state's plans and arrangements. The "shopping basket" project 
has enabled the production of non-staple food to maintain a 
rising momentum. Except for some areas where pork is in short 
supply, there will be a relatively adequate supply of other 
products in the markets. Township and town enterprises 
continued to maintain comparatively rapid growth, and the per 
capita cash income of peasants across the country increased more 
rapidly in the first quarter than in the same period this year. 
  [Liu Xianghong] In light of the inadequate acreage of spring 
sowing and other problems, what measures has the Ministry of 
Agriculture taken to strive for bumper harvests in grain and 
cotton? 
  [Liu] In order to stabilize grain production and change the 
situation of reduced cotton output for two consecutive years, we 
have paid special attention to the following issues. 
  First, we gave guidance and encouragement to the localities, 
where conditions exist, to increase the acreage of the "two 
improved varieties through hybridization," put an emphasis on 
disseminating high-yield and fine-quality hybrid rice 
combination in the Chang Jiang basin and southern China, and 
popularized the method of crossbreeding maize on a tight 
schedule in the Huang He, Huai He, and Hai He basins as well as 
in northeastern China. We also guided the peasants in cotton 
producing regions in northern China, the provinces of Hebei, 
Shandong, and Henan in particular, in giving priority to growing 
cotton on fallow land and reserved ridges in the fields. In the 
localities where conditions exist, the acreage of summer cotton 
should be increased appropriately, and in the cotton producing 
regions in the south, the acreage for transplanting young cotton 
plants in the fields, where wheat or oil-bearing crops have just 
been gathered in, should also be increased wherever conditions 
exist. The autumn grain should be grown sufficiently, and the 
multiple crop index should be heightened. 
  Second, we positively carried out plans for summer harvests 
and paid attention to applying practical key techniques for 
increasing output such as cultivation by using plastic covers, 
deep spread of chemical fertilizers, application of mixed 
manure, and modelled cultivation technique; vigorously enlisted 
people to store farmyard manure and popularized the practices of 
composting the fields with straw and farm manure; pushed forward 
the combination of agriculture with science and education, and 
put in time and energy to enhance the per unit yield of 
agricultural and sideline products. 
  Third, we coordinated with relevant departments in effecting 
proper supply of agricultural production means to ensure the 
demands of agricultural production, intensified supervision and 
control over the markets of means of agricultural production, 
and resolutely cracked down on the production and marketing of 
forged and inferior products. 
  Fourth, we positively led various localities in enhancing 
field management, paid serious attention to preventing and 
curing plant diseases and preventing and eliminating insect 
pests, took firm control of the production of summer grain and 
edible oil, and did a good job of preventing and eradicating 
bollworms. 
  [Liu Xianghong] How will you effectively increase the 
peasants' income while ensuring the market supply of 
agricultural products? 
  [Liu Chengguo] Peasants' cash income in the first quarter 
grew faster than it did last year. Taken as whole, however, the 
task of achieving the objective of increasing the peasants' 
income is still rather difficult. The fundamental way out for 
increasing the peasants' income lies in deepening reform and 
accelerating development. First, on the basis of stabilizing 
grain and cotton acreage, we should make efforts to enhance the 
yield per unit area and reduce production costs. Second, we 
should properly readjust the industrial structure and the 
product mix and energetically develop agriculture characterized 
by high yields, good quality, and high efficiency to enhance 
agricultural economic results. Third, based on the entire land 
resources, we should step up comprehensive agricultural 
development, elevate the production level of medium- and 
low-yield land, and exploit reserve resources. Fourth, we 
should vigorously develop township and town enterprises, combine 
their development with that of small towns, and expedite the 
transfer of surplus laborers in rural areas. In the meantime, 
we should provide guidance to township and town enterprises 
according to different circumstances: Township and town 
enterprises in eastern China should be transformed to the type 
that produces economic results through exports; their work 
should be focused on readjusting the industrial structure and 
the product mix; and efforts should be concentrated on raising 
their operational level and increasing economic results. 
Particular assistance should be given to the development of 
township and town enterprises in central and western China. The 
"demonstration project of cooperation among township and town 
enterprises in eastern and western China" should be well 
organized and put into practice, and special loans to foster 
these enterprises should be made available and regulated 
appropriately. In addition, we should also hold fast to the 
work of reducing the peasants' burdens and coordinate with the 
relevant departments in implementing the "state plan of 
assisting the poor and assaulting fortified positions to resolve 
the food and clothing problems of 80 million rural residents in 
seven years" in order to effectively perform the work of 
assisting the poor through development. 
  [Liu Xianghong] In fact, rural economic development as a 
whole depends on in-depth rural reform. What are the focal 
points of rural reform this year? 
  [Liu Chengguo] Rural reform will be deepened in line with 
the objective of establishing a socialist market economic 
structure. This year, we will pay particular attention to the 
following aspects: 
  1. Further efforts should be made to improve the policy of 
grain purchases and sales. In light of the present condition of 
grain demand and supply, reform will focus on intensifying state 
macroeconomic regulation and control of grain. First, on the 
basis of increasing the procurement price of grain, we will 
further improve the procurement method so as to ensure that the 
state controls the necessary sources of grain supply. Second, 
we will set up a venture fund for grain, perfect the system of 
grain reserves, and form a flexible regulatory mechanism to 
stabilize markets and keep down grain prices. Moreover, we will 
tighten the management of grain markets, control wholesale 
exchanges and free retail sales in a proper way, and, at the 
same time, thoroughly separate the commercial operation of grain 
from operation out of policy considerations in business as well 
as in organization. 
  2. On the issue of perfecting the basic rural operating 
system, attention will be focused on implementing policies such 
as extending the time limit for contracted land, compensatory 
transfer of land use rights, and so on. At present, special 
attention should be paid to the following two problems: One is 
making excuses to tear up or change contracts that have not 
expired yet, and the other is raising charges on contracts at 
will. 
  3. We will conscientiously experiment with the joint-stock 
system in rural areas. The joint-stock system cannot be taken 
purely as a means of raising funds, and attention should be paid 
to clarifying the relations between ownership and management, 
transforming operational mechanisms, and forming an effective 
system of asset accumulation. 
  4. We will repeatedly augment the collective economic 
strength, increase the service functions of unified operations, 
and resolve the problem of serving the production and operation 
of peasant households. 
  5. We will construct wholesale "shopping basket" markets, 
positively cultivate the rural market system, define a number of 
projects integrating trade with industry and agriculture, and 
give impetus to developing integrated trade, industrial, and 
agricultural operations. 

