BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed GGD/MAR: "`No Specific Partnership for </F>
Russia,' NATO Attests"] 
  [Text] Brussels, 19 May (BELGA) -- NATO is refusing Russia 
the right to have a special status within the context of the 
Partnership for Peace (PFP), the initiative launched by the 
Atlantic Alliance to increase its cooperation with the European 
countries that are not members, it was pointed out Thursday [19 
May] at the organization's Brussels headquarters. 
  "There will not be any `specific PFP' for Moscow," affirmed 
two senior NATO officials, who requested anonymity. 
  According to the same sources, the alliance nevertheless 
wishes, albeit in an informal manner, to establish relations 
involving close contacts on the subjects of Bosnia, peacekeeping 
operations, and nuclear weapons, due to the "important 
geopolitical role" played by Moscow in the area of European 
security. However, the details of this specific relationship 
still have to be worked out. 
  Meanwhile, the Kremlin wants a special treaty to obtain 
specific rights within the PFP before signing the framework 
accession document. Russia also wants to place NATO under the 
supervision of the CSCE, which comprises 52 countries in Europe 
and Central Asia. 
  The question of the relations to be established between NATO 
and Moscow was raised Wednesday by the ambassadors of the 16 
member countries, who had gathered for their weekly meeting, but 
our sources added that no decision had yet been made. 
  "There is room for dialogue and cooperation which would 
reflect the role of Russia in Europe," the two senior NATO 
officials went on, emphasizing that it was in the interests of 
both parties for Moscow to join the PFP. 
  These statements come just a few days before the arrival in 
Brussels of General Pavel Grachev, the Russian defense minister, 
who will be coming to present the Russian military doctrine to 
his NATO counterparts (minus France) on Tuesday evening. The 
next day, he will participate in a meeting of defense ministers 
from NATO countries and the countries of Central and East Europe. 
  General Grachev recently stated that he would benefit from 
the occasion to present NATO Russia's "own concept" of a PFP. 
  The Russian minister is then scheduled to proceed with a 
two-day visit to Belgium, at the invitation of his Belgian 
counterpart, Mr. Leo Delcroix. 

