Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sufi Yusof] </F>
  [Excerpts] Kuala Lumpur, Fri. [11 February] -- Malaysia is 
prepared to send additional troops to Bosnia-Herzegovina 
following the Organisation of Islamic Conference's [OIC] offer 
of 10,000 troops to beef up the United Nations peacekeeping 
contingent there. It is proposed that the troops will come from 
Malaysia, Jordan, Pakistan, and Egypt. Previously, the UN had 
asked for 7,600 troops from the OIC. [passage omitted] 
  Defence Minister Datuk Sri Najib Tun Razak said any 
additional troop deployment would have to be sanctioned by the 
world body. "We will abide by the decision of the OIC, but we 
must get the green light from the UN," he said in a telephone 
interview from his house here today. Najib was not surprised 
that the OIC Contact Group at its Jakarta meeting yesterday made 
the offer of additional troops. "The move to send additional 
troops from the OIC member countries is an on going discussion. 
"We have discussed this issue many times before and we are ready 
to offer more troops for UN duty in Bosnia." [passage omitted] 
  Malaysia has about 1,500 troops serving with the UN 
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) under the command of Kol. [Colonel] 
Hashim Hussein. 
  Asked about the total number of troops which Malaysia was 
willing to send to Bosnia-Herzegovina, Najib said it was 
premature to give a figure. However, Defence Ministry sources 
said Malaysia could send up to three battalions, but this would 
depend on logistical support. "The question is whether we will 
have the ability to support the troops with the necessary 
equipment, winter clothing and boots, medicine, engineering 
supplies, and other vital logistics to sustain operations in 
such a harsh environment there," said a source. 
  Foreign Minister Datuk Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, meanwhile, 
said 
Malaysia wants the UN Security Council to allow member countries 
to openly debate the atrocities and ethnic cleansing by the 
Serbs in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Such a move would be against the 
norm of closed-door sessions held by the council. 
  Abdullah said that Malaysia's permanent representative to 
the 
UN, Tan Sri Razali Ismail, would liaise with the NAM 
Coordinating Group Committee and the OIC Contact Group to 
pressure the council for the open debate. He said the council 
was expected to hold its meeting on the Bosnian issue in a 
couple of days. The chances of the meeting being convened were 
good as he understood that Russia, a member of the council with 
veto powers, had shown interest in having such a discussion, he 
added. 
  Abdullah was certain the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
(NATO) would not launch an air strike against Serb artillery 
positions besieging Sarajevo. 
  Meanwhile, [Pakistani Foreign Minister] Asif said moves by 
NATO to lift the siege of Sarajevo fell short of expectations. 
  "In expressing their (the OIC Contact Group's) 
disappointment 
at the lack of resolute action in the past, they underlined the 
imperative of the immediate lifting of the siege of Sarajevo and 
carrying through the necessary actions foreseen in the latest 
NATO decision," he said. 
  He also said the contact group had agreed to support a 
proposal by Indonesia's president, Suharto, the current NAM 
chairman, for an appropriately structured international 
conference on Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  "We welcome the NATO chairman's decision to conduct a 
meeting 
through the NAM Coordinating Bureau in New York to demand more 
effective measures be undertaken by the UN," he said. [passage 
omitted] 

