Discussed 

<F P=102>   PY1304222994 Lima CARETAS in Spanish 7 Apr 94 pp 31, 65 </F>
<F P=103> PY1304222994 </F>
<F P=104>  Lima CARETAS </F>
<F P=105>  Spanish </F>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with General Tomas Marky, chief of the Ayacucho </F>
Political-Military Command, by correspondent Abilio Arroyo; 
place and date not given] 
  [Excerpts] Arroyo: After 14 years, what is the 
situation of subversion in Ayacucho where the fighting began? 
  Marky: It has been reduced considerably. I 
believe the reason for this success--in addition to the capture 
of [Shining Path, SL, leader] Abimael Guzman--is basically the 
union between the population and the police. This is why our 
first objective was to gain and keep the support of the 
population without which it would have been impossible to defeat 
the SL. The people are currently cooperating with us and the 
51st Los Cabitos Garrison now has a different image. This was 
possible thanks to our road development and civic action program. 
  Arroyo: What role do the peasant defense patrols 
and self-defense committees play in the antisubversive struggle? 
  Marky: The peasant defense patrols have helped 
tremendously in the pacification program. I would say that this 
is one of the factors that caused the SL to crash. About 60 
percent of the rural population is organized in patrols. 
  Arroyo: There are, however, many accusations of 
abuse by the defense patrols which sometimes involve the 
security forces. What measures have you taken? 
  Marky: There are isolated cases of abuse. As you 
can understand, Ayacucho Department is large and it is not 
possible to guarantee adequate action. We learn about the 
abuses from our patrols which are permanently covering the zone. 
If there is a serious mistake, we immediately report it to the 
court. This is why some peasant defense patrol members are 
under arrest. Abuses happen within the context of a war and are 
comprehensible but they are not part of the antisubversive 
policy. It is like in any institution, if someone commits a 
crime he is reported to justice and punished. 
  Arroyo: How many of the settlements that were 
abandoned are coming back with life in Ayacucho? 
  Marky: There are 30 settlements. The newest are 
Nununhuaycco, Umaru, Marccaraccay, and all the settlements in 
Uchuraccay. We give them security with a military patrol. 
These settlements are taking great steps to return to 
tranquility and going back to agriculture gradually. There is 
also a food program from the Pronaa [National Food Assistance 
Program] and the PAR [Rapid Assistance Post] which are creating 
the basic conditions for the people to live in a dignified 
manner in their communities. This means reconstruction of 
houses, medical posts, and schools. This is important because 
in the past the people returned to their communities in a 
disorganized manner. Perhaps not everyone will return to the 
communities, especially the youth who have already adjusted to 
city life. Many people long to return to their land and prefer 
their community instead of promiscuity and poverty far from 
their home. We help with the transportation and every other way 
we can. 
  Arroyo: When did the strategy in Ayacucho change? 
  Marky: Last year. It was realized that it was 
necessary to stop giving priority to repression and to 
concentrate on development. We took advantage of the legal 
framework of Law 24150 and Legislative Decree 749 which modified 
Article 5 of this law regarding the rights of the 
Political-Military Commands. [passage omitted] 
  Arroyo: Is it true that the Apurimac valley is the 
second Huallaga due to the ``cocalization'' of the zone and the 
increased drug trafficking? 
  Marky: Denying that would be like trying to cover 
the sun with a finger. These people have no good roads and the 
prices of coffee and cocoa are very low. There is not much 
incentive to grow those products, so many people are now growing 
coca. We do not repress coca growing because the Enaco 
[National Coca Enterprise] is in the area and there are many 
legal coca growers. But we are not naive, part of that 
production is used for drugs. 
  As the zone is wide and long, we would need many people to 
fight it. We are doing it but we need specialized personnel, 
perhaps a police base like the one in Santa Lucia to give us 
greater logistical support with radar in this struggle. I have 
information on the clandestine airfields in the zone but we have 
no means to control them. If we go to one place to fight 
trafficking, these people with their resources will move their 
illegal trafficking. This is why it is urgent to promote 
alternative development instead of repressive measures. 
  Arroyo: How do you evaluate the subversion in that 
zone? 
  Marky: That question will allow me to clarify a 
statement on a television program that the red flag was flying 
over the Apurimac River valley. That is not true. I know that 
zone and I can assure you that the SL was eradicated from there. 
The latest subversive outbreaks occurred in Viscatan where we 
intervened to evict the subversives. We fired on them with 
gunships, our military patrols captured many subversives and 
seized an important arsenal. We have information that the 
subversives are returning through the Sello de Oro zone but we 
will pounce at any moment. 
  Arroyo: And in other zones of Ayacucho? 
  Marky: Very little, we know of the presence of a 
few subversives in the zone of Rasuhuillca, Huanta, but we are 
permanently patrolling that area. With the information provided 
by the subversives who repented, we have discovered several SL 
hideouts which prompted the subversives to migrate to other 
regions. 
  Arroyo: How many SL members do you estimate are 
operating in Ayacucho? 
  Marky: I cannot say, but there are only a few. 
Their internal struggles have lead to murder. One SL leader 
was murdered a month and a half ago. We were surprised because 
it involved Engineer Chocce, the departmental director of the 
Transportation and Communications Ministry. The police found in 
his house several letters of obedience to ``President Gonzalo'' 
and other letters recriminating him for the lack of action in 
Ayacucho. 
  Arroyo: Did you know him? 
  Marky: Yes. We suspected he was a terrorist 
because a repented terrorist reported him. After a police 
interrogation, and as no concrete evidence linking him with 
subversion was found, he was released and resumed his work as an 
important Transportation and Communications Ministry official. 
He held meetings with everybody, including us, and kept a close 
watch of the work in his sector. Then one day he was found dead 
on the slope of the Acuchimay with a SL sign saying: ``This how 
the traitors of the party die.'' 
  Arroyo: Did he participate in the SL Committee 
meetings? 
  Marky: Never, he was a low ranking official at a 
regional level. He did, however, participate in official 
meetings. This case has helped us adjust and improve our 
intelligence service, making it more selective and much more 
accurate, to identify terrorists and their aides who have 
infiltrated public institutions. 
  Arroyo: Does this mean there are terrorists in the 
city? 
  Marky: Very few. They have repented and want 
nothing to do with the SL column that continues to perpetrate 
terrorist actions. Proof of this is that since last year there 
have been no actions such as the feared ``armed strikes'' in the 
city. In the education field, there might be some cases of 
indoctrination, but we are detecting them gradually. We believe 
some teachers were recruited through fear. They have now 
changed now and want peace. Not long ago members of the SUTE 
[Trade Union of Education Workers] of Huamanga requested 
permission to hold a rally and I granted it. They held their 
rally peacefully. 

