Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] San Cristobal de las Casas, 24 Feb (NOTIMEX) -- 
Peace Commissioner Manuel Camacho Solis and the Zapatist 
National Liberation Army [EZLN] announced today they have 
advanced 50 percent in the demands presented to attain peace in 
Chiapas. 
  Upon concluding their fourth day of meetings at the 
cathedral 
of this city, both parties reported on the development of the 
conversations initiated 21 February to end the armed conflict, 
which erupted in Chiapas last 1 January. 
  "Things have continued to advance, and today we have been 
able to reach agreements on 50 percent of the issues that have 
been presented to us" by the armed group, Camacho told the 
national and international press gathered at the "Cathedral of 
Peace." 
  "We see in this the opportunity not only to answer one 
question but to achieve a broad consensus regarding these 
accords to attain a political solution to the conflict in 
Chiapas and regarding the peace accord," the peace commissioner 
added. 
  "Subcommander Marcos" said among the points on which 
progress 
has been made are the electrification of Indian communities and 
the redistribution of public investment in the state, as well as 
demands on health, truthful information, and housing. 
  NAFTA's impact on the Indian communities also received a 
satisfactory response at the negotiations in the Chiapas city of 
San Cristobal, 1,200 km southeast of the Mexican capital. 
  Regarding education, the parties agreed to build schools, 
provide them with school supplies, train teachers, and establish 
mandatory and official bilingual education in the Indian 
communities. 
  The respect for Indian tradition and culture, the punishment 
for discrimination and prejudice against Indians, the problem of 
nourishment, and economic support to the victims of war have 
also been discussed at the negotiations. 
  The need to create a National Peace Commission in charge of 
following up to ensure compliance with the agreements and the 
multiplication and strengthening of nongovernmental human rights 
organizations are within the 50-percent advancement. 
  In addition, the peace commissioner and the 19 EZLN 
delegates 
agreed humanitarian aid in the areas of conflict must be 
channeled through "authentic" representatives of Indian 
communities. 
  Both sides concurred the agreements reached in principle 
will 
be consulted with the highest Mexican authorities and with the 
Indian communities in Chiapas for their final approval. 
  The agreements will also be presented to the public in order 
to gather opinions and seek a consensus around the so-called 
"peace with dignity," according to "Subcommander Marcos," the 
rebel group's military chief. 
  Camacho recalled this Thursday is national flag day, 
stressing the importance of maintaining and defending 
territorial integrity, and of finding a solution for the Chiapas 
conflict in Mexico, by Mexicans, on the basis of dialogue and 
mutual respect. 
  The conditions of neglect and poverty faced by the Indians 
in 
Chiapas is what led to the emergence of the rebel group, one of 
the delegates who identified himself as "Juan" said, reiterating 
the demands for work, housing, land, freedom of expression, and 
democracy. 
  "We Indians are also struggling for a respect of our dignity 
as Indians," he said. 
  Both sides will continue the talks on 25 February, based on 
the list of demands presented by the rebel group on 22 February. 

