Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 8 Mar (MENA)--Palestinian Ambassador in Cairo 
Sa'id Kamal has stressed that the PLO insists that Israel submit 
a written document in which it commits itself to withdrawing 
from Gaza and Jericho no later than 12 April in accordance with 
the Palestinian-Israeli Declaration of Principles, otherwise 
there will be no guarantee for the success of the peace process. 
In a statement to MENA today, Kamal said that he and Foreign 
Minister 'Amr Musa yesterday evening discussed the Egyptian and 
Palestinian efforts with the United States and the European 
Union intended to have the UN Security Council pass a resolution 
condemning the massacre at the al-Ibrahimi Mosque and protecting 
the Palestinian people. 
  Kamal said that the Palestinian leadership insists on a 
Security Council resolution even if the United States were to 
veto it. He pointed out that the Palestinian leadership 
conveyed its demands to Israel and that Israeli Prime Minister 
Yitzhaq Rabin's envoy, perhaps Jacques Neriya or an Israeli 
minister, will convey the Israeli response to these demands to 
the Palestinian leadership in Tunis in the next 24 hours after 
the mini-meeting of the Israeli cabinet. 
  MENA has learned that the Palestinian leadership notified 
Israel through Israeli envoy Neriya of a number of conditions 
and principles with which Israel must comply for resumption of 
the peace talks. Foremost among these conditions are: 
  1. Providing international protection throughout the 
occupied territories and not only in the Gaza Strip and the 
Jericho area, where the temporary Palestinian self-rule will 
begin, as well as Hebron, as Israel has offered. 
  2. Ensuring that this protection will be real and applied 
not only by UN observers as Israel wants. 
  Kamal said that France, Russia, Norway, and Spain have 
offered to participate in international protection, either 
something belonging to the United Nations or through special 
multi-nationality agreements with the guarantee of the two 
cosponsors of the peace process -- the United States and Russia. 
He noted that Britain expressed readiness to participate in a 
UN observers force. 
  MENA has learned that the PLO does not ask that these forces 
be heavily armed, but only lightly armed to defend themselves. 
He noted that the third Palestinian demand is the dismantling 
of four Israeli settlements in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, 
including the Bet Hadasa settlement in the center of Hebron and 
the departure of 400 extremist Israeli settlers who live inside 
the Arab city of Hebron. 
  Ambassador Sa'id Kamal said that the Palestinian leadership 
demands that the issue of settlements be discussed at the 
negotiating table directly after Israeli withdrawal in 
accordance with the text of the Palestinian-Israeli Declaration 
of Principles signed in Washington on 13 September 1993, and not 
within the two years as the Israeli side is demanding. 
  It is worth noting that the Declaration of Principles 
stipulated discussing the issue of the settlements as soon as 
possible. 
  The Palestinian ambassador in Cairo clarified that the 
fourth 
Palestinian demand is to disarm all Israeli settlers and prevent 
them from carrying weapons outside their settlements. Their 
protection should be taken on by the Israeli forces in 
accordance with the security arrangements that were agreed upon 
during the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. 
  It is noteworthy that Israel declared its approval for 
disarming some extremists from the Kakh and Gush Emunim groups, 
who are considered the radical extremists. This will not 
include the rest of the settlers, though. 
  The fifth Palestinian demand is to form a neutral 
investigative committee to establish responsibility for the 
al-Ibrahimi Mosque massacre and punish those responsible or 
compensate the victims of that massacre in moral and material 
ways. 
  The Palestinian side maintains that the massacre was 
committed not by just one Israeli extremist from the Kakh 
movement; many individuals from the Israeli forces took part in 
it also. 
  MENA has learned that the Palestinian leadership is not 
expected to accept holding a meeting between Palestinian 
President Yasir 'Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin 
without meeting the Palestinian demands and without 
international guarantees, especially as regards protecting the 
Palestinian people. 
  Palestinian sources affirmed that the negotiations cannot be 
resumed without setting the appropriate atmosphere for them -- 
something that will not be realized except through international 
protection for the Palestinian people in the occupied 
territories, especially since the situation has now become very 
volatile as a result of the frustration the Palestinian people 
are feeling and the emergence of trends and conflicts demanding 
reaction and revenge for the death of the Palestinian martyrs. 

