BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 12 May (MENA) -- President Mubarak has 
declared that Egypt is not prepared to send a single soldier to 
Yemen, either as part of a peace-keeping force or otherwise. He 
said Egypt only sends troops abroad when there is an 
international dispute and to achieve specific goals. He 
affirmed that what is happening in Yemen is an "internal issue." 
  In an interview with Radio Monte Carlo to be broadcast 
today, 
the president said: I am not prepared to lose a single 
individual in an operation that is "not right." 
  Mubarak added that he had contacted Yemeni President 'Ali 
'Abdallah Salih and his Vice President 'Ali Salim al-Bid and 
told them the Yemeni situation is not comforting. He said he 
asked them to disengage the troops for fear of a clash that 
might develop into an unmanageable armed conflict. Even if it 
could be managed, people will get killed and wounded and hatreds 
will emerge and trigger mutual vendettas and a guerrilla war 
might rage for years, Mubarak said. 
  The president added that the advancement of northern forces 
toward Aden will not solve the problem and the war will neither 
assist nor guarantee unity. War is a call for secession; it 
means occupation and so does entering Aden, he said, adding: 
The world will not view Yemen as a united country. 
  They are reassuring me that the issue will end, but in fact 
I 
do not see any hope, Mubarak said. 
  President Mubarak added that he is not against one side or 
the other. I am for peace, stability, and unity. The use of 
force will not lead to unity; it will light the fuse of 
retaliation, he said. The president asked: Is this in the 
general interest? Has the Arab world been afflicted with states 
that devour their neighbors? How can two states unite and then 
end up fighting each other? 
  Mubarak regretted what is happening, hoping that the two 
parties to the crisis will reach a solution, although he doubts 
this is possible. All that is happening is a result of the Gulf 
war, he remarked. 
  Touching on the Arab situation, Mubarak said that bringing 
Arabs back together will take a long time, because the Gulf war 
caused deep wounds. 
  He added that Egypt is trying and that the Palestinian 
president had met with the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques. 
  The president added that he talked to the Gulf states and 
the 
situation with Jordan is slightly better now. He pointed out 
that the Gulf states are still bitter over what had happened. 
They believe that King Husayn was involved. But we are trying 
to clear the air, and the situation today is better than it was 
two years ago, he said. 
  The president pointed out that the invasion of Kuwait was a 
very serious matter for all Gulf states, particularly since 
information indicated that Iraq would not stop at Kuwait's 
invasion and that the situation would develop until it affected 
the entire Gulf region. 
  President Mubarak announced that Egypt opposes the 
partition of Iraq and that it sympathizes with the Iraqi people. 
However, it seems that the international community insists on 
continuing the sanctions on Iraq while President Saddam Husayn 
remains in power. 
  The president said: We are opposed to the removal of a head 
of state through the intervention of foreign powers. The people 
are the ones who should decide whether or not a president should 
stay in power. We could never accept a head of state being 
harmed by foreign forces. I have spoken to some countries about 
this issue. 
  The president affirmed that lifting the blockade of Iraq is 
not an easy process and will require time. The president added 
that he sympathizes a great deal with the Iraqi people, as do 
the Egyptian people. 
  Discussing the peace process in the Middle East, President 
Mubarak said that the question of Palestine is over 45 years 
old. Therefore, it is a very complicated issue and many new 
complications will emerge in the coming stages of the 
negotiations. 
  He added: It will not be easy for the Palestinian 
administration to manage affairs because it will take power 
after autonomy is actually implemented. However, it is the best 
option because it comes in close contact with the problems of 
the people. He said that the problem of settlements is another 
complicated matter. It was only natural for problems to crop up 
at the last minute during the ceremony for signing the autonomy 
agreement considering the nature of the problem. "The road is 
still long," because the Palestinian problem is more complicated 
than any of the other problems that fall within the Middle East 
issue. 
  President Mubarak said that the Gaza-Jericho Agreement is a 
first step. I was of the opinion that the Palestinians should 
first set foot in their territory. They can then start the 
confidence-building process with Israel so that the Israelis can 
feel at ease about their security, which is a very sensitive 
matter to them. The president affirmed that both president 
Yasir 'Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Rabin made a very 
courageous decision in reaching this agreement. However, the 
situation still needs a great deal of time to reach the final 
solution. 
  Regarding the negotiations on the Syrian-Israeli track, the 
president said that he hopes the two parties reach an agreement 
before the end of the year. He expressed his belief that the 
problem now is the lack of confidence between Syria and Israel. 
Israel wants to know what it will get in return for the land and 
Syria wants to know what it will get in return for peace. The 
issue is one of confidence. 
  He added that the issue will take some time and that each 
party must gradually get to understand the other party. Perhaps 
the Syrian question is not as complicated as the Palestinian one 
because it involves only the Golan Heights. 
  The president said that Israel wants to fully normalize 
relations with Syria, which means opening the borders and 
establishing diplomatic relations. Normalizing relations 
requires some time, as was the case with Egypt and Israel. 
  Regarding Jordan, President Mubarak said: There are some 
issues such as the borders, but I believe that the Jordanian 
problem is on its way to being resolved. 
  President Mubarak was asked about the apprehensions 
regarding 
the Middle Eastern common market and fears that the Egyptian 
role in the region will diminish. He said: I have heard about 
the Middle Eastern market and a great deal has been said about 
it, without this market actually existing; but talk about it 
continues. In the final analysis, no one will impose anything 
on us, and nothing can happen in the region without our being 
fully convinced of it. In any case, Egypt will be at the top. 
  On the possibility that the terrorist operations taking 
place in Egypt from time to time might affect the country's 
democratic experience, President Mubarak said: No one can harm 
the democratic process in Egypt. Had this been possible, then 
these terrorists could have attained something. 
  The president added: We are keen on democracy and freedom. 
There has never before been freedom like that which exists in 
our country now, not even under, before, or after the monarchy. 
We are convinced that we are not working to "abort" democratic 
pluralism. What we are doing is in line with the Constitution 
and the law. I do not like to violate them at all, because I am 
establishing the bases for the future. I support freedoms even 
though some papers are not writing objectively. But I say let 
the people learn and get to know right from wrong and to discern 
good from bad. 
  President Mubarak went on to say: Studies to determine the 
public's situation began as soon as I took over. The 
infrastructure--such as the bad sewage system, electricity and 
water supplies, and the railroads--was minimal. The 
infrastructure had to be reformed so that we could get the 
investment we wanted but which investors were hesitant about. 
Hence, we held the economic conference in 1982 and this 
resulted in the plan we are proceeding with now, with amendments 
made from time to time. We started with the infrastructure and 
this continued for several years. We found out that we had the 
problem of slums--which began in the sixties-- poor people, and 
unemployment, like all other countries. 
  President Mubarak said: When I took over, we had 500,000 
telephone lines, including 300,000 that were not working. We 
now have three million lines and we can call Japan, the United 
States, anywhere in the world. We had the same problems with 
electricity. 
  The president explained that the infrastructure work cost 
too 
much and this caused us problems, but God made it easy for us. 
He said: Half the debts have been cancelled and we are now 
looking at priorities, such as the slums and unemployment. We 
have many new cities--that is, 13--where there is work. 
  Asked if the citizens can feel the state's confrontation 
with 
corruption, the president said: Corruption exists among human 
beings wherever they are. Egypt is one of the countries that 
suffers the least from corruption. There is not a single 
corruption case that the state has not monitored or followed. 
He added: I wish those who are talking about corruption would 
reform themselves first. Some people talk loudly about 
corruption in order to cover up their own corruption. But I do 
not want to mention any names. 
  The president said: I want you to name one country where 
there are only angels. Any government in any country has 
bureaucracy. In any country that has public money, those in 
charge know that they are held accountable. 
  Asked if some of the local leaders submit to extremists, 
President Mubarak said: This happens, but it is not a major 
phenomenon. The local government councils are all right and 
those in charge of them are conscientious. All the people are 
aware and make the right decision. 

