Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Ivan Ivanov] </F>
  [Text] Nizhnyy Novgorod March 10 TASS -- Despite the deep 
economic crisis and stagnation in the scientific and 
technological complex, many of Russia's high technologies 
maintain leading positions in the world. This conclusion was 
made by the Russian governmental delegation led by Prime 
Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin after a visit to the Nizhnyy 
Novgorod region, particularly the local TV-set factory which 
demonstrated the newest and most advance radar capable of 
detecting the most sophisticated "Stealth planes" at a range of 
up to 1,200 kilometers. 
  Chernomyrdin also met with the directors of Nizhnyy 
Novgorod's defence plants and heads of local administrations to 
discuss conversion. The premier urged them to exert maximum 
effort in order to preserve the defence, scientific and 
technological potential of the country. 
  The draft budget for 1994 slightly cuts military 
expenditures. This may lead to the "immediate demobilisation of 
400,000 servicemen and termination of arms purchases," according 
to First Defence Minister Andrey Kokoshin. 
  Chernomyrdin was in the Nizhnyy Novgorod region to take part 
in an agricultural conference, "Land Reform: the Nizhnyy 
Novgorod Model," which was attended by the leaders of more than 
40 Russian regions. The region has been carrying out a 
comprehensive programme of land privatisation and reorganisation 
of state and collective farms since the autumn of 1993. Two 
farms have already held auctions to sell plots of land and 
property. 
  Chernomyrdin called for radical changes in the system of 
state financing of agriculture and said that "the state has 
always supported and will support agriculture because Russia 
cannot survive without it." 
  "We will lend money against guaranteed results and only on 
the basis of such results. We must know how much food and of 
what quality people of Russia will receive on the allocated 
budget means," the premier said. He said that the draft budget 
for 1994 envisages allocating 11 billion roubles to agriculture 
this year. 
  The main task of the government is to "breed" an effective, 
independent and sovereign owner in the agrarian sector, the 
premier said. He praised the experience of land auctions 
organised in the region, one of which he attended today. The 
aim of such auctions is to encourage the owners of plots of land 
and other property to play a more active part in agriculture. 
  The development of the system of land and property auctions 
marks considerable progress on the way towards building a 
civilised market. The existing land law has so far failed to 
create conditions for the transfer of land to those who would 
use it more effectively. There is no mechanism regulating the 
purchasing, selling and leasing of land in Russia, chernomyrdin 
said. He considers land auctions as the real beginning of the 
process to establish a land market in Russia. The premier 
believes that the experience of land auctions in Nizhnyy 
Novgorod should be used across the entire Russia. 
  The conference was also attended by First-Vice Prime 
Ministers Aleksandr Zaveryukha and Anatoliy Chubays. 
Chernomyrdin is expected to return to Moscow today. 

