Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by M.V. Filatov, S.A. Bulat, Ye.A. Drobchenko, L.V. </F>
Kotlovanova, R.A. Pantina, Ye.V. Semenova, S.I. Stepanov, A.N. 
Tretyakov, and O.G. Shcherbakova, Saint Petersburg Institute of 
Nuclear Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Gatchina] 
  [Abstract] A set of techniques has been proposed for 
obtaining hybrid cell lines representing a cross between human 
and Chinese hamster cells. Specifically, the technique of 
introducing exogenous genetic material into cells by 
transfecting the cells is proposed as a way of overcoming 
existing problems with genetic markers. The transfected material 
serves to mark various segments of the genome in the different 
cell clones. These portions of the genome may then be preserved 
in cell hybrids by using a selective medium. The human DNA 
preserved in the hybrids may be obtained and tested in two ways: 
1. by karyotyping the hybrid cells by means of continuous 
cytometry (which makes it possible to identify and sort human 
chromosomes as individual peaks on the resultant histogram and 
2. by obtaining large amounts of human DNA from the hybrids by 
a chain polymerase reaction with primers homologous to the 
consensus sequence of Alu-repeats specific for human DNA. 
The experiments conducted to test and illustrate the proposed 
procedure were performed on a subclone of a crossed line of lung 
fibroblasts of Chinese hamster (V79-_g_-8). A culture of human 
embryo lung fibroblasts served as the primary culture. The cells 
were grown in Eagle's medium plus either 20 percent bovine serum 
or 10 percent embryonal calf serum and 5 percent human umbilical 
cord serum. The plasmid psv2neo, which caries a gene of 
resistance to the antibiotic G418, was used to transfect the 
human fibroblasts. The plasmid was introduced into the cells by 
electroporation. The transfected cells were selected in a medium 
containing the antibiotic G418 (500 g/ml). To obtain the 
cell 
hybrids, the researchers incubated the cell mixture in a 
suspension with phytohemagglutinin (10 g/ml) for 10 minutes. 
This was followed by centrifugation and processing of the cells 
for 1 minute with 50 percent polyethylene glycol. The hybrid 
cells were selected in a medium with a reduced serum content (7 
percent) in the presence of 500 g/ml antibiotic. The primer 
Alu-517 was used in the chain polymerase reaction. After the 
polymerase reaction had been completed, aliquots of amplified 
DNA (volume, 2 l) were separated in 1.8 percent agarose in 
0.75xTAE buffer. Several dozen clones of human embyro lung 
fibroblasts resistant to 500 g/ml of the antibiotic G418 
were 
obtained. Cells cloned for several months in the absence of G418 
retained their resistance to the antibiotic, thus indicating the 
stable integration of the plasmid into the chromosomal DNA. The 
experiments confirmed that the primer Alu-517, when used in a 
chain polymerase reaction with DNA, amplifies only the DNA of 
the hybrids and HeLa cells and not the DNA of Chinese hamster 
cells. The primer and chain polymer reaction made it possible to 
detect human DNA in all of the clones analyzed, whereas 
conventional continuous cytometry only resulted in the 
preservation of human chromosome in one of the three clones 
analyzed. Figures 3, tables 2; references 13: 2 Russian, 11 
Western. 


