Continuing     to call for the creation of a Greater Serbia, Bosnian 
Serb leaders have rejected joining the Bosnian Muslim-Croatian 
federation announced in Washington on 1 March.  In an interview 
published in Der Spiegel on 7 March, Bosnian Serb "President" 
Radovan Karadzic sharply denounced the Muslim-Croat federation 
and the confederation between Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Republic 
of Croatia.  Insisting that the Serbs could accept only "an 
independent Serbian state" or unification "with all other Serbs 
in one state," he asserted that only "political illiterates could 
expect" the Bosnian Serbs to live in a "Croatian-Muslim state." 
Suggesting that his remarks to Der Spiegel were a definitive 
statement of policy, both Belgrade television and the Yugoslav 
press agency Tanjug gave prominent treatment to quotations from 
the interview (Belgrade TV, 7 March; Tanjug, 8 March). 
   At the same time, while unanimously expressing their opposition 
to signing on to the Washington agreement, Bosnian Serb leaders 
have not opposed the idea of Muslim-Croatian union.   However, 
they insist that such a union must not threaten what they define 
as Serbian interests.  Momcilo Krajisnik, president of the 
Bosnian Serb assembly, described the idea of a federation or 
confederation with the Croats and Muslims in one Bosnian state as 
"out of the question."  While Krajisnik  evinced skepticism that 
a Muslim-Croatian federation could survive, he did not reject the 
idea out of hand (Tanjug, 5 March).  Bosnian Serb "Foreign 
Minister" Aleksa Buha said that the Serbs would never "return to 
any sovereign and integral Bosnia-Herzegovina."  While declaring 
that he would not oppose a Muslim-Croatian union as long as it 
did not constitute a threat "against" the Serbs, nevertheless he 
speculated that the federation was intended to "create a firm 
negotiating--and possibly military--bloc" opposed to Bosnian Serb 
interests (Tanjug, 6 March).    Nikola Koljevic, a vice president 
of the so-called Republic of Srpska in Bosnia-Herzegovina, who 
earlier suggested that the Serbs would continue to seek the union 
of "all Serbian lands" with "Mother Serbia" despite the 
Washington agreement (Vecernje Novosti, 3 March), more recently 
has praised the agreement as a "pragmatic move" in the "direction 
of peace."  He suggested, however, that the Serbs would enter 
into negotiations on the agreement only in the unlikely event 
that UN sanctions against Belgrade were lifted (Tanjug, 8 March). 
(AUTHOR:  NASH.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF 
ANALYST, ELAG, (703) 733-6120) 
ELAG/GILISON/GSP 08/2136z MAR 

