BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed "Scope" column: "Review of Plutonium Policy </F>
Shows STA-MITI Frictions"] 
  [Text] Japan will slow down its plutonium-related 
projects, a subpanel of the (prime minister's) advisory Atomic 
Energy Commission said in its report submitted on 18 May. The 
policy change was made in view of global concern over Japan's 
plutonium policy. On the other hand, the advisory report again 
stressed the need for continued studies on plutonium use, 
without indicating future directions of the project. The 
inadequateness of the report reflects frictions between the 
Science and Technology Agency [STA], which is seeking the 
promotion of nuclear fuel recycling, and the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry [MITI], which takes a prudent 
stance toward plutonium use. The industrial circles are voicing 
concern over the unclear policy review because they always 
become the sole sufferers from inadequate policies. 
<H5>  Speculations </H5>
  The advisory report by the Atomic Energy Commission is 
expected to become the outline of the government's new long-term 
program for atomic energy development, which will be revised for 
the first time in seven years. Therefore, STA and MITI 
finalized the report by carefully adjusting the interests of 
both sides. 
  For STA, nuclear fuel recycling is a big-scale and long-term 
project which guarantees much expenditures and manpower 
mobilization. STA cannot accept the scaledown of the project 
since the project is a "centerpiece" to demonstrate its presence 
in Kasumigaseki [bureaucratic circles]. On the other hand, MITI 
is looking for good excuses for checking STA's initiative. 
Based on studies by the (MITI minister's advisory) General 
Energy Council, a top MITI official recently stated: "The 
government should slow down its plutonium-related projects." 
  The experimental fast breeder reactor "Monju" cost the 
government over 600 billion yen, and in the next stage, electric 
power companies plan to build a demonstration reactor. The 
government intends to add nuclear fuel recycling costs to the 
price of plutonium, and the companies will have to buy the 
expensive fuel. MITI says it has to speak out for "silent 
complaints" from electric power companies. Since the ministry 
is in charge of Japan-U.S. relations, it has to give 
consideration to the U.S. policy on the DPRK's (North Korea's) 
nuclear weapons development. 
<H5>  Concern </H5>
  Atomic energy-related products occupy about 10 percent of 
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Limited's total annual sales. The 
company has over 1,000 engineers working in this field. In 
response to the governmental decision on the setback in 
plutonium use, the company expressed its concern over the policy 
review, saying: "In line with the policy review, we will have 
to slow down our technological studies." 
  According to the Atomic Energy Industries Council, the total 
amount of nuclear-related projects in 1992 reached 2.24 trillion 
yen. These contracts were received by 470 companies, including 
electric applicant manufacturers, heavy machinery builders, and 
constructors. 
  Taking subcontractors into account, the "atomic power 
business" involves many companies. For the last five years, 
there have been no plans for constructing new nuclear-power 
plants due to difficulties in finding local government bodies 
willing to accept nuclear-related facilities. Under such 
circumstances, "We are not happy" about a possible delay in 
orders for nuclear recycling facilities (as noted by a major 
electric appliance company). Yet, "We cannot move engineers to 
other sections because it narrows future business chances" (as 
noted by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries). 
  In addition, the advisory report imposes on the business 
sector a duty to provide a nuclear fuel processing plant for 
consuming surplus plutonium. The plutonium business costs 
companies a lot, no matter which ones remain or withdraw from 
the business field, and it will certainly hit consumers in the 
future as a utility fee hike. Dilemma in the unclear nuclear 
policy will inevitably trouble the business sector and consumers. 

