Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] 
<H6>  THE STAR </H6>
  ANC Contradictory on Police Presence -- Johannesburg THE 
STAR 
in English on 11 January in a page 12 editorial mentions the 
hostels, and the lack of police presence in Katlehong, as "two 
distinct aspects" of the events that led to the killing of a 
journalist in a shootout during a visit to the area by Joe Slovo 
and Cyril Ramaphosa on 9 January. A "veritable arsenal" was 
found in the hostel at the center of this attack, and in this 
respect the police "appear to have failed the community. They 
should deal with problem hostels more effectively." But the 
African National Congress, ANC, "is not beyond reproach either. 
It did not ask for protection on Sunday, probably because of 
its well-known hostility towards the Internal Stability Unit, 
the only SAP [South African Police] presence in the area. Yet 
it now complains about the absence of the SAP. Mr Mandela went 
so far as to say that it was not relevant whether the ANC had or 
hadn't asked for protection. We beg to differ. If the ANC 
doesn't want the police around, it should not go marching into 
well-known trouble spots unprotected." 
<H6>  BUSINESS DAY </H6>
  Criticism of ANC Reaction to Katlehong Shooting -- 
Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY in English on 11 January in a page 4 
editorial says the potential victims of the shooting in 
Katlehong on 9 January, were Cyril Ramaphosa and Joe Slovo, and 
their "violent deaths would again have taken South Africa to the 
brink of disaster, and perhaps beyond. That, and the fact that 
photographer Abdul Shariff was killed and two other journalists 
injured, has shaken the renewed confidence that has developed 
since the signing of the constitution in November. Even more 
disturbing is that gun battles of this sort are almost daily 
events in that part of the East Rand, and in parts of Natal." 
BUSINESS DAY believes the ANC's reaction to the shooting "did 
little to support its argument that it is ready to govern. It 
instinctively sought a scapegoat and, as usual, the police were 
the obvious and easiest choice. Why, after all, should they not 
be everywhere all the time, even if their presence is often 
described by the ANC as provocative rather than helpful?" 
BUSINESS DAY further wonders how the ANC would address the 
problem of violence. "Will it take harsh and ultimately 
ineffective security action against the `enemy' -- such as the 
Inkatha-supporting hostel dwellers -- while leaving alone the 
gangsters acting in the name of the ANC among the self-defence 
units? The threatening parallels with National Party rule are 
not encouraging." 
<H6>  SOWETAN </H6>
  Katlehong `No-Go Zone' for Media -- "The death of 
photographer Abdul Shariff at the hands of faceless killers in 
Katlehong on Sunday is a stark reminder of the frontline role 
media workers have assumed at this stage," notes a page 6 
editorial in Johannesburg SOWETAN in English on 11 January. It 
seems to SOWETAN that "there is an attempt to create no-go zones 
for the media in these areas, apparently so that the mayhem in 
the hapless communities of the East Rand, will continue without 
the prying eyes of the media. Media workers must not allow that 
to happen." 
<H6>  CITY PRESS </H6>
  Call for ANC To Control Self-Defense Units -- Johannesburg 
CITY PRESS in English on 9 January in a page 14 editorial finds 
it "galling" that those responsible for the latest round of 
killings in Katlehong and Thokoza are members of the 
self-defense units, SDU's, "structures which were created for 
the specific purpose of curbing violence in the townships." "No 
one can deny that some SDU members are involved in violence. 
But if the police were doing their job efficiently, and some of 
them were not colluding in the violence as several respectable 
organisations have alleged, there would be no need for SDUs." 
"For too long the ANC has been shirking its responsibilities 
instead of clamping down on the culprits by subscribing to the 
fiction that the SDUs were not their creation. With uncertainty 
looming ahead, disbanding the SDUs once a national peace-keeping 
force has been established may not be a solution. What is needed 
is for senior ANC members to take control of them so that its 
actions are monitored." 
<H6>  ILANGA </H6>
  SADTU, Cosas Promises -- Durban ILANGA in Zulu for 10-12 
January in a page 4 editorial notes: "The promises by the 
teachers' union, the South African Democratic Teachers Union, 
SADTU, and the student organization, the Congress of South 
African Students, Cosas, to make this year a trouble-free one 
for the education process must be commended and supported by 
everyone who favors progress in the education field. We trust 
that this means that right from the beginning of the year school 
pupils can go back to being just exactly that, school pupils. 
We trust also that they will now desist from playing principal 
and taking on themselves the task of registering pupils and 
hiring and firing teachers." "We repeat, that this is a good 
thing, indeed, that is being promised by these student and 
teacher organizations, but we need to know the details of just 
what they are promising." "We also say that you parents should 
stand up for your rights as parents to see to it that your 
children do not become pawns in the games of the ruthless right 
under your noses. Let us as a nation take these promises 
seriously and make sure that they are fulfilled." 

