Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial by Philippe Reinhard] </F>
  [Text] The trade unions and parties of the Left are back in 
business. This is good news for the quality of democratic 
debate. A country with no opposition is like a person suffering 
from partial paralysis. But you have to be pretty cynical to 
tap into the despair of the country's youth in this way after 
having failed to respond to their questions and their needs 
during 10 years in power. 
  The 813,000 unemployed young people between the ages of 18 
and 24 -- including 80,000 with qualifications of no use in the 
labor market -- have good reason to blame their elders, and most 
certainly the government of the day. However, it is primarily 
due to the Socialists that they are so numerous, because it was 
the Left which allowed state education to fall into its present 
sorry state. The tens of thousands who took to the streets on 
Saturday had picked the wrong target in denouncing the first 
government which has made any attempt to tackle the difficult 
problem of youth unemployment. 
  The government would, however, be making a serious mistake 
if 
it did nothing but denounce its predecessors. It is in power 
today precisely because the country sought to punish the 
Socialists. Now, one year later, it is perfectly reasonable to 
demand an explanation from those who govern. The criticism from 
the opposition is perfectly valid, but the Majority has the 
means to defend itself provided it does not indulge in internal 
quarrels. The matter of the CIP [Youth Vocational Training 
Contract] has shown that solidarity within government ranks was 
fragile to say the least. 
  The problems of the government seem to be providing fuel for 
the prime minister's rivals. The same mistakes are being 
repeated which, on two occasions already, have resulted in the 
defeat of the parliamentary Right. The leaders of the RPR 
[Rally for the Republic] and the UDF [Union for French 
Democracy] seem to be concerned only with fighting Balladur. 
Votes in Parliament and claims of solidarity -- when openly 
discovered trying to trip up their colleagues -- change nothing. 
The voters have quite clearly understood that the battle for 
the crown is being waged once again. The refusal to clearly 
support Matignon [prime minister's office] on the CIP issue 
shows the ulterior motives of the politicians. 
  This attitude is suicidal in two respects. On the one hand, 
the credibility of potential presidential candidates of the 
Right would not benefit from the declining popularity of the 
prime minister (who remains the best-placed candidate for the 
Elysee [presidential office). The government would also be very 
mistaken to believe that it is assured of victory in 1995. The 
Socialists will no doubt not do very well in the European 
elections. But too damaging a failure for Rocard -- openly 
desired, and perhaps soon to be organized by a section of the 
Left, and by the Elysee -- could result in him dropping out of 
the presidential race to Jacques Delors' benefit. This would 
greatly complicate the job of the candidates of the Right. 

