Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Henri Emmanuelli, Socialist Party official </F>
and former president of the National Assembly, by Joseph 
Mace-Scaron; place and date not given: "Henri Emmanuelli: `The 
Scarcity Theory'"] 
  [Text] In the opinion of the former president of the 
National Assembly, "the right has revived the thesis of an 
adjustment of the workweek" in order to "put a good face on 
social regression that is without precedent." 
  The Socialist Party [PS] has again taken the offensive on 
the 
question of employment and the adjustment of the work week. 
Henri Emmanuelli hopes that the coming special convention to 
deal with the subject of employment will undertake a critical 
analysis of the free enterprise system. 
  [Mace-Scaron] In organizing a convention on employment--and 
in particular, on the question of the 32-hour work week--isn't 
the PS attempting to reclaim title to a thesis of which it had 
been dispossessed? 
  [Emmanuelli] The PS is not holding a convention to discuss 
the 32-hour work week--which is only one issue among many 
others--but to discuss the problem of employment, which is the 
central problem of our developed democracies. To speak of 
employment necessarily implies that we are speaking of economic 
policy. For my part, I do not see how we can deal seriously 
today with the unemployment problem without undertaking a 
critical analysis of the free enterprise system. How long are we 
going to feign ignorance of the fact that this system--which 
simultaneously produces wealth and exclusion--is headed straight 
for the rocks? 
  [Mace-Scaron] Haven't the 32-hour threshold and the 
consequent loss of wages distorted the debate concerning the 
workweek and workplace? 
  [Emmanuelli] Reducing the hours of work is one of various 
methods for reducing unemployment, but it is not a miraculous 
method. It is also a method for redistributing the wealth 
produced. It is, after all, a question of social well-being. By 
its proposal to reduce the workweek to 32 hours with a 
corresponding reduction in wages, the right has revived the 
thesis of a reduction in the workweek with the aim of 
incorporating it into a program of generalized wage deflation. 
It is using this thesis to construct a theory of scarcity, 
whereby in order to reduce unemployment all that is necessary is 
to "incorporate" more wage earners into the work force without 
increasing the total amount of wages paid. The right is putting 
forward this kind of proposal in a renewed effort to put a good 
face on the unprecedented social regression that we are 
currently experiencing. 
  [Mace-Scaron] A shorter workweek used to result in increased 
access by wage earners to goods and services. Today, however, 
isn't it instead a true-false solution for the failures in the 
labor market? 
  [Emmanuelli] Absolutely. In the opinion of the right--which 
has not changed its way of thinking in a century--unemployment 
is caused by the cost of labor. In the hope of lowering the cost 
of labor, the supply of jobs is increased. This theory has never 
worked, and because it reduces income from wages, it also 
intensifies the crisis with respect to consumption. Not only 
will the wage earners lose purchasing power, but lowering their 
living standards will intensify the economic deflation and 
thereby generate unemployment, reducing to naught the sacrifice 
of the men and women who--when they agreed to a wage cut--might 
have imagined that they were "sharing" jobs. 
  [Mace-Scaron] How can you explain the great reticence 
displayed by the social partners in this debate? How can you 
carry out reform if you are unable to negotiate compromises at 
the most appropriate level--the level of the business enterprise? 
  [Emmanuelli] I believe that most of the labor union 
organizations have clearly expressed their opposition to wage 
cuts in any form. If others are undecided, they should be wary 
of the fact that "job sharing" at the level of each individual 
enterprise--where this strategy is understandable as an effort 
to cope with local pressures--will be translated into a disaster 
at the macroeconomic level. How can you justify cutting wages 
when unemployment continues to increase and the other categories 
of income are flaunting their insolent prosperity? For this is a 
fundamental point: except for a few variations, overall wealth 
has continued to grow, with the GNP increasing from 6 trillion 
francs in 1986 to more than 7.4 trillion today. France has not 
become poorer, as some would have you believe, or as others are 
pretending to believe. 
<H5>  Neo-Molletism </H5>
  [Mace-Scaron] Is it not true that the debate on the left is 
between those who believe that it is no longer possible to take 
action "except at the margin," on the one hand, and those who 
believe that a clean break with the status quo is necessary? 
  [Emmanuelli] I believe so. There has been no open debate, 
but 
rather a "repressed" debate, for the moment, between those who 
seek solutions within the framework of the free enterprise 
system and those who believe that there can be no genuine 
solution for unemployment unless that system is seriously called 
into question and subjected to a "radical critique" with the aim 
of developing an alternative model. It should be a critique not 
of the market economy--which has demonstrated its value--but 
rather of the inability of the free enterprise system to 
redistribute the wealth produced, to protect the environment, 
and to organize society for the benefit of the greatest number; 
and it should also deal with the dangers inherent in the 
doctrine of free trade. 
  [Mace-Scaron] By adopting a harsh tone toward the government 
and then putting forward "soft" [preceding word in English] 
proposals, is not the PS being waylaid by a manifestation of 
neo-Molletism [reference is to the late Guy Mollet, Socialist 
leader and prime minister in 1956-57]? 
  [Emmanuelli] I do not believe that the PS has taken a harsh 
tone toward the government. In my humble opinion, it is instead 
having difficulty freeing itself from its administrative 
reflexes and positioning itself as a genuine opposition force. 
In the context of an obvious process of social regression, its 
critiques are not always readable or coherent. I believe it is 
more in danger from "technocratism" than from neo-Molletism. It 
must not confuse the esteem of its peers with the confidence of 
the larger society, which remains to be won. 
  [Mace-Scaron] Isn't the PS tempted to reestablish an 
identity 
based on the issue of the repeal of the Falloux Law rather than 
on the duration of the workweek? 
  [Emmanuelli] The two are neither contradictory nor 
incompatible. The desire of the right to reopen the school 
controversy in a heavy-handed manner, as it has done, is a 
useless and stupid provocation in a country that has 3.3 million 
unemployed and whose national debt has grown 25 percent in one 
year, and it deserves a response. As for adjusting the hours of 
work, it is--I repeat--only one of the methods for combating 
unemployment. The real issue is the redistribution of the wealth 
produced, in order to finance social inclusion--if possible, 
through the instrumentality of work. It is obvious to me that 
the PS cannot be absent from the debate on either of these two 
issues. 

