BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of "Policy Statement of the Government of the Slovak </F>
Republic," approved by the National Council of the Slovak 
Republic on 13 April] 
  [Text] 
<H8>  Policy Statement of theGovernment of the Slovak </H8>
Republic 
<H8>  Introduction </H8>
  The coalition government, sworn in on 16 March 1994 in 
accordance with the Constitution, is presenting to the National 
Council its policy statement in order to seek the confidence of 
the supreme legislative body of the Slovak Republic. The 
government came into being on the basis of a decision made by 
this parliament, and its six-month term of office must be seen 
within the context of domestic political developments since 1992. 
  The government assumed responsibility for the country's fate 
under exceedingly difficult conditions of the development of our 
young state, which is undergoing an extensive political, 
economic, and spiritual transformation. 
  One of the basic aims of the preceding government was to 
wind 
up the emancipation process and gain for Slovakia the status of 
an entity under international law. It became apparent that, in 
view of the outcome of the 1992 elections in the Slovak Republic 
and the Czech Republic, the fulfillment of this aim was possible 
only through the partition of the CSFR and the founding of two 
independent states. Today it is evident that the Government of 
the Slovak Republic was not sufficiently prepared for this step, 
which manifested itself in improvisation in tackling many 
serious problems of society in the process of the founding of 
the independent state. The gradual rise of authoritarian 
management led to the escalation of social tension and to 
disintegrative tendencies not only within the government and 
within the ruling parliamentary majority, but also in many 
spheres of social life, which increasingly rendered it 
impossible for other political entities to effectively 
participate in political decisions. 
  The Slovak Republic's efforts at integration into democratic 
European structures were harmed by inappropriate statements 
about the foreign policy orientation of the republic as well as 
about some issues regarding national minorities and ethnic 
groups. 
  A dangerous phenomenon, which had been introduced into 
political life by the ruling power, was the confrontational 
manner of political communication and its low standard. The 
solution of personal conflicts among politicians and individual 
parties through the mass media discouraged a considerable 
segment of the population from participating in political life, 
particularly those citizens who are interested more in specific 
results than in political squabbling, demagogy, or populism. 
  By slowing down the transformation process, lack of concept 
in its economic policy, particularly lack of dovetailing of its 
instruments, by delaying solutions, but also by an unrealistic 
assessment of the starting macroeconomic position of the Slovak 
Republic's independence and by insufficient preparations for the 
independent existence of the Slovak economy, by politicizing 
economic problems, deferring the transformation of the social 
sphere, failing to deal with the complicated situation in the 
company sphere, giving insufficient support to the development 
of the entrepreneurial sphere, and failing to ensure political 
and economic stability inevitable for the entry of foreign 
investors, the government greatly contributed to the unfavorable 
development of the Slovak economy in the years 1992-93. GDP and 
industrial production dropped. The growth rate of consumer 
prices more than doubled in 1993, compared with 1992, 
unemployment and regional differences in unemployment levels 
rose, and the indebtedness of the government sector drastically 
increased. The social cost of transformation inordinately 
increased in 1992-93 and the social situation of the population 
further deteriorated. The ruling power was not competent enough 
to halt and reverse the unfavorable development, for which it 
bears its share of responsibility. 
  Those were the main reasons for the passage of a vote of no- 
confidence in the ex-prime minister by the National Council of 
the Slovak Republic and the subsequent departure of the whole 
government. In this context, attention needs to be drawn to the 
fact that the refusal by members of the preceding government and 
state secretaries to remain in office until the appointment of a 
new government was unusual and in contravention of practices 
that are customary in democratic states. 
  By its subsequent decision to shorten the electoral term, 
parliament at the same time defined the present government's 
term of office. 
  During its term of office, this government wants to restore 
confidence in the highest constitutional bodies and lay 
foundations for a permanent democratic execution of state power 
based on tolerance, consensus, and a businesslike exchange of 
opinions. 
  The government must, and wants, to govern on the basis of a 
broad political consensus among forces that assess many problems 
differently from their party positions. Our ability to display 
this consensus in today's immensely difficult situation, 
particularly economic situation, and to apply this consensus in 
practice will be to the benefit of the broadest spectrum of our 
citizens. Only by achieving this consensus and by such a 
crystallization of views can we gradually start working on 
Slovakia's development strategy, a call for which was made by 
President Michal Kovac in his report on the state of the 
republic. 
  We will continue all the positive steps taken by the 
previous government. We regard our most important tasks to be 
stabilizing the political, economic, social, and security 
situation in Slovakia, preparing the elections and important 
conceptual documents and legislative norms, and warding off 
collapse in health care, education, culture, and the judiciary. 
We will continue putting the finishing touches to the shaping 
of a state based on the rule of law and will complete the 
drafting of basic documents pertaining to the security and 
defense policies of the Slovak Republic. With regard to foreign 
relations, we want to effectively defend the foreign political 
interests of our state and tackle existing problems in a 
professional way. 
  Although the government's program has been worked out for a 
period of six months, it is based on longer-term development 
targets. On this basis, the government also wants to initiate 
new dynamizing elements [dynamizujuce prvky], regardless of the 
fact that their effects will make themselves felt only after the 
present government's mandate expires. 
  The government undertakes to speed up economic 
transformation, which is a prerequisite of an efficient economy, 
and to raise the standard of living on this basis. 
  We will devote maximum efforts to bringing about 
macroeconomic stability, which we consider to be an important 
condition of further development. We want to achieve this by 
means of a prudent budget policy and by coordinating our policy 
with the monetary policy of the Slovak National Bank. 
  On questions of principle of economic policy, the government 
will proceed so as to win trust at home and abroad. It will 
focus, in particular, on creating a favorable entrepreneurial 
environment for domestic and foreign entities, a transparent and 
energetic privatization, and on combining foreign economic 
policy with stabilizing measures in the crucial sectors of the 
economy. 
  The government's intention in the social sphere is to speed 
up its transformation and to abandon state paternalism in favor 
of citizens' responsibility while retaining the principle of 
social solidarity and state guarantees where essential. 
  Within the framework of an active employment policy, we will 
concentrate on solving the problems of the most severely 
affected regions and micro-regions. 
  We want to pursue our activities in such a way as to halt 
the 
process of anarchy in social life and the moral decline of 
society. 
  This government is a coalition government, composed of 
political entities from various parts of the political spectrum. 
The coming together of such heterogeneous entities in one 
government does not occur often in history. It is at times when 
the foundations of society's functioning and of democracy are 
threatened that diverse political entities raise common interest 
above their particular interests. We are of the opinion that 
Slovakia finds itself in such a situation at present. 
  The political entities participating in this government are 
convinced that their main task is to help solve the present 
critical period in Slovakia's development, calm the emotions 
that are running high, and contribute to the holding of 
democratic elections. They will do everything they can to 
maintain the established consensus. 
<H8>  Risks of the Starting Position of the Economy </H8>
  In 1993, the first year of the existence of the independent 
Slovak Republic, the development of the economy deteriorated 
once again, particularly in the first half of the year. This 
was caused by the previous government's lack of concept in 
preparing the independent existence of the Slovak economy, gross 
shortcomings in its economic policy, and the slowing down of the 
transformation process and privatization, in particular. 
  This found expression in another decline of real GDP by 4.1 
percent, in a decline of industrial production by 13.5 percent, 
and in a drop of construction output by almost one-fourth. 
  The conditions of internal and external balance 
substantially 
deteriorated compared with 1992. The deficit of the state 
budget, which increased to 23 billion Slovak korunas [Sk] (6.8 
percent of GDP), not only contributed to further price growth 
but, by siphoning off credit resources, also had an extremely 
adverse influence on the development of the entrepreneurial 
sphere. The increase in the budget deficit was accounted for, 
apart from the decline in GDP, also by shortcomings in preparing 
the introduction of the new system of taxation and insurance. 
  In spite of the Sk's devaluation, exports declined sharply 
(11.5 percent compared with 1992), while imports grew at a 
relatively rapid pace (15.4 percent), which resulted in a Sk26.7 
billion deficit in the foreign trade balance. 
  At the same time, the clearing account registering trade 
with 
the Czech Republic showed a deficit of Sk5.8 billion, which, 
while representing an extraordinary boost to budget revenues in 
1993, aggravated, on the other hand, the starting position for 
budget management in 1994. 
  The starting position of the state budget for 1994 is also 
made worse by the unresolved liabilities of public sector 
branches -- health care, transportation, education, and others 
-- which were not included in the 1993 state budget deficit. 
These represent an additional burden of more than Sk6 billion 
for the 1994 budget. 
  As a result of deficit financing, which assumed unrestrained 
dimensions toward the end of 1993, the net debt indebtedness of 
the government sector rose to Sk60.0 billion. This substantially 
increased the debt servicing burden for the state budget in 1994 
and the subsequent years. 
  The price level went up 23.2 percent in 1993, more than 
double the 1992 price growth. 
  The unfavorable development of the Slovak economy in the 
years 1992 and 1993 also found expression in growing 
unemployment and in the social situation of the population. By 
the end of 1993, the rate of unemployment increased to 14.4 
percent. 
  The preceding government did not take resolute steps to 
stabilize the conditions for the development of the 
entrepreneurial sphere and in support of its development. This 
was reflected in another increase in the number of companies 
operating at a loss, the proportion of which reached 57.5 
percent by the end of 1993, with their aggregate loss amounting 
to Sk42.5 billion. This further aggravated companies' inability 
to pay their bills and acted as a brake on monetary flows. 
  Our predecessors are accountable for the, by international 
standards, low inflow of foreign investments, primarily because 
they failed to ensure essential political and economic stability 
and because the government's low credibility deterred foreign 
investors. This is reflected in the fact that the overall volume 
of foreign investments reached only Sk10.8 billion by the end of 
1993, which was Sk4.2 billion more than at the end of 1992, but, 
when Czech investors' capital is subtracted, the increase 
represented only Sk3 billion. The inflow of foreign capital had 
a declining tendency in the course of 1993. 
  As transpires from the aforesaid, we are taking over the 
economy in a situation when negative trends -- particularly the 
drop in GDP, the decline of production in industry, 
construction, and agriculture, the growth of unemployment, the 
growth of social costs, and the like -- culminate. We are 
convinced that this situation can be changed. However, this 
requires a change of economic policy. We are putting forward 
the aims and instruments of a new policy, realizing that during 
this government's term of office the results of this policy can 
be reflected in the economy only partially. 
<H8>  Basic Economic Intentions and Targets </H8>
  In contrast to the preceding government's program, our 
program proceeds from the longer-term aims of the Slovak 
economy's development. On this basis, during our term of 
office, we want to lay the foundations for new dynamizing 
elements, regardless of the fact that their effects will make 
themselves felt only later. At the same time, we will try to 
achieve that the transformation process does not slow down and 
that the attainment of the targets of economic policy for 1994 
is not jeopardized. 
  The government's unequivocal intention is to speed up the 
embarked-upon process of transforming the economy and ownership 
relations, in particular. We will set the process of 
privatization in motion again, with respect to which we will 
return to the tried-and-tested method of coupon privatization, 
which had in the past won citizens' trust. We regard successful 
transformation as the prerequisite for the development of a 
modern and efficient economy that will enable the Slovak 
Republic to join the league of economically advanced countries 
and to raise the living standards of the population. We pledge 
to retain the social tolerability of transformation. We will 
conduct social dialogue to achieve generally acceptable 
solutions in the interest of maintaining social peace. We will 
devote particular attention to the socially weakest strata of 
the population. 
  The government wants to implement the basic aims of economic 
policy arising from the Memorandum on Economic Policy for 1994. 
In view of our starting position, great risks are associated 
with the attainment of those targets. We will prepare measures 
to alleviate those risks. Apart from short-term fiscal measures 
that will contribute to the attainment of 1994 macroeconomic 
targets, we place emphasis, above all, on measures that will 
help break through the unfavorable tendencies in the development 
of the Slovak economy and lay foundations for the renewal of 
economic growth. 
  The government realizes that at the root of the development 
of society lie the initiative and responsibility of every 
individual and every economic and noneconomic organization. The 
government's task is to act as the catalyst of this initiative. 

<H8>    Points of Departure of Macroeconomic Policy </H8>
  The government considers macroeconomic stability to be one 
of 
the basic features determining the development of the Slovak 
Republic's economy. The attainment of this stability is 
conditional on the implementation of prudent budget, tax, wage, 
price, subsidies, and customs policies. To achieve the common 
macroeconomic targets regarding internal and external balance, 
the government considers it essential to coordinate its 
macroeconomic policy with the monetary policy of the Slovak 
National Bank, while respecting its independence. This means 
drawing as close as possible in 1994 to zero-growth of GDP, 
maintaining price growth in the range of 10 to 13 percent, 
keeping unemployment under the 17 percent limit, and meeting the 
commitment [not further specified, referring possibly to the 
commitment to keep budget deficit under 4 percent of GDP as 
recommended by the IMF] in budget management. We envisage a 
growth of net foreign exchange reserves, with a view to 
maintaining the internal convertibility of the [Slovak] currency 
and a surplus in the balance of payments. The government will 
seek to obtain a standby credit from the IMF in order to 
maintain macroeconomic stability. 
  In budget policy, the government will focus on closing the 
unfavorable budget management for 1993 and the preceding years. 
It will have to resolve the high deficit of the state budget for 
1993 bequeathed to it by the previous government. 
  To prevent the situation of 1993 from recurring, the 
government will focus in 1994 on securing revenues for the state 
budget. It will implement measures to mobilize budget resources 
and, in strictly defined cases, reduce budget expenditures and 
will strive, in general, to bring about order in finances. It 
will adopt measures to prevent tax evasion, reduce outstanding 
tax arrears, unblock claims abroad, and address the issue of 
debts stemming from the pre-1993 period. 
  During its term of office, the government will prepare the 
draft state budget for 1995. 
  We have inherited an unintelligible and inefficient system 
of 
taxation, customs, and insurance and will prepare specific 
proposals to improve this system. 
  While implementing wage policy, we will attend to it, in 
enterprises with dominant participation by the state, that wages 
serve as a sufficient incentive for individual initiative. At 
the same time we will see to it that the disproportion between 
the growth of wages and the development of labor productivity 
does not increase. 
  We will establish conditions for a more extensive 
utilization 
of the financing of development targets from foreign resources. 
At the same time we want to make transparent the existing 
system of obtaining foreign credits and assessing their 
effectiveness. We will therefore tighten the criteria governing 
the assumption of liabilities vis-a-vis foreign partners. We 
consider it essential that every credit taken abroad should 
establish prerequisites for its repayment and strengthen the 
economic position of the Slovak Republic. 
<H8>  Macroeconomic Policy </H8>
  The government will adjust macroeconomic policy with a view 
to attaining its macroeconomic targets. Without bringing about a 
fundamental turnabout in the company sphere, we will not only 
fail to achieve the set macroeconomic targets, but the 
unfavorable tendencies will continue to intensify. The 
government's attention will center on speeding up the 
commercialization [komercionalizacia] and transformation of 
state enterprises in terms of ownership in order to finally 
resolve the institutional vacuum, in which companies have found 
themselves in the last four years and to shorten the intolerably 
long pre-privatization agony of companies. With respect to 
commercialized state enterprises, the government will make use 
of the motivating function of managerial contracts and will 
limit its interference to rigid financial control. 
  By its economic policy the government will establish 
prerequisites for eliminating the causes of the intolerable 
growth of company indebtedness and will take specific steps in 
the legislative sphere, and to secure the course of court 
proceedings in commercial matters and bankruptcy proceedings, 
which will help speed up the financial restructuring of 
companies. It will speed up negotiations on obtaining a loan 
for restructuring the company and banking sphere (EFSAL). 
<H8>  Creation of Favorable EntrepreneurialEnvironment and </H8>
Support for theDevelopment of the Private Sector 
  The basic prerequisite and impulse for the desirable 
development of enterprise is the stability of the 
entrepreneurial environment and its ability to provide 
motivation. The government wants to establish a favorable 
entrepreneurial environment by means of macroeconomic measures, 
particularly fiscal and economic instruments, but mainly by 
means of measures in tax, customs, and social policy and by 
improving the legislative framework. 
  We will also orient our efforts toward improving the 
competitive environment and finalizing the system, and 
intensifying the activity, of institutions charged with 
promoting the development of businesses, such as the National 
Agency for the Support and Development of Small and Medium-Sized 
Businesses, consultancy centers, Slovenska Zarucna Banka [Slovak 
Guarantee Bank], and the like. In this process we will 
cooperate with entrepreneurs' associations and with the Slovak 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry. 
  We regard a strong private sector, operating on the basis of 
market principles and private ownership, as the source of Slovak 
economic prosperity. Therefore, we want to expeditiously 
eliminate obstacles and restrictions to the development of the 
private sector in the legislative and administrative spheres and 
help tackle the financial prerequisites for the further 
development of private entrepreneurial activities. 
  We will support private activities even in those sectors of 
public services that have until now been the exclusive domain of 
the state. 
  Foreign investment, which should help eliminate the acute 
shortage of capital, will represent one of the dynamizing 
elements of the economy. We want to create a stable and 
favorable entrepreneurial environment that will also be 
attractive to foreign investors and take specific steps to 
facilitate their becoming involved in the economy of the Slovak 
Republic. We will establish conditions to substantially improve 
and increase the flow of information to foreign investors and 
will give support to those, whose entry will accelerate the 
development of the economy. 
<H8>  Privatization </H8>
  One of the most serious causes of the intensification of 
negative tendencies in the development of the economy was the 
slowing down, and virtual halting, of privatization. Lack of 
concept compounded by lack of transparency and exceptionally 
hasty privatization in the closing days of the previous 
government's term of office have brought about loss of 
confidence in privatization among citizens. We consider it our 
priority to restore the confidence of citizens and foreign 
investors alike in the process of privatization in Slovakia. In 
this spirit we are taking measures to speed up the privatization 
process in such a way that, by the time the second wave of 
coupon privatization is concluded, more than one-half of all 
property in state ownership should be into private hands. At 
the same time we will establish conditions for effective control 
of privatization by the public. 
  The government will secure the equality of privatization 
methods and the equality of participants in privatization. It 
will consistently attend to making privatization transparent and 
will prevent political deformations of this process. In 
contrast to the preceding government, which considered coupon 
privatization a residual method and was deferring its 
preparation, this government will approach it as an equal method 
and, within the framework of its mandate, will also secure the 
commencement of the second wave of coupon privatization. 
Enterprises from all branches of the economy, including 
attractive investment opportunities, will be included in coupon 
privatization. Parts of property that were not privatized in 
the first wave will also be offered for sale by means of coupons. 
  We will speed up the realization of already prepared and 
undisputed privatization projects by means of standard methods. 
We will offer certain enterprises, or their parts, to domestic 
and foreign interested parties who will demonstrate their 
credibility and will submit the most interesting projects, 
interesting not only in financial terms, but also from the 
viewpoint of entrepreneurial plans. 
  In the near future, we will prepare a proposal in which we 
will specify our ideas about the extent, timetable, and methods 
of privatization in individual sectors of the economy. We want 
to cooperate with the National Property Fund on new foundations. 
We will strive to speed up the sale of shares in the National 
Property Fund's portfolio. We will work toward the National 
Property Fund exercising its ownership functions only passively 
in those companies in which there are important private 
shareholders. 
<H8>  Regional Policy </H8>
  Within the framework of the transformation process, we will 
also give consideration to regional aspects. On the basis of 
monitoring the situation in individual regions, we will support 
the program of their structural adaptation. The government 
regards as its long- term priorities, in particular, the 
creation of conditions for a balanced economic and social 
development of regions, a rational use of resources, 
environmental protection and ecological stability of the 
landscape, and a harmonious arrangement of economic and social 
functions on a given territory. It will also pay heed to the 
problem of migration from the countryside and the lagging behind 
of rural areas, to cross-border and international cooperation 
among region, and to the establishment of free-trade zones, 
business zones, science and technology parks, and the like. 

<H8>    Sectoral Policy </H8>
  The government will adopt economic stabilization measures 
that will convince not only our citizens, but also foreign 
countries of its readiness and ability to carry on the 
transformation of the economy and to gradually finalize the 
conditions for the Slovak economy's transition to a modern 
market economy integrated into European and global economic 
structures. 
<H8>  Industry, Construction, Trade, and Tourism </H8>
  The government's priority in industry will be, above all, 
raising the ability of Slovak products to compete. We consider 
support for the restructuring and revitalization of industrial 
companies to be the foundation of sectoral policy. We will 
speed up the privatization of arms companies, which was kept 
being delayed thus far, while at the same time securing the 
state's adequate participation so as to be able to preserve the 
strategic interests of defense and security. 
  In the sphere of energy, the government will draw up a 
proposal for the organization, restructuring, and gradual 
privatization of enterprises that are now in state ownership, 
providing for well-considered participation by foreign capital. 
Based on foreign experience, the government will proceed 
particularly circumspectly in the process of transforming and 
privatizing the energy sector in order to preserve the state's 
energy sufficiency. It will prepare regulatory measures to 
prevent unwarranted price increases in this sector. Our main 
target in the construction industry, apart from giving support 
to small entrepreneurs, will be to establish conditions for the 
utilization of our large-scale capacities to build transport 
infrastructure and complete unfinished apartments and energy 
projects. We will take the necessary steps to make possible the 
export of construction capacities. We will speed up 
negotiations on the completion of the Mochovce nuclear power 
plant. In the sphere of domestic trade, we will ensure the 
adoption of the Principles of State Consumer Policy, with a view 
to protecting the health, safety, and economic interests of 
consumers. 
  The preceding government did not make use of the dynamizing 
potentials of tourism for the development of the Slovak economy. 
In contrast to the preceding government, we will focus on the 
development of tourism with a view of increasing its share in 
the generation of new jobs, revitalizing individual regions, and 
increasing foreign exchange earnings. 
  We will speed up the privatization of companies engaged in 
tourism, will prepare the institutional framework for tourism 
promotion and a law on tourism, will intensify the promotion of 
Slovakia, and the like. 
<H8>  Transport, Communications, and Public Works </H8>
  In the sector of transport and communications, we will 
replace by pragmatic solutions the previous practice of 
unsuitable interventions and statements, which brought about 
stagnation in those areas and met with unfavorable response 
abroad. We will support the restructuring of the Railroads of 
the Slovak Republic and of enterprises of the Slovak Automobile 
Transportation as well as modernization projects in transport 
and communications, particularly the Telecommunications I and 
Telecommunications II projects for the renewal of the 
telecommunications network, for which the state will provide 
important guarantees. We will place emphasis on the efficient 
utilization of foreign credits. We will establish conditions 
for the development of combined transportation and will support 
the creation, and speed up the enforcement, of a competitive 
environment on the domestic and international haulage markets. 
In implementing state transport policy by means of foreign 
activities, we will closely cooperate with neighboring states in 
order to acquire funds for linking our transport network with 
the main European transport routes. 
  The government will draw up and submit to parliament for 
discussion, still during its term of office, a draft amendment 
to the Law on Railroads, a Bill on the Health Insurance of 
Railroad Employees and the Railroad Employees' Health Insurance 
Company, a Bill on Road Transportation, as well as a Bill on 
Telecommunications. 
  It will follow up on all legislative and preparatory work 
and 
all studies and blueprints aimed at the development of 
infrastructure in transportation, postal services and 
communications, and the institution of public works and will 
secure a more distinct progress of all those projects. 
  The need to take care of the citizens' housing situation was 
not fully appreciated in the preceding period. We will draw up, 
and will begin to implement, our own concept of housing policy, 
including the completion of unfinished apartments and 
infrastructure and amenities. We will initiate and speed up the 
launching of privatization of the housing stock and will 
initiate an increase of investments in the housing economy. We 
will clarify the legal framework regarding expropriation for 
projects in the public interest. 

<H8>    Agriculture </H8>
  In agriculture, the government will orient its activities 
toward meeting the basic strategic targets adopted by the 
National Council of the Slovak Republic. We consider 
agriculture to be one of our priorities. 
  Establishing the prerequisites for stabilizing agriculture, 
halting a further production decline, securing continuity of 
agricultural production, and ensuring conditions for its 
qualitative growth remain the primary tasks. We want to clarify 
the arrangement of property relations and claims in agricultural 
cooperatives, speed up the transformation of proprietary 
relations regarding land, particularly the privatization of 
state farms, and establish conditions for agricultural 
enterprises' faster adaptation to the new conditions. 
  In giving a final shape to the economic environment and a 
functioning market for agricultural products and food, the 
government will use economic and legislative instruments as well 
as organizational and institutional measures that conform with 
market principles. 
  Following up on the transformation of proprietary relations, 
we are planning a new organizational arrangement of the forest 
economy. The implementation of the program of remedial measures 
in forests damaged by pollutants will continue by drawing on 
domestic as well as foreign financial resources. 
  One of the most important tasks in water management is to 
ensure the supply of larger territorial entities with 
unobjectionable drinking water. The basic priority is the 
protection and economical use of water resources in conformity 
with the most demanding ecological criteria. The construction 
of the Malinec and Turcek water reservoirs will continue and 
support will be given to the construction of the Zilina 
hydroelectric power project. Special attention will be devoted 
to the quest for an agreement with Hungary on the operation of 
the Gabcikovo hydroelectric power project. 
<H8>  Development of the Financial Sector </H8>
  The government is interested in the formation of a 
competitive commercial banking sector. In the endeavor to 
contribute to this process, we will support measures designed to 
continue the privatization of banks, improve the banks' 
portfolio, and reinforce the banks' capital stock, including 
reinforcement from outside capital resources. One of the aims 
of this support is to significantly raise the level of Slovak 
banks' international acceptance and to integrate them into the 
international banking system as fully fledged members. 
  We will also devote attention to the expansion of insurance 
services mitigating entrepreneurial risks, particularly to 
insuring export credits. We will also give consideration to a 
system of insuring citizens' bank deposits and to the formation 
of credit cooperatives. 
  The government will finalize the establishment of conditions 
for a more intensive development of the capital market, which 
operates as an important means of allocating capital resources 
in the economy. In the process of developing the capital 
market, it will attend to ensuring its transparency, improving 
the legislative framework regulating its operation, and defining 
the status and extent of control functions, including the 
finalizing of a state supervisory body. 
<H8>  Foreign Economic Policy </H8>
  Some areas of foreign economic policy remained unresolved in 
the preceding period. Essential measures designed to protect 
the market in the transitional period, as well as exceptionally 
needed export- promoting measures, kept being delayed, which 
caused a further intensification of external disequilibrium and 
economic decline. 
  We will therefore strive, above all, to give finishing 
touches to export-promoting policy and to implement it 
across-the-board in order support the export potentials of 
Slovak companies. In justified cases we will also secure an 
adequate protection of the internal market. 
  We will project the conclusions of the bilateral and 
multilateral talks of the Uruguay Round of GATT into instruments 
of economic and trade policy. The preparation and 
implementation of international bilateral and multilateral 
agreements essential for the expansion of space for trade will 
be an integral part of trade policy. We will support the 
adoption and implementation of an agreement on shortening the 
transitional period and eliminating tariff and non- tariff 
obstacles to trade within the framework of the Central European 
Free Trade Agreement, while taking into consideration the 
specific situation in agriculture. We will support the 
development of mutual economic relations with the Czech Republic 
and other neighboring states. 

<H8>    Ecology and Economic Policy </H8>
  The successful transformation of our society is conditional 
also on respect for requirements for the protection and 
enhancement of a healthy environment. The government will 
therefore significantly reinforce the linkage between economy 
and ecology. 
  The principle of separating the protection of natural 
resources from their exploitation has not been conceptually 
resolved thus far, which generates a number of problems in 
practice. 
  The allocation of resources from the State Environmental 
Fund 
of the Slovak Republic has thus far respected, more or less, the 
importance of requirements and priorities at district level, 
while the importance of national priorities has not always been 
respected. This situation jeopardizes the possibility of funding 
from the resources of the State Environmental Fund nationwide 
priority projects and of positively evaluating other requests in 
the second round. 
  A great deal has been expected of the establishment of the 
Slovak Environmental Agency, but its activity needs to be 
consolidated. With the aim of preventing further environmental 
damage, we will strive for the speedy passage of a law on the 
assessment of the impact of operations on the environment and 
for the comprehensive completion of the legal system related to 
the environment, in a way that will make it compatible with the 
legal system in the European Union. 
  The Government of the Slovak Republic will define with 
greater precision and make more transparent individual 
government departments' powers regarding the use and protection 
of natural resources, particularly forests, water, and soil, 
while also paying heed to the rights of owners. 
  With a view to a rational utilization and protection of 
natural resources that are in state ownership, we will reassess 
the present system of fees for their exploitation. The 
government will harmonize the use of resources appropriated from 
the state budget in special-purpose state funds with the aim of 
a more efficient financing of environmental projects. At the 
same time, it will establish conditions for the transformation 
of the State Environmental Fund into a revolving fund [obratovy 
fond], in conformity with the principles of the market economy. 
<H8>  Social Sphere </H8>
  In the interest of continuity in the transformation of the 
social sphere, the government will continue ensuring the tasks 
of social policy. The government's intention is to abandon 
state paternalism in favor of citizens' responsibility. It 
wants to reinforce the citizen's personal participation in 
solving his social situation while retaining the principle of 
social solidarity and state guarantees where essential. The 
steps taken thus far came too late and were not always in 
harmony with the systemic and conceptual intentions laid down in 
1990, despite the preceding government's declared identification 
with those intentions. Insufficient attention was also devoted 
to the dovetailing of economic and social transformation, which 
led to an undesirable development in the social situation of the 
population. 
  The rate of unemployment reached almost 14.8 percent in 
February 1994, which represents almost 380,000 unemployed 
registered with labor offices. In February 1994, the rate of 
unemployment exceeded 20 percent in 14 districts, with the 
district of Rimavska Sobota reporting a rate of unemployment of 
26.7 percent. That the growth of long-term unemployment (the 
average period of registration of job applicants with labor 
offices) represented 229 days at the end of 1993), as well as 
the fact that, by the end of 1993, the category of young people 
under 25 represented almost one-third of all unemployed, must be 
regarded as a particularly negative phenomenon. 
  Apart from the growth of unemployment, the deterioration of 
the social situation and the living conditions of the population 
in 1993 was also caused by another increase in the cost of 
living, which went up 22.8 percent compared with the preceding 
year, and by a 2.6 percent decline of real earnings. 
Single-parent families, families with several children, and 
pensioners are the worst off. The proportion of households with 
children whose income in 1993 was lower than 1.5 times the 
subsistence minimum reached 61.9 percent, with 15.2 percent of 
households with children finding themselves below the 
subsistence level. The unfavorable social situation of citizens 
was tackled by means of the provision of welfare payments. A 
total of 239,000 recipients of these payments were registered in 
1993, more than 140,000 of whom were long-term unemployed. 
Welfare payments were collected by 8.6 percent of households 
with dependent children. 
  Taking the above facts into consideration, dovetailing the 
processes of economic and social transformation, abandoning 
state paternalism, and embracing citizens' responsibility will 
remain the basic approach in the social sphere, the target 
solution being a socially equitable acceptance of the citizen's 
personal participation, social solidarity, and state guarantees. 
  From the viewpoint of the situation in the sphere of 
employment, the government will reassess, on the basis of a 
thorough analysis of the labor market, the instruments of active 
employment policy, while respecting the demand that financial 
resources be spent rationally and effectively and while 
respecting the situation on regional labor markets. It will 
place particular emphasis on active employment policy, on 
reassessing the provision of material benefits also from the 
viewpoint of the gradual transfer of this care to the insurance 
system, as well as on expanding the possibilities for our 
citizens to assert themselves in the work process, and 
protecting the labor market, by means of bilateral contracts 
with other states. 
  Within the framework of the transformation of labor 
relations 
onto a new qualitative level corresponding to the conditions of 
a socially conform market economy, the government will continue 
working on the preparation of a new Labor Code and a new system 
of accident insurance and will tackle the status of civil 
servants. 
  The transformation of the existing systems of pension 
schemes, health insurance, state social payments, and welfare 
payments into systems of social insurance, state social support, 
and social assistance remains the government's basic conceptual 
intention in the sphere of social security. 
  From the viewpoint of topical tasks in the sphere of social 
security, we consider it necessary: 
  -- to tackle the issue of child allowances as the key form 
of 
state transfer payments for families with children, 
  -- to analyze the functionality of the National Insurance 
Company, 
  -- to create legislative foundations for a system of 
supplementary pension insurance, 
  -- to continue to gradually create conditions for humanizing 
the care of physically and mentally severely disabled persons 
and elderly citizens, with particular emphasis on the actual 
guarantee of their rights, 
  -- and to gradually establish conditions for the activity of 
nonstate entities in the social sphere. 
  In the sphere of social security, the government will 
respect 
all claims of citizens that are guaranteed by law. In 
accordance with this commitment, it will index [valorizovat] 
pensions and the subsistence minimum, as well as transfer 
payments whose level is calculated on the basis of the 
subsistence minimum, when the conditions set by law are met. We 
support dialogue with social partners on all matters pertaining 
to employment, labor relations, and social security with the aim 
of maintaining social peace. 
<H8>  Health Care </H8>
  The present unfavorable situation in health care results 
from 
the disrupted continuity of the 1992 health care reform and from 
the introduction of some incorrect systemic steps, compounded by 
a drastic cut in financial resources. 
  As of 31 December 1993, health care establishments reported 
unpaid bills of Sk1.8 billion, of which bills for medical drugs 
account for Sk1.2 billion. The remainder is made up of bills 
for energy, fuel, and food supplies and reconstruction and 
modernization projects. 
  Health care has found itself in a critical financial 
situation, as a consequence of which one can also speak about a 
high level of hidden indebtedness (which is estimated at Sk50 
billion). 
  In 1992, 17.1 billion Czechoslovak korunas were spent on the 
operation of health care facilities, in 1993 Sk16.2 billion, 
and, disregarding inflation and the introduction of systemic 
measures, the use of only Sk15.7 billion was projected for 1994. 
  The government's main aim in the sphere of health care will 
be to deal with the financial crisis taht directly threatens the 
provision of health care and slows down the transformation 
process. The following measures are inevitable to ward off an 
imminent collapse: 
  -- to quantify and specify the justified demands of health 
care on the state budget for 1993 and determine the method of 
settling the liabilities of health care facilities, 
  -- to find ways of alleviating the budget deficit in health 
care for 1994, 
  -- to carry out changes in the existing system of payments 
for health services. 
  Concurrently with the aforesaid inevitable measures, 
conditions will be established for systemic changes in key 
health care areas. 
  In the sphere of financing health care and health insurance, 
the government will strive to establish conditions to 
financially secure the provision of basic health care, support 
the development of the Health Insurance Fund, and secure its 
independent operation. 
  The system of assessing the value of health services 
introduced as of 1 October 1993 will have to be replaced by a 
new solution that will be more effective, simpler, less 
demanding administratively, and less costly. The new system 
will have to be prepared in a differentiated way, separately for 
individual types of health care providers. 
  In the near future, we will put forward draft laws on health 
care and on the protection of people's health. 
  Following up on the passage of the law on the protection of 
people's health, we will ensure in organizational terms the 
transformation of the institutes of public health and 
epidemiology into state health institutes. The government will 
update the National Health Support Program. 
  We will continue to privatize health care facilities, using 
publicly controllable criteria. In the course of April we will 
ensure the drafting and publication of conditions for the 
privatization of pharmacies and health spas. Changes in 
ownership must not jeopardize the therapeutic functions of 
natural springs and spas. A majority participation by the state 
in the privatization of key spa facilities is foreseen. By the 
end of June 1994, we will prepare documents for the 
privatization of primary health care establishments. 
  The government will work out an analysis of the present 
state 
and structure of health care establishments. In implementing 
structural changes, it will cooperate with the appropriate 
regional bodies of state administration involved in health care. 
  In connection with the implementation of essential changes 
to 
the existing system of payments for health services, the 
government will establish conditions for a solution to the wage 
conditions of health care employees. The government will ensure 
the drafting of a concept for the further education of medical 
staff. 
<H8>  School System, Education, and Science </H8>
  High educational and cultural standards of the population 
represent the basic source of a state's wealth. Advanced 
countries pursue the strategy of growth of investments into the 
sphere of education and science. In defiance of this worldwide 
trend, both the conceptual and the everyday issues regarding the 
development of education, science, and research have been 
neglected in our country of late. 
  The budget of the department of education and science has 
been cut by Sk2.795 billion over the last two years. The 
already low budget for 1994 is further reduced by a debt of 
Sk298 million stemming from the year 1993. The situation is so 
grave that, if education retained all its functions at the level 
of 1993, the budget resources allocated for education and 
science would be exhausted in the 9th month of 1994, even if the 
price level remained constant. The situation is compounded by 
the fact that no legal norms have been drawn up and introduced 
into practice that would make it possible to introduce 
progressive forms of management into schools and educational 
establishments. 
  As a result of the grim situation in the sphere of education 
and science, which is documented, for example, by the breakup of 
kindergartens, school catering, and school accommodation, the 
government will pay particular heed to ensuring a calm 
completion of the 1993/94 school year and preparation of the new 
1994/95 school year. 
  For this reason we consider writing off the 1993 debts of 
schools and educational establishments, adequately amending the 
state budget for education and science for 1994, and reassessing 
the existing structure of revenues and expenditures in the 
department of education to be unavoidable. We will explore 
additional sources of revenue at home and abroad. Our intention 
is to concurrently rationalize and make transparent the spending 
of financial resources in this sphere. With this in mind, we 
will work out principles to be used in drafting a law on 
financing schools. 
  The government regards as one of the decisive tasks the 
formulation of the republic's strategic interests in the sphere 
of education and training and the commencement of work on 
drafting the National Program of Education and Training. 
  We consider good primary schools to represent the foundation 
of the good work of the entire educational system. In addition 
to essential improvements in the contents and forms of primary 
education, we will work toward its gradual humanization and 
influence also out of classroom. A contribution to this should 
be made also by the drafting of the principles of a law on 
protecting and supporting youth, which should guarantee the 
physical and mental development of young people. 
  In the sphere of secondary schools, we will continue 
restructuring the network of schools and the system of fields of 
study and vocational training, with special regard for the 
changing conditions of the labor market. We will also devote 
attention to addressing the complex issue of specialized 
secondary schools. We will take the necessary steps to ensure 
an even development of education in areas inhabited by people 
with diverse mother tongues. We will guarantee the fulfillment 
of the right to the free choice of the language of instruction. 
We will guarantee to students of all nationalities conditions 
to master literary Slovak. 
  The government will ensure the drafting of the Concept of 
Developing University Education in the Slovak Republic Until the 
Year 2010 and the transformation of the existing system into a 
system that will flexibly react to the needs of the labor market 
and will be compatible with the system of education in the 
countries of the European Union. Based on experience from the 
implementation of the law on higher educational establishments, 
the government will establish prerequisite for the drafting of a 
new law or for amending the existing law. 
  While implementing school policy, we will give 
comprehensive support to further improvements in qualification. 
In view of the complicated economic situation of higher 
educational establishments, we will support their acquisition of 
funds from nonstate resources as well. 
  We want to consistently support the development of science 
and technology in the directions designated as priorities as an 
important prerequisite of economic, social, and cultural growth 
under the conditions of an unfolding market economy. We will 
submit to the National Council of the Slovak Republic for 
adoption a law on state support for science and technology. We 
will propose the establishment of the Slovak Republic State Fund 
for Science and Technology as well as an independent Slovak 
Republic Grant Agency for Science and Technology, which should 
help preserve and develop the intellectual base of the state and 
prevent academics and researchers from leaving universities and 
research institutes. The government will also ensure a regular 
and consistent process of mutual recognition [akreditacia] of 
universities and the research and development base. 
  Based on a realistic assessment of the present situation in, 
and standard of, physical education and sports, we want to 
establish the necessary institutional, legislative, and economic 
conditions for the development of physical education and sports, 
with emphasis on financing them from central sources through the 
medium of the State Physical Education Fund. By giving support 
to top-performance sports, we will contribute to the successful 
representation of the Slovak Republic in sports. 
  For the needs of public administration and division of 
powers 
between state administration and self-administrative bodies, the 
government will draft an optimal variant of management and 
administration of primary and secondary schools, providing for 
the gradual transfer of some of the powers of central bodies of 
state administration to local state administration and 
self-administrative bodies. We will seek to gradually transfer 
powers in the sphere of the economic management of preschool 
facilities to the administration of towns and communities, while 
retaining state guarantees for the contents of pre-school 
education and supporting the consolidation of preschool 
education as the basic element of the educational system. 
  In the effort to stabilize researchers and pedagogical 
staff, 
we want to create scope for the drafting of a proposal for the 
systemization [systemizacia] of university jobs and address the 
issue of university teachers' and researchers' salaries. With 
the aim of rationalizing and making more transparent the 
spending of financial resources in the sphere of education, we 
will work out principles to be used in drafting a law on 
financing education. We want to devote attention to the 
development of international cooperation in the sphere of 
education, science, and technology, with emphasis on the more 
distinct involvement of universities, the Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, and departmental research and development institutes 
in international cooperation programs. 
<H8>  Culture </H8>
  The government will draft a basic long-term strategy concept 
for developing culture under the conditions of the 
transformation of the economic and social system. It will also 
prepare a basic model of the organizational arrangement and 
financing of culture, a model that will ensure functional ties 
in the emerging market environment. 
  The government's basic aim is to establish legislative 
prerequisites for the transition from the central financing of 
culture toward providing incentives, and introducing 
preferences, for investments in this sphere. At the same time, 
it is necessary to retain the possibility of supporting 
directly, by means of the state-run PRO SLOVAKIA [as published] 
fund, those areas of culture in which the market instruments do 
not assert themselves. We will support the drafting of an 
analysis of the functioning of this fund, with emphasis on the 
attainment of the expected targets and its position [sentence as 
published]. 
  We will continue our efforts to finalize the legislative, 
political, and social scope for the functioning of media at the 
level of the European standard. The law on the mass media, now 
in preparation, and the law on economic support for the 
periodical press will lay the groundwork for this. 
  We want to continue supporting the activity of churches and 
develop cooperation with them on the basis of partnership. The 
present good relations will have to be put on a legislative 
footing corresponding to the standard customary in the advanced 
democratic states of Western Europe. 
  The difficult financial situation in culture is also a 
result 
of indebtedness and of the failure to commence the privatization 
of cultural facilities. This is true, in particular, of the 
Slovak Film Production company, which loses Sk40 million 
annually. The required settlement of debts is often being 
ensured through the sale of property. In this regard, it is 
necessary to speedily privatize the film studios of Slovak Film 
Production. 
  We consider it essential to finally resolve the problems of 
privatization in the sphere of culture, particularly of entities 
involved in the publication of books and in cinematography. 
  Complicated problems arise from the failure to approve the 
license for the second channel of Slovak Television. This issue 
will have to be resolved as soon as possible. 
  We want to make visible progress in dealing with short-term 
problems. This concerns financial and legislative provisions 
for the opening of the Kosice State Theater and the theater in 
Zvolen. It is also necessary to secure nonbudget funds to 
finance the completion of the National Theater. 
  An important task is to distribute financial resources for 
individual spheres of culture according to "cultural" and not 
political criteria. 
  Debts accumulated over the past few years complicate and 
limit the care of monuments, cultural values, and galleries. In 
contrast to past practices, an accommodating attitude and 
dialogue are necessary in financing local culture, some branches 
of culture, particularly graphic arts, music, and books, as well 
as the development of ethnic minorities' cultures. 
  One of the immediate tasks in the sphere of culture will be 
to make transparent the flow of finances into the development of 
ethnic minorities' cultures. In conjunction with this, it will 
be necessary to prepare legislative procedures for financing the 
culture of national minorities and ethnic groups while providing 
for direct control by representatives of minorities and ethnic 
groups. The government sets itself the task to improve, in 
cooperation with the Slovak Heritage Foundation, the moral and 
financial care of Slovaks living in areas where Slovak culture 
and the cultures of ethnic minorities exert influence on one 
another. 
  We will support talks with all artists' associations and 
seek 
common aims with them in the interest of developing Slovak 
culture. The implementation of this intention is also associated 
with limiting and, ultimately, eliminating the preferential 
treatment of certain groups at the expense of others. 
  We want to approach in a novel way the arrangement of 
relations with the Czech Republic regarding the exchange of 
objects and values of cultural heritage. 
  We set ourselves the task of working out a concept for the 
presentation of Slovak culture abroad. This concept must lay 
down guarantees ruling out the duality and degradation [dualita 
a degradacia] of the presentation of individual cultures of the 
Slovak Republic abroad. 
<H8>  Ethnic Policy </H8>
  The government considers it an important task to secure the 
rights of ethnic minorities, and to establish conditions for 
their fully fledged development, in the spirit of the 
Constitution of the Slovak Republic as well as ratified and 
transformed international agreements pertaining to the rights of 
citizens belonging to ethnic minorities. 
  We would like to achieve social consensus that will 
guarantee 
the stability and peaceful coexistence of all citizens of the 
Slovak Republic, regardless of nationality and the color of 
their skin. A prerequisite for this necessary consensus is the 
mutuality of rights and duties, combined with the civic 
principle. The government is prepared to provide all necessary 
guarantees of rights to persons belonging to ethnic minorities. 
  Instead of confrontation, we will introduce the mechanism of 
permanent dialogue as a method that promotes cooperation and 
seeks consensus in generating and exercising rights of citizens 
belonging to ethnic minorities. 
  We will resolve the issue of designation of the names of 
towns and communities. Following up on the valid legislation 
regarding citizenship and names and surnames, we will prepare a 
draft law on [birth and marriage] registers as well as a 
proposal for its execution by means of generally binding legal 
regulations. 
<H8>  State, Democracy, Law, and Public Order </H8>
  The government will continue building a state based on the 
rule of law and a modern legal system. It will support all 
positive processes leading to the formation of a democratic 
environment and the rule of law, particularly in the sphere of 
enhancing guarantees of citizens' rights and freedoms, 
reinforcing the independence and improving the efficiency of the 
judiciary, and strengthening compliance with the Constitution 
and legal guarantees by means of control by the courts. On the 
other hand, it expects all citizens of the Slovak Republic to 
fulfill their constitutional civic duties, which is an important 
prerequisite of eliminating instances of ultra-nationalism, 
irredentism, and separatism. 
  We consider it important that all necessary conditions be 
established for reinforcing the key elements and links of the 
constitutional form of government, that is, parliamentary 
republic, with emphasis on the government's constitutional and 
political accountability to parliament. Our task is to 
continue decentralizing the state by devolving the appropriate 
powers to community and regional self-administrative bodies and 
reinforcing the self-regulation of the civic society's life. 
The economic reform is also a reform of the state and must 
reduce the state's interference in the economy and the state's 
"redistribution" functions. 
  The government's intention in this sphere is to concurrently 
support the idea of constitutionalism [konstitucionalizmus], 
that is, the stability of the Constitution and its supremacy 
over the parliament, government, president, the Constitutional 
Court, the judiciary at large, and the civic society. 
  In building a state based on the rule of law, we will 
explore the possibilities of introducing the institution of the 
ombudsman and improving the system of protecting the legal 
status of citizens. 
  The government will seek to eliminate shortcomings in state 
administration, reflected in the passivity of state agencies, 
procrastination, and decisions running counter to the 
Constitution and laws. It will establish the prerequisites for 
transparency in the operation of state and self-administrative 
bodies. It will give comprehensive support to all institutions 
guaranteeing the protection of the Constitution, the democratic 
system, and the integrity and sovereignty of the state, and all 
instruments preventing the concentration of power, particularly 
state and economic power, in the hands of a single body or even 
in the hands of an individual. 
  We will take steps to transform government administration. 
Our aim is to improve the government's efficiency, reduce 
administrative costs, make transparent the activity of state 
agencies, establish prerequisites for professionalism and ethics 
in the work of the government administration, and change the 
style of the government's work. 
  We will support all efforts aimed at improving the quality 
of 
the activity of courts and at effectively enforcing their 
independent operation and status as well as their professional 
ethics. 
  The government will continue to implement the concept of 
stabilizing the judiciary of the Slovak Republic that was 
approved by the National Council of the Slovak Republic. By 
means of legislative proposals and organizational and financial 
measures, it will establish conditions for improving the quality 
and effective exertion of independent judicial power as an 
essential and equal branch of power in a democratic state based 
on the rule of law. 
  Amending and recodifying [rekodifikacia] laws pertaining to 
the judiciary will represent an organic part of purposeful steps 
leading toward the completion of the democratic legal system. 
  The government will submit the draft principles of laws on 
judges, the state administration of courts, and court executors, 
as well as a draft law that changes and amends the law on courts 
and judges. The government regards as particularly important 
the preparation of the draft principles of recodifying the Penal 
Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
  We want to continue creating conditions for establishing the 
office of the Slovak Republic's legal representative for 
proceedings before the European Commission for Human Rights and 
the European Court for Human Rights in Strasbourg. 
  The government will seek to further raise the functionality 
of local state administration and self-administrative bodies, 
strengthen their powers, and de-politicize local state 
administration. It will reassess the time frame for the 
implementation of the reform of public administration and the 
reform of the Slovak Republic's territorial and administrative 
division. 
  In implementing reform in public administration, we will 
devote special attention to the rational structure of local 
state administration bodies, to the devolution of powers from 
state administration to local self-administrative bodies, to the 
formation of self-administration in higher-level territorial 
entities, and to the problem of financial flows in this area. 
The sequence of pragmatic solutions will be determined so as to 
guarantee their continuity and so that it results in the 
proposal for a new territorial and administrative division of 
the Slovak Republic. 
  In implementing legal policy, the government will proceed 
from the long-term program of the Slovak Republic in combating 
crime, including effective prevention. It will complete the 
institutional framework for crime prevention within individual 
government departments. It will give support to all 
constitutional measures aimed at speeding up and facilitating 
preparatory procedures. 
  With the aim of limiting various forms of social pathology 
and crime, in particular, the government will prepare a draft 
law on combating the most serious, especially organized, forms 
of criminal activity and the legalization of income stemming 
from such activity. It will also complete, and soon submit [to 
parliament], proposals for extensive amendments to the Penal 
Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure, which will, at the same 
time, mark the first phase of changes to the criminal law codes. 
  The government will raise the effectiveness of the struggle 
against organized crime, including international organized 
crime, by means of close cooperation with foreign police forces 
and cooperation at the level of other bodies involved in the 
suppression of crime. 
  With regard to the prison system, the government will 
establish further norms to govern the serving of prison terms 
and will see to the creation of prerequisites for the employment 
of convicts. 
  The government will establish the prerequisites for a 
comprehensive system of protecting the state border against 
illegal migration. 
  Our immediate aim is not only to make public life more 
democratic, but also to strengthen public order and social 
responsibility for public affairs at the level of the community 
and the whole state. 
  In conjunction with the preparation of elections to the 
National Council of the Slovak Republic and community 
self-administrative bodies, the government will prepare and 
introduce the appropriate organizational, technical, and 
material measures, in harmony with the Constitution and laws. 

<H8>    Aims and Tasks in Legislation </H8>
  An important intention of the government is to strive for a 
functional and internally harmonious legal system, so that there 
are no discrepancies among individual legal norms, their 
compatibility with the European law is increased, and their life 
span extended. The government's aim in this area is to 
contribute to the stabilization of developments in the republic 
and to gradually establish a democratic, cooperative, and 
peaceful environment for building our state. In addition, the 
government will ensure the better orientation of citizens in the 
rapidly changing legal system of the republic. It will 
coordinate the entire process of the massive transformation of 
legislation to a far greater degree than has been the case thus 
far. 
  The passage of the amendment to the law on the organization 
of ministries and other central bodies of state administration, 
which the government pushed through in the National Council of 
the Slovak Republic immediately after its appointment, put an 
end to the provisional situation that arose in the wake of the 
transfer of the former federation's powers to the Slovak 
Republic. The passage of this law wound up the building of the 
institutions of the young state and established prerequisites 
for its operation as a law- governed state. 
  In the period running up to the September elections, the 
government will place emphasis, in the legislative sphere, on 
the establishment of basic legislative rules for the stable 
functioning of the state. 
  The key long-term task in the legislative sphere is to 
ensure 
the compatibility of our legal system with laws of the European 
Union. The implementation of this task is urgent also because, 
thus far, the Slovak Republic did not devote the appropriate 
attention to the fulfillment of this commitment, which arises 
from the association agreement concluded between the CSFR and 
the European Community. 
  It will be necessary to reexamine the compatibility of our 
legal regulations with the appropriate Council of Europe 
agreements to which the Slovak Republic is a contracting party, 
and to adopt measures necessary to meet the adopted commitments. 
It will also be appropriate to analyze those Council of Europe 
conventions to which the Slovak Republic is not a contracting 
party from the viewpoint of our possible accession to them. 
  With this in mind, the government is determined to prepare 
its legislative proposals so that the legal system of the Slovak 
Republic is brought closer to European law, in spirit as well as 
in contents. The government will establish conditions to raise 
the standard, and importance, of comparative legal studies. 
  The basic intentions in the legislative sphere proceed from 
the government's general intention to stabilize developments in 
the Slovak Republic and to establish conditions for the peaceful 
building of the state. 
  To make this possible, systemic prerequisites must be 
established for purity of public life. We are firmly determined 
to prepare and enforce in the National Council of the Slovak 
Republic a law on preventing conflicts of interest in the 
performance of duties, which would pertain to constitutional and 
higher-level state administration officials. This law will put 
an end to the practice of higher-level state officials 
collecting several salaries from the state and will render it 
impossible for state officials to exploit their post for illicit 
profits from entrepreneurial activity. We will prepare a law 
that will lay down the obligation to prove the origin of 
financial resources used in privatization. Only such systemic 
legislative provisions for the purity of public life can restore 
citizens' trust in their representatives in state bodies and in 
state institutions in general. The peaceful building of our 
republic would be impossible without this basic trust. 
  The government considers it important to improve conditions 
for the entrepreneurial sphere and for the operation of 
non-profit organizations. With this in mind, it will prepare a 
law on state support for small and medium-sized business, as 
well as a draft law on foundations and civic associations. 
  The rise in crime and, in particular, the emergence of new 
forms of crime, compel us to proceed energetically in this 
sphere. In the legislative sphere, this means expeditiously 
preparing and submitting a law on combating organized crime as 
well as amendments to the Penal Code and the Code of Criminal 
Procedure. In the principles of a new Penal Code and a new Code 
of Criminal Procedure, the government will formulate its 
fundamental plans for the future. 
  In its legislative activity, the government is prepared to 
meet also those international commitments that were assumed by 
the former government. 
  We attach extraordinary importance to the consolidation and 
stabilization of state administration. We want to submit to the 
National Council of the Slovak Republic a law on civil service 
that will make it possible to improve the execution of the state 
administration and to separate qualified staff from political 
functions. 
  The government's legislative activity will also extend to 
the 
preparation of new parliamentary rules of procedure and, 
possibly, to the improvement of legislative conditions for the 
parliamentary and communal elections in 1994. 

<H8>    The Security and the Defense of the State </H8>
  The government will complete principal documents regarding 
the concepts for Slovak Republic's security and defense policy 
-- which are: the Basic Objectives and the Principles for the 
Slovak Republic's National Security, the Slovak Republic's 
Defense Doctrine, the Strategic Concept for the Defense of the 
Slovak Republic, and the Concept for the Building of the Army of 
the Slovak Republic -- and will present them to the applicable 
bodies for approval. Within the framework of the Partnership 
For Peace plan, the government will present to the National 
Council of the Slovak Republic a Presentation Document, in which 
our cooperation with NATO will be outlined. In the interests of 
laying down the foundations for the legal basis of the defense 
of our democratic state, the government will draft a bill on the 
Slovak Republic's defense, on the Slovak Republic Army, on 
compulsory military service, and on the working conditions of 
the soldiers of the Slovak Republic Army. 
  The government wants to consistently continue the 
transformation of the army. In this framework, the government 
will demand that the Defense Ministry should precisely define 
its own jurisdiction in the military, political, and executive 
spheres, and create conditions for introducing systemic 
management and increasing the powers of the lover organizational 
structures. It is necessary to gradually introduce the system 
of defensive planning, programming, and budgeting. By 
introducing these qualitative changes, the government wants to 
free the huge human potential in the army, be able to utilize 
material and financial resources more rationally and 
efficiently, and create systemic prerequisites for a democratic 
control of the army. 
  The Defense Ministry will draft a concept for social policy, 
in which it will pay increased attention to the solution of the 
problems linked to the living conditions of the individual 
groups of soldiers, improvement of the overall atmosphere in the 
army, and improvement in relations between its members. In the 
Ministry of Defense sector, education toward patriotism will 
improve, and a concept for religious services within the army 
will be drafted. 
  The Slovak Republic Government has decided to build the army 
within the framework of the adopted international obligations so 
that this army might become a modern army, sufficiently armed 
and trained for the defense of our country. 
<H8>  Foreign Policy </H8>
  The objectives and priorities of the Slovak Republic's 
foreign policy were correctly set out after the establishment of 
the independent state. In the past period, the decisive 
political forces adopted them. In this way, the basic 
prerequisites have been established for political consensus 
needed in the country, which is in the process of establishing 
itself in international relations. This consensus was 
significantly confirmed in practice when the government of wide 
coalition was established. This is a good signal to foreign 
countries. 
  A full integration of Slovakia in European political, 
economic, and security structures is a priority of strategic 
importance. We realize the significance of our future 
membership in the European Union. We want to create our path to 
our membership by developing all-encompassing relations with the 
European Union and its individual members. The internal 
prerequisite for the success of our efforts is a further 
stabilization of our democratic institutions, a speedy 
continuation of economic transformation, and respect for the 
principles of our legal system. We are going to cooperate in 
harmonizing the Slovak Republic's legal system with the European 
laws. Our pushing the individual countries of the European 
Union toward the smooth completion of the ratification process 
outlined in the European Association Treaty will be our most 
topical task in the upcoming period. 
  The government confirms the interest of the Slovak Republic 
in obtaining full membership in NATO and the Western European 
Union. This objective is not based on any imminent threat, but 
on the logic of our orientation and our scale of values. The 
government will use the opportunity given to us in the 
Partnership For Peace plan. In relation to the Western European 
Union, the government will take diplomatic steps to 
qualitatively improve our status, with the aim of achieving 
as-close-as-possible cooperation with all the Western European 
Union's structures. 
  The Slovak Republic will build on its successful activity in 
the United Nations and its specialized agencies. By being 
active in the UN peacekeeping forces, we are also accepting the 
responsibility for keeping peace on the global scale. We are 
also going to use our presence in the CSCE process, where we 
will build on our experience from work in the Troika. 
  The Slovak Republic's membership in the Council of Europe 
has 
a key role in the development of democratic institutions and the 
protection of human rights. We are going to create legislative 
prerequisites for meeting the recommendations of the Council of 
Europe's Parliamentary Assembly in connection with the Slovak 
Republic's joining the Council of Europe. We want our experts 
to be more active in the process of drafting new documents and 
legal norms in the Council of Europe, mainly those documents 
that deal with the protection of the rights of ethnic 
minorities. The government will prepare an analysis of the 
conditions for the Slovak Republic's joining the European 
charter of Regional and Minority Languages, and the European 
Charter of Local Self-Administration. 
  The government is aware of the fact that every successful 
step of the state in the sphere of multilateral diplomacy is 
also dependent on the large scale of harmonious bilateral 
relations, particularly with our closest neighbors. The 
government is interested in forming relations with the 
neighboring countries in the spirit of modern European 
cooperation. Slovakia will act as a reliable and cooperating 
partner. We are expecting a similar attitude from our 
neighbors. We are convinced that this type of cooperation will 
bring a double benefit. It will mobilize the hidden potential 
of bilateral relations and create favorable conditions for 
trustworthy integration of the Central European countries in the 
process of Europe's unification. In this sense, we are also 
understanding of the European Union's initiative -- the Pact of 
Stability -- which can help create political conditions for the 
integration of the Central European countries in the European 
Union, while respecting the interests of the participating 
countries and retaining wide stability in our region. We are 
aware of the fact that a satisfactory solution of the problems 
linked to the people belonging to ethnic minorities is part of 
European stability. We will pay extra attention, in particular, 
to cooperation with our neighbors that are undergoing the 
transformation process, namely the Czech Republic, Poland, and 
Hungary. After the most recent decision on the conditions for 
Austria's joining the European Union, the existing importance of 
our relations with Austria will grow even more. We are very 
interested in cooperating with Ukraine and in a successful 
completion of the transformation process in this important 
European country. 
  The government will make efforts to develop advantageous 
relations and a high level of political dialogue with other 
European countries. We are interested in broadening and 
intensifying cooperation with the United States and Canada with 
the aim of strengthening the transatlantic dimension of the 
Slovak Republic's foreign policy. The Slovak Republic is also 
interested in maintaining good relations and general cooperation 
with the Russian Federation. In the economic sphere, the 
government will create proper conditions for developing 
cooperation, particularly with the G-7 countries and the OECD, 
while it will pay increased attention to the dynamically 
developing Pacific region. Searching for cooperation in other 
parts of the world will become a permanent task for our 
diplomacy. 
  A greater level of involvement of the tools of Slovak 
diplomacy and closer coordination with economic sectors in the 
sphere of pushing for the Slovak Republic's interests must 
become a significant feature of our efforts in the period to 
come. It is possible to push for Slovak interests abroad only 
if our foreign service is fully professional and the leading 
positions at our diplomatic missions abroad filled. 
  To provide objective information to the foreign countries on 
the developments in the country and to intensify communication 
with our partners is a permanent task for the government. The 
government confirms the necessity to develop the closest 
contacts with our people living abroad. 
  The government will consistently secure the coordination of 
foreign policy activities and is prepared to coordinate closely 
with the National Council of the Slovak Republic and the 
president of the Slovak Republic in order to fully utilize 
constitutional bodies of the state in the interests of 
strengthening the international position of the Slovak Republic. 
We have to realize that the smaller the country is, the more 
professional its foreign policy must be for it to assume a firm 
position in the network of international relations. 
  The government is convinced that, when pushing for our 
foreign policy interests, we do not have to create an atmosphere 
of fear and create the image of an enemy. In foreign policy we 
want to solve problems in a businesslike manner, professionally, 
with a feeling of responsibility for the destiny of our country. 
<H8>  Conclusion </H8>
  The government is presenting its policy statement while 
being 
aware of the fact that it has a mandate for only six months. 
From its contents it is clear that the government will not 
conduct policy aimed at creating effects for the election 
campaign. The government is not going to postpone important 
decisions. On the contrary, it will create conditions for 
making the inevitable changes more dynamic, the objective of 
which is political stability, economic prosperity, and a free 
and fruitful civic society. 
  The government coalition initiated early elections. It did 
not do so because of self-interests, or in fearing 
responsibility. The government is convinced that, in this short 
period, it can show the Slovak citizens that there is an 
alternative to the way of governing the country, an alternative 
that avoids confrontational and strong-arm gestures in politics, 
and an alternative that can improve the respect for our country 
abroad. We believe in the increasing power of civic democratic 
society and are convinced that when parliamentary elections are 
held, we will be able to look the electorate in the eye and 
accept its decision. Before this happens, we want to call on 
all the people to join our work for the benefit of the Slovak 
Republic. 

