Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jorma Rotko: "In Paldiski, Estonia Everything Is </F>
the Way It Was in the Soviet Period"] 
  [Text] The buildings are dilapidated, the signs on 
storefronts are printed in Russian, and the selection of goods 
is meager. The Soviet Union is dead, but its ghost still walks. 
In the Paldiski base in Estonia it is still possible to become 
acquainted with genuine Soviet goings-on, since neither 
Gorbachev's perestroyka nor Yeltsin's edicts have penetrated 
there. 
  The Estonians have attempted to push their own 
administration 
into the region, but the city continues to be ruled by a city 
council of a kind that has ceased to exist in Russia. Passports 
are issued and cars registered by a body called the Paldiski 
Branch Office of the Leningrad Militia. 
<H5>  Change in the Landscape </H5>
  Estonia's economy has developed rapidly, and this is visible 
in the exterior appearance of cities and villages. This makes 
the change in landscape when one drives to Paldiski all the 
greater. 
  Everything is the way it was in the Soviet period. The 
buildings are gray and dilapidated. The signs on the store 
fronts are written in Russian, and the selection of goods is 
meager in contrast to the rest of Estonia, where one can obtain 
everything now. 
  On the city's main street there is a pothole that could 
swallow a car, and traffic is routed around it on the sidewalk. 
Telephones operate sporadically or not at all. 
  There were local elections in Estonia last fall, but they 
could not be held in Paldiski, because a list of eligible voters 
was not prepared for the city. The Russian militia did not agree 
to hand over a list of the city's residents, and now it has 
become clear that they did not have a proper list. 
  Last week some kind of document on which was recorded the 
number of persons moving to Paldiski and departing from there in 
the course of the years was handed over to the Estonian police. 
There is no information about the actual number of residents in 
Paldiski. 
  The city council continues its existence as if nothing had 
happened. It distributes apartments to those who need them and 
issues administrative regulations without paying much attention 
to Estonian opinions about what should be done in the city. 
Recently the Estonian Government made Paldiski a city district 
of the neighboring city Keila, so that Paldiski could have some 
kind of Estonian administration. For the time being this has had 
no effect at all on the course of life in the city. 
  In negotiations between the Estonians and Russians, the 
register for Paldiski's motor vehicles was promised to the 
Estonians, but the Russian militia has not handed it over but 
rather has proposed that the register be made one issue in the 
negotiations between Estonia and Russia. 
<H5>  A Paradise for Car Thieves </H5>
  It is an open secret in Estonia that many stolen cars are 
taken to Paldiski. The Russian militia registers the cars in the 
Russian car register, and the papers are in order. 
  Junior Inspector Agu Mitt of the Estonian police force, who 
works in Paldiski, reports that previously cars were taken to 
Russia on naval vessels. 
  "The stolen cars were hidden in the deserted missile bunkers 
in Paldiski, for example. When a naval transport ship arrived in 
the harbor, the cars were driven onto the ship in the dark of 
the night. I myself traced a new Mercedes 600, but it managed to 
drive onto a ship, and nothing could be done. The Estonian 
police are still too weak to dare to raid a great power's naval 
vessel." 
  Agu Mitt said that two kinds of cars are taken to Russia. 
Either a Lada or a brand-new Western car is stolen. Old Western 
cars are not suitable in Russia, because spare parts for them 
cannot be obtained there. 
  Last year over 1,000 cars vanished without a trace in 
Estonia, and the police are certain that they were exported to 
Russia, often through Paldiski. Several insurance companies no 
longer sell theft insurance for new Western cars. 
  Since the Paldiski administration is in a state of 
confusion, 
the city has become a favorite hiding place for the Russian 
mafia. There is no address registration, so that professional 
criminals fall into the clutches of the police only by chance. 
  Agu Mitt reported that one arrested criminal was taken by 
force from the Estonian police station in Paldiski. 
  "During the night 20 armed Russians rushed in at a time when 
there was only one man on duty. Of course he could have cut 
loose with an automatic weapon, but this would have created 
havoc, and the consequence would have been a political conflict. 
Thus there was nothing to be done but let the man go." 
<H5>  Population Does Not Decline </H5>
  About 200 Estonians and about 7,000 Russians live in 
Paldiski. Although the naval base has already been shut down 
with the exception of the submarine training center, the city's 
population has not declined. The thing is that the Russians have 
not shipped the officers out of Paldiski but rather they have 
remained there to live as "pensioners." 
  The temptation to participate in criminal operations is 
great, since the pension paid by Russia is only 600 kroons (280 
markka) per month. 
  With the exception of the nuclear reactor building and the 
submarine training center, the military sites in Paldiski are in 
rundown condition. All possible metal, including the metal roofs 
of buildings, has been plundered to be sold. 
  The Russian demand that Estonia compensate Russia for the 
money that Russia invested in the buildings in the past has 
aroused irritation in Estonia. "When you go, take with you the 
rubbish that is left." 

