Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Hong Kong, Feb 15 (AFP)--A group of Hong Kong-based 
U.S. Christian missionaries returned to the colony Tuesday after 
being detained for five days under China's sweeping new laws to 
control religious activity. 
  Cathy Balcombe, wife of Reverend Dennis Balcombe of the 
Revival Christian Church, said her husband and his companions 
returned from China late in the day, exhausted and hungry. 
  "They are very tired," she said, adding that Balcombe was 
not 
giving telephone interviews for the time being. 
  Amnesty International had earlier said that a total of 10 
Christians had been detained in central China last week, but the 
U.S. Embassy in Beijing said Tuesday that the three Americans 
among them had been freed. 
  Two Indonesians, two Hong Kong residents, and three Chinese 
detained along with the Americans were apparently still being 
held by the Public Security Bureau in Henan province, the 
London-based human rights group reported. 
  They were believed to be the first Christians detained under 
new regulations governing religion which took effect January 31 
and restrict the religious activities of foreigners in China. 
  The U.S. Embassy said in a statement it had been informed by 
the Henan authorities that "the American Christians were 
released this morning." 
  Police and religious affairs bureau officials in the central 
province, contacted by AFP by telephone, said they were "unaware 
of the whole affair." 
  Amnesty International said Balcombe, Daughin Chan and Paul 
Star, all U.S. nationals, were put under house arrest in a 
guesthouse in Fangcheng city following their detention last 
Thursday. 
  They were detained along with Hong Kongers Kok Fai Kwok and 
May Chong, Indonesian nationals Bam Bang Yang and Ina Yang, and 
three unidentified Chinese. 
  Amnesty urged the Chinese authorities to release the 
detainees, saying they were "at risk of being held without 
charge" for carrying out "peaceful religious activities." 
  Amnesty said the detainees "should be released 
unconditionally if not promptly charged with recognizable 
criminal offences in accordance with international standards." 
  It said the three Chinese were being held separately from 
the 
foreigners, who had been in Fangcheng since February 8 and 
intended to meet with Christians in villages in Henan. 

