Language: <F P=105> Afrikaans </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Afrikaner Resistance Movement leader Eugene </F>
Terreblanche, by SABC correspondent Max du Preez, BEELD 
correspondent Tim du Plessis, CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MONITOR 
correspondent John Battersby, and DIE AFRIKANER correspondent 
Jakkie Basson; followed by telephone discussion with former 
Bophuthatswana chief negotiator Rowan Cronje; on the "Agenda" 
program -- live] 
  [Text] [Du Preez] Mr. Terreblanche, may I begin? 
  [Terreblanche] Certainly. 
  [Du Preez] At seven this evening, I spoke to Mr. Rowan 
Cronje 
about your press conference. Mr. Cronje told me to tell you 
this: If Eugene Terreblanche says I or anyone else in the 
government invited him to Bophuthatswana, you must tell him he 
is lying. 
  [Terreblanche] It is not odd that a man who succeeded in 
giving away two fatherlands in his political career would use 
such crude language. 
  [Du Preez, interrupting] He said he has many witnesses -- 
among others, Brigadier Turner. 
  [Terreblanche] Let me speak -- you have posed a question: 
Mr. 
Cronje never asked me to be present. Two years ago, I signed 
several agreements with various people, among others, a military 
accord with the Ciskei -- with Brigadier Gqozo. You will 
remember that about a year or so ago he said that should he be 
threatened, he would make use of AWB [Afrikaner Resistance 
Movement] assistance. I have signed agreements with Inkatha in 
the Transvaal -- it has been proved demonstratively by joint 
action in the Vaal triangle. Those agreements still stand. I 
also concluded an agreement in which Mr. Cronje was present 
personally -- in a full cabinet meeting -- with President 
Mangope about a year or two ago. 
  [Du Preez] Can I quickly give you his version of that? He 
said you got up and said: You people in Bophuthatswana are 
against communists. We are also against communists. If you 
should need help, ask us. Mr. Cronje said President Mangope did 
not reply to that. 
  [Terreblanche] Wait a second, please. The whole 
discussion--and this can be confirmed by anyone who was with 
us--the whole discussion actually dealt with the fact that we 
have moved closer to each other; we jointly had the feeling that 
the communists were going to damage the sovereignty of both 
countries. We were received on those conditions. That was the 
subject that was discussed, and that is how we accepted it. I 
just want to add -- so that we do not waste time -- I sent a fax 
to the president early during the week when the situation there 
was starting to deteriorate. There has been telephone contact 
with my office and even from his residence, in which messages 
were sent to the president. And on Friday, when the situation 
grew worse, I personally spoke to him. In my office, I use a 
loudspeaker so that when such matters are discussed and there 
are members of my senior staff present, they can follow the 
conversation. I phoned the president and asked what the 
situation was like. He said it was critical. His words were 
that the situation was very bad. I said to him that at that 
stage I had about 160 men, since we did not have time to 
mobilize more. He thanked me and added that I should try to get 
hold of Mr. Cronje. I hope Mr. Cronje does not deny this as 
well. The phone number supplied to me, Mr. Cronje's number, had 
come from President Lucas Mangope. An hour or so later about 
300 men arrived. I had another discussion with the president. 
I asked him how long he could still hold out, upon which he 
replied that he did not know -- the situation was very critical. 
Then I pertinently asked this question because it seemed as 
though from the side of the National Front it had been said that 
the AWB was not welcome. Then I said: President, did you or 
anyone else say the AWB should not move in, or do you know of 
anyone who said that? He answered no. I still tried to make 
contact with Cronje, and I could not, until I arrived at the 
base in Mmabatho and I spoke to him. Now I hope Mr. Cronje told 
you what was decided between him and me. 
  [Du Preez] I can tell you what he said. It is right here.... 
  [Terreblanche, interrupting] I will appreciate that. 
  [Du Preez] At 1905, he asked me to talk to Eugene 
Terreblanche. I told him that the image of the AWB in 
Bophuthatswana is extremely negative and racist. The 
sensitivity in the Bophuthatswana security forces, regarding the 
AWB, is unbelievable. I asked him courteously and politely to 
leave. Mr. Terreblanche then told me: This night I will never 
forget. It has been a terrible humiliation. I want to fight 
the communists but you do not want me to. 
  [Terreblanche] Is that all he said we spoke about? 
  [Du Preez] Yes. 
  [Terreblanche] Now I understand why Bophuthatswana is where 
it is today. 
  [Du Preez] And Brig. Turner supports that. He says it is 
true. 
  [Terreblanche] Well, let me answer that. I now want to refer 
to a later discussion. I spoke to General Turner -- not 
Brigadier -- on more than one occasion. It was decided between 
him and the general that the AWB....[pauses] Apparently Mr. 
Cronje was under the impression that the AWB was present in 
uniform, with flags and so forth. I was engaged in a discussion 
with him when he asked me if we have symbols denoting rank, 
flags, and uniforms. I told him that the order was for the men 
to move in in civilian clothes. He asked Turner what his 
impression was -- and General Turner is regarded as a very 
honorable man. He said that he has no problem since the men are 
in civilian clothes. He added that it is a civilian force 
present and the AWB is prepared to plan jointly the transfer of 
power to the planners. Now I want to say that it is very 
strange that a venue was prepared for the AWB, because at a 
stage when the AWB numbers rose to between 400 and 500, there 
were 60 members of our other Volksfront [National Front] friends 
-- a venue was prepared and food packages were handed out; 
mattresses were handed out. The intention was to keep us there, 
not to see us go away. At 0500, and one has to be honest, at 
0500 I had another discussion on the insistence of Gen. Turner, 
and he told me the politicians feel that I, Terreblance, should 
leave the territory because the black population were becoming 
agitated at my presence there. Lengthy discussions were held. 
Fortunately, I was not alone and two senior generals on my 
staff were present. The general was very disappointed. I said 
that I would leave with my men upon which one of my generals 
said that if I withdraw then the entire AWB would withdraw. The 
general was very apologetic and said the decision is not his, 
but comes from Mr. Rowan Cronje. This came hours after an 
agreement for us to stay and for us to be part of the armed 
civilian force there. I kept my word and I went to my men and 
withdrew in my personal capacity. If you look at the realities 
-- that I did withdraw and that my men did stay -- then it 
clearly indicates the agreements made. I withdrew personally. 
My generals stayed behind. They would form part of the 
offensive. Weapons would be handed out after which 
Bophuthatswana would be stabilized, and this is the situation 
until that point. 
  [Du Preez] Let's have some questions now. 
  [Du Plessis] Mr. Terreblanche, despite the argument over who 
invited whom, it is clear to me that neither the political 
leaders of Bophuthatswana nor their military leaders wanted you 
or your forces there. But there is also a second reason why you 
should not have been there: Any good general, before committing 
himself to a battle, would gather as much intelligence as 
possible before the time. Your own people are quoted in the 
newspapers. THE CITIZEN, says: The AWB commanders advised him 
on the radio to withdraw immediately from the base, because the 
AWB men would not stand a chance against the armored vehicles of 
the BDF [Bophuthatswana Defense Force]. You ought to have known 
that your men stood no chance against them. You yourself said 
that, in Africa, a white man without a rifle is a dead man. But 
five people died, and they had rifles. It seems to me that in 
Africa a white man without sense and without good judgment is a 
dead man. 
  [Terreblanche] Look, it's no use trying to be sarcastic. I 
hope you will have the good manners suitable to the occasion. 
You have insulted the AWB, saying they have no sense. You are 
not aware of the facts. The facts are that those men were to be 
issued with weapons. 
  [Du Plessis] But they were not. 
  [Terreblanche] The facts are -- look, let me finish, please. 
If you want to engage me in a debate, and try to control me, I 
will refuse to respond. I have no need to speak with you. The 
facts are that an undertaking had been given that weapons would 
be issued, even to the AVF men. But only 280 weapons had been 
made available at that point. Now you say no preplanning had 
been done. We had done very good preplanning. That is why the 
AWB was able to move around, occupy the whole white area, secure 
it, and defend it, after which the defense force decided that we 
should all gather at the air force base, where joint planning 
would be done. That was done, because I was in a foreign 
country and I accepted the right of the general to decide and 
evaluate the situation, and to assemble the men. I took my men 
to the air force base, where we all assembled and passed the 
night together, as guests of the Bophuthatswana Defense Force 
and officers. The following morning, as a result of the 
interference of the politicians -- who, as Mr. Mangope correctly 
pointed out, had an entirely different agenda and did not want 
to stabilize Bophuthatswana, but wanted to destabilize it so 
that President Mangope's government could be overthrown, so that 
he could be compelled to take part in the election, or so that 
he could be replaced by another government which would take part 
in the election. The AWB once again gave heed to the wishes of 
the military authorities in Bophuthatswana.... 
  [Du Plessis, interrupting] But you also shot a few of them 
dead. 
  [Terreblanche] ...that we should withdraw. At that stage not 
a shot had been fired. The AWB was informed that they we should 
withdraw, and what did we do? We withdrew from the operational 
area on the instructions of the Bophuthatswana police and 
Colonel Breytenbach, who almost certainly was speaking on behalf 
of the BDF. We withdrew in vulnerable vehicles, open pick-up 
trucks, headed for the border, without our weapons.... 
  [Du Plessis, interrupting] But firing as you went.... 
  [Terreblanche, interrupting] Wait, wait.... 
  [Du Plessis, interrupting] Were you not.... 
  [Terreblanche, interrupting] You were not there. Let me tell 
you.... 
  [Du Plessis, interrupting] But is it not true that your men 
were firing as they went? 
  [Terreblanche] Of course it is not true. The AWB withdrew. 
But I would like to ask you now, in all fairness, if we are to 
conduct a sensible discussion, please do not interrupt me again. 
Really, don't. The AWB reached a certain point, and that was a 
bridge. The first vehicle had already crossed over, and the 
second vehicle, the command vehicle in which my generals were 
traveling -- an ordinary pickup, people armed with handguns, 
hunting rifles, and other weapons, not operational weapons. 
Right at the bridge the very same defense force which was 
supposed to defend us suddenly started firing on our moving 
vehicles with 40-mm mortars. And that is it. The AWB took 
cover and fired back. The fight started, and they took their 
injured took them out, including Colonel Bouwer and the other 
six injured men who are now in the hospital. These injured 
people were put in the open pick-ups and, firing as they went, 
and as you said, reached the border. The casualty figure, as 
you said, reached 50 dead on the side of the Bophuthatswana 
people, including 10 civilians -- which I sincerely regret. I 
believe they were caught in the crossfire. No one will accept 
responsibility, as to whose bullets hit them. But more than 280 
people, according to the SABC [South African Broadcasting 
Corporation], were injured. Our movement was placed in a 
position where we had to defend ourselves.... 
  [Battersby, interrupting] But where was your victory, then, 
your shining victory? 
  [Terreblanche] Wait a moment, wait.... 
  [Battersby, interrupting] I want to ask you about the 
shining 
victory that you referred to today at the press conference in 
Ventersdorp. In fact, it is the direct opposite of what the 
overwhelming majority of South Africans and foreigners believe. 
I want you to tell us how it is possible that you can speak of 
an overwhelming victory, and a miracle, when in the first place 
your men were thrown out by the AVF's people. Second, your 
people, your soldiers were shot at by the security forces of a 
government which, in your own words, had invited you into the 
country. Third, it was clear that you stood no chance against 
the united forces of the SADF [South African Defense Force]. 
How can that be a victory? I cannot understand it. 
  [Terreblanche] I want you to understand it very clearly, so 
that you will not remain in the dark for so long. It is a 
shining victory when people are sent into an operational area 
with handguns. They were fired upon from Casspirs [armored 
vehicle] and other armored vehicles. They were fired upon in 
open pick-ups and even ordinary sedans. They stopped the 
assault of the mortars and the Casspirs by firing back 
effectively. They moved up to the border, and the outcome of 
the attack was just that -- the total number of casualties on 
the side of the AWB, five were killed, while on the other side 
50 were killed and 285 were....[pauses] Now I want to say to 
you, the reason why..,. 
  [Du Preez, interrupting] Were they the enemy? 
  [Terreblanche] But of course. What do you call the people 
who are firing on you with mortars? 
  [Du Preez] But they were the legitimate defense force, and 
you see them as the enemy? 
  [Terreblanche] Look, everyone knows that the defense force 
and the police had turned against the Bophuthatswana government; 
they mutinied. That is why President Mangope is where he is 
today. And your enemy becomes your enemy within a second. That 
is what we found out there. Those who were supposed to be our 
friends, the communist-inspired elements within the defense 
force -- let me say straight out, that was the dilemma: Many of 
the BDF members welcomed the AWB in the most friendly manner; 
the betrayal which was committed was so shocking precisely 
because it came from the same force which had received us in 
such a friendly manner. The deserters in Mr. Mangope's defense 
force and the police deserters....[pauses] General Turner told 
us that night that 90 percent of his policemen had deserted. 
The next morning the whole Bophuthatswana police force 
deserted. So the AWB drew the fire of the police and defense 
force deserters, who were using artillery and armored vehicles 
against its small-arms fire. And you say you find it difficult 
to see it as a victory? Had the AWB not been able to stop the 
armored vehicles in their retreat, it would have meant hundreds 
of dead in the AWB. But that did not happen. 
  [Battersby] I understand that, but I want to ask again: How 
can it be a shining victory when you yourself withdrew from the 
scene, knowing full well -- as you said today -- that Gen. 
Viljoen had betrayed you several times. How could you... 
  [Terreblanche, interrupting] It remains a victory for us, 
because we pulled out, as we had been asked to do by the BDF. 
We followed the instruction of the head of state whom we 
recognized as the head of state. We did not know that at that 
stage he was no longer head of state. If the head of state and 
his forces say we must withdraw, and we do it, and we withdraw 
honorably, and we are attacked during our withdrawal, and we 
fight our way out, and we fight to gain safety, and we fight and 
we win -- can you still say you can't understand how that can be 
a victory? I am a veteran. I served a long time in Rhodesia. 
For years I served on the South- West African border. I know 
battle under those circumstances. The most difficult battle is 
when you are withdrawing, when you are in fact firing over your 
shoulder. And if you are drawn into an ambush four or five 
times, and you emerge from the presence of death and you bring 
your people home, and your casualty figure is so small that in 
our group only three men fell, with two more later when Gen. 
Viljoen sent out some men; in all that great convoy only three 
men fell, and you tell me that is not a success. 
  [Battersby] But I want to ask you once again, how can that 
be 
a victory when you left your own injured people behind? 
  [Du Plessis, interrupting] And the president you had gone to 
defend was no longer president. 
  [Battersby] How can that be a victory, Mr. Terreblanche? 
  [Terreblanche] Look, those are two questions. There are two 
of you asking questions, so please listen patiently to my reply, 
the two replies. 
  [Du Preez] Could you keep it short? Our time is limited. 
  [Terreblanche] Look. I want to answer you the way you ought 
to be answered. 
  [Du Preez] Mr. Rowan Cronje is on the telephone. He would 
like to respond to some of the things you have said. 
  [Terreblanche] He's welcome. I first wish to say I see it as 
a shining victory for people who had to withdraw under fire, and 
only left three bodies behind, while the attackers who had laid 
the ambushes suffered a loss of more than 50 dead and more than 
280 injured. And bear in mind that we picked up our injured, 
except for the three whom we had not seen in the convoy -- 
indeed, we had to search for their bodies where they had fallen. 
I can assure you, had they been left behind by the AWB, I would 
have instituted an investigation. 
  [Du Preez] I think you will have to. Here we have a report 
by a senior AVF man. Tim, do you have it? 
  [Du Plessis] Yes, an AVF man said: I could hear clearly over 
the radio how he was ordering his men not to turn back for the 
injured; they would not stand a chance against the BDF soldiers. 
  [Terreblanche] Let me first ask you, who is the person who 
said that? 
  [Du Plessis] It was a senior member of the AVF who was 
involved in the... 
  [Terreblanche, interrupting] I asked what his name was. My 
name if Eugene Terreblanche; you are Tim. Who is the person who 
made this so-called allegation? Why is he not here on AGENDA 
tonight? I do not react to ghosts. 
  [Basson] I would also like to enter this discussion Max. 
  [Du Preez] Please. Yes. I have been neglecting you a little. 
  [Basson] I would like us to look at the other side of this 
issue, and I would like to hear Mr. Terreblanche's comment on 
the role played by the SADF in the whole matter. We are faced 
with an absolute textbook-type communist takeover where chaos 
and anarchy is first being created.... 
  [Du Preez, interrupting] Is that a statement or is that a 
question to Mr. Terreblanche? 
  [Basson] It is a question to Mr. Terreblanche. 
  [Du Preez] Mr. Terreblanche? 
  [Terreblanche] I would really like to answer the question 
but 
let him tell me what he wants from me. Give him the opportunity. 
  [Du Preez] We just have a few minutes left, please. I would 
rather like to hear from you now that the question has been 
posed. 
  [Basson] In other words, we would like to know what role.... 
[pauses] Now that the revolution has been completed -- after 
the AWB and the Volksfront have withdrawn, the South African 
Defense Force came into the picture for the first time, and if 
one looks at a document distributed by Joe Slovo, in which he 
also predicts what the situation will be like in South Africa, 
he said: [quotation in English] These actions on the part of 
elements within the regime, extend for example to the continuing 
disruptive actions aimed by the regime's National Intelligence 
Service, against the Conservative Party and Inkatha, as well as 
elements within the South African military establishment.... 
  [Du Preez, interrupting] Jakkie, excuse me. We really do not 
have time. 
  [Terreblanche] I will answer as quickly as possible. 
  [Du Preez] Thank you. 
  [Terreblanche] It seems clear to me that the 
order....[pauses] After an agreement had been reached for us to 
become part of the joint civilian force there, then I was asked 
at 0430 by Rowan Cronje, via Gen. Turner, to leave the 
territory, because if I did not leave the territory, according 
to him, the SADF would act. I left the territory because I 
expected this and I did not want to take responsibility for 
this. I left the territory as requested. The AWB left the 
territory. You are completely correct in saying this. The 
Volksfront left the area and still the SADF took action. The 
defense force, trying to find a reason to overthrow President 
Mangope, attempted blame us. The defense force went into the 
territory not to stabilize -- it was there, and it knows. If 
anyone was not invited, it is the SADF. President Mangope said 
repeatedly he did not want them there. Gen. Turner told me the 
president told him he did not want them there because if the ANC 
[African National Congress]-National Party defense force enters 
the territory, then he would never be able to get them out of 
his country. That Is the reality and it has been proven correct. 
  [Du Plessis] But I do not see the victory, Mr. Terreblanche. 
  [Terreblanche] But then you would never see the victory. 
  [Du Preez] Mr. Terreblanche, can we cross over to Mr. Rowan 
Cronje. He will speak to us by telephone. Good evening Mr. 
Cronje. 
  [Cronje] Good evening. 
  [Du Preez] You have heard Mr. Terreblanche's version. What 
is your reaction to that? 
  [Cronje] No, I did not hear what he said because my 
television set is not working. 
  [Du Preez] Mr. Terreblanche.... 
  [Cronje, interrupting] But if it concerns the issue as to 
whether they were allowed into the country, then I want to say 
the following: The president contacted me late afternoon and 
said Mr. Terreblanche telephoned him twice. He gave me a 
number, and I returned Mr. Terreblanche's call but there was no 
reply. Early the morning Gen. Turner telephoned me and said he 
understood that the AWB was on the way. We sent Colonel Manna 
Bothes to the border at Rooigrond to stop them from entering the 
country. Gen. Turner informed me by telephone that Mr. 
Terreblanche was not prepared to listen to the colonel and he 
proceeded to enter the country. He held talks with Gen. Turner. 
Gen. Turner informed me about his discussion with Mr. 
Terreblanche, and then I spoke to Mr. Terreblanche. I told him 
that no arrangements were made with us and that no permission 
was requested for the AWB to enter the country. I made it clear 
to him that the perception and the image of the AWB in 
Bophuthatswana is one of racism, that this is a delicate and 
sensitive situation totally unacceptable to the Bophuthatswana 
Defense Force and that it will cause enormous problems. Mr. 
Terreblanche reacted by saying that he will never forget this 
night. He said he had come to fight communists and he was being 
made to feel so unwelcome. He added that he had never been so 
unwelcome in his life in any place. I spoke again to Gen. 
Turner and we arranged, concerning these people who have already 
entered the country -- you will remember that they entered with 
pickup trucks on several roads -- that they should be given 
immediate orders to remove their flags and so forth, and that 
they should be taken to the airport where they could be 
assembled and then be taken out of the country. Thereafter, we 
contacted General Viljoen. General Viljoen, in reaction to that 
telephone call to him, gave a direct order for the AWB to be 
withdrawn immediately. They also ignored that order. That's 
the third one. Several journalists who were with me yesterday 
confirmed that the defense force spent most of the morning 
trying to assemble men on pick-up trucks who were causing 
large-scale damage, resulting in a flare-up of emotions and 
problems, to escort them to the airport so that they can leave 
the country under supervision. This is precisely what I 
arranged with Mr. Terreblanche and with Mr. Turner and this was 
done in the presence of several people. This was confirmed by 
Gen. Viljoen and several others, as well as Gen. Turner. The 
situation is very clear. The developments were tragic. The 
loss of life is inexcusable, and the damage to Bophuthatswana, 
the hatred which never before existed against whites, currently 
being experienced in Mmabatho, is life threatening. It is a 
pity that this has happened. I trust that it will not happen 
again. 
  [Du Preez] Thank you very much, Mr. Cronje. Hold the line 
while we hear Mr. Terreblanche's response. 
  [Terreblanche] I would like to react immediately. You speak 
about a single conversation we had, Mr. Cronje? And you also 
reached an agreement with me just once? Is that the case? 
  [Cronje] I never reached any agreement with you. 
  [Terreblanche] So you never said that if the men do not have 
any insignia, and if they form part of the forces there, and if 
they were not in uniform, then they could remain there, and I 
should personally maintain a low profile? Did you never say 
that? 
  [Cronje] We said the men there with insignia should remove 
them immediately, and they must go to the airport outside the 
city and remain there. They failed to do so. They went into 
the streets. They caused tremendous problems, and we asked you 
to please go. 
  [Terreblanche] No, Mr. Cronje, please answer my question. 
You are not negotiating with the communists now. Please answer 
my question. 
  [Cronje] I am answering your question. 
  [Terreblanche] That morning at 0500, in a second discussion 
with Gen. Turner, he told me you were demanding my head; I must 
leave the area, and the AWB troops must remain. I want to tell 
you something, as you were not present. You gave the 
instruction by telephone. Senior members of my general staff 
witnessed the discussion at 0530 that morning. It was decided 
that I should leave the area, because you said if I remained, 
then the SADF would invade. Now you say all AWB members were 
ordered out. I say it is a pity that at the end of your 
political career you step out of South African politics with a 
cold-blooded lie. It is a shame. I say my general staff can 
confirm the fact. 
  [Cronje] Mr. Terreblanche, the situation was clear. The men 
had been requested to go to the airport immediately. They were 
to remain there; they were not to enter the town. They were to 
leave the country under escort. Those who ignored the request 
and the order of Gen. Viljoen were collected by the BDF. The 
BDF and your forces fired on each other. You had never been 
given permission to enter Bophuthatswana. You had made no 
arrangement. There was no agreement. Indeed, Gen. Turner told 
me that after the discussion you referred to -- and I am not 
aware of the discussion -- you and two of your generals stood up 
and said you were being chased away. And then you stood up and 
walked out with your two generals. I was not present at the 
discussion. I know what I told you, and I know what I told Gen. 
Turner... 
  [Terreblanche, interrupting] Yes. It is clear that you were 
not there. 
  [Cronje] ...and don't talk to me ab0ut a cold-blooded lie. 
  [Terreblanche] I say to you that you are a cold-blooded 
liar. 
Let me tell you, there are many hundreds, a thousand or more 
people, who know of your request that I personally leave the 
area or the SADF would join the fray. 
  [Cronje] Sir, I never spoke to you.... 
  [Terreblanche, interrupting] Give me one reason why I, as a 
person, had to leave the area. It was at your request, and now 
you deny it. Now I understand how you were able to give away 
two countries within a single life. 
  [Cronje] I never spoke to you about the SADF. Not once. The 
instruction was clear: You must go, and your men must go to the 
airport, and from there they must leave the country. At 1100 
our people, in the presence of many journalists, saw how our 
defense force attempted to collect those people who were still 
in the streets -- where they were not supposed to be; they were 
to be at the airport -- to see that they left the country. The 
orders were clear. My discussion with you was clear. Why did 
you tell me you would never forget that night, you had never 
feld so unwelcome? 
  [Terreblanche] It was precisely because it involved me 
personally. 
  [Cronje] It involved the AWB, Mr. Terreblanche, not you 
personally. I never spoke to you personally. It involved the 
AWB.... 
  [Terreblanche, interrupting] Could I refer to another lie? 
  [Cronje] ...that is why all those men went to the airport. 
  [Terreblanche] Mr. Cronje, I was never personally asked to 
leave. 
  [Cronje] I asked you to leave, and for your men to go to the 
airport. 
  [Terreblanche] Mr. Cronje, I don't know how you get it 
right, 
knowing full well that this issue was discussed not only with my 
general staff, but also with the full contingent of the AWB. A 
choice had to be made -- either I left and all left with me, or 
I left, and they remained. And I decided that if they wished to 
remain, they could do so, but not in uniform. Now you claim 
before millions of people that you never said that. It is a 
good thing that you have resigned.... 
  [Cronje, interrupting] During my discussion with you several 
people were present. 
  [Terreblanche] Yes, mine were also present. 
  [Cronje] I spoke to you once, and thereafter I made 
arrangements with Gen. Turner. 
  [Terreblanche] Quite correct. And thereafer Gen. Turner told 
me I must.... 
  [Cronje, interrupting] The arrangement was clear: Your 
people 
were to go to the airport, you must leave, the rest must be 
gathered together, and they must be accompanied out of the 
country. 
  [Terreblanche] So you are placing the blame on your own 
general. You say he told me of his own accord that I must leave 
and the rest could remain. 
  [Cronje] No, my general agrees with me. I checked my facts 
with him. 
  [Terreblanche] Your general will never again trust you, not 
even at a Sunday school picnic. I wish I could see the 
general's face when you say he never told me that you said they 
want my head, that I must leave and the AWB can remain. It was 
discussed with at least 1,000 men who had to make a choice. 
  [Cronje] It is a distortion of the truth. You do not know 
what damage you have done, and the danger you posed to many 
lives. I have seen Gen. Turner's face, Sir. 
  [Terreblanche] It cannot be a happy face. It is just further 
proof that when politicians get involved in military matters, 
this kind of thing happens. You gave the instructions, Sir. 
  [Cronje] If the military intervenes in a country, in a 
neighboring country, without being invited, and causes the 
problems you caused, then I say, long live the politicians. 
Good night, Mr. Terreblanche. 
  [Terreblanche] Yes, those politians who retire the moment 
their country needs them, like you. 
  [Du Preez] Our time has run out, unfortunately. Thank you, 
Mr. Cronje, Mr. Terreblanche, gentlemen. I hope we will one day 
get to know the truth about this tragic episode in our history. 
Good night. 

