Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Damascus, Feb 19 (AFP) -- Israel is trying to 
prevent Syria and the United States from establishing normal 
relations, the official Syrian daily AL-THAWRAH charged Saturday 
[19 February]. 
  The paper said Israel "is anxious to detach Syrian-U.S. 
relations from the area of dialogue," fearing that "solid, 
balanced relations may be established, enabling the whole peace 
process to be brought back to its legitimate basis." 
  Israel was escalating tension in south Lebanon "in its 
customary arrogant and aggressive way," in order to pressure 
U.S. President Bill Clinton into "ending or postponing the U.S. 
role in the peace process," AL-THAWRAH said. 
  Israel tried to torpedo the Geneva summit meeting between 
Clinton and Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad on January 16 
"through pressure and intensive moves inside the U.S. 
administration and in the region," the paper added. 
  "However, we believe the Clinton administration is aware of 
these moves and what lies behind them." 
  Israel and Syria failed to make headway during peace talks 
in 
Washington earlier in the week, Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister 
Yosi Beilin told reporters Thursday. 
  Asked whether Israel had moved closer to the Syrian demand 
that Israel fully withdraw from the Golan Heights seized in 1967 
and partially annexed in 1981, Beilin said, "regrettably, no." 
  Israel has refused to withdraw without first getting 
security 
guarantees from Syria. 
  Israel threatened to launch a massive operation in south 
Lebanon after a rocket attack on northern Israel on Wednesday, 
which was claimed by PLO dissidents opposed to the Palestinian 
autonomy deal. 
  The attack provoked intense diplomatic moves by the United 
States, with Washington sending messages to Damascus and Beirut 
calling for restraint. 
  Israel blamed Syria, which has some 35,000 troops in 
Lebanon. 
  Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres said the attack was a 
"violation" of a U.S.-brokered deal with Damascus last July to 
halt Hizballah guerrilla strikes on Jewish communities. 
  The deal followed a seven-day blitz by Israeli forces in 
south Lebanon which killed 132 people and wounded 500. 

