Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 2 February (MTI) -- The second largest 
Jewish community of continental Europe, after France, is found 
in Hungary, numbering approximately 80,000, but estimates reckon 
that an additional 70,000 people currently included in the 
Christian population are of Jewish origin. Since 1989, there 
has been a renaissance in the culture and traditions of the 
Jewish community. 
  Jews can freely exercise their religion in Hungary's 41 
synagogues, and the faith is recognized by authorities as a 
historical religion, indicated by the restoration of the army 
chaplain service. 
  The only rabbi training institute in eastern Europe is found 
in Budapest, the Jewish Pedagogicum, which is soon to be 
officially ranked as a college. There are three Jewish 
kindergartens, four primary, and four secondary schools, 
attended by more than 1,000 pupils. Traditionally 
well-qualified, 30 percent of Hungarian Jews are presently 
graduates of higher educational institutions, a proportion that 
is the highest in Europe, including even Israel. 
  The Hungarian state and society express their effort for 
reconciliation in many ways. Partial financial compensation is 
granted for individual grievances by the compensation laws, and 
talks are still under way between the Hungarian state and 
international and Hungarian Jewish organizations on compensation 
to be provided by the Hungarian state for Jewish assets held in 
its possession without beneficiaries. 
  A law passed last year, complementing the earlier law 
banning 
racist, anti-semite organizations termed the use of national 
socialist symbols to be a crime. 
  The government has, in real value, increased financial 
support for Jewish organizations in Hungary: From 44 million 
forints in 1990, 216 million in 1991, and 237 million in 1992, 
to 287 million forints in 1993. ($1 equalled approx. 103 
forints in January.) The government provides financial 
assistance to the national social movement which, relying on 
local authorities, encourages the restoration of Jewish 
cemeteries throughout the country. As a result, more than 30 
cemeteries have been retored, most recently in Kal, northern 
Hungary. 
  The activity of anti-semites in Hungary -- termed a "dwarf 
minority" by the government, the parties, and Jewish 
organizations -- has enlivened in the past period. A 
parliamentary committee registered 115 anti-semite 
manifestations in the last quarter of 1993, twice as many as in 
the first quarter. The Holocaust Memorial Committee protested 
this January against the bomb threats of synagogues and Jewish 
schools, and the fascist symbols painted on synagogues. 

