Language: <F P=105>Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Announcer-read report over video with recorded passage from </F>
the "Special News Program on the Second Session of the Eighth 
NPC": "Report on the Implementation of the 1993 Plan for 
National Economic and Social Development and the Draft 1994 Plan 
for National Economic and Social Development" -- identified by 
caption -- delivered by Chen Jinhua, minister in charge of the 
State Planning Commission, to the second session of the Eighth 
National People's Congress (NPC) on 11 March] 
  [Text] [Video shows close up shots of Chen Jinhua speaking, 
and close up shots of Qiao Shi, Jiang Zemin, Li Peng, Zhu 
Rongji, Liu Huaqing, Hu Jintao, Rong Yiren, and others in the 
audience; video occasionally pans across the audience and cuts 
to wide angle shots of the hall] 
  [Begin Chen Jinhua recording] Fellow deputies: At the 
request 
of the State Council, I now submit to this session the report on 
the implementation of the 1993 plan for national economic and 
social development and the draft 1994 plan for national economic 
and social development for your examination and approval, and 
also for suggestions and comments from members of the National 
Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference and other observers. [end recording] 
  Chen Jinhua's report contains three parts: (1) The Basic 
Situation of the National Economic and Social Development in 
1993; (2) The Major Objectives and Tasks of the 1994 Plan for 
National Economic and Social Development; (3) The Need to 
Strengthen and Improve Macroeconomic Regulation and Control and 
Implement the 1994 Plan for National Economic and Social 
Development in an All-Around Way. 
<H3>  1. The Basic Situation of the National Economic and Social 
Development in 1993 </H3>
  Social production continued a rapid growth. The country's 
gross domestic product last year reached 3,138 billion yuan, up 
13.4 percent over the previous year and 8 percent higher than 
the planned growth rate. The rural economy saw overall growth 
last year, with the output of grain and oil bearing crops 
hitting an all-time high. Grain output reached 456.4 million 
tons, 13.8 billion kilograms more than in 1992 and 103.1 percent 
of the planned figure; and the output of oil bearing crops 
amounted to 17.61 million tons, 1.2 million tons more than in 
1992 and 106.7 percent of the planned figure. Cotton and sugar 
crop outputs decreased and fell short of planned targets due to 
reduced crop areas and pests. Crop cultivation was moving in 
the direction of good quality, high yield, and high efficiency. 
  The production of animal husbandry and fishery increased 
quite rapidly. Total meat output rose 10.2 percent over 1992, 
while the output of aquatic products increased by 14.6 percent. 
  Village and town enterprises reported continued vigorous 
growth, and their development accelerated in the central and 
western regions of the country. 
  The nation's industry produced a total added value of 1,414 
billion yuan, up 21.1 percent over the previous year. This 
growth rate breaks down into 22.2 percent for heavy industry and 
19.9 percent for light industry. Industrial economic efficiency 
was somewhat enhanced. The sales rate of industrial products 
rose from 95.5 percent to 96.4 percent, the profits and tax 
rates of industrial funds rose from 10.1 percent to 10.6 
percent, and the velocity of funds circulating increased from 
1.66 to 1.71 times. The building industry continued rapid 
development. 
  New achievements were made in geological prospecting, and 
new 
progress was made in the tertiary industry. The transport and 
telecommunications industries tapped their potential and strived 
to satisfy the needs of production and the people's livelihood. 
The total volume of rail freight transport was 1,193.6 billion 
tonne-km, up 3.1 percent from 1992. The total volume of post 
and telecommunications services amounted to 46.1 billion yuan, 
up 58.9 percent from the previous year. Rapid development was 
also seen in banking, accounting, auditing, information, 
consulting, and other service trades which provide direct 
services to people's everyday lives. 
  The building of key construction projects and technological 
transformation projects was stepped up. Investment in fixed 
assets nationwide reached 1,182.9 billion yuan, fulfilling 
147.98 percent of the annual plan and up 50.6 percent over the 
previous year, or 22 percent with inflation taken into account. 
To ease bottleneck restrictions on national economic 
development, the investment in the transport and 
telecommunications industries enjoyed greater increases, and its 
proportion in the total investment of state-owned enterprises 
rose to 20.2 percent in 1993 from 14.7 percent in 1992. Both the 
investment scale and engineering progress in railroad 
construction were unprecedented since the founding of the 
People's Republic. Preparations for the construction of the 
Three Gorges Project, which the NPC decided to build, have 
started in an all- around way. The first-stage of construction, 
involving earth-stone work for a cofferdam and an open 
water-diversion channel, is proceeding smoothly. The 
resettlement of displaced residents has been stepped up. The 
construction fund-raising has been going on quite well. New 
progress has been made in tackling major equipment and 
technology problems. 
  In the building of key state construction projects, better 
results were achieved in 1993 than in previous years. A number 
of backbone projects of structural readjustment were completed 
and put into operation. One hundred thirty-three large and 
medium capital construction projects and [word indistinct] 128 
technical renovation projects were completed. Newly added 
industrial and transport capacities included 14.38 million kw of 
electric power generation, 15.42 million tonnes of petroleum, 
1,019 km of newly built, newly double-tracked, and 
newly-electrified railroads, 3,556 km of highways, 37.52 million 
tonnes in harbor loading-unloading capacity, and 3.672 million 
telephone lines. In addition, a number of public welfare 
facilities were completed and put to use. 
  Economic, trade, and technological exchanges with foreign 
countries continued to expand last year. The opening up of 
coastal regions was moving in the direction of optimizing the 
industrial structure. The pace of development and opening up of 
Shanghai's Pudong District was accelerated. A number of new 
economic and technological development zones were built in some 
border and coastal cities and in some cities along inland rivers. 
  Foreign trade developed steadily. The total volume of import 
and export trade reached $195.8 billion, up 18.2 percent over 
1992. Use of foreign funds increased substantially last year. 
The amount of foreign capital actually used during the year 
reached $36.77 billion, up 91.5 percent over the previous year. 
The investment pattern by foreign businesses improved, with 
increased investment in long- and medium-term projects. 
Investment by big overseas companies and financial groups 
increased. The focus of investment is gradually shifting 
towards infrastructure and basic industries, and more 
investments are flowing to central and western China. 
  Success was achieved in promoting international tourism, 
with 
a considerable increase in income from the tourism industry. At 
the year's end, the state's foreign currency cash holdings 
amounted to $21.2 billion, up 9 percent as compared with the 
beginning of the year. 
  Domestic markets were thriving and brisk. Total retail sales 
volume in 1993 amounted to 1,223.7 billion yuan, up 26.1 percent 
from the previous year, or 11.6 percent with inflation taken 
into account. There was an ample supply of consumer goods with 
a great variety of designs. Of more than 90 percent of 
commodities, either the supply and demand were balanced, or 
supply was greater than demand. More capital goods were in 
circulation. The capital goods sold by supply and marketing 
enterprises at and above the county level in 1993 totalled 779.6 
billion yuan in value, a 32.3 percent increase over 1992. The 
retail sales of agricultural capital goods amounted to 135.6 
billion yuan, showing an actual decrease of 7.8 percent with 
inflation taken into account. 
  Scientific and technological, educational, and social 
undertakings developed vigorously. New achievements were made 
in key state scientific and technological projects. In 1993, a 
total of 33,000 major scientific and technological achievements 
were scored at the provincial and ministerial level, of which 
781 won national awards. The technology market developed 
soundly, with annual transactions totalling 20.76 billion yuan. 
Further development was made in education, and basic education 
was strengthened. Of primary school-age children, 97.7 percent 
are attending schools. New development was made in secondary 
vocational education. New achievements were also made in 
culture, press, publication, radio and television broadcasting, 
cinema, public health, and sports. 
  New progress was made in family planning. The natural 
population growth rate was 11.45 per thousand, 2.43 per thousand 
lower than the planned target. New success was made in 
controlling environmental pollution. The people's lives were 
continually improving, with a continued overall increase in 
residents' income. During the year, per-capita income of urban 
residents that could be used in living expenses averaged 2,337 
yuan, up 10.2 percent over the previous year after taking 
inflation into account. Rural residents received a net 
per-capita income of 921 yuan, up 3.2 percent over 1992 with 
inflation taken into account. The savings accounts of urban and 
rural residents totaled 1,476.4 billion yuan in 1993, an 
increase of 27.9 percent or 321.9 billion yuan over the end of 
1992. Stocks, bonds, and debentures in the hands of the 
residents increased sharply. 
  Urban employment increased by 7.05 million, and the urban 
unemployment rate at the year's end was 2.6 percent. Housing 
conditions continued to improve in both urban and rural areas. 
New housing built during the year totalled 836 million square 
meters in floor space, with 266 million square meters in urban 
areas and 570 million square meters in rural areas. 
  In 1993, the general index of retail prices rose 13 percent 
over 1992. The price index of the residents' living expenses 
increased by 14.7 percent. In 35 large and medium cities, the 
price index of the living expenses of industrial workers and 
staff members increased by 19.6 percent. 

<H3>    2. The Major Goal and Tasks of the National Economic 
and Social Development in 1994 </H3>
  In drafting, adopting, and implementing the 1994 plan for 
national economic and social development, we must use Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the party's basic line as our guide and 
implement in an all- around way, the guidelines of the 14th 
National Party Congress and Third Plenary Session of the 14th 
CPC Central Committee to accelerate the pace of building a 
socialist market economic structure, open China wider to the 
outside world, strengthen and improve macroeconomic regulation 
and control, vigorously adjust the economic structure, promote 
technological progress, actively open new markets, increase 
economic efficiency, control inflation, and maintain sustained, 
rapid, and healthy development of the national economy. 
  In accordance with the state's general work arrangement and 
guidelines for economic work, the major macroeconomic regulation 
and control targets for the national economic and social 
development in 1994 are: Gross national product is to increase 
9 percent over the previous year. Total investment in fixed 
assets is expected to reach 1,300 billion yuan. The deficit for 
1994 is expected to reach 66.9 billion yuan. Counting the 
principal and interest of internal and external debts and 
external loans for key projects due to be paid back in 1994, 
total internal and external debts for this year will amount to 
129.2 billion yuan. Banks will grant 470 billion yuan in new 
loans. Total retail sales are expected to reach 1,600 billion 
yuan in value. Imports and exports are expected to reach $200 
billion in value. The increase in the general level of retail 
prices will be controlled at under 10 percent. Economic 
efficiency will be improved. The marketing rate of products 
manufactured by enterprises, the rate of profits and tax 
generated from used capital, labor productivity, the turnover 
rate and (words indistinct) of circulating funds shall all be 
increased. The natural population growth rate is to be 
controlled at about 1.3 percent for the year. 
  The tasks for national economic and social development in 
1994 are: 
  -- Persistently attaching prime importance to agriculture 
and 
developing the rural economy in an all-around way. Continuous 
efforts will be made to strengthen agriculture as the foundation 
of the economy, invigorate the rural economy, and increase 
peasants' income. Every possible means will be employed to win 
a good harvest in agriculture and ensure stable and increased 
output of grain, cotton, oil-bearing crops, and other major 
agricultural products. We plan to produce 450 billion kilograms 
of grain, 4.85 million tonnes of cotton, and 17.65 million 
tonnes of oil bearing crops during 1994. 
  -- Vigorously readjusting the structure, improving 
management 
and operation, raising efficiency, and running large and medium 
state- owned enterprises well. In 1994, industries must truly 
focus on optimizing structure, improving efficiency, and 
maintaining an effective growth rate through deepening of 
reform, opening new markets, strengthening management, and 
accelerating technological progress. 
  -- Maintaining a reasonable amount of investment in fixed 
assets and vigorously optimizing the investment structure: In 
view of the fact that the current volume of investment in fixed 
assets and the size of construction projects are already large, 
it is necessary to strictly control excessively high investment 
growth this year, and to focus our work on optimizing the 
investment structure and improving economic investment returns. 
Available construction resources will be allocated first to 
projects that have been completed and are ready to be put into 
production, to continuation projects, and essential new key 
projects incorporated in the Eighth Five-Year Plan. Efforts 
will be concentrated particularly on a number of major projects 
which have a bearing on the overall situation, including the 
Huai He and Tai Lu harnessing project, the Xiaolangdi key water 
conservancy project on the Huang He, and other water conservancy 
projects; the Beijing-Jiulong and Lanzhou-Xinjiang railways; 
harbor construction at such key ports as Qinhuangdao, Dalian, 
and Shanghai; the Beijing-Shenyang-Harbin, 
Beijing-Wuhan-Guangzhou, and Xining-Lanzhou-Urumqi optical cable 
trunks; major projects in the eastern region; large coal bases 
in Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, and Shaanxi; and large hydroelectric 
and thermal power stations. Efforts will be stepped up to 
complete automobile projects selected by the state; the Wuxi 
micro electronics project; and special projects on applied 
satellites. Preparations will be made for the early stage of the 
Three Gorges Project, with construction started on both banks at 
the same time. Construction of transportation projects leading 
to places outside the country and (?words indistinct) will be 
put into full swing. Land requisition and migration in the dam 
area will be completed. Preparations will continue for the early 
stages of Phase Three of the Baoshan Iron and Steel Complex and 
other key projects. Investment in processing industries that 
have surplus production capacities will be strictly controlled. 
  -- Opening wider to the outside world and actively and 
effectively using foreign capital, resources, technologies, and 
markets. Efforts will continue to operate special economic 
zones, the Pudong New Area in Shanghai, open coastal cities and 
areas, and economic and technological development zones in an 
efficient way; and to open up more central cities in border 
regions, along the Chang Jiang river, and in the interior. 
  -- Earnestly shifting economic construction onto the path 
that relies on scientific and technological progress, and 
further developing educational undertakings. We will continue 
to implement the guiding ideology of taking science and 
technology as the primary productive force. We will continue to 
implement the state's intermediate- and long-term science and 
technology development programs. This year's science and 
technology work will focus on the following: 1) Vigorously 
promoting advances in industrial technologies; 2) continuously 
promoting key scientific and technological research that has a 
major impact on economic and social development, and applying 
major scientific and technological achievements in industries; 
3) strengthening the building of scientific research facilities 
and a contingent of scientific and technological personnel; and 
4) helping enterprises become a mainstay in technological 
development. Further steps will be taken to bring market forces 
into play to promote integration of science and technology, and 
the economy. Education will continue to occupy a strategic 
position for development on a priority basis. Earnest efforts 
will be made to implement the program for China's education 
reform and development. 
  -- Continuing to improve the people's living standards and 
develop various social undertakings. While developing the 
economy and upgrading labor productivity, we will continue to 
upgrade the people's living standards. An important task for 
this year's economic work is to strive to increase peasants' 
income. We will further strengthen socialist spiritual 
civilization as well as actively develop cultural, press, 
publishing, broadcasting, film and television, healthcare, and 
sports sectors. We will continue to earnestly and effectively 
tackle family planning by stressing work in rural areas and the 
mobile population, and strive to control the natural population 
growth rate within macroeconomic control targets. We should 
further strengthen environmental protection, effectively control 
pollution, implement strong measures for afforestation, and 
improve the ecological environment. We will protect and 
rationally utilize natural resources such as land, minerals, 
forests, and water. This year, the state will also draw up an 
outline for the development of national social undertakings. 
<H3>  3. Strengthen and Improve Macroeconomic Regulation and 
Control; Comprehensively Accomplish the 1994 Plan for National 
Economic and Social Development </H3>
  In accordance with the demand for establishing the socialist 
market economic system, deepening various major reforms, and 
maintaining a good momentum for sustained economic development, 
we will further strengthen and improve macroeconomic regulation 
and control. The basic starting point of macroeconomic 
regulation and control is to maintain mutual coordination and 
integration among reform, development, and stability. 
Development is the last word. To develop we must have new 
ideas. It is crucial to place the emphasis on optimizing the 
economic structure, quickening technological progress, 
strengthening operations and management, and upgrading economic 
efficiency. The main task in macroeconomic regulation and 
control is to maintain an overall balance of total supply and 
total demand in society. Currently, to maintain the overall 
balance of total supply and total demand, it is necessary to 
effectively increase supply by ways and means while controlling 
the excessive growth of total demand. Macroeconomic regulation 
and control should be aimed at controlling the increase margin 
of overall price level. This year, while giving full 
consideration to the enduring capability of state enterprises 
and the people, we will appropriately adjust prices of energy, 
grain, and cotton. While promoting price reform, we must 
control the increase margin of overall price level within 
macroeconomic targets, as determined in the plan. The 
macroeconomic regulation and control system needs to be 
continually perfected with deepened reform. Effective 
implementation of this year's economic plan is significant to 
quickening the task of establishing the socialist market 
economic system; keeping a sustained, rapid, and healthy 
development of the national economy; and promoting comprehensive 
social progress. 

