Language: <F P=105> Swedish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Now Sweden, and how top secret Soviet information 
was used in the development of the JAS-39 Gripen [multirole 
combat aircraft]. Many of the most advanced Soviet weapons 
systems ended up in the United States during the 1980's. The 
deliveries were made in Poland in great secrecy according to the 
newspaper THE WASHINGTON POST. Information from the Soviet 
Union also went to Sweden and has influenced the development 
work of the JAS-39 Gripen, among other things. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] The United States managed to 
obtain during the 1980's a number of items of advanced Soviet 
military equipment like air defense missiles, radar systems, 
communications equipment, torpedoes, attack helicopters, and 
tanks. Even though the most modern Soviet material was not 
available in Poland, the deals were made there. Thousands of 
millions were then paid through the military intelligence 
agency, CIA, to foreign contacts. They for their part made sure 
that the money ended up with politicians and officials who were 
willing to sell Soviet military secrets. The analysis of this 
material gave the United States the possibility of preparing 
effective countermeasures and also an advantage in 
military-technological development over the Soviet Union. 
  The CIA thus had access to excellent contacts in Poland, and 
from the United States, Swedish defense has also received 
information on Soviet war materiel. This information has been 
important in the development work of the JAS-39 Gripen, mainly 
in its radar and countermeasures against attacking missiles. 
  But Sweden has also had its own channels. The visa freedom 
between Sweden and Poland in the 1970's and the later emergence 
of the Solidarity movement created space for contacts that were 
very useful to military intelligence. Poland is not available 
for technical reconnaissance in the same way as the Baltic 
countries, for example, so there has been a need for Polish 
informers who have been able to give information on the Warsaw 
Pact's war preparations. The military mapping, of which the 
Polish sellers of tabulated information are suspected, in Sweden 
has had its counterpart in the other direction, a former 
military intelligence officer says to Ekot [the name of this 
program]. The activities in Poland were led by the [Swedish] 
KSI, the Office for Special Information Gathering at the Defense 
Staff, a most secret operation of the military intelligence 
service. 
  There is also information on the regular exchange of 
intelligence information between Sweden and Poland. According 
to information obtained by Ekot, Bengt Wallroth, the then chief 
of the Military Intelligence Service of the Defense Staff, who 
earlier was also the head of the KSI, made an official visit to 
his Polish colleague at the beginning of the 1980's. Such 
contacts with the East bloc were very unusual and only existed 
with Poland and Yugoslavia. The information from Poland and 
Yugoslavia has been of great value both to Swedish defense 
planning and as a commodity to exchange with other countries' 
military intelligence organizations. 

