BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Yuriela Sagel] </F>
  [Text] Major Santiago Fundora, National Air Service (SAN) 
director, pointed out yesterday that drug traffickers are 
looking for new routes to conduct their drug activity in the 
national territory. He also confirmed the existence of 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia [FARC] guerrillas in the 
border region with Darien. 
  Fundora indicated that, given the pressures the National 
Police are exerting on international drug traffickers, the 
traffickers are looking for new areas to bring drugs into the 
nation, thereby continuing the trafficking process. Fundora 
said this is the reason authorities often refuse to disclose 
information on operations to eradicate and to prevent drug 
trafficking activities. 
  According to the SAN director, the traffickers work around 
the clock and they relocate very easily to other sites to 
continue their trafficking. Fundora made these statements 
during a meeting with directors of various state security 
organizations. The objective of the meeting was to discuss new 
strategies to fight drug trafficking, money laundering, and 
crime. 
  Fundora confirmed the presence of FARC guerrillas in the 
Darien territory, and he stressed that more vigilance in this 
zone is needed because of the FARC presence. Fundora added that 
the National Government must increase the number of Border 
Police units and it must supply them with better equipment to 
conduct their work. 
  The government must make efforts to combat piracy on the 
seas, drug trafficking activities, and crime in the capital, 
Fundora noted. He added that the ghost of militarism should 
disappear and that members of the National Police should be 
properly equipped to perform their duties more effectively. 
  Fundora also suggested more drastic measures to combat crime 
and international drug trafficking, such as 30-year sentences. 
He also suggested that guards whose participation is proven in 
the escape of drug traffickers should be forced to pay for the 
pending sentence. If this were implemented, the system would 
change, he noted. 
  Citizens must cooperate by informing the police when they 
know about the location of drug sales, otherwise, youths will 
continue to be caught in the drug net, Fundora reiterated. 

