BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Kira Adham] </F>
  [Text] During the recent visit to the U.S. Pentagon and 
State Department by National Defense Minister Yerasimos Arsenis, 
the Greek Government seemed immovable in its position on the 
sovereign rights in the Aegean, but with the intention for 
closer cooperation with the United States at a bilateral as well 
as collective level. 
  The aim of Arsenis' visit was to moderate the pressure that 
Washington had exerted recently on the Aegean issue and, at the 
same time, to transfer the U.S. interest's center of gravity 
from the Greek-Turkish disputes in the Aegean to the prospects 
for closer Greek-U.S. cooperation in the Balkan region at a 
bilateral level as well as within NATO. 
  Concerning the Greek-Turkish disputes, Arsenis raised the 
issue for discussion with his U.S. counterpart William 
Perry--since the initiative for discussion of other issues was 
taken by the U.S. side--in order to explain that the Turkish 
violations and infringements in the Aegean airspace are taking 
place with the Turkish side overstepping the 1988 Vouliagmeni 
official memorandum and that the Greek fighter planes, on the 
basis of NATO regulations and instructions for "area 41" which 
is covered by Greece as a member of the alliance, are obliged to 
be armed. 
  The U.S. officials, according to the Greek side's 
impression, 
did not put further pressure on this issue but did not show that 
they changed their views either. It is indicative that in its 
"corrective" statement the State Department insists on its 
objection to the 10 nautical miles in the Aegean airspace, 
adding its reservations on the Turkish violations and 
infringements. The State Department, however, at first glance 
"harder" than the Pentagon, transferred the Greek-Turkish issue 
to the sea, insisting that Greece must virtually irrevocably 
disavow its right to extend its territorial waters from the 
present 6 nautical miles to 12 nautical miles. The U.S. 
officials, outlining in the discussion the "Turkish fears," 
insisted that as "a gesture of goodwill" Athens must disavow 
this right as of November, when the new Law of the Sea goes into 
effect and which recognizes the right of a state to extend its 
territorial waters to 12 nautical miles and that the islands 
have their own continental shelf. (Turkey has not signed this 
agreement.) 
  During the visit one could not fail to get the impression 
that Turkey still is given privileged treatment concerning U.S. 
military aid. Athens, which is now "being drowned" by a debt of 
$6 billion for U.S. military aid (as against Turkey which 
receives 60 percent of the aid free), asked that either part of 
the debt be converted into free aid or the interest on the debt 
($2 billion) be let off for as long as Turkey receives free aid. 
  However, while the Greek proposals were not rejected but 
were 
met with skepticism, it has been learned that Turkey will 
purchase 10 air refueling aircraft, KC-135 air tankers [last 
three words in English] that had been withdrawn from action, at 
a cost of $0.5 billion but the kind of transaction has not as 
yet been clarified. It is interesting that the introductory 
report maintains that Turkey must remain a strong military force 
since it plays a role in the Balkans, Middle East, Asia, and 
primarily because Turkey participates in operations of the UN 
peace forces and could use the "tankers" in Bosnia "alleviating" 
the U.S. Air Force. 
  At any rate, Mr. Arsenis' "secret card" at the U.S. Pentagon 
was Greece's intention to cooperate with the United States 
within the NATO framework in developing the Partnership for 
Peace (PFP) initiative regarding the Balkans. This intention 
for bilateral cooperation within the NATO framework came at the 
right time (Mr. Perry will begin a visit on this issue to 
Bucharest, Sofia, Skopje, and Tirana) and it seems that it will 
materialize on 19 July when Mr. Perry visits Athens. 
  Thus, the Greek National Defense Ministry primarily shows 
Greece's intention to stop being an "inactive" NATO member and 
to participate actively in the Alliance's new plans, which also 
include the Balkans. So, this "upgrades" Greece's candidacy to 
host the headquarters of the NATO Multinational Rapid Deployment 
Force while the question of military commands becomes a 
secondary issue. 

