BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 17 (XINHUA) -- It was sunset and 
hundreds of fishing boats laden with their catches returned to 
Jiaozhou Bay in east China. 
  "We have not had such a good harvest in the coastal waters 
for years," said a weather-beaten fisherman busy unloading live 
fish and other aquatic products. 
  "In the past, the sea water for a time turned blackish and 
the fish started to die," he said. The picture is now 
different. He attributed the clean water and the coming back of 
fish to the Chinese government's anti-pollution efforts. 
  According to Xu Hongkai, an official of the Qingdao city 
environmental protection bureau, 80 percent of the pollutants in 
coastal waters used to come from the land. 
  Located on Jiaozhou Bay, Qingdao city has studied and worked 
out regulations to strengthen the oceanic environment, and 
invested an annual 40 million yuan in cleaning and controlling 
pollutant sources. It also built four pollution treatment 
projects with loans from the Asian Development Bank. 
  "As a result, the contents of key pollutants in the sea 
water 
has dropped steadily over the past five years," Xu said. 
  Qingdao is one of the places benefiting from the 
government's 
efforts to protect the oceanic environment. 
  China has 32,000 kilometers of coastline and three million 
square kilometers of sea areas, equal to less than one third of 
the country's landspace. 
  As long as 15 years ago, the Chinese Government laid down 
the 
principle that the environment must be protected alongside 
economic development, and conducted a number of research surveys 
on the environment and pollution control in the Bohai Sea and 
Yellow Sea. 
  In the early 1980s, the central government formulated six 
laws to protect the marine environment. The National Bureau of 
Oceanography set up a nationwide pollutant monitoring network 
and designated 39 sea zones for the dumping of waste, employing 
a system of licensing for dumping. 
  Zhu Guangqing, an official of the State Administration of 
Environmental Protection, said: "While rearranging the 
industrial location and product mix, the government has built a 
number of waste water treatment projects at ports and offshore 
oilfields and on ships." 
  It also designated 56 nature reserves to protect the ocean, 
oceanic ecology, plants and animals. These reserves cover a 
total area of 3.7 million hectares. 
  One example is the Yancheng National Nature Reserve in 
Jiangsu Province, where the number of red-crowned cranes, a rare 
bird under top government protection, has increased from 200 in 
1984 to more than 800 at present. 
  Nowadays, wherever you go along the coastal areas, you will 
see bill-boards with slogans like "developing the oceanic 
economy while protecting the sea". 
  China has concluded agreements with 30 countries for jointly 
protecting oceanic resources and environment. 
  While joining in three international pacts to ban ships 
leaking oil and polluting the sea, China has joined the efforts 
to protect the environment of the north-west Pacific Ocean zone 
and wishes to participate in the plan to protect the oceanic 
environment of the east Asian sea areas. 
  Yan Hongmo, director of the National Bureau of Oceanography, 
acknowledged that there is still room for improvement in the 
formation of laws and expansion of the number of specialists in 
oceanic environmental protection. Further efforts are to be 
made in this field. 
  He noted that China has just worked out a plan to clean and 
control pollutants in the sea by the year 2000. 

