BFN 

  [Text] Koper, Slovenia, May 19 (TANJUG) -- Slovenian Prime 
Minister Janez Drnovsek said on Thursday that the main dispute 
in connection with the state border between Slovenia and Croatia 
in the Bay of Piran in the northern Adriatic might be put to 
international arbitration, because Croatia was not interested in 
a speedy solution of territorial disputes. Slovenia recognizes 
only the republican borders of former Yugoslavia, whereas 
Croatia insists on the Cadastral border between the two former 
Yugoslav republics. The Cadastral border entitles Croatia to 
the entire Bay of Piran, which the republican border bisects 
into two halves. 
  The Slovenian-Croatian border dispute has nearly ruptured 
bilateral relations. Close political cooperation maintained at 
the time of their violent secession from former Yugoslavia [word 
indistinct] has been eroded by numerous economic disputes, 
division of property and mutual debts amounting to hundreds of 
millions of U.S. dollars. 
  Speaking in the port town of Koper in the northern Adriatic, 
near Slovenia's border with Italy, Drnovsek said that Slovenia 
was anticipating a tougher position of Italy concerning its 
territorial claims, which he said would jeopardize Slovenia's 
sovereignty. He explained that the views of the other European 
Union states, and not just Italy, were also relevant in 
connection with this issue. 
  The clamouring of the rightist parties which form the new 
coalition government in Rome for revising the Osimo Accords 
(signed between Italy and former Yugoslavia) are beginning 
seriously to worry the Slovenian leadership. 
  The subject has lately gained prominence in the Slovenian 
media, which are sharply critical of what they see as the 
authorities' docility and are warning that any procrastination 
in dealing with the issues may mean incalculable damage to 
Slovenia. The 1973 Osimo Accords regulated all territorial 
disputes which had existed between Italy and former Yugoslavia 
since World War II. 

