BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prime Minister Anatole Kanyenkiko by </F>
unidentified correspondent on 16 June; place not given -- 
recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [Correspondent] The country is 
currently headed by an interim head of state whose term of 
office has only three months to run. The three months are about 
to end on 12 July. What will happen if the choosing of the new 
head of state takes longer? Has any other path been planned? 
  [Kanyenkiko] The Constitution provides for that. The first 
term ends on 12 July, however, should any problems arise, we 
hope that the concerned parties will have reached an agreement 
before that date. If that proves impossible, the Constitution 
provides that the Constitutional Court can prolong the current 
term. However, in view of the way things are progressing, we 
believe that we shall not have to do that. 
  [Correspondent] There has been tension here in Bujumbura 
recently. Some people believe this is because there are weapons 
in the country, while others think it is due to the absence of a 
head of state. What are your views? 
  [Kanyenkiko] The two things have nothing in common. You are 
aware that the people in possession of weapons should know that 
the government is currently in the process of disarming them. 
That is the way to restore peace in the country. Currently, as 
we have heard, whether in rural Bujumbura or Kayanza, the 
security forces are disarming them and the security forces are 
winning. For example, today those who fled rural Bujumbura are 
returning home. The other thing that everyone should know is 
that anyone bringing weapons into your vicinity is your enemy if 
he shoots at security forces attempting to disarm him, 
especially if a shootout ensues between them and some people are 
killed in the cross fire. What we would like people to know is 
that their enemies are those who bring weapons into their 
vicinity; that when there is fighting, people die or flee and 
their homes, are burned or destroyed. The people must denounce 
them and report them. They are their real enemies. 

