Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Yesterday, National Defense Minister Mario Rene 
Enriquez said a plan has been initiated to modernize the Army. 
He added that the plan was designed for 1991 to 2010 and it 
mainly focuses on the education sector. He said that starting 
this year the curriculum of all Polytechnic School graduates 
must include liberal arts classes. He explained that "no one 
will be able to take command or staff courses, meaning no one 
can be promoted to the rank of colonel without a bachelor's or 
master's degree in the field of liberal arts, for example, law, 
medicine, economy, or others." 
  When asked if a reduction was included in the Army 
modernization plan, he said some plans have been prepared for 
implementation when the counterinsurgency struggle ends. These 
plans deal with the relocation of Army units. He said more 
attention will be given to Peten to deal with issues like 
deforestation and the plunder of the country's archaeological 
heritage because it is necessary to maintain the country's 
sovereignty in an area where oil abounds. This is very important 
for the future. "Hopefully, we will reorganize the Army soon. 
Its members will be equitably distributed. This is an 
opportunity to change the quality of their lives and to achieve 
adequate technology for the Corps," he added. 
  Enriquez said he does not share Christian Tomuschat's views 
on the Army's size, adding that the country could easily have an 
155,000-member Army if what was done in El Salvador is done 
here, given the country's size and its demography. He said that 
currently the Army has less than 45,000 members, meaning less 
than 0.05 percent of the population -- 10 million. Civilian 
patrols should not be included in the number because they do not 
earn a salary, they are not armed, and their essential role is 
to protect their children and towns. 
  Defense Minister Matio Enriquez said in response to the 
rebels' claims that the military might have perpetrated the 
attack on the San Juan Bridge, located on the Atlantic coast 
highway: "The only thing I can say is that I cannot conceive of 
anything as absurd as the URNG [Guatemalan National 
Revolutionary Unity] communique" on the San Juan Bridge attack. 
  He reiterated that the military had exerted an effort to 
restore traffic along that important highway; adding he does not 
believe law-abiding people are capable of perpetrating terrorist 
attacks like the most recent one. He also pointed out that the 
URNG admitted on several occasions it considers bridges, 
electric towers, or GUATEL [Guatemalan Telecommunications 
Enterprise] pylons as military targets. "I do not believe the 
military or any other Guatemalan group could created another 
terrorist faction because we are genuinely striving to achieve 
peace rather than to increase poverty and polarization," he 
added. 
  Referring to OAS statements on conscription, he said it must 
be indiscriminate because it is a service, a duty, and a right 
to serve the homeland. "I believe we will have no more problems 
as soon as the Military Service Bill, sent to Congress, is 
approved," he asserted. He said he personally signed the orders 
to all the commanders so the latest military enrollment would be 
voluntary. 

