BFN 

  [Text] The Philippines has renewed its call to set aside 
sovereignty issues and work instead for cooperation in 
developing the Spratly Islands, following renewed tension 
between China and Vietnam triggered by China's go-signal for an 
American firm to explore for oil in the disputed area. 
  "We are concerned over developments that tend to disrupt the 
equilibrium in the region. But we hope that China and Vietnam 
can resolve this amicably, and later all claimants can proceed 
multilaterally on the issue," Foreign Affairs Undersecretary 
Rodolfo Severino said. 
  "Although this is a bilateral problem, but since its impact 
has reverberations in the region, then all claimants have an 
interest in what happens," Severino added. 
  The latest row between China and Vietnam, two of the six 
claimants to the Spratly Islands, stemmed from China's grant of 
oil exploration rights to the Colorado-based Crestone Energy 
Corp. over a 25,000 square kilometer area of the South China 
Sea, which Vietnam claimed was within its continental shelf. 
  Vietnam warned that Crestone's decision to proceed with its 
exploration of the disputed area was a "serious violation of 
Vietnam's sovereignty" and would escalate tensions in the region. 
  Vietnam, apparently in retaliation, also signed up with 
Mobil 
Oil Corp. to explore an area overlapping the Crestone concession. 
  The Department of Foreign Affairs [DFA] said that while the 
Crestone concession does not fall within the territorial claim 
of the Philippines in the South China Sea, it is closely 
monitoring developments in the area to review its implications 
on regional stability. 
  "As defined by Presidential Decree 1596, the Crestone 
exploration block is not covered by the Philippines' claim to 
the Spratlys. The Crestone block lies some 135 kilometers from 
the Western boundary of the Philippine claim," a DFA official 
said. 
  But the Philippines reminded China and Vietnam of the 1992 
ASEAN Declaration on the South China Sea which urged 
claimant-states "to set aside issues of sovereignty and explore 
the possibility of cooperation" in the Spratlys. 
  The official said the Philippine strategy was to initiate 
bilateral talks with other claimants to the Spratlys to promote 
the idea of demilitarizing the area and developing the oil-rich 
islands through cooperation. The Philippines first proposed the 
plan of demilitarizing the area during President Ramos' state 
visit to Vietnam. 
  The Philippines will also continue diplomatic initiatives to 
adopt confidence-building measures which will "veer away from 
military confrontation," the official said. 
  The oil-rich Spratlys is being claimed in whole or in part 
by 
the Philippines, China, Vietnam, Brunei, Taiwan, and Malaysia. 

