BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Marshal of Aviation Yevgeniy Shaposhnikov in the </F>
"In the World" column: "What I Would Take to NATO"] 
  [Text] If mutual extremism in assessments is ignored for a 
while, the logical question arises: Why, after the abolition of 
the Warsaw Pact, the breakup of the Soviet Union, the 
reunification of Germany, and the pullout of our troops from 
Eastern Europe, has the NATO bloc not dissolved itself too? And 
why, moreover, is it beginning to expand? 
  It is no secret that for several years now the bloc members 
have been casting around for a rationale for its existence. One 
of such "finds" is the Partnership for Peace program, which 
allows NATO to exist in a new, expanded composition, with 
camouflaged claims to establishing a "new world order." This 
can be seen in the obvious attempts to turn NATO into a UN 
muscle force (for instance, in Yugoslavia) and its aspiration to 
control the situation not only within the bloc's framework but 
also in other regions of the world. 
  The invitation to join the program has confronted Russia 
with 
a responsible choice. In the event of unqualified signing of 
the Partnership, NATO's influence will stretch to the borders 
with China, which will not only upset the balance of forces in 
the East but could also revive confrontation with our eastern 
neighbor. If Russia does not sign the Partnership, it could 
find itself in isolation while NATO pushes up against its 
borders. This could be followed by the erosion of trust between 
Russia and the West, which would provide fertile ground for 
restoring the "Cold War." Raising the question of a special 
role for Russia in the Partnership is not the best possible 
option because it is perceived negatively by other partners (due 
to analogies with the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact). 
  The most appropriate option for us would be one which, on 
the 
one hand, would save Russia from an unacceptable choice and, on 
the other, reaffirm its role as a member of the world community 
capable of proposing formulas matching Russia's authority and 
shared by other countries. 
  In my opinion, today the world community needs not military 
blocs but more civilized mechanisms for regulating their 
relations. Such mechanisms exist: the United Narions, the CSCE, 
and others. With some qualifications, the CIS can also be 
ranked among such organizations. But under the new conditions 
none of them is effective enough to ensure real trust and 
security. Therefore, the need arises, on the one hand, to 
improve both the worldwide organization (the United Nations) and 
regional organizations (the CSCE, CIS, and so forth), and, on 
the other, to transform military blocs into peacekeeping 
civilian mechanisms which would become constituent elements of 
these organizations. Herein lies the essence of a bloc-free 
existence of states. And this is precisely what Russia can 
propose. 
  The worldwide organization would attend to general and more 
important questions, while regional organizations would deal 
with specific ones (ecological, economic, social, information, 
security, and so forth), thereby complementing each other. Each 
of them should also have military bodies with peacekeeping force 
contingents which could be brought into action by decision of 
the United Nations or at the request of its regional structures 
at early stages in the evolution of a conflict and also in the 
event of natural disasters, accidents, and catastrophes and also 
for humanitarian deliveries. It is advisable to train such 
(coalition) peacekeeping contingents at special training centers 
in the regions (for action under tropical conditions, in 
mountain/desert terrain, and so forth) with maximally 
standardized equipment and control and support facilities, 
developed on a competitive basis. Therefore the military force 
of various states would have one common enemy: reckless 
adventurism, extremism, and terrorism. 
  Consolidation, let alone expansion, of one military bloc is 
hardly an alternative to this concept. It will serve not the 
creation of a new world order but a unipolar system which is 
unstable by definition. Naturally the NATO bloc today is not 
ready to dismantle itself for a number of reasons. The main one 
among them is the absence of confidence among its leaders that 
democratic processes in Russia are irreversible. But if there 
is such lack of confidence, why then should Russia be confident 
that the Partnership will only be good for it? 
  Russia and other CIS states have done much more in the name 
of trust than all the NATO countries, and more than the world 
community expected. Russia not only closed all loopholes 
undermining trust but is now beginning to retrench its interests 
and its authority. What will come next? It is difficult to make 
forecasts, but they could be deplorable not only to Russia. A 
most reassuring response from NATO would be its readiness to 
reorganize itself as a peacekeeping structure, say, of the CSCE, 
with Russia and other states participating in it on an equal 
footing. 

