Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tehsimul Haq Haqi: "Need for Effective Steps To </F>
Control Drugs"] 
  [Text] A lot has been written about the abuse and ill 
effects of drugs. However, no effective steps have been taken to 
stop this curse. This has resulted in escalated abuse by the 
younger generation. According to a report issued by the director 
of intelligence, about 1.2 million people are addicted to this 
ugly habit. From among the 45,000 prisoners, 12,000 were 
arrested for crimes related to the drug trade. In some areas of 
Punjab as many as 40 percent of the population is involved in 
drug trade. According to the findings of a U.S. drug expert, 
drug traders are earning $1.22 billion from the heroin trade 
alone. The question arises: can we afford to spend that much 
money? The administration should consider how much money they 
spend to control the drug trade. The little work being done to 
control drug abuse in Pakistan is insufficient. Even now 200,000 
new persons fall prey to drug abuse each year. If people 
continued to become drug addicts at this rate, the time is not 
far off when 15 percent of Pakistan's population will be 
suffering from this addiction. The former caretaker prime 
minister, Mayueen Qureshi, had a list of drugs smugglers which 
included over 160 very influential persons from our country. 
Because of political considerations this list was neither made 
public nor were these smugglers arrested. Now after the removal 
of the caretaker government, this whole affair seems to have 
been totally ignored. It is not expected that a political 
government will touch influential persons. The second problem is 
that, because of the specific kind of government and life style 
in our tribal areas, the drug dealers move there to avoid 
arrests. Others get support from political leaders and move to 
Afghanistan which is famous for producing and smuggling drugs 
all over the world. 
  According to a report issued by an international narcotics 
control agency, Afghanistan is second after Burma for exporting 
opium. The figures included in this report show that poppy 
cultivation increased by 12 percent in Afghanistan last year 
(1992), and 1470.19 acre land was used for cultivating poppy. 
This will harvest 640 metric tons of heroin. In Langaryar and 
Halmand provinces of Afghanistan, 75 percent of the land is used 
for growing opium. If the Afghan people want, they could take 
concrete steps to stop drug abuse. Drug abuse is extremely 
dangerous for people, and they cannot adjust themselves to their 
environments. This reduces their judgment ability. The curse of 
drug abuse cannot be controlled by rhetoric and statements given 
to the press. This curse can be ended only when concrete steps 
are taken. Not only this, strict action is necessary against 
those who are involved in this trade. Our younger generation can 
play an important role in this context, if they unite and 
resolve to stop the rising tide of drug abuse and its negative 
effects. If they do that, there is no reason that we cannot rid 
the society of the evils of drug dealers and drug abuse. 

