BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Christian Hoffmann: "Husayn Warns Against Middle </F>
East Disaster"] 
  [Text] Jordanian King Husayn has warned against a disaster 
in the Middle East peace process. On the occasion of a joint 
news conference with Austrian President Thomas Klestil, the 
Jordanian ruler deplored that the peace talks are stagnating. 
  President Klestil, who is paying a three-day official visit 
to Jordan, affirmed again to his hosts that Austria is prepared 
to develop its economic aid to this region, as soon as the 
situation has stabilized. Klestil, who will travel to Israel as 
early as this summer, offered Austria's mediation. Since the 
complete normalization of relations with Jerusalem, Austria's 
opportunities on the diplomatic level have increased. Klestil's 
visit will be the first of an Austrian head of state. 
  Moreover, in his speech at the state banquet in the Basman 
Palace, the president announced that a conference for 
communication between representatives of Christianity, Islam, 
and Judaism will be held in Vienna in December. He pointed out 
that about 250,000 Muslims are currently living in Austria, 
among them are about 70,000 refugees from Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  On Tuesday, the second day of his visit, the president 
traveled to Um Qais in the Jordan Valley. Before that, he had 
laid wreaths at the tombs of King 'Abdallah and King Talal. 
Afterward, a reception for the Austrian colony in Jordan was on 
the agenda. Today, Wednesday, is devoted to a visit to the 
archaeological finds in Petra. Afterward, the president will 
return to Vienna. 
  In the next few days, Austria will present four ambulance 
cars, three water tanks, and two emergency aid vehicles to the 
Jordanian Civil Defense Authority. An additional delivery of 
six fire trucks will conclude a relief program that continued 
the help for the states affected by the Gulf war in 1993 and as 
part of which goods valued at 100 million schillings have been 
supplied. Moreover, Austria will reorganize the school of hotel 
management in Amman. In addition, Austrian companies are active 
in the fields of telecommunications and water economy. 

