BFN 

  [Text] Hanoi VNA April 29 -- Following are large excerpts 
from a joint press statement released at the end today of 
President Le Duc Anh's four-day official friendship visit to 
Indonesia: 
  -- On 27 April 1994, President Le Duc Anh held talks with 
President Suharto at the Independence Palace. The two leaders 
had discussions on the orientation and measures to further 
strengthen the friendship and multi-sided cooperation between 
Vietnam and Indonesia as well as on international regional 
issues of mutual interest. 
  -- The Vietnamese side warmly welcomed Indonesia's active 
and independent foreign policy and greatly appreciated the 
important contributions made by Indonesia to the cause of peace, 
stability and development in the region and in the world in 
general it also stressed that Indonesia as chairman of the 
Non-Aligned Movement has actively contributed to the 
consolidation and enhancement of the Non-Aligned Movement's 
role, to the intensification of its activities and to the 
promotion of South-South cooperation and North-South dialogue. 
Vietnam confirmed its continued cooperation with Indonesia in 
these activities. 
  The two sides expressed satisfaction over the positive 
development of the relations between the two countries, 
especially since the visit to Vietnam by H.E. [His Excellency] 
President Suharto in November 1990 and the visit to Indonesia by 
H.E. Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet in October 1979 the two sides 
once again confirmed their resolve to preserve and develop the 
good relations of friendship, good neighbourliness and 
multi-sided cooperation on the basis of the ten principles of 
the Bandung Conference and the Five Principles of Peaceful 
Co-Existence. 
  The Vietnamese side expressed gratitude to Indonesia for 
having shared the latter's valuable experience with Vietnam in 
national construction and development and extended assistance to 
personnel training in such fields as science and technology, 
health, population, etc. The two sides noted with satisfaction 
the good bilateral cooperation on population control and family 
planning, considering it as a concrete manifestation of the 
cooperation between developing countries. The two sides agreed 
to further strengthen this cooperation by helping to ensure the 
success of the forth-coming World Population Conference to be 
held in Cairo in September 1994. 
  With a view to intensifying the multi-faceted cooperation 
between the two countries, the two sides signed the memorandum 
of understanding [MOU] on tourism cooperation. The two sides 
agreed to further prepare for an early conclusion of the 
agreement on avoidance of double taxation and the agreement on 
postal and telecommunications cooperation. 
  The two sides were of the view that further efforts should 
be 
generated to fully utilize the great potentials of the two 
countries for promoting and broadening the cooperation in the 
interest of development of their respective countries. To this 
end, the two sides agreed to reconvene the Joint Commission for 
Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation so as to review 
and look for measures to increase trade and promote investments 
between two countries. The two sides also agreed on the speedy 
implementation of the signed agreements and MOUs. 
  The two sides noted with satisfaction the development of 
talks on the delimitation of the continental-shelf boundaries 
between the two countries. In this spirit, the two sides agreed 
to accelerate the negotiations on the basis of the results 
achieved so far, and the 1982 UN Convention of the Law of the 
Sea as well as the general international law principles and 
practices in accordance with the long traditional friendship 
between the two peoples with a view to bringing it to a 
conclusion as soon as possible for the sake of cooperation and 
development of the two countries. 
  The two sides took note of the signing of the tripartite 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) on the principles and 
arrangements relating to returning Vietnamese non-refugees from 
Indonesia among the Republic of Indonesia, the Socialist 
Republic of Vietnam and the UNHCR in Hanoi, 2 October 1993. 
They were of the view that greatest efforts should be taken by 
both sides in cooperation with the UNHCR to accelerate the 
implementation of the above mentioned MOU. 
  The two sides were pleased to note the positive changes and 
the strong trend towards peace, stability, cooperation and 
development in Southeast Asia. The two sides welcomed the 
efforts and initiatives made by countries in the region to 
encourage dialogues aimed at improving mutual understanding and 
peacefully settling the disputes and differences between 
countries in this region. The two sides reaffirmed their 
continued determination to broaden the relations of good 
neighbourliness and cooperation with all countries in the 
region, on the basis of equality and mutual benefit thus 
contributing to the building of a Southeast Asia of peace, 
freedom, neutrality, cooperation, prosperity and free from 
nuclear weapons. 
  The Vietnamese side highly valued Indonesia's and other 
ASEAN 
countries' support for Vietnam's observer status in ASEAN and 
its participation in the ASEAN functional committees as well as 
in a number of projects of ASEAN functional cooperation in such 
fields as science and technology, culture and information, 
environment, health, tourism, and human resources development. 
  The two sides noted that there was a common understanding 
between Vietnam and ASEAN on Vietnam's joining ASEAN as a full 
member. The Vietnamese side reaffirmed its readiness to work 
for the continued strengthening of multi-sided cooperation with 
ASEAN, and to prepare, together with ASEAN, the early entry of 
Vietnam as full member of ASEAN. Both sides believed that this 
development would not only be in keeping with but also in the 
interest of peace, cooperation and development in the region. 
[sentence as received] 
  The Indonesian side was of the view that Vietnam-ASEAN 
cooperation and Vietnam's participation in the forthcoming ASEAN 
Regional Forum in Bangkok would serve as an important and 
practical contribution to strengthening the trend of peace, 
stability and cooperation in the region. 
  The two sides shared the view that the changes in the global 
and regional situation are creating new opportunities as well as 
new challenges. This situation required all countries in the 
world to work together on the basis of peaceful co-existence, 
mutual respect of each other's independence and sovereignty, 
non-use of force or threat to use force, the settlement of 
disputes through peaceful negotiation, non-aggression, 
non-interference in each other's internal affairs and 
non-imposition of one country's will on the other. Both sides 
reaffirmed their determination to make continued contributions 
to the struggle of mankind for international peace and security 
and for national independence and prosperity. 
  President Le Duc Anh expressed his heartfelt gratitude for 
the warm welcome and generous hospitality accorded to him and 
his wife as well as his delegation by President Suharto and 
madame, the Indonesian state and people. President Le Duc Anh 
extended an invitation to President Suharto and madame to pay an 
official visit to Vietnam. President Suharto accepted the 
invitation with pleasure, the timing of which will be arranged 
through diplomatic channels. 

