Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Richard Savill and Robert Shrimsley: "Tory </F>
Outrage at Dublin `Concessions' to IRA"] 
  [Text] The Irish Foreign Affairs Minister, Mr Dick Spring, 
moved yesterday to ease fears of a rift between London and 
Dublin after a magazine article in which he appeared to suggest 
that a temporary ceasefire would be enough to win the IRA a seat 
at the negotiating table. 
  His comments, in an interview with the Left of centre New 
Century magazine, enraged Unionists and backbench Conservatives 
coming just after news of an IRA plot to murder a senior Tory MP. 
  Mr Andrew Hunter, Tory MP for Basingstoke and chairman of 
the 
backbench Northern Ireland committee -- the post held by the 
late Mr Ian Gow when he was murdered by the terrorists -- 
confirmed this weekend that he had been the target of an 
assassination plot. 
  Unconfirmed reports suggest that an explosive package was 
intercepted en route to his home and the MP has now been given 
24-hour armed protection at his Berkshire home. Security at 
Westminster has also been stepped up. 
  Yesterday he admitted that the incident, the day after the 
second mortar attack on Heathrow airport, and the subsequent 
security had been "pretty hellish". Mr Hunter reacted with 
understandable anger to Mr Spring's article and remained 
unconvinced by the foreign minister's later explanations. 
  In the magazine Mr Spring is reported as saying: "I think it 
is possible they (the IRA) will offer some temporary cessation 
of violence in order to sit down round the table with other 
nationalist parties... That is going to pose a bit of a 
dilemma. If they offer a temporary ceasefire we will want to 
find a way of building on that without making any concessions to 
them." 
  Yesterday afternoon however Mr Spring used an interview on 
Irish Radio to stress that he was not saying a temporary 
ceasefire would suffice, simply that it might be necessary to 
give the terrorists some help as they "inched" their way towards 
peace. 
  However, his comments served only to fuel suspicion among 
Unionists and Tories. Mr Hunter said: "We are not in the 
business of appeasing the IRA. I don't understand what a 
temporary ceasefire would mean. There is no way you can sit at 
the negotiating table with them if they are saying that if they 
don't get what they want they will start shooting again." 
  Mr Peter Robinson, the Democratic Unionist MP, said: "I 
think this confirms my view that if there is a tactical pause in 
violence, the Irish government would invite the IRA in on the 
basis of a temporary ceasefire. This appears to be part of the 
process that the IRA can be brought in without giving up 
violence." 

