Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe arrived in 
Zagreb late this evening. His meeting with Croatian 
representatives, headed by the Croatian president, began some 50 
minutes ago. We have just established phone contact with the 
minister of foreign affairs and deputy prime minister of 
Croatia. Good evening Mr. Granic. You ended the meeting with 
Mr. Juppe about 10 minutes ago. Could you tell us briefly why 
Mr. Juppe arrived Zagreb this evening. 
  [Granic] To explain NATO's decisions adopted in Brussels. 
This means that the warning issued to the Serb side is really 
serious but pressure is also exerted on all sides, including the 
Muslim side, to negotiate seriously. The negotiations should be 
based on the European Union plan, and what is most important is 
that the Americans are also supporting it now. This is an 
entirely new element. Croatia accepted the plan a long time 
ago. It was not difficult for us to attend the Geneva talks 
today because Croatia firmly supported the plan. 
  [Announcer] Did Mr. Juppe mention any new elements as far as 
American and French political initiatives are concerned? 
  [Granic] There are no new important elements in the plan but 
what is new and important is that for the first time America 
made it clear that it supported the plan and that it would make 
its diplomatic presence more visible and maybe on a higher 
level. As you know Mr. Tanner who is the assistant secretary of 
state has arrived in Paris and he will go to Geneva tomorrow 
along with Ambassador Redman. In any case they will help in 
urgent and serious resumption of the negotiations and on the 
other hand to implement the decisions and the NATO ultimatum. 
  [Announcer] Let us return to today's events in Geneva. 
Please tell us whether Russia's mild disagreement with this 
plan devised by NATO, the United States, and France could fuel 
the Serbs' intransigence. 
  [Granic] I spoke with Mr. Churkin today. The Russian 
Federation requested the urgent convocation of a UN Security 
Council session. This did not happen although a session will 
take place tomorrow with the possibility for all countries to 
take part in the debate. The Bosnia-Herzegovina issue will be 
discussed in global terms. This is a positive thing. We 
believe the Russians will not be allowed to frustrate NATO's 
decision, which is firm. 
  [Announcer] Let us review what happened in Geneva today. It 
seems to me that this decision signed by you and Silajdzic is 
nothing spectacular but that it nevertheless heralds a certain 
thaw between the Croats and the Muslims in Bosnia and between 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia. 
  [Granic] I agree. It is certainly not spectacular but it is 
an important step forward. The situation in the field is well 
known and everyone knows what it was like in the past. The 
talks were held in an open and constructive atmosphere and 
certain very important things were agreed -- a meeting will be 
held between the commanders of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army and 
the Croatian Defense Council, Generals Roso and Delic, and they 
will discuss a definitive truce. 
  Second, we seriously discussed prisoners and refugees. We 
agreed that the Croatian and Muslim sides would send letters to 
the UN Security Council, demanding the supervision of borders. 
  [Announcer, interrupting] I'm sorry, has Croatia also 
proposed inspection of its units, although this was not 
contained in the declaration. 
  [Granic] Croatia will propose this tomorrow and will also 
demand the establishment of safe areas in central Bosnia. This 
will be demanded tomorrow in a letter I will be sending to the 
chairman of the UN Security Council. 
  [Announcer] We should clarify this concept of safe areas -- 
would these zones be similar to the ones in Srebrenica and 
Gorazde or would they be more like the one around Sarajevo? 
  [Granic] We will demand what is known as safe havens. This 
is similar to Gorazde and Srebrenica. This will be the fourth 
time we are demanding such a thing. But this time we have more 
of a chance, considering NATO's decision on the one hand, on the 
other, the climate has changed altogether. The possibility of 
sanctions [against Croatia] has almost completely disappeared 
after these talks. 
  [Announcer] I will take the liberty of making a conclusion 
here -- it seems that Croatian diplomats have made several 
exceptionally good moves lately, especially since the Livno 
assembly, and that the threat of sanctions has become a thing of 
the past. 
  [Granic] I believe that today's talks have really brought us 
closer to the time when there will be a lasting cessation of 
hostilities between the Croats and Muslims and a final agreement 
will be reached on setting up relations. This will not be an 
easy task, there are still many obstacles, but we are certainly 
far from any sanctions. 
  [Announcer] Mr. Granic, thank you for your understanding and 
willingness to grant this interview. 

